conduct all the negotiations in
the light of day before the people, and will proceed immediately to
the full publication of all secret treaties confirmed or concluded
by the Government of land-owners and capitalists, from March until
November 7th, 1917. All the clauses of the secret treaties which, as
occur in a majority of cases, have for their object to procure
advantages and privileges for Russian capitalists, to maintain or
augment the annexations of the Russian imperialists, are denounced
by the Government immediately and without discussion.

In proposing to all Governments and all peoples to engage in public
negotiations for peace, the Government declares itself ready to
carry on these negotiations by telegraph, by post, or by pourparlers
between the representatives of the different countries, or at a
conference of these representatives. To facilitate these
pourparlers, the Government appoints its authorised representatives
in the neutral countries.

The Government proposes to all the governments and to the peoples of
all the belligerent countries to conclude an immediate armistice, at
the same time suggesting that the armistice ought to last three
months, during which time it is perfectly possible, not only to hold
the necessary pourparlers between the representatives of all the
nations and nationalities without exception drawn into the war or
forced to take part in it, but also to convoke authorised assemblies
of representatives of the people of all countries, for the purpose
of the definite acceptance of the conditions of peace.

In addressing this offer of peace to the Governments and to the
peoples of all the belligerent countries, the Provisional Workers'
and Peasants' Government of Russia addresses equally and in
particular the conscious workers of the three nations most devoted
to humanity and the three most important nations among those taking
part in the present war-England, France, and Germany. The workers of
these countries have rendered the greatest services to the cause of
progress and of Socialism. The splendid examples of the Chartist
movement in England, the series of revolutions, of world-wide
historical significance, accomplished by the French proletariat-and
finally, in Germany, the historic struggle against the Laws of
Exception, an example for the workers of the whole world of
prolonged and stubborn action, and the creation of the formidable
organisations of German proletarians-all these models of proletarian
heroism, these monuments of history, are for us a sure guarantee
that the workers of these countries will understand the duty imposed
upon them to liberate humanity from the horrors and consequences of
war; and that these workers, by decisive, energetic and continued
action, will help us to bring to a successful conclusion the cause
of peace-and at the same time, the cause of the liberation of the
exploited working masses from all slavery and all exploitation.

When the grave thunder of applause had died away, Lenin spoke again:

"We propose to the Congress to ratify this declaration. We address
ourselves to the Governments as well as to the peoples, for a
declaration which would be addressed only to the peoples of the
belligerent countries might delay the conclusion of peace. The
conditions of peace, drawn up during the armistice, will be ratified
by the Constituent Assembly. In fixing the duration of the armistice
at three months, we desire to give to the peoples as long a rest as
possible after this bloody extermination, and ample time for them to
elect their representatives. This proposal of peace will meet with
resistance on the part of the imperialist governments-we don't fool
ourselves on that score. But we hope that revolution will soon break
out in all the belligerent countries; that is why we address
ourselves especially to the workers of France, England and Germany....

"The revolution of November 6th and 7th," he ended, "has opened the
era of the Social Revolution.... The labour movement, in the name of
peace and Socialism, shall win, and fulfil its destiny....

There was something quiet and powerful in all this, which stirred
the souls of men. It was understandable why people believed when
Lenin spoke...."

By crowd vote it was quickly decided that only representatives of
political factions should be allowed to speak on the motion and that
speakers should be limited to fifteen minutes.

First Karelin for the Left Socialist Revolutionaries. "Our faction
had no opportunity to propose amendments to the text of the
proclamation; it is a private document of the Bolsheviki. But we
will vote for it because we agree with its spirit...."

For the Social Democrats Internationalists Kramarov, long,
stoop-shouldered and near-sighted-destined to achieve some notoriety
as the Clown of the Opposition. Only a Government composed of all
the Socialist parties, he said, could possess the authority to take
such important action. If a Socialist coalition were formed, his
faction would support the entire programme; if not, only part of it.
As for the proclamation, the Internationalists were in thorough
accord with its main points....

Then one after another, amid rising enthusiasm; Ukrainean Social
Democracy, support; Lithuanian Social Democracy, support; Populist
Socialists, support; Polish Social Democracy, support; Polish
Socialists support-but would prefer a Socialist coalition; Lettish
Social Democracy, support.... Something was kindled in these men. One
spoke of the "coming World-Revolution, of which we are the
advance-guard"; another of "the new age of brotherhood, when all the
peoples will become one great family...." An individual member claimed
the floor. "There is contradiction here," he said. "First you offer
peace without annexations and indemnities, and then you say you will
consider all peace offers. To consider means to accept...."

Lenin was on his feet. "We want a just peace, but we are not afraid
of a revolutionary war.... Probably the imperialist Governments will
not answer our appeal-but we shall not issue an ultimatum to which
it will be easy to say no.... If the German proletariat realises that
we are ready to consider all offers of peace, that will perhaps be
the last drop which overflows the bowl-revolution will break out in
Germany....

"We consent to examine all conditions of peace, but that doesn't
mean that we shall accept them.... For some of our terms we shall
fight to the end-but possibly for others will find it impossible to
continue the war.... Above all, we want to finish the war...."

It was exactly 10:35 when Kameniev asked all in favour of the
proclamation to hold up their cards. One delegate dared to raise his
hand against, but the sudden sharp outburst around him brought it
swiftly down.... Unanimous.

Suddenly, by common impulse, we found ourselves on our feet,
mumbling together into the smooth lifting unison of the
_Internationale._ A grizzled old soldier was sobbing like a child.
Alexandra Kollontai rapidly winked the tears back. The immense sound
rolled through the hall, burst windows and doors and seared into the
quiet sky. "The war is ended! The war is ended!" said a young
workman near me, his face shining. And when it was over, as we stood
there in a kind of awkward hush, some one in the back of the room     ck of the room     |          |
shouted, "Comrades! Let us remember those who have died for
liberty!" So we began to sing the Funeral March, that slow,
melancholy and yet triumphant chant, so Russian and so moving. The
_Internationale_ is an alien air, after all. The Funeral March
seemed the very soul of those dark masses whose delegates sat in
this hall, building from their obscure visions a new Russia-and
perhaps more.

You fell in the fatal fight

For the liberty of the people, for the honour of the people....

You gave up your lives and everything dear to you,

You suffered in horrible prisons,

You went to exile in chains....

Without a word you carried your chains because you could not ignore
your suffering brothers,

Because you believed that justice is stronger than the sword....

The time will come when your surrendered life will count

That time is near; when tyranny falls the people will rise, great
and free!

Farewell, brothers, you chose a noble path,

You are followed by the new and fresh army ready to die and to
suffer....

Farewell, brothers, you chose a noble path,

At your grave we swear to fight, to work for freedom and the
people's happiness....

For this did they lie there, the martyrs of March, in their cold
Brotherhood Grave on Mars Field; for this thousands and tens of
thousands had died in the prisons, in exile, in Siberian mines. It
had not come as they expected it would come, nor as the
_intelligentzia_ desired it; but it had come-rough, strong,
impatient of formulas, contemptuous of sentimentalism; real....

Lenin was reading the Decree on Land:

(1.) All private ownership of land is abolished immediately without
compensation.

(2.) All land_owners' estates, and all lands belonging to the Crown,
to monasteries, church lands with all their live stock and
inventoried property, buildings and all appurtenances, are
transferred to the disposition of the township Land Committees and
the district Soviets of Peasants' Deputies until the Constituent
Assembly meets.

(3.) Any damage whatever done to the confiscated property which from
now on belongs to the whole People, is regarded as a serious crime,
punishable by the revolutionary tribunals. The district Soviets of
Peasants' Deputies shall take all necessary measures for the
observance of the strictest order during the taking over of the
land-owners' estates, for the determination of the dimensions of the
plots of land and which of them are subject to confiscation, for the
drawing up of an inventory of the entire confiscated property, and
for the strictest revolutionary protection of all the farming
property on the land, with all buildings, implements, cattle,
supplies of products, etc., passing into the hands of the People.

(4.) For guidance during the realisation of the great land reforms
until their final resolution by the Constituent Assembly, shall
serve the following peasant _nakaz_ (See App. V, Sect. 3)
(instructions), drawn up on the basis of 242 local peasant _nakazi_
by the editorial board of the "_Izviestia_ of the All-Russian Soviet
of Peasants' Deputies," and published in No.88 of said _"Izviestia"_
(Petrograd, No.88, August 19th, 1917).

The lands of peasants and of Cossacks serving in the Army shall not
be confiscated.

"This is not," explained Lenin, "the project of former Minister
Tchernov, who spoke of 'erecting a frame-work' and tried to realise
reforms from above. From below, on the spot, will be decided the
questions of division of the land. The amount of land received by
each peasant will vary according to the locality....

"Under the Provisional Government, the _pomieshtchiki_ flatly
refused to obey the orders of the Land Committees-those Land
Committees projected by Lvov, brought into existence by Shingariov,
and administered by Kerensky!"

Before the debates could begin a man forced his way violently
through the crowd in the aisle and climbed upon the platform. It was
Pianikh, member of the Executive Committee of the Peasants' Soviets,
and he was mad clean through.

"The Executive Committee of the All-Russian Soviets of Peasants'
Deputies protests against the arrest of our comrades, the Ministers
Salazkin and Mazlov!" he flung harshly in the faces of the crowd,
"We demand their instant release! They are now in Peter-Paul
fortress. We must have immediate action! There is not a moment to
lose!"

Another followed him, a soldier with disordered beard and flaming
eyes. "You sit here and talk about giving the land to the peasants,
and you commit an act of tyrants and usurpers against the peasants'
chosen representatives! I tell you-" he raised his fist, "If one
hair of their heads is harmed, you'll have a revolt on your hands!"
The crowd stirred confusedly.

Then up rose Trotzky, calm and venomous, conscious of power, greeted
with a roar. "Yesterday the Military Revolutionary Committee decided
to release the Socialist Revolutionary and Menshevik Ministers,
Mazlov, Salazkin, Gvozdov and Maliantovitch-on principle. That they
are still in Peter-Paul is only because we have had so much to do....
They will, however, be detained at their homes under arrest until we
have investigated their complicity in the treacherous acts of
Kerensky during the Kornilov affair!"

"Never," shouted Pianikh, "in any revolution have such things been
seen as go on here!"

"You are mistaken," responded Trotzky. "Such things have been seen
even in this revolution. Hundreds of our comrades were arrested in
the July days.... When Comrade Kollontai was released from prison by
the doctor's orders, Avksentiev placed at her door two former agents
of the Tsar's secret police!" The peasants withdrew, muttering,
followed by ironical hoots.

The representative of the Left Socialist Revolutionaries spoke on
the Land Decree. While agreeing in principle, his faction could not
vote on the question until after discussion. The Peasants' Soviets
should be consulted....

The Mensheviki Internationalists, too, insisted on a party caucus.

Then the leader of the Maximalists, the Anarchist wing of the
peasants: "We must do honour to a political party which puts such an
act into effect the first day, without jawing about it!"

A typical peasant was in the tribune, long hair, boots and
sheep-skin coat, bowing to all corners of the hall. "I wish you
well, comrades and citizens," he said. "There are some Cadets
walking around outside. You arrested our Socialist peasants-why not
arrest them?"

This was the signal for a debate of excited peasants. It was
precisely like the debate of soldiers of the night before. Here were
the real proletarians of the land....

"Those members of our Executive Committee, Avksentiev and the rest,
whom we thought were the peasants' protectors-they are only Cadets
too! Arrest them! Arrest them!"

Another, "Who are these Pianikhs, these Avksentievs? They are not
peasants at all! They only wag their tails!"

How the crowd rose to them, recognising brothers!

The Left Socialist Revolutionaries proposed a half-hour
intermission. As the delegates streamed out, Lenin stood up in his
place.

"We must not lose time, comrades! News all-important to Russia must
be on the press to-morrow morning. No delay!"

And above the hot discussion, argument, shuffling of feet could be
heard the voice of an emissary of the Military Revolutionary
Committee, crying, "Fifteen agitators wanted in room 17 at once! To
go to the Front!"hellip;

It was almost two hours and a half later that the delegates came
straggling back, the presidium mounted the platform, and the session
recommenced by the reading of telegrams from regiment after
regiment, announcing their adhesion to the Military Revolutionary
Committee.

In leisurely manner the meeting gathered momentum. A delegate from
the Russian troops on the Macedonian front spoke bitterly of their
situation. "We suffer there more from the friendship of our 'Allies'
than from the enemy," he said. Representatives of the Tenth and
Twelfth Armies, just arrived in hot haste, reported, "We support you
with all our strength!" A peasant-soldier protested against the
release of "the traitor Socialists, Mazlov and Salazkin"; as for the
Executive Committee of the Peasants' Soviets, it should be arrested
_en masse!_Here was real revolutionary talk.... A deputy from the
Russian Army in Persia declared he was instructed to demand all
power to the Soviets.... A Ukrainean officer, speaking in his native
tongue: "There is no nationalism in this crisis.... _Da zdravstvuyet_
the proletarian dictatorship of all lands!" Such a deluge of high
and hot thoughts that surely Russia would never again be dumb!

Kameniev remarked that the anti-Bolshevik forces were trying to stir
up disorders everywhere, and read an appeal of the Congress to all
the Soviets of Russia:

The All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers'
Deputies, including some Peasants' Deputies, calls upon the local
Soviets to take immediate energetic measures to oppose all
counter-revolutionary anti-Jewish action and all _pogroms,_ whatever
they may be. The honour of the Workers', Peasants' and Soldiers'
Revolution demands that no _pogrom_ be tolerated.

The Red Guard of Petrograd, the revolutionary garrison and the
sailors have maintained complete order in the capital.

Workers, soldiers and peasants, you should follow everywhere the
example of the workers and soldiers of Petrograd.

Comrade soldiers and Cossacks, on us falls the duty of assuring real
revolutionary order.

All revolutionary Russia and the entire world have their eyes on us....

At two o'clock the Land Decree was put to vote, with only one
against and the peasant delegates wild with joy.... So plunged the
Bolsheviki ahead, irresistible, over-riding hesitation and
opposition-the only people in Russia who had a definite programme of
action while the others talked for eight long months.

Now arose a soldier, gaunt, ragged and eloquent, to protest against
the clause of the _nakaz_ tending to deprive military deserters from
a share in village land allotments. Bawled at and hissed at first,
his simple, moving speech finally made silence. "Forced against his
will into the butchery of the trenches," he cried, "which you
yourselves, in the Peace decree, have voted senseless as well as
horrible, he greeted the Revolution with hope of peace and freedom.
Peace? The Government of Kerensky forced him again to go forward
into Galicia to slaughter and be slaughtered; to his pleas for
peace, Terestchenko simply laughed.... Freedom? Under Kerensky he
found his Committees suppressed, his newspapers cut off, his party
speakers put in prison.... At home in his village, the landlords were
defying his Land Committees, jailing his comrades.... In Petrograd the
bourgeoisie, in alliance with the Germans, were sabotaging the food
and ammunition for the Army.... He was without boots, or clothes.... Who
forced him to desert? The Government of Kerensky, which you have
overthrown!" At the end there was applause.

But another soldier hotly denounced it: "The Government of Kerensky
is not a screen behind which can be hidden dirty work like
desertion! Deserters are scoundrels, who run away home and leave
their comrades to die in the trenches alone! Every deserter is a
traitor, and should be punished...." Uproar, shouts of _"Do volno!
Teesche!"_ Kameniev hastily proposed to leave the matter to the
Government for decision. (See App. V, Sect. 4)

At 2.30 A. M. fell a tense hush. Kameniev was reading the decree of
the Constitution of Power:

Until the meeting of the Constituent Assembly, a provisional
Workers' and Peasants' Government is formed, which shall be named
the Council of People's Commissars. (See App. V, Sect. 5)

The administration of the different branches of state activity shall
be intrusted to commissions, whose composition shall be regulated to
ensure the carrying out of the programme of the Congress, in close
union with the mass-organisations of working-men, working-women,
sailors, soldiers, peasants and clerical employees. The governmental
power is vested in a _collegium_ made up of the chairmen of these
commissions, that is to say, the Council of People's Commissars.

Control over the activities of the People's Commissars, and the
right to replace them, shall belong to the All-Russian Congress of
Soviets of Workers', Peasants' and Soldiers' Deputies, and its
Central Executive Committee.

Still silence; as he read the list of Commissars, bursts of applause
after each name, Lenin's and Trotzky's especially.

_President of the Council:_ Vladimir Ulianov _(Lenin)_

_Interior:_ A. E. Rykov

_Agriculture:_ V. P. Miliutin

_Labour:_ A. G. Shliapnikov

_Military and Naval Affairs_-a committee composed of V. A.

_Avseenko (Antonov),_ N. V. Krylenko, and F. M. Dybenko.

_Commerce and Industry:_ V. P. Nogin

_Popular Education:_ A. V. Lunatcharsky

_Finance:_ E. E. Skvortsov _(Stepanov)_

_Foreign Affairs:_ L. D. Bronstein _(Trotzky)_

_Justice:_ G. E. Oppokov _(Lomov)_

_Supplies:_ E. A. Teodorovitch

_Post and Telegraph:_ N. P. Avilov _(Gliebov)_

_Chairman for Nationalities:_ I. V. Djougashvili _(Stalin)_

_Railroads:_ To be filled later.

There were bayonets at the edges of the room, bayonets pricking up
among the delegates; the Military Revolutionary Committee was arming
everybody, Bolshevism was arming for the decisive battle with
Kerensky, the sound of whose trumpets came up the south-west wind....
In the meanwhile nobody went home; on the contrary hundreds of
newcomers filtered in, filling the great room solid with stern-faced
soldiers and workmen who stood for hours and hours, indefatigably
intent. The air was thick with cigarette smoke, and human breathing,
and the smell of coarse clothes and sweat.

Avilov of the staff of _Novaya Zhizn_ was speaking in the name of
the Social Democrat Internationalists and the remnant of the
Mensheviki Internationalists; Avilov, with his young, intelligent
face, looking out of place in his smart frock-coat.

"We must ask ourselves where we are going.... The ease with which the
Coalition Government was upset cannot be explained by the strength
of the left wing of the democracy, but only by the incapacity of the
Government to give the people peace and bread. And the left wing
cannot maintain itself in power unless it can solve these questions....

"Can it give bread to the people? Grain is scarce. The majority of
the peasants will not be with you, for you cannot give them the
machinery they need. Fuel and other primary necessities are almost
impossible to procure....

"As for peace, that will be even more difficult. The allies refused
to talk with Skobeliev. They will never accept the proposition of a
peace conference from _you._ You will not be recognised either in
London and Paris, or in Berlin....

"You cannot count on the effective help of the proletariat of the
Allied countries, because in most countries it is very far from the
revolutionary struggle; remember, the Allied democracy was unable
even to convoke the Stockholm Conference. Concerning the German
Social Democrats, I have just talked with Comrade Goldenberg, one of
our delegates to Stockholm; he was told by the representatives of
the Extreme Left that revolution in Germany was impossible during
the war...." Here interruptions began to come thick and fast, but
Avilov kept on.

"The isolation of Russia will fatally result either in the defeat of
the Russian Army by the Germans, and the patching up of a peace
between the Austro-German coalition and the Franco-British coalition
_at the expense of Russia_-or in a separate peace with Germany.

"I have just learned that the Allied ambassadors are preparing to
leave, and that Committees for Salvation of Country and Revolution
are forming in all the cities of Russia....

"No one party can conquer these enormous difficulties. The majority
of the people, supporting a government of Socialist coalition, can
alone accomplish the Revolution....

"He then read the resolution of the two factions:

Recognising that for the salvation of the conquests of the
Revolution it is indispensable immediately to constitute a
government based on the revolutionary democracy organised in the
Soviets of Workers,' Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, recognising
moreover that the task of this government is the quickest possible
attainment of peace, the transfer of the land into the hands of the
agrarian committees, the organisation of control over industrial
production, and the convocation of the Constituent Assembly on the
date decided, the Congress appoints an executive committee to
constitute such a government after an agreement with the groups of
the democracy which are taking part in the Congress.

In spite of the revolutionary exaltation of the triumphant crowd,
Avilov's cool tolerant reasoning had shaken them. Toward the end,
the cries and hisses died away, and when he finished there was even
some clapping.

Karelin followed him-also young, fearless, whose sincerity no one
doubted-for the Left Socialist Revolutionaries, the party of Maria
Spiridonova, the party which almost alone followed the Bolsheviki,
and which represented the revolutionary peasants.

"Our party has refused to enter the Council of People's Commissars
because we do not wish forever to separate ourselves from the part
of the revolutionary army which left the Congress, a separation
which would make it impossible for us to serve as intermediaries
between the Bolsheviki and the other groups of the democracy.... And
that is our principal duty at this moment. We cannot sustain any
government except a government of Socialist coalition....

"We protest, moreover, against the tyrannical conduct of the
Bolsheviki. Our Commissars have been driven from their posts. Our
only organ, _Znamia Truda_ (Banner of Labour), was forbidden to
appear yesterday....

"The Central Duma is forming a powerful Committee for Salvation of
Country and Revolution, to fight you. Already you are isolated, and
your Government is without the support of a single other democratic
group....

And now Trotzky stood upon the raised tribune, confident and
dominating, with that sarcastic expression about his mouth which was
almost a sneer. He spoke, in a ringing voice, and the great crowd
rose to him.

"These considerations on the dangers of isolation of our party are
not new. On the eve of insurrection our fatal defeat was also
predicted. Everybody was against us; only a faction of the Socialist
Revolutionaries of the left was with us in the Military
Revolutionary Committee. How is it that we were able to overturn the
Government almost without bloodshed?.... That fact is the most
striking proof that we _were not isolated._ In reality the
Provisional Government was isolated; the democratic parties which
march against us were isolated, are isolated, and forever cut off
from the proletariat!

"They speak of the necessity for a coalition. There is only one
coalition possible-the coalition of the workers, soldiers and
poorest peasants; and it is our party's honour to have realised that
coalition.... What sort of coalition did Avilov mean? A coalition with
those who supported the Government of Treason to the People?
Coalition doesn't always add to strength. For example, could we have
organised the insurrection with Dan and Avksentiev in our ranks?"
Roars of laughter.

"Avksentiev gave little bread. Will a coalition with the _oborontsi_
furnish more? Between the peasants and Avksentiev, who ordered the
arrest of the Land Committees, we choose the peasants! Our
Revolution will remain the classic revolution of history....

"They accuse us of repelling an agreement with the other democratic
parties. But is it we who are to blame? Or must we, as Karelin put
it, blame it on a 'misunderstanding'? No, comrades. When a party in
full tide of revolution, still wreathed in powder-smoke, comes to
say, 'Here is the Power-take it!'-and when those to whom it is
offered go over to the enemy, that is not a misunderstanding.... that
is a declaration of pitiless war. And it isn't we who have declared
war....

"Avilov menaces us with failure of our peace efforts-if we remain
'isolated.' I repeat, I don't see how a coalition with Skobeliev, or
even Terestchenko, can help us to get peace! Avilov tries to
frighten us by the threat of a peace at our expense. And I answer
that in any case, if Europe continues to be ruled by the imperialist
bourgeoisie, revolutionary Russia will inevitably be lost....

"There are only two alternatives; either the Russian Revolution will
create a revolutionary movement in Europe, or the European powers
will destroy the Russian Revolution!"

They greeted him with an immense crusading acclaim, kindling to the
daring of it, with the thought of championing mankind. And from that
moment there was something conscious and decided about the
insurrectionary masses, in all their actions, which never left them.

But on the other side, too, battle was taking form. Kameniev
recognised a delegate from the Union of Railway Workers, a
hardfaced, stocky man with an attitude of implacable hostility. He
threw a bombshell.

"In the name of the strongest organisation in Russia I demand the
right to speak, and I say to you: the _Vikzhel_charges me to make
known the decision of the Union concerning the constitution of
Power. The Central Committee refuses absolutely to support the
Bolsheviki if they persist in isolating themselves from the whole
democracy of Russia!" Immense tumult all over the hall.

"In 1905, and in the Kornilov days, the Railway Workers were the
best defenders of the Revolution. But you did not invite us to your
Congress-" Cries, "It was the old _Tsay-ee-kah_ which did not invite
you!" The orator paid no attention. "We do not recognise the
legality of this Congress; since the departure of the Mensheviki and
Socialist Revolutionaries there is not a legal quorum.... The Union
supports the old _Tsay-ee-Kah,_ and declares that the Congress has
no right to elect a new Committee....

"The Power should be a Socialist and revolutionary Power,
responsible before the authorised organs of the entire revolutionary
democracy. Until the constitution of such a power, the Union of
Railway Workers, which refuses to transport counter-revolutionary
troops to Petrograd, at the same time forbids the execution of any
order whatever without the consent of the _Vikzhel._ The _Vikzhel_
also takes into its hands the entire administration of the railroads
of Russia."

At the end he could hardly be heard for the furious storm of abuse
which beat upon him. But it was a heavy blow-that could be seen in
the concern on the faces of the presidium. Kameniev, however, merely
answered that there could be no doubt of the legality of the
Congress, as even the quorum established by the old _Tsay-ee-Kah_
was exceeded-in spite of the secession of the Mensheviki and
Socialist Revolution arises....

Then came the vote on the Constitution of Power, which carried the
Council of People's Commissars into office by an enormous majority....

The election of the new _Tsay-ee-kah,_ the new parliament of the
Russian Republic, took barely fifteen minutes. Trotzky announced its
composition: 100 members, of which 70 Bolsheviki.... As for the
peasants, and the seceding factions, places were to be reserved for
them. "We welcome into the Government all parties and groups which
will adopt our programme," ended Trotzky.

And thereupon the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets was
dissolved, so that the members might hurry to their homes in the
four corners of Russia and tell of the great happenings....

It was almost seven when we woke the sleeping conductors and
motor-men of the street-cars which the Street-Railway Workers' Union
always kept waiting at Smolny to take the Soviet delegates to their
homes. In the crowded car there was less happy hilarity than the
night before, I thought. Many looked anxious; perhaps they were
saying to themselves, "Now we are masters, how can we do our will?"

At our apartment-house we were held up in the dark by an armed
patrol of citizens and carefully examined. The Duma's proclamation
was doing its work....

The landlady heard us come in, and stumbled out in a pink silk
wrapper.

The House Committee has again asked that you take your turn on
guard-duty with the rest of the men," she said.

"What's the reason for this guard-duty?"

"To protect the house and the women and children."

"Who from?"

"Robbers and murderers."

"But suppose there came a Commissar from the Military Revolutionary
Committee to search for arms?"

"Oh, that's what they'll _say_ they are.... And besides, what's the
difference?"

I solemnly affirmed that the Consul had forbidden all American
citizens to carry arms-especially in the neighbourhood of the
Russian _intelligentzia_....

                              Chapter VI

                      The Committee for Salvation

FRIDAY, November 9th....

Novotcherkask, November 8th.

In view of the revolt of the Bolsheviki, and their attempt to depose
the Provisional Government and to seize the power in Petrograd... the
Cossack Government declares that it considers these acts criminal
and absolutely inadmissible. In consequence, the Cossacks will lend
all their support to the Provisional Government, which is a
government of coalition. Because of these circumstances, and until
the return of the Provisional Government to power, and the
restoration of order in Russia, I take upon myself, beginning
November 7th, all the power in that which concerns the region of the
Don.

Signed: ATAMAN KALEDIN

_President of the Government of the Cossack Troops._

_Prikaz_ of the Minister-President Kerensky, dated at Gatchina:

I, Minister-President of the Provisional Government, and Supreme
Commander of all the armed forces of the Russian Republic, declare
that I am at the head of regiments from the Front who have remained
faithful to the fatherland.

I order all the troops of the Military District of Petrograd, who
through mistake or folly have answered the appeal of the traitors to
the country and the Revolution, to return to their duty without
delay.

This order shall be read in all regiments, battalions and squadrons.

Signed: _Minister-President of the Provisional_

_Government and Supreme Commander_

A. F. KERENSKY.

Telegram from Kerensky to the General in Command of the Northern
Front:

The town of Gatchina has been taken by the loyal regiments without
bloodshed. Detachments of Cronstadt sailors, and of the Semionovsky
and Ismailovsky regiments, gave up their arms without resistance and
joined the Government troops.

I order all the designated units to advance as quickly as possible.
The Military Revolutionary Committee has ordered its troops to
retreat....

Gatchina, about thirty kilometers south-west, had fallen during the
night. Detachments of the two regiments mentioned-not the
sailors-while wandering captainless in the neighbourhood, had indeed
been surrounded by Cossacks and given up their arms; but it was not
true that they had joined the Government troops. At this very moment
crowds of them, bewildered and ashamed, were up at Smolny trying to
explain. They did not think the Cossacks were so near.... They had
tried to argue with the Cossacks....

Apparently the greatest confusion prevailed along the revolutionary
front. The garrisons of all the little towns southward had split
hopelessly, bitterly into two factions-or three: the high command
being on the side of Kerensky, in default of anything stronger, the
majority of the rank and file with the Soviets, and the rest
unhappily wavering.

Hastily the Military Revolutionary Committee appointed to command
the defence of Petrograd an ambitious regular Army Captain,
Muraviov, the same Muraviov who had organised the Death Battalions
during the summer, and had once been heard to advise the Government
that "it was too lenient with the Bolsheviki; they must be wiped
out." A man of military mind, who admired power and audacity,
perhaps sincerely....

Beside my door when I came down in the morning were posted two new
orders of the Military Revolutionary Committee, directing that all
shops and stores should open as usual, and that all empty rooms and
apartments should be put at the disposal of the Committee....

For thirty-six hours now the Bolsheviki had been cut off from
provincial Russia and the outside world. The railway men and
telegraphers refused to transmit their despatches, the postmen would
not handle their mail. Only the Government wireless at Tsarskoye
Selo launched half-hourly bulletins and manifestoes to the four
corners of heaven; the Commissars of Smolny raced the Commissars of
the City Duma on speeding trains half across the earth; and two
aeroplanes, laden with propaganda, fled high up toward the Front....

But the eddies of insurrection were spreading through Russia with a
swiftness surpassing any human agency. Helsingfors Soviet passed
resolutions of support; Kiev Bolsheviki captured the arsenal and the
telegraph station, only to be driven out by delegates to the
Congress of Cossacks, which happened to be meeting there; in Kazan,
a Military Revolutionary Committee arrested the local garrison staff
and the Commissar of the Provisional Government; from far
Krasnoyarsk, in Siberia, came news that the Soviets were in control
of the Municipal institutions; at Moscow, where the situation was
aggravated by a great strike of leather-workers on one side, and a
threat of general lock-out on the other, the Soviets had voted
overwhelmingly to support the action of the Bolsheviki in
Petrograd.... Already a Military Revolutionary Committee was
functioning.

Everywhere the same thing happened. The common soldiers and the
industrial workers supported the Soviets by a vast majority; the
officers, _yunkers_ and middle class generally were on the side of
the Government-as were the bourgeois Cadets and the "moderate"
Socialist parties. In all these towns sprang up Committees for
Salvation of Country and Revolution, arming for civil war....

Vast Russia was in a state of solution. As long ago as 1905 the
process had begun; the March Revolution had merely hastened it, and
giving birth to a sort of forecast of the new order, had ended by
merely perpetuating the hollow structure of the old regime. Now,
however, the Bolsheviki, in one night, had dissipated it, as one
blows away smoke. Old Russia was no more; human society flowed
molten in primal heat, and from the tossing sea of flame was
emerging the class struggle, stark and pitiless-and the fragile,
slowly-cooling crust of new planets....

In Petrograd sixteen Ministries were on strike, led by the
Ministries of Labour and of Supplies-the only two created by the
all-Socialist Government of August.

If ever men stood alone the "handful of Bolsheviki" apparently stood
alone that grey chill morning, with all storms towering over them.
(See App. VI, Sect. 1) Back against the wall, the Military
Revolutionary Committee struck-for its life. _"De l'audace, encore
de l'audace, et toujours de l'audace_.... At five in the morning the
Red Guards entered the printing office of the City Government,
confiscated thousands of copies of the Appeal-Protest of the Duma,
and suppressed the official Municipal organ-the _Viestnik Gorodskovo
Samoupravleniya_ (Bulletin of the Municipal Self-Government). All
the bourgeois newspapers were torn from the presses, even the _Golos
Soldata,_ journal of the old _Tsay-ee-kah_-which, however, changing
its name to _Soldatski Golos,_ appeared in an edition of a hundred
thousand copies, bellowing rage and defiance:

The men who began their stroke of treachery in the night, who have
suppressed the newspapers, will not keep the country in ignorance
long. The country will know the truth! It will appreciate you,
Messrs. the Bolsheviki! We shall see!...

As we came down the Nevsky a little after midday the whole street
before the Duma building was crowded with people. Here and there
stood Red Guards and sailors, with bayonetted rifles, each one
surrounded by about a hundred men and women-clerks, students,
shopkeepers, _tchinovniki_-shaking their fists and bawling insults
and menaces. On the steps stood boy-scouts and officers,
distributing copies of the _Soldatski Golos._ A workman with a red
band around his arm and a revolver in his hand stood trembling with
rage and nervousness in the middle of a hostile throng at the foot
of the stairs, demanding the surrender of the papers.... Nothing like
this, I imagine, ever occurred in history. On one side a handful of
workmen and common soldiers, with arms in their hands, representing
a victorious insurrection-and perfectly miserable; on the other a
frantic mob made up of the kind of people that crowd the sidewalks
of Fifth Avenue at noon-time, sneering, abusing, shouting,
"Traitors! Provocators! _Opritchniki!_ [*]"
[* Savage body-guards if Ian the Terrible, 17th century]

The doors were guarded by students and officers with white arm-bands
lettered in red, "Militia of the Committee of Public Safety," and
half a dozen boy-scouts came and went. Upstairs the place was all
commotion. Captain Gomberg was coming down the stairs. "They're
going to dissolve the Duma," he said. "The Bolshevik Commissar is
with the Mayor now." As we reached the top Riazanov came hurrying
out. He had been to demand that the Duma recognise the Council of
peoples' Commissars, and the Mayor had given him a flat refusal.

In the offices a great babbling crowd, hurrying, shouting,
gesticulating-Government officials, intellectuals, journalists,
foreign correspondents, French and British officers.... "The City
Engineer pointed to them triumphantly. "The Embassies recognise the
Duma as the only power now," he explained. "For these Bolshevik
murderers and robbers it is only a question of hours. All Russia is
rallying to us....

In the Alexander Hall a monster meeting of the Committee for
Salvation. Fillipovsky in the chair and Skobeliev again in the
tribune, reporting, to immense applause, new adhesions to the
Committee; Executive Committee of Peasants' Soviets, old
_Tsay-ee-kah,_ Central Army Committee, _Tsentroflot,_ Menshevik,
Socialist Revolutionary and Front group delegates from the Congress
of Soviets, Central Committees of the Menshevik, Socialist
Revolutionary, Populist Socialist parties. "Yedinstvo" group,
Peasants' Union, Cooperatives, Zemstvos, Municipalities, Post and
Telegraph Unions, _Vikzhel,_ Council of the Russian Republic, Union
of Unions,  [*] Merchants' and Manufacturers' Association....
[* See Notes and Explanations.]

".... The power of the Soviets is not democratic power, but a
dictatorship-and not the dictatorship of the proletariat, but
_against_ the proletariat. All those who have felt or know how to
feel revolutionary enthusiasm must join now for the defence of the
Revolution....

"The problem of the day is not only to render harmless irresponsible
demagogues, but to fight against the counter-revolution.... If rumours
are true that certain generals in the provinces are attempting to
profit by events in order to march on Petrograd with other designs,
it is only one more proof that we must establish a solid base of
democratic government. Otherwise, troubles with the Right will
follow troubles from the Left....

"The garrison of Petrograd cannot remain indifferent when citizens
buying the _Golos Soldata_ and newsboys selling the _Rabotchaya
Gazeta_ are arrested in the streets....

"The hour of resolutions has passed.... Let those who have no longer
faith in the Revolution retire.... To establish a united power, we
must again restore the prestige of the Revolution....

"Let us swear that either the Revolution shall be saved-or we shall
perish!"

The hall rose, cheering, with kindling eyes. There was not a single
proletarian anywhere in sight....

Then Weinstein:

"We must remain calm, and not act until public opinion is firmly
grouped in support of the Committee for Salvation-then we can pass
from the defensive to action!"

The _Vikzhel_ representative announced that his organisation was
taking the initiative in forming the new Government, and its
delegates were now discussing the matter with Smolny.... Followed a
hot discussion: were the Bolsheviki to be admitted to the new
Government? Martov pleaded for their admission; after all, he said,
they represented an important political party. Opinions were very
much divided upon this, the right wing Mensheviki and Socialist
Revolutionaries, as well as the Populist Socialists, the
Cooperatives and the bourgeois elements being bitterly against....

"They have betrayed Russia," one speaker said. "They have started
civil war and opened the front to the Germans. The Bolsheviki must
be mercilessly crushed...."

Skobeliev was in favor of excluding both the Bolsheviki and the
Cadets.

We got into conversation with a young Socialist Revolutionary, who
had walked out of the Democratic Conference to gether with the
Bolsheviki, that night when Tseretelli and the "compromisers" forced
Coalition upon the democracy of Russia.

"You here?" I asked him.

His eyes flashed fire. "Yes!" he cried. "I left the Congress with my
party Wednesday night. I have not risked my life for twenty years
and more to submit now to the tyranny of the Dark People. Their
methods are intolerable. But they have not counted on the peasants....
When the peasants begin to act, then it is a question of minutes
before they are done for."

"But the peasants-will they act? Doesn't the Land decree settle the
peasants? What more do they want?"

"Ah, the Land decree!" he said furiously. "Yes, do you know what
that Land decree is? It is _our_ decree-it is the Socialist
Revolutionary programme, intact! My party framed that policy, after
the most careful compilation of the wishes of the peasants
themselves. It is an outrage...."

"But if it is your own policy, why do you object? If it is the
peasants' wishes, why will they oppose it?"

"You don't understand! Don't you see that the peasants will
immediately realise that it is all a trick-that these usurpers have
stolen the Socialist Revolutionary programme?"

I asked if it were true that Kaledin was marching north.

He nodded, and rubbed his hands with a sort of bitter satisfaction.
"Yes. Now you see what these Bolsheviki have done. They have raised
the counter-revolution against us. The Revolution is lost. The
Revolution is lost."

"But won't you defend the Revolution?"

"Of course we will defend it-to the last drop of our blood. But we
won't cooperate with the Bolsheviki in any way...."

"But if Kaledin comes to Petrograd, and the Bolsheviki defend the
city. Won't you join with them?"

"Of course not. We will defend the city also, but we won't support
the Bolsheviki. Kaledin is the enemy of the Revolution, but the
Bolsheviki are equally enemies of the Revolution."

"Which do you prefer-Kaledin or the Bolsheviki?"

"It is not a question to be discussed!" he burst out impatiently. "I
tell you, the Revolution is lost. And it is the Bolsheviki who are
to blame. But listen-why should we talk of such things? Kerensky is
comming.... Day after tomorrow we shall pass to the offensive....
Already Smolny has sent delegates inviting us to form a new
Government. But we have them now-they are absolutely impotent.... We
shall not cooperate...."

Outside there was a shot. We ran to the windows. A Red Guard,
finally exasperated by the taunts of the crowd, had shot into it,
wounding a young girl in the arm. We could see her being lifted into
a cab, surrounded by an excited throng, the clamour of whose voices
floated up to us. As we looked, suddenly an armoured automobile
appeared around the corner of the Mikhailovsky, its guns sluing this
way and that. Immediately the crowd began to run, as Petrograd
crowds do, falling down and lying still in the street, piled in the
gutters, heaped up behind telephone-poles. The car lumbered up to
the steps of the Duma and a man stuck his head out of the turret,
demanding the surrender of the _Soldatski Golos._ The boy-scouts
jeered and scuttled into the building. After a moment the automobile
wheeled undecidedly around and went off up the Nevsky, while some
hundreds of men and women picked themselves up and began to dust
their clothes....

Inside was a prodigious running-about of people with armfuls of
_Soldatski Golos,_ looking for places to hide them....

A journalist came running into the room, waving a paper.

"Here's a proclamation from Krasnov!" he cried. Everybody crowded
around. "Get it printed-get it printed quick, and around to the
barracks!"

By the order of the Supreme Commander I am appointed commandant of
the troops concentrated under Petrograd.

Citizens, soldiers, valorous Cossacks of the Don, of the Kuban, of
the Transbaikal, of the Amur, of the Yenissei, to all you who have
remained faithful to your oath I appeal; to you who have sworn to
guard inviolable your oath of Cossack-I call upon you to save
Petrograd from anarchy, from famine, from tyranny, and to save
Russia from the indelible shame to which a handful of ignorant men,
bought by the gold of Wilhelm, are trying to submit her.

The Provisional Government, to which you swore fidelity in the great
days of March, is not overthrown, but by violence expelled from the
edifice in which it held its meetings. However the Government, with
the help of the Front armies, faithful to their duty, with the help
of the Council of Cossacks, which has united under its command all
the Cossacks and which, strong with the morale which reigns in its
ranks, and acting in accordance with the will of the Russian people,
has sworn to serve the country as its ancestors served it in the
Troublous Times of 1612, when the Cossacks of the Don delivered
Moscow, menaced by the Swedes, the Poles, and the Lithuanians. Your
Government still exists....

The active army considers these criminals with horror and contempt.
Their acts of vandalism and pillage, their crimes, the German
mentality with which they regard Russia-stricken down but not yet
surrendered-have alienated from them the entire people.

Citizens, soldiers, valorous Cossacks of the garrison of Petrograd;
send me your delegates so that I may know who are traitors to their
country and who are not, that there may be avoided an effusion of
innocent blood.

Almost the same moment word ran from group to group that the
building was surrounded by Red Guards. An officer strode in, a red
band around his arm, demanding the Mayor. A few minutes later he
left and old Schreider came out of his office, red and pale by turns.

"A special meeting of the Duma!" he cried. "Immediately!"

In the big hall proceedings were halted. "All members of the Duma
for a special meeting!"

"What's the matter?"

"I don't know-going to arrest us-going to dissolve the
Duma-arresting members at the door-" so ran the excited comments.

In the Nicolai Hall there was barely room to stand. The Mayor
announced that troops were stationed at all the doors, prohibiting
all exit and entrance, and that a Commissar had threatened arrest
and the dispersal of the Municipal Duma. A flood of impassioned
speeches from members, and even from the galleries, responded. The
freely-elected City Government could not be dissolved by _any_
power; the Mayor's person and that of all the members were
inviolable; the tyrants, the provocators, the German agents should
never be recognised; as for these threats to dissolve us, let them
try-only over our dead bodies shall they seize this chamber, where
like the Roman senators of old we await with dignity the coming of
the Goths....

Resolution, to inform the Dumas and Zemstvos of all Russia by
telegraph. Resolution, that it was impossible for the Mayor or the
Chairman of the Duma to enter into any relations whatever with
representatives of the Military Revolutionary Committee or with the
so-called Council of People's Commissars. Resolution, to address
another appeal to the population of Petrograd to stand up for the
defence of their elected town government. Resolution, to remain in
permanent session....

In the meanwhile one member arrived with the information that he had
telephoned to Smolny, and that the Military Revolutionary Committee
said that no orders had been given to surround the Duma, that the
troops would be withdrawn....

As we went downstairs Riazanov burst in through the front door, very
agitated.

"Are you going to dissolve the Duma?" I asked.

"My God, no!" he answered. "It is all a mistake. I told the Mayor
this morning that the Duma would be left alone....

Out on the Nevsky, in the deepening dusk, a long double file of
cyclists came riding, guns slung on their shoulders. They halted,
and the crowd pressed in and deluged them with questions.

"Who are you? Where do you come from?" asked a fat old man with a
cigar in his mouth.

"Twelfth Army. From the front. We came to support the Soviets
against the damn' bourgeoisie!"

"Ah!" were furious cries. "Bolshevik gendarmes! Bolshevik Cossacks!"

A little officer in a leather coat came running down the ste