a grassy terrace. I climbed up to them. "Who are you?" I asked.

"We are the guard," answered one. They all looked very depressed, as
undoubtedly they were, from weeks and weeks of all-day all-night
argument and debate.

"Are you Kerensky's troops, or the Soviets'?"

There was silence for a moment, as they looked uneasily at each
other. Then, "We are neutral," said he.

We went on through the arch of the huge Ekaterina Palace, into the
Palace enclosure itself, asking for headquarters. A sentry outside a
door in a curving white wing of the Palace said that the commandant
was inside.

In a graceful, white, Georgian room, divided into unequal parts by a
two-sided fire-place, a group of officers stood anxiously talking.
They were pale and distracted, and evidently hadn't slept. To one,
an oldish man with a white beard, his uniform studded with
decorations, who was pointed out as the Colonel, we showed our
Bolshevik papers.

He seemed surprised. "How did you get here without being killed?" he
asked politely. "It is very dangerous in the streets just now.
Political passion is running very high in Tsarskoye Selo. There was
a battle this morning, and there will be another to-morrow morning.
Kerensky is to enter the town at eight o'clock."

"Where are the Cossacks?"

"About a mile over that way." He waved his arm.

"And you will defend the city against them?"

"Oh dear no." He smiled. "We are holding the city for Kerensky." Our
hearts sank, for our passes stated that we were revolutionary to the
core. The Colonel cleared his throat. "About those passes of yours,"
he went on. "Your lives will be in danger if you are captured.
Therefore, if you want to see the battle, I will give you an order
for rooms in the officers' hotel, and if you will come back here at
seven o'clock in the morning, I will give you new passes."

"So you are for Kerensky?" we said.

"Well, not exactly _for_ Kerensky." The Colonel hesitated. "You see,
most of the soldiers in the garrison are Bolsheviki, and to-day,
after the battle, they all went away in the direction of Petrograd,
taking the artillery with them. You might say that none of the
_soldiers_ are for Kerensky; but some of them just don't want to
fight at all. The _officers_ have almost all gone over to Kerensky's
forces, or simply gone away. We are-ahem-in a most difficult
position, as you see...."

We did not believe that there would be any battle.... The Colonel
courteously sent his orderly to escort us to the railroad station.
He was from the South, born of French immigrant parents in
Bessarabia. "Ah," he kept saying, "it is not the danger or the
hardships I mind, but being so long, three years, away from my
mother...."

Looking out of the window of the train as we sped through the cold
dark toward Petrograd, I caught glimpses of clumps of soldiers
gesticulating in the light of fires, and of clusters of armoured
cars halted together at cross-roads, the chauffeurs hanging out of
the turrets and shouting to each other....

All the troubled night over the bleakflats leaderless bands of
soldiers and Red Guards wandered, clashing and confused, and the
Commissars of the Military Revolutionary Committee hurried from one
group to another, trying to organise a defence....

Back in town excited throngs were moving in tides up and down the
Nevsky. Something was in the air. From the Warsaw Railway station
could be heard far-off cannonade. In the _yunker_ schools there was
feverish activity. Duma members went from barracks to barracks,
arguing and pleading, narrating fearful stories of Bolshevik
violence-massacre of the _yunkers_ in the Winter Palace, rape of the
women soldiers, the shooting of the girl before the Duma, the murder
of Prince Tumanov.... In the Alexander Hall of the Duma building the
Committee for Salvation was in special session; Commissars came and
went, running.... All the journalists expelled from Smolny were there,
in high spirits. They did not believe our report of conditions in
Tsarskoye. Why, everybody knew that Tsarskoye was in Kerensky's
hands, and that the Cossacks were now at Pulkovo. A committee was
being elected to meet Kerensky at the railway station in the
morning....

One confided to me, in strictest secrecy, that the
counter-revolution would begin at midnight. He showed me two
proclamations, one signed by Gotz and Polkovnikov, ordering the
_yunker_ schools, soldier convalescents in the hospitals, and the
Knights of St. George to mobilise on a war footing and wait for
orders from the Committee for Salvation; the other from the
Committee for Salvation itself, which read as follows:

To the Population of Petrograd!

Comrades, workers, soldiers and citizens of revolutionary Petrograd!  nary Petrograd!  |          |

The Bolsheviki, while appealing for peace at the front, are inciting
to civil war in the rear.

Do not dig their provocatory appeals!

Do not dig trenches!

Down with the traitorous barricades!

Lay down your arms!

Soldiers, return to your barracks!

The war begun in Petrograd-is the death of the Revolution!

In the name of liberty, land, and peace, unite around the Committee
for Salvation of Country and Revolution!

As we left the Duma a company of Red Guards, stern-faced and
desperate, came marching down the dark, deserted street with a dozen
prisoners-members of the local branch of the Council of Cossacks,
caught red-handed plotting counter-revolution in their headquarters....

A soldier, accompanied by a small boy with a pail of paste, was
sticking up great flaring notices:

By virtue of the present, the city of Petrograd and its suburbs are
declared in a state of siege. All assemblies or meetings in the
streets, and generally in the open air, are forbidden until further
orders.

N. PODVOISKY, President of the Military

Revolutionary Committee.

As we went home the air was full of confused sound-automobile horns,
shouts, distant shots. The city stirred uneasily, wakeful.

In the small hours of the morning a company of _yunkers,_ disguised
as soldiers of the Semionovsky Regiment, presented themselves at the
Telephone Exchange just before the hour of changing guard. They had
the Bolshevik password, and took charge without arousing suspicion.
A few minutes later Antonov appeared, making a round of inspection.
Him they captured and locked in a small room. When the relief came
it was met by a blast of rifle-fire, several being killed.

Counter-revolution had begun...

                              Chapter VIII

                            Counter-Revolution

NEXT morning, Sunday the 11th, the Cossacks entered Tsarskoye Selo,
Kerensky (See App. VIII, Sect. 1) himself riding a white horse and
all the church-bells clamouring. From the top of a little hill
outside the town could be seen the golden spires and many-coloured
cupolas, the sprawling grey immensity of the capital spread along
the dreary plain, and beyond, the steely Gulf of Finland.

There was no battle. But Kerensky made a fatal blunder. At seven in
the morning he sent word to the Second Tsarskoye Selo Rifles to lay
down their arms. The soldiers replied that they would remain
neutral, but would not disarm. Kerensky gave them ten minutes in
which to obey. This angered the soldiers; for eight months they had
been governing themselves by committee, and this smacked of the old
régime.... A few minutes later Cossack artillery opened fire on the
barracks, killing eight men. From that moment there were no more
"neutral" soldiers in Tsarskoye....

Petrograd woke to bursts of rifle-fire, and the tramping thunder of
men marching. Under the high dark sky a cold wind smelt of snow. At
dawn the Military Hotel and the Telegraph Agency had been taken by
large forces of _yunkers,_ and bloodily recaptured. The Telephone
Station was besieged by sailors, who lay behind barricades of
barrels, boxes and tin sheets in the middle of the Morskaya, or
sheltered themselves at the corner of the Gorokhovaya and of St.
Isaac's Square, shooting at anything that moved. Occasionally an
automobile passed in and out, flying the Red Cross flag. The sailors
let it pass....

Albert Rhys Williams was in the Telephone Exchange. He went out with
the Red Cross automobile, which was ostensibly full of wounded.
After circulating about the city, the car went by devious ways to
the Mikhailovsky _yunker_ school, headquarters of the
counter-revolution. A French officer, in the court-yard, seemed to
be in command.... By this means ammunition and supplies were conveyed
to the Telephone Exchange. Scores of these pretended ambulances
acted as couriers and ammunition trains for the _yunkers._

Five or six armoured cars, belonging to the disbanded British
Armoured Car Division, were in their hands. As Louise Bryant was
going along St. Isaac's Square one came rolling up from the
Admiralty, on its way to the Telephone Exchange. At the corner of
the Gogolia, right in front of her, the engine stalled. Some sailors
ambushed behind wood-piles began shooting. The machine-gun in the
turret of the thing slewed around and spat a hail of bullets
indiscriminately into the wood-piles and the crowd. In the archway
where Miss Bryant stood seven people were shot dead, among them two
little boys. Suddenly, with a shout, the sailors leaped up and
rushed into the flaming open; closing around the monster, they
thrust their bayonets into the loop-holes, again and again, yelling...
The chauffeur pretended to be wounded, and they let him go free-to
run to the Duma and swell the tale of Bolshevik atrocities....Among
the dead was a British Officer....

Later the newspapers told of another French officer, captured in a
_yunker_ armoured car and sent to Peter-Paul. The French Embassy
promptly denied this, but one of the City Councillors told me that
he himself had procured the officer's release from prison....

Whatever the official attitude of the Allied Embassies, individual
French and British officers were active these days, even to the
extent of giving advice at executive sessions of the Committee for
Salvation.

All day long in every quarter of the city there were skirmishes
between _yunkers_ and Red Guards, battles between armoured cars....
Volleys, single shots and the shrill chatter of machine-guns could
be heard, far and near. The iron shutters of the shops were drawn,
but business still went on. Even the moving-picture shows, all
outside lights dark, played to crowded houses. The street-cars ran.
The telephones were all working; when you called Central, shooting
could be plainly heard over the wire.... Smolny was cut off, but the
Duma and the Committee for Salvation were in constant communication
with all the _yunker_ schools and with Kerensky at Tsarskoye.

At seven in the morning the Vladimir _yunker_ school was visited by
a patrol of soldiers, sailors and Red Guards, who gave the _yunkers_
twenty minutes to lay down their arms. The ultimatum was rejected.
An hour later the _yunkers_ got ready to march, but were driven back
by a violent fusillade from the corner of the Grebetskaya and the
Bolshoy Prospekt. Soviet troops surrounded the building and opened
fire, two armoured cars cruising back and forth with machine guns
raking it. The _yunkers_ telephoned for help. The Cossacks replied
that they dare not come, because a large body of sailors with two
cannon commanded their barracks. The Pavlovsk school was surrounded.
Most of the Mikhailov _yunkers_ were fighting in the streets....

At half-past eleven three field-pieces arrived. Another demand to
surrender was met by the _yunkers_ shooting down two of the Soviet
delegates under the white flag. Now began a real bombardment. Great
holes were torn in the walls of the school. The _yunkers_ defended
themselves desperately; shouting waves of Red Guards, assaulting,
crumpled under the withering blast.... Kerensky telephoned from
Tsarskoye to refuse all parley with the Military Revolutionary
Committee.

Frenzied by defeat and their heaps of dead, the Soviet troops opened
a tornado of steel and flame against the battered building. Their
own officers could not stop the terrible bombardment. A Commissar
from Smolny named Kirilov tried to halt it; he was threatened with
lynching. The Red Guards' blood was up.

At half-past two the _yunkers_ hoisted a white flag; they would
surrender if they were guaranteed protection. This was promised.
With a rush and a shout thousands of soldiers and Red Guards poured
through windows, doors and holes in the wall. Before it could be
stopped five _yunkers_ were beaten and stabbed to death. The rest,
about two hundred, were taken to Peter-Paul under escort, in small
groups so as to avoid notice. On the way a mob set upon one party,
killing eight more _yunkers_.... More than a hundred Red Guards and
soldiers had fallen....

Two hours later the Duma got a telephone message that the victors
were marching toward the _Injinierny Zamok_-the Engineers' school. A
dozen members immediately set out to distribute among them armfuls
of the latest proclamation of the Committee for Salvation. Several
did not come back.... All the other schools surrendered without
resistance, and the _yunkers_ were sent unharmed to Peter-Paul and
Cronstadt....

The Telephone Exchange held out until afternoon, when a Bolshevik
armoured car appeared, and the sailors stormed the place. Shrieking,
the frightened telephone girls ran to and fro; the _yunkers_ tore
from their uniforms all distinguishing marks, and one offered
Williams _anything_ for the loan of his overcoat, as a disguise....
"They will massacre us! They will massacre us!" they cried, for many
of them had given their word at the Winter Palace not to take up
arms against the People. Williams offered to mediate if Antonov were
released. This was immediately done; Antonov and Williams made
speeches to the victorious sailors, inflamed by their many dead-and
once more the _yunkers_ went free.... All but a few, who in their
panic tried to flee over the roofs, or to hide in the attic, and
were found and hurled into the street.

Tired, bloody, triumphant, the sailors and workers swarmed into the
switchboard room, and finding so many pretty girls, fell back in an
embarrassed way and fumbled with awkward feet. Not a girl was
injured, not one insulted. Frightened, they huddled in the corners,
and then, finding themselves safe, gave vent to their spite. "Ugh!
The dirty, ignorant people! The fools!"... The sailors and Red Guards
were embarrassed. "Brutes! Pigs!" shrilled the girls, indignantly
putting on their coats and hats. Romantic had been their experience
passing up cartridges and dressing the wounds of their dashing young
defenders, the _yunkers,_ many of them members of noble families,
fighting to restore their beloved Tsar! These were just common
workmen, peasants, "Dark People."...

The Commissar of the Military Revolutionary Committee, little
Vishniak, tried to persuade the girls to remain. He was effusively
polite. "You have been badly treated," he said. "The telephone
system is controlled by the Municipal Duma. You are paid sixty
rubles a month, and have to work ten hours and more.... From now on
all that will be changed. The Government intends to put the
telephones under control of the Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs.
Your wages will be immediately raised to one hundred and fifty
rubles, and your working-hours reduced. As members of the
working-class you should be happy--"

Members of the _working-class_ indeed! Did he mean to infer that
there was anything in common between these-these animals-and _us?_
Remain? Not if they offered a thousand rubles!... Haughty and spiteful
the girls left the place....

The employees of the building, the line-men and labourers-they
stayed. But the switch-boards must be operated-the telephone was
vital.... Only half a dozen trained operators were available.
Volunteers were called for; a hundred responded, sailors, soldiers,
workers. The six girls scurried backward and forward, instructing,
helping, scolding.... So, crippled, halting, but _going,_ the wires
slowly began to hum. The first thing was to connect Smolny with the
barracks and the factories; the second, to cut off the Duma and the
_yunker_ schools.... Late in the afternoon word of it spread through
the city, and hundreds of bourgeois called up to scream, "Fools!
Devils! How long do you think you will last? Wait till the Cossacks
come!"

Dusk was already falling. On the almost deserted Nevsky, swept by a
bitter wind, a crowd had gathered before the Kazan Cathedral,
continuing the endless debate; a few workmen, some soldiers and the
rest shop-keepers, clerks and the like.

"But Lenin won't get Germany to make peace!" cried one.

A violent young soldier replied. "And whose fault is it? Your damn
Kerensky, dirty bourgeois! To hell with Kerensky! We don't want him!
We want Lenin...."

Outside the Duma an officer with a white arm-band was tearing down
posters from the wall, swearing loudly. One read:

To the Population of Petrograd!

At this dangerous hour, when the Municipal Duma ought to use every
means to calm the population, to assure it bread and other
necessities, the Right Socialist Revolutionaries and the Cadets,
forgetting their duty, have turned the Duma into a
counter-revolutionary meeting, trying to raise part of the
population against the rest, so as to facilitate the victory of
Kornilov-Kerensky. Instead of doing their duty, the Right Socialist
Revolutionaries and the Cadets have transformed the Duma into an
arena of political attack upon the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers'
and Peasants' Deputies, against the revolutionary Government of
peace, bread and liberty.

Citizens of Petrograd, we, the Bolshevik Municipal Councillors
elected by you-we want you to know that the Right Socialist
Revolutionaries and the Cadets are engaged in counter-revolutionary
action, have forgotten their duty, and are leading the population to
famine, to civil war. We, elected by 183,000 votes, consider it our
duty to bring to the attention of our constituents what is going on
in the Duma, and declare that we disclaim all responsibility for the
terrible but inevitable consequences....

Far away still sounded occasional shots, but the city lay quiet,
cold, as if exhausted by the violent spasms which had torn it.

In the Nicolai Hall the Duma session was coming to an end. Even the
truculent Duma seemed a little stunned. One after another the
Commissars reported-capture of the Telephone Exchange,
street-fighting, the taking of the Vladimir school.... "The Duma,"
said Trupp, "is on the side of the democracy in its struggle against
arbitrary violence; but in any case, whichever side wins, the Duma
will always be against lynchings and torture...."

Konovski, Cadet, a tall old man with a cruel face: "When the troops
of the legal Government arrive in Petrograd, they will shoot down
these insurgents, and that will not be lynching!" Protests all over
the hall, even from his own party.

Here there was doubt and depression. The counter-revolution was
being put down. The Central Committee of the Socialist Revolutionary
party had voted lack of confidence in its officers; the left wing
was in control; Avksentiev had resigned. signed. A courier reported
that the Committee of Welcome sent to meet Kerensky at the railway
station had been arrested. In the streets could be heard the dull
rumble of distant cannonading, south and southwest. Still Kerensky
did not come...

Only three newspapers were out-_Pravda, Dielo Naroda_ and _Novaya
Zhizn._ All of them devoted much space to the new "coalition"
Government. The Socialist Revolutionary paper demanded a Cabinet
without either Cadets or Bolsheviki. Gorky was hopeful; Smolny had
made concessions. A purely Socialist Government was taking shape-all
elements except the bourgeoisie. As for _Pravda,_ it sneered:

We ridicule these coalitions with political parties whose most
prominent members are petty journalists of doubtful reputation; our
"coalition" is that of the proletariat and the revolutionary Army
with the poor peasants...

On the walls a vainglorious announcement of the _Vikzhel,_
threatening to strike if both sides did not compromise:

The conquerors of these riots, the saviours of the wreck of our
country, these will be neither the Bolsheviki, nor the Committee for
Salvation, nor the troops of Kerensky-but we, the Union of
Railwaymen...

Red Guards are incapable of handling a complicated business like the
railways; as for the Provisional Government, it has shown itself
incapable of holding the power...

We refuse to lend our services to any party which does not act by
authority of ... a Government based on the confidence of all the
democracy....

Smolny thrilled with the boundless vitality of inexhaustible
humanity in action.

In Trade Union headquarters Lozovsky introduced me to a delegate of
the Railway Workers of the Nicolai line, who said that the men were
holding huge mass-meetings, condemning the action of their leaders.

"All power to the Soviets!" he cried, pounding on the table.
"The_oborontsi_ in the Central Committee are playing
Ko&rgrave;nilov's game. They tried to send a mission to the Stavka,
but we arrested them at Minsk.... Our branch has demanded an
All-Russian Convention, and they refuse to call it...."

The same situation as in the Soviets, the Army Committees. One after
another the various democratic organisations, all over Russia, were
cracking and changing. The Cooperatives were torn by internal
struggles; the meetings of the Peasants' Executive broke up in
stormy wrangling; even among the Cossacks there was trouble....

On the top floor the Military Revolutionary Committee was in full
blast, striking and slacking not. Men went in, fresh and vigorous;
night and day and night and day they threw themselves into the
terrible machine; and came out limp, blind with fatigue, hoarse and
filthy, to fall on the floor and sleep.... The Committee for Salvation
had been outlawed. Great piles of new proclamations (See App. VIII,
Sect. 2) littered the floor:

... The conspirators, who have no support among the garrison or the
working-class, above all counted on the suddenness of their attack.
Their plan was discovered in time by Sub-Lieutenant Blagonravov,
thanks to the revolutionary vigilance of a soldier of the Red Guard,
whose name shall be made public. At the centre of the plot was the
Committee for Salvation. Colonel Polkovnikov was in command of their
forces, and the orders were signed by Gotz, former member of the
Provisional Government, allowed at liberty on his word of honour....

Bringing these facts to the attention of the Petrograd population,
the Military Revolutionary Committee orders the arrest of all
concerned in the conspiracy, who shall be tried before the
Revolutionary Tribunal....

From Moscow, word that the _yunkers_ and Cossacks had surrounded the
Kremlin and ordered the Soviet troops to lay down their arms. The
Soviet forces complied, and as they were leaving the Kremlin, were
set upon and shot down. Small forces of Bolsheviki had been driven
from the Telephone and Telegraph offices; the _yunkers_ now held the
centre of the city. ... But all around them the Soviet troops were
mustering. Street-fighting was slowly gathering way; all attempts at
compromise had failed.... On the side of the Soviet, ten thousand
garrison soldiers and a few Red Guards; on the side of the
Government, six thousand _yunkers,_ twenty-five hundred Cossacks and
two thousand White Guards.

The Petrograd Soviet was meeting, and next door the new
_Tsay-ee-kah,_ acting on the decrees and orders (See App. VIII,
Sect. 3) which came down in a steady stream from the Council of
People's Commissars in session upstairs; on the Order in Which Laws
Are to be Ratified and Published, Establishing an Eight hour Days
for Workers, and Lunatcharsky's "Basis for a System of Popular
Education." Only a few hundred people were present at the two
meetings, most of them armed. Smolny was almost deserted, except for
the guards, who were busy at the hall windows, setting up
machine-guns to command the flanks of the building.

In the _Tsay-ee-kah_ a delegate of the _Vikzhel_ was speaking: "We
refuse to transport the troops of either party.... We have sent a
committee to Kerensky to say that if he continues to march on
Petrograd we will break his lines of communication...."

He made the usual plea for a conference of all the Socialist parties
to form a new Government....

Kameniev answered discreetly. The Bolsheviki would be very glad to
attend the conference. The centre of gravity, however, lay not in
composition of such a Government, but in its acceptance of the
programme of the Congress of Soviets.

... The _Tsay-ee-kah_ had deliberated on the declaration made by the
Left Socialist Revolutionaries and the Social Democrats
Internationalists, and had accepted the proposition of proportional
representation at the conference, even including delegates from the
Army Committees and the Peasants' Soviets....

In the great hall, Trotzky recounted the events of the day.

"We offered the Vladimir _yunkers_ a chance to surrender," he said.
"We wanted to settle matters without bloodshed. But now that blood
has been spilled there is only one way-pitiless struggle. It would
be childish to think we can win by any other means.... The moment is
decisive. Everybody must cooperate with the Military Revolutionary
Committee, report where there are stores of barbed wire, benzine,
guns.

... We've won the power; now we must keep it!"

The Menshevik Yoffe tried to read his party's declaration, but
Trotzky refused to allow "a debate about principle."

"Our debates are now in the streets," he cried. "The decisive step
has been taken. We all, and I in particular, take the responsibility
for what is happening...."

Soldiers from the front, from Gatchina, told their stories. One from
the Death Battalion, Four Hundred Eighty-first Artillery: "When the
trenches hear of this, they will cry, 'This is _our_ Government!'" A
_yunker_ from Peterhof said that he and two others had refused to
march against the Soviets; and when his comrades had returned from
the defence of the Winter Palace they appointed him their Commissar,
to go to Smolny and offer their services to the _real_ Revolution....

Then Trotzky again, fiery, indefatigable, giving orders, answering
questions.

"The petty bourgeoisie, in order to defeat the workers, soldiers and
peasants, would combine with the devil himself!" he said once. Many
cases of drunkenness had been remarked the last two days. "No
drinking, comrades! No one must be on the streets after eight in the
evening, except the regular guards. All places suspected of having
stores of liquor should be searched, and the liquor destroyed. (See
App. VIII, Sect. 4) No mercy to the sellers of liquor...."

The Military Revolutionary Committee sent for the delegation from
the Viborg section; then for the members from Putilov. They clumped
out hurriedly.

"For each revolutionist killed," said Trotzky, "we shall kill five
counter-revolutionists!"

Down-town again. The Duma brilliantly illuminated and great crowds
pouring in. In the lower hall wailing and cries of grief; the throng
surged back and forth before the bulletin board, where was posted a
list of _yunkers_ killed in the day's fighting-or supposed to be
killed, for most of the dead afterward turned up safe and sound.... Up
in the Alexander Hall the Committee for Salvation held forth. The
gold and red epaulettes of officers were conspicuous, the familiar
faces of the Menshevik and Socialist Revolutionary intellectuals,
the hard eyes and bulky magnificence of bankers and diplomats,
officials of the old régime, and well-dressed women....

The telephone girls were testifying. Girl after girl came to the
tribune-over-dressed, fashion-aping little girls, with pinched faces
and leaky shoes. Girl after girl, flushing with pleasure at the
applause of the "nice" people of Petrograd, of the officers, the
rich, the great names of politics-girl after girl, to narrate her
sufferings at the hands of the proletariat, and proclaim her loyalty
to all that was old, established and powerful....

The Duma was again in session in the Nicolai Hall. The Mayor said
hopefully that the Petrograd regiments were ashamed of their
actions; propaganda was making headway.

[Graphic page-205 Proclamation for "wine pogroms" ]

Revolutionary law and order. A proclamation of the Finland Regiment,
in December, 1917, announcing desperate remedies for "wine pogroms."
For translation see Appendix 5.

... Emissaries came and went, reporting horrible deeds by the
Bolsheviki, interceding to save the _yunkers,_ busily investigating....

"The Bolsheviki," said Trupp, "will be conquered by moral force, and
not by bayonets....."

Meanwhile all was not well on the revolutionary front. The enemy had
brought up armoured trains, mounted with cannon. The Soviet forces,
mostly raw Red Guards, were without officers and without a definite
plan. Only five thousand regular soldiers had joined them; the rest
of the garrison was either busy suppressing the _yunker_ revolt,
guarding the city, or undecided what to do. At ten in the evening
Lenin addressed a meeting of delegates from the city regiments, who
voted overwhelmingly to fight. A Committee of five soldiers was
elected to serve as General Staff, and in the small hours of the
morning the regiments left their barracks in full battle array....
Going home I saw them pass, swinging along with the regular tread of
veterans, bayonets in perfect alignment, through the deserted
streets of the conquered city....

At the same time, in the headquarters of the _Vikzhel_ down on the
Sadovaya, the conference of all the Socialist parties to form a new
Government was under way. Abramovitch, for the centre Mensheviki,
said that there should be neither conquerors nor conquered-that
bygones should be bygones. ...In this were agreed all the left wing
parties. Dan, speaking in the name of the right Mensheviki, proposed
to the Bolsheviki the following conditions for a truce: The Red
Guard to be disarmed, and the Petrograd garrison to be placed at the
orders of the Duma; the troops of Kerensky not to fire a single shot
or arrest a single man; a Ministry of all the Socialist parties
_except the Bolsheviki._ For Smolny Riazanov and Kameniev declared
that a coalition ministry of all parties was acceptable, but
protested at Dan's proposals. The Socialist Revolutionaries were
divided; but the Executive Committee of the Peasants's Soviets and
the Populist Socialists flatly refused to admit the Bolsheviki....
After bitter quarrelling a commission was elected to draw up a
workable plan....

All that night the commission wrangled, and all the next day, and
the next night. Once before, on the 9th of November, there had been
a similar effort at conciliation, led by Martov and Gorky; but at
the approach of Kerensky and the activity of the Committee for
Salvation, the right wing of the Mensheviki, Socialist
Revolutionaries and Populist Socialists suddenly withdrew. Now they
were awed by the crushing of the _yunker_ rebellion...

Monday the 12th was a day of suspense. The eyes of all Russia were
fixed on the grey plain beyond the gates of Petrograd, where all the
available strength of the old order faced the unorganised power of
the new, the unknown. In Moscow a truce had been declared; both
sides parleyed, awaiting the result in the capital. Now the
delegates to the Congress of Soviets, hurrying on speeding trains to
the farthest reaches of Asia, were coming to their homes, carrying
the fiery cross. In wide-spreading ripples news of the miracle
spread over the face of the land, and in its wake towns, cities and
far villages stirred and broke, Soviets and Military Revolutionary
Committees against Dumas, Zemstvos and Government Commissars-Red
Guards against White-street fighting and passionate speech.... The
result waited on the word from Petrograd....

Smolny was almost empty, but the Duma was thronged and noisy. The
old Mayor, in his dignified way, was protesting against the Appeal
of the Bolshevik Councillors.

"The Duma is not a centre of counter-revolution," he said, warmly.
"The Duma takes no part in the present struggle between the parties.
But at a time when there is no legal power in the land, the only
centre of order is the Municipal Self-Government. The peaceful
population recognises this fact; the foreign Embassies recognise
only such documents as are signed by the Mayor of the town. The mind
of a European does not admit of any other situation, as the
Municipal self-government is the only organ which is capable of
protecting the interests of the citizens. The City is bound to show
hospitality, to all organisations which desire to profit by such
hospitality, and therefore the Duma cannot prevent the distribution
of any newspapers whatever within the Duma building. The sphere of
our work is increasing, and we must be given full liberty of action,
and our rights must be respected by both parties....

"We are perfectly neutral. When the Telephone Exchange was occupied
by the _yunkers_ Colonel Polkovnikov ordered the telephones to
Smolny disconnected, but I protested, and the telephones were kept
going...."

At this there was ironic laughter from the Bolshevik benches, and
imprecations from the right.

"And yet," went on Schreider, "they look upon us as
counter-revolutionaries and report us to the population. They
deprive us of our means of transport by taking away our last
motor-cars. It will not be our fault if there is famine in the town.
Protests are of no use...."

Kobozev, Bolshevik member of the Town Board, was doubtful whether
the Military Revolutionary Committee had requisitioned the Municipal
automobiles. Even granting the fact, it was probably done by some
unauthorised individual, in the emergency.

"The Mayor," he continued, "tells us that we must not make political
meetings out of the Duma. But every Menshevik and Socialist
Revolutionary here talks nothing but party propaganda, and at the
door they distribute their illegal newspapers, _Iskri_ (Sparks),
_Soldatski Golos_ and _Rabotchaya Gazeta,_ inciting to insurrection.
What if we Bolsheviki should also begin to distribute our papers
here? But this shall not be, for we respect the Duma. We have not
attacked the Municipal Self-Government, and we shall not do so. But
you have addressed an Appeal to the population, and we are entitled
also to do so....

Followed him Shingariov, Cadet, who said that there could be no
common language with those who were liable to be brought before the
Attorney General for indictment, and who must be tried on the charge
of treason.... He proposed again that all Bolshevik members should be
expelled from the Duma. This was tabled, however, for there were no
personal charges against the members, and they were active in the
Municipal administration.

Then two Mensheviki Internationalists, declaring that the Appeal of
the Bolshevik Councillors was a direct incitement to massacre. "If
everything that is against the Bolsheviki is counter-revolutionary,"
said Pinkevitch, "then I do not know the difference between
revolution and anarchy.... The Bolsheviki are depending upon the
passions of the unbridled masses; we have nothing but moral force.
We will protest against massacres and violence from both sides, as
our task is to find a peaceful issue."

"The notice posted in the streets under the heading 'To the
Pillory,' which calls upon the people to destroy the Mensheviki and
Socialist Revolutionaries," said Nazariev, "is a crime which you,
Bolsheviki, will not be able to wash away. Yesterday's horrors are
but a preface to what you are preparing by such a proclamation.... I
have always tried to reconcile you with the other parties, but at
present I feel for you nothing but contempt!"

The Bolshevik Councillors were on their feet, shouting angrily,
assailed by hoarse, hateful voices and waving arms....

Outside the hall I ran into the City Engineer, the Menshevik Gomberg
and three or four reporters. They were all in high spirits.

"See!" they said. "The cowards are afraid of us. They don't dare
arrest the Duma! Their Military Revolutionary Committee doesn't dare
to send a Commissar into this building. Why, on the corner of the
Sadovaya to-day, I saw a Red Guard try to stop a boy selling
_Soldatski Golos_.... The boy just laughed at him, and a crowd of
people wanted to lynch the bandit. It's only a few hours more, now.
Even if Kerensky wouldn't come they haven't the men to run a
Government. Absurd! I understand they're even fighting among
themselves at Smolny!"

A Socialist Revolutionary friend of mine drew me aside. "I know
where the Committee for Salvation is hiding," he said. "Do you want
to go and talk with them?"

By this time it was dusk. The city had again settled down to
normal-shop-shutters up, lights shining, and on the streets great
crowds of people slowly moving up and down and arguing....

At Number 86 Nevsky we went through a passage into a courtyard,
surrounded by tall apartment buildings. At the door of apartment 229
my friend knocked in a peculiar way. There was a sound of scuffling;
an inside door slammed; then the front door opened a crack and a
woman's face appeared. After a minute's observation she led us in-a
placid-looking, middle-aged lady who at once cried, "Kyril, it's all
right!" In the dining-room, where a samovar steamed on the table and
there were plates full of bread and raw fish, a man in uniform
emerged from behind the window-curtains, and another, dressed like a
workman, from a closet. They were delighted to meet an American
reporter. With a certain amount of gusto both said that they would
certainly be shot if the Bolsheviki caught them. They would not give
me their names, but both were Socialist Revolutionaries....

"Why," I asked, "do you publish such lies in your newspapers?"

Without taking offence the officer replied, "Yes, I know; but what
can we do?" He shrugged. "You must admit that it is necessary for us
to create a certain frame of mind in the people...."

The other man interrupted. "This is merely an adventure on the part
of the Bolsheviki. They have no intellectuals. ... The Ministries
won't work.... Russia is not a city, but a whole country.... Realising
that they can only last a few days, we have decided to come to the
aid of the strongest force opposed to them-Kerensky-and help to
restore order."

"That is all very well," I said. "But why do you combine with the
Cadets?"

The pseudo-workman smiled frankly. "To tell you the truth, at this
moment the masses of the people are following the Bolsheviki. We
have no following-now. We can't mobilise a handful of soldiers.
There are no arms available.... The Bolsheviki are right to a certain
extent; there are at this moment in Russia only two parties with any
force-the Bolsheviki and the reactionaries, who are all hiding under
the coat-tails of the Cadets. The Cadets think they are using us;
but it is really we who are using the Cadets. When we smash the
Bolsheviki we shall turn against the Cadets...."

"Will the Bolsheviki be admitted into the new Government?"

He scratched his head. "That's a problem," he admitted. "Of course
if they are not admitted, they'sll probably do this all over again.
At any rate, they will have a chance to hold the balance of power in
the Constituent-that is, if there _is_ a Constituent."

"And then, too," said the officer, "that brings up the question of
admitting the Cadets into the new Government-and for the same
reasons. You know the Cadets do not really want the Constituent
Assembly-not if the Bolsheviki can be destroyed now." He shook his
head. "It is not easy for us Russians, politics. You Americans are
born politicians; you have had politics all your lives. But for
us-well, it has only been a year, you know!"

"What do you think of Kerensky?" I asked.

"Oh, Kerensky is guilty of the sins of the Provisional Government,"
answered the other man. "Kerensky himself forced us to accept
coalition with the bourgeoisie. If he had resigned, as he
threatened, it would have meant a new Cabinet crisis only sixteen
weeks before the Constituent Assembly, and that we wanted to avoid."

"But didn't it amount to that anyway?"

"Yes, but how were we to know? They tricked us-the Kerenskys and
Avksentievs. Gotz is a little more radical. I stand with Tchernov,
who is a real revolutionist.... Why, only to-day Lenin sent word that
he would not object to Tchernov entering the Government.

"We wanted to get rid of the Kerensky Government too, but we thought
it better to wait for the Constituent.... At the beginning of this
affair I was with the Bolsheviki, but the Central Committee of my
party voted unanimously against it-and what could I do? It was a
matter of party discipline....

"In a week the Bolshevik Government will go to pieces; if the
Socialist Revolutionaries could only stand aside and wait, the
Government would fall into their hands. But if we wait a week the
country will be so disorganised that the German imperialists will be
victorious. That is why we began our revolt with only two regiments
of soldiers promising to support us-and they turned against us....
That left only the _yunkers_...."

"How about the Cossacks?"

The officer sighed. "They did not move. At first they said they
would come out if they had infantry support. They said moreover that
they had their men with Kerensky, and that they were doing their
part.... Then, too, they said that the Cossacks were always accused of
being the hereditary enemies of democracy.... And finally, 'The
Bolsheviki promise that they will not take away our land. There is
no danger to us. We remain neutral.'"

During this talk people were constantly entering and leaving-most of
them officers, their shoulder-straps torn off. We could see them in
the hall, and hear their low, vehement voices. Occasionally, through
the half-drawn portières, we caught a glimpse of a door opening into
a bath-room, where a heavily-built officer in a colonel's uniform
sat on the toilet, writing something on a pad held in his lap. I
recognised Colonel Polkovnikov, former commandant of Petrograd, for
whose arrest the Military Revolutionary Committee would have paid a
fortune.

"Our programme?" said the officer. "This is it. Land to be turned
over to the Land Committees. Workmen to have full representation in
the control of industry. An energetic peace programme, but not an
ultimatum to the world such as the Bolsheviki issued. The Bolsheviki
cannot keep their promises to the masses, even in the country
itself. We won't let them.... They stole our land programme in order
to get the support of the peasants. That is dishonest. If they had
waited for the Constituent Assembly-"

"It doesn't matter about the Constituent Assembly!" broke in the
officer. "If the Bolsheviki want to establish a Socialist state
here, we cannot work with them in any event! Kerensky made the great
mistake. He let the Bolsheviki know what he was going to do by
announcing in the Council of the Republic that he had ordered their
arrest....

"But what," I said, "do you intend to do now?"

The two men looked at one another. "You will see in a few days. If
there are enough troops from the front on our side, we shall not
compromise with the Bolsheviki. If not, perhaps we shall be forced
to...."

Out again on the Nevsky we swung on the step of a streetcar bulging
with people, its platforms bent down from the weight and scraping
along the ground, which crawled with agonising slowness the long
miles to Smolny.

Meshkovsky, a neat, frail little man, was coming down the hall,
looking worried. The strikes in the Ministries, he told us, were
having their effect. For instance, the Council of People's
Commissars had promised to publish the Secret Treaties; but Neratov,
the functionary in charge, had disappeared, taking the documents
with him. They were supposed to be hidden in the British Embassy....

Worst of all, however, was the strike in the banks. "Without money,"
said Menzhinsky, "we are helpless. The wages of the railroad men, of
the postal and telegraph employees, must be paid.... The banks are
closed; and the key to the situation, the State Bank, is also shut.
All the bank-clerks in Russia have been bribed to stop work....

"But Lenin has issued an order to dynamite the State Bank vaults,
and there is a Decree just out, ordering the private banks to open
to-morrow, or we will open them ourselves!"

The Petrograd Soviet was in full swing, thronged with armed men,
Trotzky reporting:

"The Cossacks are falling back from Krasnoye Selo." (Sharp, exultant
cheering.) "But the battle is only beginning. At Pulkovo heavy
fighting is going on. All available forces must be hurried there....

"From Moscow, bad news. The Kremlin is in the hands of the
_yunkers,_ and the workers have only a few arms. The result depends
upon Petrograd.

"At the front, the decrees on Peace and Land are provoking great
enthusiasm. Kerensky is flooding the trenches with tales of
Petrograd burning and bloody, of women and children massacred by the
Bolsheviki. But no one believes him....

"The cruisers _Oleg, Avrora_ and _Respublica_ are anchored in the
Neva, their guns trained on the approaches to the city...."

"Why aren't you out there with the Red Guards?" shouted a rough
voice.

"I'm going now!" answered Trotzky, and left the platform. His face a
little paler than usual, he passed down the side of the room,         e room,         |          |
surrounded by eager friends, and hurried out to the waiting
automobile.

Kameniev now spoke, describing the proceedings of the reconciliation
conference. The armistice conditions proposed by the Mensheviki, he
said, had been contemptuously rejected. Even the branches of the
Railwaymen's Union had voted against such a proposition....

"Now that we've won the power and are sweeping all Russia," he
declared, "all they ask of us are three little things: 1. To
surrender the power. 2. To make the soldiers continue the war. 3. To
make the peasants forget about the land...."

Lenin appeared for a moment, to answer the accusations of the
Socialist Revolutionaries:

"They charge us with stealing their land programme.... If that is so,
we bow to them. It is good enough for us...."

So the meeting roared on, leader after leader explaining, exhorting,
arguing, soldier after soldier, workman after workman, standing up
to speak his mind and his heart.... The audience flowed, changing and
renewed continually. From time to time men came in, yelling for the
members of such and such a detachment, to go to the front; others,
relieved, wounded, or coming to Smolny for arms and equipment,
poured in....

It was almost three o'clock in the morning when, as we left the
hall, Holtzman, of the Military Revolutionary Committee, came
running down the hall with a transfigured face.

"It's all right!" he shouted, grabbing my hands. "Telegram from the
front. Kerensky is smashed! Look at this!"

He held out a sheet of paper, scribbled hurriedly in pencil, and
then, seeing we couldn't read it, he declaimed aloud:

Pulkovo. Staff. 2.10 A.M.

The night of October 30th to 31st will go down in history. The
attempt of Kerensky to move counter-revolutionary troops against the
capital of the Revolution has been decisively repulsed. Kerensky is
retreating, we are advancing. The soldiers, sailors and workers of
Petrograd have shown that they can and will with arms in their hands
enforce the will and authority of the democracy. The bourgeoisie
tried to isolate the revolutionary army. Kerensky attempted to break
it by the force of the Cossacks. Both plans met a pitiful defeat.

The grand idea of the domination of the worker and peasant democracy
closed the ranks of the army and hardened its will. All the country
from now on will be convinced that the Power of the Soviets is no
ephemeral thing, but an invincible fact.... The repulse of Kerensky is
the repulse of the land-owners, the bourgeoisie and the Kornilovists
in general. The repulse of Kerensky is the confirmation of the right
of the people to a peaceful free life, to land, bread and power. The
Pulkovo detachment by its valorous blow has strengthened the cause
of the Workers' and Peasants's Revolution. There is no return to the
past. Before us are struggles, obstacles and sacrifices. But the
road is clear and victory is certain.

Revolutionary Russia and the Soviet Power can be proud of their
Pulkovo detachment, acting under the command of Colonel Walden.
Eternal memory to those who fell! Glory to the warriors of the
Revolution, the soldiers and the officers who were faithful to the
People!

Long live revolutionary, popular, Socialist Russia!

In the name of the Council,

L. TROTZKY, People's Commissar....

Driving home across Znamensky Square, we made out an unusual crowd
in front of the Nicolai Railway Station. Several thousand sailors
were massed there, bristling with rifles.

Standing on the steps, a member of the _Vikzhel_ was pleading with
them.

"Comrades, we cannot carry you to Moscow. We are neutral. We do not
carry troops for either side. We cannot take you to Moscow, where
already there is terrible civil war...."

All the seething Square roared at him; the sailors began to surge
forward. Suddenly another door was flung wide; in it stood two or
three brakeman, a fireman or so.

"This way, comrades!" cried one. "We will take you to Moscow-or
Vladivostok, if you like! Long live the Revolution!"

                              Chapter IX

                               Victory

_Order Number I_

To the Troops of the Pulkovo Detachment.

November 13, 1917. 38 minutes past 9 a. m.

After a cruel fight the troops of the Pulkovo detachment completely
routed the counter-revolutionary forces, who retreated from their
positions in disorder, and under cover of Tsarskoye Selo fell back
toward Pavlovsk II and Gatchina.

Our advanced units occupied the northeastern extremity of Tsarskoye
Selo and the station Alexandrovskaya. The Colpinno detachment was on
our left, the Krasnoye Selo detachment to our right.

I ordered the Pulkovo forces to occupy Tsarskoye Selo, to fortify
its approaches, especially on the side of Gatchina.

Also to pass and occupy Pavlovskoye, fortifying its southern side,
and to take up the railroad as far as Dno.

The troops must take all measures to strengthen the positions
occupied by them, arranging trenches and other defensive works.

They must enter into close liaison with the detachments of Colpinno
and Krasnoye Selo, and also with the Staff of the Commander in Chief
for the Defence of Petrograd.

Signed,

_Commander in Chief aver all Forces acting against the
Counter-revolutionary Troops of Kerensky,_

Lieutenant-Colonel MURAVIOV.

Tuesday morning. But how is this? Only two days ago the Petrograd
campagna was full of leaderless bands, wandering aimlessly; without
food, without artillery, without a plan. What had fused that
disorganised mass of undisciplined Red Guards, and soldiers without
officers, into an army obedient to its own elected high command,
tempered to meet and break the assault of cannon and Cossack
cavalry? (See App. IX, Sect. 1)

People in revolt have a way of defying military precedent. The
ragged armies of the French Revolution are not forgotten-Valmy and
the Lines of Weissembourg. Massed against the Soviet forces were
_yunkers,_ Cossacks, land-owners, nobility, Black Hundreds-the Tsar
come again, _Okhrana_ and Siberian chains; and the vast and terrible
menace of the Germans.... Victory, in the words of Carlyle, meant
"Apotheosis and Millennium without end!"

Sunday night, the Commissars of the Military Revolutionary Committee
returning desperately from the field, the garrison of Petrograd
elected its Committee of Five, its Battle Staff, three soldiers and
two officers, all certified free from counter-revolutionary taint.
Colonel Muraviov, ex-patriot, was in command-an efficient man, but
to be carefully watched. At Colpinno, at Obukhovo, at Pulkovo and
Krasnoye Selo were formed provisional detachments, increased in size
as the stragglers came in from the surrounding country-mixed
soldiers, sailors and Red Guards, parts of regiments, infantry,
cavalry and artillery all together, and a few armoured cars.

Day broke, and the pickets of Kerensky's Cossacks ca