n the meanwhile delegations continued to arrive from Petrograd; from
the Duma, the Committee for Salvation, and, last of all, from the
_Vikzhel._ The Union of Railway Workers insisted that some agreement
be reached to halt the civil war, and demanded that Kerensky treat
with the Bolsheviki, and that he stop the advance on Petrograd. In
case of refusal, the _Vikzhel_ threatened a general strike at
midnight of November 11th.

Kerensky asked to be allowed to discuss the matter with the Socialist
Ministers and with the Committee for Salvation. He was plainly
undecided.

On the 11th Cossack outposts reached Krasnoye Selo, from which the
local Soviet and the heterogeneous forces of the Military
Revolutionary Committee precipitately retired, some of them
surrendering…. That night they also touched Pulkovo, where the first
real resistance was encountered….

Cossacks deserters began to dribble into Petrograd, declaring that
Kerensky had lied to them, that he had spread broadcast over the
front proclamations which said that Petrograd was burning, that the
Bolsheviki  had invited the Germans to come in, and that they were
murdering women and children and looting indiscriminately….

The Military Revolutionary Committee immediately sent out some dozens
of “agitators,” with thousands of printed appeals, to inform the
Cossacks of the real situation….

                                 2.

        PROCLAMATIONS OF THE MILITARY REVOLUTIONARY COMMITTEE

“To All Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies.

“The All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and
Peasants’ Deputies charges the local Soviets immediately to take the
most energetic measures to oppose all counter-revolutionary
anti-Semitic disturbances, and all _pogroms_ of whatever nature. The
honour of the workers’, peasants’ and soldiers’ Revolution cannot
tolerate any disorders….

“The Red Guard of Petrograd, the revolutionary garrison and the
sailors have maintained complete order in the capital.

“Workers, soldiers, and peasants, everywhere you should follow the
example of the workers and soldiers of Petrograd.

“Comrades soldiers and Cossacks, on us falls the duty of keeping real
revolutionary order.

“All revolutionary Russia and the whole world have their eyes on
you….”

“The All-Russian Congress of Soviets decrees:

“To abolish capital punishment at the Front, which was reintroduced
by Kerensky.

“Complete freedom of propaganda is to be re-established in the
country. All soldiers and revolutionary officers now under arrest for
so-called political ‘crimes’ are at once to be set free.”

“The ex-Premier Kerensky, overthrown by the people, refuses to submit
to the Congress of Soviets and attempts to struggle against the legal
Government elected by the All-Russian Congress—the Council of
People’s Commissars. The Front has refused to aid Kerensky. Moscow
has rallied to the new Government. In many cities (Minsk, Moghilev,
Kharkov) the power is in the hands of the Soviets. No infantry
detachment consents to march against the Workers’ and Peasants’
Government, which, in accord with the firm will of the Army and the
people, has begun peace negotiations and has given the land to the
peasants….

“We give public warning that if the Cossacks do not halt Kerensky,
who has deceived them and is leading them against Petrograd, the
revolutionary forces will rise with all their might for the defence
of the precious conquests of the Revolution—Peace and Land.

“Citizens of Petrograd! Kerensky fled from the city, abandoning the
authority to Kishkin, who wanted to surrender the capital to the
Germans; Rutenburg, of the Black Band, who sabotaged the Municipal
Food Supply; and Paltchinsky, hated by the whole democracy. Kerensky
has fled, abandoning you to the Germans, to famine, to bloody
massacres. The revolting people have arrested Kerensky’s Ministers,
and you have seen how the order and supplying of Petrograd at once
improved. Kerensky, at the demand of the aristocrat proprietors, the
capitalists, speculators, marches against you for the purpose of
giving back the land to the land-owners, and continuing the hated and
ruinous war.

“Citizens of Petrograd! We know that the great majority of you are in
favour of the people’s revolutionary authority, against the
Kornilovtsi led by Kerensky. Do not be deceived by the lying
declarations of the impotent bourgeois conspirators, who will be
pitilessly crushed.

“Workers, soldiers, peasants! We call upon you for revolutionary
devotion and discipline.

“Millions of peasants and soldiers are with us.

“The victory of the people’s Revolution is assured!”

                                 3.

                ACTS OF THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’s COMMISSARS

In this book I am giving only such decrees as are in my opinion
pertinent to the Bolshevik conquest of power. The rest belong to a
detailed account of the Structure of the Soviet State, for which I
have no place in this work. This will be dealt with very fully in the
second volume, now in preparation, “Kornilov to Brest-Litovsk.”

                _Concerning Dwelling-Places_

1. The independent Municipal Self-Governments have the right to
sequestrate all unoccupied or uninhabited dwelling-places.

2. The Municipalities may, according to laws and arrangements
established by them, install in all available lodgings citizens who
have no place to live, or who live in congested or unhealthy lodgings.

3. The Municipalities may establish a service of inspection of
dwelling-places, organise it and define its powers.

4. The Municipalities may issue orders on the institution of House
Committees, define their organisation, their powers and give them
juridical authority.

5. The Municipalities may create Housing Tribunals, define their
powers and their authority.

6. This decree is promulgated by telegraph.

                                _People’s Commissar of the Interior,_

                                                A. I. RYKOV.

                        *     *     *     *     *

                        _On Social Insurance_

The Russian proletariat has inscribed on its banners the promise of
complete Social Insurance of wage-workers, as well as of the town and
village poor. The Government of the Tsar, the proprietors and the
capitalists, as well as the Government of coalition and conciliation,
failed to realise the desires of the workers with regard to Social
Insurance.

The Workers’ and Peasants’ Government, relying upon the support of
the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, announces
to the working-class of Russia and to the town and village poor, that
it will immediately prepare laws on Social Insurance based on the
formulas proposed by the Labour organisations:

1. Insurance for all wage-workers without exception, as well as for
all urban and rural poor.

2. Insurance to cover all categories of loss of working capacity,
such as illness, infirmities, old age, childbirth, widowhood,
orphanage, and unemployment.

3. All the costs of insurance to be charged to employers.

4. Compensation of at least full wages in all loss of working
capacity and unemployment.

5. Complete workers’ self-government of all Insurance institutions.

In the name of the Government of the Russian Republic,
                                _The People’s Commissar of Labour,_
                                                ALEXANDER SHLIAPNIKOV.

                        *     *     *     *     *

                        _On Popular Education_

Citizens of Russia!

With the insurrection of November 7th the working masses have won for
the first time the real power.

The All-Russian Congress of Soviets has temporarily transferred this
power both to its Executive Committee and to the Council of People’s
Commissars.

By the will of the revolutionary people, I have been appointed
People’s Commissar of Education.

The work of guiding in general the people’s education, inasmuch as it
remains with the central government, is, until the Constituent
Assembly meets, entrusted to a Commission on the People’s Education,
whose chairman and executive is the People’s Commissar.

Upon what fundamental propositions will rest this State Commission?
How is its sphere of competence determined?

_The General Line of Educational Activity:_ Every genuinely
democratic power must, in the domain of education, in a country where
illiteracy and ignorance reign supreme, make its first aim the
struggle against this darkness. It must acquire in the shortest time
_universal literacy,_ by organising a network of schools answering to
the demands of modern pedagogics; it must introduce universal,
obligatory and free tuition for all, and establish at the same time a
series of such teachers’ institutes and seminaries as will in the
shortest time furnish a powerful army of people’s teachers so
necessary for the universal instruction of the population of our
boundless Russia.

_Decentralisation:_ The State Commission on People’s Education is by
no means a central power governing the institutions of instruction
and education. On the contrary, the entire school work ought to be
transferred to the organs of local self-government. The independent
work of the workers, soldiers and peasants, establishing on their own
initiative cultural educational organisations, must be given full
autonomy, both by the State centre and the Municipal centres.

The work of the State Commission serves as a link and helpmate to
organise resources of material and moral support to the Municipal and
private institutions, particularly to those with a class-character
established by the workers.

_The State Committee on People’s Education:_ A whole series of
invaluable law projects was elaborated from the beginning of the
Revolution by the State Committee for People’s Education, a tolerably
democratic body as to its composition, and rich in experts. The State
Commission sincerely desires the collaboration of this Committee.

It has addressed itself to the bureau of the Committee, with the
request at once to convoke an extraordinary session of the Committee
for the fulfilment of the following programme:

1. The revision of rules of representation in the Committee, in the
sense of greater democratisation.

2. The revision of the Committee’s rights in the sense of widening
them, and of converting the Committee into a fundamental State
institute for the elaboration of law projects calculated to
reorganise public instruction and education in Russia upon democratic
principles.

3. The revision, jointly with the new State Commission, of the laws
already created by the Committee, a revision required by the fact
that in editing them the Committee had to take into account the
bourgeois spirit of previous Ministries, which obstructed it even in
this its narrowed form.

After this revision these laws will be put into effect without any
bureau-cratic red tape, in the revolutionary order.

_The Pedagogues and the Societists:_ The State Commission welcomes
the pedagogues to the bright and honourable work of educating the
people—the masters of the country.

No one measure in the domain of the people’s education ought to be
adopted by any power without the attentive deliberation of those who
represent the pedagogues.

On the other hand, a decision cannot by any means be reached
exclusively through the cooperation of specialists. This refers as
well to reforms of the institutes of general education.

The cooperation of the pedagogues with the social forces—this is how
the Commission will work both in its own constitution, in the State
Committee, and in all its activities.

As its first task the Commission considers the improvement of the
teachers’ status, and first of all of those very poor though almost
most important contributors to the work of culture—the elementary
school teachers. Their just demands ought to be satisfied at once and
at any cost. The proletariat of the schools has in vain demanded an
increase of salary to one hundred rubles per month. It would be a
disgrace any longer to keep in poverty the teachers of the
overwhelming majority of the Russian people.

But a real democracy cannot stop at mere literacy, at universal
elementary instruction. It must endeavour to organise a uniform
secular school of several grades. The ideal is, equal and if possible
higher education for all the citizens. So long as this idea has not
been realised for all, the natural transition through all the
schooling grades up to the university—a transition to a higher
stage—must depend entirely upon the pupil’s aptitude, and not upon
the resources of his family.

The problem of a genuinely democratic organisation of instruction is
particularly difficult in a country impoverished by a long, criminal,
imperialistic war; but the workers who have taken the power must
remember that education will serve them as the greatest instrument in
their struggle for a better lot and for a spiritual growth. However
needful it may be to curtail other articles of the people’s budget,
the expenses on education must stand high. A large educational budget
is the pride and glory of a nation. The free and enfranchised peoples
of Russia will not forget this.

The fight against illiteracy and ignorance cannot be confined to a
thorough establishment of school education for children and youths.
Adults, too, will be anxious to save themselves from the debasing
position of a man who cannot read and write. The school for adults
must occupy a conspicuous place in the general plan of popular
instruction.

_Instruction and Education:_ One must emphasise the difference
between instruction and education.

Instruction is the transmission of ready knowledge by the teacher to
his pupil. Education is a creative process. The personality of the
individual is being “educated” throughout life, is being formed,
grows richer in content, stronger and more perfect.

The toiling masses of the people—the workmen, the peasants, the
soldiers—are thirsting for elementary and advanced instruction. But
they are also thirsting for education. Neither the government nor the
intellectuals nor any other power outside of themselves can give it
to them. The school, the book, the theatre, the museum, etc., may
here by only aids. They have their own ideas, formed by their social
position, so different from the position of those ruling classes and
intellectuals who have hitherto created culture. They have their own
ideas, their own emotions, their own ways of approaching the problems
of personality and society. The city labourer, according to his own
fashion, the rural toiler according to his, will each build his clear
world-conception permeated with the class-idea  of the workers. There
is no more superb or beautiful phenomenon than the one of which our
nearest descendants will be both witnesses and participants: The
building by collective Labour of its own general, rich and free soul.

Instruction will surely be an important but not a decisive element.
What is more important here is the criticism, the creativeness of the
masses themselves; for science and art have only in some of their
parts a general human importance. They suffer radical changes with
every far-reaching class upheaval.

Throughout Russia, particularly among the city labourers, but also
among the peasants, a powerful wave of cultural educational movement
has arisen; workers’ and soldiers’ organisations of this kind are
multiplying rapidly. To meet them, to lend them support, to clear the
road before them is the first task of a revolutionary and popular
government in the domain of democratic education.

_The Constituent Assembly_ will doubtless soon begin its work. It
alone can permanently establish the order of national and social life
in our country, and at the same time the general character of the
organisation of popular education.

Now, however, with the passage of power to the Soviets, the really
democratic character of the Constituent Assembly is assured. The line
which the State Commission, relying upon the State Committee, will
follow, will hardly suffer any modification under the influence of
the Constituent Assembly. Without pre-determining it, the new
People’s Government considers itself within its rights in enacting in
this domain a series of measures which aim at enriching and
enlightening as soon as possible the spiritual life of the country.

_The Ministry:_ The present work must in the interim proceed through
the Ministry of the People’s Education. Of all the necessary
alterations in its composition and construction the State Commission
will have charge, elected by the Executive Committee of the Soviets
and the State Committee. Of course the order of State authority in
the domain of the people’s education will be established by the
Constituent Assembly. Until then, the Ministry must play the part of
the executive apparatus for both the State Committee and the State
Commission for People’s Education.

The pledge of the country’s safety lies in the cooperation of all its
vital and genuinely democratic forces.

We believe that the energetic effort of the working people and of the
honest enlightened intellectuals will lead the country out of its
painful crisis, and through complete democracy to the reign of
Socialism and the brotherhood of nations.

                                _People’s Commissar on Education,_

                                        A. V. LUNACHARSKY.

                        *     *     *     *     *

    _On the Order in Which the Laws Are to be Ratified and Published._

1. Until the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, the enacting
and publishing of laws shall be carried out in the order decreed by
the present Provisional Workmen’s and Peasants’ Government, elected
by the All-Russian Congress of Workers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’
Deputies.

2. Every bill is presented for consideration of the Government by the
respective Ministry, signed by the duly authorised People’s
Commissar; or it is presented by the legislative section attached to
the Government, signed by the chief of the section.

3. After its ratification by the Government, the decree in its final
edition, in the name of the Russian Republic, is signed by the
president of the Council of People’s Commissars, or for him by the
People’s Commissar who presented it for the consideration of the
Government, and is then published.

4. The date of publishing it in the official “Gazette of the
Provisional Workmen’s and Peasants’ Government,” is the date of its
becoming law.

5. In the decree there may be appointed a date, other than the date
of publication, on which it shall become law, or it may be
promulgated by telegraph; in which case it is to be regarded in every
locality as becoming law upon the publication of the telegram.

6. The promulgation of legislative acts of the government by the
State Senate is abolished. The Legislative Section attached to the
Council of People’s Commissars issues periodically a collection of
regulations and orders of the government which possess the force of
law.

7. The Central Executive Committee of the Soviets of Workers’,
Peasants’, and Soldiers’ Deputies _(Tsay-ee-kah)_ has at all times
the right to cancel, alter or annul any of the Government decrees.

_In the name of the Russian Republic, the President of the Council of
People’s Commissars,_

                                        V. ULIANOV-LENIN.

                                 4.

                        THE LIQUOR PROBLEM

        _Order Issued by the Military Revolutonary Committee_

1. Until further order the production of alcohol and alcoholic drinks
is prohibited.

2. It is ordered to all producers of alcohol and alcoholic drinks to
inform not later than on the 27th inst. of the exact site of their
stores.

3. All culprits against this order will be tried by a Military
Revolutionary Court.

                                THE MILITARY REVOLUTIONARY COMMITTEE.

                                 5.

                           ORDER NO. 2

_From the Committee of the Finland Guard Reserve Regiment to all
House Committees and to the citizens of Vasili Ostrov._

The bourgeoisie has chosen a very sinister method of fighting against
the proletariat; it has established in various parts of the city huge
wine depots, and distributes liquor among the soldiers, in this
manner attempting to sow dissatisfaction in the ranks of the
Revolutionary army.

It is herewith ordered to all house committees, that at 3 o’clock,
the time set for posting this order, they shall in person and
secretly notify the President of the Committee of the Finland Guard
Regiment, concerning the amount of wine in their premises.

Those who violate this order will be arrested and given trial before
a merciless court, and their property will be confiscated, and the
stock of wine discovered will be

                        BLOWN UP WITH DYNAMITE

                        2 hours after this warning,

because more lenient measures, as experience has shown, do not bring
the desired results.

REMEMBER, THERE WILL BE NO OTHER WARNING BEFORE THE EXPLOSIONS.

                _Regimental Committee of the Finland Guard Regiment._


                       APPENDIX TO CHAPTER IX

                                 1.

                MILITARY REVOLUTIONARY COMMITTEE. BULLETIN NO. 2

November 12th, in the evening, Kerensky sent a proposition to the
revolutionary troops—“to lay down their arms.” Kerensky’s men opened
artillery fire. Our artillery answered and compelled the enemy to be
silent. The Cossacks assumed the offensive. The deadly fire of the
sailors, the Red Guards and the soldiers forced the Cossacks to
retreat. Our armoured cars rushed in among the ranks of the enemy.
The enemy is fleeing. Our troops are in pursuit. The order has been
given to arrest Kerensky. Tsarskoye Selo has been taken by the
revolutionary troops.

_The Lettish Riflemen:_ The Military Revolutionary Committee has
received precise information that the valiant Lettish Riflemen have
arrived from the Front and taken up a position in the rear of
Kerensky’s bands.

_From the Staff of the Military Revolutionary Committee_

The seizure of Gatchina and Tsarskoye Selo by Kerensky’s detachments
is to be explained by the complete absence of artillery and
machine-guns in these places, whereas Kerensky’s cavalry was provided
with artillery from the beginning. The last two days were days of
enforced work for our Staff, to provide the necessary quantity of
guns, machine-guns, field telephones, etc., for the revolutionary
troops. When this work—with the energetic assistance of the District
Soviets and the factories (the Putilov Works, Obukhov and others)—was
accomplished, the issue of the expected encounter left no place for
doubt: on the side of the revolutionary troops there was not only a
surplus in quantity and such a powerful material base as Petrograd,
but also an enormous moral advantage. All the Petrograd regiments
moved out to the positions with tremendous enthusiasm. The Garrison
Conference elected a Control Commission of five soldiers, thus
securing a complete unity between the commander in chief and the
garrison. At the Garrison Conference it was unanimously decided to
begin decisive action.

The artillery fire on the 12th of November developed with
extraordinary force by 3 P.M. The Cossacks were completely
demoralised. A parliamentarian came from them to the staff of the
detachment at Krasnoye Selo, and proposed to stop the firing,
threatening otherwise to take “decisive” measures. He was answered
that the firing would cease when Kerensky laid down his arms.

In the developing encounter all sections of the troops—the sailors,
soldiers and the Red Guards—showed unlimited courage. The sailors
continued to advance until they had fired all their cartridges. The
number of casualties has not been established yet, but it is larger
on the part of the counter-revolutionary troops, who experienced
great losses through one of our armoured cars.

Kerensky’s staff, fearing that they would be surrounded, gave the
order to retreat, which retreat speedily assumed a disorderly
character. By 11-12 P.M., Tsarkoye Selo, including the wireless
station, was entirely occupied by the troops of the Soviets. The
Cossacks retreated towards Gatchina and Colpinno.

The morale of the troops is beyond all praise. The order has been
given to pursue the retreating Cossacks. From the Tsarskoye Selo
station a radio-telegram was sent immediately to the Front and to all
local Soviets throughout Russia. Further details will be
communicated….

                                 2.

                    EVENTS OF THE 13TH IN PETROGRAD

Three regiments of the Petrograd garrison to take any part in the
battle against Kerensky. On the morning of the 13th they summoned to
a joint conference sixty delegates from the Front, in order to find
some way to stop the civil war. This conference appointed a committee
to go and persuade Kerensky’s troops to lay down their arms. They
proposed to ask the Government soldiers the following questions: (1)
Will the soldiers and Cossacks of Kerensky recognise the
_Tsay-ee-kah_ as the repository of Governmental power, responsible to
the Congress of Soviets? (2) Will the soldiers and Cossacks accept
the decrees of the second Congress of Soviets? (3) Will they accept
the Land and Peace decrees? (4) Will they agree to cease hostilities
and return to their units? (5) Will they consent to the arrest of
Kerensky, Krasnov and Savinkov?

At the meeting of the Petrograd Soviet, Zinoviev said, “It would be
foolish to think that this committee could finish affair. The enemy
can only be broken by force. However, it would be a crime for us not
to try every peaceful means to bring the Cossacks over to us…. What
we need is a military victory…. The news of an armistice is
premature. Our Staff will be ready to conclude an armistice when the
enemy can no longer do any harm….

“At present, the influence of our victory is creating new political
conditions…. To-day the Socialist Revolutionaries are inclined are
inclined to admit the Bolsheviki into the new Government…. A decisive
victory is indispensable, so that those who hesitate will have no
further hesitation….”

At the City Duma all attention was concentrated on the formation of
the new Government. In many factories and barracks already
Revolutionary Tribunals were operating, and the Bolsheviki were
threatening to set up more of these, and try Gotz and Avksentiev
before them. Dan proposed that an ultimatum be sent demanding the
abolition of these Revolutionary Tribunals, or the other members of
the Conference would immediately break off all negotiations with the
Bolsheviki.

Shingariov, Cadet, declared that the Municipality ought not to take
part in any agreement with the Bolsheviki…. “Any agreement with the
maniacs is impossible until they lay down their arms and recognise
the authority of independent courts of law….”

Yartsev, for the _Yedinstvo_ group, declared that any agreement with
the Bolsheviki would be equivalent to a Bolshevik victory….

Mayor Schreider, for the Socialist Revolutionaries, stated that he
was opposed to all agreement with the Bolsheviki…. “As for a
Government, that ought to spring from the popular will; and since the
popular will has been expressed in the municipal elections, the
popular will which can create a Government is actually concentrated
in the Duma….”

After other speakers, of which only the representative of the
Mensheviki Internationalists was in favour of considering the
admission of the Bolsheviki into the new Government, the Duma voted
to continue its representatives in the _Vikzhel’s_ conference, but to
insist upon the restoration of the Provisional Government before
everything, and to exclude the Bolsheviki from the new power….

                                 3.

        TRUCE. KRASNOV’s ANSWER TO THE COMMITTEE FOR SALVATION

“In answer to your telegram proposing an immediate armistice, the
Supreme Commander, not wishing further futile bloodshed, consents to
enter into negotiations and to establish relations between the armies
of the Government and the insurrectionists. He proposes to the
General Staff of the insurrectionists to recall its regiments to
Petrograd, to declare the line Ligovo-Pulkovo-Colpinno neutral, and
to allow the advance-guards of the Government cavalry to enter
Tsarskoye Selo, for the purpose of establishing order. The answer to
this proposal must be placed in the hands of our envoys before eight
o’clock to-morrow morning.

                                                KRASNOV.”

                                 4.

                        EVENTS AT TSARSKOYE SELO

On the evening that Kerensky’s troops retreated from Tsarskoye Selo,
some priests organised a religious procession through the streets of
the town, making speeches to the citizens in which they asked the
people to support the rightful authority, the Provisional Government.
When the Cossacks had retreated, and the first Red Guards entered the
town, witnesses reported that the priests had incited the people
against the Soviets, and had said prayers at the grave of Rasputin,
which lies behind the Imperial Palace. One of the priests, Father
Ivan Kutchurov, was arrested and shot by the infuriated Red Guards….

Just as the Red Guards entered the town the electric lights were shut
off, plunging the streets in complete darkness. The director of the
electric light plant, Lubovitch, was arrested by the Soviet troops
and asked why he had shut off the lights. He was found some time
later in the room where he had been imprisoned with a revolver in his
hand and a bullet hole in his temple.

The Petrograd anti-Bolshevik papers came out next day with headlines,
“Plekhanov’s temperature 39 degrees!” Plekhanov lived at Tsarskoye
Selo, where he was lying ill in bed. Red Guards arrived at the house
and searched it for arms, questioning the old man.

“What class of society do you belong to?” they asked him.

“I am a revolutionist,” answered Plekhanov, “who for forty years has
devoted his life to the struggle for liberty!”

“Anyway,” said a workman, “you have now sold yourself to the
bourgeoisie!”

The workers no longer knew Plekhanov, pioneer of the Russian Social
Democracy!

                                 5.

                    APPEAL OF THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT

“The detachments at Gatchina, deceived by Kerensky, have laid down
their arms and decided to arrest Kerensky. That chief of the
counter-revolutionary campaign has fled. The Army, by an enormous
majority, has pronounced in favour of the second All-Russian Congress
of Soviets, and of the Government which it has created. Scores of
delegates from the Front have hastened to Petrograd to assure the
Soviet Government of the Army’s fidelity. No twisting of the facts,
no calumny against the revolutionary workers, soldiers, and peasants,
has been able to defeat the People. The Workers’ and Soldiers’
Revolution is victorious….

“The _Tsay-ee-kah_ appeals to the troops which march under the flag
of the counter-revolution, and invites them immediately to lay down
their arms—to shed no longer the blood of their brothers in the
interests of a handful of land-owners and capitalists. The Workers’,
Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Revolution curses those who remain even for a
moment under the flag of the People’s enemies….

“Cossacks! Come over to the rank of the victorious People!
Railwaymen, postmen, telegraphers—all, all support the new Government
of the People!”


                        APPENDIX TO CHAPTER X

                                 1.

                        DAMAGE TO THE KREMLIN

I myself verified the damage to the Kremlin, which I visited
immediately after the bombardment. The Little Nicolai Palace, a
building of no particular importance, which was occupied occasionally
by receptions of one of the Grand Duchesses, had served as barracks
for the _yunkers._ It was not only bombarded, but pretty well sacked;
fortunately there was nothing in it of particular historical value.

Usspensky Cathedral had a shell-hole in one of the cupolas, but
except for a few feet of mosaic in the ceiling, was undamaged. The
frescoes on the porch of Blagovestchensky Cathedral were badly
damaged by a shell. Another shell hit the corner of Ivan Veliki.
Tchudovsky Monastery was hit about thirty times, but only one shell
went through a window into the interior, the others breaking the
brick window-moulding and the roof cornices.

The clock over the Spasskaya Gate was smashed. Troitsky Gate was
battered, but easily reparable. One of the lower towers had lost its
brick spire.

The church of St. Basil was untouched, as was the great Imperial
Palace, with all the treasures of Moscow and Petrograd in its cellar,
and the crown jewels in the Treasury. These places were not even
entered.

                                 2.

                        LUNATCHARSKY’s DECLARATION

“Comrades! You are the young masters of the country, and although now
you have much to do and think about, you must know how to defend your
artistic and scientific treasures.

“Comrades! That which is happening at Moscow is a horrible,
irreparable misfortune…. The People in its struggle for the power has
mutilated our glorious capital.

“It is particularly terrible in these days of violent struggle, of
destructive warfare, to be Commissar of Public Education. Only the
hope of the victory of Socialism, the source of a new and superior
culture, brings me comfort. On me weighs the responsibility of
protecting the artistic wealth of the people…. Not being able to
remain at my post, where I had no influence, I resigned. My comrades,
the other Commissars, considered this resignation inadmissible. I
shall therefore remain at my post…. And moreover, I understand that
the damage done to the Kremlin is not as serious as has been
reported….

“But I beg you, comrades, to give me your support…. Preserve for
yourselves and your descendants the beauty of our land; be the
guardians of the property of the People.

“Soon, very soon, even the most ignorant, who have been held in
ignorance so long, will awake and understand what a source of joy,
strength and wisdom is art….”



                                 3.

                    QUESTIONNAIRE FOR THE BOURGEOISIE

[Graphic page-354]

                                 4.

                    REVOLUTIONARY FINANCIAL MEASURE
                                _Order_

In virtue of the powers vested in me by the Military Revolutionary
Committee attached to the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’
Deputies, I decree:

1. All banks with branches, the Central State Savings Bank with
branches, and the savings banks at the Post and Telegraph offices are
to be opened beginning November 22nd, from 11 A. M. to 1 P. M. until
further order.

2. On current accounts and on the books of the savings banks,
payments will be made by the above mentioned institutions, of not
more than 150 rubles for each depositor during the course of the next
week.

3. Payments of amounts exceeding 150 rubles a week on current
accounts and savings banks books, also payments on other accounts of
all kinds will be allowed during the next three days—November 22nd,
23d, and 24th, only in the following cases:

(a) On the accounts of military organisations for the satisfaction of
their needs;

(b) For the payment of salaries of employees and the earnings of
workers according to the tables and lists certified by the Factory
Committees or Soviets of Employees, and attested by the signatures of
the Commissars, or the representatives of the Military Revolutionary
Committee, and the district Military Revolutionary Committees.

4. Not more than 150 rubles are to be paid against drafts; the
remaining sums are to be entered on current account, payments on
which are to be made in the order established by the present decree.

5. All other banking operations are prohibited during these three
days.

6. The receipt of money on all accounts is allowed for any amount.

7. The representatives of the Finance Council for the certification
of the authorisations indicated in clause 3 will hold their office in
the building of the Stock Exchange, Ilyinka Street, from 10 A. M. to
2 P. M.

8. The Banks and Savings Banks shall send the totals of daily cash
operations by 5 P. M. to the headquarters of the Soviet, Skobeliev
Square, to the Military Revolutionary Committee, for the Finance
Council.

9. All employees and managers of credit institutions of all kinds who
refuse to comply with this decree shall be responsible as enemies of
the Revolution and of the mass of the population, before the
Revolutionary Tribunals. Their names shall be published for general
information.

10. For the control of the operations of Branches of the Savings
Banks and Banks within the limits of this decree, the district
Military Revolutionary Committees shall elect three representatives
and appoint their place of business.

     _Fully-authorised Commissar of the Military Revolutionary Committee,_

                                        S. SHEVERDIN-MAKSIMENKO.


                       APPENDIX TO CHAPTER XI

                                 1.

                    LIMITATIONS OF THIS CHAPTER

This chapter extends over a period of two months, more or less. It
covers the time of negotiations with the Allies, the negotiations and
armistice with the Germans, and the beginning of the Peace
negotiations at Brest-Litovsk, as well as the period in which were
laid the foundations of the Soviet State.

However, it is no part of my purpose in this book to describe and
interpret these very important historical events, which require more
space. They are therefore reserved for another volume, "Kornilov to
Brest-Litovsk."

In this chapter, then, I have confined myself to the Soviet
Government's attempts to consolidate its political power at home, and
sketched its successive conquests of hostile domestic elements—which
process was temporarily interrupted by the disastrous Peace of
Brest-Litovsk.

                                 2.

        PREAMBLE—DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLES OF RUSSIA

The October Revolution of the workers and peasants began under the
common banner of Emancipation.

The peasants are being emancipated from the power of the landowners,
for there is no longer the landowner's property right in the land—it
has been abolished. The soldiers and sailors are being emancipated
from the power of autocratic generals, for generals will henceforth
be elective and subject to recall. The workingmen are being
emancipated from the whims and arbitrary will of the capitalists, for
henceforth there will be established the control of the workers over
mills and factories. Everything living and capable of life is being
emancipated from the hateful shackles.

There remain only the peoples of Russia, who have suffered and are
suffering oppression and arbitrariness, and whose emancipation must
immediately be begun, whose liberation must be effected resolutely
and definitely.

During the period of Tsarism the peoples of Russia were
systematically incited against one another. The result of such a
policy are known: massacres and _pogroms_ on the one hand, slavery of
peoples on the other.

There can be and there must be no return to this disgraceful policy.
Henceforth the policy of a voluntary and honest union of the peoples
of Russia must be substituted.

In the period of imperialism, after the March revolution, when the
power was transferred into the hands of the Cadet bourgeoisie, the
naked policy of provocation gave way to one of cowardly distrust of
the peoples of Russia, to a policy of fault-finding, of meaningless
"freedom" and "equality" of peoples. The results of such a policy are
known: the growth of national enmity, the impairment of mutual
confidence.

An end must be put to this unworthy policy of falsehood and distrust,
of fault-finding and provocation. Henceforth it must be replaced by
an open and honest policy leading to the complete mutual confidence
of the peoples of Russia. Only as the result of such a trust can
there be formed an honest and lasting union of the peoples of Russia.
Only as the result of such a union can the workers and peasants of
the peoples of Russia be cemented into one revolutionary force able
to resist all attempts on the part of the imperialist-annexationist
bourgeoisie.

                                 3.

                              DECREES
                _On the Nationalisation of the Banks_

In the interest of the regular organisation of the national economy,
of the thorough eradication of bank speculation and the complete
emancipation of the workers, peasants, and the whole labouring
population from the exploitation of banking capital, and with a view
to the establishment of a single national bank of the Russian
Republic which shall serve the real interests of the people and the
poorer classes, the Central Executive Committee _(Tsay-ee-kah)_
resolves:

1. The banking business is declared a state monopoly.

2. All existing private joint-stock banks and banking offices are
merged in the State Bank.

3. The assets and liabilities of the liquidated establishments are
taken over by the State Bank.

4. The order of the merger of private banks in the State Bank is to
be determined by a special decree.

5. The temporary administration of the affairs of the private banks
is entrusted to the board of the State Bank.

6. The interests of the small depositors will be safeguarded.

                        *   *   *   *   *

                _On the Equality of Rank of All Military Men_

In realisation of the will of the revolutionary people regarding the
prompt and decisive abolition of all remnants of former inequality in
the Army, the Council of People's Commissars decrees:

1. All ranks and grades in the Army, beginning with the rank of
Corporal and ending with the rank of General, are abolished. The Army
of the Russian Republic consists now of free and equal citizens,
bearing the honourable title of Soldiers of the Revolutionary Army.

2. All privileges connected with the former ranks and grades, also
all outward marks of distinction, are abolished.

3. All addressing by titles is abolished.

4. All decorations, orders, and other marks of distinction are
abolished.

5. With the abolition of the rank of officer, all separate officers'
organisations are abolished.

Note.—Orderlies are left only for headquarters, chanceries,
Committees and other Army organisations.

                _President of the Council of People's Commissars,_
                                        VL. ULIANOV (LENIN).

                _People's Commissar for Military and Naval Affairs,_
                                        N. KRYLENKO.

                _People's Commissar for Military Affairs,_
                                        N. PODVOISKY.

                _Secretary of the Council,_
                                        N. GORBUNOV.
                        *    *    *    *    *

_On the Elective Principle and the Organisation of Authority in the
Army_

1. The army serving the will of the toiling people is subject to its
supreme representative—the Council of People's Commissars.

2. Full authority within the limits of military units and
combinations is vested in the respective Soldiers' Committees and
Soviets.

3. Those phases of the life and activity of the troops which are
already under the jurisdiction of the Committees are now formally
placed in their direct control. Over such branches of activity which
the Committees cannot assume, the control of the Soldiers' Soviets is
established.

4. The election of commanding Staff and officers is introduced. All
commanders up to the commanders of regiments, inclusive, are elected
by general suffrage of squads, platoons, companies, squadrons,
batteries, divisions (artillery, 2-3 batteries), and regiments. All
commanders higher than the commander of a regiment, and up to the
Supreme Commander, inclusive, are elected by congresses or
conferences of Committees.

Note.—By the term "conference" must be understood a meeting of the
respective Committees together with delegates of committees one
degree lower in rank. (Such as a "conference" of Regimental
Committees with delegates from Company Committees.—Author.)

5. The elected commanders above the rank of commander of regiment
must be confirmed by the nearest Supreme Committee.

Note. In the event of a refusal by a Supreme Committee to confirm an
elected commander, with a statement of reasons for such refusal, a
commander elected by the lower Committee a second time must be
confirmed.

6. The commanders of Armies are elected by Army congresses.
Commanders of Fronts are elected by congresses of the respective
Fronts.

7. To posts of a technical character, demanding special knowledge or
other practical preparation, namely: doctors, engineers, technicians,
telegraph  and wireless operators, aviators, automobilists, etc.,
only such persons as possess the required special knowledge may be
elected, by the Committees of the units of the respective services.

8. Chiefs of Staff must be chosen from among persons with special
military training for that post.

9. All other members of the Staff are appointed by the Chief of
Staff, and confirmed by the respective congresses.

Note.—All persons with special training must be listed in a special
list.

10. The right is reserved to retire from the service all commanders
on active service who are not elected by the soldiers to any post,
and who consequently are ranked as privates.

11. All other functions beside those pertaining to the command, with
the exception of posts in the economic departments, are filled by
appointment of the respective elected commanders.

12. Detailed instructions regarding the elections of the commanding
Staff will be published separately.

                        _President of the Council of People's Commissars._

                                        VL. ULIANOV (LENIN).

                        _People's Commissar for Military and Naval Affairs,_

                                        N. KRYLENKO.

                        _People's Commissar for Military Affairs,_

                                        N. PODVOISKY.

                        _Secretary of the Council,_

                                        N. GORBUNOV.

                        *     *     *     *     *

                _On the Abolition of Classes and Titles_

1. All classes and class divisions, all class privileges and
delimitations, all class organisations and institutions and all civil
ranks are abolished.

2. All classes of society (nobles, merchants, petty bourgeois,
etc.),and all titles (Prince, Count and others), and all
denominations of civil rank (Privy State Councillor, and others), are
abolished, and there is established the general denomination of
Citizen of the Russian Republic.

3. The property and institutions of the classes of nobility are
transferred to the corresponding autonomous Zemstvos.

4. The property of merchant and bourgeois organisations is
transferred immediately to the Municipal Self-Governments.

5. All class institutions of any sort, with their property, their
rules of procedure, and their archives, are transferred to the
administration of the Municipalities and Zemstvos.

6. All articles of existing laws applying to these matters are
herewith repealed.

7. The present decree becomes effective on the day it is published
and applied by the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers', and Peasants'
Deputies.

The present decree has been confirmed by the _Tsay-ee-kah_ at the
meeting of November 23d, 1917, and signed by:

                        _President of the Tsay-ee-kah,_

                                        SVERDLOV.

                        _President of the Council of People's Commissars,_

                                        VL. ULIANOV (LENIN).

                        _Executive of the Council of People's Commissars,_

                                        V. BONCH-BRUEVITCH.

                        _Secretary of the Council,_

                                        N. GORBUNOV.

                        *     *     *     *     *

On December 3d the Council of People's Commissars resolved "to reduce
the salaries of functionaries and employees in all Government
institutions and establishments, general or special, without
exception."

To begin with, the Council fixed the salary of a People's Commissar
at 500 rubles per month, with 100 rubles additional for each grown
member of the family incapable of work….

This was the highest salary paid to any Government official….

                                 4.

Countess Panina was arrested and brought to trial before the first
Supreme Revolutionary Tribunal. The trial is described in the chapter
on "Revolutionary Justice" in my forthcoming volume, "Kornilov to
Brist- Litovsk." The prisoner was sentenced to "return the money, and
then be liberated to the public contempt." In other words, she was
set free!

                                 5.

                        RIDICULE OF THE NEW RÉGIME

        From _Drug Naroda_ (Menshevik), November 18th:

"The story of the 'immediate peace' of the Bolsheviki reminds us of a
joyous moving-picture film…. Neratov runs—Trotzky pursues; Neratov
climbs a wall, Trotzky too; Neratov dives into the water—Trotzky
follows; Neratov climbs onto the roof—Trotzky right behind him;
Neratov hides under the bed—and Trotzky has him! He has him!
Naturally, peace is immediately signed….

"All is empty and silent at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The
couriers are respectful, but their faces wear a caustic expression….

"How about arresting an ambassador and signing an armistice or a
Peace Treaty with him? But they are strange folk, these ambassadors.
They keep silent just as if they had heard nothing. Hola, hola,
England, France, Germany! We have signed an armistice with you! Is it
possible that you know nothing about it? Nevertheless, it has been
published in all the papers and posted on all the walls. On a
Bolshevik's word of honour, Peace has been signed. We're not asking
much of you; you just have to write two words….

"The ambassadors remain silent. The Powers remain silent. All is
empty and silent in the office of the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

"'Listen,' says Robespierre-Trotzky to his assistant Marat-Uritzky,
'run over to the British Ambassador's, tell him we're proposing
peace!'

"'Go yourself,' says Marat-Uritzky. 'He's not receiving.'

"'Telephone him, then.'

"'I've tried. The receiver's off the hook.'

"'Send him a telegram.'

"'I did.'

"'Well, with what result?'

"Marat-Uritzky sighs and does not answer. Robespierre-Trotzky spits
furiously into the corner….

"'Listen, Marat,' recommences Trotzky, after a moment. 'We must
absolutely show that we're conducting an active foreign policy. How
can we do that?'

"'Launch another decree about arresting Neratov,' answers Uritzky,
with a profound air.

"'Marat, you're a blockhead!' cries Trotzky. All of a sudden he
arises, terrible and majestic, looking at this moment like
Robespierre.

"'Write, Uritzky!' he says with severity. 'Write a letter to the
British ambassador, a registered letter with receipt demanded. Write!
I also will write! The peoples of the world await an immediate peace!'

"In the enormous and empty Ministry of Foreign Affairs are to be
heard only the sound of two typewriters. With his own hands Trotzky
is conducting an active foreign policy…."

                                 6.

                ON THE QUESTION OF AN AGREEMENT

To the Attention of All Workers and All Soldiers.

November 11th, in the club of the Preobrazhensky Regiment, was held
an extraordinary meeting of representatives of all the units of the
Petrograd garrison.

The meeting was called upon the initiative of the Preobrazhensky and
Semionovsky Regiments, for the discussion of the question as to which
Socialist parties are for the power of the Soviets, which are
against, which are for the people, which against, and if an agreement
between them is possible.

The representatives of the _Tsay-ee-kah,_ of the Municipal Duma, of
the Avksentiev Peasants' Soviets, and of all the political parties
from the Bolsheviki to the Populist Socialists, were in