vited to the
meeting.

After long deliberation, having heard the declarations of all parties
and organisations, the meeting by a tremendous majority of votes
agreed that only the Bolsheviki and the Left Socialist
Revolutionaries are for the people, and that all the other parties
are only attempting, under cover of seeking an agreement, to deprive
the people of the conquests won in the days of the great Workers' and
Peasants' Revolution of November.

Here is the text of the resolution carried at this meeting of the
Petrograd garrison, by 61 votes against 11, and 12 not voting:

"The garrison conference, summoned at the initiative of the
Semionovsky and Preobrazhensky Regiments, on hearing the
representatives of all the Socialist parties and popular
organisations on the question of an agreement between the different
political parties finds that:

"1. The representatives of the _Tasy-ee-kah,_ the representatives of
the Bolshevik party and the Left Socialist Revolutionaries, declared
definitely that they stand for a Government of the Soviets, for the
decrees on Land, Peace and Workers' Control of Industry, and that
upon this platform they are willing to agree with all the Socialist
parties.

"2. At the same time the representatives of the other parties
(Mensheviki, Socialist Revolutionaries) either gave no answer at all,
or declared simply that they were opposed to the power of the Soviets
and against the decrees on Land, Peace and Workers' Control.

"In view of this the meeting resolves:

"'1. To express severe censure of all parties which, under cover of
an agreement, wish practically to annul the popular conquests of the
Revolution of November.

"2. To express full confidence in the _Tsay-ee-kah_ and the Council
of People's Commissars, and to promise them complete support.'

"At the same time the meeting deems it necessary that the comrades
Left Socialist Revolutionaries should enter the People's Government."

                                 7.

                           WINE "POGROMS"

It was afterward discovered that there was a regular organisation,
maintained by the Cadets, for provoking rioting among the soldiers.
There would be telephone messages to the different barracks,
announcing that wine was being given away at such and such an
address, and when the soldiers arrived at the spot an individual
would point out the location of the cellar….

The Council of People's Commissars appointed a Commissar for the
Fight Against Drunkenness, who, besides mercilessly putting down the
wine riots, destroyed hundreds of thousands of bottles of liquor. The
Winter Palace cellars, containing rare vintages valued at more than
five million dollars, were at first flooded, and then the liquor was
removed to Cronstadt and destroyed.

In this work the Cronstadt sailors, "flower and pride of the
revolutionary forces," as Trotzky called them, acquitted themselves
with iron selfdicipline….

                                 8.

                            SPECULATORS

Two orders concerning them:

                _Council of People's Commissars_

                _To the Military Revolutionary Committee_

The disorganisation of the food supply created by the war, and the
lack of system, is becoming to the last degree acute, thanks to the
speculators, marauders and their followers on the railways, in the
steamship offices, forwarding offices, etc.

Taking advantage of the nation's greatest misfortunes, these criminal
spoliators are playing with the health and life of millions of
soldiers and workers, for their own benefit.

Such a situation cannot be borne a single day longer.

The Council of People's Commissars proposes to the Military
Revolutionary Committee to take the most decisive measures towards
the uprooting of speculation, sabotage, hiding of supplies,
fraudulent detention of cargoes, etc.

All persons guilty of such actions shall be subject, by special
orders of the Military Revolutionary Committee, to immediate arrest
and confinement in the prisons of Cronstadt, pending their
arraignment before the Revolutionary Tribunal.

All the popular organisations are invited to cooperate in the
struggle against the spoliators of food supplies.

                _President of the Council of People's Commissaries._
                                        V. ULIANOV (LENIN).

Accepted for execution,
                _Military Revolutionary Committee attached to
                the C. E. C. of the Soviets of W. & S. Deputies._

Petrograd, Nov. 23d, 1917.

                        *     *     *     *     *

                    _To All Honest Citizens_

_The Military Revolutionary Committee Decrees:_

Spoliators, marauders, speculators, are declared to be enemies of the
People….

The Military Revolutionary Committee proposes to all public
organisations, to all honest citizens: to inform the Military
Revolutionary Committee immediately of all cases of spoliation,
marauding, speculation, which become known to them.

The struggle against this evil is the business of all honest people.
The Military Revolutionary Committee expects the support of all to
whom the interests of the People are dear.

The Military Revolutionary Committee will be merciless in pursuit of
speculators and marauders.

                                THE MILITARY REVOLUTIONARY COMMITTEE

Petrograd, Dec. 2d, 1917.

                                 9.

                    PURISHKEVITCH's LETTER TO KALEDIN

"The situation at Petrograd is desperate. The city is cut off from
the outside world and is entirely in the power of the Bolsheviki….
People are arrested in the streets, thrown into the Neva, drowned and
imprisoned without any charge. Even Burtzev is shut up in Peter-Paul
fortress, under strict guard.

"The organisation at whose head I am is working without rest to unite
all the officers and what is left of the _yunker_ schools, and to arm
them. The situation cannot be saved except by creating regiments of
officers and _yunkers._ Attacking with these regiments, and having
gained a first success, we could later gain the aid of the garrison
troops; but without that first success it is impossible to count on a
single soldier, because thousands of them are divided and terrorised
by the scum which exists in every regiment. Most of the Cossacks are
tainted by Bolshevik propaganda, thanks to the strange policy of
General Dutov, who allowed to pass the moment when by decisive action
something could have been obtained. The policy of negotiations and
concessions has borne its fruits; all that is respectable is
persecuted, and it is the _plebe_ and the criminals who dominate—and
nothing can be done except by shooting and hanging them.

"We are awaiting you here, General, and at the moment of your
arrival, we shall advance with all the forces at our disposal. But
for that we must establish some communication with you, and before
all, clear up the following points:

"(1) Do you know that in your name all officers who could take part
in the fight are being invited to leave Petrograd on the pretext of
joining you?

"(2) About when can we count on your arrival at Petrograd? We should
like to know in order to coordinate our actions.

"In spite of the criminal inaction of the conscious people here,
which allowed the yoke of Bolshevism to be laid upon us—in spite of
the extraordinary pig—headedness of the majority of officers, so
difficult to organise— we believe in spite of all that Truth is on
our side, and that we shall conquer the vicious and criminal forces
who say that they are acting for motives of love of country and in
order to save it. Whatever comes, we shall not permit ourselves to be
struck down, and shall remain firm until the end."

Purishkevitch, being brought to trial before the Revolutionary
Tribunal, was given a short prison term….

                                10.

                DECREE ON THE MONOPOLY OF ADVERTISEMENTS

1. The printing of advertisements, in newspapers, books, bill-boards,
kiosks, in offices and other establishments is declared to be a State
monopoly.

2. Advertisements may only be published in the organs of the
Provisional Workers' and Peasants' Government at Petrograd, and in
the organs of local Soviets.

3. The proprietors of newspapers and advertising offices, as well as
all employees of such establishments, should remain at their posts
until the transfer of the advertisement business to the Government….
superintending the uninterrupted continuation of their houses, and
turning over to  the Soviets all private advertising and the sums
received therefor, as well as all accounts and copy.

4. All managers of publications and businesses dealing with paid
advertising, as well as their employees and workers, shall agree to
hold a City Congress, and to join, first the City Trade Unions, and
then the All-Russian Unions, to organise more thoroughly and justly
the advertising business in the Soviet publications, as well as to
prepare better rules for the public utility of advertising.

5. All persons found guilty of having concealed documents or money,
or having sabotaged the regulations indicated in paragraphs 3 and 4,
will be punished by a sentence of not more than three years'
imprisonment, and all their property will be confiscated.

6. The paid insertion of advertisements…. in private publications, or
under a masqued form, will also be severely penalised.

7. Advertising offices are confiscated by the Government, the owners
being entitled to compensation in cases of necessity. Small
proprietors, depositors and stock-holders of the confiscated
establishments will be reimbursed for all moneys held by them in the
concern.

8. All buildings, officers, counters, and in general every
establishment doing a business in advertising, should immediately
inform the Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies of its address,
and proceed to the transfer of its business, under penalty of the
punishment indicated in paragraph 5.

                        _President of the Council of People's Commissars,_
                                        VL. ULIANOV (LENIN).

                        _People's Commissar for Public Instruction,_
                                        A. V. LUNATCHARSKY.

                        _Secretary of the Council,_

                                        N. GORBUNOV.

                                11.

                        OBLIGATORY ORDINANCE

1. The city of Petrograd is declared to be in a state of siege.

2. All assemblies, meetings and congregations on the streets and
squares are prohibited.

3. Attempts to loot wine-cellars, warehouses, factories, stores,
business premises, private dwellings, etc., etc., _will be stopped by
machine-gun fire without warning._

4. House Committees, doormen, janitors and Militiamen are charged
with the duty of keeping strict order in all houses, courtyards and
in the streets, and house-doors and carriage-entrances must be locked
at 9 o'clock in the evening, and opened at 7 o'clock in the morning.
After 9 o'clock in the evening only tenants may leave the house,
under strict control of the House Committees.

5. Those guilty of the distribution, sale or purchase of any kind of
alcoholic liquor, and also those guilty of the violation of sections
2 and 4, will be immediately arrested and subjected to the most
severe punishment.

Petrograd, 6th of December, 3 o'clock in the night.

        _Committee to Fight Against Pogroms, attached to the Executive
        Committee of the Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies._

                                12.

                        TWO PROCLAMATIONS

Lenin, To _the People of Russia:_

"Comrades workers, soldiers, peasants—all toilers!

"The Workers' and Peasants' Revolution has won at Petrograd, at
Moscow…. From the Front and the villages arrive every day, every
hour, greetings to the new Government…. The victory of the
Revolution…. is assured, seeing that it is sustained by the majority
of the people.

"It is entirely understandable that the proprietors and the
capitalists, the employees and functionaries closely allied with the
bourgeoisic—in a word, all the rich and all those who join hands with
them—regard the new Revolution with hostility, oppose its success,
threaten to halt the activity of the banks, and sabotage or obstruct
the work of other establishments…. Every conscious worker understands
perfectly that we cannot avoid this hostility, because the high
officials have set themselves against the People and do not wish to
abandon their posts without resistance. But the working classes are
not for one moment afraid of that resistance. The majority of the
people are for us. For us are the majority of the workers and the
oppressed of the whole world. We have justice on our side. Our
ultimate victory is certain.

"The resistance of the capitalists and high officials will be broken.
No one will be deprived of his property without a special law on the
nationalisation of banks and financial syndicates. This law is in
preparation. Not a worker will lose a single kopek; on the contrary,
he will be assisted. Without at this moment establishing the new
taxes, the new Government considers one of its primary duties to make
a severe accounting and control on the reception of taxes decreed by
the former régime….

"Comrades workers! Remember that you yourselves direct the
Government. No one will help you unless you organise yourselves and
take into your own hands the affairs of the State. Your Soviets are
now the organs of governmental power…. Strengthen them, establish a
severe revolutionary control, pitilessly crush the attempts at
anarchy on the part of drunkards, brigands, counter-revolutionary
_yunkers_ and Kornilovists.

"Establish a strict control over production and the accounting for
products. Arrest and turn over to the Revolutionary Tribunal of the
People every one who injures the property of the People, by sabotage
in production, by concealment of grain-reserves, reserves of other
products, by retarding the shipments of grain, by bringing confusion
into the railroads, the posts and the telegraphs, or in general
opposing the great work of bringing Peace and transferring the Land
to the peasants….

"Comrades workers, soldiers, peasants—all toilers!

"Take immediately all local power into your hands…. Little by little,
with the consent of the majority of peasants, we shall march firmly
and unhesitatingly toward the victory of Socialism, which will
fortify the advance-guards of the working-class of the most civilised
Countries, and give to the peoples an enduring peace, and free them
from every slavery and every exploitation."

                                13.

_"To All Workers of Petrograd!_

"Comrades! The Revolution is winning—the revolution has won. All the
power has passed over to our Soviets. The first weeks are the most
difficult ones. The broken reaction must be finally crushed, a full
triumph must be secured to our endeavours. The working-class ought
to—must—show in these days THE GREATEST FIRMNESS AND ENDURANCE, in
order to facilitate the execution of all the aims of the new People's
Government of Soviets. In the next few days decrees on the Labour
question will be issued, and among the very first will be the decree
on Workers' Control over the production and regulation of Industry.

"STRIKES AND DEMONSTRATIONS OF THE WORKER MASSES IN PETROGRAD NOW CAN
ONLY DO HARM.

"We ask you to cease immediately all economic and political strikes,
to  take up your work, and do it in perfect order. The work in the
factories and all the industries is necessary for the new Government
of Soviets, because any interruption of this work will only create
new difficulties for us, and we have enough as it is. All to your
places.

"The best way to support the new Government of Soviets in these
days—is by doing your job.

"LONG LIVE THE IRON FIRMNESS OF THE PROLETARIAT! LONG LIVE THE
REVOLUTION!"

                        _Petrograd Soviet of W. & S. D._

                        _Petrograd Council of Trade Unions._

                        _Petrograd Council of Factory-Shop Committees._


                                14.

                    APPEALS AND COUNTER-APPEALS

_From the Employees of the State and private Banks To the Population
of Petrograd:_

“Comrades workers, soldiers and citizens!

“The Military Revolutionary Committee in an ‘extraordinary notice’ is
accusing the workers of the State and private banking and other
institutions of ‘impeding the work of the Government, directed
towards the ensuring of the Front with provisions.’

“Comrades and citizens, do not believe this calumny, brought against
us, who are part of the general army of labour.

“However difficult it be for us to work under the constant threat of
interference by acts of violence in our hard-working life, however
depressing it be to know that our Country and the Revolution are on
the verge of ruin, we, nevertheless, all of us, from the highest to
the lowest, employees, _artelshtchiki,_ counters, labourers,
couriers, etc., are continuing to fulfil our duties which are
connected with the ensuring of provisions and munitions to the Front
and country.

“Counting upon your lack of information, comrades workers and
soldiers, in questions of finance and banking, you are being incited
against workers like yourselves, because it is desirable to divert
the responsibility for the starving and dying brother-soldiers at the
Front from the guilty persons to the innocent workers who are
accomplishing their duty under the burden of general poverty and
disorganisation.

“REMEMBER, WORKERS AND SOLDIERS! THE EMPLOYEES HAVE ALWAYS STOOD UP
FOR AND WILL ALWAYS STAND UP FOR THE INTERESTS OF THE TOILING PEOPLE,
PART OF WHICH THEY ARE THEMSELVES, AND NOT A SINGLE KOPEK NECESSARY
FOR THE FRONT AND THE WORKERS HAS EVER BEEN DETAINED AND WILL NOT BE
DETAINED BY THE EMPLOYEES.

“From November 6th to November 23d, i.e., during 17 days, 500 million
rubles were dispatched to the Front, and 120 millions to Moscow,
besides the sums sent to other towns.

“Keeping guard over the wealth of the people, the master of which can
be only the Constituent Assembly, representing the whole nation, the
employees refuse to give out money for purposes which are unknown to
them.

“DO NOT BELIEVE THE CALUMNIATORS CALLING YOU TO TAKE THE LAW INTO
YOUR OWN HANDS!”

_Central Board of the All-Russian Union of Employees of the State
Bank._

_Central Board of the All-Russian Trade Union of Employees of Credit
Institutions._

                        *     *     *     *     *

                    _To the Population of Petrograd._

“CITIZENS: Do not believe the falsehood which irresponsible people
are trying to suggest to you by spreading terrible calumnies against
the employees of the Ministry of Supplies and the workers in other
Supply organisations who are labouring in these dark days for the
salvation of Russia. Citizens! In posted placards you are called upon
to lynch us, we are accused falsely of sabotage and strikes, we are
blamed for all the woes and misfortunes that the people are
suffering, although we have been striving indefatigably and
uninterruptedly, and are still striving, to save the Russian people
from the horrors of starvation. Notwithstanding all that we are
bearing as citizens of unhappy Russia, we have not for one hour
abandoned our heavy and responsible work of supplying the Army and
population with provisions.

“The image of the Army, cold and hungry, saving our very existence by
its blood and its tortures, does not leave us for a single moment.

“Citizens! If we have survived the blackest days in the life and
history of our people, if we have succeeded in preventing famine in
Petrograd, if we have managed to procure to the suffering army bread
and forage by means of enormous, almost superhuman, efforts, it is
because we have honestly continued and are still continuing to do our
work….

“To the ‘last warning’ of the usurpers of the power we reply: It is
not for you who are leading the country to ruin to threaten us who
are doing all we can not to allow the country to perish. We are not
afraid of threats; before us stands the sacred image of tortured
Russia. We will continue our work of supplying the Army and the
people with bread to our last efforts, so long as you will not
prevent us from accomplishing our duty to our country. In the
contrary case the Army and the people will stand before the horrors
of famine, but the responsibility therefor belongs to the
perpetrators of violence.

                _Executive Committee of the Employees of the
                                Ministry of Supplies._

                        *     *     *     *     *

                _To the_ Tchinovniki (_Government Officials_).

It is notified hereby, that all officials and persons who have
quitted the service in Government and public institutions or have
been dismissed for sabotage or for having failed to report for work
on the day fixed, and who have nevertheless received their salary
paid in advance for the time they have not served, are bound to
return such salary not later than on November 27th, 1917, to those
institutions where they were in service.

In the event of this not being done, these persons will be rendered
answerable for stealing the Treasury’s property and tried by the
Military Revolutionary Court.

                                _The Military-Revolutionary Committee._

December 7th, 1917.

                        *     *     *     *     *

_From the Special Board for the Supplies_
CITIZENS

“The conditions of our work for the supplying of Petrograd are
getting more and more difficult every day.

“The interference with our work—which is so ruinous to our
business—of the Commissars of the Military Revolutionary Committee is
still continuing.

“THEIR ARBITRARY ACTS, their annulling of our orders, MAY LEAD TO A
CATASTROPHE.

“Seals have been affixed to one of the cold storages where the meat
and butter destined for the population are kept, and we cannot
regulate the temperature SO THAT THE PRODUCTS WOULD NOT BE SPOILT.

“One carload of potatoes and one carload of cabbages have been seized
and carried away no one knows where to.

“Cargoes which are not liable to requisition (_khalva_) are
requisitioned by the Commissars and, as was the case one day, five
boxes of _khalva_ were seized by the Commissar for his own use.

“WE ARE NOT IN A POSITION TO DISPOSE OF OUR STORAGES, where the
selfappointed Commissars do not allow the cargoes to be taken out,
and terrorise our employees, threatening them with arrest.

“ALL THAT IS GOING ON IN PETROGRAD IS KNOWN IN THE PROVINCES, AND
FROM THE DON, FROM SIBERIA, FROM VORONEZH AND OTHER PLACES PEOPLE ARE
REFUSING TO SEND FLOUR AND BREAD.

“THIS CANNOT GO ON MUCH LONGER.

“The work is simply falling out of our hands.

“OUR DUTY is to let the population know of this.

“To the last possibility we will remain on guard of the interests of
the population.

“WE WILL DO EVERYTHING TO AVOID THE ONCOMING FAMINE, BUT IF UNDER
THESE DIFFICULT CONDITIONS OUR WORK IS COMPELLED TO STOP, LET THE
PEOPLE KNOW THAT IT IS NOT OUR FAULT….”

                                15.

ELECTIONS TO THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY IN PETROGRAD

There were nineteen tickets in Petrograd. The results are as follows,
published November 30th:

    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | _Party_                                           | _Vote_  |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Populist Socialists                               | 19,109  |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Cadets                                            | 245,006 |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Christian Democrats                               | 3,707   |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Bolsheviki                                        | 424,027 |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Socialist Universalists                           | 158     |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | S. D. and S. R. Ukrainean and Jewish Workers      | 4,219   |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | League of Women’s Rights                          | 5,310   |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Socialist Revolutionaries (_oborontsi_)           | 4,696   |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Left Socialist Revolutionaries                    | 152,230 |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | League of the People’s Development                | 385     |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Radical Democrats                                 | 413     |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Orthodox Parishes                                 | 24,139  |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Feminine League for Salvation of Country          | 318     |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Independent League of Workers, Soldiers, Peasants | 4,942   |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Christian Democrats (Catholic)                    | 14,382  |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Unified Social Democrats                          | 11,740  |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Mensheviki                                        | 17,427  |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | _Yedinstvo_ group                                 | 1,823   |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+
    | League of Cossack Troops                          | 6,712   |
    +---------------------------------------------------+---------+

                                16.

        FROM THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’s COMMISSARS TO THE TOILING COSSACKS

_“Brothers-Cossacks._

“You are being deceived. You are being incited against the People.
You are told that the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
Deputies are your enemies, that they want to take away your Cossack
land, your Cossack ‘liberty’. Don’t believe it, Cossacks…. Your own
Generals and landowners are deceiving you, in order to keep you in
darkness and slavery.  We, the Council of People’s Commissars,
address ourselves to you, Cossacks, with these words. Read them
attentively and judge yourselves which is the truth and which is
cruel deceit. The life and service of a Cossack were always bondage
and penal servitude. At the first call of the authorities a Cossack
always had to saddle his horse and ride out on campaign. All his
military equipment a Cossack had to provide with his own hardly
earned means. A Cossack is on service, his farm is going to rack and
ruin. Is such a condition fair? No, it must be altered for ever. THE
COSSACKS MUST BE FREED FROM BONDAGE. The new People’s Soviet power is
willing to come to the assistance of the toiling Cossacks. It is only
necessary that the Cossacks themselves should resolve to abolish the
old order, that they should refuse submission to their slave-driver
officers, land-owners, rich men, that they should throw off the
cursed yoke from their necks. Arise, Cossacks! Unite! The Council of
People’s Commissars calls upon you to enter a new, fresh, more happy
life.

“In November and December in Petrograd there were All-Russian
Congresses of Soviets of Soldiers’, Workers’, and Peasants’ Deputies.
These Congresses transferred all the authority in the different
localities into the hands of the Soviets, i.e., into the hands of men
elected by the People. From now on there must be in Russia no rulers
or functionaries who command the People from above and drive them.
The People create the authority themselves. A General has no more
rights than a soldier. All are equal. Consider, Cossacks, is this
wrong or right? We are calling upon you, Cossacks, to join this new
order and to create your own Soviets of Cossacks’ Deputies. To such
Soviets all the power must belong in the different localities. Not to
_hetmans_ with the rank of General, but to the elected
representatives of the toiling Cossacks, to your own trustworthy
reliable men.

“The All-Russian Congresses of Soldiers’, Workers’, and Peasants’
Deputies have passed a resolution to transfer all landowners’ land
into the possession of the toiling people. Is not that fair,
Cossacks? The Kornilovs, Kaledins, Dutovs, Karaulovs, Bardizhes, all
defend with their whole souls the interests of the rich men, and they
are ready to drown Russia in blood if only the lands remain in the
hands of the landowners. But you, the toiling Cossacks, do not you
suffer yourselves from poverty, oppression and lack of land? How many
Cossacks are there who have more than 4-5 _dessiatins_ per head? But
the landowners, who have thousands of _dessiatins_ of their own land,
wish besides to get into their hands the lands of the Cossack Army.
According to the new Soviet laws, the lands of Cossack landowners
must pass without compensation into the hands of the Cossack workers,
the poorer Cossacks. You are being told that the Soviets wish to take
away your lands from you. Who is frightening you? The rich Cossacks,
who know that the Soviet AUTHORITY WISHES TO transfer the landowners’
lands to you. Choose then, Cossacks, for whom will you stand: for the
Kornilovs and Kaledins, for the Generals and rich men, or for the
Soviets of Peasants’, Soldiers’, Workers’ and Cossacks’ Deputies.

“THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’s COMMISSARS elected by the All-Russian
Congress HAS PROPOSED TO ALL NATIONS AN IMMEDIATE ARMISTICE AND AN
HONOURABLE DEMOCRATIC PEACE WITHOUT LOSS OR DETRIMENT TO ANY NATION.
All the capitalists, landowners, Generals-Kornilovists have risen
against the peaceful policy of the Soviets. The war was bringing them
profits, power, distinctions. And to you, Cossack privates? You were
perishing without reason, without purpose, like your
brothers-soldiers and sailors. It will soon be three years and a half
that this accursed war has gone on, a war devised by the capitalists
and landowners of all countries for their own profit, their world
robberies. To the toiling Cossacks the war has only brought ruin and
death. The war has drained all the resources from Cossack farm life.
The only salvation for the whole of our country and for the Cossacks
in  particular is a prompt and honest peace. The Council of People’s
Commissars has declared to all Governments and peoples: We do not
want other people’s property, and we do not wish to give away our
own. Peace without annexations and without indemnities. Every nation
must decide its own fate. There must be no oppressing of one nation
by another. Such is the honest, democratic, People’s peace which the
Council of People’s Commissars is proposing to all Governments, to
all peoples, allies and enemies. And the results are visible: ON THE
RUSSIAN FRONT AN ARMISTICE HAS BEEN CONCLUDED.

“The soldier’s and the Cossack’s blood is not flowing there any more.
Now, Cossacks, decide: do you wish to continue this ruinous,
senseless, criminal slaughter? Then support the Cadets, the enemies
of the people, support Tchernov, Tseretelli, Skobeliev, who drove you
into the offensive of July 1st; support Kornilov, who introduced
capital punishment for soldiers and Cossacks at the front. BUT IF YOU
WISH A PROMPT AND HONEST PEACE, THEN ENTER THE RANKS OF THE SOVIETS
AND SUPPORT THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’s COMMISSARS.

“Your fate, Cossacks, lies in your own hands. Our common foes, the
landowners, capitalists, officers-Kornilovists, bourgeois newspapers,
are deceiving you and driving you along the road to ruin. In
Orenburg, Dutov has arrested the Soviet and disarmed the garrison.
Kaledin is threatening the Soviets in the province of the Don. He has
declared the province to be in a state of war and is assembling his
troops. Karaulov is shooting the local tribes in the Caucasus. The
Cadet bourgeoisie is supplying them with its millions. Their common
aim is to suppress the People’s Soviets, to crush the workers and
peasants, to introduce again the discipline of the whip in the army,
and to eternalise the bondage of the toiling Cossacks.

“Our revolutionary troops are moving to the Don and the Ural in order
to put an end to this criminal revolt against the people. The
commanders of the revolutionary troops have received orders not to
enter into any negotiations with the mutinous Generals, to act
decisively and mercilessly.

“Cossacks! On you depends now whether your brothers’ blood is to flow
still. We are holding out our hand to you. Join the whole people
against its enemies. Declare Kaledin, Kornilov, Dutov, Karaulov and
all their aiders and abettors to be the enemies of the people,
traitors and betrayers. Arrest them with your own forces and turn
them over into the hands of the Soviet authority, which will judge
them in open and public Revolutionary Tribunal. Cossacks! Form
Soviets of Cossacks’ Deputies. Take into your toil-worn hands the
management of all the affairs of the Cossacks. Take away the lands of
your own wealthy landowners. Take over their grain, their inventoried
property and live-stock for the cultivation of the lands of the
toiling Cossacks, who are ruined by the war.

“Forward, Cossacks, to the fight for the common cause of the people!

“Long live the toiling Cossacks!

“Long live the union of the Cossacks, the soldiers, peasants and
workers!

“Long live the power of the Soviets of Cossacks’, Soldiers’, Workers’
and Peasants’ Deputies.

“Down with the war! Down with the landowners and the
Kornilovist-Generals!

“Long live Peace and the Brotherhood of peoples!”

                                _Council of People’s Commissars._

                                17.

    FROM THE COMMISSION ON PUBLIC EDUCATION ATTACHED TO THE CENTRAL
                            CITY DUMA

“Comrades Workingmen and Workingwomen!

“A few days before the holidays, a strike has been declared by the
teachers of the public schools. The teachers side with the
bourgeoisie against the Workers’ and Peasants’ Government.

“Comrades, organise parents’ committees and pass resolutions against
the strike of the teachers. Propose to the Ward Soviets of Workers’
and Soldiers’ Deputies, the Trade Unions, the Factory-Shop and Party
Committees, to organise protest meetings. Arrange with your own
resources Christmas trees and entertainments for the children, and
demand the opening of the schools, after the holidays, at the date
which will be set by the Duma.

“Comrades, strengthen your position in matters of public education,
insist on the control of the proletarian organisations over the
schools.”

      _Commission on Public Education attached to the Central City Duma._

                                18.

        DIPLOMATIC CORRESPONDENCE OF THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT

The notes issued by Trotzky to the Allies and to the neutral powers,
as well as the note of the Allied military Attachés to General
Dukhonin, are too voluminous to give here. Moreover they belong to
another phase of the history of the Soviet Republic, with which this
book has nothing to do—the foreign relations of the Soviet
Government. This I treat at length in the next volume, “Kornilov to
Brest-Litovsk.”

                                19.

                APPEALS TO THE FRONT AGAINST DUKHONIN

“… The struggle for peace has met with the resistance of the
bourgeoisie and the counter-revolutionary Generals…. From the
accounts in the newspapers, at the _Stavka_ of former Supreme
Commander Dukhonin are gathering the agents and allies of the
bourgeoisie, Verkhovski, Avksentiev, Tchernov, Gotz, Tseretelli, etc.
It seems even that they want to form a new power against the Soviets.

“Comrades soldiers! All the persons we have mentioned have been
Ministers already. They have acted in accord with Kerensky and the
bourgeoisie. They are responsible for the offensive of July 1st and
for the prolongation of the war. They promised the land to the
peasants and then arrested the Land Committees. They reestablished
capital punishment for soldiers. They obey the orders of French,
English and American financiers….

“General Dukhonin, for having refused to obey orders of the Council
of People’s Commissars, has been dismissed from his position as
Supreme Commander…. For answer he is circulating among the troops the
note from the Military Attachés of the Allied imperialist Powers, and
attempting to provoke a counter-revolution….

“Do not obey Dukhonin! Pay no attention to his provocation! Watch him
and his group of counter-revolutionary Generals carefully….”

                                20.

                            FROM KRYLENKO
                           _Order Number Two_

“… The ex-Supreme Commander, General Dukhonin, for having opposed
resistance to the execution of orders, for criminal action
susceptible of provoking a new civil war, is declared enemy of the
People. All persons who support Dukhonin will be arrested, without
respect to their social or political position or their past. Persons
equipped with special authority will operate these arrests. I charge
General Manikhovsky with the execution of the above-mentioned
dispositions….”

                     APPENDIX TO CHAPTER XII

                                 1.

                     INSTRUCTION TO PEASANTS

In answer to the numerous enquiries coming from peasants, it is
hereby explained that the whole power in the country is from now on
held by the Soviets of the Workers’, Soldiers’, and Peasants’
Deputies. The Workers’ Revolution, after having conquered in
Petrograd and in Moscow, is now conquering in all other centres of
Russia. The Workers’ and Peasants’ Government safeguards the
interests of the masses of peasantry, the poorest of them; it is with
the majority of peasants and workers against the landowners, and
against the capitalists.

Hence the Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies, and before all the District
Soviets, and subsequently those of the Provinces, are from now on and
until the Constituent Assembly meets, full-powered bodies of State
authority in their localities. All landlords’ titles to the land are
cancelled by the second All-Russian Congress of Soviets. A decree
regarding the land has already been issued by the present Provisional
Workers’ and Peasants’ Government. On the basis of the above decree
all lands hitherto belonging to landlords now pass entirely and
wholly into the hands of the Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies. The
_Volost_ (a group of several villages forms a _Volost_) Land
Committees are immediately to take over all land from the landlords,
and to keep a strict account over it, watching that order be
maintained, and that the whole estate be well guarded, seeing that
from now on all private estates become public property and must
therefore be protected by the people themselves.

All orders given by the _Volost_ Land Committees, adopted with the
assent of the District Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies, in fulfilment
of the decrees issued by the revolutionary power, are absolutely
legal and are to be forthwith and irrefutably brought into execution.

The Workers’ and Peasants’ Government appointed by the second
All-Russian Congress of Soviets has received the name of the Council
of People’s Commissars.

The Council of People’s Commissars summons the Peasants to take the
whole power into their hands in every locality.

The workers will in every way absolutely and entirely support the
peasants, arrange for them all that is required in connection with
machines and tools, and in return they request the peasants to help
with the transport of grain.

                  _President of the Council of People’s Commissars,_
                                       V. ULIANOV (LENIN).

Petrograd, November 18th, 1917.

                                 2.

The full-powered Congress of Peasants’ Soviets met about a week
later, and continued for several weeks. Its history is merely an
expanded version of the history of the “Extraordinary Conference.” At
first the great majority of the delegates were hostile to the Soviet
Government, and supported the reactionary wing. Several days later
the assembly was supporting the moderates with Tchernov. And several
days after that the vast majority of the Congress were voting for the
faction of Maria Spiridonova, and sending their representatives into
the _Tsay-ee-kah_ at Smolny…. The Right Wing then walked out of the
Congress and called a Congress of its own, which went on, dwindling
from day to day, until it finally dissolved….










THE JUNIOR CLASSICS

SELECTED AND ARRANGED BY

WILLIAM PATTEN, MANAGING EDITOR OF THE HARVARD CLASSICS

INTRODUCTION BY CHARLES W. ELIOT, LL.D., PRESIDENT EMERITUS OF HARVARD
UNIVERSITY

WITH A READING GUIDE BY WILLIAM ALLAN NEILSON, Ph. D., PROFESSOR OF
ENGLISH, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, PRESIDENT SMITH COLLEGE, NORTHAMPTON,
MASS., SINCE 1917




VOLUME ONE

Fairy and Wonder Tales




INTRODUCTION

The purpose of The Junior Classics is to provide, in ten volumes
containing about five thousand pages, a classified collection of tales,
stories, and poems, both ancient and modern, suitable for boys and
girls of from six to sixteen years of age.  Thoughtful parents and
teachers, who realize the evils of indiscriminate reading on the part
of children, will appreciate the educational value of such a
collection.  A child's taste in reading is formed, as a rule, in the
first ten or twelve years of its life, and experience has shown that
the childish mind will prefer good literature to any other, if access
to it is made easy, and will develop far better on literature of proved
merit than on trivial or transitory material.

The boy or girl who becomes familiar with the charming tales and poems
in this collection will have gained a knowledge of literature and
history that will be of high value in other school and home work.  Here
are the real elements of imaginative narration, poetry, and ethics,
which should enter into the education of every English-speaking child.

This collection, carefully used by parents and teachers with due
reference to individual tastes and needs, will make many children enjoy
good literature.  It will inspire them with a love of good reading,
which is the best possible result of any elementary education.  The
child himself should be encouraged to make his own selections from this
large and varied collection, the child's enjoyment being the object in
view.  A real and lasting interest in literature or in scholarship is
only to be developed through the individual's enjoyment of his mental
occupations.

The most important change which has been made in American schools and
colleges within my memory is the substitution of leading for driving,
of inspiration for drill, of personal interest and love of work for
compulsion and fear.  The schools are learning to use methods and
materials which interest and attract the children themselves.  The
Junior Classics will put into the home the means of using this happy
method.

Committing to memory beautiful pieces of literature, either prose or
poetry, for recitation before a friendly audience, acting charades or
plays, and reading aloud with vivacity and sympathetic emotion, are
good means of instruction at home or at school This collection contains
numerous admirable pieces of literature for such use.  In teaching
English and English literature we should place more reliance upon
processes and acts which awaken emotion, stimulate interest, prove to
be enjoyable for the actors, and result in giving children the power of
entertaining people, of blessing others with noble pleasures which the
children create and share.

>From the home training during childhood there should result in the
child a taste for interesting and improving reading which will direct
and inspire its subsequent intellectual life.  The training which
results in this taste for good reading, however unsystematic or
eccentric it may have been, has achieved one principal aim of
education; and any school or home training which does not result in
implanting this permanent taste has failed in a very important respect.
Guided and animated by this impulse to acquire knowledge and exercise
the imagination through good reading, the adult will continue to
educate him all through life.

The story of the human race through all its slow development should be
gradually conveyed to the child's mind from the time he begins to read,
or to listen to his mother reading; and with description of facts and
actual events should be mingled charming and uplifting products of the
imagination.  To try to feed the minds of children upon facts alone is
undesirable and unwise.  The immense product of the imagination in art
and literature is a concrete fact with which every educated human being
should be made somewhat familiar, that product being a very real part
of every individual's actual environment.

The right selection of reading matter for children is obviously of high
importance.  Some of the mythologies, Old Testament stories, fairy
tales, and historical romances, on which earlier generations were
accustomed to feed the childish mind, contain a great deal that is
barbarous, perverse, or cruel; and to this infiltration into children's
minds, generation after generation, of immoral, cruel, or foolish ideas
is probably to be attributed in part the slow ethical progress of the
race.  The commonest justification of this thoughtless practice is that
children do not apprehend the evil in the bad mental pictures with
which we foolishly supply them; but what should we think of a mother
who gave her children dirty milk or porridge, on the theory that the
children would not assimilate the dirt?  Should we be less careful
about mental and moral food materials?  The Junior Classics have been
selected with this principle in mind, without losing sight of the fact
that every developing human being needs to have a vision of the rough
and thorny road over which the human race has been slowly advancing
during thousands of years.

Whoever has committed to memory in childhood such Bible extracts as
Genesis i, the Ten Commandments, Psalm xxiii, Matthew v, 8-12, The
Lord's Prayer, and I Corinthians xiii, such English prose as Lincoln's
Gettysburg speech, Bacon's "Essay on Truth," and such poems as Bryant's
"Waterfowl," Addison's "Divine Ode," Milton's Sonnet on his Blindness,
Wotton's "How happy is he born or taught," Emerson's "Rhodora,"
Holmes's "Chambered Nautilus," and Gray's Elegy, and has stamped them
on his brain by frequent repetition, will have set up in his mind high
standards of noble thought and feeling, true patriotism, and pure
religion.  He will also have laid in an invaluable store of good
English.

While the majority of the tales and poems are intended for children who
have begun to do their own reading, there will be found in every volume
selections fit for reading aloud to younger children.  Throughout the
collection the authors tell the stories in their own words; so that the
salt which gave them savor is preserved.  There are some condensations
however, such as any good teller of borrowed stories would make; but as
a rule condensation has been applied only in the case of long works
which otherwise could not have been included.  The notes which precede
the condensations supply explanations, and answer questions which
experience has shown boys and girls are apt to ask about the works
condensed or their authors.

The Junior Classics constitute a set of books whose contents will
delight children and at the same time satisfy the legitimate ethical
requirements of those who have the children's best interests at heart.

Charles W. Eliot

NOTE

Notices of copyright on material used in these volumes appear on the
back of the title pages of the particular volumes in which the stories
are printed.  A complete list of acknowledgments to authors and
publishers, for their kind permission to use copyrighted material, is
given on pages 3 to 6 of Volume Ten.

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION		Charles, W. Eliot

PREFACE		William Patten

TALES OF THE AMERICAN INDIANS

Manabozho		H. R. Schoolcraft

The Woodpecker		H. R. Schoolcraft

Why the Diver Duck Has So Few Tail Feathers	H. R. Schoolcraft

Manabozho Changed to Wolf		H. R. Schoolcraft

Manabozho is Robbed 		H. R. Schoolcraft

Manabozho and the Woodpeckers	H. R. Schoolcraft

The Boy and the Wolves		Andrew Lang

The Indian Who Lost His Wife		Andrew Lang

TALES FROM INDIA

Punchkin		E. Frere

The Sun, Moon and Wind		E. Frere

Why the Fish Laughed		Joseph Jacob

The Farmer and Money Lender		Joseph Jacob

Pride Goeth Before a Fall		Joseph Jacob

The Wicked Sons		Joseph Jacob

Tiger, Brahman, and Jackal		Flora Annie Steel

The Lambikin		Flora Annie Steel

The Rat's Wedding		Flora Annie Steel

The Jackal and the Partridge		Flora Annie Steel

The Jackal and the Crocodile		Flora Annie Steel

The Jackal and the Iguana 		Flora Annie Steel

The Bear's Bad Bargain		Flora Annie Steel

The Thief and the Fox		Ramaswami Raju

The Farmer and the Fox		Ramaswami Raju

The Fools and the Drum		Ramaswami Raju

The Lion and the Goat		Ramaswami Raju

The Glowworm and Jackdaw		Ramaswami Raju

The Camel and the Pig		Ramaswami Raju

The Dog and the Dog Dealer		Ramaswami Raju

The Tiger, Fox, and Hunters		Ramaswami Raju

The Sea, the Fox, and the Wolf		Ramaswami Raju

The Fox in the Well		Ramaswami Raju

TALES FROM THE NORSELAND

Ashiepattle		P. C. Asbjörnsen

The Squire's Bride		P. C. Asbjörnsen

The Doll in the Grass		P. C. Asbjörnsen

The Bear and the Fox		P. C. Asbjörnsen

The Lad Who Went to the North Wind		Sir George W. Dasent

The Husband Who Was to Mind the House		Sir George W. Dasent

How One Went Out to Woo		Sir George W. Dasent

Why the Bear is Stumpy-Tailed		Sir George W. Dasent

Boots and the Princess		Sir George W. Dasent

The Witch in the Stone Boat		Andrew Lang

TALES FROM FRANCE, SPAIN, AND POLAND

The Snuffbox		Paul Sébillot

The Golden Blackbird		Paul Sébillot

The Half-Chick		Andrew Lang

The Three Brothers		Hermann R. Kletke

The Glass Mountain		Hermann R. Kletke

TALES FROM RUSSIA

Huntsman the Unlucky		John T. Naaké

Story of Little Simpleton		John T. Naaké

The Golden Fish		Lillian M. Gask

TALES FROM SERBIA

The Wonderful Hair		W.S. Karajich

The Language of Animals		W.S. Karajich

The Emperor Trojan's Ears		W.S. Karajich

The Maiden Who Was Wiser Than the King 	W.S. Karajich

AN IRISH TALE

The Three Sons		Lady Gregory

TALES FROM CHINA AND JAPAN

Hok Lee and the Dwarfs		Andrew Lang

A Dreadful Boar		Adele M. Fielde

The Five Queer Brothers		Adele M. Fielde

The Accomplished Teakettle		A.B. Mitford

Adventures of Little Peachling		A.B. Mitford

A	TALE FROM NEW GUINEA

The Two Lizards		Annie Ker

A TALE FROM JAMAICA

De King and De Peafowl	Mary P. Milne-Horne

SOME OLD FAVORITES

Hansel and Grethel		W. and J. Grimm

Thumbling		W. and J. Grimm

The Six Swans		W. and J. Grimm

Snow-White and Rose-Red		W. and J. Grimm

The Ugly Duckling		Hans C. Andersen

The Tinder-Box		Hans C. Andersen

The Constant Tin Soldier		Hans C. Andersen

The Fir Tree		Hans C. Andersen

The Flying Trunk		Hans C. Andersen

The Darning Needle		Hans C. Andersen

Pen and Inkstand		Hans C. Andersen

Cinderella		Miss Mulock

Little Red Riding-Hood		Charles Perrault

The Story of the Three Bears		Robert Southey

Puss in Boots		Charles Perrault

Jack the Giant-Killer		Joseph Jacobs

Tom Thumb		Joseph Jacobs

Blue Beard		Charles Perrault

The Brave Little Tailor		Anonymous

The Sleeping Beauty		Charles Perrault

The Fair One With Golden Locks	Miss Mulock

Beauty and the Beast		Mme. d'AuLnoy

Jack and the Beanstalk		Anonymous

Hop-o'-My-Thumb		Joseph Jacobs

The Goose-Girl		Anonymous

He Who Knew Not Fear		Anonymous

THE FABLES OF AESOP

The Town Mouse and the

	Country Mouse		Aesop

The Man, Boy, and Donkey		Aesop

The Shepherd's Boy		Aesop

Androcles 		Aesop

The Fox and the Stork		Aesop

The Crow and the Pitcher		Aesop

The Frogs Desiring a King		Aesop

The