 Frog and the Ox		Aesop

The Cock and the Pearl		Aesop

The Fox Without a Tail		Aesop

The Fox and the Cat		Aesop

The Dog in the Manger		Aesop

The Fox and the Goat		Aesop

Belling the Cat		Aesop

The Jay and the Peacock		Aesop

The Ass and the Lap-Dog		Aesop

The Ant and the Grasshopper		Aesop

The Woodman and the Serpent		Aesop

The Milkmaid and Her Pail		Aesop

The Lion and the Mouse		Aesop

Hercules and the Waggoner		Aesop

The Lion's Share		Aesop

The Fox and the Crow		Aesop

The Dog and the Shadow		Aesop

The Wolf and the Lamb		Aesop

The Bat, Birds, and Beasts		Aesop

The Belly and the Members		Aesop

The Fox and the Grapes		Aesop

The Swallow and the Birds		Aesop

ILLUSTRATIONS

HE OFTEN TREMBLED AT WHAT HE HEARD AND SAW, Manabozho the Mischief-
Maker, Frontispiece illustration in color from the painting by Dan
Sayre Groesbeck

WHILE THEY WERE STUPIDLY STARING, THE KETTLE BEGAN FLYING ABOUT THE
ROOM, The Accomplished and Lucky Teakettle, From the painting by
Warwick Goble

A VERY OLD WOMAN, WALKING UPON CRUTCHES, CAME OUT, Hansel and Grethel,
>From the painting by Arthur Rackham

THEN BLUE BEARD BAWLED OUT SO LOUD THAT HE MADE THE WHOLE HOUSE
TREMBLE, Blue Beard, From the painting by Edmund Dulac

BEING INFORMED OF EVERYTHING BY A LITTLE DWARF WHO WORE SEVEN-LEAGUE
BOOTS, Sleeping Beauty, From the painting by Edmund Dulac

PREFACE

THERE are some things in this world we can get along without, but, the
experience of many thousand years has shown us that the fairy tale is
not one of them.  There must have been fairy tales (or fables, or folk
tales, or myths, or whatever name we choose to give them) ever since
the world began.  They are not exclusively French, German, Greek,
Russian, Indian or Chinese, but are the common property of the whole
human family and are as universal as human speech.

All the world over, fairy tales are found to be pretty much the same.
The story of Cinderella is found in all countries.  Japan has a Rip Van
Winkle, China has a Beauty and the Beast, Egypt has a Puss in Boots,
and Persia has a Jack and the Beanstalk.

Those wise people who have made a careful study of literature, and
especially of what we call folk tales or fairy tales or fables or
myths, tell us that they all typify in some way the constant struggle
that is going on in every department of life.  It may be the struggle
of Summer against Winter, the bright Day against dark Night, Innocence
against Cruelty, of Knowledge against Ignorance.  We are not obliged to
think of these delightful stories as each having a meaning.  Our
enjoyment of them will not be less if we overlook that side, but it may
help us to understand and appreciate good books if we remember that the
literature of the world is the story of man's struggle against nature;
that the beginnings of literature came out of the mouths of story-
tellers, and that the stories they told were fairy tales-imaginative
stories based on truth.

There is one important fact to remember in connection with the old
fairy tales, and that is that they were repeated aloud from memory, not
read from a book or manuscript.

The printing of books from type may be said to date from the year 1470,
when Caxton introduced printing into England.  It is said that the
first book printed in English which had the pages numbered was a book
of tales, "Aesop's Fables."

As late as 1600 printed books were still so rare that only rich men
could own them.  There was one other way of printing a story-on
sheepskin (split and made into parchment) with a pen-but that was a
long and laborious art that could only be practiced by educated men who
had been taught to write.  The monks were about the only men who had
the necessary education and time, and they cared more for making copies
of the Bible and Lives of the Saints than they did of fairy tales.  The
common people, and even kings and queens, were therefore obliged to
depend upon the professional story-teller.

Fairy tales were very popular in the Middle Ages.  In the long winter
months fields could not be cultivated, traveling had to be abandoned,
and all were kept within doors by the cold and snow.  We know what the
knight's house looked like in those days.  The large beamed hail or
living room was the principal room.  At one end of it, on a low
platform, was a table for the knight, his family, and any visiting
knights and ladies.  At the other tables on the main floor were the
armed men, like squires and retainers, who helped defend the castle
from attack, and the maids of the household.

The story-teller, who was sometimes called a bard or skald or minstrel,
had his place of honor in the center of the room, and when the meal was
over he was called upon for a story.  These story-tellers became very
expert in the practice of their art, and some of them could arouse
their audiences to a great pitch of excitement.  In the note that
precedes the story "The Treason of Ganelon," in the volume "Heroes and
Heroines of Chivalry," you can see how one of these story-tellers, or
minstrels, sang aloud a story to the soldiers of William the Conqueror
to encourage them as he led them into battle.

The fairy tales collected by the Brothers Grimm were first published in
1812.  They spent thirteen years collecting them, writing them down as
they were told by the peasants in Hesse, a mountainous province of
Germany lying far removed from the great main roads.

Their friends helped them, but their best friend was the wife of a
cowherd, a strong, intelligent woman of fifty, who had a perfect genius
for storytelling.  She knew she told the stories well, and that not
many had her gift.  The Grimms said that though she repeated a story
for them three times, the variations were so slight as to be hardly
apparent.

The American Indian stories of Manabozho the Mischief-Maker and his
adventures with the Wolf and the Woodpeckers and the Ducks were
collected in very much the same way by Henry R. Schoolcraft (1793-
1864), the explorer and traveler, who lived among the Indian tribes for
thirty years.

Mrs. Steel has told us how she collected her Hindu stories, often
listening over and over to poor story-tellers who would spoil a story
in trying to tell it, until one day her patience would be rewarded by
hearing it from the lips of the best storyteller in the village, who
was generally a boy.

As all nations have their fairy tales, you will find in this collection
examples of English, Irish, French, German, Scandinavian, Icelandic,
Russian, Polish, Serbian, Spanish, Arabian, Hindu, Chinese, and
Japanese fairy tales, as well as those recited around the lodge fires
at night by American Indians for the entertainment of the red children
of the West.

I hope the work may prove for many a boy and girl (of any age up to a
hundred) the Golden Bridge over which they can plunge into that
marvelous world of fairies, elves, goblins, kobolds, trolls, afreets,
jinns, ogres, and giants that fascinates us all, lost to this world
till some one wakes us up to say "Bedtime!"

Such excursions fill the mind with beautiful fancies and help to
develop that most precious of our faculties, the imagination.

WILLIAM PATTEN.

MANABOZHO, THE MISCHIEF-MAKER

Adapted from H. R. Schoolcraft

THERE was never in the whole world a more mischievous busybody than
that notorious giant Manabozho.  He was everywhere, in season and out
of season, running about, and putting his hand in whatever was going
forward.

To carry on his game he could take almost any shape he pleased.  He
could be very foolish or very wise, very weak or very strong, very rich
or very poor-just as happened to suit his humor best.  Whatever anyone
else could do, he would attempt without a moment's reflection.  He was
a match for any man he met, and there were few manitoes*  (*good
spirits or evil spirits) that could get the better of him.  By turns he
would be very kind or very cruel, an animal or a bird, a man or a
spirit, and yet, in spite of all these gifts, Manabozho was always
getting himself involved in all sorts of troubles.  More than once, in
the course of his adventures, was this great maker of mischief driven
to his wits' ends to come off with his life.

To begin at the beginning, Manabozho, while yet a youngster, was living
with his grandmother near the edge of a great prairie.  It was on this
prairie that he first saw animals and birds of every kind; he also
there made first acquaintance with thunder and lightning.  He would sit
by the hour watching the clouds as they rolled by, musing on the shades
of light and darkness as the day rose and fell.

For a stripling, Manabozho was uncommonly wide-awake.  Every sight he
beheld in the heavens was a subject of remark, every new animal or bird
an object of deep interest, and every sound was like a new lesson which
he was expected to learn.  He often trembled at what he heard and saw.

The first sound he heard was that of the owl, at which he was greatly
terrified, and, quickly descending the tree he had climbed, he ran with
alarm to the lodge.  "Noko! noko! grandmother!" he cried.  "I have
heard a monedo."

She laughed at his fears, and asked him what kind of a noise it made.
He answered.  "It makes a noise like this: ko-ko-ko-ho!"

His grandmother told him he was young and foolish; that what he heard
was only a bird which derived its name from the peculiar noise it made.

He returned to the prairie and continued his watch.  As he stood there
looking at the clouds he thought to himself, "It is singular that I am
so simple and my grandmother so wise; and that I have neither father
nor mother.  I have never heard a word about them.  I must ask and find
out."

He went home and sat down, silent and dejected.  Finding that this did
not attract the notice of his grandmother, he began a loud lamentation,
which he kept increasing, louder and louder, till it shook the lodge
and nearly deafened the old grandmother.

"Manabozho, what is the matter with you?" she said, "you are making a
great deal of noise."

Manabozho started off again with his doleful hubbub, but succeeded in
jerking out between his big sobs, "I haven't got any father nor mother,
I haven't."

Knowing that he was of a wicked and revengeful nature, his grandmother
dreaded to tell him the story of his parentage, as she knew he would
make trouble of it.

Manabozho renewed his cries and managed to throw out for a third or
fourth time, his sorrowful lament that he was a poor unfortunate who
had no parents or relatives.

At last she said to him, to quiet him, "Yes, you have a father and
three brothers living.  Your mother is dead.  She was taken for a wife
by your father, the West, without the consent of her parents.  Your
brothers are the North, East, and South; and being older than you your
father has given them great power with the winds, according to their
names.  You are the youngest of his children.  I have nursed you from
your infancy, for your mother died when you were born."

"I am glad my father is living," said Manabozho, "I shall set out in
the morning to visit him."

His grandmother would have discouraged him, saying it was a long
distance to the place where his father, Ningabinn, or the West, lived.

This information seemed rather to please than to discourage Manabozho,
for by this time he had grown to such a size and strength that he had
been compelled to leave the narrow shelter of his grandmother's lodge
and live out of doors.  He was so tall that, if he had been so
disposed, he could have snapped off the heads of the birds roosting on
the topmost branches of the highest trees, as he stood up, without
being at the trouble to climb.  And if he had at any time taken a fancy
to one of the same trees for a walking stick, he would have had no more
to do than to pluck it up with his thumb and finger and strip down the
leaves and twigs with the palm of his hand.

Bidding good-by to his old grandmother, who pulled a very long face
over his departure, Manabozho set out at a great pace, for he was able
to stride from one side of a prairie to the other at a single step.

He found his father on a high mountain far in the west.  His father
espied his approach at a great distance, and bounded down the
mountainside several miles to give him welcome.  Apparently delighted
with each other, they reached in two or three of their giant paces the
lodge of the West which stood high up near the clouds.

They spent some days in talking with each other-for these two great
persons did nothing on a small scale, and a whole day to deliver a
single sentence, such was the immensity of their discourse, was quite
an ordinary affair.

One evening Manabozho asked his father what he was most afraid of on
earth.

He replied-"Nothing."

"But is there nothing you dread here-nothing that would hurt you if you
took too much of it?  Come, tell me."

Manabozho was very urgent, so at last his father said: "Yes, there is a
black stone to be found a couple of hundred miles from here, over that
way," pointing as he spoke.  "It is the only thing on earth I am afraid
of, for if it should happen to hit me on any part of my body it would
hurt me very much."  The West made this important circumstance known to
Manabozho in the strictest confidence.

"Now you will not tell anyone, Manabozho, that the black stone is bad
medicine for your father, will you?"  he added.  "You are a good son,
and I know you will keep it to yourself.  Now tell me, my darling boy,
is there not something that you don't like?"

Manabozho answered promptly-"Nothing."

His father, who was of a steady and persevering nature, put the same
question to him seventeen times, and each time Manabozho made the same
answer-' 'Nothing."

But the West insisted-"There must be something you are afraid of."

"Well, I will tell you," said Manabozho, "what it is."

He made an effort to speak, but it seemed to be too much for him.

"Out with it," said the West, fetching Manabozho such a blow on the
back as shook the mountain with its echo.

"Je-ee, je-ee-it is," said Manabozho, apparently in great pain.  "Yes,
yes!  I cannot name it, I tremble so."

The West told him to banish his fears, and to speak up; no one would
hurt him.  Manabozho began again, and he would have gone over the same
make-believe of pain, had not his father, whose strength he knew was
more than a match for his own, threatened to pitch him into a river
about five miles off.  At last he cried out:

"Father, since you will know, it is the root of the bulrush."  He who
could with perfect ease spin a sentence a whole day long, seemed to be
exhausted by the effort of pronouncing that one word, "bulrush."

Some time after Manabozho observed: "I will get some of the black rock,
merely to see how it looks."

"Well," said the father, "I will also get a little of the bulrush root,
to learn how it tastes."

They were both double-dealing with each other, and in their hearts
getting ready for some desperate work.  They had no sooner separated
for the evening than Manabozho was striding off the couple of hundred
miles necessary to bring him to the place where the black rock was to
be procured, while down the other side of the mountain hurried
Ningabinn, the West.

At the break of day they each appeared at the great level on the
mountain-top, Manabozho with twenty loads, at least, of the black
stone, on one side, and on the other the West, with a whole meadow of
bulrush in his arms.

Manabozho was the first to strike-hurling a great piece of the black
rock, which struck the West directly between the eyes, and he returned
the favor with a blow of bulrush that rung over the shoulders of
Manabozho, far and wide, like the long lash of the lightning among the
clouds.

First one and then the other, Manabozho poured in a tempest of black
rock, while the West discharged a shower of bulrush.  Blow upon blow,
thwack upon thwack-they fought hand to hand until black rock and
bulrush were all gone.  Then they betook themselves to hurling crags at
each other, cudgeling with huge oak trees, and defying each other from
one mountain top to another; while at times they shot enormous boulders
of granite across at each other's heads, as though they had been mere
jackstones.  The battle, which had commenced on the mountains, had
extended far west.  The West was forced to give ground.  Manabozho
pressing on, drove him across rivers and mountains, ridges and lakes,
till at last he got him to the very brink of the world.

"Hold!" cried the West.  "My son, you know my power, and although I
allow I am now fairly out of breath, it is impossible to kill me.  Stop
where you are, and I will also portion you out with as much power as
your brothers.  The four quarters of the globe are already occupied,
but you can go and do a great deal of good to the people of the earth,
which is beset with serpents, beasts and monsters, who make great havoc
of human life.  Go and do good, and if you put forth half the strength
you have to-day, you will acquire a name that will last forever.  When
you have finished your work I will have a place provided for you.  You
will then go and sit with your brother, Kabinocca, in the north."

Manabozho gave his father his hand upon this agreement.  And parting
from.  him, he returned to his own grounds, where he lay for some time
sore of his wounds.

WHY THE WOODPECKER HAS RED HEAD FEATHERS

Adapted from H. R. Schoolcraft

WHEN his wounds had all been cured by his grandmother's skill in
medicine, Manabozho, as big and sturdy as ever, was ripe for new
adventures.  He set his thoughts immediately upon a war excursion
against the Pearl Feather, a wicked old manito, living on the other
side of the great lake, who had killed his grandfather.

He began his preparations by making huge bows and arrows without
number, but he had no arrow heads.  At last his grandmother, Noko, told
him that an old man who lived at some distance could furnish him with
some, and he sent her to get them.  Though she returned with her
wrapper full, he told her that he had not enough and sent her again for
more.

In the meanwhile he thought to himself, "I must find out the way of
making these heads."

Instead of directly asking how it was done, he preferred-just like
Manabozho-to deceive his grandmother, in order to learn what he wanted
by a trick.  "Noko," said he, "while I take my drum and rattle, and
sing my war songs, do you go and try to get me some larger heads, for
these you have brought me are all of the same size.  Go and see whether
the old man is not willing to make some a little larger."

He followed her at a distance as she went, having left his drum at the
lodge, with a great bird tied at the top, whose fluttering wings should
keep up the drumbeat, the same as if he were standing there beating the
drum himself.  He saw the old workman busy, and learned how he prepared
the heads; he also beheld the old man's daughter, who was very
beautiful.  Manabozho discovered for the first time that he had a heart
of his own, and the sigh he heaved passed through the arrow maker's
lodge like a young gale of wind.

"My how it blows!" said the old man.

"It must be from the south, though," said the daughter, "it is so
fragrant."

Manabozho slipped away, and in two strides he was at home, shouting
forth his songs as though he had never left the lodge.  He had just
time to untie the bird which had been beating the drum when his
grandmother came in and gave him the big arrowheads.

In the evening the grandmother said, "My son, you ought to fast before
you go to war, as your brothers do, to find out whether you will be
successful or not."

He said he had no objection.  Having privately stored away in a shady
place in the forest two or three dozen juicy bears, a moose, and twenty
strings of the tenderest birds, he would retire from the lodge so far
as to be entirely out of view of his grandmother and fall to and enjoy
himself heartily.  At nightfall, having dispatched a dozen birds and
half a bear or so, he would return, tottering and forlorn, as if quite
famished, so as to make his grandmother feel sorry for him.

When he had finished his term of fasting, in the course of which he
slyly dispatched twenty fat bears, six dozen birds, and two fine moose,
Manabozho sung his war song and embarked in his canoe, fully prepared
for war.

Besides his weapons he took along a large supply of oil.

He traveled rapidly night and day, for he had only to will or speak,
and the canoe went.  At length he arrived in sight of the fiery
serpents, and stopped to study them.  He noticed that they were of
enormous length and of a bright color, that they were some distance
apart, and that the flames which poured forth from the mouths reached
across the pass, so he said good morning and began talking with them in
a very friendly way.  They were not to be deceived, however.

"We know you, Manabozho," they said, "you cannot pass."

Turning his canoe as if about to go back, he suddenly cried out with a
loud and terrified voice:  "WHAT IS THAT BEHIND YOU?"

The serpents thrown off their guard, instantly turned their heads, and
in a moment Manabozho glided silently past them.

"Well," said he, softly, after he had got by, "how about it?"

He then took up his bow and arrows, and with deliberate aim shot every
one of them easily, for the serpents were fixed to one spot and could
not even turn around.

Having thus escaped the sentinel serpents, Manabozho pushed on in his
canoe until he came to a part of the lake called Pitch-Water, as
whatever touched it was sure to stick fast.

But Manabozho was prepared with his oil and, rubbing his canoe freely
with it, from end to end, he slipped through with ease-and he was the
first person who had ever succeeded in passing through the Pitch-Water.

"Nothing like a little oil," said Manabozho to himself.

Having by this time come in view of land, he could see the lodge of the
Shining Manito, high upon a distant hill.  At the dawn of day he put
his clubs and arrows in order and began his attack, yelling and
shouting and beating his drum, and calling out so as to make it appear
that he had many followers:

"Surround him! surround him! run up! run up!"

He stalked bravely forward, shouting aloud, "It was you that killed my
grandfather," and shot off a whole forest of arrows.

The Pearl Feather appeared on the height, blazing like the sun, and
paid back Manabozho with a tempest of bolts which rattled like hail.

All day long the fight was kept up, and Manabozho had fired all of his
arrows but three without effect, for the Shining Manito was clothed in
pure wampum.  It was only by immense leaps to right and left that
Manabozho could save his head from the sturdy blows which fell about
him on every side, like pine.trees, from the hands of the Manito.  He
was badly bruised, and at his very wits' end, when a large Woodpecker
flew past and lit on a tree.  It was a bird he had known on the
prairie, near his grandmother's lodge.

"Manabozho," called out the Woodpecker, "your enemy has a weak point;
shoot at the lock of hair on the crown of his head."

The first arrow he shot only drew a few drops of blood.  The Manito
made one or two unsteady steps, but recovered himself.  He began to
parley, but Manabozho, now that he had discovered a way to reach him,
was in no humor to trifle, and he let slip another arrow which brought
the Shining Manito to his knees.  Having the crown of his head within
good range Manabozho shot his third arrow, and the Manito fell forward
upon the ground, dead.

Manabozho called the Woodpecker to come and receive a reward for the
timely hint he had given him, and he rubbed the blood of the Shining
Manito on the Woodpecker's head, the feathers of which are red to this
day.

Full of his victory, Manabozho returned home, beating his war drum
furiously and shouting aloud his song of triumph.  His grandmother was
on the shore to welcome him with the war dance, which she performed
with wonderful skill for one so far advanced in years.

WHY THE DIVER DUCK HAS SO FEW TAIL FEATHERS

Adapted from H. R. Schoolcraft

HAVING overcome the powerful Pearl Feather, killed his serpents and
escaped all is wiles and charms, the heart of Manabozho welled within
him.  An unconquerable desire for further adventures seized upon him.
He had won in a great fight on land, so he determined -his next success
should come to him from the water.

He tried his luck as a fisherman and with such success that he captured
an enormous fish, a fish so -rich in fat that with the oil Manabozho
was able to -form a small lake.  Wishing to be generous, and at the
same time having a cunning plan of his own, he invited all the birds
and beasts of his acquaintance to come and feast upon the oil, telling
them that the order in which they partook of the banquet -would decide
how fat each was to be for all time to -come.

As fast as they arrived he told them to plunge in and help themselves.

The first to make his appearance was the bear, -who took a long and
steady draft; then came the deer, the opossum, and such others of the
family as are noted for their comfortable covering.  The moose and the
buffalo were late in arriving on the scene, and the partridge, always
lean in flesh, looked on till the supply was nearly gone.  There was
not -a drop left by the time the hare and the marten appeared on the
shore of the lake, and they are, in consequence, the slenderest of all
creatures.

When this ceremony was over Manabozho suggested to his friends, the
assembled birds and animals, that the occasion was proper for a little
merrymaking; and taking up his drum he cried out:

"New songs from the South! Come, brothers, dance!"

They all fell in and commenced their rounds.  Whenever Manabozho, as he
stood in the circle, saw a fat fowl which he fancied pass him, he
adroitly wrung its neck and slipped it under his belt, at the same time
beating his drum and singing at the top of his lungs to drown the noise
of the fluttering, crying out in a tone of admiration:

"That's the way, my brothers; that's the way."  At last a small duck of
the diver family, thinking there was something wrong, opened one eye
and saw what Manabozho was doing.  Giving a spring, and crying: "Ha-ha-
a! Manabozho is killing us!" he made a dash for the water.

Manabozho was so angry that the creature should have played the spy
that he gave chase, and just as the Diver Duck was getting into the
water he gave him a kick, which is the reason that the diver's tail
feathers are few, his back flattened, and his legs straightened out, so
that when he is seen walking on land he makes a sorry looking figure.

The other birds, having no ambition to be thrust in Manabozho's belt,
flew off, and the animals scampered into the woods.

MANAIBOZHO IS CHANGED INTO AWOLF

Adapted from H. R. Schoolcraft

ONE evening, as Manabozho was walking along the shore of a great lake,
weary and hungry, he met a great magician in the form of an Old Wolf,
with six young ones, coming toward him.

The Wolf no Sooner caught sight of him than he told his whelps, who
were close beside him, to keep out of the way of Manabozho, "For I
know," he said, "that it is that mischievous fellow whom we see
yonder."

The young wolves were in the act of running off when Manabozho cried
out, "My grandchildren, where are you going?  Stop and I will go with
you.  I wish to have a little chat with your excellent father."

Saying which, he advanced and greeted the Old Wolf, expressing himself
as delighted at seeing him looking so well.  "Whither do you journey?"
he asked.

"We are looking for a good hunting-ground to pass the winter," the Old
Wolf answered.  "What brings you here?"

'I was looking for you," said Manabozho.  "For I have a passion for the
chase, brother.  I always admired your family; are you willing to
change me into a wolf?"

The Wolf gave him a favorable answer, and he was forthwith changed into
a wolf.

"Well, that will do," said Manabozho.  "But," he said, looking at his
tail, "could you oblige me by making my tail a little longer and more
bushy, just a little more bushy?"

"Certainly," said the Old Wolf; and he straightway gave Manabozho such
a length and spread of tail that it was continually getting between his
legs, and it was so heavy that it was as much as he could do to carry
it.  But, having asked for it, he was ashamed to say a word, and they
all started off in company, dashing up the ravine.

After getting into the woods for some distance they ran across the
tracks of moose.  The young ones scampered off in pursuit, the Old Wolf
and Manabozho following at their leisure.

"Well," said the Old Wolf, by way of starting the conversation, "who do
you think is the fastest of the boys?  Can you tell by the jumps they
take?"

"Why," he replied, "that one that takes such 'long jumps, he is surely
the fastest."

"Ha! ha! you are mistaken," said the Old Wolf.  "He makes a good start,
but he will be the first to tire out; this one who appears to be behind
will be the one to kill the game."

By this time they had come to the spot where the boys had started in
chase.  One had dropped what seemed to be a small medicine-sack, which
he carried for the use of the hunting party.

"Take that, Manabozho," said the Old Wolf.

"Why, what will I do with a dirty dog skin?"

The Old Wolf took it up; it was a beautiful robe.

"Oh, I will carry it now," cried Manabozho.

"Oh, no," said the Wolf, who had used his magical powers, "it is a robe
of pearls.  Come along!" And away he sped at a great rate of speed.

"Not so fast," called Manabozho after him; and then he added to himself
as he panted after, "Oh, this tail!"

Coming to a place where the moose had lain down, they saw that the
young wolves had made a fresh start after their prey.  "'Why," said the
Old Wolf, "this moose is thin.  I know by the tracks.  I can always
tell whether they are fat or not."  A little farther on, one of the
young wolves, in dashing at the moose, had broken a tooth on a tree.

"Manabozho," said the Old Wolf, "one of your grandchildren has shot at
the game.  Take his arrow; there it is."

"No," replied Manabozho, "what will I do with a dirty dog's tooth?"

The Old Wolf took it up, and behold it was a beautiful silver arrow.

When they at last overtook them, they found that the youngsters had
killed a very fat moose.  Manabozho was very hungry, but the Old Wolf
just then again exerted his magical powers, and Manabozho saw nothing
but the bones picked quite clean.  He thought to himself, "Just as I
expected; dirty, greedy fellows.  If it had not been for this log at my
back I should have been in time to have got a mouthful"; and he cursed
the bushy tail which he carried to the bottom of his heart.

The Old Wolf finally called out to one of the young ones, "Give some
meat to your grandfather."

One of them obeyed, and coming near to Manabozho he presented him the
end of his own bushy tail, which was now nicely seasoned with burs
gathered in the course of the hunt.  Manabozho jumped up and called
out: "You dog, do you think I am going to eat you?" And he walked off
in anger.

"Come back brother," cried the Wolf.  "You are losing your eyes.  You
do the child injustice.  Look there I" and behold a heap of fresh meat
was lying on the spot, all prepared.

Manabozho turned back, and at the sight of so much good food put on a
smiling face.  "Wonderful!" he said, "how fine the meat is !"

"Yes," replied the Old Wolf, "it is always so with us; we know our work
and always get the best.  It is not a long tail that makes the hunter."

Manabozho bit his lip.

MANABOZHO IS ROBBED BY THE WOLVES

Adapted from H. R. Schoolcraft

SHORTLY after this the Old Wolf suggested to Manabozho that he should
go out and try his luck in hunting by himself.  When he chose to put
his mind to it he was quite expert, and this time he succeeded in
killing a fine fat moose which he thought he would take aside slyly and
devour alone.

He was very hungry and he sat down to eat, but as he never could go to
work in a straightforward way, he immediately fell into great doubts as
to the proper point at which to begin.

"Well," said he, "I do not know where to commence.  At the head?  No,
people will laugh, and say, 'He ate him backward.'"

He went to the side.  "No," said he, "they will say I ate him
sideways."

He then went to the hind quarter.  "No, that will not do, either; they
will say I ate him forward.  I will begin here, say what they will."

He took a delicate piece from the small of the back, and was just on
the point of putting it to his mouth when a tree close by made a
creaking noise.  He seemed vexed at the sound.  He raised the morsel to
his mouth the second time, when the tree creaked again.

"Why," he exclaimed, "I cannot eat when I hear such a noise. "Stop,
stop! " he cried to the tree.  He put down the morsel of meat,
exclaiming.  "I CANNOT eat with such a noise," and starting away he
climbed the tree and was actually pulling at the limb which had
bothered him, when his forepaw was caught between the branches so that
he could not free himself.

While thus held fast he saw a pack of wolves advancing through the wood
in the direction of his meat.  He suspected them to be the Old Wolf and
his cubs, but night was coming on and he could not make them out.  "Go
the other way, go the other Way!" he cried out; "what do you expect to
get here?"

The Wolves stopped for a while and talked among themselves, and said:
"Manabozho must have something there, or he would not tell us to go
another way. "

"I begin to know know him," said the Old Wolf, "and all his tricks.
Let us go forward and see." They came on and, finding the moose soon
made away with it.

Manabozho looked wistfully on while they ate until they were fully
satisfied, when off they scampered in high spirits.  A heavy blast of
wind opened the branches finally, and released him.  The wolves had
left nothing but bare bones.  He made for home.

When he related his mishap, the Old Wolf, taking him by the forepaw,
condoled with him deeply on his ill luck.  A tear even started to his
eye as he added: "My brother, this should teach us not to meddle with
points of ceremony when we have good meat to eat."

MANABOZHO AND THE WOODPECKERS

Adapted from H. R. Schoolcraft

MANABOZHO lost the greater part of his magical power through letting
his young wolf grandson fall through the thin ice and drown.  No one
knew where his grandmother had gone to.  He married the arrow maker's
daughter, and became the father of several children, but he was very
poor and scarcely able to procure a living.  His lodge was pitched in a
distant part of the country, where he could get no game, and it was
winter time.  One day he said to his wife, "I will go out walking and
see if I can find some lodges."

After walking some time he finally discovered a lodge at a distance.
There were children playing at the door, and when they saw him
approaching they ran in and told their parents Manabozho was coming.

It was the home of the large Red-Headed Woodpecker.  He came to the
door and asked Manabozho to enter, and the invitation was promptly
accepted.  After some time the Woodpecker, who was a magician, said to
his wife: "Have you nothing to give Manabozho?  he must be hungry."

She answered, "No."

"He ought not to go without his supper," said the Woodpecker.  "I will
see what I can do."

In the center of the lodge stood a large tamarack tree.  Upon this the
Woodpecker flew, and commenced going up, turning his head on each side
of the tree, and every now and then driving in his bill.  At last he
pulled something out of the tree and threw it down, when, behold, a
fine fat raccoon lay on the ground.  He drew out six or seven more, and
then came down and told his wife to prepare them.

"Manabozho," he said, "this is the only thing we eat; what else can we
give you?"

"It is very good," replied Manabozho.

They smoked their pipes and conversed, and after a while Manabozho got
ready to go home, so the Woodpecker said to his wife, "Give him the
Other raccoons to take home for his children."

In the act of leaving the lodge Manabozho on purpose dropped one of his
mittens, which was soon after observed upon the ground.  "Run," said
the Woodpecker to his eldest son, "and give it to him; but mind that
you do not give it into his hand; throw it at him, for there is no
knowing what he may do, he acts so curiously."

The boy did as he was directed.  "Grandfather," he said, as he came up
to him, "you have left one of your mittens, and here it is."

"Yes," he said, making believe he did not know he had dropped it, "so I
did; but don't throw it, you will get it wet on the snow."

The lad, however, threw it, and was about to return when Manabozho
cried out, "Bakah! Bakah! Stop, stop; is that all you eat?  Do you eat
nothing else with your raccoon?  Tell me!"

"Yes, that is all, answered the Young Woodpecker; "we have nothing
else."

"Tell your father," continued Manabozho, "to come and visit me, and let
him bring a sack.  I will give him what he shall eat with his raccoon
meat."

When the young one returned and reported this message to his father the
Old Woodpecker turned up his nose at the invitation.  "I wonder," he
said "what he thinks he has got, poor fellow!" He was bound, however,
to answer the offer of hospitality, and he went accordingly, taking
along a cedar-sack, to pay a visit to Manabozho.

Manabozho received the Old Red-Headed Woodpecker with great ceremony.
He had stood at the door awaiting his arrival, and as soon as he came
in sight Manabozho commenced, while he was yet far off, bowing and
opening wide his arms, in token of welcome; all of which the Woodpecker
returned in due form, by ducking his bill and hopping to right and
left, extending his wings to their full length and fluttering them back
to his breast.

When the Woodpecker at last reached the lodge Manabozho made several
remarks upon the weather, the appearance of the country, and especially
spoke of the scarcity of game.  "But we," he added-"we always have
enough.  Come in, and you shall not go away hungry, my noble birds!"

Manabozho had always prided himself on being able to give as good as he
had received; and to be up with the Woodpecker he had shifted his lodge
so as to inclose a large dry tamarack tree.

"What can I give you?" said he to the Woodpecker; "as we eat so shall
you eat."

With this he hopped forward and, jumping on the tamarack tree, he
attempted to climb it just as he had seen the Woodpecker do in his own
lodge.  He turned his head first on one side and then on the other, as
the Woodpecker does, striving to go up the tree, but as often slipping
down.  Every now and then he would strike the tree with his nose, as if
it was a bell, and draw back as if to pull something out of the tree,
but he pulled out no raccoons.  He dashed his nose so often against the
trunk that at last the blood began to flow, and he tumbled down
senseless on the ground.

The Woodpecker started up with his drum and rattle to restore him, and
by beating them violently he succeeded in bringing him to.

As soon as he came to his senses, Manabozho began to lay the blame of
his failure upon his wife, saying to his guest: "Nemesho, it is this
woman relation of yours-she is the cause of my not succeeding.  She has
made me a worthless fellow.  Before I married her I also could get
raccoons.

The Woodpecker said nothing, but flying on the tree he drew out several
fine raccoons.  "Here," said he, "this is the way we do" and left him
in disdain, carrying his bill high in the air, and stepping over the
doorsill as if it were not worthy to be touched by his toes.

THE BOY AND THE WOLVES

Retold by Andrew Lang

ONCE upon a time an Indian hunter built himself a house in the middle
of a great forest, far away from all his tribe; for his heart was
gentle and kind and he was weary of the treachery and cruel deeds of
those who had been his friends.  So he left them and took his wife and
three children, and they journeyed on until they found a spot near to a
clear stream, where they began to cut down trees and to make ready
their wigwam.  For many years they lived peacefully and happily in this
sheltered place, never leaving it except to hunt the wild animals,
which served them both for food and clothes.  At last, however, the
strong man fell sick, and before long lie knew he must die.  So he
gathered his family round him and said his last words to them.

"You, my wife, the companion of my days, will follow me ere many moons
have waned to the island of the blessed.  But for you, 0 my children,
whose lives are but newly begun, the wickedness, unkindness, and
ingratitude from which I fled are before you.  Yet I shall go hence in
peace, my children, if you will promise always to love each other and
never to forsake your youngest brother."

"Never!" they replied, holding out their hands.  And the hunter died
content.

Scarcely eight moons had passed when, just as he had said, the wife
went forth and followed her husband; but before leaving her children
she bade the two elder ones think of their promise never to forsake the
younger, for he was a child and weak.  And while the snow lay thick
upon the ground they tended him and cherished him; but when the earth
showed green again the heart of the young man stirred within him, and
he longed to see the wigwams of the village where his father's youth
was spent.

Therefore he opened all his heart to his sister, who answered: "My
brother, I understand your longing for our fellow-men, whom here we
cannot see.  But remember our father's words.  Shall we not seek our
own pleasures and forget the little one?"

But he would not listen, and, making no reply, he took his bow and
arrows and left the hut.  The snows fell and melted, yet he never
returned, and at last the heart of the girl grew cold and hard and her
little boy became a burden in her eyes, till one day she spoke thus to
him: "See, there is food for many days to come.  Stay here within the
shelter of the hut.  I go to seek our brother, and when I have found
him I shall return hither."

But when, after hard journeying, she reached the village where her
brother dwelt and saw that he had a wife and was happy, and when she,
too, was sought by a young brave, then she also forgot the boy alone in
the forest and thought only of her husband.

Now as soon as the little boy had eaten all the food which his sister
had left him, he went out into the woods and gathered berries and dug
up roots, and while the sun shone he was contented and had his fill.
But when the snows began and the wind howled, then his stomach felt
empty and his limbs cold, and he hid in trees all the night and only
crept out to eat what the wolves had left behind.  And by and by,
having no other friends, he sought their company, and sat by while they
devoured their prey, and they grew to know him and gave him food.  And
without them he would have died in the snow.  But at last the snows
melted and the ice upon the great lake, and as the wolves went down to
the shore the boy went after them.  And it happened one day that his
big brother was fishing in his canoe near the shore, and he heard the
voice of a child singing in the Indian tone:

	"My brother, my brother!

	I am becoming a wolf,

	I am becoming a wolf!"

And when he had so sung he howled as wolves howl.  Then the heart of
the elder sank and he hastened toward him, crying: "Brother, little
brother, come to me;" but he, being half a wolf, only continued his
song.  And the louder the elder called him, "Brother, little brother,
come to me," the swifter he fled after his brothers the wolves and the
heavier grew his skin, till, with a long howl, he vanished into the
depths of the forest.

So, with shame and anguish in his soul, the elder brother went back to
his village, and with his sister mourned the little boy and the broken
promise till the end of his life.


THE INDIAN WHO LOST HIS WIFE

Retold by Andrew Lang

ONCE upon a time there was a man and his wife who lived in the forest
far from the rest of the tribe.  Very often they spent the day in
hunting together, but after awhile the wife found that she had so many
things to do that she was obliged to stay at home; so he went alone,
though he found that when his wife was not with him he never had any
luck.  One day, when he was away hunting, the woman fell ill, and in a
few days she died.  Her husband grieved bitterly and buried her in the
house where she had passed her life; but as the time went on he felt so
lonely without her that he made a wooden doll about her height amid
size for company and dressed it in her clothes.  He seated it in front
of the fire and tried to think he had his wife back again.  The next
day he went out to hunt, and when he came home the first thing he did
was to go up to the doll and brush off some of the ashes from the fire
which had fallen on its face.  But he was very busy now, for he had to
cook and mend, besides getting food, for there was no one to help him.
And so a whole year passed away.

At the end of that time he came back from hunting one night and found
some wood by the door and a fire within.  The next night there was not
only wood and fire, but a piece of meat in the kettle, nearly ready for
eating.  He searched all about to see who could have done this, but
could find no one.  The next time he went to hunt he took care not to
go far and came in quite early.  And while he was still a long way off
he saw a woman going into the house with wood on her shoulders.  So he
made haste and opened the door quickly, and instead of the wooden doll
his wife sat in front of the fire.  Then she spoke to him and said:

"The Great Spirit felt sorry for you because you would not be
comforted, so he let me come back to you, but you must not stretch out
your hand to touch me till we have seen the rest of our people.  If you
do I shall die."

So the man listened to her words, and the woman dwelt there and brought
the wood and kindled the fire, till one day her husband said to her:

"It is now two years since you died.  Let us now go back to our tribe.
Then you will be well and I can touch you."

And with that he prepared food for the journey, a string of deer's
flesh for her to carry and one for himself; and so they started.  Now,
the camp of the tribe was distant six days' journey, and when they were
yet one day's journey off it began to snow, and they felt weary and
longed for rest.  Therefore they made a fire, cooked some food, and
spread out their skins to sleep.

Then the heart of the man was greatly stirred and he stretched out his
arms to his wife, but she waved her hands and said:

"We have seen no one yet.  It is too soon."

But he would not listen to her and caught her to him, and behold! he
was clasping the wooden doll.  And when he saw it was the doll he
pushed it from him in his misery and rushed away to the camp and told
them all his story.  And some doubted, and they went back with him to
the place where he and his wife had stopped to rest, and there lay the
doll, and besides, they saw in time snow the steps of two people, and
the foot of one was like the foot of the doll.  And the man grieved
sore all the days of his life.

PUNCHKIN

By E. Frere

ONCE upon a time there was a Raja who had seven beautiful daughters.
They were all good girls; but the youngest, named Balna, was more
clever than the rest.  The Raja's wife died when they were quite little
children, so these seven poor Princesses were left with no mother to
take care of them.

The Raja's daughters took it by turns to cook their father's dinner
every day, while he was absent deliberating with his Ministers on the
affairs of the nation.

About this time the Prudhan died, leaving a widow and one daughter; and
every day, when the seven Princesses were preparing their father's
dinner, the Prudhan's widow and daughter would come and beg for a
little fire from the hearth.  Then Balna used to say to her sisters,
"Send that woman away; send her away.  Let her get the fire at her own
house.  What does she want with ours?  If we allow her to come here, we
shall suffer for it some day."

But the other sisters would answer, "Be quiet, Balna; why must you
always be quarreling with this poor woman?  Let her take some fire if
she likes."  Then the Prudhan's widow used to go to the hearth and take
a few sticks from it; and while no one was looking, she would quickly
throw some mud into the midst of the dishes which were being prepared
for the Raja's dinner.

Now the Raja was very fond of his daughters.  Ever since their mother's
death they had cooked his dinner with their own hands, in order to
avoid the danger of his being poisoned by his enemies.  So, when he
found the mud mixed up with his dinner, he thought it must arise from
their carelessness, as it did not seem likely that anyone should have
put mud there on purpose; but being very kind he did not like to
reprove them for it, although this spoiling of the curry was repeated
many days.

At last, one day, he determined to hide, and watch his daughters
cooking, and see how it all happened; so he went into the next room,
and watched them through a hole in the wall.

There he saw his seven daughters carefully washing the rice and
preparing the curry, and as each dish was completed, they put it by the
fire ready to be cooked.  Next he noticed the Prudhan's widow come to
the door, and beg for a few sticks from the fire to cook her dinner
with.  Balna turned to her, angrily, and said, "Why don't you keep fuel
in your own house, and not come here every day and take ours?  Sisters,
don't give this woman any more wood; let her buy it for herself."

Then the eldest sister answered, "Balna, let the poor woman take the
wood and the fire; she does us no harm."  But Balna replied, "If you
let her come here so often, maybe she will do us some harm, and make us
sorry for it, some day."

The Raja then saw the Prudhan's widow go to the place where all his
dinner was nicely prepared, and, as she took the wood, she threw a
little mud into each of the dishes.

At this he was very angry, and sent to have the woman seized and
brought before him.  But when the widow came, she told him that she had
played this trick because she wanted to gain an audience with him; and
she spoke so cleverly, and pleased him so well with her cunning words,
that instead of punishing her, the Raja married her, and made her his
Ranee, and she and her daughter came to live in the palace.

Now the new Ranee hated the seven poor Princesses, and wanted to get
them, if possible, out of the way, in order that her daughter might
have all their riches, and live in the palace as Princess in their
place; and instead of being grateful to them for their kindness to her,
she did all she could to make them miserable.  She gave them nothing
but bread to eat, and very little of that, and very little water to
drink; so these seven poor little Princesses, who had been accustomed
to have everything comfortable about them, and good food and good
clothes all their lives long, were very miserable and unhappy; and they
used to go out every day and sit by their dead mother's tomb and cry-
and say:

"O mother, mother, cannot you see your poor children, how unhappy we
are, and how we are starved by our cruel stepmother?"

One day, while they were thus sobbing and crying, lo and behold! a
beautiful pomelo tree grew up out of the grave, covered with fresh,
ripe pomeloes, and the children satisfied their hunger by eating some
of the fruit, and every day after this, instead of trying to eat the
bad dinner their stepmother provided for them, they used to go out to
their mother's grave and eat the pommels which grew there on the
beautiful tree.

Then the Ranee said to her daughter, "I cannot tell how it is, every
day those seven girls say they don't want any dinner, and won't eat
any; and yet they never grow thin nor look ill; they look better than
you do.  I cannot tell how it is."   And she bade her watch the seven
Princesses, and see if anyone gave them anything to eat.

So next day, when the Princesses went to their mother's grave, and were
eating the beautiful pomeloes, the Prudhan's daughter followed them,
and saw them gathering the fruit.

Then Balna said to her sisters, "Do you not see that girl watching us?
Let us 