drive her away, or hide the pomeloes, else she will go and tell
her mother all about it, and that will be bad for us."

But the other sisters said, "Oh no, do not be unkind, Balna.  The girl
would never be so cruel as to tell her mother.  Let us rather invite
her to come and have some of the fruit."  And calling her to them, they
gave her one of the pomeloes.

No sooner had she eaten it, however, than the Prudhan's daughter went
home and said to her mother, "I do not wonder the seven Princesses will
not eat the dinner you prepare for them, for by their mother's grave
there grows a beautiful pomelo tree, and they go there every day and
eat the pomeloes.  I ate one, and it was the nicest I have ever
tasted."

The cruel Ranee was much vexed at hearing this, and all next day she
stayed in her room, and told the Raja that she had a very bad headache.
The Raja was deeply grieved, and said to his wife, "What can I do for
you?"   She answered, "There is only one thing that will make my
headache well.  By your dead wife's tomb there grows a fine pomelo
tree; you must bring that here, and boil it, root and branch, and put a
little of the water in which it has been boiled on my forehead, and
that will cure my headache."   So the Raja sent his servants, and had
the beautiful pomelo tree pulled up by the roots, and did as the Ranee
desired; and when some of the water, in which it had been boiled, was
put on her forehead, she said her headache was gone and she felt quite
well.

Next day, when the seven Princesses went as usual to the grave of their
mother, the pomelo tree had disappeared.  Then they all began to cry
very bitterly.

Now there was by the Ranee's tomb a small tank, and as they were crying
they saw the tank was filled with a rich cream-like substance, which
quickly hardened into a thick white cake.  At seeing this all the
Princesses were very glad, and they ate some of the cake, and liked it;
and next day the same thing happened, and so it went on for many days.
Every morning the Princesses went to their mother's grave, and found
the little tank filled with the nourishing cream-like cake.  Then the
cruel stepmother said to her daughter: "I cannot tell how it is, I have
had the pomelo tree which used to grow by the Ranee's grave destroyed,
and yet the Princesses grow no thinner, nor look more sad, though they
never eat the dinner I give them.  I cannot tell how it is!"

And her daughter said, "I will watch."

Next day, while the Princesses were eating the cream cake, who should
come by but their stepmother's daughter.  Balna saw her first, and
said, "See, sisters, there comes that girl again.  Let us sit round the
edge of the tank and not allow her to see it, for if we give her some
of our cake, she will go and tell her mother; and that will be very
unfortunate for us."

The other sisters, however, thought Balna unnecessarily suspicious, and
instead of following her advice, they gave the Prudhan's daughter some
of the cake, and she went home and told her mother all about it.

The Ranee, on hearing how well the Princesses fared, was exceedingly
angry, and sent her servants to pull down the dead Ranee's tomb, and
fill the little tank with the ruins.  And not content with this, she
next day pretended to be very, very ill-in fact, at the point of death-
and when the Raja was much grieved, and asked her whether it was in his
power to procure her any remedy, she said to him: "Only one thing can
save my life, but I know you will not do it."  He replied, "Yes,
whatever it is, I will do it."  She then said, "To save my life, you
must kill the seven daughters of your first wife, and put some of their
blood on my forehead and on the palms of my hands, and their death will
be my life."  At these words the Raja was very sorrowful; but because
he feared to break his word, he went out with a heavy heart to find his
daughters.

He found them crying by the ruins of their mother's grave.

Then, feeling he could not kill them, the Raja spoke kindly to them,
and told them to come out into the jungle with him; and there he made a
fire and cooked some rice, and gave it to them.  But in the afternoon,
it being very hot, the seven Princesses all fell asleep, and when he
saw they were fast asleep, the Raja, their father, stole away and left
them (for he feared his wife), saying to himself: "It is better my poor
daughters should die here, than be killed by their stepmother."

He then shot a deer, and returning home, put some of its blood on the
forehead and hands of the Ranee, and she thought then that he had
really killed the Princesses, and said she felt quite well.

Meantime the seven Princesses awoke, and when they found themselves all
alone in the thick jungle they were much frightened, and began to call
out as loud as they could, in hopes of making their father hear; but he
was by that time far away, and would not have been able to hear them
even had their voices been as loud as thunder.

It so happened that this very day the seven young sons of a neighboring
Raja chanced to be hunting in that same jungle, and as they were
returning home, after the day's sport was over, the youngest Prince
said to his brothers: "Stop, I think I hear some one crying and calling
out.  Do you not hear voices?  Let us go in the direction of the sound,
and find out what it is."

So the seven Princes rode through the wood until they came to the place
where the seven Princesses sat crying and wringing their hands.  At the
sight of them the young Princes were very much astonished, and still
more so on learning their story; and they settled that each should take
one of these poor forlorn ladies home with him, and marry her.

So the first and eldest Prince took the eldest Princess home with him,
and married her.

And the second took the second; and third took the third; and the
fourth took the fourth; and the fifth took the fifth; and the sixth
took the sixth; and the seventh, and the handsomest of all, took the
beautiful Balna.

And when they got to their own land, there was great rejoicing
throughout the kingdom, at the marriage of the seven young Princes to
seven such beautiful Princesses.

About a year after this Balna had a little son, and his uncles and
aunts were so fond of the boy that it was as if he had seven fathers
and seven mothers.  None of the other Princes and Princesses had any
children, so the son of the seventh Prince and Balna was acknowledged
their heir by all the rest.

They had thus lived very happily for some time, when one fine day the
seventh Prince (Balna's husband) said he would go out hunting, and away
he went; and they waited long for him, but he never came back.

Then his six brothers said they would go and see what had become of
him; and they went away, but they also did not return.

And the seven Princesses grieved very much, for they feared that their
kind husbands must have been killed.

One day, not long after this had happened, as Balna was rocking her
baby's cradle, and while her sisters were working in the room below,
there came to the palace door a man in a long black dress, who said
that he was a Fakir, and came to beg.  The servant said to him, "You
cannot go into the palace-the Raja's sons have all gone away; we think
they must be dead, and their widows cannot be interrupted by your
begging."  But he said, "I am a holy man, you must let me in.  Then the
stupid servants let him walk through the palace, but they did not know
that this was no Fakir, but a wicked Magician named Punchkin.

Punchkin Fakir wandered through the palace, and saw many beautiful
things there, till at last he reached the room where Balna sat singing
beside her little boy's cradle.  The Magician thought her more
beautiful than all the other beautiful things he had seen, insomuch
that he asked her to go home with him and to marry him.  But she said,
"My husband, I fear, is dead, but my little boy is still quite young; I
will stay here and teach him to grow up a clever man, and when he is
grown up he shall go out into the world, and try and learn tidings of
his father.  Heaven forbid that I should ever leave him, or marry yon."
At these words the Magician was very angry, and turned her into a
little black dog, and led her away; saying, "Since yon will not come
with me of your own free will, I will make you."  So the poor Princess
was dragged away, without any power of effecting an escape, or of
letting her sisters know what had become of her.  As Punchkin passed
through the palace gate the servants said to him, "Where did yon get
that pretty little dog?"  And he answered, "One of the Princesses gave
it to me as a present."  At hearing which they let him go without
further questioning.

Soon after this, the six elder Princesses heard the little baby, their
nephew, begin to cry, and when they went upstairs they were much
surprised to find him all alone, and Balna nowhere to be seen.  Then
they questioned the servants, and when they heard of the Fakir and the
little black dog, they guessed what had happened, and sent in every
direction seeking them, but neither the Fakir nor the dog were to be
found.  What could six poor women do?  They gave up all hopes of ever
seeing their kind husbands, and their sister, and her husband again,
and devoted themselves thenceforward to teaching and taking care of
their little nephew.

Thus time went on, till Balna's son was fourteen years old.  Then, one
day, his aunts told him the history of the family; and no sooner did he
hear it, than be was seized with a great desire to go in search of his
father and mother and uncles, and if he could find them alive to bring
them home again.  His aunts, on learning his determination, were much
alarmed and tried to dissuade him, saying, "We have lost our husbands,
and our sister and her husband, and you are now our sole hope; if you
go away, what shall we do?"  But he replied, "I pray you not to be
discouraged; I will return soon, and if it is possible bring my father
and mother and uncles with me."  So he set out on his travels; but for
some months he could learn nothing to help him in his search.

At last, after he had journeyed many hundreds of weary miles, and
become almost hopeless of ever hearing anything further of his parents,
he one day came to a country that seemed full of stones, and rocks, and
trees, and there he saw a large palace with a tower; hard by was a
Malee's little house.

As he was looking about, the Malee's wife saw him, and ran out of the
house and said, "My dear boy, who are you that dare venture to this
dangerous place?"  He answered, "I am a Raja's son, and I come in
search of my father, and my uncles, and my mother whom a wicked
enchanter bewitched."

Then the Malee's wife said, "This country and this palace belong to a
great enchanter; he is all powerful, and if anyone displeases him, he
can turn them into stones and trees.  All the rocks and trees you see
here were living people once, and the Magician turned them to what they
now are.  Some time ago a Raja's son came here, and shortly afterward
came his six brothers, and they were all turned into stones and trees;
and these are not the only unfortunate ones, for up in that tower lives
a beautiful Princess, whom the Magician has kept prisoner there for
twelve years, because she hates him and will not marry him."

Then the little Prince thought, "These must be my parents and my
uncles.  I have found what I seek at last."  So he told his story to
the Malee's wife, and begged her to help him to remain in that place
awhile and inquire further concerning the unhappy people she mentioned;
and she promised to befriend him, and advised his disguising himself
lest the Magician should see him, and turn him likewise into stone.  To
this the Prince agreed.  So the Malee's wife dressed him up in a saree,
and pretended that he was her daughter.

One day, not long after this, as the Magician was walking in his garden
he saw the little girl (as he thought) playing about, and asked her who
she was.  She told him she was the Malee's daughter, and the Magician
said, "You are a pretty little girl, and to-morrow you shall take a
present of flowers from me to the beautiful lady who lives in the
tower."

The young Prince was much delighted at hearing this, and went
immediately to inform the Malee's wife; after consultation with whom he
determined that it would be more safe for him to retain his disguise,
and trust to the chance of a favorable opportunity for establishing
some communication with his mother, if it were indeed she.

Now it happened that at Balna's marriage her husband had given her a
small gold ring on which her name was engraved, and she had put it on
her little son's finger when he was a baby, and afterward when he was
older his aunts had had it enlarged for him, so that he was still able
to wear it.  The Malee's wife advised him to fasten the well-known
treasure to one of the bouquets he presented to his mother, and trust
to her recognizing it.  This was not to be done without difficulty, as
such a strict watch was kept over the poor Princess (for fear of her
ever establishing communication with her friends), that though the
supposed Malee's daughter was permitted to take her flowers every day,
the Magician or one of his slaves was always in the room at the time.
At last one day, however, opportunity favored him, and when no one was
looking the boy tied the ring to a nosegay, and threw it at Balna's
feet.  It fell with a clang on the floor, and Balna, looking to see
what made the strange sound, found the little ring tied to the flowers.
On recognizing it, she at once believed the story her son told her of
his long search, and begged him to advise her as to what she had better
do; at the same time entreating him on no account to endanger his life
by trying to rescue her.  She told him that for twelve long years the
Magician had kept her shut up in the tower because she refused to marry
him, and she was so closely guarded that she saw no hope of release.

Now Balna's son was a bright, clever boy, so he said, "Do not fear,
dear mother; the first thing to do is to discover how far the
Magician's power extends, in order that we may be able to liberate my
father and uncles, whom he has imprisoned in the form of the rocks and
trees.  You have spoken to him angrily for twelve long years; now
rather speak kindly.  Tell him you have given up all hopes of again
seeing the husband you have so long mourned, and say you are willing to
harry him.  Then endeavor to find out what his power consists in, and
whether he is immortal, or can be put to death."

Balna determined to take her son's advice; and the next day sent for
Punchkin, and spoke to him as had been suggested.

The Magician greatly delighted, begged her to allow the wedding to take
place as soon as possible.

But she told him that before she married him he must allow her a little
more time, in which she might make his acquaintance, and that, after
being enemies so long, their friendship could but strengthen by
degrees.  "And do tell me," she said, "are you quite immortal?  Can
death never touch you?  And are you too great an enchanter ever to feel
human suffering?"

"Why do you ask?" said he.

"Because," she replied.  "if I am to be your wife, I would fain know
all about you, in order, if any calamity threatens you, to overcome, or
if possible to avert it."

"It is true," he added, "that I am not as others.  Far, far away,
hundreds of thousands of miles from this, there lies a desolate country
covered with thick jungle.  In the midst of the jungle grows a circle
of palm trees, and in the center of the circle stand six chattees full
of water, piled one above another: below the sixth chattee is a small
cage which contains a little green parrot; on the life of the parrot
depends my life; and if the parrot is killed I must die.  It is.
however," he added, "impossible that the parrot should sustain any
injury, both on account of the inaccessibility of the country, and
because, by my appointment, many thousand genii surround the palm
trees, and kill all who approach the place."

Balna told her son what Punchkin had said; but at the same time
implored him to give up all idea of getting the parrot.

The Prince, however, replied, "Mother, unless I can get hold of that
parrot, you, and my father, and uncles, cannot be liberated: be not
afraid, I will shortly return.  Do you, meantime, keep the Magician in
good humor-still putting off your marriage with him on various
pretexts; and before he finds out the cause of delay, I will be here."
So saying, he went away.

Many, many weary miles did he travel, till at last he came to a thick
jungle; and, being very tired, sat down under a tree and fell asleep.
He was awakened by a soft rustling sound, and looking about him, saw a
large serpent which was making its way to an eagle's nest built in the
tree under which he lay, and in the nest were two young eagles.  The
Prince seeing the danger of the young birds, drew his sword, and killed
the serpent; at the same moment a rushing sound was heard in the air,
and the two old eagles, who had been out hunting for food for their
young ones, returned.  They quickly saw the dead serpent and the young
Prince standing over it; and the old mother eagle said to him, "Dear
boy, for many' years all our young ones have been devoured by that
cruel serpent; you have now saved the lives of our children; whenever
you are in need therefore, send to us and we will help you; and as for
these little eagles, take them, and let them be your servants."

At this the Prince was very glad, and the two eaglets crossed their
wings, on which he mounted; and they carried him far, far away over the
thick, jungles, until he came to the place where grew the circle of
palm trees, in the midst of which stood the six chattees full of water.
It was the middle of the day, and the heat was very great.  All round
the trees were the genii fast asleep; nevertheless, there were such
countless thousands of them, that it would have been quite impossible
for anyone to walk through their ranks to the place; down swooped the
strong-winged eaglets-down jumped the Prince; in an instant he had
overthrown the six chattees full of water, and seized the little green
parrot, which he rolled up in his cloak; while, as he mounted again
into the air, all the genii below awoke, and finding their treasure
gone, set up a wild and melancholy howl.

Away, away flew the little eagles, till they came to their home in the
great tree; then the Prince said to the old eagles, "Take back your
little ones; they have done me good service; if ever again I stand in
need of help, I will not fail to come to you."  He then continued his
journey on foot till he arrived once more at the Magician's palace,
where he sat down at the door and began playing with the Parrot.
Punchkin saw him, and came to him quickly, and said, "My boy, where did
yon get that parrot?  Give it to me, I pray you."

But the Prince answered, "Oh no, I cannot give away my parrot, it is a
great pet of mine; I have had it many years."

Then the Magician said, "If it is an old favorite, I can understand
your not caring to give it away; but come, what will you sell it for?"

"Sir," said the Prince, "I will not sell my parrot."

Then Punchkin got frightened, and said, "Anything, anything; name what
price you will, and it shall be yours."  The Prince answered, "Let the
seven Raja's sons whom you turned into rocks and trees be instantly
liberated."

"It is done as you desire," said the Magician, "only give me my
parrot."  And With that, by a stroke of his wand, Balna's husband and
his brothers resumed their natural shapes.  "Now, give me my parrot,"
repeated Punchkin.

"Not so fast, my master," rejoined the Prince; "I must first beg that
you will restore to life all whom you have thus imprisoned."

The Magician immediately waved his wand again; and whilst he cried, in
an imploring voice, "Give me my parrot!' the whole garden became
suddenly alive: where rocks, and stones, and trees had been before,
stood Rajas, and Punts, and Sirdars, and mighty men on prancing horses,
and jeweled pages, and troops of armed attendants.

"Give me my parrot!" cried Punchkin.  Then the boy took hold of the
parrot, and tore off one of its wings; and as he did so the Magician's
right arm fell off.

Punchkin then stretched out his left arm, crying, "Give me my parrot!"
The Prince pulled off the parrot's second wing, and the Magician's left
arm tumbled off.

"Give me my parrot!" cried he, and fell on his knees.  The Prince
pulled off the parrot's right leg, and the Magician's right leg fell
off: the Prince pulled off the parrot's left leg, down fell the
Magician's left.

Nothing remained of him save the limbless body and the head; but still
he rolled his eyes, and cried "Give me my parrot!"  "Take your parrot,
then, cried the boy, and with that.  he wrung the bird's neck, and
threw it at the magician; and as he did so, Punchkin's head twisted
round and, with a fearful groan, he died!

Then they let Balna out of the tower; and she, her son, and the seven
Princes went to their own country, and lived very happily ever
afterward.  And as to the rest of the world, everyone went to his own
house.

HOW SUN, MOON AND WIND WENT OUT TO DINNER

By E. Frere

ONE day Sun, Moon, and Wind went out to dine with their uncle and aunt
Thunder and Lightning.  Their mother (one of the most distant Stars you
see far up in the sky) waited alone for her children's return.

Now both Sun and Wind were greedy and selfish.  They enjoyed the great
feast that had been prepared for them, without a thought of saving any
of it to take home to their mother-but the gentle Moon did not forget
her.  Of every dainty dish that was brought round, she placed a small
portion under one of her beautiful long fingernails, that Star might
also have a share in the treat.

On their return, their mother, Who had kept watch for them all night
long with her little bright eye, said, "Well, children, what have yon
brought home for me?"  Then Sun (who was eldest) said, "I have brought
nothing home for you.  I went out to enjoy myself with my friends-not
to fetch dinner for my mother!"  And Wind said, "Neither have I brought
anything home for you, mother.  You could hardly expect me to bring a
collection of good things for you, when I merely went out for my own
pleasure."  But Moon said, "Mother, fetch a plate, see what I have
brought you."  And shaking her hands she showered down such a choice
dinner as never was seen before.

Then Star turned to Sun and spoke thus, "Because you went out to amuse
yourself with your friends, and feasted and enjoyed yourself, without
any thought of our mother at home-you shall be cursed.  Henceforth,
your rays shall ever be hot and scorching, and shall burn all that they
touch.  And men shall hate you, and cover their heads when you appear.

(And that is why the Sun is so hot to this day.)

Then she turned to Wind and said, "You also who forgot your mother in
the midst of your selfish pleasures-hear your doom.  You shall always
blow in the hot, dry weather, and shall parch and shrivel all living
things.  And men shall detest and avoid you from this very time."

(And that is why the Wind in the hot weather is still so disagreeable.)

But to Moon she said, "Daughter, because you remembered your mother,
and kept for her a share in your own enjoyment, from henceforth you
shall be ever cool, and calm and bright.  No noxious glare shall
accompany your pure rays, and men shall always call you 'blessed."

(And that is why the Moon's light is so soft, and cool, and beautiful
even to this day.)

WHY THE FISH LAUGHED

By Joseph Jacobs

As a certain fisherwoman passed by a palace crying her fish, the queen
appeared at one of the windows and beckoned her to come near and show
what she had.  At that moment a very big fish jumped about in the
bottom of the basket.

"Is it a he or a she?"  inquired the queen.  "I wish to purchase a she
fish."

On hearing this the fish laughed aloud.

"It's a he," replied the fisherwoman, and proceeded on her rounds.

The queen returned to her room in a great rage; and on coming to see
her in the evening, the king noticed that something had disturbed her.

"Are you indisposed?"  he said.

"No; but I am very much annoyed at the strange behavior of a fish.  A
woman brought me one to-day, and on my inquiring whether it was a male
or female, the fish laughed most rudely."

"A fish laugh! Impossible! You must be dreaming."

"I am not a fool.  I speak of what I have seen with my own eyes and
heard with my own ears."

"Passing strange! Be it so.  I will inquire concerning it."

On the morrow the king repeated to his vizier what his wife had told
him, and bade him investigate the matter, and be ready with a
satisfactory answer within six mouths, on pain of death.  The vizier
promised to do his best, though he felt almost certain of failure.  For
live months he labored indefatigably to find a reason for the laughter
of the fish.  He sought everywhere and from everyone.  The wise and
learned, and they who were skilled in magic and in all manner of
trickery, were consulted.  Nobody, however, could explain the matter;
and so he returned broken-hearted to his house, and began to arrange
his affairs in prospect of certain death, for he had had sufficient
experience of the king to know that His Majesty would not go back from
his threat.  Amongst other things, he advised his son to travel for a
time, until the king's anger should have somewhat cooled.

The young fellow, who was both clever and handsome, started off
whithersoever Kismet might lead him.  He had been gone some days, when
he fell in with an old farmer, who also was on a journey to a certain
village.  Finding the old man very pleasant, he asked him if he might
accompany him, professing to be on a visit to the same place.  The old
farmer agreed, and they walked along together.  The day was hot, and
the way was long and weary.

"Don't yon think it would be pleasanter if you and I sometimes gave one
another a lift?"  said the youth.

"What a fool the man is!" thought the old farmer.

Presently they passed through a field of corn ready for the sickle, and
looking' like a sea of gold as it waved to and fro in the breeze.

"Is this eaten or not?"  said the young man.

Not understanding his meaning, the old man replied, "I don't know."

After a little while the two travelers arrived at a big village, where
the young man gave his companion a clasp knife, and said, "Take this,
friend, and get two horses with it; but mind and bring it back, for it
is very precious."

The old man, looking half amused and half angry, pushed back the knife,
muttering something to the effect that his friend was either a fool
himself or else tying to play the fool with him.  The young man
pretended not to notice his reply, and remained almost silent till they
reached the city, a short distance outside which was the old farmer's
house.

They walked about the bazaar and went to the mosque, but nobody saluted
them or invited them to come in and rest.

"What a large cemetery!" exclaimed the young man.

"What does the man mean," thought the old farmer, "calling this largely
populated city a cemetery?"

On leaving the city their way led through a cemetery where a few people
were praying beside a grave and distributing chupatties and kulchas to
Passers-by, in the name of their beloved dead.  They beckoned to the
two travelers and gave them as much as they would.

"What a splendid city this is!" said the young man.

"Now, the man must surely be demented!"  thought the old farmer.  "I
wonder what he will do next?  He will be calling the land water, and
the water land; and be speaking of light where there is darkness, and
of darkness where it is light."  However, he kept his thoughts to
himself.

Presently they had to wade through a stream that ran along the edge of
the cemetery.  The water was rather deep, so the old farmer took off
his shoes and pajamas and crossed over; but the young man waded through
it with his shoes and pajamas on.

"Well!  I never did see such a perfect fool, both in word and in deed,
said the old man to himself.

However, he liked the fellow; and thinking that he would amuse his wife
and daughter, he invited him to come and stay at his house as long as
he had occasion to remain in the village.

"Thank you very much," the young man replied; "but let me first
inquire, if you please, whether the beam of your house is strong. "

The old farmer left him in despair, and entered his house laughing.

"There is a man in yonder field," he said, after returning their
greetings.  "He 'has come the greater part of the way with me, and I
wanted him to put up here as long as he had to stay in this village.
But the fellow is such a fool that I cannot make anything out of him.
He wants to know if the beam of this house is all right.  The man must
be mad!" and saying this he burst into a fit of laughter.

"Father," said the farmer's daughter, who was a very sharp and wise
girl, "this man, whosoever he is, is no fool, as you deem him.  He only
wishes to know if you can afford to entertain him."

"Oh! of course," replied the farmer.  "I see.  Well perhaps you can
help me to solve some of his other mysteries.  While we were walking
together he asked whether he should carry me or I should carry him, as
he thought that would be a pleasanter mode of proceeding."

"Most assuredly," said the girl.  "He meant that one of you should tell
a story to beguile the time."

"Oh, yes.  Well, we were passing through a cornfield, when he asked me
whether it was eaten or not."

"And didn't you know the meaning of this, father?  He simply wished to
know if the man was in debt or not; because if the owner of the field
was in debt, then the produce of the field was as good as eaten to him;
that is, it would have to go to his creditors."

"Yes, yes, yes; of course!  Then, on entering a certain village, he
bade me take his clasp knife and get two horses with it, and bring back
the knife again to him."

"Are not two stout sticks as good as two horses for helping one along
on the road?  He only asked you to cut a couple of sticks and be
careful not to lose his knife."

"I see," said time farmer.  "While we were walking over the city we did
not see anybody that we knew, and not a soul gave us a scrap of
anything to eat, till we were passing the cemetery; but there some
people called to us and put into our hands some chupatties and kulchas;
so my companion called the city a cemetery, and the cemetery a city."

"This also is to be understood, father, if one thinks of the city as
the place where everything is to be obtained, and of inhospitable
people as worse than the dead.  The city, though crowded with people,
was as if dead, as far as you were concerned; while, in the cemetery,
which is crowded with time dead, you were saluted by kind friends and
provided with bread."

"True, true!" said the astonished farmer.  "Then, just now, when we
were crossing the stream, he waded through it without taking off his
shoes and pajamas.''

"I admire his wisdom," replied time girl.  "I have often thought how
stupid people were to venture into that swiftly flowing stream and over
those sharp stones with bare feet.  The slightest stumble and they
would fall, and be wetted from head to foot.  This friend of yours is a
most wise man.  I should like to see him and speak to him."

"Very well," said time farmer; "I will go and find him, and bring him
in."

"Tell him, father, that our beams are strong enough, and then he will
come in.  I'll send on ahead a present to the man, to show him that we
can afford to have him for our guest."

Accordingly she called a servant and sent him to the young man with a
present of a basin of ghee, twelve chupatties, and a jar of milk, and
the following message: "O friend, time moon is full; twelve months make
a year, and the sea is overflowing with water."

Half-way the bearer of this present and message met his little son,
who, seeing what was in the basket, begged his father to give him some
of the food.  His father foolishly complied.  Presently he saw the
young man, and gave him the rest of the present and the message.

"Give your mistress my salaam," he replied, "and tell her that the moon
is new, and that I can only find eleven mouths in the year, and the sea
is by no means full."

Not understanding the meaning of these words, the servant repeated them
word for word, as he had heard them, to his mistress; and thus his
theft was discovered, and he was severely punished.  After a little
while the young man appeared with the old farmer.  Great attention was
shown to him, and he was treated in every way as it he were the son of
a great man, although his humble host knew nothing of his origin.  At
length be told them everything-about the laughing of the fish, his
father's threatened execution, and his own banishment-and asked their
advice as to what he should do.

"The laughing of the fish,'' said the girl "which seems to have been
the cause of all this trouble, indicates that there is a man in the
palace who is plotting against the king's life."

"Joy, joy!" exclaimed the vizier's son.  "There is yet time for me to
return and save my father from an ignominious and unjust death, and the
king from danger."

The following day he hastened back to his own country, taking with him
the farmer's daughter.  Immediately on arrival he ran to the palace and
informed his father of what he had heard.  The poor vizier, now almost
dead from the expectation of death, was at once carried to the king, to
whom he repeated the news that his son had just brought.

"Never!" said the king.

"But it must be so, Your Majesty," replied the vizier; "and in order to
prove the truth of what I have heard, I pray you call together all the
maids in your palace, and order them to jump over a pit, which must be
dug.  We'll soon find out whether there is any man there."

The king had time pit dug, and commanded all the maids belonging to the
palace to try to jump it.  All of them tried, but only one succeeded.
That one was found to be a man!

Thus was the queen satisfied, and the faithful old vizier saved.

Afterward, as soon as could be, the vizier's son married the old
farmer's daughter; and a most happy marriage it was.

THE FARMER AND THE MONEY LENDER

By Joseph Jacobs

THERE was ounce a farmer who suffered much at time hands of the money
lender.  Good harvests, or bad, the farmer was always poor, the money
lender rich.  At the last, when he hadn't a farthing left, the farmer
went to the money lender's house, and said, "You can't squeeze water
from a stone, and as you have nothing to get by me now, you might tell
me the secret of becoming rich."

"My friend," returned the money lender, piously, "riches come from Ram-
ask him."

"Thank you, I will!" replied the simple farmer; so he prepared three
griddle cakes to last him on the journey, and set out to find Ram.

First he met a Brahman, and to him he gave a cake asking him to point
out the road to Ram; but the Brahman only took the cake and went on his
way without a word.  Next the farmer met a Jogi or devotee, and to him
he gave a cake, without receiving any help in return.  At last, he came
upon a poor man sitting under a tree, and finding out he was hungry,
the kindly farmer gave him his last cake, and sitting clown to rest
beside him, entered into conversation.

"And where are you going?"  asked the poor man, at length.

"Oh, I have a long journey before me, for I am going to find Ram!"
replied the farmer.  "I don't suppose you could tell me which way to
go?"

"Perhaps I can," said the poor man, smiling, "for I am Ram! What do you
want of me?"

Then the farmer told the whole story, and Rain, taking pity on him,
gave him a conch shell, and showed him how to blow it in a particular
way, saying, "Remember! whatever you wish for, you have only to blow
the conch that way, and your wish will be fulfilled.  Only have a care
of that money lender, for even magic is not proof against their wiles!"

The farmer went back to his village rejoicing.  In fact the money
lender noticed his high spirits at once, and said to himself, "Some
good fortune must have befallen the stupid fellow, to make him hold his
head so jauntily."  Therefore he went over to the simple farmer's
house, and congratulated him on his good fortune, in such cunning
words, pretending to have heard all about it, that before long the
farmer found himself telling the whole story-all except the secret of
blowing the conch, for, with all his simplicity, the farmer was not
quite such a fool as to tell that.

Nevertheless, the money lender determined to have the conch by hook or
by crook, and as he was villain enough not to stick at trifles, he
waited for a favorable opportunity and stole the conch.

But, after nearly bursting himself with blowing the conch in every
conceivable way, he was obliged to give up the secret as a bad job.
However, being determined to succeed he went back to the farmer and
said, coolly, "Look here; I've got your conch, but I can't use it; you
haven't got it, So it's clear you can't use it either.  Business is at
a standstill unless we make a bargain.  Now, I promise to give you back
your conch, and never to interfere with your using it, on one
condition, which is this-Whatever you get from it, I am to get double."

"Never!" cried the farmer; "that would be the old business all over
again!"

"Not at all!" replied time wily money lender; "you will have your
share!  Now, don't be a dog in the manger, for if you get all you want,
what can it matter to you if I am rich or poor?"

At last, though it went sorely against the grain to be of any benefit
to a money lender, the farmer was forced to yield, and from that time,
no matter what he gained by the power of the couch, time money lender
gained double.  And the knowledge that this was so preyed upon the
farmer's mind day and night, so that he had no satisfaction out of
anything.

At last, there came a very dry season-so dry that the farmer's crops
withered for want of rain.  Then he blew his conch, and wished for a
well to water them, and lo! there was the well, but the money lender
had two!-two beautiful new wells!  This was too much for any farmer to
stand: and our friend brooded over it, and brooded over it, till at
last a bright idea came into his head.  He seized the conch, blew it
loudly, and cried out, "Oh Ram!  I wish to be blind of one eye!"  And
so he was in a twinkling, but the money lender of course was blind of
both, and in trying to steer his way between the two new wells, he fell
into one and was drowned.

Now this true story shows that a farmer once got time better of a money
lender-but only by losing one of his eyes.

PRIDE GOETH BEFORE A FALL

By Joseph Jacobs

IN a certain village there lived ten cloth merchants who always went
about together.  Once upon a time they had traveled far afield, and
were returning home with a great deal of money which they had obtained
by selling their wares.  Now there happened to be a dense forest near
their village, and this they reached early one morning.  In it there
lived three notorious robbers, of whose existence the traders had never
heard, and while they were still in the middle of it the robbers stood
before them, with swords and cudgels in their hands, and ordered them
to lay down all they had.  The traders had no weapons with them, and
so, though they were many more in number, they had to submit themselves
to the robbers, who took away everything from them, even the very
clothes they wore, and gave to each only a small loin cloth a span in
breadth and a cubit in length.

The idea that they had conquered ten men and plundered all their
property now took possession of the robbers' minds.  They seated
themselves like three monarchs before the men they had plundered, and
ordered them to dance to them before returning home.  The merchants now
mourned their fate.

They had lost all they had, except their loin cloth, and still the
robbers were not satisfied, but ordered them to dance.

There was, among the ten merchants, one who was very clever.  He
pondered over the calamity that had come upon him and his friends, the
dance they would have to perform, and the magnificent manner in which
the three robbers had seated themselves on the grass.  At the same time
he observed that these last had placed their weapons on the ground, in
the assurance of having thoroughly cowed the traders, who were now
commencing to dance.  So he took the lead in the dance, and, as a song
is always sung by the leader on such occasions, to which the rest keep
time with hands and feet, he thus began to sing:

	We are enty men,

	They are erith men:

	If each erith man

	Surround eno men,

	Eno man remains.

	Ta, tai, tom, tadingana.

The robbers were all uneducated, and thought that the leader was merely
singing a song as usual.  So it was in one sense: for the leader
commenced from a distance, and had sung the song over twice before he
and his companions commenced to approach the robbers.  They had
understood his meaning, because they had been trained in trade.

When two traders discuss the price of an article in the presence of a
purchaser, they use a riddling sort of language.

"What is the price of this cloth?"  one trader will ask another.

"Enty rupees," another will reply, meaning "ten rupees."

Thus, there is no possibility of the purchaser knowing what is meant
unless he be acquainted with trade language.  By the rules of this
secret language erith means "three," enty means "ten," and eno means
"one."  So the leader by his song meant to hint to his fellow-traders
that they were ten men, the robbers only three, that if three pounced
upon each of the robbers, nine of them could hold them down, while the
remaining one bound the robbers' hands and feet.

The three thieves, glorying in their victory, and little understanding
the meaning of the song and the intentions of the dancers, were proudly
seated chewing betel and tobacco.  Meanwhile the song was sung a third
time.  Ta, tai, tom had left the lips of the singer; and, before
tadingana was out of them, the traders separated into parties of three,
and each party pounced upon a thief.  The remaining one-the leader
himself-tore up into long narrow strips a large piece of cloth, six
cubits long, and tied the hands and feet of the robbers.  These were
entirely humbled now, and rolled on the ground like three bags of rice!

The ten traders now took back all their property, and armed themselves
with the swords and cudgels of their enemies; and when they reached
their village, they often amused their friends and relatives by
relating their adventure.

HOW THE WICKED SONS WERE DUPED

By Joseph Jacobs

A VERY wealthy old man, imagining that he was on the point of death,
sent for his sons and divided his property among them.  However, he did
not die for several years afterward, and miserable years many of them
were.  Besides the weariness of old age, the old fellow had to bear
with much abuse and cruelty from his sons.  Wretched, selfish ingrates!
Previously they vied with one another in trying to please their father,
hoping thus to receive more money, but now they had received their
patrimony, they cared not how soon he left them-nay, the sooner the
better, because he was only a needless trouble and expense.  And they
let the poor old man know what they felt.

One day he met a friend and related to him all his troubles.  The
friend sympathized very much with him, and promised to think over the
matter, and call in a little while and tell him what to do.  He did so;
in a few days he visited the old man and put down four bags full of
stones and gravel before him.

"Look here, friend," said he.  "Your sons will get to know of my coming
here to-day, and will inquire about it.  You must pretend that I came
to discharge a long-standing debt with you, and that you are several
thousands of rupees richer than you thought you were.  Keep these bags
in your own hands, and on no account let your sons get to them as long
as you are alive.  You will soon find them change their conduct toward
you.  Salaam, I will come again soon to see how you are getting on."

When the young men got to hear of this further increase of wealth they
began to be more attentive and pleasing to their father than ever
before.  And thus they continued to the day of the old man's demise,
when the bags were greedily opened, and found to contain only stones
and gravel!

THE TIGER, THE BRAHMAN, AND THE JACKAL

By Flora Annie Steel

ONCE upon a time a Tiger was caught in a trap.  He tried in vain to get
out through the bars, and rolled and bit with rage and grief when he
failed.

By chance a poor Brahman came by.

"Let me out of this cage, oh pious one!" cried the Tiger.

"Nay, my friend," replied the Brahman mildly, you would probably eat me
if I did."

"Not at all!" swore the Tiger with many oaths; "on the contrary, I
should be forever grateful, and serve you as a slave!"

Now when the Tiger sobbed and sighed and wept and swore, the pious
Brahman's heart softened, and at last he consented to open the door of
the cage.  Out popped the Tiger, and, seizing the poor man, cried,
"What a fool you are!  What is to prevent my eating you now, for after
being cooped up so long I am terribly hungry!"

In vain the Brahman Pleaded for his life; the most he could gain was a
promise to abide by the decision of the first three things he chose to
question as to the justice of the Tiger's action.

So the Brahman first asked a Pipal Tree what it thought of the matter,
but the Pipal Tree replied coldly, "What have you to complain about?
Don't I give shade and shelter to everyone who passes by, and don't
they in return tear down my branches to feed their cattle?  Don't
whimper-be a. man! "

Then the Brahman sad at heart, went farther afield till he saw a
Buffalo turning a well wheel; but he fared no better from it, for it
answered, "You are a fool to expect gratitude!  Look at me!  While I
gave milk they fed me on cottonseed and oil cake, but now I am dry they
yoke me here, and give me refuse as fodder!"

The Brahman, still more sad, asked the Road to give him its opinion.

"My dear sir,'' said the Road, "how foolish you are to expect anything
else!  Here am I, useful to everybody, yet all, rich and poor, great
and small, trample on me as they go past, giving me nothing but the
ashes of their pipes and the husks of their grain!"

On this the Brahman turned back sorrowfully, and on the way he met a
Jackal, who called out, "Why, what's the matter, Mr. Brahman?  You look
as miserable as a fish out of water!"

The Brahman told him all that had occurred.

"How very confusing!" said the Jackal, when the recital was ended;
"would you mind telling me over again, for everything has got so mixed
up?"

The Brahman told it all over again, but the Jackal shook his head in a
distracted sort of way, and still could not understand.

"It's very odd," said he, sadly, "but it all seems to go in at one ear
and out at the other!  I will go to the place where it all happened,
and then perhaps I shall be able to give a judgment. "

So they returned to the cage, by which the Tiger was waiting for the
Brahman, and sharpening his teeth and claws.

"You've been away a long time!" growled the savage beast, "but now let
us begin our dinner."

"Our dinner!" thought the wretched Brahman, as his knees knocked
together with fright; "what a remarkably delicate way of putting it!"

"Give mime five minutes, my lord!" he pleaded, "in order that I may
explain matters to the Jackal here, who is somewhat slow in his wits."

The Tiger consented, and the Brahman began the whole story over again,
not missing a single detail, and spinning as long a yarn as possible.

''Oh, my poor brain! oh, my poor brain!" cried the Jackal, wringing its
paws.  "Let me see! how did it all begin?  You were in the cage, and
the Tiger came walking by-"

"Pooh!" interrupted the Tiger, "what a fool you are!  I was in the
cage."

"Of course!" cried the Jackal, pretending to tremble with fright; "yes
I was in the cage-no I wasn't-dear! dear, where are my wits?  Let me
see-the Tiger was in the Brahman, and the cage came walking by-no,
that's not it, either! Well, don't mind me, but begin your dinner, for
I shall never understand!"

"Yes, you shall!" returned the Tiger, in a rage at the Jackal's
stupidity; "I'll make you understand!  Look here-I am the Tiger-"

"Yes, my lord!"

"And that is the Brahman-"

"Yes, my lord!"

"And that is the cage-"

"Yes, my lord!"

"And I was in the cage-do you understand?"

"Yes-no- Please, my lord-"

"Well?"  cried the Tiger impatiently.

"Please, my lord !-how did you get in?"

"How?-why, in the usual way, of course! "

"Oh, dear me!-My head is beginning to whirl again! Please don't get
angry, my lord, but what is the usual way?"

At this the Tiger lost patience, and, jumping into the cage, cried,
"This way!  Now do you understand how it was?"

"Perfectly!" grinned the Jackal, as he dexterously shut the door.  "And
if you will permit me to say so, I think matters will remain as they
were!"

THE LAMBIKIN

By Flora Annie Steel

ONCE upon a time there was a wee wee Lambikin, who frolicked about on
his little tottery legs, and enjoyed himself amazingly.

Now one day he set off to visit his Granny, and was jumping with joy to
think of all the good things he should get from her, when who should he
meet but a Jackal, who looked at the tender young morsel and said:
"Lambikin!  Lambikin!  I'll EAT YOU!"

But Lambikin only gave a little frisk and said:

	"To Granny's house I go,

	Where I shall fatter grow,

	Then you can eat me so."

The Jackal thought this reasonable, and let Lambikin pass.

By and by he met a Vulture, and the Vulture, looking hungrily at the
tender morsel before him, said: "Lambikin!  Lambikin!  I'll EAT YOU!"

But Lambikin only gave a little frisk, and said:

	"To Granny's house I go,

	Where I shall fatter grow,

	Then you can eat me so."

The Vulture thought this reasonable, and let Lambikin pass.

And by and by he met a Tiger, and then a Wolf, and a Dog, arid an
Eagle, and all these, when they saw the tender little morsel, said:
"Lambikin!  Lambikin!  I'll EAT YOU!"

But to all of them Lambikin replied, with a little frisk:

	"To Granny's house I go,

	Where I shall fatter grow,

	Then you can eat me so.

At last he reached his Granny's house, and said, all in a great hurry,
"Granny, dear, I've promised to get very fat; so, as people ought to
keep their promises, please put me into the corn bin at once."

So his Granny said he was a good boy, and put him into the corn bin,
and there the greedy little Lambikin stayed for seven days, and ate,
and ate, and ate, until he could scarcely waddle, and his Granny said
he was fat enough for anything, and must go home.  But cunning little
Lambikin said that would never do, for some animal would be sure to eat
him on the way back, he was so plump and tender.

"I'll tell you what you must do," said Master Lambikin, "you must make
a little drumikin out of the skin of' my little brother who died, and
then I can sit inside and trundle along nicely, for I'm as tight as a
drum myself."

So his Granny made a nice little drumikin out of his brother's skin,
with the wool inside, and Lambikin curled himself up snug and warm in
the middle, and trundled away gayly.  Soon lie met with the Eagle, who
called out:

	"Drumikin!  Drumikin!

	Have you seen Lambikin?"

And Mr. Lambikin, curled up in his soft warm nest, replied:

	"Fallen into the fire, and so will you

	On little Drumikin.  Tum-pa, tum-too!"

"How very annoying!" sighed the Eagle, thinking regretfully of the
tender morsel he had let slip.

Meanwhile Lambikin trundled along, laughing to himself, and singing:

	"Tum-pa, tum-too;

	Tum-pa, tum-too!"

Every animal and bird he met asked him the same question:

	"Drumikin!  Drumikin!

	Have you seen Lambikin?"

And to each of them the little slyboots replied:

	"Fallen into the fire, and so will you

	On little Drumikin. Tum-pa, tum-too;

	Tum-pa, tum-too; Tum-pa, tum-too!"

Then they all sighed to think of the tender little morsel they had let
slip.

At last the Jac