kal came limping along, for all his sorry looks as sharp
as a needle, and he too called out-

	"Drumikin!  Drumikin!

	Have you seen Lambikin?"

And Lambikin, curled up in his snug little nest, replied gayly:

	"Fallen into the fire, and so will you

	On little Drumikin!  Tum-pa-"

But he never got any further, for the Jackal recognized his voice at
once, arid cried: "Hullo!  you've turned yourself inside out, have you?
Just you come out of that!"

Whereupon he tore open Drumikin and gobbled up Lambikin.

THE RAT'S WEDDING

By Flora Annie Steel

ONCE upon a time a fat, sleek Rat was caught in a shower of rain, and
being far from shelter he set to work and soon dug a nice hole in the
ground, in which he sat as dry as a bone while the raindrops splashed
outside, making little puddles on the road.

Now in the course of digging, he came upon a fine bit of root, quite
dry and fit for fuel, which he set aside carefully-for the Rat is an
economical creature--in order to take it home with him.  So when the
shower was over, he set off with the dry root in his mouth.  As he went
along, daintily picking his way through the puddles, he Saw a Poor Man
vainly trying to light a fire, while a little circle of children stood
by, and cried piteously.

"Goodness gracious!" exclaimed the Rat, who was both soft-hearted and
curious, "What a dreadful noise to make!  What is the matter?"

"The children are hungry," answered the Man; "they are crying for their
breakfast, but the sticks are damp, the fire won't burn, and so I can't
bake the cakes."

"If that is all your trouble, perhaps I can help you," said the good-
natured Rat, "you are welcome to this dry root and I'll warrant it will
soon make a fine blaze."

The Poor Man, with a thousand thanks, took the dry root, and in his
turn presented the Rat with a morsel of dough, as a reward for his
kindness and generosity.

"What a remarkably lucky fellow I am!" thought the Rat, as he trotted
off gayly with his prize, "and clever, too!  Fancy making a bargain
like that-food enough to last me five days in return for a rotten old
stick!  Wah!  Wah!  Wah!  What it is to have brains!"

Going along, hugging his good fortune in this way, he came presently to
a Potter's yard, where the Potter, leaving his wheel to spin round by
itself, was trying to pacify his three little children, who were
screaming arid crying as if they would burst.

"My gracious!" cried the Rat, stopping his ears, "what a noise!  do
tell me what it is all about."

"I suppose they are hungry," replied the Potter ruefully; "their mother
has gone to get flour in the bazaar, for there is none in the house.
In the meantime I can neither work nor rest because of them."

"Is that all?" answered the officious Rat; then I can help you.  Take
this dough, cook it quickly, and stop their mouths with food."

The Potter overwhelmed the Rat with thanks for his obliging kindness,
and choosing out a nice well-burned pipkin, insisted on his accepting
it as a remembrance.

The Rat was delighted at the exchange, and though the pipkin was just a
trifle awkward for him to manage, he succeeded, after infinite trouble,
in balancing it on his head and went away gingerly, tink-a-tink, tin k-
a-tink, down the road, with his tail over his arm for fear he should
trip on it.  And all the time he kept saying to himself, "What a lucky
fellow I am!  and clever, too!  Such a hand at a bargain!"

By and by he came to where some cowherds were herding their cattle.
One of them was milking a buffalo, and having no pail, he used his
shoes instead.

"Oh fie!  oh fie!" cried the cleanly Rat, quite shocked at the sight.
"What a nasty, dirty trick!  Why don't you use a pail?"

"For the best of all reasons-we haven't got one!" growled the Cowherd,
who did not see why the Rat should put his finger in the pie.

"If that is all," replied the dainty Rat, "oblige me by using this
pipkin, for I cannot bear dirt!"

The Cowherd, nothing loath, took the pipkin and milked away until it
was brimming over; then turning to the Rat, who stood looking on, said,
"Here, little fellow, You may have a drink, in payment."

But if the Rat was good-natured he was also shrewd.  "No, no, my
friend," said he, "that will not do!  As if I could drink the worth of
any pipkin at a draft!  My dear sir, I couldn't hold it!  Besides, I
never make a bad bargain, so I expect you, at least to give me the
buffalo that gave the milk."

"Nonsense!" cried the Cowherd; "a buffalo for a pipkin!  Whoever heard
of such a price?  And what on earth could you do with a buffalo when
you got it?  Why, the pipkin was about as much as you could manage."

At this the Rat drew himself up with dignity, for he did not like
allusions to his size.  "That is my affair, not yours," he retorted;
"your business is to hand over the buffalo."

So just for the fun of the thing, and to amuse themselves at the Rat's
expense, the cowherds loosened the buffalo's halter and began to tie it
to the little animal's tail.

"No!  no!' he called, in a great hurry.  "If the beast pulled, the skin
of my tail would come off, and then where should I be?  Tie it around
my neck, if you please."

So with much laughter the cowherds tied the halter round the Rat's
neck, and he, after a polite leave-taking, set off gayly toward home
with his prize; that is to say, he set off with the rope, for no sooner
did he come to the end of the tether than be was brought up with a
round turn; the buffalo, nose down, grazing away, would not budge until
it had finished its tuft of grass, and then seeing another in a
different direction marched off toward it, while the Rat, to avoid
being dragged, had to trot humbly behind, willy-nilly.  He was too
proud to confess the truth, of course, and, nodding his head knowingly
to the cowherds, said: "Ta-ta, good people!  I am going home this way.
It may be a little longer, but it's much shadier."

And when the cowherds roared with laughter he took no notice, but
trotted on, looking as dignified as possible.  "After all," he reasoned
to himself, "when one keeps a buffalo one has to look after its
grazing.  A beast must get a good bellyful of grass if it is to give
any milk, and I have plenty of time at my disposal."  So all day long
he trotted about after the buffalo, making believe; but by evening he
was dead tired, and felt truly thankful when the great big beast,
having eaten enough, lay down under a tree to chew the cud.

Just then a bridal party came by.  The Bridegroom and his friends had
evidently gone on to the next village, leaving the Bride's palanquin to
follow; so the palanquin bearers, being lazy fellows and seeing a nice
shady tree, put down their burden, and began to cook some food.

"What detestable meanness!" grumbled one; "a grand wedding, and nothing
but plain rice to eat!  Not a scrap of meat in it, neither sweet nor
salt!  It would serve the skinflints right if we upset the Bride into a
ditch!"

"Dear me!" cried the Rat at once, seeing a way out of his difficulty,
"that is a shame!  I sympathize with your feelings so entirely that if
you will allow me, I'll give you my buffalo.  You can kill it, and cook
it."

"Your buffalo!" returned the discontented bearers.  "What rubbish!
Whoever heard of a rat owning a buffalo?"

"Not often, I admit," replied the Rat with conscious pride; "but look
for yourselves.  Can you not see that I am leading the beast by a
string?"

"Oh, never mind the string!" cried a great big hungry bearer; master or
no master, I mean to have meat for my dinner!"  Whereupon they killed
the buffalo, and cooking its flesh, ate their dinner with a relish;
then, offering the remains to the Rat, said carelessly, "Here, little
Rat-skin, that is for you!"

"Now look here!" cried the Rat hotly; "I'll have none of your pottage,
or your sauce, either.  You don't suppose I am going to give my best
buffalo, that gave quarts and quarts of milk-the buffalo I have been
feeding all day-for a wee bit of rice?  No!  I got a loaf for a bit of
stick; I got a pipkin for a little loaf; I got a buffalo for a pipkin;
and now I'll have the Bride for my buffalo-the Bride, and nothing
else!"

By this time the servants, having satisfied their hunger, began to
reflect on what they had done, and becoming alarmed at the
consequences, arrived at the conclusion it would be wisest to make
their escape while they could.  So, leaving the Bride in her palanquin,
they took to their heels in various directions.

The Rat, being as it were left in possession, advanced to the
palanquin, and drawing aside the curtain, with the sweetest of voices
and best of bows begged the Bride to descend.  She hardly knew whether
to laugh or to cry, but as any company, even a Rat's, was better than
being quite alone in the wilderness, she did what she was bidden, and
followed the lead of her guide, who set off as fast as be could for his
hole.

As he trotted along beside the lovely young Bride, who, by her rich
dress and glittering jewels, seemed to be some king's daughter, he kept
saying to himself, "How clever I am!  What bargains I do make, to be
sure!"

When they arrived at his hole, the Rat stepped forward with the
greatest politeness, and said, "Welcome, madam, to my humble abode!
Pray step in, or if you will allow me, and as the passage is somewhat
dark, I will show you the way."

Whereupon he ran in first, but after a time, finding the Bride did not
follow, he put his nose out again, saying testily, "Well, madam, why
don't you follow?  Don't you know it's rude to keep your husband
waiting?"

"My good sir," laughed the handsome young Bride, "I can't squeeze into
that little hole!"

The Rat coughed; then after a moment's thought he replied, "There is
some truth in your remark- you are overgrown, and I suppose I shall
have to build you a thatch somewhere, For to-night you can rest under
that wild plum tree."

"But I am so hungry!" said the Bride ruefully.

"Dear, dear!  everybody seems hungry to-day!" returned the Rat
pettishly; "however, that's easily settled-I'll fetch you Some supper
in a trice."

So he ran into his hole, returning immediately with an ear of millet
and a dry pea.  "There!" said he, triumphantly, "isn't that a fine
meal?"

"I can't eat that!" whimpered the Bride; "it isn't a mouthful; and I
want rice pottage, and cakes, and sweet eggs, and sugar drops.  I shall
die if I don't get them!"

"Oh, dear me!" cried the Rat in a rage, "what a nuisance a bride is, to
be sure!  Why don't you eat the wild plums?"

"I can't live on wild plums!" retorted the weeping Bride; "nobody
could; besides, they are only half ripe, and I can't reach them."

"Rubbish!" cried the Rat; "ripe or unripe, they must do you for to-
night, and to-morrow you can gather a basketful, sell them in the city,
and buy sugar drops and sweet eggs to your heart's content!"

So the next morning the Rat climbed up into the plum tree, and nibbled
away at the stalks till the fruit fell down into the Bride's veil.
Then, unripe as they were, she carried them into the city, calling out
through the streets-

	"Green plums I sell!  green plums I sell!

	Princess am I, Rat's bride as well!"

As she passed by the palace, her mother, the Queen, heard her voice,
and running out, recognized her daughter.  Great were the rejoicings,
for everyone thought the poor Bride had been eaten by wild beasts.

In the midst of the feasting and merriment, the Rat, who had followed
the Princess at a distance, and had become alarmed at her long absence,
arrived at the door, against which he beat with a big knobby stick,
calling out fiercely, "Give me my wife!  Give me my wife!  She is mine
by a fair bargain.  I gave a stick and I got a loaf; I gave a loaf and
I got a pipkin; I gave a pipkin and I got a buffalo; I gave a buffalo
and I got a bride.  Give me my wife!  Give me my wife!"

"La!  son-in-law!  What a fuss you do make," said the wily old Queen
through the door, "and all about nothing!  Who wants to run away with
your wife?  On the contrary, we are proud to see you, and I only keep
you waiting at the door till we can spread the carpets, and receive you
in style."

Hearing this, the Rat was mollified, and waited patiently outside while
the cunning old Queen prepared for his reception, which she did by
cutting a hole in the very middle of a stool, putting a red hot stone
underneath, covering it over with a stew-pan lid, and then spreading a
beautiful embroidered cloth over all.  Then she went to the door, and
receiving the Rat with the greatest respect, led him to the stool,
praying him to be seated.

"Dear!  dear!  how clever I am!  What bargains I do make, to be sure!"
said he to himself as he climbed on to the stool.  "Here I am, son-in-
law to a real live Queen!  What will the neighbors say?"

At first he sat down on the edge of the stool, but even there it was
warm, and after a while he began to fidget, saying, "Dear me, mother-
in-law, how hot your house is!  Everything I touch seems burning!"

"You are out of the wind there, my son," replied the cunning old Queen;
"sit more in the middle of the stool, and then you will feel the breeze
and get cooler."

But he didn't!  for the stewpan lid by this time had become so hot that
the Rat fairly frizzled when he sat down on it; and it was not until he
had left all his tail, half his hair, and a large piece of his skin
behind him, that he managed to escape, howling with pain, and vowing
that never, never, never again would he make a bargain!

THE JACKAL AND THE PARTRIDGE

By Flora Annie Steel

A JACKAL and a partridge swore eternal friendship; but the Jackal was
very exacting and jealous.  "You don't do half as much for me as I do
for you," he used to say, "and yet you talk a great deal of your
friendship.  Now my idea of a friend is one who is able to make me
laugh or cry, give me a good meal, or save my life if need be.  You
couldn't do that!"

"Let us see," answered the Partridge; "follow me at a little distance,
and if I don't make you laugh soon you may eat me!"

So she flew on till she met two travelers trudging along, one behind
the other.  They were both foot-sore and weary, and the first carried
his bundle on a stick over his shoulder, while the second had his shoes
in his hand.

Lightly as a feather the Partridge settled on the first traveler's
stick.  He, none the wiser, trudged on, but the second traveler, seeing
the bird sitting so tamely just in front of his nose, said to himself,
"What a chance for a supper!" and immediately flung his shoes at it,
they being ready to hand.  Whereupon the Partridge flew away, and the
shoes knocked off the first traveler's turban.

"What a plague do you mean?" cried he, angrily turning on his
companion.  "Why did you throw your shoes at my head?"

"Brother," replied the other mildly, "do not be vexed.  I didn't throw
them at you, but at a Partridge that was sitting on your stick."

"On my stick!  Do you take me for a fool?" shouted the injured man, in
a great rage.  "Don't tell me such cock-and-bull stories.  First you
insult me, and then you lie like a coward; but I'll teach you manners!"

Then he fell upon his fellow traveler without more ado, and they fought
until they could not see out of their eyes, till their noses were
bleeding, their clothes in rags, and the Jackal had nearly died of
laughing.

"Are you satisfied?" asked the Partridge of her friend.

"Well," answered the Jackal, "you have certainly made nine laugh, but I
doubt if you could make me cry.  It is easy enough to be a buffoon; it
is more difficult to excite the highest emotions."

"Let us see," retorted the Partridge, somewhat piqued; "there is a
huntsman with his dogs coming along the road.  Just creep into that
hollow tree and watch me; if you don't weep scalding tears, you must
have no feeling in you!"

The Jackal did as he was bid, and watched the Partridge, who began
fluttering about the bushes till the dogs caught sight of her, when she
flew to the hollow tree where the Jackal was hidden.  Of course the
dogs smelt him at once, and set up such a yelping and scratching that
the huntsman came up, and seeing what it was, dragged the Jackal out by
the tail.  Whereupon the dogs worried him to their heart's content, and
finally left him for dead.

By and by he opened his eyes-for he was only foxing-and saw the
Partridge sitting on a branch above him.

"Did you cry?" she asked anxiously.  "Did I rouse your high emo---"

"Be quiet, will you!" snarled the Jackal; half dead with fear!"

So there the Jackal lay for some time, getting the better of his
bruises, and meanwhile he became hungry.

"Now is the time for friendship!" said he to the Partridge.  "Get me a
good dinner, and I will acknowledge you a true friend."

"Very well!" replied the Partridge; "only watch me, and help yourself
when the time comes."

Just then a troop of women came by, carrying their husbands dinners to
the harvest field.  The Partridge gave a little plaintive cry, and
began fluttering along from bush to bush as if she were wounded.

"A wounded bird!  a wounded bird!" cried the women; "we can easily
catch it."  Whereupon they set off in pursuit, but the cunning
Partridge played a thousand tricks, till they became so excited over
the chase that they put their bundles on the ground in order to pursue
it more nimbly.  The Jackal, meanwhile, seizing his opportunity, crept
up, and made off with a good dinner.

"Are you satisfied now?" asked the Partridge.

"Well," returned the Jackal, "I confess you have given me a very good
dinner; you have also made me laugh-and cry-ahem!  But, after all, the
great test of friendship is beyond you-you couldn't save my life!"

"Perhaps not," acquiesced the Partridge mournfully, "I am so small and
weak.  But it grows late-we should be getting home; and as it is a long
way round by the ford, let us go across the river.  My friend the
Crocodile will carry us over."

Accordingly they set off for the river, and the Crocodile kindly
consented to carry them across, so they sat on his broad back and he
ferried them over.  But just as they were in the middle of the stream
the Partridge remarked.  "I believe the Crocodile intends to play us a
trick.  How awkward if he were to drop you into the water!"

"Awkward for you, too!" replied the Jackal, turning pale.

"Not at all!  not at all!  I have wings, you haven't."

On this the Jackal shivered and shook with fear, and when the
Crocodile, in a gruesome growl, remarked that he was hungry and wanted
a good meal, the wretched creature hadn't a word to say.

"Pooh!" cried the Partridge airily, "don't try tricks on us-I should
fly away, and as for my friend, the Jackal, you couldn't hurt him.  He
is not such a fool as to take his life with him on these little
excursions; he leaves it at home, locked up in the cupboard."

"Is that a fact?" asked the Crocodile, surprised. "Certainly!" retorted
the Partridge.  Try to eat him if you like, but you will only tire
yourself to no purpose.

"Dear me!  how very odd!" gasped time Crocodile; and he was so taken
aback that he carried the Jackal safe to shore.

"Well, are you satisfied now?" asked the Partridge.

"My dear madam!" quoth the Jackal, "you have made me laugh, you have
made me cry, you have given me a good dinner, and you have saved my
life; but, upon my honor, I think you are too clever for a friend so
good-by!"

And the Jackal never went near the Partridge again.

THE JACKAL AND THE CROCODILE

By Flora Annie Steel

ONCE upon a time Mr. Jackal was trotting along gayly, when lie caught
sight of a wild plum tree laden with fruit on the other side of a
broad, deep stream.  I could not get across anyhow, so he just sat down
on the bank and looked at the ripe, luscious fruit until his mouth
watered with desire.

Now it so happened that, just then, Miss Crocodile came floating down
stream with her nose in the air.

"Good morning, my dear!" said Mr. Jackal politely; "how beautiful you
look to-day, and how charmingly you swim!  Now, if I could only swim
too, what a fine feast of plums we two friends might have over there
together!"  And Mr. Jackal laid his paw on his heart, and sighed.

Now Miss Crocodile had a very inflammable heart, and when Mr. Jackal
looked at her so admiringly, and spoke so sentimentally, she simpered
and blushed, saying, "Oh!  Mr. Jackal!  how can you talk so?  I could
never dream of going out to dinner with you, unless-unless-"

"Unless what?" asked the Jackal persuasively.

"Unless we were going to be married!" simpered Miss Crocodile.

"And why shouldn't we be married, my charmer?" returned the Jackal
eagerly.  "I would go and fetch the barber to begin the betrothal at
once, but I am so faint with hunger just at present that I should never
reach the village.  Now, if the most adorable of her sex would only
take pity on her slave, and carry me over the stream, I might refresh
myself with those plums, and so gain strength to accomplish the ardent
desire of my heart!"

Here the Jackal sighed so piteously, and cast such sheep's eyes at Miss
Crocodile, that she was unable to withstand him.  So she carried him
across to the plum tree, and then sat on the water's edge to think over
her wedding dress, while Mr. Jackal feasted on the plums and enjoyed
himself.

"Now for the barber, my beauty!" cried the gay Jackal, when he had
eaten as much as he could.  Then the blushing Miss Crocodile carried
him back again, and bade him be quick about his business, like a dear
good creature, for really she felt so flustered at the very idea that
she didn't know what might happen.

"Now don't distress yourself, my dear!" quoth the deceitful Mr. Jackal,
springing to the bank, "because it's not impossible that I may not find
the barber, and then, you know, you may have to wait some time, a
considerable time in fact, before I return.  So don't injure your
health for my sake, if you please."  With that he blew her a kiss, and
trotted away with his tail up.

Of course he never came back, though trusting Miss Crocodile waited
patiently for him; at last she understood what a gay, deceitful fellow
he was, and determined to have her revenge on him one way or another.

So she hid herself in the water, under the roots of a tree, close to a
ford where the Jackal always came to drink.  By and by,  sure enough,
he came lilting along in a self-satisfied way, and went right into the
water for a good long draft.  Whereupon Miss Crocodile seized him by
the right legs and held on.  He guessed at once what had happened, and
called out, "Oh!  my heart's adored!  I'm drowning!  I'm drowning!  If
you love me, leave hold of that old root and get a good grip of my leg-
it is just next door!"

Hearing this, Miss Crocodile thought she must have made a mistake, and,
letting go the Jackal's leg in a hurry, seized an old root close by,
and held on.  Whereupon Mr. Jackal jumped nimbly to shore, and ran off
with his tail up, calling out, "Have a little patience, my beauty!  The
barber will come some day!"

But this time Miss Crocodile knew better than to wait, and being now
dreadfully angry, she crawled away to the Jackal's hole, and, slipping
inside, lay quiet.

By and by Mr. Jackal came lilting along with his tail up.  "Ho!  ho!
That is your game, is it?" said he to himself, when he saw the trail of
the Crocodile in the sandy soil.  So he stood outside, and said aloud,
"Bless my stars!  What has happened?  I don't half like to go in, for
whenever I come home my wife always calls out,

	'Oh, dearest hubby hub!

	What have you brought for grub

	to me and the darling cub?'

and to-day she doesn't say anything!"

Hearing this, Miss Crocodile sang out from inside,

	"Oh, dearest hubby hub!

	What have you brought for grub

	To me and the darling cub?"

The Jackal winked a very big wink, and, stealing in softly, stood at
the doorway.  Meanwhile Miss Crocodile, hearing him coming, held her
breath, and lay, shamming dead, like a big log.

"Bless my stars!" cried Mr. Jackal, taking out his pocket handkerchief,
"how very sad!  Here's poor Miss Crocodile stone dead, and all for love
of me!  Dear!  dear!  Yet it is very odd, and I don't think she can be
quite dead, you know-for dead folks always wag their tails!"

On this, Miss Crocodile began to wag her tail very gently, and Mr.
Jackal ran off, roaring with laughter, and saying.  "Oho!  oho!  so
dead folks always wag their tails!"

THE JACKAL AND THE IGUANA

By Flora Annie Steel

ONE moonlight night a miserable, half-starved Jackal, skulking through
the village, found a worn-out pair of shoes in the gutter.  They were
too tough for him to eat, so, determined to make some use of them, he
strung them to his ears like earrings, and, going down to the edge of
the pond, gathered all the old bones he could find together and built a
platform of them, plastering it over with mud.

On this he sat in a dignified attitude, and when any animal came to the
pond to drink, he cried out in a loud voice, "Hi!  stop!  You must not
taste a drop till you have done homage to me.  So repeat these verses
which I have composed in honor of the occasion:

	'Silver is his dais, plastered o'er with gold;

	In his ears are jewels,-some prince I must behold!'"

Now, as most of the animals were very thirsty, and in a great hurry to
drink, they did not care to dispute the matter, but gabbled off the
words without a second thought.  Even the royal tiger, treating it as a
jest, repeated the Jackal's rime, in consequence of which the latter
became quite a cock-a-hoop, and really began to believe he was a
personage of great importance.

By and by an Iguana, or big lizard, came waddling down to the water,
looking for all the world like a baby alligator.

"Hi!  you there!" sang out the Jackal; "you mustn't drink until you
have said-

	'Silver is his dais, plastered o'er with gold;

	In his ears are jewels,-some prince I must behold!'"

"Pouf!  pouf!  pouf!" gasped the Iguana.  "Mercy on us, how dry my
throat is!  Mightn't I have just a wee sip of water first?  and then I
could do justice to your admirable lines; at present I am as hoarse as
a crow!"

"By all means," replied the Jackal, with a gratified smirk.  "I flatter
myself the verses are good, especially when well recited."

So the Iguana, nose down in the water, drank away until the Jackal
began to think he would never leave off, and was quite taken aback when
he finally came to an end of his draft, and began to move away.

"Hi!  hi!" cried the Jackal, recovering his presence of mind, "stop a
bit, and say---

	'Silver is his dais, plastered o'er with gold;

	In his ears are jewels,-some prince I must behold!'"

"Dear me!" replied the Iguana, politely, "I was very near forgetting!
Let me see-I must try my Voice first-do, re, me, fa, sol, la, si-that
is right!  Now, how does it run?"

	"Silver is his dais, plastered o'er with gold;

	In his ears are jewels,-some prince I must behold!"

repeated the Jackal, not observing that the Lizard Was carefully edging
farther and farther away.

"Exactly so," returned the Iguana; "I think I could say that!"
Whereupon he sang out at the top of his voice-

	"Bones made up his dais, with mud it's plastered o'er,

	Old shoes are his eardrops; a jackal, nothing more!"

And turning round, he bolted for his hole as hard as he could.

The Jackal could scarcely believe his ears, and sat dumb with
astonishment.  Then, rage lending him wings, he flew after the Lizard,
who, despite his short legs and scanty breath, put his best foot
foremost, and scuttled away at a great rate.

It was a near race, however, for just as he popped into his hole, the
Jackal caught him by the tail, and held on.  Then it was a case of
"pull, butcher; pull, baker," until the Lizard made certain his tail
must come off, and he felt as if his front teeth would come out.  Still
not an inch did either budge, one way or the other, and there they
might have remained till the present day, had not the Iguana called
out, in his sweetest tones, "Friend, I give in!  Just leave hold of my
tail, will you?  then I can turn round and come out."

Whereupon the Jackal let go, and the tail disappeared up the hole in a
twinkling; while all the reward the Jackal got for digging away until
his nails were nearly worn out was hearing the Iguana sing softly-

	"Bones made up his dais, with mud it's plastered o'er,

	Old shoes are his eardrops; a jackal, nothing more

THE BEAR'S BAD BARGAIN

By Flora Annie Steel

ONCE upon a time a very old Woodman lived with his very old Wife in a
tiny hut close to the orchard of a very rich man, so close that the
boughs of a pear tree hung right over the cottage yard.  Now it was
agreed between the rich man and the Woodman that if any of the fruit
fell into the yard, the old couple were to be allowed to eat it; so you
may imagine with what hungry eyes they watched the pears ripening, and
prayed for a storm of wind, or a flock of flying foxes, or anything
which would cause the fruit to fall.  But nothing came, and the old
Wife, who was a grumbling, scolding old thing, declared they would
infallibly become beggars.  So she took to giving her husband nothing
but dry bread to eat, and insisted on his working harder than ever,
till the poor soul got quite thin; and all because the pears would not
fall down!

At last the Woodman turned round and declared he would not work more
unless his Wife gave him Khichri for his dinner; so with a very bad
grace the old woman took some rice and pulse, some butter and spices,
and began to cook a savory Khichri.  What an appetizing smell it had,
to be sure!  The Woodman was for gobbling it up as soon as ever it was
ready.  "No, no," cried the greedy old Wife, not till you have brought
me in another load of Wood; and mind it is a good one.  You must work
for your dinner."

So the old man set off to the forest and began to hack and to hew with
such a will that he soon had quite a large bundle, and with every
faggot he cut he seemed to smell the savory Khichri and think of the
feast that was coming.

Just then a Bear came swinging by, with its great black nose tilted in
the air, and its little keen eyes peering about; for bears, though good
enough fellows on the whole, are just dreadfully inquisitive.

"Peace be with you, friend," said the Bear, "and what may you be going
to do with that remarkably large bundle of wood?"

"It is for my Wife," returned the Woodman.  "The fact is," he added
confidentially, smacking his lips, "she has made such a Khichri for
dinner!  and if I bring in a good bundle of wood she is pretty sure to
give me a plentiful portion.  Oh, my dear fellow, you should just smell
that Khichri."

At this the Bear's mouth began to water, for, like all bears, he was a
dreadful glutton.

"Do you think your Wife would give mite some, too, if I brought her a
bundle of wood?" he asked anxiously.

"Perhaps; if it is a very big load," answered the Woodman craftily.

"Would-would four hundredweight be enough?" asked the Bear.

"I'm afraid not," returned the 'Woodman, shaking his head; "you see
Khichri is an expensive dish to make-there is rice in it, and plenty of
butter, and pulse, and-"

"Would-would eight hundredweight do?"

"Say half a ton, and it's a bargain!" quoth the Woodman.

"Half a ton is a large quantity!" sighed the Bear.

"There is saffron in the Khichri," remarked the Woodman, casually.

The Bear licked his lips, and his little eyes twinkled with greed and
delight.

"Well it's a bargain!  Go home sharp and tell your Wife to keep the
Khichri hot; I'll be with you in a trice."

Away went the Woodman in great glee to tell his Wife how the Bear had
agreed to bring half a ton of wood in return for a share of the
Khichri.

Now the wife could not help allowing that her husband had made a good
bargain, but being by nature a grumbler, she was determined not to be
pleased, so she began to scold the old man for not having settled
exactly the share the Bear was to have.  "For," said she, "he will
gobble up the potful before we have finished our first helping."

On this the Woodman became quite pale.  "In that case," he said, "we
had better begin now, and have a fair start." So without more ado they
squatted down on the floor, with the brass pot full of Khichri between
them, and began to eat as fast as they could.

"Remember to leave some for the Bear, Wife," said the Woodman, speaking
with his mouth crammed full.

"Certainly, certainly," she replied, helping herself to another
handful.

"My dear," cried the old woman in her turn, with her mouth so full she
could hardly speak, "remember the poor Bear!"

"Certainly, certainly, my love!" returned the old man, taking another
mouthful.

So it went on, till there was not a single grain left in the pot.

"What's to be done now?" said the Woodman; "it is all your fault, Wife,
for eating so much."

"My fault!" retorted his Wife scornfully, "why, you ate twice as much
as I did!"

"No, I didn't!"

"Yes, you did! Men always eat more than women.

"No, they don't!"

"Yes, they do!"

"Well, it's no use quarreling about it now," said the Woodman, "the
Khichri's gone, and the Bear will be furious."

"That wouldn't matter much if we could get the wood," said the greedy
old woman.  "I'll tell you what we must do-we must lock up everything
there is to eat in the house, leave the Khichri pot by the fire, and
hide in the garret.  When the Bear comes he will think we have gone out
and left his dinner for him.  Then he will throw down his bundle and
come in.  Of course he will rampage a little when he finds the pot is
empty, but he can't do much mischief, and I don't think he will take
the trouble of carrying the wood away."

So they made haste to lock up all the food and hide themselves in the
garret.

Meanwhile the Bear had been toiling and moiling away at his bundle of
wood, which took him much longer to collect than he expected; however,
at last he arrived quite exhausted at the woodcutter's cottage.  Seeing
the brass Khichri pot by the fire, he threw down his load and went in.
And then-mercy!  wasn't he angry when he found nothing in it-not even a
grain of rice, nor a tiny wee bit of pulse, but only a smell that was
so uncommonly nice that he actually cried with rage and disappointment.
He flew into the most dreadful temper, but though he turned the house
topsy-turvy, he could not find a morsel of food.  Finally, he declared
he would take the wood away again, but, as the crafty old woman had
imagined, when he came to the task, he did not care, even for the sake
of revenge, to carry so heavy a burden.

"I won't go away empty-handed," said he to himself, seizing the Khichri
pot; "if I can't get the taste I'll have the smell!"

Now, as he left the cottage, he caught sight of the beautiful golden
pears hanging over into the yard.  His mouth began to water at once,
for he was desperately hungry, and the pears were the best of the
season.  In a trice he was on the wall, up the tree, and gathering the
biggest and ripest one he could find, was just putting it into his
mouth when a thought struck him.

"If I take these pears home I shall be able to sell them for ever so
much to the other bears, and then with the money I shall be able to buy
some Khichri.  Ha, ha!  I shall have the best of the bargain after
all!"

So saying, he began to gather the ripe pears as fast as he could and
put them in the Khichri pot, but whenever he came to an unripe one he
would shake his head and say, "No one would buy that, yet it is a pity
to waste it."  So he would pop it into his mouth and eat it, making wry
faces if it was very sour.

Now all this time the Woodman's Wife had been watching the Bear through
a crevice, and holding her breath for fear of discovery; but, at last,
what with being asthmatic, and having a cold in her head, she could
hold it no longer, and just as the Khichri pot was quite full of golden
ripe pears, out she came with the most tremendous sneeze you ever
heard-"A-h-che-u !"

The Bear, thinking some one had fired a gun at him, dropped the Khichri
pot into the cottage yard, and fled into the forest as fast as his legs
would carry him.

So the Woodrnan and his Wife got the Khichri, the wood, and the coveted
pears, but the poor bear got nothing but a very bad stomachache from
eating unripe fruit.

THE THIEF AND THE FOX

By Ramaswarni Raju

A MAN tied his horse to a tree and went into an inn.  A Thief hid the
horse in a wood, and stood near the tree as if he had not done it.

"Did you see my horse?" said the man.

"Yes," said the Thief, "I saw the tree eat up your horse.''

"How could the tree eat up my horse?" said the man.

"Why it did so," said the Thief.

The two went to a Fox and told him of the case.  The Fox said.  "I am
dull.  All last night the sea was on fire; I had to throw a great deal
of hay into it to quench the flames; so come to-morrow, and I shall
hear your case.

"Oh, you lie," said the Thief. "How could the sea burn?  How could hay
quench the flames?"

"Oh, you lie," said the Fox, with a loud laugh; "how could a tree eat
up a horse?"

The Thief saw his lie had no legs, and gave the man his horse.

THE FARMER AND THE FOX

By Ramaswami Raju

A FARMER was returning from a fair which he had attended the previous
day at a neighboring market town.  He had a quantity of poultry which
he had purchased.  A Fox observed this, and approaching the Farmer,
said, "Good morning, my friend."

"What cheer, old fellow?" said the Farmer.

"I am just coming from the wood, through which you mean to go with your
poultry.  A band of highwaymen has been tarrying there since daybreak."

"Then what shall I do?" said the Farmer.

"Why," said the Fox, "if I were you I should stay here a while, and
after breakfast enter the wood, for by that time the robbers will have
left the place."

"So be it," said the Farmer, and had a hearty breakfast, with Reynard
for his guest.

They kept drinking for a long time.  Reynard appeared to have lost his
wits; he stood up and played the drunkard to perfection.  The Farmer,
who highly admired the pranks of his guest, roared with laughter, and
gradually fell into a deep slumber.  It was some time after noon when
he awoke.  To his dismay he found that the Fox was gone, and that the
poultry had all disappeared!

"Alas!" said the Farmer, as he trudged on his way home with a heavy
heart, "I thought the old rogue was quite drowned in liquor, but I now
see it was all a pretense.  One must indeed be very sober to play the
drunkard to perfection."

THE FOOLS AND THE DRUM

By Ramaswami Raju

TWO FOOLS heard a Drum sounding, and said to themselves, There is some
one inside it who makes the noise."

So, watching a moment, when the drummer was out, they pierced a hole in
each side of it, and pushed their hands in.  Each felt the hand of the
other within the Drum, and exclaimed, "I have caught him!"

Then one said to the other, "Brother, the fellow seems to be a stubborn
knave; come what will, we should not give in."

"Not an inch, brother," said the other.

So they kept pulling each other's hand, fancying it was the man in the
Drum.  The drummer came up, and finding them in such an awkward plight
showed them with his fist who the man in the Drum really was.  But as
his fine Drum was ruined, he said, with a sigh, "Alas!  Fools have
fancies with a triple wing!"

THE LION AND THE GOAT

By Ramaswami Raju

A LION was eating up one after another the animals of a certain
country.  One day an old Goat said, "We must put a stop to this.  I
have a plan by which he may be sent away from this part of the
country."

"Pray act up to it at once," said the other animals.

The old Goat laid himself down in a cave on the roadside, with his
flowing beard and long curved horns.  The Lion, on his way to the
village, saw him, and stopped at the mouth of the cave.

"So you have come, after all," said the Goat.

"What do you mean?" said the Lion.

"Why, I have long been lying in this cave.  I have eaten up one hundred
elephants, a hundred tigers, a thousand wolves, and ninety-nine lions.
One more lion has been wanting.  I have waited long and patiently.
Heaven has, after all, been kind to me," said the Goat, and shook his
horns and his beard, and made a start as if he were about to spring
upon the Lion.

The latter said to himself, "This animal looks like a Goat, but it does
not talk like one.  So it is very likely some wicked spirit in this
shape.  Prudence often serves us better than valor, so for the present
I shall return to the wood," and he turned back.

The Goat rose up, and, advancing to the mouth of the cave, said, "Will
you come back tomorrow?"

"Never again," said the Lion.

"Do you think I shall be able to see you, at least, in the wood to-
morrow?"

"Neither in the wood nor in this neighborhood any more," said the Lion,
and running to the forest, soon left it with his kindred.

The animals in the country, not hearing him roar any more, gathered
round the Goat, and said, "The wisdom of one doth save a host."

THE GLOWWORM AND THE JAC KDAW

By Ramaswami Raju

JACKDAW once ran up to a Glowworm and was about to seize him.  "Wait a
moment, good friend," said the Worm, "and you shall hear something to
your advantage."

"Ah!  what is it?" said the Daw.

"I am but one of the many glowworms that live in this forest.  If you
wish to have them all, follow me," said the Glowworm.

"Certainly!" said the Daw.

Then the Glowworm led him to a place in the wood where a fire had been
kindled by some woodmen, and pointing to the sparks flying about, said,
"There you find the glowworms warming themselves round a fire.  When
you have done with them I shall show you some more, at a distance from
this place."

The Daw darted at the sparks and tried to swallow some of them, but his
mouth being burned by the attempt, he ran away exclaiming, "Ah, the
Glowworm is a dangerous little creature!"

THE CAMEL AND THE PIG

By Ramaswami Raju

A CAMEL said, "Nothing like being tall!  Look how tall I am!"

A Pig, who heard these words, said, "Nothing like being short!  Look
how short I am!"

The Camel said, "Well, if I fail to prove the truth of what I said.  I
shall give up my hump."

The Pig said, "If I fail to prove the truth of what I have said, I
shall give up my snout."

"Agreed!" said the Camel.

"Just so!" said the Pig.

They came to a garden, inclosed by a low wall without any opening.  The
Camel stood on this side of the wall, and reaching the plants within by
means of his long neck, made a breakfast on them.  Then he turned,
jeeringly to the Pig, who had been standing at the bottom of the wall,
without even having a look at the good things in the garden, and said,
"Now, would you be tall or short?"

Next they came to a garden, inclosed by a high wall, with a wicket gate
at one end.  The Pig entered by the gate, and, after having eaten his
fill of the vegetables within, came out, laughing at the poor Camel,
who had had to stay outside because he was too tall to enter the garden
by the gate, and said, "Now, would you be tall or short?"

Then they thought the matter over and came to the conclusion that the
Camel should keep his hump and the Pig his snout, observing, "Tall is
good, where tall would do; of short, again, 'tis also true!"

THE DOG AND.  THE DOG DEALER

By Ramaswami Raju

A DOG was standing by the cottage of a peasant.  A man who dealt in
dogs passed by the way.  The Dog said, "Will you buy me?"

The man said, "Oh, you ugly little thing!  I would not give a quarter
of a penny for you!"

Then the Dog went to the palace of the king and stood by the portal.
The sentinel caressed it, and said, "You are a charming little
creature!"

Just then the Dog Dealer came by.  The Dog said, "Will you buy me?"

"Oh," said the man, "you guard the palace of the king, who must have
paid a high price for you.  I cannot afford to pay the amount, else I
would willingly take you."

"Ah!" said the Dog, "how place and position affect people!"

THE TIGER, THE FOX, AND THE HUNTERS

By Ramaswami Raju

A FOX was once caught in a trap.  A hungry Tiger saw him and said, "So
you are here!"

"Only on your account," said the Fox in a whisper.

"How so?" said the Tiger.

"Why, you were complaining you could not get men to eat, so I got into
this net to-day, that you may have the men when they come to take me,"
said the Fox, and gave a hint that if he would wait a while in a
thicket close by he would point out the men to him.

"May I depend upon your word?" said the Tiger.

"Certainly," said the Fox.

The Hunters came, and seeing the Fox in the net, said, "So you are
here!"

"Only on your account," said the Fox, in a whisper.

"How so?" said the men.

"Why, you were complaining you could not get at the Tiger that has been
devouring your cattle; I got into this net to-day that you may have
him.  As I expected, he came to eat me up, and is in yonder thicket, "
said the Fox, and gave a hint that if they would take him out of the
trap he would point out the Tiger.

"May we depend upon your word?" said the men.

"Certainly," said the Fox, while the men went with him in a circle to
see that he did not escape.

Then the Fox said to the Tiger and the men, "Sir Tiger, here are the
men; gentlemen, here is the Tiger."

The men left the Fox and turned to the Tiger.  The former beat a hasty
retreat to the wood, saying, "I have kept my promise to both; now you
may settle it between yourselves."

The Tiger exclaimed, when it was too late, "Alas!  what art for a
double part!"


THE SEA, THE FOX, AND THE WOLF

By Ramaswami Raju

A FOX that lived by the seashore once met a 'Wolf that had never seen
the Sea.  The Wolf said, "What is the Sea?"

"It is a great piece of water by my dwelling," said the Fox.

"Is it under your control?" said the Wolf.

"Certainly," said the Fox.

"Will you show me the Sea, then?" said the Wolf.

"With pleasure," said the Fox.  So the Fox led the Wolf to the Sea and
said to the waves, "Now go back"-they went back!  "Now come up"- and
they came up!  Then the Fox said to the waves, "My friend, the Wolf,
has come to see you, so you will come up and go back till I bid you
stop; and the Wolf saw with wonder the waves coming up and going back.

He said to the Fox, "May I go into the Sea?"

"As far as you like.  Don't be afraid, for at a word, the Sea would go
or come as I bid, and as you have already seen."

The Wolf believed the Fox, and followed the waves rather far from the
shore.  A great wave soon upset him, and threw his carcass on the
shore.  The Fox made a hearty breakfast on it.

THE FOX IN THE WELL

By Ramaswami Raju

A FOX fell into a well and was holding hard to some roots at the side
of it, just above the water.  A Wolf, who was passing by, saw him, and
said, "Hello, Reynard, after all you have fallen into a well!"

"But not without a purpose, and not without the means of getting out of
it," said the Fox.

"What do you mean?" said the Wolf.

"Why," said the Fox, "there is a drought all over the country now, and
the water in this well is the only means of appeasing the thirst of the
thousands that live in this neighborhood.  They held a meeting, and
requested me to keep the water from going down lower; so I am holding
it up for the public good."

"What will be your reward?" said the 'Wolf.

"They will give me a pension, and save me the trouble of going about
every day in quest of food, not to speak of innumerable other
privileges that will be granted me.  Further, I am not to stay here all
day.  I have asked a kinsman of mine, to whom I have communicated the
secret of holding up the water, to relieve me from time to time.  Of
course he will also get a pension, and have other privileges.  I expect
him here shortly."

"Ah, Reynard, may I relieve you, then?  May I hope to get a pension and
other privileges?  You know what a sad lot is mine, especially in
winter."

"Certainly," said the Fox; "but you must get a long rope, that I may
come up and let you in.

So the Wolf got a rope.  Up came the Fox and down went the wo1f, when
the former observed, with a laugh, "My dear sir, you may remain there
till doomsday, or till the owner of the well throws up your carcass,"
and left the place.

ASHIEPATTLE AND HIS GOODLY CREW

By P. C. Asbjörnsen

ONCE upon a time there was a king, and this king had heard about a ship
which went just as fast by land as by water; and as he wished to have
one like it, he promised his daughter and half the kingdom to anyone
who could build one for him.  And this was given out at every church
all over the country.  There were many who tried, as you can imagine;
for they thought it would be a nice thing to have half the kingdom, and
the princess wouldn't be a bad thing into the bargain.  But they all
fared badly.

Now there were three brothers, who lived far away on the borders of a
forest; the eldest was called Peter, the second Paul, and the youngest
Espen Ashiepattle, because he always sat in the hearth, raking and
digging in the ashes.

It so happened that Ashiepattle was at church on the Sunday when the
proclamation about the ship, which the king wanted, was read.  When he
came home amid told his family, Peter, the eldest, asked his mother to
get some food ready for him, for now he was going away to try if he
could build the ship and win the princess and half the kingdom.  When
the bag was ready lie set out.  On the way he met an old man who was
very crooked and decrepit.

"Where are you going?" said the man.

"I'm going into the forest to make a trough for my father.  He doesn't
like to eat at table in our company," said Peter.

"Trough it shall he!" said the man.  "What have you got in that bag of
yours?" he added.

"Stones," said Peter.

"Stones it shall be," said the man.  Peter then went into the forest
and began to cut and chop away at the trees and work away as hard as he
could, but in spite of all his cutting and chopping he could only turn
out troughs.  Toward dinner time he wanted something to eat and opened
his bag.  But there was not a crumb of food in it.  As he had nothing
to live upon, and as he did not turn out anything but troughs, he
became tired of the work, took his ax and bag on his shoulder, and went
home to his mother.

Paul then wanted to set out to try his luck at building the ship and
winning the princess and half the kingdom.  He asked his mother for
provisions, and when the bag was ready he threw it over his shoulder
and went on his way to the forest.  On the road he met the old man, who
was very crooked and decrepit.

"Where are you going?" said the man.

"Oh, I am going into the forest to make a trough for our sucking pig,"
said Paul.

"Pig trough it shall be," said the man.  "What have you got in that bag
of yours?" added the man.

"Stones," said Paul.

 "Stones it shall be," said the man.

Paul then began felling trees and working away as hard as he could, but
no matter how he cut and how he worked he could only turn out pig
troughs.  He did not give in, however, but worked away till far into
the afternoon before he thought of taking any food; then all at once he
became hungry and opened his bag, but not a crumb could he find.  Paul
became so angry he turned the bag inside out and struck it against the
stump of a tree; then lie took his ax, went out of the forest, and set
off homeward.

As soon as Paul returned, Ashiepattle wanted to set out and asked his
mother for a bag of food.

"Perhaps I can manage to build the ship and win the princess and half
the kingdom," said he.

"Well, I never heard the like," said his mother.  "Are you likely to
win the princess, you, who never do anything but root and dig in the
ashes?  No, you shan't have any bag with food!"

Ashiepattle did not give in, however, but he prayed and begged till he
got leave to go.  He did not get any food, not he; but he stole a
couple of oatmeal cakes and some flat beer and set out.

When he had walked a while he met the same old man, who was so crooked
and tattered and decrepit.

"'Where are you going?" said the man.

"Oh, I was going into the forest to try if it were possible to build a
ship which can go as fast by land as by water," said Ashiepattle, "for
the king has given out that anyone who can build such a ship shall have
the princess and half the kingdom."

"What have you got in that bag of yours?" said the man.

"Not much worth talking about; there ought to be a little food in it,"
answered Ashiepattle.

"If you'll give me a little of it I'll help you, said the