 man.

"With all my heart," said Ashiepattle, "but there is nothing but some
oatmeal cakes and a drop of flat beer."

It didn't matter what it was, the man said; if he only got some of it
he would be sure to help Ashiepattle.

When they came up to an old oak in the wood the man said to the lad,
"Now you must cut off a chip and then put it back again in exactly the
same place, and when you have done that you can lie down and go to
sleep."

Ashiepattle did as he was told and then lay down to sleep, and in his
sleep lie thought he heard somebody cutting and hammering and sawing
and carpentering, but he could not wake up till the man called him;
then the ship stood quite finished by the side of the oak.

"Now you must go on board and everyone you meet you must take with
you," said the man.  Espen Ashiepattle thanked him for the ship, said
he would do so, and then sailed away.

When he had sailed some distance he came to a long, thin tramp, who was
lying near some rocks, eating stones.

"What sort of a fellow are you, that you lie there eating stones?"
asked Ashiepattle.  The tramp said he was so fond of meat he could
never get enough, therefore he was obliged to eat stones.  And then he
asked if he might go with him in the ship.

"If you want to go with us, you must make haste and get on board," said
Ashiepattle.

Yes, that he would, but he must take with him some large stones for
food.

When they had sailed some distance they met one who was lying on the
side of a sunny hill, sucking at a bung.

"Who are you," said Ashiepattle, "and what is the good of lying there
sucking that bung?"

"Oh, when one hasn't got the barrel, one must be satisfied with the
bung," said the man.  "I'm always so thirsty, I can never get enough
beer and wine."  And then he asked for leave to go with him in the
ship.

"If you want to go with me you must make haste and get on board," said
Ashiepattle.

Yes, that he would.  And so he went on board and took the bung with him
to allay his thirst.

When they had sailed a while again they met one who was lying with his
ear to the ground, listening.

"Who are you, and what is the good of lying there on the ground
listening?" said Ashiepattle.

"I'm listening to the grass, for I have such good ears that I can hear
the grass growing," said the man.  And then he asked leave to go with
him in the ship.  Ashiepattle could not say nay to that, so he said:

"If you want to go with me, you must make haste and get on board."

Yes, the man would.  And he also went on board.

When they had sailed some distance they came to one who was standing
taking aim with a gun.

"Who are you, and what is the good of standing there aiming like that?"
asked Ashiepattle.

So the man said: "I have such good eyes that I can hit anything, right
to the end of the world." And then he asked for leave to go with him in
the ship.

"If you want to go with me, you must make haste and get on board," said
Ashiepattle.

Yes, that he would.  And he went on board.

When they had sailed some distance again they came to one who was
hopping and limping about on one leg, and on the other he had seven ton
weights.

"Who are you, said Ashiepattle, "and what is the good of hopping and
limping about on one leg with seven ton weights on the other?"

"I am so light," said the man, "that if I walked on both my legs I
should get to the end of the world in less than five minutes." And then
he asked for leave to go with him in the ship.

"If you want to go with us, you must make haste and get on board," said
Ashiepattle.

Yes, that he would.  And so he joined Ashiepattle and his crew on the
ship.

When they had sailed on some distance they met one who was standing
holding his hand to his mouth.

"Who are you?" said Ashiepattle, "and what is the good of standing
there, holding your mouth like that?"

"Oh, I have seven summers and fifteen winters in my body," said the
man; "so I think I ought to keep my mouth shut, for if they get out all
at the same time they would finish off the world altogether."  And then
he asked for leave to go with him in the ship.

"If you want to go with us you must make haste and get on board," said
Ashiepattle.

Yes, that he would, and then he joined the others on the ship.

When they had sailed a long time they came to the king's palace.

Ashiepattle went straight in to the king and said the ship stood ready
in the courtyard outside; and now he wanted the princess, as the king
had promised.

The king did not like this very much, for Ashiepattle did not cut a
very fine figure; he was black and sooty, and the king did not care to
give his daughter to such a tramp, so he told Ashiepattle that he would
have to wait a little.

"But you can have her all the same, if by this time to-morrow you can
empty my storehouse of three hundred barrels of meat," said the king.

"I suppose I must try," said Ashiepattle; "but perhaps you don't mind
my taking one of my crew with me?"

"Yes, you can do that, and take all six if you like," said the king,
for he was quite sure that even if Ashiepattle took six hundred with
him, it would be impossible.  So Ashiepattle took with him the one who
ate stones and always hungered after meat.

When they came next morning and opened the storehouse they found he had
eaten all the meat, except six small legs of mutton, one for each of
his companions.  Ashiepattle then went to the king and said the
storehouse was empty, and he supposed he could now have the princess.

The king went into the storehouse and, sure enough, it was quite empty;
but Ashiepattle was still black and sooty, and the king thought it was
really too bad that such a tramp should have his daughter.  So he said
he had a cellar full of beer and old wine, three hundred barrels of
each kind, which he would have him drink first.

"I don't mind your having my daughter if you can drink them up by this
time to-morrow," said the king.

"I suppose I must try," said Ashiepattle, "but perhaps you don't mind
my taking one of my crew with me?"

"Yes, you may do that," said the king, for he was quite sure there was
too much beer and wine even for all seven of them.  Ashiepattle took
with him the one who was always sucking the bung and was always
thirsty; and the king then shut them down in the cellar.

There the thirsty one drank barrel after barrel, as long as there was
any left, but in the last barrel he left a couple of pints to each of
his companions.

In the morning the cellar was opened and Ashiepattle went at once to
the king and said he had finished the beer and wine, and now he
supposed he could have the princess as the king had promised.

"Well, I must first go down to the cellar and see," said the king, for
he could not believe it; but when he got there he found nothing but
empty barrels.

But Ashiepattle was both black and sooty and the king thought it
wouldn't do for him to have such a son in law.  So he said that if
Ashiepattle could get water from the end of the world in ten minutes
for the princess's tea, he could have both her and half the kingdom;
for he thought that task would be quite impossible.

"I suppose I must try," said Ashiepattle, and sent for the one of his
crew who jumped about on one leg and had seven ton weights on the
other, and told him he must take off the weights and use his legs as
quickly as he could, for he must have water from the end of the world
for the princess's tea in ten minutes.

So he took off the weights, got a bucket, and set off, and the next
moment he was out of sight.  But they waited and waited and still he
did not return.  At last it wanted but three minutes to the time and
the king became as pleased as if he had won a big wager.

Then Ashiepattle called the one who could hear the grass grow and told
him to listen and find out what had become of their companion.

"He has fallen asleep at the well"," said he who could hear the grass
grow; "I can hear him snoring, and a troll is scratching his head."
Ashiepattle then called the one who could shoot to the end of the world
and told him to send a bullet into the troll; he did so and hit the
troll right in the eye.  The troll gave such a yell that he woke the
man who had come to fetch the water for the tea, and when he returned
to the palace there was still one minute left out of the ten.

Ashiepattle went straight to the king and said:  "Here is the water;"
and now he supposed he could have the princess, for surely the king
would not make any more fuss about it now.  But the king thought that
Ashiepattle was just as black and sooty as ever, and did not like to
have him for a son-in-law; so he said he had three hundred fathoms of
wood with which he was going to dry corn in the bakehouse, and he
wouldn't mind Ashiepattle having his daughter if he would first sit in
the bakehouse and burn all the wood; he should then have the princess,
and that without fail.

"I suppose I must try," said Ashiepattle; "but perhaps you don't mind
my taking one of my crew with me?"

"Oh, no, you can take all six," said the king, for he thought it would
be warm enough for all of them.

Ashiepattle took with him the one who had fifteen winters and seven
summers in his body, and in the evening he went across to the
bakehouse: but the king had piled up so much wood on the fire that you
might almost have melted iron in the room.  They could not get out of
it, for no sooner were they inside than the king fastened the bolt and
put a couple of padlocks on the door besides.  Ashiepattle then said to
his companion:

"You had better let out six or seven winters, so that we may get
something like summer weather here."

They were then just able to exist, but during the night it got cold
again and Ashiepattle then told the man to let out a couple of summers,
and so they slept far into the next day.  But when they heard the king
outside Ashiepattle said:

"You must let out a couple more winters, but you must manage it so that
the last winter you let out strikes the king right in the face."

He did so, and when the king opened the door, expecting to find
Ashiepattle and his companion burned to cinders, he saw them huddling
together and shivering with cold till their teeth chattered.  The same
instant Ashiepattle's companion with the fifteen winters in his body
let loose the last one right in the king's face, which swelled up into
a big chilblain.

"Can I have the princess now?" asked Ashiepattle

"Yes, take her and keep her and the kingdom into the bargain," said the
king, who dared not refuse any longer.  And so the wedding took place
and they feasted and made merry and fired off guns and powder.

While the people were running about searching for wadding for their
guns, they took me instead, gave me some porridge in a bottle and some
milk in a basket, and fired me right across here, so that I could tell
you how it all happened.

THE SQUIRE'S BRIDE

By P.  C.  Asbjörnsen

ONCE UPON a time there was a rich squire who owned a large farm, and
had plenty of silver at the bottom of his chest and money in the bank
besides; but he felt there was something wanting, for he was a widower.

One day the daughter of a neighboring farmer was working for him in the
hayfield.  The squire saw her and liked her very much, and as she was
the child of poor parents he thought if he only hinted that he wanted
her she would be ready to marry him at once.

So he told her he had been thinking of getting married again.

"Aye!  one may think of many things," said the girl, laughing slyly.

In her opinion the old fellow ought to be thinking of something that
behooved him better than getting married.

"Well, you see, I thought that you should be my wife!"

"No, thank you all the same," said she, "that's not at all likely."

The squire was not accustomed to be gainsaid, and the more she refused
him the more determined he was to get her.

But as he made no progress in her favor he sent for her father and told
him that if he could arrange the matter with his daughter he would
forgive him the money he had lent him, and he would also give him the
piece of land which lay close to his meadow into the bargain.

"Yes, you may be sure I'll bring my daughter to her senses," said the
father.  "She is only a child, and she doesn't know what's best for
her."  But all his coaxing and talking did not help matters.  She would
not have the squire, she said, if he sat buried in gold up to his ears.

The squire waited day after day, but at last he became so angry and
impatient that he told the father, if he expected him to stand by his
promise, he would have to put his foot down and settle the matter now,
for he would not wait any longer.

The man knew no other way out of it but to let the squire get
everything ready for the wedding; and when the parson and the wedding
guests had arrived the squire should send for the girl as if she were
wanted for some work on the farm.  When she arrived she would have to
be married right away, so that she would have no time to think it over.

The squire thought this was well and good, and so he began brewing and
baking and getting ready for the wedding in grand style.  When the
guests had arrived the squire called one of his farm lads and told him
to run down to his neighbor and ask him to send him what he had
promised.

"But if you are not back in a twinkling," he said, shaking his fist at
him, "I'll-"

He did not say more, for the lad ran off as if he had been shot at.

"My master has sent me to ask for that you promised him," said the lad,
when he got to the neighbor, "but there is no time to be lost, for he
is terribly busy to-day."

"Yes, yes!  Run down into the meadow and take her with you.  There she
goes!" answered the neighbor.

The lad ran off and when he came to the meadow he found the daughter
there raking the hay.

"I am to fetch what your father has promised my master," said the lad.

"Ah, ha!" thought she.  "Is that what they are up to?"

"Ah, indeed!" she said.  "I suppose it's that little bay mare of ours.
You had better go and take her.  She stands there tethered on the other
side of the pea field," said the girl.

The boy jumped on the back of the bay mare and rode home at full
gallop.

"Have you got her with you?" asked the squire.

"She is down at the door," said the lad.

"Take her up to the room my mother had," said the squire.

"But master, how can that be managed?" said the lad.

"You must just do as I tell you," said the squire.  "If you cannot
manage her alone you must get the men to help you," for he thought the
girl might turn obstreperous.

When the lad saw his master's face he knew it would be no use to
gainsay him.  So he went and got all the farm tenants who were there to
help him.  Some pulled at the head and the forelegs of the mare and
others pushed from behind, and at last they got her up the stairs and
into the room.  There lay all the wedding finery ready.

"Now, that's done master!" said the lad; "but it was a terrible job.
It was the worst I have ever had here on the farm.

"Never mind, you shall not have done it for nothing," said his master.
"Now send the women up to dress her."

"But I say master-!" said the lad.

"None of your talk!" said the squire.  "Tell them they must dress her
and mind and not forget either wreath or crown.

The lad ran into the kitchen.

"Look here, lasses," he said; "you must go upstairs and dress up the
bay mare as bride.  I expect the master wants to give the guests a
laugh."

The women dressed the bay mare in everything that was there, and then
the lad went and told his master that now she was ready dressed, with
wreath and crown and all.

"Very well, bring her down!" said the squire.  "I will receive her
myself at the door," said he.

There was a terrible clatter on the stairs; for that bride, you know,
had no silken shoes on.

When the door was opened and the squire's bride entered the parlor you
can imagine there was a good deal of tittering and grinning.

And as for the squire you may he sure line had had enough of that
bride, and they say he never went courting again.

THE DOLL IN THE GRASS

By P.  C.  Asbjörnsen

ONCE upon a time there was a king who had twelve sons.  When they were
grown up he told them they must go out into the world and find
themselves wives, who must all be able to spin and weave and make a
shirt in one day, else he would not have them for daughters-in-law.  He
gave each of his sons a horse and a new suit of armor, and so they set
out in the world to look for wives.

When they had traveled a bit on the way they said they would not take
Ashiepattle with them, for he was good for nothing.  Ashiepattle must
stop behind; there was no help for it.  He did not know what he should
do or which way he should turn; he became so sad that he got off the
horse and sat down on the grass and began to cry.

When he had sat a while one of the tussocks among the grass began to
move, and out of it came a small white figure; as it came nearer
Ashiepattle saw that it was a beautiful little girl, but she was so
tiny, so very, very tiny.

She went up to him and asked him if he would come below and pay a visit
to the doll in the grass.

Yes, that he would; and so he did.  When he came down below, the doll
in the grass was sitting in a chair dressed very finely and looking
still more beautiful.  She asked Ashiepattle where he was going and
what was his errand.

He told her they were twelve brothers, and that the king had given them
each a horse and a suit of armor, and told them to go out in the world
and find themselves wives, but they must all be able to spin and weave
and make a shirt in a day.

"If you can do that and will become my wife, I will not travel any
farther," said Ashiepattle to the doll in the grass.

Yes, that she would, and she set to work at once to get the shirt spun,
woven, and made; but it was so tiny, so very, very tiny, no bigger
than-so!

Ashiepattle then returned home, taking the shirt with him; but when he
brought it out he felt very shy because it was so small.  But the king
said he could have her for all that, and you can imagine how happy and
joyful Ashiepattle became.

The road did not seem long to him as he set out to fetch his little
sweetheart.  When he came to the doll in the grass he wanted her to sit
with him on his horse; but no, that she wouldn't; she said she would
sit and drive in a silver spoon, and she had two small while horses
which would draw her.  So they set out, he on his horse and she in the
silver spoon; and the horses which drew her were two small white mice.

Ashiepattle always kept to one side of the road, for he was so afraid
he should ride over her; she was so very, very tiny.

When they had traveled a bit on the way they came to a large lake;
there Ashiepattle's horse took fright and shied over to the other side
of the road, and upset the spoon, so that the doll in the grass fell
into the water.  Ashiepattle became very sad, for he did not know how
he should get her out again; but after a while a merman brought her up.

But now she had become just as big as any other grown-up being and was
much more beautiful than she was before.  So he placed her in front of
him on the horse and rode home.

When Ashiepattle got there all his brothers had also returned, each
with a sweetheart; but they were so ugly and ill-favored and bad-
tempered that they had come to blows with their sweethearts on their
way home.  On their heads they had hats which were painted with tar and
soot, and this had run from their hats down their faces, so that they
were still uglier and more ill-favored to behold.

When the brothers saw Ashiepattle's sweetheart they all became envious
of him, but the king was so pleased with Ashiepattle and his sweetheart
that he drove all the others away, and so Ashiepattle was married to
the doll in the grass; and afterward they lived happy and comfortable
for a long, long while; and if they are not dead, they must be still
alive.

THE BEAR AND THE FOX

By P.  C.  Asbjörnsen

Once upon a time there was a bear, who sat on a sunny hillside taking a
nap.  Just then a fox came slinking by and saw him.

"Aha!  have I caught you napping, grandfather?  See if I don't play you
a trick this time!" said Reynard to himself.

He then found three wood mice and laid them on a stump of a tree just
under the bear's nose.

"Boo!  Bruin!  Peter the hunter is just behind that stump!" shouted the
fox right into the bear's ear, and then took to his heels and made off
into the wood.

The bear woke at once, and when he saw the three mice he became so
angry that he lifted his paw and was just going to strike them, for he
thought it was they who had shouted in his ear.

But just then he saw Reynard's tail between the bushes and he set off
at such a speed that the branches crackled under him, and Bruin was
soon so close upon Reynard that he caught him by the right hind leg
just as be was running into a hole under a pine tree.

Reynard was now in a fix; but he was not to be outwitted, and he cried:

"Slip pine root, grip fox foot," and so the bear let go his hold; but
the fox laughed far down in the hole and said:

"I sold you that time, also, grandfather!"

"Out of sight is not out of mind!" said the bear, who was in a fine
fury.



The other morning, when Bruin came trudging across the moor with a fat
pig, Master Reynard was lying on a stone by the moorside.

"Good-day, grandfather!" said the fox.  "What nice thing have you got
there?"

"Pork," said the bear.

"I have got something tasty as well," said the fox.

"What's that?" said the bear.

"It's the biggest bees' nest I ever found," said Reynard.

"Ah, indeed," said the bear, grinning, and his mouth began to water, he
thought a little honey would be so nice.  "Shall we change victuals?"
he said.

"No, I won't do that," said Reynard.  But they made a wager about
naming three kinds of trees.  If the fox could say them quicker than
the bear he was to have one bite at the pig; but if the bear could say
them quicker he was to have one suck at the bee's nest.  The bear
thought he would be able to suck all the honey up at one gulp.

"Well said the fox, "that's all well and good but if I win you must
promise to tear off the bristles where I want to have a bite," he said.

"Well, I suppose I must, since you are too lazy yourself," said the
bear.

Then they began to name the trees.

"Spruce, fir, pine," growled the bear.  His voice was very gruff.  But
all these were only different names of one kind of tree.

"Ash, aspen, oak," screeched the fox, so that the forest resounded.  He
had thus won the bet, and so he jumped down, took the heart out of the
pig at one bite, and tried to run off.  But the bear was angry, because
he had taken the best bit of the whole pig, and seized hold of him by
his tail and held him fast.

"Just wait a bit," said the bear, who was furious.

"Never mind, grandfather; if you'll let me go you shall have a taste of
my honey," said the fox.

When the bear heard this he let go his hold and the fox jumped up on
the stone after the honey.

"Over this nest," said Reynard, "I'll put a leaf, and in the leaf there
is a hole, through which you can suck the honey."  He then put the nest
right up under the bear's nose, pulled away the leaf, jumped on to the
stone, and began grinning and laughing; for there was neither honey nor
honeycomb in the nest.  It was a wasp's nest as big as a man's head,
full of wasps, and out they swarmed and stung the bear in his eyes and
ears and on his mouth and snout.  He had so much to do with scratching
them off him that he had no the to think of Reynard.

Ever since the bear has been afraid of wasps.




Once the fox and the bear made up their minds to have a field in
common.  They found a small clearing far away in the forest, where they
sowed rye the first year.

"Now we must share and share alike," said Reynard; "if you will have
the roots I will have the tops," he said.

Yes, Bruin was quite willing; but when they had thrashed the crop the
fox got all the corn, while the bear got nothing but the roots and
tares.

Bruin didn't like this, but the fox said it was only as they had
agreed.

"This year I am the gainer," said the fox; "another year it will be
your turn; you can then have the tops and I will be satisfied with the
roots."

Next spring the fox asked the bear if he didn't think turnips would be
the right thing for that year.

"Yes, that's better food than corn," said the bear; and the fox thought
the same.

When the autumn came the fox took the turnips, but the bear only got
the tops.

The bear then became so angry that he parted company then and there
with Reynard.




One day the bear was lying eating a horse which he had killed.  Reynard
was about again and came slinking along, his mouth watering for a tasty
bit of the horseflesh.

He sneaked in and out and round about till he came up behind the bear,
when he made a spring to the other side of the carcass, snatching a
piece as he jumped across.

The bear was not slow either; he made a dash after Reynard and caught
the tip of his red tail in his paw.  Since that time the fox has always
had a white tip to his tail.

"Wait a bit Reynard, and come here," said the bear, "and I'll teach you
how to catch horses."

Yes, Reynard was quite willing to learn that, but he didn't trust
himself too near the bear.

"When you see a horse lying asleep in a sunny place," said the bear,
"you must tie yourself fast with the hair of his tail to your brush,
and then fasten your teeth in his thigh," he said.

Before long the fox found a horse lying asleep on a sunny hillside; and
so he did as the bear had told him; he knotted and tied himself well to
the horse with the hair of the tail and then fastened his teeth into
his thigh.

Up jumped the horse and began to kick and gallop so that Reynard was
dashed against stock and stone, and was so bruised and battered that he
nearly lost his senses.

All at once a hare rushed by.  "Where are you off to in such a hurry,
Reynard?" said the hare.

"I'm having a ride, Bunny!" said the fox.

The hare sat up on his hind legs and laughed till the sides of his
mouth split right up to his ears, at the thought of Reynard having such
a grand ride; but since then the fox has never thought of catching
horses again.

That time it was Bruin who for once had the better of Reynard;
otherwise they say the bear is as simple-minded as the trolls.

THE LAD WHO WENT TO THE NORTH WIND

By Sir George Webbe Dasent

Once upon a time there was an old widow who had one son, and she was
poorly and weak, her son had to go up into the safe to fetch meal for
cooking; but when he got outside the safe, and was just going down the
steps, there came the North Wind, puffing and blowing, caught up the
meal, and so away with it through the air.  Then the lad went back into
the safe for more; but when he came out again on the steps, if the
North Wind didn't come again and carry off the meal with a puff; and
more than that, he did so the third time.  At this the lad got very
angry; and as he thought it hard that the North Wind should behave so,
he thought he'd just look him up and ask him to give up his meal.

So off he went, but the way was long, and he walked and walked; but at
last he came to the North Wind's house.

"Good day!" said the lad, and "thank you for coming to see us
yesterday."

"GOOD DAY!" answered the North Wind, for his voice was loud and gruff,
"AND THANKS FOR COMING TO SEE ME.  WHAT DO YOU WANT?"

"Oh!" answered the lad, "I only wished to ask you to be so good as to
let me have back that meal you took from me on the safe steps, for we
haven't much to live on; and if you're to go on snapping up the morsel
we have there'll be nothing for it but to starve."

"I haven't got your meal," said the North Wind; "but if you are in such
need, I'll give you a cloth which will get you everything you want, if
you only say, 'Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good
dishes!'"

With this the lad was well content.  But, as the way was so long he
couldn't get home in one day, he stopped at an inn on the way; and when
they were going to sit down to supper, he laid the cloth on a table
which stood in the corner and said:

"Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes."

He had scarce said so before the cloth did as it was bid; and all who
stood by thought it a fine thing, but most of all the landlady.  So,
when all were fast asleep, at dead of night, she took the lad's cloth,
and put another in its stead, just like the one he had got from the
North Wind, but which couldn't so much as serve up a bit of dry bread.

So when the lad awoke, he took his cloth and went off with it, and that
day he got home to his mother.

"Now," said he, "I've been to the North Wind's house, and a good fellow
he is, for he gave me this cloth, and when I only say to it, 'Cloth,
spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes,' I get any sort
of food I please."

"All very true, I dare say," said his mother, "but seeing is believing,
and I shan't believe it till I see it."

So the lad made haste, drew out a table, laid the cloth on it, and
said- "Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes."

But never a bit of dry bread did the cloth serve

"Well," said the lad, "there's no help for it but to go to the North
Wind again;" and away he went.

So late in the afternoon he came to where the North Wind lived.

"Good evening!" said the lad.

"Good evening!" said the North Wind.  "I want my rights for that meal
of ours which you took," said the lad; "for, as for that cloth I got,
it isn't worth a penny."

"I've got no meal," said the North Wind; "but yonder you have a ram
which coins nothing but golden ducats as soon as you say to it-

"'Ram, ram!  Make money!'"

So the lad thought this a fine thing; but as it was too far to get home
that day, he stopped for the night at the same inn where he had slept
before.

Before he called for anything, he tried the truth of what the North
Wind had said of the ram, and found it all right; but when the landlord
saw that, he thought it was a famous ram, and, when the lad had fallen
asleep, he took another which couldn't coin gold ducats, and changed
the two.

Next morning off went the lad; and when he got home to his mother, he
said-"After all, the North Wind is a jolly fellow; for now he has given
me a ram which can coin golden ducats if I only say, 'Ram, ram!  Make
money!'"

"All very true, I dare say," said his mother; "but I shan't believe any
such stuff until I see the ducats made."

"Ram, ram!  Make money!" said the lad; but the ram made no money.

So the lad went back again to the North Wind, and blew him up, and said
the ram was worth nothing, and he must have his rights for the meal.

"Well," said the North Wind, "I've nothing else to give you but that
old stick in the corner yonder; but it's a stick of that kind that if
you say- 'Stick, stick!  lay on!' it lays on till you say, 'Stick,
stick!  now stop!'

So, as the way was long the lad turned in this night, too, to the
landlord; but as he could pretty well guess how things stood as to the
cloth and the ram, he lay down at once on the bench and began to snore,
as if he were asleep.

Now the landlord, who easily saw that the stick must be worth
something, hunted up one which was like it, and when he heard the lad
snore, was going to change the two, but just as the landlord was about
to take it, the lad bawled out- "Stick, stick!  lay on!"

So the stick began to beat the landlord till he jumped over chairs, and
tables, and benches, and yelled and roared,- "Oh my!  oh my!  bid the
stick be still, else it will beat me to death, and you shall have back
your cloth and your ram,

When the lad thought the landlord had got enough, he said- "Stick,
stick!  now stop!"

Then he took the cloth and put it into his pocket, and went home with
his stick in his hand, leading the ram by a cord round its horns; and
so he got his rights for the meal he had lost.

THE HUSBAND WHO WAS TO MIND THE HOUSE

By Sir George Webbe Dasent

ONCE upon a time there was a man, so surly and cross, he never thought
his wife did anything right in the house.  So one evening in haymaking
time, he came home, scolding and swearing, and showing his teeth and
making a dust.

"Dear love, don't be so angry; there's a good man," said his goody;
"to-morrow let's change our work.  I'll go out with the mowers and mow,
and you shall mind the house at home."

Yes, the husband thought that would do very well.  He was quite
willing, he said.

So early next morning his goody took a scythe over her neck, and went
out into the hayfield with the mowers and began to mow; but the man was
to mind the house, and do the work at home.

First of all he wanted to churn the butter; but when he had churned a
while, he got thirsty, and went down to the cellar to tap a barrel of
ale.  So, just when he had knocked in the bung, and was putting the tap
into the cask, he heard overhead the pig come into the kitchen.  Then
off he ran up the cellar steps, with the tap in his hand, as fast as he
could, to look after the pig, lest it should upset the churn; but when
he got up, and saw that the pig had already knocked the churn over, and
stood there, routing and grunting amid the cream which was running all
over the floor, he got so wild with rage that he quite forgot his ale
barrel and ran at the pig as hard as he could.  He caught it, too, just
as it ran out of doors, and gave it such a kick that piggy lay for dead
on the spot.  Then all at once he remembered he had the tap in his
hand, but when he got down to the cellar, every drop of ale had run out
of the cask.

Then he went into the dairy and found enough cream left to fill the
churn again, and so he began to churn, for butter they must have for
dinner.  When he had churned a bit, he remembered that their milking
cow was still shut up in the brye, and hadn't had a bit to eat or a
drop to drink all the morning, though the sun was high.  Then all at
once he thought 'twas too far to take her down to the meadow, so he'd
just get her up on the housetop-for the house, you must know, was
thatched with sods, and a fine crop of grass was growing there.

Now their house lay close up against a steep down, and he thought if he
laid a plank across to the thatch at the back he'd easily get the cow
up.

But still he couldn't leave the churn, for there was his little babe
crawling about the floor, and "if I leave it," he thought, "the child
is sure to upset it!"  So he took the churn on his back, and went out
with it; but then he thought he'd better first water the cow before he
turned her out on the thatch; so he took up a bucket to draw water out
of the well; but, as he stooped down at the well's brink, all the cream
ran out of the churn over his shoulders, and so down into the well.

Now it was near dinner time, and he hadn't even got the butter yet; so
he thought he'd best boil the porridge, and filled the pot with water,
and hung it over the fire.  When he had done that, he thought the cow
might perhaps fall off the thatch and break her legs or her neck.  So
he got up on the house to tie her up.  One end of the rope he made fast
to the cow's neck, and the other he slipped down the chimney and tied
round his own thigh; and he had to make haste, for the water now began
to boil in the pot, and he had still to grind the oatmeal.

So he began to grind away; but while he was hard at it, down fell the
cow off the housetop after all, and as she fell, she dragged the man up
the chimney by the rope.  There he stuck fast; and as for the cow, she
hung halfway down the wall, swinging between heaven and earth, for she
could neither get down nor up.

And now the goody had waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her
husband to come and call them home to dinner; but never a call they
had.  At last she thought she'd waited long enough, and went home.  But
when she got there and saw the cow hanging in such an ugly place, she
ran up and cut the rope in two with her scythe.  But as she did this,
down came her husband out of the chimney; and so when his old dame came
inside the kitchen, there she found him standing on his head in the
porridge pot.

HOW ONE WENT OUT TO WOO

By Sir George Webbe Dasent

O NCE upon a time there was a lad who went out to woo him a wife.
Among other places he came to a farmhouse, where the household were
little better than beggars; but when the wooer came in they wanted to
make out that they were well to do, as you may guess.  Now the husband
had got a new arm to his coat.

"Pray, take a seat," he said to the wooer; "but there's a shocking dust
in the house."

So he went about rubbing and wiping all the benches and tables with his
new arm, but he kept the other all the while behind his back.

The wife she had got one new shoe, and she went stamping and sliding
with it up against the stools and chairs saying, "How untidy it is
here!  Everything is out of place!"

Then they called out to their daughter to come down and put things to
rights; but the daughter she had got a new cap; so she put her head in
at the door, and kept nodding and nodding, first to this side and then
to that.

"Well!  For my part, She said, I can't be everywhere at once."

Aye!  Aye! That was a well-to-do household the wooer had come to.

WHY THE BEAR IS STUMPY-TAILED

By Sir George Webbe Dasent

ONE day the Bear met the Fox, who came slinking along with a string of
fish he had stolen.

"Whence did you get these from?" asked the Bear.

"Oh! My Lord Bruin, I've been out fishing and caught them," said the
Fox.

So the Bear had a mind to learn to fish too, and bade the Fox tell him
how he was to set about it.

"Oh! It's an easy craft for you", answered the Fox, "and soon learned.
You've only got to go upon the ice, and cut a hole and stick your tail
down into it; and so you must go on holding it there as long as you
can.  You're not to mind if your tail smarts a little; that's when the
fish bite.  The longer you hold it there the more fish you'll get; and
then all at once out with it, with a cross pull sideways, and with a
strong pull too."

Yes; the Bear did as the Fox had said, and held his tail a long, long
the down in the hole, till it was fast frozen in.  Then he pulled it
out with a cross pull, and it snapped short off.  That's why Bruin goes
about with a stumpy tail this very day.

BOOTS WHO MADE THE PRINCESS SAY "THAT'S A STORY"

By Sir George Webbe Dasent

ONCE upon a time there was a King who had a daughter, and she was such
a dreadful storyteller that the like of her was not to be found far or
near.  So the King gave out, that if anyone could tell such a string of
lies as would get her to say, "That's a story," he should have her to
wife, and half the kingdom besides.  Well, many came, as you may fancy,
to try their luck, for everyone would have been very glad to have the
Princess, to say nothing of the kingdom; but they all cut a sorry
figure, for the Princess was so given to storytelling, that all their
lies went in at one ear and out of the other.  Among the rest came
three brothers to try their luck, and the two elder went first, but
they fared no better than those that had gone before them.  Last of
all, the third, Boots, set off and found the Princess in the farmyard.

"Good morning," he said, "and thank you for nothing."  "Good morning,"
said she, "and the same to you."  Then she went on-

"You haven't such a fine farmyard as ours, I'll be bound; for when two
shepherds stand, one at each end of it, and blow their ram's horns, the
one can't hear the other."

"Haven't we though!" answered Boots; "ours is far bigger; for when a
calf starts to cross a field, it is a full-grown cow when it reaches
the other end."

"I dare say," said the Princess.  "Well, but you haven't such a big ox,
after all, as ours yonder; for when two men sit, one on each horn, they
can't touch each other with a tweny-foot rule."

"Stuff!" said Boots; "is that all?  Why, we have an ox who is so big,
that when two men sit, one on each horn, and each blows his great
mountain-trumpet, they can't hear one another."

"I dare say," said the Princess; "but you haven't so much milk as we,
I'll be bound; for we milk our cows into great pails, and carry them
indoors, and empty them into great tubs, and so we make great, great
cheeses."

"Oh!  you do, do you?" said Boots.  "Well, we milk ours into great
tubs, and then we put them in carts and drive them indoors, and then we
turn them out into great brewing vats, and so we make cheeses as big as
a great house.  We had, too, a dun mare to tread the cheese well
together when it was making; but once she tumbled down into the cheese,
and we lost her; and after we had eaten at this cheese seven years, we
came upon a great dun mare, alive and kicking.  Well, once after that I
was going to drive this mare to the mill, and her backbone snapped in
two; but I wasn't put out, not I; for I took a spruce sapling, and put
it into her for a backbone, and she had no other backbone all the while
we had her.  But the sapling grew up into such a tall tree, that I
climbed right up to the sky by it, and when I got there I saw a lady
sitting and spinning the foam of the sea into pigs'-bristle ropes; but
just then the spruce-fir broke short off, and I couldn't get down
again; so the lady let me down by one of the ropes, and down I slipped
straight into a fox's hole, and who should sit there but my mother and
your father cobbling shoes; and just as I stepped in, my mother gave
your father such a box on the ear that it made his whiskers curl."

"That's a story!" said the Princess, "my father never did any such
thing in all his born days!"

So Boots got the Princess to wife, and half the kingdom besides.


THE WITCH IN THE STONE BOAT

Retold by Andrew Lang

THERE was once a king and queen, and they had a son called Sigurd, who
was very strong and active and good-looking.  When the king came to be
bowed down with the weight of years he spoke to his son, and said that
now it was time for him to look out for a fitting match for himself,
for he did not know how long he might last now, and he would like to
see him married before he died.

Sigurd was not averse to this and asked his father where he thought it
best to look for a wife.  The king answered that in a certain country
there was a king who had a beautiful daughter, and he thought it would
be most desirable if Sigurd could get her.  So the two parted, and
Sigurd prepared for the journey and went to where his father had
directed him.

He came to the king and asked his daughters hand, which was readily
granted him, but only on the condition that he should remain there as
long as he could, for the king himself was not strong and not very able
to govern his kingdom.  Sigurd accepted this condition, but added that
he would have to get leave to go home again to his own country when he
heard news of his father's death.  After that Sigurd married the
princess and helped his father-in-law to govern the kingdom.  He and
the princess loved each other dearly, and after a year a son came to
them, who was two years old when word came to Sigurd that his father
was dead.  Sigurd now prepared to return home with his wife and child
and went on board ship to go by sea.

They had sailed for several days, when the breeze suddenly fell and
there came a dead calm at a time when they needed only one day's voyage
to reach home.  Sigurd and his queen were one day on deck when most of
the others on the ship had fallen asleep.  There they sat and talked
for a while, and had their little son along with them.  After a time
Sigurd became so heavy with sleep that he could no longer keep awake,
so he went below and lay down, leaving the queen alone on the deck
playing with her son.

A good while after Sigurd had gone below the queen saw something black
on the sea which seemed to be coming nearer.  As it approached she
could make out that it was a boat and could see the figure of some one
sitting in it and rowing it.  At last the boat came alongside the ship,
and now the queen saw that it was a stone boat, out of which there came
on board the ship a fearfully ugly witch.  The queen was more
frightened than words can describe, and could neither speak a word nor
move from the place so as to awaken the king or the sailors.  The witch
came right up to the queen, took the child from her, and laid it on the
deck; then she took the queen and stripped her of all her fine clothes,
which she proceeded to put on herself and looked then like a human
being.  Last of all she took the queen, put her into the boat and said:

"This spell I lay upon you, that you slacken not your course until you
come to my brother in the under world."

The queen sat stunned and motionless, but the boat at once shot away
from the ship with her, and before long she was out of sight.

When the boat could no longer be seen the child began to cry, and
though the witch tried to quiet it she could not manage it; so, with
the child on her arm, she went below to where the king was sleeping,
and awakened him, scolding him for leaving them alone on deck while he
and all the crew were asleep.  It was great carelessness of him, she
said, to leave no one to watch the ship with her.

Sigurd was greatly surprised to hear his queen scold him so much, for
she had never said an angry word to him before; but he thought it was
quite excusable in this case, and tried to quiet the child along with
her but it was no use.  Then he went and wakened the sailors and bade
them hoist the sails, for a breeze had sprung up and was blowing
straight toward the harbor.

They soon reached the land which Sigurd was to rule over, and found all
the people sorrowful for the old king's death, but they became glad
when they got Sigurd back to the court, and made him king over them.

The king's son, however, hardly ever stopped crying from the time he
had been taken from his mother on the deck of the ship, although he had
always been such a good child before, so that at last the king had to
get a nurse for him-one of the maids of the court.  As soon as the
child got into her charge he stopped crying and behaved as well as
before.

After the sea voyage it seemed to the king that the queen had altered
very much in many ways, and not for the better.  He thought her much
more haughty and stubborn and difficult to deal with than she used to
be.  Before long others began to notice this as well as the king.  In
the court there were two young fellows, one of eighteen years old, the
other of nineteen, who were very fond of playing chess and often sat
long inside playing at it.  Their room was next the queen's, and often
during the day they heard the queen talking.

One day they paid more attention than usual when they heard her talk,
and put their ears close to a crack in the wall between the rooms, and
heard the queen say quite plainly: 'When I yawn a little, then I am a
nice little maiden: when I yawn halfway, then I am half a troll; and
when I yawn fully then I am a troll altogether."

As she said this she yawned tremendously, and in a moment had put on
the appearance of a fearfully ugly troll.  Then there came up through
the floor of the room a three-headed giant with a trough full of meat,
who saluted her as his sister and set down the trough before her.  She
began to eat out of it and never stopped till she had finished it.  The
young fellows saw all this going on, but did not hear the two of them
say anything to each other.  They were astonished, though, at how
greedily the queen devoured the meat and how much she ate of it, and
were no longer surprised that she took so little when she sat at table
with the king.  As soon as she had finished it the giant disappeared
with the trough by the same way as he had come, and the queen returned
to her human shape.

Now we must go back to the king's son after he had been put in charge
of the nurse.  One evening. after she had lit a candle and was holding
the child, several planks sprang up in the floor of the room, and out
at the opening came a beautiful woman dressed in white, with an iron
belt round her waist, to which was fastened an iron chain that went
down into the ground.  The woman came up to the nurse, took the child
from her, and pressed it to her breast; then she gave it back to the
nurse and returned by the same way as she had come, and the floor
closed over her again.  Although the woman had not spoken a single word
to her, the nurse was very much frightened, but told no one about it.

Next evening the same thing happened again, just as before, but as the
woman was going away she said in a sad tone, "Two are gone and one only
is left," and then disappeared as before.  The nurse was still more
frightened when she heard the woman say this, and thought that perhaps
some danger was hanging over the child, though she had no ill opinion
of the unknown woman, who, indeed, had behaved toward the child as if
it were her own.  The most mysterious thing was the woman saying "and
only one is left"; but the nurse guessed that this must mean that only
one day was left, since she had come for two days already.

At last the nurse made up her mind to go to the king.  She told him the
whole story and asked him to be present in person the next day about
the time when the woman usually came.  The king promised to do so, and
came to the nurse's room a little before the time and sat down on a
chair with his drawn sword in his hand.  Soon after the planks in the
floor sprang up as before, and the woman came up, dressed in white,
with the iron belt and chain.  The king saw at once that it was his own
queen, and immediately hewed asunder the iron chain that was fastened
to the belt.  This was followed by such noises and crashings down in
the earth that all the king's palace shook, so that no one expected
anything else than to see every bit of it shaken to pieces.  At last
the noises and shaking stopped, and they began to come to themselves
again.

The king and queen embraced each other, and she told him the whole
story-how the witch came to the ship when they were all asleep and sent
her off in the boat.  After she had gone so far that she could not see
the ship, she sailed on through darkness until she landed beside a
three-headed giant.  The giant wished her to marry him, but she
refused; whereupon he shut her up by herself and told her she would
never get free until she consented.  After a time she began to plan how
to get her freedom, and at last told him that she would consent if he
would allow her to visit her son on earth three days on end.  This he
agreed to, but put on her this iron belt and chain, the other end of
which he fastened around his, own waist, and the great noises that were
heard when the king cut the chain must have been caused by the giant's
falling down the underground passage when the chain gave way so
suddenly.  The giant's dwelling, indeed, was right under the palace,
and the terrible shakings must have been caused by him in his death
throes.

The king now understood how the queen he had had for some time past had
been so ill-tempered.  He at once had a sack drawn over her head and
made her be stoned to death, and after that torn in pieces by untamed
horses.  The two young fellows also told now what they had heard and
seen in the queen's room, for before this they had been afraid to say
anything about it, on account of the Queen's power.

The real queen was now restored to all her dignity and was beloved by
all.  The nurse was married to a nobleman and the king and queen gave
her splendid presents.

THE SNUFFIBOX

By Paul Sébillot

As often happens in this world, there was once a young man who spent
all his time in traveling.  One day, as he was walking along, he picked
up a snuffbox.  He opened it, and the snuffbox said to him in the
Spanish language:  "What do you want?"  He was very much frightened,
but, luckily, instead of throwing the box away he only shut it tight
and put it in his pocket.  Then he went on, away, away, away, and as he
went he said to himself, "if it says to me again, 'What do you want?' I
shall know better what to say this time."  So he took out the snuffbox
and opened it, and again it asked: "What do you want?"  "My hat full of
gold," answered the youth, and immediately it was full.

Our young