 man was enchanted.  Henceforth he should never be in need of
anything.  So on he traveled, away, away, away, through thick forests,
till at last he came to a beautiful castle.  In the castle there lived
a king.  The young man walked round and round the castle, not caring
who saw him, till the king noticed him and asked what he was doing
there.  "I was just looking at your castle."  "You would like to have
one like it, wouldn't you?"  The young man did not reply, but when it
grew dark he took out his snuffbox and opened the lid."  What do you
want?"  "Build me a castle with laths of gold and tiles of diamond and
the furniture all of silver and gold."  He had scarcely finished
speaking when there stood in front of him, exactly opposite the king's
palace, a castle built precisely as he had ordered.  When the king
awoke he was struck dumb at the sight of the magnificent house shining
in the rays of the sun.  The servants could not do their work for
stopping to stare at it.  Then the king dressed himself and went to see
the young man.  And he told him plainly that he was a very powerful
prince, and that he hoped that they might all live together in one
house or the other, and that the king would give him his daughter to
wife.  So it all turned out just as the king wished.  The young man
married the princess and they lived happily in the palace of gold.

But the king's wife was jealous both of the young man and of her own
daughter.  The princess had told her mother about the snuffbox, which
gave them everything they wanted, and the queen bribed a servant to
steal the snuffbox.  They noticed carefully where it was put away every
night, and one evening, when the whole world was asleep, the woman
stole it and brought it to her old mistress.  Oh, how happy the queen
was!  She opened the lid and the snuffbox said to her: "What do you
want?"  And she answered at once: "I want you to take me and my husband
and my servants and this beautiful house and set us down on the other
side of the Red Sea, but my daughter and her husband are to stay
behind."

When the young couple woke up they found themselves back in the old
castle, without their snuffbox.  They hunted for it high and low, but
quite vainly.  The young man felt that no time was to be lost, and he
mounted his horse and filled his pockets with as much gold as he could
carry.  On he went, away, away, away, but he sought the snuffbox in
vain all up and down the neighboring countries, and very soon he came
to the end of all his money.  But still he went on, as fast as the
strength of his horse would let him, begging his way.

Some one told him that he ought to consult the moon, for the moon
traveled far and might be able to tell him something.  So he went away,
away, away, and ended, somehow or other, by reaching the land of the
moon.  There he found a little old woman who said to him: "What are you
doing here?  My son eats all living things he sees, and if you are wise
you will go away without coming any farther."  But the young man told
her all his sad tale, and how he possessed a wonderful snuffbox, and
how it had been stolen from him, and how he had nothing left now that
he was parted from his wife and was in need of everything.  And he said
that perhaps her son, who traveled so far, might have seen a palace
with laths of gold and tiles of diamond and furnished all in silver and
gold.  As he spoke these last words the moon came in and said he
smelled mortal flesh and blood.  But his mother told him that it was an
unhappy man who had lost everything and had come all this way to
consult him, and bade the young man not to be afraid, but to come
forward and show himself.  So he went boldly up to the moon, and asked
if by any accident he had seen a palace with the laths of gold and the
tiles of diamond and all the furniture of silver and gold.  Once this
house belonged to him, but now it was stolen.  And the moon said no,
but that the sun traveled farther than he did, and that the young man
had better go and ask him.

So the young man departed and went away, away, away, as well as his
horse would take him, begging his living as he rode along, and somehow
or other at last he got to the land of the sun.  There he found a
little old woman, who asked him:  "What are you doing here?  Go away.
Have you not heard that my son feeds upon Christians?"  But he said no
and that he would not go, for he was so miserable that it was all one
to him whether he died or not; that he had lost everything, and
especially a splendid palace like none other in the whole world, for it
had laths of gold and tiles of diamond and all the furniture was of
silver and gold; and that he had sought it far and long, and in all the
earth there was no man more unhappy.  So the old woman's heart melted
and she agreed to hide him.

When the sun arrived he declared that he smelled Christian flesh and he
meant to have it for his dinner.  But his mother told him such a
pitiful story of the miserable wretch who had lost everything and had
come from far to ask his help that at last he promised to see him.

So the young man came out from his hiding-place and begged the sun to
tell him if in the course of his travels he had not seen somewhere a
palace that had not its like in the whole world, for its laths were of
gold and its tiles of diamond and all the furniture in silver and gold.

And the sun said no, but that perhaps the wind had seen it, for he
entered everywhere and saw things that no one else ever saw, and if
anyone knew where it was it was certainly the wind.

Then the poor young man again set forth as well as his horse could take
him, begging his living as he went, and somehow or other he ended by
reaching the home of the wind.  He found there a little old woman
busily occupied in filling great barrels with water.  She asked him
what had put it into his head to come there, for her son ate everything
he saw, and that he would shortly arrive quite mad, and that the young
man had better look out.  But he answered that he was so unhappy that
he had ceased to mind anything, even being eaten, and then he told her
that he had been robbed of a palace that had not its equal in all the
world, and of all that was in it, and that he had even left his wife
and was wandering over the world until he found it.  And that it was
the sun who had sent him to consult the wind.  So she hid him under the
staircase, and soon they heard the south wind arrive, shaking the house
to its foundations.  Thirsty as he was, he did not wait to drink, but
he told his mother that he smelled the blood of a Christian man, and
that she had better bring him out at once and make him ready to be
eaten.  But she bade her son eat and drink what was before him, and
said that the poor young man was much to be pitied, and that the sun
had granted him his life in order that he might consult the Wind.  Then
she brought out the young man, who explained how he was seeking for his
palace, and that no man had been able to tell him where it was, so he
had come to the Wind.  And he added that he had been shamefully robbed,
and that the laths were of gold and the tiles of diamond, and all the
furniture in silver and gold, and he inquired if the Wind had not seen
such a palace during his wanderings.

And the Wind said yes, and that all that day he had been blowing
backward and forward over it without being able to move one single
tile.  "Oh, do tell me where it is," cried the young man."  "It is a
long way off," replied the Wind, "on the other side of the Red Sea."
But our traveler was not discouraged-he had already journeyed too far.

So he set forth at once, and somehow or other he managed to reach that
distant land.  And he inquired if any one wanted a gardener.  He was
told that the head gardener at the castle had just left, and perhaps he
might have a chance of getting the place.  The young man lost no time,
but walked up to the castle and asked if they were in want of a
gardener; and how happy he was when they agreed to take him!  Now he
passed most of his day in gossiping with the servants about the wealth
of their masters and the wonderful things in the house.  He made
friends with one of the maids, who told him the history of the
snuffbox, and he coaxed her to let him see it.  One evening she managed
to get hold of it, and the young man watched carefully where she hid it
away in a secret place in the bedchamber of her mistress.

The following night, when everyone was fast asleep, he crept in and
took the snuffbox.  Think of his joy as he opened the lid!  When it
asked him, as of yore, "What do you want?"  he replied: "What do I
want?  What do I want?  Why, I want to go with my palace to the old
place, and for the king and the queen and all their servants to be
drowned in the Red Sea."

He had hardly finished speaking when he found himself back again with
his wife, while all the other inhabitants of the palace were lying at
the bottom of the Red Sea.

THE GOLDEN BLACKBIRD

By Paul Sébillot

ONCE upon a time there was a great lord who had three sons.  He fell
very ill, sent for doctors of every kind, even bonesetters, but they
none of them could find out what was the matter with him or even give
him any relief.  At last there came a foreign doctor, who declared that
the golden blackbird alone could cure the sick man.

So the old lord dispatched his eldest son to look for the wonderful
bird, and promised him great riches if he managed to find it and bring
it back.

The young man began his journey and soon arrived at a place where four
roads met.  He did not know which to choose, and tossed his cap in the
air, determining that the direction of its fall should decide him.
After traveling for two or three days he grew tired of walking without
knowing where or for how long, and .he stopped at an inn which was
filled with merrymakers and ordered something to eat and drink.

"My faith," said he, "it is sheer folly to waste more time hunting for
this bird.  My father is old, and if he dies I shall inherit his
goods."

The old man, after waiting patiently for some time, sent his second son
to seek the golden blackbird.  The youth took the same direction as his
brother, and when he came to the crossroads he too tossed up which road
he should take.  The cap fell in the same place as before, and he
walked on till he came to the spot where his brother had halted.  The
latter, who was leaning out of the window of the inn, called to him to
stay where he was and amuse himself.

"You are right," replied the youth.  "Who knows if I should ever find
the golden blackbird, even if I sought the whole world through for it?
At the worst, if the old man dies we shall have his property."

He entered the inn and the two brothers made merry and feasted, till
very soon their money was all spent.  They even owed something to their
landlord, who kept them as hostages till they could pay their debts.

The youngest son set forth in his turn, and he arrived at the place
where his brothers where still prisoners.  They called to him to stop
and did all they could to prevent his going further.

"No," he replied, "my father trusted me, and I will go all over the
world till I find the golden blackbird."

"Bah," said his brothers, "you will never succeed any better than we
did.  Let him die if he wants to.  We will divide the property."

As he went his way he met a little hare, who stopped to looked at him
and asked:

"Where are you going, my friend ?"

"I really don't quite know," answered he.  "My father is ill, and he
cannot be cured unless I bring him back the golden blackbird.  It is a
long time since I set out, but no one can tell me where to find it."

"Ah," said the hare, "you have a long way to go yet.  You will have to
walk at least seven hundred miles before you get to it."

"And how am I to travel such a distance?"

"Mount on my back," said the little hare, "and I will conduct you."

The young man obeyed.  At each bound the little hare went seven miles,
and it was not long before they reached a castle that was as large and
beautiful as a castle could be.

"The golden blackbird is in a little cabin near by," said the little
hare, "and you will easily find it.  It lives in a little cage, with
another cage beside it made all of gold.  But whatever you do, be sure
not to put it in the beautiful cage, or everybody in the castle will
know that you have stolen it."

The youth found the golden blackbird standing on a wooden perch, but as
stiff and rigid as if he was dead.  And beside, was the beautiful cage,
the cage of gold.

"Perhaps he would revive if I were to put him in that lovely cage,"
thought the youth.

The moment the golden blackbird had touched the bars of the splendid
cage he awoke and began to whistle, so that all the servants of the
castle ran to see what was the matter, saying that he was a thief and
must be put in prison.

"No," he answered, "I am not a thief.  If I have taken the golden
blackbird, it is only that it may cure my father, who is ill, and I
have traveled more than seven hundred miles in order to find it."

"Well," they replied, "we will let you go, and will even give you the
golden blackbird if you are able to bring us the porcelain maiden."

The youth departed, weeping, and met the little hare, who was munching
wild thyme.

"What are you crying for, my friend?"  asked the hare.

"It is because," he answered, "the castle people will not allow me to
carry off the golden blackbird without giving them the porcelain maiden
in exchange."

"You have not followed my advice," said the little hare.  "And you have
put the golden blackbird into the fine cage."

"Alas!  yes!"

"Don't despair.  The porcelain maiden is a young girl, beautiful as
Venus, who dwells two hundred miles from here.  Jump on my back and I
will take you there."

The little hare, who took seven miles in a stride, was there in no time
at all, and he stopped on the borders of a lake.

"The porcelain maiden," said the hare to the youth, "will come here to
bathe with her friends.  Keep yourself out of sight behind the thicket,
while I just eat a mouthful of thyme to refresh me.  When she is in the
lake be sure you hide her clothes, which are of dazzling whiteness, and
do not give them back to her unless she consents to follow you."

The little hare left him, and almost immediately the porcelain maiden
arrived with her friends.  She undressed herself and got into the
water.  Then the young man glided up noiselessly and laid hold of her
clothes, which he hid under a rock at some distance.

When the porcelain maiden was tired of playing in the water she came
out to dress herself, but though she hunted for her clothes high and
low she could find them nowhere.  Her friends helped her in the search,
but, seeing at last that it was of no use, they left her alone on the
bank, weeping bitterly.

"Why do you cry?"  said the young man, approaching her.

"Alas!"  answered she, "while I was bathing some one stole my clothes,
and my friends have abandoned me."

"I will find your clothes if you will only come with me."

And the porcelain maiden agreed to follow him, and after having given
up her clothes the young man bought a small horse for her which went
like the wind.  The little hare brought them both back to seek for the
golden blackbird, and when they drew near the castle where it lived the
little hare said to the young man:

"Now, do be a little sharper than you were before, and you will manage
to carry off both the golden blackbird and the porcelain maiden.  Take
the golden cage in one hand and leave the bird in the old cage where he
is, and bring that away too."

The little hare then vanished.  The youth did as he was bid, and the
castle servants never noticed that he was carrying off the golden
blackbird.  When he reached the inn where his brothers were detained he
delivered them by paying their debt.  They set out all together, but as
the two elder brothers were jealous of the success of the youngest,
they took the opportunity as they were passing by the shores of a lake
to throw themselves upon him, seize the golden blackbird, and fling him
in the water.  Then they continued their journey, taking with them the
porcelain maiden, in the firm belief that their brother was drowned.
But happily he had snatched in falling at a tuft of rushes and called
loudly for help.  The little hare came running to him and said: "Take
hold of my leg and pull yourself out of the water."

When he was safe on shore the little hare said to him:

"Now, this is what you have to do: dress yourself like a Breton seeking
a place as stableboy, and go and offer your services to your father.
Once there, you will easily be able to make him understand the truth."

The young man did as the little hare bade him, and he went to his
father's castle and inquired if they were not in want of a stableboy.

"Yes," replied his father, "very much indeed.  But it is not an easy
place.  There is a little horse in the stable which will not let anyone
go near it, and it has already kicked to death several people who have
tried to groom it."

"I will undertake to groom it," said the youth.  "I never saw the horse
I was afraid of yet."

The little horse allowed itself to be rubbed down without a toss of its
head and without a kick.

"Good gracious!"  exclaimed the master.  "How is it that he lets you
touch him when no one else can go near him?"

"Perhaps he knows me," answered the stableboy.

Two or three days later the master said to him: "The porcelain maiden
is here; but though she is as lovely as the dawn, she is so wicked that
she scratches every one that approaches her.  Try if she will accept
your services."

When the youth entered the room where she was the golden blackbird
broke forth into a joyful song, and the porcelain maiden sang too and
jumped for joy.

"Good gracious!"  cried the master."  The porcelain maiden and the
golden blackbird know you too?"

"Yes," replied the youth, "and the porcelain maiden can tell you the
whole truth if she only will."

Then she told all that had happened, and how she had consented to
follow the young man who had captured the golden blackbird.

"Yes," added the youth, "I delivered my brothers, who were kept
prisoners in an inn, and as a reward they threw me into a lake.  So I
disguised myself and came here in order to prove the truth to you.

So the old lord embraced his son and promised that he should inherit
all his possessions, and he put to death the two elder ones, who had
deceived him and had tried to slay their own brother.

The young man married the porcelain maiden and had a splendid wedding
feast

THE HALF-CHICK

Retold by Andrew Lang

ONCE upon a time there was a handsome black Spanish hen who had a large
brood of chickens.  They were all fine, plump little birds except the
youngest, who was quite unlike his brothers and sisters.  Indeed, he
was such a strange, queer-looking creature that when he first clipped
his shell his mother could scarcely believe her eyes, he was so
different from the twelve other fluffy, downy, soft little chicks who
nestled under her wings.  This one looked just as if he had been cut in
two.  He had only one leg, and one wing, and one eye, and he had half a
head and half a beak.  His mother shook her head sadly as she looked at
him and said:

"My youngest born is only a half-chick.  He can never grow up a tall,
handsome cock like his brothers.  They will go out into the world and
rule over poultry yards of their own; but this poor little fellow will
always have to stay at home with his mother."  And she called him Medio
Pollito, which is Spanish for half-chick.

Now, though Medio Pollito was such an odd, helpless-looking little
thing, his mother soon found that he was not at all willing to remain
under her wing and protection.  Indeed, in character he was as unlike
his brothers and sisters as he was in appearance.  They were good,
obedient chickens, and when the old hen chicked after them they chirped
and ran back to her side.  But Medio Pollito had a roving spirit in
spite of his one leg, and when his mother called to him to return to
the coop, he pretended that he could not hear, because he had only one
ear.

When she took the whole family out for a walk in the fields, Medio
Pollito would hop away by himself and hide among the corn.  Many an
anxious minute his brothers and sisters had looking for him, while his
mother ran to and fro cackling in fear and dismay.

As he grew older he became more self-willed and disobedient, and his
manner to his mother was often very rude and his temper to the other
chickens very disagreeable.

One day he had been out for a longer expedition than usual in the
fields.  On his return he strutted up to his mother with the peculiar
little hop and kick which was his way of walking, and cocking his one
eye at her in a very bold way, he said:

"Mother, I am tired of this life in a dull f farmyard, with nothing but
a dreary maize-field to look at.  I'm off to Madrid to see the king."

"To Madrid, Medio Pollito!" exclaimed his mother.  "Why, you silly
chick, it would be a long Journey for a grown-up cock, and a poor
little thing like you would be tired out before you had gone half the
distance.  No, no, stay at home with your mother, and some day, when
you are bigger, we will go a little journey together."

But Medio Pollito had made up his mind, and he would not listen to his
mother's advice nor to the prayers and entreaties of his brothers and
sisters.

"What is the use of our all crowding each other up in this poky little
place?"  he said.  "When I have a fine courtyard of my own at the
king's palace, I shall perhaps ask some of you to come and pay me a
short visit."

And scarcely waiting to say good-by to his family, away he stumped down
the high road that led to Madrid.

"Be sure that you are kind and civil to every one you meet," called his
mother, running after him; but he was in such a hurry to be off that he
did not wait to answer her or even to look back.

A little later in the day, as he was taking a short cut through a
field, he passed a stream.  Now, the stream was all choked up and
overgrown with weeds and water-plants, so that its waters could not
flow freely.

"Oh!  Medio Pollito," it cried as the half-chick hopped along its
banks, "do come and help me by clearing away these weeds."

"Help you, indeed!" exclaimed Medio Pollito, tossing his head and
shaking the few feathers in his tail.  "Do you think I have nothing to
do but to waste my time on such trifles?  Help yourself and don't
trouble busy travelers.  I am off to Madrid to see the king," and
hoppity-kick, hoppity-kick, away stumped Medio Pollito.

A little later he came to a fire that had been left by some gypsies in
a wood.  It was burning very low and would soon be out.

"Oh!  Medio Pollito," cried the fire in a weak, wavering voice as the
half-chick approached, "in a few minutes I shall go quite out unless
you put some sticks and dry leaves upon me.  Do help me or I shall
die!"

"Help you, indeed!"  answered Medio Pollito.  "I have other things to
do.  Gather sticks for yourself and don't trouble me.  I am off to
Madrid to see the king," and hoppity-kick, hoppity-kick, away stumped
Medio Pollito.

The next morning, as he was getting near Madrid, he passed a large
chestnut tree, in whose branches the wind was caught and entangled.

"Oh!  Medio Pollito," called the wind, "do hop up here and help me to
get free of these branches.  I cannot come away and it is so
uncomfortable."

"It is your own fault for going there," answered Medio Pollito.  "I
can't waste all my morning stopping here to help you.  Just shake
yourself off, and don't hinder me, for I am off to Madrid to see the
king," and hoppity-kick, hoppity-kick, away stumped Medio Pollito in
great glee, for the towers and roofs of Madrid were now in sight.  When
he entered the town he saw before him a great, splendid house, with
soldiers standing before the gates.  This he knew must be the king's
palace, and he determined to hop up to the front gate and wait there
until the king came out.  But as he was hopping past one of the back
windows the king's cook saw him.

"Here is the very thing I want," he exclaimed, "for the king has just
sent a message to say that he must have chicken broth for his dinner."
Opening the window he stretched out his arm, caught Medio Pollito, and
popped him into the broth pot that was standing near the fire.  Oh!
how wet and clammy the water felt as it went over Medio Pollito's head,
making his feathers cling to him.

"Water!  water!" he cried in his despair, "do have pity upon me and do
not wet me like this."

"Ah! Medio Pollito," replied the water, "you would not help me when I
was a little stream away on the fields.  Now you must be punished."

Then the fire began to burn and scald Medio Pollito, and he danced and
hopped from one side of the pot to the other, trying to get away from
the heat and crying out in pain:

"Fire!  fire!  do not scorch me like this; you can't think how it
hurts."

"Ah! Medio Pollito," answered the fire, "you would not help me when I
was dying away in the wood.  You are being punished."

At last, just when the pain was so great that Medio Pollito thought he
must die, the cook lifted up the lid of the pot to see if the broth was
ready for the king's dinner.

"Look here!" he cried in horror, "this chicken is quite useless.  It is
burned to a cinder.  I can't send it up to the royal table."  And
opening the window he threw Medio Pollito out in the street.  But the
wind caught him up and whirled him through the air so quickly that
Medio Pollito could scarcely breathe, and his heart beat against his
side till he thought it would break.

"Oh, wind I" at last he gasped out, "if you hurry me along like this
you will kill me.  Do let me rest a moment, or-"

But he was so breathless that he could not finish his sentence.

"Ah! Medio Pollito," replied the wind, "when I was caught in the
branches of the chestnut tree you would not help me.  Now you are
punished."  And he swirled Medio Pollito over the roofs of the houses
till they reached the highest church in the town, and there he left him
fastened to the top of the steeple.

And there stands Medio Pollito to this day.  And if you go to Madrid
and walk through the streets till you come to the highest church, you
will see Medio Pollito perched on his one leg on the steeple, with his
one wing drooping at his side and gazing sadly out of his one eye over
the town.

THE THREE BROTHERS

By Hermann R. Kletke

THERE was once upon a time a witch who in the shape of a hawk used
every night to break the windows of a certain village church.  In the
same village there lived three brothers, who were all determined to
kill the mischievous hawk.  But in vain did the two eldest mount guard
in the church with their guns; as soon as the bird appeared high above
their heads sleep overpowered them, and they only awoke to hear the
windows crashing in.

Then the younger brother took his turn of guarding the windows, and to
prevent his being overcome by sleep he placed a lot of thorns under his
chin, so that if he felt drowsy and nodded his head they would prick
him and keep him awake.

The moon was already risen and it was as light as day, when suddenly he
heard a fearful noise, and at the same time a terrible desire to sleep
overpowered him.

His eyelids closed and his head sank on his shoulders, but the thorns
ran into him and were so painful that he awoke at once.  He saw the
hawk swooping down upon the church, and in a moment he had seized his
gun and shot at the bird.  The hawk fell heavily under a big stone,
severely wounded in its right wing.  The youth ran to look at it and
saw that a huge abyss had opened below the stone.  He went at once to
fetch his brothers, and with their help dragged a lot of pine wood and
ropes to the spot.  They fastened some of the burning pine wood to the
end of the rope and let it slowly down to the bottom of the abyss.  At
first it was quite dark, and the flaming torch only lit up dirty gray
stone walls.  But the youngest brother determined to explore the abyss,
and letting himself down by the rope he soon reached the bottom.  Here
he found a lovely meadow full of green trees and exquisite flowers.

In the middle of the meadow stood a huge stone castle, with an iron
gate leading to it, which was wide open.  Everything in the castle
seemed to be made of copper, and the only inhabitant he could discover
was a lovely girl, who was combing her golden hair; and he noticed that
whenever one of her hairs fell on the ground it rang out like pure
metal.  The youth looked at her more closely, and saw that her skin was
smooth and fair, her blue eyes bright and sparkling, and her hair as
golden as the sun.  He fell in love with her on the spot, and kneeling
at her feet he implored her to become his wife.

The lovely girl accepted his proposal gladly; but at the same time she
warned him that she could never come up to the world above till her
mother, the old witch, was dead.  And she went on to tell him that the
only way in which the old creature could be killed was with the sword
that hung up in the castle; but the sword was so heavy that no one
could lift it.

Then the youth went into a room in the castle where everything was made
of silver, and here he found another beautiful girl, the sister of his
bride.  She was combing her silver hair, and every hair that fell on
the ground rang out like pure metal.  The second girl handed him the
sword, but though he tried with all his strength he could not lift it.
At last a third sister came to him and gave him a drop of something to
drink, which she said would give him the needful strength.  He drank
one drop, but still he could not lift the sword; then he drank a second
and the sword began to move; but only after he had drunk a third drop
was he able to swing the sword over his head.

Then he hid himself in the castle and awaited the old witch's arrival.
At last as it was beginning to grow dark she appeared.  She swooped
down upon a big apple tree, and after shaking some golden apples from
it she pounced down upon the earth.  As soon as her feet touched the
ground she became transformed from a hawk into a woman.  This was the
moment the youth was waiting for, and he swung his mighty sword in the
air with all his strength and the witch's head fell off, and her blood
spurted upon the walls.

Without fear of any further danger, he packed up all the treasures of
the castle into great chests and gave his brothers a signal to pull
them up out of the abyss.  First the treasures were attached to the
rope and then the three lovely girls.  And now everything was up above
and only he himself remained below.  But as he was a little suspicious
of his brothers, he fastened a heavy stone on to the rope and let them
pull it up.  At first they heaved with a will, but when the stone was
halfway up they let it drop suddenly, and it fell to the bottom broken
into a hundred pieces.

"So that's what would have happened to my bones had I trusted myself to
them," said the youth sadly; and he cried bitterly, not because of the
treasures, but because of the lovely girl with her swanlike neck and
golden hair.

For a long time he wandered sadly all through the beautiful underworld,
and one day he met a magician who asked him the cause of his tears.
The youth told him all that had befallen him, and the magician said:

"Do not grieve, young man!  If you will guard the children who are
hidden in the golden apple tree I will bring you at once up to the
earth.  Another magician who lives in this land always eats my children
up.  It is in vain that I have hidden them under the earth and locked
them into the castle.  Now I have hidden them in the apple tree; hide
yourself there, too, and at midnight you will see my enemy."

The youth climbed up the tree and picked some of the beautiful golden
apples, which he ate for his supper.  At midnight the wind began to
rise and a rustling sound was heard at the foot of the tree.  The youth
looked down and beheld a long thick serpent beginning to crawl up the
tree.  It wound itself round the stem and gradually got higher and
higher.  It stretched its huge head, in which the eyes glittered
fiercely, among the branches, searching for the nest in which the
little children lay.  They trembled with terror when they saw the
hideous creature and hid themselves beneath the leaves.

Then the youth swung his mighty sword in the air, and with one blow cut
off the serpent's head.  He cut up the rest of the body into little
bits and strewed them to the four winds.

The father of the rescued children was so delighted over the death of
his enemy that he told the youth to get on his back, and thus he
carried him up to the world above.

With what joy did he hurry now to his brothers' house!  He burst into a
room where they were all assembled, but no one knew who he was.  Only
his bride, who was serving as cook to her sisters, recognized her lover
at once.

His brothers, who had quite believed he was dead, yielded him up his
treasures at once and flew into the woods in terror.  But the good
youth forgave them all they had done and divided his treasures with
them.  Then he built himself a big castle with golden windows, and
there he lived happily with his golden-haired wife till the end of
their lives.

THE GLASS MOUNTAIN

By Hermann R. Kletke

ONCE upon a time there was a glass mountain at the top of which stood a
castle made of pure gold, and in front of the castle there grew an
apple tree on which there were golden apples.

Anyone who picked an apple gained admittance into the golden castle,
and there in a silver room sat an enchanted princess of surpassing
fairness and beauty.  She was as rich, too, as she was beautiful, for
the cellars of the castle were full of precious stones, and great
chests of the finest gold stood round the walls of all the rooms.

Many knights had come from afar to try their luck, but it was in vain
they attempted to climb the mountain.  In spite of having their horses
shod with sharp nails, no one managed to get more than halfway up, and
then they all fell back right down to the bottom of the steep, slippery
hill.  Sometimes they broke an arm, sometimes a leg, and many a brave
man had broken his neck even.

The beautiful princess sat at her window and watched the bold knights
trying to reach her on their splendid horses.  The sight of her always
gave men fresh courage, and they flocked from the four quarters of the
globe to attempt the work of rescuing her.  But all in vain, and for
seven years the princess had sat now and waited for some one to scale
the glass mountain.

A heap of corpses both of riders and horses lay round the mountain, and
many dying men lay groaning there unable to go any further with their
wounded limbs.  The whole neighborhood had the appearance of a vast
churchyard.  In three more days the seven years would be at an end,
when a knight in golden armor and mounted on a spirited steed was seen
making his way toward the fatal hill.

Sticking his spurs into his horse he made a rush at the mountain and
got up halfway, then he calmly turned his horse's head and came down
again without a slip or stumble.  The following day he started in the
same way; the horse trod on the glass as if it had been level earth,
and sparks of fire flew from its hoofs.  All the other knights gazed in
astonishment, for he had almost gained the summit, and in another
moment he would have reached the apple tree; but of a sudden a huge
eagle rose up and spread its mighty wings, hitting as it did so the
knight's horse in the eye.  The beast shied, opened its wide nostrils,
and tossed its mane, then rearing high up in the air, its hind feet
slipped and it fell with its rider down the steep mountain side.
Nothing was left of either of them except their bones, which rattled in
the battered, golden armor like dry peas in a pod.

And now there was only one more day before the close of the seven
years.  Then there arrived on the scene a mere school boy-a merry,
happy-hearted youth, but at the same time strong and well grown.  He
saw how many knights had broken their necks in vain, but undaunted he
approached the steep mountain on foot and began the ascent.

For long he had heard his parents speak of the beautiful princess who
sat in the golden castle at the top of the glass mountain.  He listened
to all he heard and determined that he too would try his luck.  But
first he went to the forest and caught a lynx, and cutting off the
creature's sharp claws, he fastened them on to his own hands and feet.

Armed with these weapons he boldly started up the glass mountain.  The
sun was nearly going down, and the youth had not got more than halfway
up.  He could hardly draw breath he was so worn out, and his mouth was
parched by thirst.  A huge black cloud passed over his head, but in
vain did he beg and beseech her to let a drop of water fall on him.  He
opened his mouth, but the black cloud sailed past and not as much as a
drop of dew moistened his dry lips.

His feet were torn and bleeding, and he could only hold on now with his
hands.  Evening closed in, and he strained his eyes to see if he could
behold the top of the mountain.  Then he gazed beneath him, and what a
sight met his eyes!  A yawning abyss, with certain and terrible death
at the bottom, reeking with half-decayed bodies of horses and riders!
And this had been the end of all the other brave men who like himself
had attempted the ascent.

It was almost pitch dark now, and only the stars lit up the glass
mountain.  The poor boy still clung on as if glued to the glass by his
blood-stained hands.  He made no struggle to get higher, for all his
strength had left him, and seeing no hope he calmly awaited death.
Then all of a sudden he fell into a deep sleep, and forgetful of his
dangerous position he slumbered sweetly.  But all the same, although he
slept, he had stuck his sharp claws so firmly into the glass that he
was quite safe not to fall.

Now, the golden apple tree was guarded by the eagle which had
overthrown the golden knight and his horse.  Every night it flew round
the glass mountain keeping a careful lookout, and no sooner had the
moon emerged from the clouds than the bird rose up from the apple tree,
and circling round in the air caught sight of the sleeping youth.

Greedy for carrion, and sure that this must be a fresh corpse, the bird
swooped down upon the boy.  But he was awake now, and perceiving the
eagle, he determined by its help to save himself.

The eagle dug its sharp claws into the tender flesh of the youth, but
he bore the pain without a sound and seized the bird's two feet with
his hands.  The creature in terror lifted him high up into the air and
began to circle round the tower of the castle.  The youth held on
bravely.  He saw the glittering palace, which by the pale rays of the
moon looked like a dim lamp; and he saw the high windows, and round one
of them a balcony in which the beautiful princess sat lost in sad
thoughts.  Then the boy saw that he was close to the apple tree, and
drawing a small knife from his belt he cut off both the eagle's feet.
The bird rose up in the air in its agony and vanished into the clouds,
and the youth fell on to the broad branches of the apple tree.

Then he drew out the claws of the eagle's feet that had remained in his
flesh and put the peel of one of the golden apples on the wound, and in
one moment it was healed and well again.  He pulled several of the
beautiful apples and put them in his pocket; then he entered the
castle.  The door was guarded by a great dragon, but as soon as he
threw an apple at it the beast vanished.

At the same moment a gate opened, and the youth perceived a courtyard
full of flowers and beautiful trees, and on a balcony sat the lovely
enchanted princess with her retinue.

As soon as she saw the youth she ran toward him and greeted him as her
husband and master.  She gave him all her treasures, and the youth
became a rich and mighty ruler.  But he never returned to the earth,
for only the mighty eagle, who had been the guardian of the princess
and of the castle, could have carried on his wings the enormous
treasure down to the world.  But as the eagle had lost its feet, it
died, and its body was found in a wood on the glass mountain.

One day when the youth was strolling about the palace garden with the
princess, his wife, he looked down over the edge of the glass mountain
and saw to his astonishment a great number of people gathered there.
He blew his silver whistle, and the swallow who acted as messenger in
the golden castle flew past.

"Fly down and ask what the matter is," he said to the little bird, who
sped off like lightning and soon returned saying:

"The blood of the eagle has restored all the people below to life.  All
those who have perished on this mountain are awakening up to-day, as it
were from a sleep, and are mounting their horses, and the whole
population are gazing on this unheard-of wonder with joy and
amazement."

HUNTSMAN THE UNLUCKY

By John T. Naaké

ONCE upon a time there lived a huntsman.  He would go every day in
search of game, but it often happened that he killed nothing, and so
was obliged to return home with his bag empty.  On that account he was
nicknamed "Huntsman the Unlucky."  At last he was reduced by his ill
fortune to such extremities that he had not a piece of bread nor a
kopek left.  The wretched man wandered about the forest, cold and
hungry; he had eaten nothing for three days, and was nearly dying of
starvation.  He lay down on the grass determined to put an end to his
existence; happily better thoughts came into his mind; he crossed
himself, and threw away the gun.  Suddenly he heard a rustling noise
near him.  It seemed to issue from some thick grass close at hand.  The
hunter got up and approached the spot.  He then observed that the grass
partly hid a gloomy abyss, from the bottom of which there rose a stone,
and on it lay a small jar.  As he looked and listened the hunter heard
a small voice crying-

"Dear, kind traveler, release me!"

The voice seemed to proceed from the little jar.  The courageous
hunter, walking carefully from one stone to another, approached the
spot where the jar lay, took it up gently, and heard a voice crying
from within like the chirping of a grasshopper-

"Release me, and I will be of service to you."

"Who are you, my little friend?" asked Huntsman the Unlucky.

"I have no name, and cannot be seen by human eyes," answered a soft
voice.  "If you want me, call 'Murza!'  A wicked magician put me in
this jar, sealed it with the seal of King Solomon, and then threw me
into this fearful place, where I have lain for seventy years."

"Very good," said Huntsman the Unlucky; "I will give you your liberty,
and then we shall see how you will keep your word."  He broke the seal
and opened the little jar-there was nothing in it!

"Halloa!  where are you, my friend?" cried the hunter.

"By your side," a voice answered.

The hunter looked about him, but could see no one.

"Murza!"

"Ready!  I await your orders.  I am your servant for the next three
days, and will do whatever you desire.  You have only to say, 'Go
there, I know not where; bring something, I know not what.'"

"Very well," said the hunter.  "'You will doubtless know best what is
wanted: Go there, I know not where; bring something, I know not what."

As soon as the hunter had uttered these words there appeared before him
a table covered with dishes, each filled with the most delicious
viands, as if they had come direct from a banquet of the czar.  The
hunter sat down at the table, and ate and drank till he was satisfied.
He then rose, crossed himself, and, bowing on all sides, exclaimed-

"Thank you!  thank you!"

Instantly the table, and everything else with it, disappeared, and the
hunter continued his journey.

After walking some distance he sat down by the roadside to rest.  It so
happened that while the hunter was resting himself, there passed
through the forest a gypsy thief, leading a horse which he wanted to
sell.

"I wish I had the money to buy the horse with," thought the hunter;
"what a pity my pockets are empty!  However, I will ask my invisible
friend.  Murza!"

"Ready!"

"Go there, I know not where; bring something, I know not what."

In less than a minute the hunter heard the money chinking in his
pocket; gold poured into them, he knew not how nor whence.

"Thanks!  you have kept your word," said the hunter.

He then began to bargain with the gypsy for the horse.  Having agreed
upon the price, he paid the man in gold, who, staring at the hunter
with his mouth wide open, wondered where Huntsman the Unlucky had got
so much money from.  Parting from the hunter, the gypsy thief ran with
all his speed to the farther end of the forest, and whistled.  There
was no answer.  "They are asleep," thought the gypsy, and entered a
cavern where some robbers, lying on the skins of animals, were resting
themselves.

"Halloa, comrades!  Are you asleep?" cried the gypsy.  "Get up, quick!
or you will lose a fine bird.  He is alone in the forest, and his
pockets are full of gold.  Make haste!"

The robbers sprang up, mounted their horses, and galloped after the
hunter.

The hunter heard the clatter, and seeing himself suddenly surrounded by
robbers, cried out- "Murza!"

"Ready!"  answered a voice near him.  "Go there, I know not where;
bring something, I know not what."

There was a rustling noise heard in the forest, and then something from
behind the trees fell upon the robbers.  They were knocked from their
horses, and scattered on all sides; yet no hand was seen to touch them.
The robbers, thrown upon the ground, could not raise themselves, and
the hunter, thankful and rejoicing at his deliverance, rode on, and
soon found his way out of the dark forest, and came upon a town.

Near this town there were pitched tents full of soldiers.  Huntsman the
Unlucky was told that an enormous army of Tartars had come, under the
command of their khan, who, angry at being refused the hand of the
beautiful Princess Milovzora, the daughter of the czar, had declared
war against him.  The hunter had seen the Princess Milovzora when she
was out hunting in the forest.  She used to ride a beautiful horse, and
carry a golden lance in her hand; a magnificent quiver of arrows hung
from her shoulder.  When her veil was lifted up she appeared like the
spring sunlight, to give light to the eyes and warmth to the heart.

The hunter reflected for a little while, and then cried, "Murza!"

In an instant he found himself dressed in splendid attire; his jacket
was embroidered with gold, he wore a beautiful mantle on his shoulders,
and ostrich feathers hung gracefully down from the top of his helmet,
fastened by a brooch of a ruby surrounded by pearls.  The hunter went
into the castle, presented himself before the czar, and offered to
drive away the forces of the enemy on condition that the czar gave him
the beautiful Princess Milovzora for his wife.

The czar was greatly surprised, but did not like to refuse such an
offer at once; he first asked the hunter his name, his birth and his
possessions.

"I am called Huntsman the Unlucky, Master of Murza the Invisible."

The czar thought the young stranger was mad; the courtiers, however,
who had seen him before, assured the czar that the stranger exactly
resembled Huntsman the Unlucky, whom they knew; but how he had got that
splendid dress they could not tell.

Then the czar demanded:

"Do you hear what they say?  If you are telling lies, you will lose
your head.  Let us see, then, how you will overcome the enemy with the
forces of your invisible Murza?"

"Be of good hope, czar," answered the hunter; "as soon as I say the
word, everything will be completed."

"Good," said the czar.  "If you have spoken the truth you shall have my
daughter for your wife; if not, your head will be the forfeit."

The hunter said to himself, "I shall either become a prince, or I am a
lost man."

He then whispered, "Murza, go there, I know not where; do this, I know
not what."

A few minutes passed, and there was nothing to be heard or seen.
Huntsman the Unlucky turned pale; the czar, enraged, ordered him to be
seized and put in irons, when suddenly the firing of guns was heard in
the distance.  The czar and his courtiers ran out on the steps leading
to the castle, and saw bodies of men approaching from both right and
left, their standards waving gracefully in the air; the soldiers were
splendidly equipped.  The czar could hardly believe his eyes, for he
himself had no troops so fine as these.

"This is no delusion!" cried Huntsman the Unlucky.  "These are the
forces of my invisible friend."

"Let them drive away the enemy then, if they can," said the czar.

The hunter waved his handkerchief.  The army wheeled into position;
music burst forth in a martial strain, and then a great cloud of dust
arose.  When the dust had cleared away, the army was gone.

The czar invited Huntsman the Unlucky to dinner, and asked him numerous
questions about Murza the Invisible.  At the second course the news
came that the enemy was flying in every direction, completely routed.
The terrified Tartars had left all their tents and baggage behind them.
The czar thanked the hunter for his assistance, and informed his
daughter that he had found a husband for her.  Princess Milovzora
blushed upon receiving this intelligence, then turned pale, and began
to shed tears.  The hunter whispered something to Murza, and the
princess's tears changed into precious stones as they fell.  The
courtiers hastened to pick them up-they were pearls and diamonds.  The
princess smiled at this, and overcome with pleasure gave her hand to
Huntsman the Unlucky-unlucky no longer.  Then began the feast.  But
here the story must end.

STORY OF LITTLE SIMPLETON

By John T. Naaké

ONCE there lived a peasant and his wife who had three daughters.  The
two elder girls were cunning and selfish; the youngest was simple and
open-hearted, and on that account came to be called, first by her
sisters and afterward by her father and mother, "Little Simpleton."
Little Simpleton was pushed about, had to fetch everything that was
wanted, and was always kept at work; but she was ever ready to do what
she was told, and never uttered a word of complaint.  She would water
the garden, prepare pine splinters, milk the cows, and feed the ducks;
she had to wait upon everybody-in a word, she was the drudge of the
family.

One day, as the peasant was going with the hay to market, he asked his
daughters what they would like him to buy for them.

"Buy me some kumach (Red wool stuff from Bucharest) for a sarafan (A
long dress worn by the Russian peasant women) father," answered the
eldest daughter.

"And me some nankeen," said the second.  The youngest daughter alone
did not ask for a present.  The peasant was moved with compassion for
the girl; although a simpleton she was still his daughter.

Turning to her he asked "Well, Little Simpleton, what shall I buy for
you?"

Little Simpleton smiled and replied-

"Buy me, dearest father, a little silver plate and a little apple."

"What do you want them for?" asked her sisters.

"I will make the little apple roll round the plate, and will say some
words to it which an old woman taught me because I gave her a cake."

The peasant promised to buy his daughters what they asked of him, and
then started for market.  He sold his hay, and bought the presents:
some nankeen for one of his daughters, for another some kumach, and for
Little Simpleton a little silver plate and a little apple.  Then he
returned home and gave these things to his daughters.

The girls were delighted; the two elder ones made themselves sarafans,
and laughed at Little Simpleton, wondering what she would do with the
silver plate and the apple.

Little Simpleton did not eat the apple, but sat down in a corner and
cried-

"Roll, roll, little apple on the silver plate, and show me towns and
fields, forests and seas, lofty mountains and beautiful skies."

And the apple began to roll on the plate, and there appeared on it town
after town; ships sailing on the seas, and people in the fields;
mountains and beautif