ul skies; suns and stars.  All these things looked
so beautiful, and were so wonderful, that it would be impossible to
tell of them in a story, or describe them with the pen.

At first the elder sisters looked at the little plate with delight;
soon, however, their hearts were filled with envy, and they began to
try to get it from their younger sister.  But the girl would not part
with it on any account.  Then the wicked girls said- "Dearest sister,
let us go into the forest to gather blackberries."

Little Simpleton got up, gave the plate and apple to her father, and
went with them into the forest.  They walked about and gathered
blackberries.  All at once they saw a spade lying upon the ground.  The
wicked sisters killed Little Simpleton with it, and buried her under a
birch tree.

They returned home late, and told their father, "The Simpleton is lost;
she ran away from us in the forest; we searched, but could not find her
anywhere.  The wolves must have eaten her."

The peasant regretted the loss of his daughter bitterly; for although
so simple she was still his child.  The wicked sisters also shed tears.
Her father put the little silver plate and the little apple into a box,
and locked them up.

Next morning a shepherd was tending his sheep near the place, playing
on his pipe, and searching in the forest for one of his flock that was
missing.  He observed the little grave under the birch tree; it was
covered by the most lovely flowers, and out of the middle of the grave
there grew a reed.  The shepherd cut off the reed, and made a pipe of
it.  As soon as the pipe was prepared, oh, wonderful!  It began to play
of itself, and say-

"Play, oh pipe, play!  and comfort my poor parents and sisters.  I was
killed for the sake of my little silver plate and my little apple."

When the people heard of this they ran out of their huts, and all came
round the shepherd and began to ask him who was killed.

"Good people," answered the shepherd, "I don't know who it is.  While
searching for one of my sheep in the forest, I came upon a grave
covered with flowers.  Above them all stood a reed.  I cut off the reed
and made this pipe of it.  It plays of itself, and you have heard what
it says."

The father of Little Simpleton happened to be present.  He took the
pipe into his own hand, and it began to play:

"Play, oh pipe, play!  Comfort my poor father and mother.  I was killed
for the sake of my little silver plate and my little apple."  The
peasant asked the shepherd to take him to the place where he had cut
the reed.  They all went into the forest, saw the grave, and were
astonished at the sight of the lovely flowers which grew there.  They
opened the grave, and there discovered the body of a girl, which the
poor man recognized as that of his youngest daughter.  There she lay,
murdered-but by whom no one could tell.  The people asked one another
who it was that had killed the poor girl.  Suddenly the pipe began to
play-

"Oh, my dearest father; my sisters brought me to this forest, and here
killed me for the sake of my little plate and my little apple.  You
will not bring me to life until you fetch some of the water from the
czar's well."

Then the wicked sisters confessed it all.  They were seized and cast
into a dark prison, to await the pleasure of the czar.  The peasant set
out for the capital.  As soon as he arrived at the city, he went to the
palace, saw the czar, told his story, and begged permission to take
some water from the well.  The czar said, "You may take some water of
life from my well, and as soon as you have restored your daughter to
life, bring her here with her little plate and the little apple; bring
your other two daughters also."

The peasant bowed to the ground, and returned home with a bottle full
of the water of life.  He hastened to the grave in the forest, lifted
up the body of his daughter, and as soon as he had sprinkled it with
the water the girl came to life again, and threw herself into his arms.
All who were present were moved to tears.

Then the peasant started again for the capital, and arriving there went
at once to the czar's palace.  The czar came out, and saw the peasant
with his three daughters, two of them with their arms bound, the third,
as beautiful as the spring flowers, stood near, the tears like diamonds
falling down her cheeks.  The czar was very angry with the two wicked
sisters; then he asked the youngest for her little plate and apple.
The girl took the box from her father's hands, and said-

"Sire, what would you like to see?  Your towns or your armies; the
ships at sea, or the beautiful stars in the sky?"

Then she made the little apple roll round the plate, and there appeared
on it many towns, one after the other, with bodies of soldiers near
them, with their standards and artillery.  Then the soldiers made ready
for the fight, and the officers stood in their places.  The firing
commenced, the smoke arose, and hid it all from view.  The little apple
began again to roll on the plate, and there appeared the sea covered
with ships, their flags streaming in the wind.  The guns began to fire,
the smoke arose, and again all disappeared from their sight.  The apple
again began to roll on the plate, and there appeared on it the
beautiful sky with suns and stars.

The czar was astonished.  The girl fell down on her knees before him,
and cried-

"Oh, Sire, take my little plate and my little apple, and forgive my
sisters!"

The czar was moved by her tears and entreaties and forgave the wicked
sisters; the delighted girl sprang up and began to embrace and kiss
them.  The czar smiled, took her by the hand and said, "I honor the
goodness of your heart, and admire your beauty.  Would you like to
become my wife?"

"Sire," answered the beautiful girl, "I obey your royal command; but
allow me first to ask my parents' permission."

The delighted peasant at once gave his consent; they sent for the
mother, and she, too, gladly bestowed her blessing.

"One favor more," said the beautiful girl to the czar.  "Permit my
parents and sisters to remain with me."

On hearing this the sisters fell down on their knees before her, and
cried-

"We are not worthy of so much favor!"

"Dearest sisters," said the beautiful girl, "all is forgotten and
forgiven.  They who remember the past with malice deserve to lose their
sight."

She then tried to lift them up from the ground, but they, shedding
bitter tears, would not rise.  Then the czar, looking at them with a
frown, bade them get up; he allowed them, however, to stay in the
palace.

A magnificent entertainment then began: the palace was splendidly
lighted up, and looked like the sun among the clouds.  The czar and
czarina rode out in an open chariot and showed themselves to the
people, who cried joyfully-

"Long live czar and czarina!  May they shine upon us like the glorious
sun for years and years to come!"

THE GOLDEN FISH

By L. M. Gask

UPON a certain island in the middle of the sea dwelt an old man and his
wife.  They were so poor that they often went short of bread, for the
fish he caught were their only means of livelihood.

One day when the man had been fishing for many hours without success,
he hooked a small Gold Fish, whose eyes were bright as diamonds.

"Let me go, kind man," the little creature cried.  "I should not make a
mouthful either for yourself or your wife, and my own mate waits for me
down in the waters."

The old man was so moved by his pleadings that he took him off the hook
and threw him back into the sea.  Before he swam off to rejoin his
mate, the Gold Fish promised that in return for his kindness he would
come to the fisherman's help if ever he wanted him.  Laughing merrily
at this, for he did not believe that a fish could help him except by
providing him with food, the old man went home and told his wife.

"What!" she cried, "you actually let him go when you had caught him?
It was just like your stupidity.  We have not a scrap of bread in the
house, and now, I suppose, we must starve!"

Her reproaches continued for so long that though he scarcely believed
what the fish had said, the poor old man thought that at least it would
do no harm to put him to the test.  He therefore hastened back to the
shore, and stood at the very edge of the waves.

"Golden Fish, Golden Fish!" he called.  "Come to me, I pray, with your
tail in the water, and your head lifted up toward me!"

As the last word was uttered the Gold Fish popped up his head.

"You see I have kept my promise," he said.  "What can I do for you, my
good friend?"

"There is not a scrap of bread in the house," quavered the old man,
"and my wife is very angry with me for letting you go.

"Don't trouble about that!" said the Gold Fish in an off-hand manner;
"you will find bread, and to spare, when you go home."  And the old man
hurried away to see if his little friend had spoken truly.

Surely enough, he found that the pan was full of fine white loaves.

"I did not do so badly for you after all, good wife!"  he said, as they
ate their supper; but his wife was anything but satisfied.  The more
she had, the more she wanted, and she lay awake planning what they
should demand from the Gold Fish next.

"Wake up, you lazy man!" she cried to her husband, early next morning.
"Go down to the sea and tell your fish that I must have a new washtub."

The old man did as his wife bade him, and the moment he called the Gold
Fish reappeared.  He seemed quite willing to grant the new request, and
on his return home the old man found a beautiful new washtub in the
small yard at the back of their cabin.

"Why didn't you ask for a new cabin too?"  his wife said angrily.  "If
you had had a grain of sense you would have done this without being
told.  Go back at once, and say that we must have one.

The old man was rather ashamed to trouble his friend again so soon; but
the Gold Fish was as obliging as ever.

"Very well," he said, "a new cabin you shall have."  And the old mart
found one so spick-and-span that he hardly dare cross the floor for
fear of soiling it.  It would have pleased him greatly had his wife
been contented, but she, good woman, did nothing but grumble still.

"Tell your Gold Fish," she said next day, "that I want to be a duchess,
with many servants at my beck and call, and a splendid carriage to
drive in.

Once more her wish was granted, but now her husband's plight was hard
indeed.  She would not let him share her palace, but ordered him off to
the stables, where he was forced to keep company with her grooms.  In a
few days, however, he grew reconciled to his lot, for here he could
live in peace, while he learned that she was leading those around her a
terrible life, it was not long before she sent for him again.

"Summon the Gold Fish," she commanded haughtily, "and tell him I wish
to be Queen of the Waters, and to rule over all the fish."

The poor old man felt sorry for the fish if they had to be under her
rule, for prosperity had quite spoiled her.  However, he dared not
disobey, and once more summoned his powerful friend.

"Make your wife the Queen of the Waters?" exclaimed the Gold Fish.
"That is the last thing I should do.  She is unfit to reign, for she
cannot rule herself or her desires.  I shall make her once more a poor
old woman.  Adieu!  You will see me no more."

The old man returned sorrowfully with this unpleasant message, to find
the palace transformed into a humble cabin, and his wife in a skirt of
threadbare stuff in place of the rich brocade which she had worn of
late.  She was sad and humble, and much more easy to live with than she
had been before.  Her husband therefore had occasion many times to
think gratefully of the Gold Fish, and sometimes when drawing up his
net the glint of the sun upon the scales of his captives would give him
a moment's hope-which, alas!  was as often disappointed-that once again
he was to see his benefactor.

THE WONDERFUL HAIR

By W. S. Karajich

THERE once lived a man who was very poor, and who had many children; so
many that he was unable to support them.  As he could not endure the
idea of their perishing of hunger, he was often tempted to destroy
them; his wife alone prevented him.  One night, as he lay asleep, there
appeared to him a lovely child in a vision.  The child said-

"Oh, man!  I see your soul is in danger, in the thought of killing your
helpless children.  But I know you are poor, and am come here to help
you.  You will find under your pillow in the morning a looking-glass, a
red handkerchief, and an embroidered scarf.  Take these three things,
but show them to no one, and go to the forest.  In that forest you will
find a rivulet.  Walk by the side of this rivulet until you come to its
source; there you will see a girl, as bright as the sun, with long hair
streaming down her shoulders.  Take care that she does you no harm.
Say not a word to her; for if you utter a single syllable, she will
change you into a fish or some other creature, and eat you.  Should she
ask you to comb her hair, obey her.  As you comb it, you will find one
hair as red as blood; pull it out, and run away with it.  Be swift, for
she will follow you.  Then throw on the ground, first the embroidered
scarf, then the red handkerchief, and last of all the looking-glass;
they will delay her pursuit of you.  Sell the hair to some rich man;
but see that you do not allow yourself to be cheated, for it is of
boundless worth.  Its produce will make you rich and thus you will be
able to feed your children."

Next morning, when the poor man awoke, he found under his pillow
exactly the things the child mad told him of in his dream.  He went
immediately into the forest, and when he had discovered the rivulet he
walked by the side of it, on and on, until he reached its source.
There he saw a girl sitting on the bank, threading a needle with the
rays of the sun.  She was embroidering a net made of the hair of
heroes, spread on a frame before her.  He approached and bowed to her.
The girl got up and demanded-

"Where did you come from, strange knight?"

The man remained silent.  Again she asked him-

"Who are you, and why do you come here?"  And many other questions.
But he remained silent as a stone, indicating with his hands only that
he was dumb and in need of help.  She told him to sit at her feet, and
when he had gladly done so, she inclined her head toward him, that he
might comb her hair.  He began to arrange her hair as if to comb it,
but as soon as he had found the red one, he separated it from the rest,
plucked it out, leaped up, and ran from her with his utmost speed.

The girl sprang after him, and was soon at his heels.  The man, turning
round as he ran, and seeing that his pursuer would soon overtake him,
threw the embroidered scarf on the ground, as he had been told.  When
the girl saw it, she stopped and began to examine it; turning it over
on both sides, and admiring the embroidery.  Meanwhile the man gained a
considerable distance in advance.  The girl tied the scarf round her
bosom and recommenced the pursuit.  When the man saw that she was again
about to overtake him, he threw down the red handkerchief.  At the
sight of it, the girl again stopped, examined, and wondered at it; the
peasant, in the meantime, was again enabled to increase the distance
between them.  When the girl perceived this, she became furious, and
throwing away both scarf and handkerchief began to run with increased
speed after him.  She was just upon the point of catching the poor
peasant, when he threw the looking-glass at her feet.  At the sight of
the looking-glass, the like of which she had never seen before, the
girl checked herself, picked it up, and looked in it.  Seeing her own
face, she fancied there was another girl looking at her.  While she was
thus occupied the man ran so far that she could not possibly overtake
him.  When the girl saw that further pursuit was useless, she turned
back, and the peasant, joyful and unhurt, reached his home.  Once
within doors he showed the hair to his wife and children, and told them
all that had happened to him; but his wife only laughed at the Story.
The peasant, however, took no heed of her ridicule, but went to a
neighboring town to sell the hair.  He was soon surrounded by a crowd
of people, and some merchants began to bid for his prize.  One merchant
offered him one gold piece, another two, for the single hair, and so
on, until the price rose to a hundred gold pieces.  Meanwhile the king,
hearing of the wonderful red hair, ordered the peasant to be called in,
and offered him a thousand gold pieces for it.  The man joyfully sold
it for that sum.

What wonderful kind of hair was this after all?  The king split it
carefully open from end to end, and in it was found the story of many
marvelous secrets of nature, and of things that had happened since the
creation of the world.

Thus the peasant became rich, and henceforth lived happily with his
wife and children.  The child he had seen in his dream, was an angel
sent down from heaven to succor him, and to reveal to mankind the
knowledge of many wonderful things which had hitherto remained
unexplained.

THE LANGUAGE OF ANIMALS

By W. S. Karajich

A CERTAIN man had a shepherd who had served him faithfully and honestly
for many years.  One day, as the Shepherd was tending his sheep, he
heard a hissing noise in the forest, and wondered what it could he.  He
went, therefore, into the wood in the direction of the sound, to learn
what it was.  There he saw that the dry grass and leaves had caught
fire, and in the middle of a burning circle a Snake was hissing.  The
Shepherd stopped to see what the Snake would do, for the fire was
burning all around it, and the flames approached it nearer and nearer
every moment.  Then the Snake cried from amid the fire-

"Oh, Shepherd!  for heaven's sake save me from this fire!"

The Shepherd stretched out his crook over the flames to the Snake, and
the Snake passed along it on to his hand, and from his hand it crawled
to his neck, where it twisted itself round.

When the Shepherd perceived this, he was greatly alarmed, and said to
the Snake-

"What have I done in an evil hour?  Have I saved you to my own
destruction?"

The Snake answered him, "Fear not, but carry me to my father's house.
My father is the King of the snakes."

The Shepherd, however, began to beg the Snake to excuse him, saying
that he could not leave the sheep; but the Snake answered-

"Be not troubled about the sheep; no harm shall happen to them; only go
as fast as you can."

The Shepherd then walked through the forest with the Snake until he
came to a gate which was entirely made of snakes knotted together.
There the Snake on the Shepherd's neck gave a whistle, and all the
other snakes untwisted themselves.  Then the Snake said to the
Shepherd-

"When we come to my father's palace he will give you whatever you ask
for: silver, gold, and precious stones.  Do you, however, take nothing
of these, but beg to know the language of the brutes and other
creatures.  He will refuse you this for a long time, but at last he
will grant your request."

Meanwhile they came to the palace, to the father, who, shedding many
tears, cried-

"For heaven's sake!  my dearest daughter, where have you been?"

And she told him in due order how she had been surrounded by the forest
fire, and how the Shepherd had rescued her.  Then the King of the
snakes turned to the Shepherd and said to him-

"What would you have me give you for the deliverance of my daughter?"

The Shepherd answered, "Only let me understand the language of animals;
I want nothing else."

Then the King said, "That is not good for you; for if I were to bestow
upon you the gift of the knowledge of the tongue of animals, and you
were to tell anyone of it, you would instantly die.  Ask, therefore,
for something else; whatever you desire to possess, I will give to
you."

To which the Shepherd replied-

"If you wish to give me anything, then grant me the knowledge of the
language of brute creatures; but if you do not care to give me that-
farewell, and God protect you!  I want nothing else."  And the Shepherd
turned to leave the place.

Then the King called him back, saying-

"Stay!  come here to me, since you will have it at all hazards.  Open
your mouth."

The Shepherd opened his mouth, and the King of the snakes breathed into
it, and said-

"Do you now breathe into my mouth."

The Shepherd breathed into his mouth, and the Snake King breathed again
into that of the Shepherd.  After they had breathed each three times
into the other's mouth, the King said-

"Now you understand the language of animals, and of all created things.
Go in peace, and God be with you!  but for the life of you, tell no one
of this; if you do, you will die on the instant!"

The Shepherd returned home through the forest.  As he walked he heard
and understood all that the birds said, and the grass and all the other
things that are upon the earth.  When he came to his sheep and found
them all together and quite safe, he laid himself down to rest.
Scarcely had he lain down when there flew two ravens toward him, who
took their perch upon a tree, and began to talk together in their own
language.

"What if that Shepherd only knew that underneath the place where the
black lamb lies there is a cellar full of silver and gold!'

When the Shepherd heard this, he went to his master, and told him of
it.  The master took a cart with him, and they dug down to a door
leading to the cave, and removed the treasure to his house.  But the
master was an honest man, and gave all the treasure to the Shepherd,
saying-

"My son, all this treasure is yours, for heaven has given it to you.
Buy yourself a house with it, marry, and live happily in it."

The Shepherd took the treasure, built himself a house, and, having
married, lived a happy life.  Soon he became known as the richest man,
not only in his own village, but so rich that there was not his equal
in the whole neighborhood.  He had his own shepherd, cow keeper,
hostler, and swineherd; plenty of goods and chattels, and great riches.

One day, just before Christmas, he said to his wife, "Get some wine,
and some brandy, and all things necessary; to-morrow we will go to the
farmyard and take the good things to the shepherds that they may also
enjoy themselves."

The wife followed his directions and prepared all that he had told her.
When they arrived on the following day at the farmhouse, the master
said to the shepherds in the evening--

"Come here, all of you; eat, drink, and be merry.  I will watch over
the flocks for you to-night."  And he went, in very deed, and remained
with the flocks.

About midnight the wolves began to howl and the dogs to bark, and the
wolves said in their language-

"May we come in and do what mischief we like?  Then you, too, shall
have your share."

And the dogs answered in their language, "Come in; and we will eat our
fill with you."

But among the dogs there was an old one, who had but two teeth in his
head, and he said to the wolves-

"That will not do.  So long as I have my two teeth in my head you shall
do no harm to my master nor his."

The master heard it all, and understood what was said.  On the
following morning he ordered all the dogs to be killed save only the
old one.  The hinds said, "Heaven forbid, sir; that would be a great
pity!"  But the master answered, "Do what I have told you."

Then he prepared to return home with his wife, and they both mounted
their horses.  And as they rode on, the husband got a little ahead,
while the wife fell behind.  At last the husband's horse neighed, and
called to the mare-

"Come on!  make haste!  Why do you lag behind!"

And the mare answered him, "Ah yes, it is all very easy for you: you
have only one to carry, the master; while I have to carry two, the
mistress and her baby."

The husband turned round and laughed, and his wife seeing this, urged
the mare forward, overtook her husband, and asked him what he had been
laughing at.

"Nothing; I do not know; just something that came into my mind,"
answered the husband.

But the wife was not satisfied with this answer, and she pressed him
again and again to tell her why he had laughed.

But he excused himself, and said-

"Let me alone, wife!  What is the matter with you?  I do not know
myself why I laughed."

But the more he denied her the more she insisted upon his telling her
what he had been laughing at.  At last the husband said to her-

"Know then, that if I tell you the reason, I shall instantly die."

The woman, however, did not care for that, but urged him to tell her
notwithstanding.

Meanwhile they had reached home.  The husband ordered a coffin to be
made immediately, and when it was ready he had it placed before the
house, and said to his wife-

"See now, I now lay me down in this coffin, and then tell you why I
laughed; but as soon as I have told you I shall die."

The husband lay down in the coffin, and looked around him for the last
time.  And there came the old Dog from the farmyard, and sat down at
his head and whined.  The husband seeing this, said to his wife-

"Bring a piece of bread and give it to this Dog."

The wife brought out a piece of bread, and threw it down to the Dog;
but the Dog would not even look at it.  Then the House Cock ran up, and
began to pick at the bread; and the Dog said to it-

"You miserable greedy thing, you!  You can eat, and yet you see that
the master is going to die!"

The Cock answered the Dog, "And let him die since he is such a fool.  I
have a hundred wives, and I call them all together whenever I find a
grain of corn, and as soon as they have come round me, I swallow it
myself.  And if any one of them got angry, I should be at her directly
with my beak.  The master has only one wife, and he cannot even manage
her."

When the husband heard this he quickly sprang out of the coffin, took
up a stick, and called his wife into the room.

"Come, wife," he said, "I will tell you what you so much want to hear."

Then as he beat her with the stick he cried, "This is it, wife!  This
is it."

In this way he quieted his wife, and she never asked him again what he
had been laughing at.

THE EMPEROR TROJAN'S GOAT'S EARS

By W. S. Karajich

THERE once lived an emperor whose name was Trojan.  This emperor had
goat's ears, and he used to call in barber after barber to shave him.
But whoever went in never came out again; for while the barber was
shaving him, the emperor would ask what he observed uncommon in him,
and when the barber would answer that he observed his goat's ears, the
Emperor would immediately cut him into pieces.

At last it came to the turn of a certain barber to go who feigned
illness, and sent his apprentice instead.  When the apprentice appeared
before the emperor he was asked why his master did not come, and he
answered, "Because he is ill."  Then the emperor sat down, and allowed
the youth to shave him.

As he shaved him the apprentice noticed the emperor's goat's ears, but
when Trojan asked him what he had observed, he answered, "I have
observed nothing."

Then the emperor gave him twelve ducats, and said to him-

"From this time forth you shall always come and shave me.

When the apprentice came home, his master asked him how he got on at
the emperor's, and the youth answered--

"All well; and the emperor has told me that I am to shave him in
future."

Then he showed the twelve ducats he had received; but as to the
emperor's goat's ears, of that he said nothing.

>From this time forth the apprentice went regularly to Trojan to shave
him, and for each shaving he received twelve ducats; but he told no one
that the emperor had goat's ears.

At last it began to worry and torment him that he dare tell no one his
secret; and he became sick and began to pine away.  His master, who
could not fail to observe this, asked him what ailed him, and after
much pressing the apprentice confessed that he had something on his
heart which he dared not confide to anyone, and he added, "If I could
only tell it to somebody, I should feel better at once."

Then said the master-

"Tell it to me, and I will faithfully keep it from everybody else; or
if you fear to trust me with it, then go to the confessor and confide
it to him; but if you will not do even that, then go into the fields
outside the town, there dig a hole, thrust your head into it, and tell
the earth three times what you know, then throw the mold in again and
fill up the hole."

The apprentice chose the last course; went into the field outside the
city, dug a hole, into which he thrust his head, and called out three
times-

"The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears."

Then he filled up the hole again, and with his mind quite relieved went
home.

When some time had passed by, there sprang an elder tree out of this
very hole, and three slender sterns grew up, beautiful and straight as
tapers.  Some shepherds found this elder, cut off one of the stems, and
made a pipe of it.  But as soon as they began to blow into the new
pipe, out burst the words:

"The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears!"

The news of this strange occurrence spread immediately through the
whole city, and at last the Emperor Trojan himself heard the children
blowing on a pipe:

"The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears!"

He sent instantly for the barber's apprentice, and shouted to him-

"Heh!  what is this you have been telling the people about me."

The poor youth began at once to explain that he had indeed noticed the
emperor's ears, but had never told a soul of it.  The emperor tore his
saber out of its sheath to hew the apprentice down, at which the youth
was so frightened that he told the whole story in its order: how he had
confessed himself to the earth; how an elder tree had sprang up on the
very spot; and how, when a pipe was made of one of its sterns, the tale
was sounded in every direction.

Then the emperor took the apprentice with him in a carriage to the
place, to convince himself of the truth of the story; and when they
arrived there they found there was only a single stem left.  The
Emperor Trojan ordered a pipe to be made out of this stem, that he
might hear how it sounded.  As soon as the pipe was ready, and one of
them blew into it, out poured the words:

"The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears!"

Then the emperor was convinced that nothing on this earth could be
hidden, spared the barber apprentices life, and henceforth allowed any
barber, without exception, to come and shave him.

THE MAIDEN WHO WAS WISER THAN THE KING

By W. S. Karajich

THERE once lived a poor man in a miserable hovel, who had no one with
him save an only daughter.  But she was very wise, and went about
everywhere seeking alms, and taught her father also to speak in a
becoming manner when he begged.  It happened once that the poor man
came to the king and asked for a gift.  The king demanded whence he
came, and who had taught him to speak so well.  The man said whence he
came, and that it was his daughter who had taught him.

"And who taught your daughter?"  asked the king.

The poor man answered: "God, and our great poverty.''

Then the king gave him thirty eggs, saying-

"Take these eggs to your daughter, and tell her to hatch chickens out
of them, and I will reward her handsomely; but if she cannot hatch
them, it will go ill with you."

The poor man went crying back to his hovel, and related to his daughter
what had passed.  The maiden saw at once that the eggs had been boiled,
but she told her father to go to rest, and assured him that she would
see that all went well.  The father followed her advice, and went to
sleep; the maiden took a pot, filled it with water and beans, and set
it on the fire.  On the following morning, the beans being quite
boiled, she told her father to take a plow and oxen, and to plow along
the road where the king would pass.

"And," she added, "when you see the king, take the beans, sow them, and
cry, 'Hi!  go on, oxen mine!  Heaven be with me, and make my boiled
beans take root and grow!'  And when the king asks you how it is
possible for boiled beans to grow, answer him, that it is quite as
possible as for boiled eggs to yield chickens."

The poor man hearkened to his daughter, went away, and began to plow.
When he saw the king coming he began to cry-

"Hi, go on, oxen mine!  God help me, and make my boiled beans take root
and grow!"

The king, hearing these words, stopped on the road, and said to the
poor man-

"Here, fellow!  how is it possible for boiled beans to grow?"

And the poor man answered him-

"Heaven prosper you, king!  just as possible as for boiled eggs to
yield chickens."

The king guessed at once that it was the poor man's daughter who had
taught him this answer.  He ordered his servants to seize him and bring
him into his presence.  Then he gave him a bundle of flax, and said to
him-

"Take this flax and make out of it ropes and sails and all that is
wanted on shipboard; if you do not, you shall lose your head."

The poor man took the bundle in great fear, and went crying home to his
daughter, to whom he related all that had passed.  But the maiden sent
him again to rest with the promise that all should go well.  On the
following day she took a small piece of wood, awoke her father, and
said to him-

"Take this wood, and carry it to the king; let him cut a spinning
wheel, a spindle, and a loom out of it, and I will do all that he
demands of me."

The poor man again followed the directions of his daughter; he went to
the king and delivered the maiden's message.  The king was astonished
at hearing this, and began to think what he should do next.  At last he
took up a small cup, and said as he gave it to the father-

"Take this cup to your daughter, and let her empty the sea with it, so
that it shall become like a dry field."

The poor man obeyed with tears in his eyes, and took the cup to his
daughter with the king's message.  But the maiden told him he need only
leave the matter till the morning, when she would see to it.

In the morning she called her father, and gave him a pound of tow to
take to the king, and bade him say:

"Let the king stop up all the springs and river mouths of the earth
with this tow, and then will I dry up the sea for him."

And the poor man went and told this to the king.

Now the king saw that this maiden was wiser that he was himself, and he
ordered her to be brought before him.  And when the father and daughter
stood in his presence and bowed before him, he said to the daughter-

"Tell me, girl, what is it that man hears the farthest?"

And the maiden answered- "Great king!  that which man hears the
farthest is the thunder, and a lie."

Upon this the king took hold of his beard, and turning to his
councilors, demanded of them:

"Tell me what my beard is worth?"

And when one valued it at so much, and another at so much more, the
maiden told them outright that they could not guess it.  "The king's
beard," she said, "is of as much worth as three rainy days in summer
time."

The king was astonished and exclaimed, "The maiden has made the best
answer!"

Then he asked her if she would be his wife, nor would he desist from
pressing his suit, until she agreed to it.  The maiden bent before him
and said-

"Glorious king!  let it be as you will; but I beg of you to write on a
piece of paper with your own hand, that, should you ever be angry with
me, and should drive me forth from your palace, I shall be at liberty
to take whatever I love dearest away with me."

And the king agreed and wrote out the paper.  After some time had
passed away, it came, in fact, to pass, that the king became one day so
angry with his wife, that he said to her-

"I will have you no longer for my wife; leave my palace, and go where
you will."

"Illustrious king!"  answered the queen, "I will obey you.  Permit me,
however, to stay here over the night, then in the morning I will go
forth."

The king granted her prayer; and the queen before supper mixed some
brandy and some sweet herbs in the king's wine, and pressed him to
partake of it, saying-

"Drink, O king, and be merry.  To-morrow we part; and believe me, I
shall then be happier than when I married you."

The king drank too much, and when he was fast asleep, the queen had him
laid in a wagon ready prepared, and drove with him into a rocky cavern.
And when the king awoke in the cavern, and saw where he was, he cried
out-

"Who has brought me here?"

"I have brought you here," answered the queen.

The king demanded of her:

"Why have you done this?  Have I not told you that you are no longer my
wife?"

Then said she, as she drew forth a sheet of paper-

"It is true what you say; but see what you yourself have laid down on
this sheet: that when I should leave you, I might take with me, from
your palace, that which I loved best."

When the king heard this, he kissed her, and went back with her to the
palace.

THE THREE SONS

By Lady Gregory

I'LL tell you a story, says the old man who was bringing fish from the
sea; and after that I'll be going on to Ballinrobe, to one that has a
shop there and that was reared by my grandmother.  It is likely he'll
give me a tasty suit of clothes.

Working all my life I am, working with the flail in the barn, working
with the spade at the potato tilling and the potato digging, breaking
stones on the road.  And four years ago the wife died, and it's
lonesome to be housekeeping alone.

There was a King long ago in Ireland, and he had three sons, and one of
them was something silly.  There came a sickness on the King, and he
called his three sons, and he said to them that he had knowledge the
only thing would cure him was the apples from Burnett's orchard, and he
bade them to go look for them, for that orchard was in some far-away
place, and no one could tell where it was.

The three sons went then, and they caught their horses, and put on
their bridles, and they set out, and went on till they came to three
crossroads.  There they stopped, and they settled among themselves that
each one of them would take one of the roads and go searching for the
apples, and they would meet at the same place at the end of a year and
a day.

The youngest son, that was a bit silly, took the crossest of the roads,
and he went on till he came to a cottage by the roadside.  He went in,
and there was a withered old man in the house, and he said:  "There is
a great welcome before the King of Ireland's son!"  The son was
astonished at that because he thought no one could know him.  He was
well received there, and in the course of the evening he asked the old
man did he know where was Burnett's garden.  "I am a hundred years
old," said the man, "and I never heard of such a place.  But I have a
brother," he said, "that is a hundred years older than I am, and it may
be he would know," he said.

So in the morning he gave a canoe to the King's son, and it went on of
itself without him turning or guiding it, till it brought him to the
old man's brother, and he got a welcome there and good treatment, and
in the course of the night he asked that old man did he know where was
Burnett's orchard.

"I do not," said he: "though I am two hundred years old I never heard
of it.  But go on," he said, "to a brother I have that has a hundred
years more than myself."

So in the morning, he went into the canoe, and it went on of itself
till it came to where the third old man was, that was older again than
the other two, and the King's son asked did he know where was Burnett's
garden.  "I do not," he said, "although I am three hundred years old;
but I will tell you how you will know it," he said.  "Go on till you
come to shore, where you will see a Swan-Gander standing by the water,
and he is the one that can tell you and can bring you to it," he said.
"And ask him to bring you to that garden in the name of the Almighty
God."

So the King's son went on in the canoe till he came where the Swan-
Gander was standing on the shore.  "Can you tell me," says he, "where
can I get the apples that are in Burnett's orchard?  And can you bring
me there?"  he said.

"Indeed," said the Swan-Gander, "I am in no way obliged to your leader,
or to whoever it was sent you to me and gave you that teaching.  And
those apples are well minded," he said, "by wolves; and the only time
they sleep is for three hours once in every seven years.  And it
chances they are asleep for those three hours at this time; and so I
will bring you there," he said.

With that he stretched out his wings, and he bade the King's son to get
on his back.  And it was long before he could start flying with the
weight that was on him; but at last he flew away, and he brought the
King's son to Burnett's garden, and there was a high wall around it,
but he flew over the wall, and put him down in the garden.  The King's
son filled his bag with the apples, and when he had done that he went
looking around, and he came to a large cottage in the garden, and he
went in, and there was no one in the house but a beautiful young girl,
and she was asleep.  So he went away; but he brought with him the gold
rings and the gold garters that he saw there in the window.

He got up again on the back of the Swan-Gander, but it was hard for it
to rise with the weight of the bag of apples.  But it did rise at last,
and it brought him to where the old man was that was three hundred
years old.  The King's son gave one of the apples to the old man, and
no sooner did he eat it than his age left him, and he was like a boy of
fifteen years.

He went on then to the two other old men, and gave an apple to both of
them, and no sooner did they eat it than they were like young boys
again.

Then the King's son went back to the crossroads, for it was the end of
the year and a day, and he was the first to come there, and he fell
asleep.  The two brothers came and saw him there, and they stole the
bag of apples from under his head and put in the place of it a bag of
apples that were no use at all.  Then they went on to their father's
house, and they gave him the apples they had stolen, and he was cured
on the moment; but they told him that what the youngest son was
bringing to him was poison apples, that would bring him to his death.

The King was very angry when he heard that, and he went to his butler
and said, "Go out to the wood where my son is, and shoot him, and bring
his heart here with you on the top of a gun and throw it to the dogs at
the door; for I will never have him, or anything belonging to him,
brought into the house," he said.

So the butler got the gun, and went out to the wood; and when he saw
the young man he was going to shoot him.  "Why would you do that?"
said he.  So the butler told him all the father ordered him; and the
young man said, "Do not shoot me, but save me.  And this is what you
will do.  Go into the wood until you meet with a woodcock, and shoot
it, and take the heart out of it, for that is most like the heart of a
man.  Bring the woodcock's heart to my father's house," he said, "and
throw it to the dogs at the door."

So the butler did that, and spared him, and took the woodcock's heart
and threw it to the dogs at the door.

It was a good while after that, a beautiful young lady came to the
King's doorway in a coach and four, and stopped at the door.  "Send out
my husband to me here," she said.  So the eldest son came out to her.
"Was it you came to the garden for the apples?"  says she.  "It was,"
says he.  "What things did you take notice of in the cottage where I
was?" says she.

So he began telling of this thing and that thing that never was in it
at all.

And when she heard that she gave him a clout that knocked his head as
solid as any stone in the wall.

Then the second son came out, and she asked him the same question, and
he told the same lies, and she gave him another clout that left his
head as solid as any stone in the wall.

When the King heard all that, he knew they had deceived him, and that
it was the youngest son who got the apples for his cure, and he began
to cry after him and to lament that he was not living to come back
again.  "Would you like to know he is living yet?"  says the butler.
"I would sooner hear it than any word ever I heard," says the King.

"Well he is living yet, and is in the wood," says the butler.

When the young lady heard that, she bade the butler bring her to where
he was, and they went together to the wood, and there they found him,
where he had been living on the fruits of trees through the most of the
year.  When the young lady saw him, she said: "Was it you came to the
house where I was in the garden?"  "It was," says he.

"What things did you take notice of in it?"

"Here they are," says he.  And he put his hand in his pocket, and
brought out the gold rings and the golden garters, and the other signs
he had brought away.

So she knew that he was the right one, and she married him, and they
lived happy ever after, and there was great rejoicing in the King of
Ireland's house.

HOK LEE AND THE DWARFS

Retold by Andrew Lang

THERE once lived in a small town in China a man named Hok Lee.  He was
a steady, industrious man, who not only worked hard at his trade, but
did all his own housework as well, for he had no wife to do it for him.
"What an excellent, industrious man is this Hok Lee!" said his
neighbors.  "How hard he works!  He never leaves his house to amuse
himself or to take a holiday as others do!"

But Hok Lee was by no means the virtuous person his neighbors thought
him.  True, he worked hard enough by day, but at night, when all
respectable folk were fast asleep, he used to steal out and join a
dangerous band of robbers, who broke into rich people's houses and
carried off all they could lay hands on.

This state of things went on for some time, and though a thief was
caught now and then and punished, no suspicion ever fell on Hok Lee, he
was such a very respectable, hard-working man.

Hok Lee had already amassed a good store of money as his share of the
proceeds of these robberies, when it happened one morning on going to
market that a neighbor said to him:

"Why, Hok Lee, what is the matter with your face?  One side of it is
all swelled up."

True enough, Hok Lee's right cheek was twice the size of his left, and
it soon began to feel very uncomfortable.

"I will bind up my face," said Hok Lee.  "Doubtless the warmth will
cure the swelling."  But no such thing.  Next day it was worse, and day
by day it grew bigger and bigger till it was nearly as large as his
head and became very painful.

Hok Lee was at his wits' end what to do.  Not only was his check
unsightly and painful, but his neighbors began to jeer and make fun of
him, which hurt his feelings very much indeed.

One day, as luck would have it, a traveling doctor came to the town.
He sold not only all kinds of medicine, but also dealt in many strange
charms against witches and evil spirits.

Hok Lee determined to consult him and asked him into his house.  After
the doctor had examined him carefully he spoke thus:

"This, Hok Lee, is no ordinary swelled face.  I strongly suspect you
have been doing some wrong deed which has called down the anger of the
spirits on you.  None of my drugs will avail to cure you, but if you
are willing to pay me handsomely I can tell you how you may be cured."

Then Hok Lee and the doctor began to bargain together, and it was a
long time before they could come to terms.  However, the doctor got the
better of it in the end, for he was determined not to part with his
secret under a certain price, and Hok Lee had no mind to carry his huge
cheek about with him to the end of his days.  So he was obliged to part
with the greater portion of his ill-gotten gains.

When the doctor had pocketed the money he told Hok Lee to go on the
first night of the full moon to a certain wood and there to watch by a
particular tree.  After a time he would see the dwarfs and little
sprites who live underground come out to dance.  When they saw him they
would be sure to make him dance too.  "And mind you dance your very
best," added the doctor.  "If you dance well and please them they will
grant you a petition and you can then beg to be cured; but if you dance
badly they will most likely do you some mischief out of spite."  With
that he took leave and departed.

Happily the first night of the full moon was near, and at the proper
time Hok Lee set out for the wood.  With a little trouble he found the
tree the doctor had described, and feeling nervous he climbed up into
it.

He had hardly settled himself on a branch when he saw the little dwarfs
assembling in the moonlight.  They came from all sides, till at length
there appeared to be hundreds of them.  They seemed in high glee and
danced and skipped and capered about, while Hok Lee grew so eager
watching them that he crept farther and farther along his branch till
at length it gave a loud crack.  All the dwarfs stood still, and Hok
Lee felt as if his heart stood still also.

Then one of the dwarfs called out: "Some one is up in that tree.  Come
down at once, whoever you are, or we must come and fetch you."

In great terror Hok Lee proceeded to come down; but he was so nervous
that he tripped near the ground and came rolling down in the most
absurd manner.  When he had picked himself up he came forward with a
low bow, and the dwarf who had first spoken and who appeared to be the
leader said: "Now, then, who art thou and what brings thee here?"

So Hok Lee told him the sad story of his swelled cheek, and how he had
been advised to come to the forest and beg the dwarfs to cure him.

"It is well," replied the dwarf.  "We will see about that.  First,
however, thou must dance before us.  Should thy dancing please us,
perhaps we may be able to do something; but shouldst thou dance badly
we shall assuredly punish thee, so now take warning and dance away."

With that, he and all the other dwarfs sat down in a large ring,
leaving Hok Lee to dance alone in the middle.  He felt half-frightened
to death, and besides was a good deal shaken by his fall from the tree
and did not feel at all inclined to dance.  But the dwarfs were not to
be trifled with.

"Begin!"  cried their leader, and "Begin!"  shouted the rest in chorus.

So in despair Hok Lee began.  First he hopped on one foot and then on
the other, but he was so stiff and so nervous that he made but a poor
attempt, and after a time sank down on the ground and vowed he could
dance no more.

The dwarfs were very angry.  They crowded round Hok Lee and abused him.
"Thou to come here to be cured, indeed!" they cried.  "Thou hast
brought one big cheek with thee, but thou shalt take away two."  And
with that they ran off and disappeared, leaving Hok Lee to find his way
home as best he might.

He hobbled away, weary and depressed, and not a little anxious on
account of the dwarfs' threat.

Nor were his fears unfounded, for when he rose next morning his left
cheek was swelled up as big as his right, and he could hardly see out
of his eyes.  Hok Lee felt in despair, and his neighbors jeered at him
more than ever.  The doctor, too, had disappeared, so there was nothing
for it but to try the dwarfs once more.

He waited a month till the first night of the full moon came round
again, and then he trudged back to the forest and sat down under the
tree from which he had fallen.  He had not long to wait.  Ere long the
dwarfs came trooping out till all were assembled.

"I don't feel quite easy," said one.  "I feel as if some horrid human
being were near us."

When Hok Lee heard this he came forward and bent down to the ground
before the dwarfs, who came crowding round and laughed heartily at his
comical appearance with his two big cheeks.

"'What dost thou want?" they asked; and Hok Lee proceeded to tell them
of his fresh misfortunes and begged so hard to be allowed one more
trial at dancing that the dwarfs consented, for there is nothing they
love so much as being amused.

Now, Hok Lee knew how much depended on his dancing well, so he plucked
up a good spirit and began, first quite slowly and faster by degrees,
and he danced so well and gracefully, and made such new and wonderful
steps, that the dwarfs were quite delighted with him.

They clapped their tiny hands and shouted:

"Well done, Hok Lee, well done.  Go on-dance more, for we are pleased."

And Hok Lee danc