poor maiden thought to herself: "This is no longer my place, I will
go and seek my brothers;" and when night came she escaped and went
quite deep into the wood.  She walked all night long and great part of
the next day, until she could go no further from weariness.  Just then
she saw a rude hut, and walking in she found a room with six little
beds, but she dared not get into one, but crept under, and, laying
herself upon the hard earth, prepared to pass the night there.  Just as
the sun was setting, she heard a rustling, and saw six white Swans come
flying in at the window.  They settled on the ground and began blowing
one another until they had blown all their feathers off, and their
swan's down stripped off like a shirt.  Then the maiden knew them at
once for her brothers, and gladly crept out from under the bed, and the
brothers were not less glad to see their sister, but their joy was of
short duration.  "Here you must not stay," said they to her; "this is a
robber's hiding-place; if they should return and find you here, they
will murder you."  "Can you not protect me, then?" inquired the sister.

"No," they replied, "for we can only lay aside our swan's feathers for
a quarter of an hour each evening, and for that time we retain our
human form, but afterward we resume our usual appearance."

Their sister then asked them with tears, "Can you not be restored
again?"

"Oh, no," replied they, "the conditions are too difficult.  For six
long years you must neither speak nor laugh, and during that time you
must sew together for us six little shirts of star flowers, and should
there fall a single word from your lips, then all your labor will be
vain."  Just as the brother finished speaking, the quarter of an hour
elapsed, and they all flew out of the window again like Swans.

The little sister, however, made a solemn resolution to rescue her
brothers or die in the attempt; and she left the cottage, and,
penetrating deep into the forest, passed the night amid the branches of
a tree.  The next morning she went out and collected the star flowers
to sew together.  She had no one to converse with, and as for laughing
she had no spirits, so there up in the tree she sat, intent only upon
her work.  After she had passed some time there, it happened that the
King of that country was hunting in the forest, and his huntsmen came
beneath the tree on which the maiden sat.  They called to her and
asked, "Who art thou?"  But she gave no answer.  "Come down to us,"
continued they, "we will do thee no harm."  She simply shook her head,
and, when they pressed her further with questions, she threw down to
them her gold necklace, hoping therewith to satisfy them.  They did
not, however, leave her, and she threw down her girdle, but in vain;
and even her rich dress did not make them desist.  At last the hunter
himself climbed the tree and brought down the maiden and took her
before the King.  The King asked her, "Who art thou?  What dost thou
upon that tree?  But she did not answer, and then he asked her, in all
the languages that he knew, but she remained dumb to all, as a fish.
Since, however, she was so beautiful, the King's heart was touched, and
he conceived for her a strong affection.  Then he put around her his
cloak, and, placing her before him on his horse, took her to his
castle.  There he ordered rich clothing to be made for her, and,
although her beauty shone as the sun-beams, not a word escaped her.
The King placed her by his side at table, and there her dignified mien
and manners so won upon him, that he said, "This maiden will I to
marry, and no other in the world," and after some days he was united to
her.

Now, the King had a wicked stepmother who was discontented with his
marriage, and spoke evil of the young Queen.  "Who knows whence the
wench comes?" said she.  "She who cannot speak is not worthy of a
King."  A year after, when the Queen brought her first-born son into
the world, the old woman took him away.  Then she went to the King and
complained that the Queen was a murderess.  The King, however, would
not believe it, and suffered no one to do any injury to his wife, who
sat composedly sewing at her shirts and paying attention to nothing
else.  When a second child was born, the false stepmother used the same
deceit, but the King again would not listen to her words, but said,
"She is too pious and good to act so: could she but speak and defend
herself, her innocence would come to light."  But when again the third
time the old woman stole away the child, and then accused the Queen,
who answered her not a word to the accusation, the King was obliged to
give her up to be tried, and she was condemned to suffer death by fire.

When the time had elapsed, and the sentence was to be carried out,
during which she had neither spoken nor laughed, it was the very day
when her dear brothers should be made free; the six shirts were also
ready, all but the last, which yet wanted the left sleeve.  As she was
led to the scaffold she placed the shirts upon her arm, and just as she
had mounted it, and the fire was about to be kindled, she looked round,
and saw six Swans come flying through the air.  Her heart leaped for
joy as she perceived her deliverers approaching, and soon the Swans,
flying toward her, alighted so near that she was enabled to throw over
them the shirts, and as soon as she had so done their feathers fell off
and the brothers stood up alive and well; but the youngest wanted his
left arm, instead of which he had a swan's wing.  They embraced and
kissed each other, and the Queen going to the King, who was
thunderstruck, began to say, "Now may I speak, my dear husband, and
prove to you that I am innocent and falsely accused;" and then she told
him how the wicked old woman had stolen away and hidden her three
children.  When she had concluded, the King was overcome with joy, and
the wicked stepmother was led to the scaffold and bound to the stake
and burned to ashes.

The King and the Queen forever after lived in peace and prosperity with
their six brothers.

SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

By William and Jacob Grimm

THERE was once a poor Widow who lived alone in her hut with her two
children, who were called Snow-White and Rose-Red, because they were
like the flowers which bloomed on two rosebushes which grew before the
cottage.  But they were two as pious, good, industrious, and amiable
children as any that were in the world, only Snow-White was more quiet
and gentle than Rose-Red.  For Rose-Red would run and jump about the
meadows, seeking flowers and catching butterflies, while Snow-White sat
at home helping her Mother to keep house, or reading to her if there
were nothing else to do.  The two children loved one another dearly,
and always walked hand in hand when they went out together; and ever
when they talked of it they agreed that they would never separate from
each other, and that whatever one had the other should share.  Often
they ran deep into the forest and gathered wild berries; but no beast
ever harmed them.  For the hare would eat cauliflowers out of their
hands, the fawn would graze at their side, the goats would frisk about
them in play, and the birds remained perched on the boughs singing as
if nobody were near.  No accident ever befell them; and if they stayed
late in the forest, and night came upon them, they used to lie down on
the moss and sleep till morning; and because their Mother knew they
would do so, she felt no concern about them.  One time when they had
thus passed the night in the forest, and the dawn of morning awoke
them, they saw a beautiful Child dressed in shining white sitting near
their couch.  She got up and looked at them kindly, but without saying
anything went into the forest; and when the children looked round they
saw that where they had slept was close to the edge of a pit, into
which they would have certainly fallen had they walked a couple of
steps further in the dark.  Their Mother told them the figure they had
seen was doubtless the good angel who watches over children.

Snow-White and Rose-Red kept their Mother's cottage so clean that it
was a pleasure to enter it.  Every morning in the summer time Rose-Red
would first put the house in order, and then gather a nosegay for her
Mother, in which she always placed a bud from each rose tree.  Every
winter's morning Snow-White would light the fire and put the kettle on
to boil, and although the kettle was made of copper it yet shone like
gold, because it was scoured so well.  In the evenings, when the flakes
of snow were falling, the Mother would say: "Go, Snow-White, and bolt
the door;" and then they used to sit down on the hearth, and the Mother
would put on her spectacles and read out of a great book while her
children sat spinning.  By their side, too, laid a little lamb, and on
a perch behind them a little white dove reposed with her head under her
wing.

One evening, when they were thus sitting comfortably together, there
came a knock at the door as if somebody wished to come in.  "Make
haste, Rose-Red," cried her Mother; "make haste and open the door;
perhaps there is some traveler outside who needs shelter."  So Rose-Red
went and drew the bolt and opened the door, expecting to see some poor
man outside, but instead, a great fat Bear poked his black head in.
Rose-Red shrieked out and ran back, the little lamb bleated, the dove
fluttered on her perch, and Snow-White hid herself behind her Mother's
bed.  The Bear, however, began to speak, and said: "Be not afraid, I
will do you no harm; but I am half frozen, and wish to come in and warm
myself."

"Poor Bear!" cried the Mother; "come in and lie down before the fire;
but take care you do not burn your skin;" and then she continued: "Come
here, Rose-Red and Snow-White, the Bear will not harm you, he means
honorably."  So they both came back, and by degrees the lamb too and
the dove overcame their fears and welcomed the rough visitor.

"You children!" said the Bear, before he entered, "come and knock the
snow off my coat."  And they fetched their brooms and swept him clean.
Then he stretched himself before the fire and grumbled out his
satisfaction; and in a little while the children became familiar enough
to play tricks with the unwieldy animal.  They pulled his long, shaggy
skin, set their feet upon his back and rolled him to and fro, and even
ventured to beat him with a hazel stick, laughing when he grumbled.
The Bear bore all their tricks good temperedly, and if they hit him too
hard he cried out:

"Leave me my life, you children,

Snow-White and Rose-Red,

Or you'll never wed."

When bedtime came and the others were gone, the Mother said to the
Bear: "You may sleep here on the hearth if you like, and then you will
be safely protected from the cold and bad weather."

As soon as day broke the two children let the Bear out again, and he
trotted away over the snow, and ever afterward he came every evening at
a certain hour.  He would lie down on the hearth and allow the children
to play with him as much as they liked, till by degrees they became so
accustomed to him that the door was left unbolted till their black
friend arrived.

But as soon as spring returned, and everything out of doors was green
again, the Bear one morning told Snow-White that he must leave her, and
could not return during the whole summer.  "Where are you going, then,
dear Bear?" asked Snow-White, "I am obliged to go into the forest and
guard my treasures from the evil Dwarfs; for in winter, when the ground
is hard, they are obliged to keep in their holes, and cannot work
through; but now, since the sun has thawed the earth and warmed it, the
Dwarf's pierce through, and steal all they can find; and what has once
passed into their hands, and gets concealed by them in their caves, is
not easily brought to light."  Snow-White, however, was very sad at the
departure of the Bear, and opened the door so hesitatingly that when he
pressed through it he left behind on the sneck a piece of his hairy
coat; and through the hole which was made in his coat Snow-White
fancied she saw the glittering of gold; but she was not quite certain
of it.  The Bear, however, ran hastily away, and was soon hidden behind
the trees.

Some time afterward the Mother sent the children into the wood to
gather sticks; and while doing so, they came to a tree which was lying
across the path, on the trunk of which something kept bobbing up and
down from the grass, and they could not imagine what it was.  When they
came nearer they saw a Dwarf, with an old wrinkled face and a snow-
white beard a yard long.  The end of this beard was fixed in a split of
the tree, and the little man kept jumping about like a dog tied by a
chain, for he did not know how to free himself.  He glared at the
Maidens with his red fiery eyes, and exclaimed, "Why do you stand
there?  are you going to pass without offering me any assistance?"
"What have you done, little man?" asked Rose-Red.  "You stupid, gaping
goose!" exclaimed he.  "I wanted to have split the tree, in order to
get a little wood for my kitchen, for the little wood which we use is
soon burned up with great fagots, not like what you rough, greedy
people devour!  I had driven the wedge in properly, and everything was
going on well, when the smooth wood flew upward, and the tree closed so
suddenly together that I could not draw my beautiful beard out, and
here it sticks and I cannot get away.  There, don't laugh, you milk-
faced things!  are you dumfounded?"

The children took all the pains they could to pull the Dwarf's beard
out; but without success.  "I will run and fetch some help," cried
Rose-Red at length.

"Crack-brained sheep's head that you are!" snarled the Dwarf; "what are
you going to call other people for?  You are two too many now for me;
can you think of nothing else?"

"Don't be impatient," replied Snow-White; "I have thought of
something;" and pulling her scissors out of her pocket she cut off the
end of the beard.  As soon as the Dwarf found himself at liberty, he
snatched up his sack, which lay between the roots of the tree, filled
with gold, and throwing it over his shoulder marched off, grumbling and
groaning and crying: "Stupid people!  to cut off a piece of my
beautiful beard.  Plague take you!" and away he went without once
looking at the children.

Some time afterward Snow-White and Rose-Red went a-fishing, and as they
neared the pond they saw something like a great locust hopping about on
the bank, as if going to jump into the water.  They ran up and
recognized the Dwarf.  "What are you after?" asked Rose-Red; "you will
fall into the water."  "I am not quite such a simpleton as that,"
replied the Dwarf: "but do you not see this fish will pull me in?"  The
little man had been sitting there angling, and unfortunately the wind
had entangled his beard with the fishing line; and so, when a great
fish bit at the bait, the strength of the weak little fellow was not
able to draw it out, and the fish had the best of the struggle.  The
Dwarf held on by the reeds and rushes which grew near; but to no
purpose, for the fish pulled him where it liked, and he must soon have
been drawn into the pond.  Luckily just then the two Maidens arrived,
and tried to release the beard of the Dwarf from the fishing line; but
both were too closely entangled for it to be done.  So the Maiden
pulled out her scissors again and cut off another piece of the beard.
When the Dwarf saw this done he was in a great rage, and exclaimed:
"You donkey!  that is the way to disfigure my face.  Was it not enough
to cut it once, but you must now take away the best part of my fine
beard?  I dare not show myself again now to my own people.  I wish you
had run the soles off your boots before you had come here!"  So saying,
he took up a bag of pearls which lay among the rushes, and without
speaking another word, slipped off and disappeared behind a stone.

Not many days after this adventure, it chanced that the Mother sent the
two Maidens to the next town to buy thread, needles and pins, laces and
ribbons.  Their road passed over a common, on which here and there
great pieces of rock were lying about.  Just over their heads they saw
a great bird flying round and round, and every now and then, dropping
lower and lower, till at last it flew down behind a rock.  Immediately
afterward they heard a piercing shriek, and running up they saw with
affright that the eagle had caught their old acquaintance.  the Dwarf,
and was trying to carry him off.  The compassionate children thereupon
laid hold of the little man, and held him fast till the bird gave up
the struggle and flew off.  As soon then as the Dwarf had recovered
from his fright, he exclaimed in his squeaking voice: "Could you not
hold me more gently?  You have seized my fine brown coat in such a
manner that it is all torn and full of holes, meddling and interfering
rubbish that you are!"  With these words he shouldered a bag filled
with precious stones, and slipped away to his cave among the rocks.

The maidens were now accustomed to his ingratitude, and so they walked
on to the town and transacted their business there.  Coming home, they
returned over the same common, and unawares walked up to a certain
clean spot on which the Dwarf had shaken out his bag of precious
stones, thinking nobody was near.  The sun was shining, and the bright
stones glittered in its beams and displayed such a variety of colors
that the two Maidens stopped to admire them.

"What are you standing there gaping for?" asked the Dwarf, while his
face grew as red as copper with rage; he was continuing to abuse the
poor Maidens, when a loud roaring noise was heard, and presently a
great black Bear came rolling out of the forest.  The Dwarf jumped up
terrified, but he could not gain his retreat before the Bear overtook
him.  Thereupon, he cried out: "Spare me, my dear Lord Bear!  I will
give you all my treasures.  See these beautiful precious stones which
lie here; only give me my life; for what have you to fear from a little
weak fellow like me?  you could not touch me with your big teeth.
There are two wicked girls, take them; they would make nice morsels, as
fat as young quails; eat them for heaven's sake."

The Bear, however, without troubling himself to speak, gave the bad-
hearted Dwarf a single blow with his paw, and he never stirred after.

The Maidens were then going to run away, but the Bear called after
them: "Snow-White and Rose-Red, fear not!  wait a bit and I will
accompany you."  They recognized his voice and stopped; and when the
Bear came, his rough coat suddenly fell off, and he stood up a tall
man, dressed entirely in gold.  "I am a king's son," he said, "and was
condemned by the wicked Dwarf, who stole all my treasures, to wander
about in this forest, in the form of a bear, till his death released
me.  Now he has received his well-deserved punishment."

Then they went home, and Snow-White was married to the prince, and
Rose-Red to his brother, with whom they shared the immense treasure
which the Dwarf had collected.  The old Mother also lived for many
years happily with her two children, and the rose trees which had stood
before the cottage were planted now before the palace, and produced
every year beautiful red and white roses.

THE UGLY DUCKLING

By Hans Christian Andersen

IT was so glorious out in the country; it was summer; the cornfields
were yellow, the oats were green, the hay had been put up in stacks in
the green meadows, and the stork went about on his long red legs, and
chattered Egyptian, for this was the language he had learned from his
good mother.  All around the fields and meadows were great forests, and
in the midst of these forests lay deep lakes.  Yes, it was right
glorious out in the country.  In the midst of the sunshine there lay an
old farm, with deep canals about it, and from the wall down to the
water grew great burdocks, so high that little children could stand
upright under the loftiest of them.  It was just as wild there as in
the deepest wood, and here sat a Duck upon her nest; she had to hatch
her ducklings; but she was almost tired out before the little ones
came; and then she so seldom had visitors.  The other ducks liked
better to swim about in the canals than to run up to sit down under a
burdock, and cackle with her.

At last one egg-shell after another burst open.  "Piep!  piep!" it
cried, and in all the eggs there were little creatures that stuck out
their heads.

"Quack!  quack!" they said; and they all came quacking out as fast as
they could, looking all round them under the green leaves; and the
mother let them look as much as they chose, for green is good for the
eye.

"How wide the world is!" said all the young ones, for they certainly
had much more room now than when they were in the eggs.

"D'ye think this is all the world?" said the mother.  "That stretches
far across the other side of the garden, quite into the parson's field;
but I have never been there yet.  I hope you are all together," and she
stood up.  "No, I have not all.  The largest egg still lies there.  How
long is that to last?  I am really tired of it." And she sat down
again.

"Well, how goes it?" asked an old Duck who had come to pay her a visit.

"It lasts a long time with that one egg," said the Duck who sat there.
"It will not burst.  Now, only look at the others; are they not the
prettiest little ducks one could possibly see?  They are all like their
father: the rogue, he never comes to see me."

"Let me see the egg which will not burst," said the old visitor.  "You
may be sure it is a turkey's egg.  I was once cheated in that way, and
had much anxiety and trouble with the young ones, for they are afraid
of the water.  Must I say it to you, I could not get them to venture
in.  I quacked and I clacked, but it was no use.  Let me see the egg.
Yes, that's a turkey's egg.  Let it lie there, and teach the other
children to swim."

"I think I will sit on it a little longer," said the Duck.  "I've sat
so long now that I can sit a few days more."

"Just as you please," said the old Duck; and she went away.

At last the great egg burst.  "Piep!  piep!" said the little one, and
crept forth, it was very large and very ugly.  The Duck looked at it.

"It's a very large duckling," said she; "none of the others look like
that: can it really be a turkey chick?  Well, we shall soon find out.
It must go into the water, even if I have to thrust it in myself."

The next day, it was bright, beautiful weather; the sun shone on all
the green trees.  The Mother Duck went down to the canal with all her
family.  Splash!  she jumped into the water.  "Quack!  quack!" she
said, and one duckling after another plunged in.  The water closed over
their heads, but they came up in an instant, and swam capitally; their
legs went of themselves, and they were all in the water.  The ugly gray
Duckling swam with them.

"No, it's not a turkey," said she; "look how well it can use its legs,
and how straight it holds itself.  It is my own child!  On the whole
it's quite pretty, if one looks at it rightly.  Quack!  quack!  come
with me, and I'll lead you out into the great world, and present you in
the duckyard; but keep close to me, so that no one may tread on you,
and take care of the cats!"

And so they came into the duckyard.  There was a terrible riot, going
on in there, for two families were quarreling about an eel's head, and
the cat got it after all.

"See, that's how it goes in the world!" said the Mother Duck; and she
whetted her beak, for she too wanted the eel's head.  "Only use your
legs," she said.  "See that you can bustle about, and bow your heads
before the old Duck yonder.  She's the grandest of all here; she's of
Spanish blood-that's why she's so fat; and d'ye see she has a red rag
round her leg; that's something particularly fine, and the greatest
distinction a duck can enjoy; it signifies that one does not want to
lose her, and that she's to be known by the animals and by men too.
Shake yourselves-don't turn in your toes; a well-brought-up duck turns
its toes quite out, just like father and mother-so!  Now bend your
necks and say 'Quack!'"

And they did so: but the other ducks round about looked at them, and
said quite boldly:

"Look there!  now we're to have these hanging on, as if there were not
enough of us already! And- fie!-how that Duckling yonder looks; we
won't stand that!"  And one duck flew up at it, and bit it in the neck.

"Let it alone," said the mother: "it does no harm to anyone."

"Yes, but it's too large and peculiar," said the Duck who had bitten
it; "and therefore it must be put down."

"Those are pretty children that the mother has there," said the old
Duck with the rag round her leg.  They're all pretty but that one; that
was rather unlucky.  I wish she could bear it over again."

"That cannot be done, my lady," replied the Mother Duck.  "It is not
pretty, but it has a really good disposition, and swims as well as any
other; yes, I may even say it, swims better.  I think it will grow up
pretty, and become smaller in time; it has lain too long in the egg,
and therefore is not properly shaped."  And then she pinched it in the
neck, and smoothed its feathers.  Moreover it is a drake," she said,
"and therefore it is not so much consequence.  I think he will be very
strong: he makes his way already."

"The other duckling's are graceful enough," said the old Duck.  "Make
yourself at home; and if you find an eel's head, you may bring it to
me."

And now they were at home.  But the poor Duckling which had crept last
out of the egg, and looked so ugly, was bitten and pushed and jeered,
as much by the ducks as by the chickens.

"It is too big!" they all said.  And the turkey cock, who had been born
with spurs, and therefore thought himself an emperor, blew himself up
like a ship in full sail, and bore straight down upon it; then he
gobbled and grew quite red in the face.  The poor Duckling did not know
where it should stand or walk; it was quite melancholy because it
looked ugly, and was the butt of the whole duckyard.

So it went on the first day; and afterward it became worse and worse.
The poor Duckling was hunted about by everyone: even its brothers and
sisters were quite angry with it, and said: "If the cat would only
catch you, you ugly creature!"  And the mother said: "If you were only
far away!"  And the ducks hit it, and the chickens beat it, and the
girl who had to feed the poultry kicked at it with her foot.

Then it ran and flew over the fence, and the little birds in the bushes
flew up in fear.

"That is because I am so ugly!" thought the Duckling; and it shut its
eyes, but flew on further; and so it came out into the great moor,
where the wild ducks lived.  Here it lay the whole night long; and it
was weary and downcast.

Toward morning the wild chicks flew up, and looked at their new
companion.

"What sort of a one are you?" they asked; and the Duckling turned in
every direction, and bowed as well as it could.  You are remarkably
ugly!" said the Wild Ducks.  "But that is nothing to us, so long as you
do not marry into our family."

Poor thing!  it certainly did not think of marrying, and only hoped to
obtain leave to lie among the reeds and drink some of the swamp water.

Thus it lay two whole days; then came thither two wild geese, or,
properly speaking, two wild ganders.  It was not long since each had
crept out of an egg, and that's why they were so saucy.

"Listen, comrade," said one of them.  "You're so ugly that I like you.
Will you go with us, and become a bird of passage?  Near here, in
another moor, there are a few sweet lovely geese, all unmarried, and
all able to say 'Rap?'  You've a chance of' making your fortune, ugly
as you are."

"Piff!  paff!" resounded through the air; and the two ganders fell down
dead in the swamp, and the water became blood red.  "Piff paff!" it
sounded again, and the whole flock of wild geese rose up from the
reeds.  And then there was another report.  A great hunt was going on.
The sportsmen were lying in wait all round the moor, and some were even
sitting up in the branches of the trees, which spread far over the
reeds.  The blue smoke rose up like clouds among the dark trees, and
was wafted far away across the water; and the hunting dogs came-splash,
splash!-into the swamp, and the rushes and the reeds bent down on every
side.  That was a fright for the poor Duckling!  It turned its head,
and put it under its wing; but at that moment a frightful great dog
stood close by the Duckling.  His tongue hung far out of his mouth, and
his eyes gleamed horrible and ugly; he thrust out his nose close
against the Duckling, showed his Sharp teeth, and-splash, splash!-on he
went, without seizing it.

"O, Heaven be thanked!" sighed the Duckling.  "I am so ugly, that even
the dog does not like to bite me!"

And so it lay quite quiet, while the shots rattled through the reeds
and gun after gun was fired.  At last, late in the day, all was still;
but the poor Duckling did not dare to rise up; it waited several hours
before it looked round, and then hastened away out of the moor as fast
it could.  It ran on over field and meadow; there was such a storm
raging that it was difficult to get from one place to another.

Toward evening the Duck came to a little miserable peasant's hut.  This
hut was so dilapidated that it did not itself know on which side it
should fall; and that's why it remained standing.  The storm whistled
round the Duckling in such a way that the poor creature was obliged to
sit down, to stand against it; and the wind blew worse and worse.  Then
the Duckling noticed that one of the hinges of the door had given way,
and the door hung so slanting that the Duckling could slip through the
crack into the room; and that is what it did.

Here lived a woman, with her Cat and her Hen.  And the Cat, whom she
called Sonnie, could arch his back and purr, he could even give out
sparks; but for that one had to stroke his fur the wrong way.  The Hen
had quite little short legs, and therefore she was called Chickabiddy
Shortshanks; she laid good eggs, and the woman loved her as her own
child.

In the morning the strange Duckling was at once noticed, and the Cat
began to purr and the Hen to cluck.

"What's this?" said the woman, and looked all round; but she could not
see well, and therefore she thought the Duckling was a fat duck that
had strayed.  "This is a rare prize!" she said, "Now I shall have
ducks' eggs.  I hope it is not a drake.  We must try that."

And so the Duckling was admitted on trial for three weeks; but no eggs
came.  And the Cat was master of the house, and the Hen was the lady,
and always said "We and the world!" for she thought they were half the
world, and by far the better half.  The Duckling thought one might have
a different opinion, but the Hen would not allow it.

"Can you lay eggs?" she asked.

"No."

"Then will you hold your tongue!"

And the Cat said, "Can you curve your back, and purr, and give out
sparks?"

"No."

"Then you will please have no opinion of your own when sensible folks
are speaking.

And the Duckling sat in a corner and was melancholy; then the fresh air
and the sunshine streamed in; and it was seized with such a strange
longing to swim on the water, that it could not help telling the Hen of
it.

"What are you thinking of?" cried the Hen.  "You have nothing to do,
that's why you have these fancies.  Lay eggs, or purr, and they will
pass over."

"But it is so charming to swim on the water!" said the Duckling, "so
refreshing to let it close over one's head, and to dive down to the
bottom."

"Yes, that must be a mighty pleasure, truly," quoth the Hen.  "I fancy
you must have gone crazy.  Ask the Cat about it-he's the cleverest
animal I know-ask him if he likes to swim on the water, or to dive
down: I won't speak about myself.  Ask our mistress, the old woman; no
one in the world is cleverer than she.  Do you think she has any desire
to swim, and to let the water close above her head?"

"You don't understand me," said the Duckling.

"We don't understand you?  Then pray who is to understand you?  You
surely don't pretend to be cleverer than the Cat and the woman-I won't
say anything of myself.  Don't be conceited, child, and thank your
Maker for all the kindness you have received.  Did you not get into a
warm room, and have you not fallen into company from which you may
learn something?  But you are a chatterer, and it is not pleasant to
associate with you.  You may believe me, I speak for your good.  I tell
you disagreeable things, and by that one may always know one's true
friends!  Only take care that you learn to lay eggs, or to purr, and
give out sparks!"

"I think I will go out into the wide world," said the Duckling.

"Yes, do go," replied the Hen.

And so the Duckling went away.  It swam on the water, and dived, but it
was slighted by every creature because of its ugliness.

Now came the autumn.  The leaves in the forest turned yellow and brown;
the wind caught them so that they danced about, and up in the air it
was very cold.  The clouds hung low, heavy with hail and snowflakes,
and on the fence stood the raven, crying, "Croak!  croak!" for mere
cold; yes, it was enough to make one feel cold to think of this.  The
poor little Duckling certainly had not a good time.  One evening-the
sun was just setting in his beauty-there came a whole flock of great,
handsome birds out of the bushes; they were dazzlingly white, with
long, flexible necks; they were swans.  They uttered a very peculiar
cry, spread forth their glorious great wings, and flew away from that
cold region to warmer lands, to fair open lakes.  They mounted so high,
so high!  and the ugly Duckling felt quite strangely as it watched
them.  It turned round and round in the water like a wheel, stretched
out its neck toward them, and uttered such a strange, loud cry as
frightened itself.  Oh!  it could not forget those beautiful, happy
birds; and so soon as it could see them no longer, it dived down to the
very bottom, and when it came up again, it was quite beside itself.  It
knew not the name of those birds, and knew not whither they were
flying; but it loved them more than it had ever loved anyone.  It was
not at all envious of them.  How could it think of wishing to possess
such loveliness as they had?  It would have been glad if only the ducks
would have endured its company the poor, ugly creature!

And the winter grew cold, very cold!  The Duckling was forced to swim
about in the water, to prevent the surface from freezing entirely; but
every night the hole in which it swam about became smaller and smaller.
It froze so hard that the icy covering crackled again; and the Duckling
was obliged to use its legs continually to prevent the hole from
freezing up.  At last it became exhausted, and lay quite still, and
thus froze fast into the ice.  Early in the morning a peasant came by,
and when he saw what had happened, he took his wooden shoe, broke the
ice crust to pieces, and carried the Duckling home to his wife.  Then
it came to itself again.  The children wanted to play with it; but the
Duckling thought they wanted to hurt it, and in its terror fluttered up
into the milk pan, so that the milk spurted down into the room.  The
woman clasped her hands, at which the Duckling flew down into the
butter tub, and then into the meal barrel and out again.  How it looked
then!  The woman screamed, and struck at it with the fire tongs; the
children tumbled over one another in their efforts to catch the
Duckling; and they laughed and they screamed!-well it was that the door
stood open, and the poor creature was able to slip out between the
shrubs into the newly fallen snow-there it lay quite exhausted.

But it would be too melancholy if I were to tell all the misery and
care which the Duckling had to endure in the hard winter.  It lay out
on the moor among the reeds, when the sun began to shine again and the
larks to sing: it was a beautiful spring.

Then all at once the Duckling could flap its wings: they beat the air
more strongly than before, and bore it strongly away; and before it
well knew how all this happened, it found itself in a great garden,
where the elder trees smelled sweet, and bent their long green branches
down to the canal that wound through the region.  Oh, here it was so
beautiful, such a gladness of spring!  and from the thicket came three
glorious white swans; they rustled their wings, and swam lightly on the
water.  The Duckling knew the splendid creatures, and felt oppressed by
a peculiar sadness.

"I will fly away to them, to the royal birds!  and they will beat me,
because I, that am so ugly, dare to come near them.  But it is all the
same.  Better to be killed by them than to be pursued by ducks, and
beaten by fowls, and pushed about by the girl who takes care of the
poultry yard, and to suffer hunger in winter!"  And it flew out into
the water, and swam toward the beautiful swans: these looked at it, and
came sailing down upon it with outspread wings.  "Kill me!" said the
poor creature, and bent its head down upon the water, expecting nothing
but death.  But what was this that it saw in the clear water?  It
beheld its own image; and, lo!  it was no longer a clumsy, dark-gray
bird, ugly and hateful to look at, but a-swan!

It matters nothing if one is born in a duck yard, if one has only lain
in a swan's egg.

It felt quite glad at all the need and misfortune it had suffered, now
it realized its happiness in all the splendor that surrounded it.  And
the great swans swam round it, and stroked it with their beaks.

Into the garden came little children, who threw bread and corn into the
water; and the youngest cried, "There is a new one!" and the other
children shouted joyously, "Yes, a new one has arrived!"  And they
clapped their hands and danced about, and ran to their father and
mother; and bread and cake were thrown into the water; and they all
said, "The new one is the most beautiful of all so young and handsome!"
and the old swans bowed their heads before him.

Then he felt quite ashamed, and hid his head under his wings, for he
did not know what to do; he was so happy, and yet not at all proud.  He
thought how he had been persecuted and despised; and now he heard them
saying that he was the most beautiful of all birds.  Even the elder
tree bent its branches straight down into the water before him, and the
sun shone warm and mild.  Then his wings rustled, he lifted his slender
neck, and cried rejoicingly from the depths of his heart:

"I never dreamed of so much happiness when I was the Ugly Duckling!"

THE TINDER-BOX

By Hans Christian Andersen

THERE came a soldier marching along the high road-one, two!  one, two!
He had his knapsack on his back and a saber by his side, for he had
been in the wars, and now he wanted to go home.  And on the way he met
with an old Witch: she was very hideous and her under lip hung down
upon her breast.  She said: "Good evening, Soldier.  What a fine sword
you have, and what a big knapsack!  You're a proper soldier!  Now you
shall have as much money as you like to have."

"I thank you, you old Witch" said the Soldier.

"Do you see that great tree?" quoth the Witch; and she pointed to a
tree which stood beside them.

"It's quite hollow inside.  You must climb to the top, and then you'll
see a hole, through which you can let yourself down and get deep into
the tree.  I'll tie a rope round your body, so that I can pull you up
again when you call me."

"What am I to do down in the tree?" asked the Soldier.

"Get money," replied the Witch.  "Listen to me.  When you come down to
the earth under the tree, you will find yourself in a great hall: it is
quite light, for above three hundred lamps are burning there.  Then you
will see three doors; these you can open, for the keys are hanging
there.  If you go into the first chamber, you'll see a great chest in
the middle of the floor; on this chest sits a dog, and he's got a pair
of eyes as big as two teacups.  But you need not care for that.  I'll
give you my blue-checked apron, and you can spread it out upon the
floor; then go up quickly and take the dog, and set him on my apron;
then open the chest, and take as many shillings as you like.  They are
of copper; if you prefer silver, you must go into the second chamber.
But there sits a dog with a pair of eyes as big as mill wheels.  But do
not you care for that.  Set him upon my apron, and take some of the
money.  And if you want gold, you can have that too-in fact, as much as
you can carry-if you go into the third chamber.  But the dog that sits
on the money chest there has two eyes as big as round towers.  He is a
fierce dog, you may be sure; but you needn't be afraid, for all that.
Only set him on my apron, and he won't hurt you; and take out of the
chest as much gold as you like."

"That's not so bad," said the Soldier.  "But what am I to give you, you
old Witch?  for you will not do it for nothing, I fancy."

"No," replied the Witch, "not a single shilling will I have.  You shall
only bring me an old Tinder-box which my grandmother forgot when she
was down there last."

"Then tie the rope round my body," cried the Soldier.

"Here it is," said the Witch, "and here's my blue-checked apron."

Then the Soldier climbed up into the tree, let himself slip down into
the hole, and stood, as the Witch had said, in the great hall where the
three hundred lamps were burning.

Now he opened the first door.  Ugh!  there sat the dog with eyes as big
as teacups, staring at him.

"You're a nice fellow!" exclaimed the Soldier; and he set him on the
Witch's apron, and took as many shillings as his pockets would hold,
and then locked the chest, set the dog on it again, and went into the
second chamber, Aha!  there sat the dog with eyes as big as mill
wheels.

"You should not stare so hard at me," said the Soldier; "you might
strain your eyes." And he set the dog upon the Witch's apron.  And when
he saw the silver money in the chest, he threw away all the copper
money he had and filled his pockets and his knapsack with silver only.
Then he went into the third chamber.  Oh, but that was horrid!  The dog
there really had eyes as big as towers, and they turned round and round
in his head like wheels.

"Good evening!" said the Soldier; and he touched his cap, for he had
never seen such a dog as that before.  When he had looked at him a
little more closely, he thought: "That will do," and lifted him down to
the floor, and opened the chest.  Mercy!  What a quantity of gold was
there!  He could buy with it the whole town, and the sugar sucking pigs
of the cake woman, and all the tin soldiers, whips, and rocking-horses
in the whole world.  Yes, that was a quantity of money!  Now the
Soldier threw away all the silver coin with which he had filled his
pockets and his knapsack, and took gold instead; yes, all his pockets,
his knapsack, his boots, and his cap were filled, so that he could
scarcely walk.  Now indeed he had plenty of money.  He put the dog on
the chest shut the door, and then called up through the tree: "Now pull
me up, you old Witch!"

"Have you the Tinder-box?" asked the Witch.

"Plague on it!" exclaimed the Soldier, "I had clean forgotten that."
And he went and brought it.

The Witch drew him up, and he stood on the high road again, with
pockets, boots, knapsack, and cap full of gold.

"What are you going to do with the Tinder-box?" asked the Soldier.

"That's nothing to you," retorted the Witch.  "You've had your money;
just give me the Tinder-box."

"Nonsense!" said the Soldier.  "Tell me directly what you're going to
do with it or I'll draw my sword and cut off your head."

"No!" cried the Witch.

So the Soldier cut off her head.  There she lay!  But he tied up all
his money in her apron, took it on his back like a bundle, put the
Tinder-box in his pocket, and went straight off toward the town.

That was a splendid town!  And he put up at the very best inn, and
asked for the finest rooms, and ordered his favorite dishes, for now he
was rich, as he had so much money.  The servant who had to clean his
boots certainly thought them a remarkably old pair for such a rich
gentleman; but he had not bought any new ones yet.  The next day he
procured proper boots and handsome clothes.  Now our Soldier had become
a fine gentleman; and the people told him of all the splendid things
which were in their city, and about the King, and what a pretty
Princess the King's daughter was.

"Where can one get to see her?" asked the Soldier.

"She is not to be seen at all," said they all together; "she lives in a
great copper castle, with a great many walls and towers round about it:
no one but the King may go in and out there, for it has been prophesied
that she shall marry a common soldier, and the King can't bear that."

"I should like to see her," thought the Soldier; but he could not get
leave to do so.  Now he lived merrily, went to the theater, drove in
the King's garden, and gave much money to the poor; and this was very
kind of him, for he knew from old times how hard it is when one has not
a shilling.

Now he was rich, had new clothes, and gained many friends, who all said
he was a rare one, a true cavalier; and that pleased the Soldier well.
But as he spent money every day and never carried any, he had at last
only two shillings left; and he was obliged to turn out of the fine
rooms in which he had dwelt, and had to live in a little garret under
the roof, and clean his boots for himself, and mend them with a
darning-needle.  None of his friends came to see him, for there were
too many stairs to climb.

It was quite dark one evening, and he could not even buy himself a
candle, when it occurred to him that there was a candle end in the
Tinder-box which he had taken out of the hollow tree into which the
Witch had helped him.  He brought out the Tinder-box and the candle
end; but as soon as he struck fire and the sparks rose up from the
flint, the door flew open, and the dog who had eyes as big as a couple
of teacups, and whom he had seen in the tree, stood before him, and
said:

"What are my lord's commands?"

"What is this?" said the Soldier.  "That's a famous Tinder-box, if I
can get everything with it that I want!  Bring me some money," said he
to the dog; and whisk!  the dog was gone, and whisk!  he was back
again, with a great bag full of shillings in his mouth.

Now the Soldier knew what a capital Tinder-box this was.  If he struck
it once, the dog came who sat upon the chest of copper money; if he
struck it twice, the dog came who had the silver; and if he struck it
three times, then appeared the dog who had the gold.  Now the Soldier
moved back into the fine rooms, and appeared again in handsome clothes;
and all his friends knew him again, and cared very much for him indeed.

Once he thought to himself: "It is a very strange thing that one cannot
get to see the Princess.  They all say she is very beautiful; but what
is the use of that, if she has always to sit in the great copper castle
with the many towers?  Can I not get to see her at all?  Where is my
Tinder-box?" And so he struck a light, and whisk!  came the dog with
eyes as big as teacups.

"It is midnight, certainly," said the Soldier, "but I should very much
like to see the Princess, only for one little moment."

And the dog was outside the door directly, and, before the Soldier
thought it, came back with the Princess.  She sat upon the dogs back
and slept; and everyone could see she was a real Princess, for she was
so lovely.  The Soldier could not refrain from kissing her, for he was
a thorough soldier.  Then the dog ran back again with the Princess.
But when morning came, and the King and Queen were drinking tea, the
Princess said she had had a strange dream the night before about a dog
and a soldier-that she had ridden upon the dog, and the soldier had
kissed her.

"That would be a fine history!" said the Queen.

So one of the old court ladies had to watch the next night by the
Princess's bed, to see if this was really a dream, or what it might be.

The Soldier had a great longing to see the lovely Princess again; so
the dog came in the night, took her away, and ran as fast as he could.
But the old lady put on water boots, and ran just as fast after him.
When she saw that they both entered a great house, she thought: "Now I
know where it is; and with a bit of chalk she drew a great cross on the
door.  Then she went home and lay down, and the dog came up with the
Princess; but when he saw that there was a cross drawn on the door
where the Soldier lived, he took a piece of chalk too, and drew crosses
on all the doors in the town.  And that was cleverly done, for now the
lady could not find the right door, because all the doors had crosses
upon them.

In the morning early came the King and Queen, the old court lady and
all the officers, to see where it was the Princess had been.  "Here it
is!" said the King, when he saw the first door with a cross upon it.
"No, my dear husband, it is there!" said the Queen, who descried
another door which also showed a cross.  "But there is one, and there
is one!" said all, for wherever they looked there were crosses on the
doors.  So they saw that it would avail them nothing if they searched
on.

But the Queen was an exceedingly clever woman, who could do more than
ride in a coach.  She took her great gold scissors, cut a piece of silk
into pieces, and made a neat little bag; this bag she filled with fine
wheat flour, and tied it on the Princess's back, and when that was
done, she cut a little hole in the bag, so that the flour would be
scattered along all the way which the Princess should take.

In the night the dog came again, took the Princess on his back, and ran
with her to the Soldier, who loved her very much, and would gladly have
been a prince, so that he might have her for his wife.  The dog did not
notice at all how the flour ran out in a stream from the castle to the
windows of the Soldier's house, where he ran up the wall with the
Princess.  In the morning the King and Queen saw well enough where
their daughter had been, and they took the Soldier and put him in
prison.

There he sat.  Oh, but it was dark and disagreeable there!  And they
said to him: "To-morrow you shall be hanged."  That was not amusing to
hear, and he had left his Tinder-box at the inn.  In the morning he
could see, through the iron grating of the little window, how the
people were hurrying out of the town to see him hanged.  He heard the
drums beat and saw the soldiers marching.  All the people were running
out, and among them was the shoemaker's boy with leather apron and
slippers, and he galloped so fast that one of his slippers flew off,
and came right against the wall where the Soldier sat looking through
the iron grating.

"Halloo, you shoemaker's boy!  you needn't be in such a hurry," cried
the Soldier to him: "it will not begin till I come.  But if you will
run to where I lived and bring me my Tinder-box, you shall have four
shillings: but you must put your best leg foremost."

The shoemaker's boy wanted to get the four shillings, so he went and
brought the Tinder-box, and-well, we shall hear now what happened.

Outside the town a great gallows had been built, and round it stood the
soldiers and many hundred thousand people.  The King and Queen sat on a
splendid throne, opposite to the judges and the whole council.  The
soldiers already stood upon the ladder; but as they were about to put
the rope round his neck, he said that before a poor criminal suffered
his punishment an innocent request was always granted to him.  He
wanted very much to smoke a pipe of tobacco, and it would be the last
pipe he should smoke in the world.  The King would not say "No" to
this; so the Soldier took his Tinder-box and struck fire.  One-two-
three! - and there suddenly stood all the dogs-the one with eyes as big
as teacups, the one with eyes as large as mill wheels, and the one
whose eyes were as big as round towers.

"Help me now, so that I may not be hanged," said the Soldier.

And the dogs fell upon the judges and all the council, seized one by
the leg and another by the nose, and tossed them many feet into the
air, so that they fell down and were a