ll broken to pieces.

"I won't!" cried the King; but the biggest dog took him and the Queen,
and threw them after the others.  Then the soldiers were afraid, and
the people cried: "Little Soldier, you shall be our king, and marry the
beautiful Princess."

So they put the Soldier into the King's coach, and all the three dogs
darted on in front and cried "Hurrah!" and the boys whistled through
their fingers, and the soldiers presented arms.  The Princess came out
of the copper castle, and became Queen, and she liked that well enough.
The wedding lasted a week, and the three dogs sat at the table too, and
opened their eyes wider than ever at all they saw.

THE CONSTANT TIN SOLDIER

By Hans Christian Andersen

THERE were once five-and-twenty tin soldiers; they were all brothers,
for they had all been born of one old tin spoon.  They shouldered their
muskets, and looked straight before them; their uniform was red and
blue, and very splendid.  The first thing they had heard in the world,
when the lid was taken off the box, had been the words "Tin soldiers!"
These words were tittered by a little boy, clapping his hands; the
soldiers had been given to him, for it was his birthday; and now he put
them upon the table.  Each soldier was exactly like the rest; but one
of them had been cast last of all, and there had not been enough tin to
finish him; but he stood as firmly upon his one leg as the others on
their two; and it was just this soldier who became remarkable.

On the table on which they had been placed stood many other playthings,
but the toy that attracted most attention was a neat castle of
cardboard.  Through the little windows one could see straight into the
hall.  Before the castle some little trees were placed round a little
looking-glass, which was to represent a clear lake.  Waxen swans swam
on this lake, and were mirrored in it.  This was all very pretty; but
the prettiest of all was a little Lady, who stood at the open door of
the castle; she was also cut out in paper, but she had a dress of the
clearest gauze, and a little narrow blue ribbon over her shoulders that
looked like a scarf; and in the middle of this ribbon was a shining
tinsel rose, as big as her whole face.  The little Lady stretched out
both her arms, for she was a dancer, and then she lifted one leg so
high that the Tin Soldier could not see it at all, and thought that,
like himself, she had but one leg.

"That would be the wife for me," thought he; "but she is very grand.
She lives in a castle, and I have only a box, and there are five-and-
twenty of us in that.  It is no place for her.  But I must try to make
acquaintance with her."

And then he lay down at full length behind a snuffbox which was on the
table; there he could easily watch the little dainty lady, who
continued to stand on one leg without losing her balance.

When the evening came, all the other tin soldiers were put into their
box, and the people in the house went to bed.  Now the toys began to
play at "visiting," and at "war," and "giving balls."  The tin soldiers
rattled in their box, for they wanted to join, but could not lift the
lid.  The Nutcracker threw somersaults, and the Pencil amused itself on
the table; there was so much noise that the Canary woke up, and began
to speak too, and even in verse.  The only two who did not stir from
their places were the Tin Soldier and the Dancing Lady; she stood
straight up on the point of one of her toes, and stretched out both her
arms: and he was just as enduring on his one leg; and he never turned
his eyes away from her.

Now the clock struck twelve-and, bounce! -the lid flew off the
snuffbox; but there was not snuff in it, but a little black goblin; you
see, it was a trick.

"Tin Soldier," said the Goblin, "don't stare at things that don't
concern you."

But the Tin Soldier pretended not to hear him.  "Just you wait till to-
morrow!" said the Goblin.  But when the morning came, and the children
got up, the Tin Soldier was placed in the window; and whether it was
the Goblin or the draft that did it, all at once the window flew open,
and the Soldier fell, head over heels, out of the third story.  That
was a terrible passage!  He put his leg straight up, and struck with
his helmet downward, and his bayonet between the paving stones.

The servant maid and the little boy came down directly to look for him,
but though they almost trod upon him they could not see him.  If the
Soldier had cried out, "Here I am!" they would have found him; but he
did not think it fitting to call out loudly, because he was in uniform.

Now it began to rain; the drops soon fell thicker, and at last it came
down in a complete stream.  When the rain was past, two street boys
came by.

"Just look!" said one of them, "there lies a tin soldier.  He must come
out and ride in the boat."

And they made a boat out of a newspaper, and put the Tin Soldier in the
middle of it; and so he sailed down the gutter, and the two boys ran
beside him and clapped their hands.  Goodness preserve us!  how the
waves rose in that gutter, and how fast the stream ran!  But then it
had been a heavy rain.  The paper boat rocked up and down, and
sometimes turned round so rapidly that the Tin Soldier trembled; but he
remained firm and never changed countenance, and looked straight before
him, and shouldered his musket.

All at once the boat went into a long drain, and it became as dark as
if he had been in his box.

"Where am I going now?" he thought.  "Yes, yes, that's the Goblin's
fault.  Ah! if the little Lady only sat here with me in the boat, it
might be twice as dark for what I should care."

Suddenly there came a great water rat, which lived under the drain.

"Have you a passport?" said the Rat.  "Give me your passport."

But the Tin Soldier kept silence, and only held his musket tighter than
ever.

The boat went on, but the Rat came after it.  Hu! how he gnashed his
teeth, and called out to the bits of straw and wood:

"Hold him! hold him! he hasn't paid toll-he hasn't showed his
passport!"

But the stream became stronger and stronger.  The Tin Soldier could see
the bright daylight where the arch ended; but he heard a roaring noise,
which might well frighten a bolder man.  Only think-just where the
tunnel ended the drain ran into a great canal; and for him that would
have been as dangerous as for us to be carried down a great waterfall.

Now he was already so near it that he could not stop.  The boat was
carried out, the poor Tin Soldier stiffening himself as much as he
could, and no one could say that he moved an eyelid.  The boat whirled
round three or four times, and was full of water to the very edge- it
must sink.  The Tin Soldier stood up to his neck in water, and the boat
sank deeper and deeper, and the paper was loosened more and more, and
now the water closed over the Soldier's head.  Then he thought of the
pretty little dancer, and how he should never see her again; and it
sounded in the Soldier's ears:

'Farewell, farewell, thou warrior brave,

Die shalt thou this day."

And now the paper parted, and the Tin Soldier fell out; but at that
moment he was snapped up by a great fish.

Oh, how dark it was in that fish's body!  It was darker yet than in the
drain tunnel; and then it was very narrow, too.  But the Tin Soldier
remained unmoved, and lay at full length, shouldering his musket.

The fish swam to and fro; he made the most wonderful movements, and
then became quite still.  At last something flashed through him like
lightning.  The daylight shone quite clear, and a voice said aloud,
"The Tin Soldier!" The fish had been caught, carried to market, bought,
and taken into the kitchen, where the cook cut him open with a large
knife.  She seized the Soldier round the body with both her hands, and
carried him into the room, where all were anxious to see the remarkable
man who had traveled about in the inside of a fish; but the Tin Soldier
was not at all proud.  They placed him on the table, and there-no!
What curious things may happen in the world!  The Tin Soldier was in
the very room in which he had been before!  he saw the same children,
and the same toys stood upon the table; and there was the pretty castle
with the graceful little Dancer.  She was still balancing herself on
one leg and held the other extended in the air.  She was faithful, too.
That moved the Tin Soldier: he was very near weeping tin tears, but
that would not have been proper.  He looked at her, but they said
nothing to each other.

Then one of the little boys took the Tin Soldier and flung him into the
stove.  He gave no reason for doing this.  It must have been the fault
of the Goblin in the snuffbox.

The Tin Soldier stood there quite illuminated, and felt a heat that was
terrible; but whether this heat proceeded from the real fire or from
love he did not know.  The colors had quite gone off from him; but
whether that had happened on the journey, or had been caused by grief,
no one could say.  He looked at the little Lady, she looked at him, and
he felt that he was melting; but he stood firm, shouldering his musket.
Then suddenly the door flew open, and the draft of air caught the
Dancer, and she flew like a sylph just into the stove to the Tin
Soldier, and flashed up in a flame, and then was gone!  Then the Tin
Soldier melted down into a lump, and when the servant maid took the
ashes out next day, she found him in the shape of a little tin heart.
But of the Dancer nothing remained but the tinsel rose, and that was
burned as black as coal.

THE FIR TREE

By Hans Christian Andersen

OUT in the woods stood a nice little Fir tree.  The place he had was a
very good one; the sun shone on him; as to fresh air, there was enough
of that, and round him grew many large-sized comrades, pines as well as
firs.  But the little Fir wanted so very much to be a grown-up tree.

He did not think of the warm sun and of the fresh air; he did not care
for the little cottage children that ran about and prattled when they
were in the wood looking for wild strawberries.  The children often
came with a whole pitcher full of berries, or a long row of them
threaded on a straw, and sat down near the young Tree and said, "Oh,
how pretty he is!  what a nice little fir!" But this was what the Tree
could not bear to hear.

At the end of a year he had shot up a good deal, and after another year
he was another long bit taller; for with fir trees one can always tell
by the shoots how many years old they are.

"Oh, were I but such a high tree as the others are," sighed he.  "Then
I should be able to spread out my branches, and with the tops to look
into the wide world!  Then would the birds build nests among my
branches; and when there was a breeze, I could bend with as much
stateliness as the others!"

Neither the sunbeams, nor the birds, nor the red clouds which morning
and evening sailed above him, gave the little Tree any pleasure.

In winter, when the snow lay glittering on the ground, a hare would
often come leaping along, and jump right over the little Tree.  Oh,
that made him so angry!  But two winters were past, and in the third
the Tree was so large that the hare was obliged to go round it.  "To
grow and grow, to get older and be tall," thought the Tree-"that, after
all, is the most delightful thing in the world!"

In autumn the woodcutters always came and felled some of the largest
trees.  This happened every year; and the young Fir tree, that had now
grown to a very comely size, trembled at the sight; for the magnificent
great trees fell to the earth with noise and cracking, the branches
were lopped off, and the trees looked long and bare: they were hardly
to be recognized; and then they were laid in carts, and the horses
dragged them out of the wood.

Where did they go to?  What became of them?  In spring, when the
Swallows and the Storks came, the Tree asked them: "Don't you know
where they have been taken?  Have you not met them anywhere?"

The Swallows did not know anything about it; but the Stork looked
musing, nodded his head, and said: "Yes; I think I know; I met many
ships as I was flying hither from Egypt; on the ships were magnificent
masts, and I venture to assert that it was they that smelled so of fir.
I may congratulate you, for they lifted themselves on high most
majestically!"

"Oh, were I but old enough to fly across the sea!  But how does the sea
look in reality?  What is it like?"

"That would take a long time to explain," said the Stork, and with
these words off he went.

"Rejoice in thy growth!" said the Sunbeams, "rejoice in thy vigorous
growth, and in the fresh life that groweth within thee!"

And the Wind kissed the Tree, and the Dew wept tears over him; but the
Fir understood it not.

When Christmas came, quite young trees were cut down; trees which often
were not even as large or of the same age as this Fir tree, who could
never rest, but always wanted to be off.  These young trees, and they
were always the finest looking, retained their branches; they were laid
on carts, and the horses drew them out of the wood.

"Where are they going to?" asked the Fir.

"They are not taller than I; there was one indeed that was considerably
shorter; -and why do they retain all their branches?  Whither are they
taken?"

"We know!  we know!" chirped the Sparrows.  "'We have peeped in at the
windows in the town below!  We know whither they are taken!  The
greatest splendor and the greatest magnificence one can imagine await
them.  We peeped through the windows, and saw them planted in the
middle of the warm room, and ornamented with the most splendid things-
with gilded apples, with gingerbread, with toys, and many hundred
lights!"

"And then?" asked the Fir tree, trembling in every bough.  "And then?
What happens then?"

"We did not see anything more: it was incomparably beautiful."

"I would fain know if I am destined for so glorious a career," cried
the Tree, rejoicing.  "That is still better than to cross the sea!
What a longing do I suffer!  Were Christmas but come!  I am now tall,
and my branches spread like the others that were carried off last year!
Oh, were I but already on the cart!  Were I in the warm room with all
the splendor and magnificence!  Yes; then something better, something
still grander, will surely follow, or wherefore should they thus
ornament me?  Something better, something still grander, must follow-
but what?  Oh, how I long, how I suffer!  I do not know myself what is
the matter with me!"

"Rejoice in our presence!" said the Air and the Sunlight; "rejoice in
thy own fresh youth!"

But the Tree did not rejoice at all; he grew and grew, and was green
both winter and summer.  People that saw him said, "What a fine tree!"
and toward Christmas he was one of the first that was cut down.  The ax
struck deep into the very pith; the tree fell to the earth with a sigh:
he felt a pang -it was like a swoon; he could not think of happiness,
for he was sorrowful at being separated from his home, from the place
where he had sprung up.  He well knew that he should never see his dear
old comrades, the little bushes and flowers around him, any more;
perhaps not even the birds!  The departure was not at all agreeable.

The Tree only came to himself when he was unloaded in a courtyard with
the other trees, and heard a man say, "That one is splendid!  we don't
want the others."  Then two servants came in rich livery and carried
the Fir tree into a large and splendid drawing-room.  Portraits were
hanging on the walls, and near the white porcelain stove stood two
large Chinese vases with lions on the covers.  There, too, were large
easy-chairs, silken sofas, large tables full of picture books, and full
of toys worth hundreds and hundreds of crowns-at least the children
said so.  And the Fir tree was stuck upright in a cask that was filled
with sand: but no one could see that it was a cask, for green cloth was
hung all round it, and it stood on a large gayly colored carpet.  Oh,
how the Tree quivered!  What was to happen?  The servants, as well as
the young ladies, decorated it.  On one branch there hung little nets
cut out of colored paper, and each net was filled with sugarplums; and
among the other boughs gilded apples and walnuts were suspended,
looking as though they had grown there, and little blue and white
tapers were placed among the leaves.  Dolls that looked for all the
world like men -the Tree had never beheld such before-were seen among
the foliage, and at the very top a large star of gold tinsel was fixed.
It was really splendid -beyond description splendid.

"This evening!" said they all; "how it will shine this evening!"

"Oh," thought the Tree, "if the evening were but come!  If the tapers
were but lighted!  And then I wonder what will happen!  Perhaps the
other trees from the forest will come to look at me!  Perhaps the
sparrows will beat against the windowpanes!  I wonder if I shall take
root here, and winter and summer stand covered with ornaments!"

He knew very much about the matter!  but he was so impatient that for
sheer longing he got a pain in his back, and this with trees is the
same thing as a headache with us.

The candles were now lighted.  What brightness!  What splendor!  The
Tree trembled so in every bough that one of the tapers set fire to the
foliage.  It blazed up splendidly.

"Help!  help!" cried the young ladies, and they quickly put out the
fire.

Now the Tree did not even dare tremble.  What a state he was in!  He
was so uneasy lest he should lose something of his splendor, that he
was quite bewildered amid the glare and brightness; when suddenly both
folding doors opened, and a troop of children rushed in as if they
would upset the Tree.  The older persons followed quietly; the little
ones stood quite still.  But it was only for a moment; then they
shouted so that the whole place reechoed with their rejoicing; they
danced round the Tree, and one present after the other was pulled off.

"What are they about?" thought the Tree.  "What is to happen now!" And
the lights burned down to the very branches, and as they burned down
they were put out one after the other, and then the children had
permission to plunder the Tree.  So they fell upon it with such
violence that all its branches cracked; if it had not been fixed firmly
in the cask, it would certainly have tumbled down.

The children danced about with their beautiful playthings; no one
looked at the Tree except the old nurse, who peeped between the
branches; but it was only to see if there was a fig or an apple left
that had been forgotten.

"A story!  a story!" cried the children, drawing a little fat man
toward the Tree.  He seated himself under it, and said: "Now we are in
the shade, and the Tree can listen too.  But I shall tell only one
story.  Now which will you have; that about IvedyAvedy, or about
Klumpy-Dumpy who tumbled downstairs, and yet after all came to the
throne and married the princess?"

"Ivedy-Avedy," cried some; "Klumpy-Dumpy," cried the others.  There was
such a bawling and screaming!  -the Fir tree alone was silent, and he
thought to himself, "Am I not to bawl with the rest?-am I to do nothing
whatever?" for he was one of the company, and had done what he had to
do.

And the man told about Klumpy-Dumpy that tumbled down, who
notwithstanding came to the throne, and at last married the princess.
And the children clapped their hands, arid cried out, "Oh, go on!  Do
go on!" they waited to hear about Ivedy-Avedy too, but the little man
only told them about Klumpy-Dumpy.  The Fir tree stood quite still and
absorbed in thought: the birds in the wood had never related the like
of this.  "Klumpy-Dumpy fell downstairs, and yet he married the
princess!  Yes, yes!  that's the way of the world!" thought the Fir
tree, and believed it all, because the man who told the story was so
good-looking.  "Well, well!  who knows, perhaps I may fall downstairs
too, and get a princess as wife!"  And he looked forward with joy to
the morrow, when he hoped to be decked out again with lights, play-
things, fruits, and tinsel.

"I won't tremble to-morrow!" thought the Fir tree.  "I will enjoy to
the full all my splendor!  To-morrow I shall hear again the story of
Klumpy-Dumpy, and perhaps that of Ivedy-Avedy too." And the whole night
the Tree stood still and in deep thought.

In the morning the servant and the housemaid came in.

"Now then the splendor will begin again," thought the Fir.  But they
dragged him out of the room, and up the stairs into the loft; and here,
in a dark corner, where no daylight could enter, they left him.
"What's the meaning of this?" thought the Tree.  "What am I to do here?
What shall I hear now, I wonder?"  And he leaned against the wall lost
in reverie.  Time enough had he too for his reflections; for days and
nights passed on, and nobody came up; and when at last somebody did
come, it was only to put some great trunks in a corner out of the way.
There stood the Tree quite hidden; it seemed as if he had been entirely
forgotten.

"'Tis now winter out-of-doors!" thought the Tree.  "The earth is hard
and covered with snow; men cannot plant me now, and therefore I have
been put up here under shelter till the springtime comes!  How
thoughtful that is!  How kind man is, after all!  If it only were not
so dark here, and so terribly lonely!  Not even a hare.  And out in the
woods it was so pleasant, when the snow was on the ground, and the hare
leaped by; yes-even when he jumped over me; but I did not like it then.
It is really terribly lonely here!"

"Squeak!  squeak!" said a little Mouse at the same moment, peeping out
of his hole.  And then another little one came.  They snuffed about the
Fir tree, and rustled among the branches.

"It is dreadfully cold," said the Mouse.  "But for that, it would be
delightful here, old Fir, wouldn't it?"

"I am by no means old," said the Fir tree.  "There's many a one
considerably older than I am."

"Where do you come from," asked the Mice; "and what can you do?"  They
were so extremely curious.  "Tell us about the most beautiful spot on
the earth.  Have you never been there?  Were you never in the larder,
where cheeses lie on the shelves, and hams hang from above; where one
dances about on tallow candles; that place where one enters lean, and
comes out again fat and portly?"

"I know no such place," said the Tree.  "But I know the wood, where the
sun shines, and where the little birds sing."  And then he told all
about his youth; and the little Mice had never heard the like before;
and they listened and said:

"Well, to be sure!  How much you have seen!  How happy you must have
been!"

"I!" said the Fir tree, thinking over what he had himself related.
"Yes, in reality those were happy times."  And then he told about
Christmas Eve, when he was decked out with cakes and candles.

"Oh," said the little Mice, "how fortunate you have been, old Fir
tree!"

"I am by no means old," said he.  "I came from the wood this winter; I
am in my prime, and am only rather short for my age."

"What delightful stories you know!" said the Mice; and the next night
they came with four other little Mice, who were to hear what the Tree
recounted; and the more he related, the more plainly he remembered all
himself; and it appeared as if those times had really been happy times.
"But they may still come-they may still come.  Humpy-Dumpy fell
downstairs, and yet he got a princess!" and he thought at the moment of
a nice little Birch tree growing out in the woods; to the Fir, that
would be a real charming princess.

"Who is Klumpy-Dumpy?" asked the Mice.  So then the Fir tree told the
whole fairy tale, for he could remember every single word of it; and
the little Mice jumped for joy up to the very top of the Tree.  Next
night two more Mice came, and on Sunday two Rats, even; but they said
the stories were not interesting, which vexed the little Mice; and
they, too, now began to think them not so very amusing either.

"Do you know only one story?" asked the Rats.

"Only that one," answered the Tree.  "I heard it on my happiest
evening; but I did not then know how happy I was."

"It is a very stupid story!  Don't you know one about bacon and tallow
candles?  Can't you tell any larder stories?"

"No," said the Tree.

"Then good-by," said the Rats and they went home.

At last the little Mice stayed away also; and the Tree sighed: "After
all, it was very pleasant when the sleek little Mice sat round me and
listened to what I told them.  Now that too is over.  But I will take
good care to enjoy myself when I am brought out again."

But when was that to be?  Why, one morning there came a quantity of
people and set to work in the loft.  The trunks were moved, the tree
was pulled out and thrown-rather hard, it is true- down on the floor,
but a man drew him toward the stairs, where the daylight shone.

"Now a merry life will begin again," thought the Tree.  He felt the
fresh air, the first sunbeam- and now he was out in the courtyard.  All
passed so quickly, there was so much going on around him, that the Tree
quite forgot to look to himself.  The court adjoined a garden, and all
was in flower; the roses hung so fresh and odorous over the balustrade,
the lindens were in blossom, the Swallows flew by, and said "Quirre-
vit!  my husband is come!" but it was not the Fir tree that they meant.

"Now, then, I shall really enjoy life," said he, exultingly, and spread
out his branches; but, alas!  they were all withered and yellow.  It
was in a corner that he lay, among weeds and nettles.  The golden star
of tinsel was still on the top of the Tree, and glittered in the
sunshine.

In the courtyard some of the merry children were playing who had danced
at Christmas round the Fir tree, and were so glad at the sight of him.
One of the youngest ran and tore off the golden star.

"Only look what is still on the ugly old Christmas tree!" said he,
trampling on the branches, so that they all cracked beneath his feet.

And the Tree beheld all the beauty of the flowers, and the freshness in
the garden; he beheld himself, and wished he had remained in his dark
corner in the loft: he thought of his first youth in the wood, of the
Merry Christmas Eve, and of the little Mice who had listened with so
much pleasure to the story of Humpy-Dumpy.

"'Tis over-'tis past!" said the poor Tree.  "Had I but rejoiced when I
had reason to do so!  But now 'tis past, 'tis past!"

And the gardener's boy chopped the Tree into small pieces; there was a
whole heap lying there.  The wood flamed up splendidly under the large
brewing copper, and it sighed so deeply!  Each sigh was like a shot.

The boys played about in the court, and the youngest wore the gold star
on his breast which the Tree had had on the happiest evening of his
life.  However, that was over now-the Tree gone, the story at an end.
All, all was over; every tale must end at last.

THE FLYING TRUNK

By Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a merchant, who was so rich that he could pave the whole
street with gold, and almost have enough left for a little lane.  But
he did not do that; he knew how to employ his money differently.  When
he spent a shilling he got back a crown, such a clever merchant was he;
and this continued till he died.

His son now got all this money; and he lived merrily, going to the
masquerade every evening, making kites out of dollar notes, and playing
at ducks and drakes on the seacoast with gold pieces instead of
pebbles.  In this way the money might soon be spent, and indeed it was
so.  At last he had no more than four shillings left, and no clothes to
wear but a pair of slippers and an old dressing gown.

Now his friends did not trouble themselves any more about him as they
could not walk with him in the street, but one of them, who was good-
natured, sent him an old trunk, with the remark:  "Pack up!"  Yes, that
was all very well, but he had nothing to pack, therefore he seated
himself in the trunk.

That was a wonderful trunk.  So soon as any one pressed the lock the
trunk could fly.  He pressed it, and whirr!  away flew the trunk with
him through the chimney and over the clouds farther and farther away.
But as often as the bottom of the trunk cracked a little he was in
great fear lest it might go to pieces, and then he would have flung a
fine somersault!  In that way he came to the land of the Turks.  He hid
the trunk in a wood under some dry leaves, and then went into the town.
He could do that very well, for among the Turks all the people went
about dressed like himself in dressing gown and slippers.  Then he met
a nurse with a little child.

"Here, you Turkish nurse," he began, "what kind of a great castle is
that close by the town, in which the windows are so high up?"

"There dwells the Sultan's daughter," replied she.  "It is prophesied
that she will be very unhappy respecting a lover; and therefore nobody
may go near her, unless the Sultan and Sultana are there too."

"Thank you!" said the Merchant's Son; and he went out into the forest,
seated himself in his trunk, flew on the roof, and crept through the
window into the Princess's room.

She was lying asleep on the sofa, and she was so beautiful that the
Merchant's Son was compelled to kiss her.  Then she awoke, and was
startled very much; but he said he was a Turkish angel who had come
down to her through the air, and that pleased her.

They sat down side by side, and he told her stories about her eyes; and
he told her they were the most glorious dark lakes, and that thoughts
were swimming about in them like mermaids.  And he told her about her
forehead; that it was a snowy mountain with the most splendid halls and
pictures.  And he told her about the stork who brings the lovely little
children.

Yes, those were fine histories!  Then he asked the Princess if she
would marry him, and she said, "Yes," directly.

"But you must come here on Saturday," said she.  "Then the Sultan and
Sultana will be here to tea.  They will be very proud that I am to
marry a Turkish angel.  But take care that you know a very pretty
story, for both my parents are very fond indeed of stories.  My mother
likes them high-flown and moral, but my father likes them merry, so
that one can laugh."

"Yes, I shall bring no marriage gift but a story," said he; and so they
parted.  But the Princess gave him a saber, the sheath embroidered with
gold pieces and that was very useful to him.

Now he flew away, bought a new dressing gown, and sat in the forest and
made up a story; it was to be ready by Saturday, and that was not an
easy thing.

By the time he had finished it Saturday had come.  The Sultan and his
wife and all the court were at the 'Princess's to tea.  He was received
very graciously.

"Will you relate us a story?" said the Sultana; "one that is deep and
edifying."

"Yes, but one that we can laugh at," said the Sultan.

"Certainly," he replied; and so began.  And now listen well.

"There was once a bundle of Matches, and these Matches were
particularly proud of their high descent.  Their genealogical tree,
that is to say, the great fir tree of which each of them was a little
splinter, had been a great old tree out in the forest.  The Matches now
lay between a Tinder-box and an old Iron Pot; and they were telling
about the days of their youth.  'Yes, when we were upon the green
boughs,' they said, 'then we really were upon the green boughs!  Every
morning and evening there was diamond tea for us-I mean dew; we had
sunshine all day long whenever the sun shone, and all the little birds
had to tell stories.  We could see very well that we were rich, for the
other trees were only dressed out in summer, while our family had the
means to wear green dresses in the winter as well.  But then the
woodcutter came, like a great revolution, and our family was broken up.
The head of the family got an appointment as mainmast in a first-rate
ship, which could sail round the world if necessary; the other branches
went to other places, and now we have the office of kindling a light
for the vulgar herd.  That's how we grand people came to be in the
kitchen.'

"'My fate was of different kind,' said the Iron Pot, which stood next
to the Matches.  'From the beginning, ever since I came into the world,
there has been a great deal of scouring and cooking done in me.  I look
after the practical part, and am the first here in the house.  My only
pleasure is to sit in my place after dinner, very clean and neat, and
to carry on a sensible conversation with my comrades.  But except the
Waterpot, which is sometimes taken down into the courtyard, we always
live within our four walls.  Our only newsmonger is the Market Basket;
but he speaks very uneasily about the government and the people.  Yes,
the other day there was an old pot that fell down, from fright, and
burst.  He's liberal, I can tell you!'- 'Now you're talking too much,'
the Tinder-box interrupted, and the steel struck against the flint, so
that sparks flew out.  'Shall we not have a merry evening?'

"'Yes, let us talk about who is the grandest,' said the Matches.

"'No, I don't like to talk about myself,' retorted the Pot. 'Let us get
up an evening entertainment.  I will begin.  I will tell a story from
real life, something that everyone has experienced, so that we can
easily imagine the situation, and take pleasure in it.   On the Baltic,
by the Danish shore-'

"'That's a pretty beginning!' cried all the Plates.  'That will be a
story we shall like.'

"'Yes, it happened to me in my youth, when I lived in a family where
the furniture was polished, the floors scoured, and new curtains were
put up every fortnight.'

"'What an interesting way you have of telling a story!' said the Carpet
Broom.  'One can tell directly that a man is speaking who has been in
woman's society.  There's something pure runs through it.'

"And the Pot went on telling the story, and the end was as good as the
beginning.

"All the Plates rattled with joy, and the Carpet Broom brought some
green parsley out of the dust hole, and put it like a wreath on the
Pot, for he knew that it would vex the others.  'If I crown him to-
day,' it thought, 'he will crown me tomorrow.'

"'Now I'll dance,' said the Fire Tongs; and they danced.  Preserve us!
how that implement could lift up one leg!  The old chair-cushion burst
to see it.  'Shall I be crowned too?' thought the Tongs; and indeed a
wreath was awarded.

"'They're only common people, after all!' thought the Matches.

"Now the Tea Urn was to sing; but she said she had taken cold and could
not sing unless she felt boiling within.  But that was only
affectation: she did not want to sing, except when she was in the
parlor with the grand people.

"In the window sat an old Quill Pen, with which the maid generally
wrote: there was nothing remarkable about this pen, except that it had
been dipped too deep into the ink, but she was proud of that.  'If the
Tea Urn won't sing,' she said, 'she may leave it alone.  Outside hangs
a nightingale in a cage, and he can sing.  He hasn't had any education,
but this evening we'll say nothing about that.'

"'I think it very wrong,' said the Teakettle- he was the kitchen
singer, and half brother to the Tea Urn-'that that rich and foreign
bird should be listened to.  Is that patriotic?  Let the Market Basket
decide.'

"'I am vexed,' said the Market Basket.  'No one can imagine how much I
am secretly vexed.  Is that a proper way of spending the evening?
Would it not be more sensible to put the house in order?  Let each one
go to his own place, and I will arrange the whole game.  That would be
quite another thing.'

'Yes, let us make a disturbance, cried they all.  Then the door opened,
and the maid came in, and they all stood still; not one stirred.  But
there was not one pot among them who did not know what he could do and
how grand he was.  'Yes, if I had liked,' each one thought, 'it might
have been a very merry evening.'

"The servant girl took the Matches and lighted the fire with them.
mercy!  how they sputtered and burst out into flame! 'Now everyone can
see,' thought they, 'that we are the first.  How we shine!  what a
light!'-and they burned out."

"That was a capital story," said the Sultana.  "I feel myself quite
carried away to the kitchen, to the Matches.  Yes, now thou shalt marry
our daughter."

"Yes, certainly," said the Sultan, "thou shalt marry our daughter on
Monday."

And they called him thou, because he was to belong to the family.

The wedding was decided on, and on the evening before it the whole city
was illuminated.  Biscuits and cakes were thrown among the people, the
street boys stood on their toes, called out "Hurrah!" and whistled on
their fingers.  It was uncommonly splendid.

"Yes, I shall have to give something as a treat," thought the
Merchant's Son.  So he bought rockets and crackers, and every
imaginable sort of fire-work, put them all into his trunk, and flew up
into the air.

"Crack!" how they went, and how they went off!  All the Turks hopped up
with such a start that their slippers flew about their ears; such a
meteor they had never yet seen.  Now they could understand that it must
be a Turkish angel who was going to marry the Princess.

What stories people tell!  Everyone whom he asked about it had seen it
in a separate way; but one and all thought it fine.

"I saw the Turkish angel himself," said one.  "He had eyes like glowing
stars, and a beard like foaming water."

"He flew up in a fiery mantle," said another; "the most lovely little
cherub peeped forth from among the folds."

Yes, they were wonderful things that he heard; and on the following day
he was to be married.

Now he went back to the forest to rest himself in his trunk.  But what
had become of that?  A spark from the fireworks had set fire to it, and
the trunk was burned to ashes.  He could not fly any more, and could
not get to his bride.

She stood all day on the roof waiting; and most likely she is waiting
still.  But he wanders through the world, telling fairy tales; but they
are not so merry as that one he told about the Matches.

THE DARNING NEEDLE

By Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a darning needle, who thought herself so fine, she
imagined she was an embroidery needle.

"Take care, and mind you hold me tight!" she said to the Fingers that
took her out.  "Don't let me fall!  If I fall on the ground I shall
certainly never be found again, for I am so fine!"

"That's as it may be," said the Fingers; and they grasped her round the
body.

"See, I'm coming with a train!" said the Darning Needle, and she drew a
long thread after her, but there was no knot in the thread.

The Fingers pointed the needle just at the cook's slipper, in which the
upper leather had burst, and was to be sewn together.

"That's vulgar work," said the Darning Needle.  "I shall never get
through.  I'm breaking!  I'm breaking!" And she really broke.  "Did I
not say so?" said the Darning Needle; "I'm too fine!"

"Now it's quite useless," said the Fingers; but they were obliged to
hold her fast, all the same; for the cook dropped some sealing wax upon
the needle, and pinned her handkerchief together with it in front.

"So, now I'm a breastpin!" said the Darning Needle.  "I knew very well
that I should come to honor: when one is something, one comes to
something!"

And she laughed quietly to herself-and one can never see when a darning
needle laughs.  There she sat, as proud as if she was in a state coach,
and looked all about her.

"May I be permitted to ask if you are of gold?" she inquired of the
pin, her neighbor.  "You have a very pretty appearance, and a peculiar
head, but it is only little.  You must take pains to grow, for it's not
everyone that has sealing wax dropped upon him."

And the Darning Needle drew herself up so proudly that she fell out of
the handkerchief right into the sink, which the cook was rinsing out.

"Now we're going on a journey," said the Darning Needle.  "If I only
don't get lost!"

But she really was lost.

"I'm too fine for this world," she observed, as she lay in the gutter.
"But I know who I am, and there's always something in that!"

So the Darning Needle kept her proud behavior, and did not lose her
good humor.  And things of many kinds swam over her, chips and straws
and pieces of old newspapers.

"Only look how they sail!" said the Darning Needle.  "They don't know
what is under them!  I'm here, I remain firmly here.  See, there goes a
chip thinking of nothing in the world but of himself-of a chip!
There's a straw going by now.  How he turns!  how he twirls about!
Don't think only of yourself, you might easily run up against a stone.
There swims a bit of newspaper.  What's written upon it has long been
forgotten, and yet it gives itself airs.  I sit quietly and patiently
here.  I know who I am, and I shall remain what I am."

One day something lay close beside her that glittered splendidly; then
the Darning Needle believed that it was a diamond; but it was a bit of
broken bottle; and because it shone, the Darning Needle spoke to it,
introducing herself as a breastpin.

"I suppose you are a diamond?" she observed.

"Why, yes, something of that kind."

And then each believed the other to be a very valuable thing; and they
began speaking about the world, and how very conceited it was.

"I have been in a lady's box," said the Darning Needle, "and this lady
was a cook.  She had five fingers on each hand, and I never saw
anything so conceited as those five fingers.  And yet they were only
there that they might take me out of the box and put me back into it."

"Were they of good birth?" asked the Bit of Bottle.

"No, indeed," cried the Darning Needle, "but very haughty.  There were
five brothers, all of the finger family.  They kept very proudly
together, though they were of different lengths: the outermost, the
thumbling, was short and fat; he walked out in front of the ranks, and
only had one joint in his back, and could only make a single bow; but
he said that if he were hacked off a man, that man was useless for
service in war.  Daintymouth, the second finger, thrust himself into
sweet and sour, pointed to sun and moon, and gave the impression when
they wrote.  Longrnan, the third, looked at all the others over his
shoulder.  Goldborder, the fourth, went about with a golden belt round
his waist; and little Playman did nothing at all, and was proud of it.
There was nothing but bragging among them, and therefore I went away."

"And now we sit here and glitter!" said the Bit of Bottle.

At that moment more water came into the gutter, so that it overflowed,
and the Bit of Bottle was carried away.

"So he is disposed of," observed the Darning Needle.  "I remain here, I
am too fine.  But that's my pride, and my pride is honorable."  And
proudly she sat there, and had many great thoughts.  "I could almost
believe I had been born of a sunbeam, I'm so fine!  It really appears
as if the sunbeams were always seeking for me under the water.  Ah!
I'm so fine that my mother cannot find me.  If I had my old eye, which
broke off, I think I should cry; but, no, I should not do that: it's
not genteel to cry."

One day a couple of street boys lay grubbing in the gutter where they
sometimes find old nails, farthings, and similar treasures.  It was
dirty work, but they took great delight in it.

"Oh!" cried one, who had pricked himself with the Darning Needle,
there's a fellow for you!"

"I'm not a fellow; I'm a young lady!" said the Darning Needle.

But nobody listened to her.  The sealing wax had come off, and she had
turned black; but black makes one look slender, and she thought herself
finer even than before.

"Here comes an eggshell sailing along!" said the boys; and they stuck
the Darning Needle fast in the eggshell.

"White walls, and black myself!  that looks well," remarked the Darning
Needle.  "Now one can see me.  I only hope I shall not be seasick!"
But she was not seasick at all.  "It is good against seasickness, if
one has a steel stomach, and does not forget that one is a little more
than an ordinary person!  Now my seasickness is over.  The finer one
is, the more one can bear."

"Crack!" went the eggshell, for a wagon went over her.

"Good heavens, how it crushes one!" said the Darning Needle.  "I'm
getting seasick now-I'm quite sick."

But she was not really sick, though the wagon went over her; she lay
there at full length, and there she may lie.

PEN AND INKSTAND

By Hans Christian Andersen

THE following remark was made in a poet's room, as the speaker looked
at the inkstand that stood upon his table:

"It is marvelous all that can come out of that ink-stand!  What will it
produce next?  Yes, it is marvelous!"

"So it is!" exclaimed the Inkstand.  "It is incomprehensible!  That is
what I always say."  It was thus the Inkstand addressed itself to the
Pen, and to everything else that could hear it on the table.  "It is
really astonishing all that can come from me!  It is almost incredible!
I positively do not know myself what the next thing may be, when a
person begins to dip into me.  One drop of me serves for half a side of
paper; and what may not then appear upon it?  I am certainly something
extraordinary.  From me proceed all the works of the poets.  These
animated beings, whom people think they recognize-these deep feelings,
that gay humor, these charming descriptions of nature -I do not
understand them myself, for I know nothing about nature; but still it
is all in me.  From me have gone forth, and still go forth, these
warrior hosts, these lovely maidens, these bold knights on snorting
steeds, those droll characters in humbler life.  The fact is, however,
that I do not know anything about them myself.  I assure you they are
not my ideas."

"You are right there," replied the Pen.  "You have few ideas, and do
not trouble yourself much with thinking, if you did exert yourself to
think, you would perceive that you ought to give something that was not
dry.  You supply me with the means of committing to paper what I have
in me; I write with that.  It is the pen that writes.  Mankind do not
doubt that; and most men have about as much genius for poetry as an old
inkstand."

"You have but little experience," said the ink-stand.  "You have
scarcely been a week in use, and you are already half worn out.  Do you
fancy that you are a poet?  You are only a servant: and I have had many
of your kind before you came- many of the goose family, and of English
manufacture.  I know both quill pens and steel pens.  I have had a
great many in my service, and I shall have many more still, when he,
the man who stirs me up, comes and puts down what he takes from me.  I
should like very much to know what will be the next thing he will take
from me."

"Ink tub!" said the Pen.

Late in the evening the Poet returned home.  He had been at a concert,
had heard a celebrated violin player, and was quite enchanted with his
wonderful performance.  It had been a complete gush of melody that he
had drawn from the instrument.  Sometimes it seemed like the gentle
murmur of a rippling stream, sometimes like the singing of birds,
sometimes like the tempest sweeping through the mighty pine forests, he
fancied he heard his own heart weep, but in the sweet tones that can be
heard in a woman's charming voice.  It seemed as if not only the
strings of the violin made music, but its bridge, its pegs, and its
sounding board.  It was astonishing!  The piece had been a most
difficult one; but it seemed like play-as if the bow were but wandering
capriciously over the strings.  Such was the appearance of facility,
that everyone might have supposed he could do it.  The violin seemed to
sound of itself, the bow to play of itself.  These two seemed to do it
all.  One forgot the master who guided them, who gave them life and
soul.  Yes, they forgot the master; but the Poet thought of him.  He
named him, and wrote down his thoughts as follows:

"How foolish it would be of the violin and the bow, were they to be
vain in their performance!  And yet this is what so often we of the
human species are.  Poets, artists, those who make discoveries in
science, military and naval commanders -we are all proud of ourselves;
and yet we are all only the instruments in our Lord's hands.  To Him
alone be the glory!  We have nothing to arrogate to ourselves."

This was what the Poet wrote; and he headed it with: "The Master and
the Instruments."

"Well, madam," said the Pen to the Inkstand when they were again alone,
"you heard him read aloud what I had written."

"Yes, what I gave you to write," said the Ink-stand.  "It was a hit at
you for your conceit.  Strange that you cannot see that people make a
fool of you!  I gave you that hit pretty cleverly.  I confess, though,
it was rather malicious."

"Inkholder!" cried the Pen.

"Writing stick!" cried the Inkstand.

They both felt assured that they had answered well; and it is a
pleasant reflection that one has made a smart reply-one sleeps
comfortably after it.  And they both went to sleep; but the Poet could
not sleep.  His thoughts welded forth like the tones from the violin,
trilling like pearls, rushing like a storm through the forest.  He
recognized the feeling of his own heart-he perceived the gleam from the
everlasting Master.

To Him alone be the glory!

CINDERELLA

Retold by Miss Mulock

THERE was once an honest gentleman who took for his second wife a lady,
the proudest and most disagreeable in the whole country.  She had two
daughters exactly like herself in all things.  He also had one little
girl, who resembled her dead mother, the best woman in all the world.
Scarcely had the second marriage taken place, than the stepmother
became jealous of the good qualities of the little girl who was so
great a contrast to her own two daughters.  She gave her all the menial
occupations of the house; compelled her to wash the floors and
staircases; to dust the bedrooms, and clean the grates; and while her
sisters occupied carpeted chambers hung with mirrors, where they could
see themselves from head to foot, this poor little damsel was sent to
sleep in an attic, on an old straw mattress, with only one chair and
not a looking-glass in the room.

She suffered all in silence, not daring to complain to her father, who
was entirely ruled by his new wife.  When her daily work was done, she
used to sit down in the chimney corner among the ashes; from which the
two sisters gave her the nickname of Cinderella.  But Cinderella,
however, shabbily clad, was handsomer than they were with all their
fine clothes.

It happened that the king's son gave a series of balls, to which were
invited all the rank and fashion of the city, and among the rest the
two elder sisters.  They were very proud and happy, and occupied their
whole time in deciding what they should wear; a source of new trouble
to Cinderella, whose duty it was to get up their fine linen and laces,
and who never could please them however much she tried.  They talked of
nothing but their clothes.

"I," said the elder, "shall wear my velvet gown and my trimmings of
English lace."

"And I," added the younger, "will have but my ordinary silk petticoat,
but I shall adorn it with an upper skirt of flowered brocade, and shall
put on my diamond tiara, which is a great deal finer than anything of
yours."

Here the elder sister grew angry, and the dispute began to run so high
that Cinderella, who was known to have excellent taste, was called upon
to decide between them.  She gave them the best advice she could, and
gently and submissively offered to dress them herself, and especially
to arrange their hair, an accomplishment in which she excelled many a
noted coiffeur.  The important evening came, and she exercised all her
skill to adorn the two young ladies.  While she was combing out the
elder's hair, this ill-natured girl said sharply, "Cinderella, do you
not wish you were going to the ball?"

"Ah, madam" (they obliged her always to say madam), "you are only
mocking me; it is not my fortune to have any such pleasure."

"You are right; people would only laugh to see a little cinder wench at
a ball."

Any other than Cinderella would have dressed the hair all awry, but she
was good, and dressed it perfectly even and smooth, and as prettily as
she could.

The sisters had scarcely eaten for two days, and had br