oken a dozen
staylaces a day, in trying to make themselves slender; but to-night
they broke a dozen more, and lost their tempers over and over again
before they had completed their toilet.  When at last the happy moment
arrived, Cinderella followed them to the coach; after it had whirled
them away, she sat down by the kitchen fire and cried.

Immediately her godmother, who was a fairy, appeared beside her.  "What
are you crying for, my little maid?"

"Oh, I wish-I wish-"  Her sobs stopped her.

"You wish to go to the ball; isn't it so? "

Cinderella nodded.

"Well then, be a good girl, and you shall go.  First run into the
garden and fetch me the largest pumpkin you can find."

Cinderella did not comprehend what this had to do with her going to the
ball, but being obedient and obliging, she went.  Her godmother took
the pumpkin, and having scooped out all its inside, struck it with her
wand; it became a splendid gilt coach, lined with rose-colored satin.

"Now fetch me the mousetrap out of the pantry, my dear."

Cinderella brought it; it contained six of the fattest, sleekest mice.
The fairy lifted up the wire door, and as each mouse ran out she struck
it and changed it into a beautiful black horse.

"But what shall I do for your coachman, Cinderella?"

Cinderella suggested that she had seen a large black rat in the rat
trap, and he might do for want of better.

"You are right; go and look again for him."

He was found; and the fairy made him into a most respectable coachman,
with the finest whiskers imaginable.  She afterward took six lizards
from behind the pumpkin frame, and changed them into six footmen, all
in splendid livery, who immediately jumped up behind the carriage, as
if they had been footmen all their days.  "Well, Cinderella, now you
can go to the ball."

"What, in these clothes?" said Cinderella piteously, looking down on
her ragged frock.

Her godmother laughed, and touched her also with the wand; at which her
wretched threadbare jacket became stiff with gold, and sparkling with
jewels; her woolen petticoat lengthened into a gown of sweeping satin,
from underneath which peeped out her little feet, no longer bare, but
covered with silk stockings, and the prettiest glass slippers in the
world.  "Now, Cinderella, depart; but remember, if you stay one instant
after midnight, your carriage will become a pumpkin, your coachman a
rat, your horses mice, and your footmen lizards; while you, yourself,
will be the little cinder wench you were an hour ago."

Cinderella promised without fear, her heart was so full of joy.

Arrived at the palace, the king's son, whom some one, probably the
fairy, had told to await the coming of an uninvited princess, whom
nobody knew, was standing at the entrance, ready to receive her.  He
offered her his hand, and led her with the utmost courtesy through the
assembled guests, who stood aside to let her pass, whispering to one
another, "Oh, how beautiful she is!"  It might have turned the head of
anyone but poor Cinderella, who was so used to be despised, that she
took it all as if it were something happening in a dream.

Her triumph was complete; even the old king said to the queen, that
never since her majesty's young days had he seen so charming and
elegant a person.  All the court ladies scanned her eagerly, clothes
and all, determining to have theirs made next day of exactly the same
pattern.  The king's son himself led her out to dance, and she danced
so gracefully that he admired her more and more.  Indeed, at supper,
which was fortunately early, his admiration quite took away his
appetite.  For Cinderella, herself, with an involuntary shyness, sought
out her sisters; placed herself beside them and offered them all sorts
of civil attentions, which coming as they supposed from a stranger, and
so magnificent a lady, almost overwhelmed them with delight.

While she was talking with them, she heard the clock strike a quarter
to twelve, and making a courteous adieu to the royal family, she
reentered her carriage, escorted tenderly by the king's son, and
arrived in safety at her own door.  There she found her godmother, who
smiled approval; and of whom she begged permission to go to a second
ball, the following night, to which the queen had earnestly invited
her.

While she was talking, the two sisters were heard knocking at the gate,
and the fairy godmother vanished, leaving Cinderella sitting in the
chimney corner, rubbing her eves and pretending to be very sleepy.

"Ah," cried the eldest sister maliciously, "it has been the most
delightful ball, and there was present the most beautiful princess I
ever saw, who was so exceedingly polite to us both."

"Was she?" said Cinderella indifferently; "and who might she be?"

"Nobody knows, though everybody would give their eyes to know,
especially the king's Son."

"Indeed!" replied Cinderella, a little more interested; "I should like
to see her.  Miss Javotte"- that was the elder sister's name-"will you
not let me go to-morrow, and lend me your yellow gown that you wear on
Sundays?"

"What, lend my yellow gown to a cinder wench!  I am not so mad as
that;" at which refusal Cinderella did not complain, for if her sister
really had lent her the gown, she would have been considerably
embarrassed.

The next night came, and the two young ladies, richly dressed in
different toilets, went to the ball.

Cinderella, more splendidly attired and beautiful than ever, followed
them shortly after.  "Now remember twelve o'clock," was her godmother's
parting speech; and she thought she certainly should.  But the prince's
attentions to her were greater even than the first evening, and in the
delight of listening to his pleasant conversation, time slipped by
unperceived.  While she was sitting beside him in a lovely alcove, and
looking at the moon from under a bower of orange blossoms, she heard a
clock strike the first stroke of twelve.  She started up, and fled away
as lightly as a deer.

Amazed, the prince followed, but could not catch her.  Indeed he missed
his lovely princess altogether, and only saw running out of the palace
doors, a little dirty lass whom he had never beheld before, and of whom
he certainly would never have taken the least notice.  Cinderella
arrived at home breathless and weary, ragged and cold, without
carriage, or footman or coachman; the only remnant of her past
magnificence being one of her little glass slippers-the other she had
dropped in the ballroom as she ran away.

When the two sisters returned, they were full of this strange
adventure, how the beautiful lady had appeared at the ball more
beautiful than ever, and enchanted everyone who looked at her; and how
as the clock was striking twelve she had suddenly risen up and fled
through the ballroom, disappearing no one knew how or where, and
dropping one of her glass slippers behind her in her flight.  How the
king's son had remained inconsolable, until he chanced to pick up the
little glass slipper, which he carried away in his pocket, and was seen
to take it out continually, and look at it affectionately, with the air
of a man very much in love; in fact, from his behavior during the
remainder of the evening, all the court and royal family were convinced
that he had become desperately enamored of the wearer of the little
glass slipper.

Cinderella listened in silence, turning her face to the kitchen fire,
and perhaps it was that which made her look so rosy, but nobody ever
noticed or admired her at home, so it did not signify, and next morning
she went to her weary work again just as before.

A few days after, the whole city was attracted by the sight of a herald
going round with a little glass slipper in his hand, publishing with a
flourish of trumpets, that the king's son ordered this to be fitted on
the foot of every lady in the kingdom, and that he wished to marry the
lady whom it fitted best, or to whom it and the fellow slipper
belonged.  Princesses, duchesses, countesses, and simple gentlewomen
all tried it on, but being a fairy slipper, it fitted nobody; and
besides, nobody could produce its fellow slipper, which lay all the
time safely in the pocket of Cinderella's old linsey gown.

At last the herald came to the house of the two sisters, and though
they well knew neither of themselves was the beautiful lady, they made
every attempt to get their clumsy feet into the glass slipper, but in
vain.

"Let me try it on," said Cinderella from the chimney corner.

"What, you?" cried the others, bursting into shouts of laughter; but
Cinderella only smiled, and held out her hand.

Her sisters cou1d not prevent her, since the command was that every
young maiden in the city should try on the slipper, in order that no
chance might be left untried, for the prince was nearly breaking his
heart; and his father and mother were afraid that though a prince, he
would actually die for love of the beautiful unknown lady.

So the herald bade Cinderella sit down on a three-legged stool in the
kitchen, and himself put the slipper on her pretty little foot, which
it fitted exactly; she then drew from her pocket the fellow slipper,
which she also put on, and stood up-for with the touch of the magic
shoes all her dress was changed likewise-no longer the poor despised
cinder wench, but the beautiful lady whom the king's son loved.

Her sisters recognized her at once.  Filled with astonishment, mingled
with no little alarm, they threw themselves at her feet, begging her
pardon for all their former unkindness.  She raised and embraced them;
told them she forgave them with all her heart, and only hoped they
would love her always.  Then she departed with the herald to the king's
palace, and told her whole story to his majesty and the royal family,
who were not in the least surprised, for everybody believed in fairies,
and everybody longed to have a fairy godmother.

For the young prince, he found her more lovely and lovable than ever,
and insisted upon marrying her immediately.  Cinderella never went home
again, but she sent for her two sisters to the palace, and with the
consent of all parties married them shortly after to two rich gentlemen
of the court.

LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD

By Charles Perrault

ONCE upon a time there lived in a certain village a little country
girl, the prettiest creature ever seen.  Her mother was very fond of
her, and her grandmother doted on her still more.  This good woman had
made for her a little red riding-hood, which became the girl so well
that everybody called her Little Red Riding-Hood.

One day her mother, having made some custards, said to her:

"Go, my dear, and see how thy grandmamma does, for I hear she has been
very ill; carry her a custard and this little pot of butter."

Little Red Riding-Hood set out immediately to go to her grandmother,
who lived in another village.

As she was going through the wood she met with Gaffer Wolf, who had a
very great mind to eat her up, but he durst not, because of some fagot
makers hard by in the forest.  He asked her whither she was going.  The
poor child, who did not know that it was dangerous to stop and listen
to a wolf, said to him:

"I am going to see my grandmamma and carry her a custard and a little
pot of butter from my mamma."

"Does she live far off?" said the Wolf.

"Oh!  yes," answered Little Red Riding-Hood; "it is beyond that mill
you see there, at the first house in the village."

"Well," said the Wolf, "I'll go and see her, too.  I'll go this way and
you go that, and we shall see who will be there soonest."

The Wolf began to run as fast as he could, taking the nearest way, and
the little girl went by the longest, diverting herself in gathering
nuts, running after butterflies, and making nosegays of such little
flowers as she met with.  The Wolf was not long before he got to the
old woman's house.  He knocked at the door-tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

"Your grandchild, Little Red Riding-Hood," replied the Wolf, imitating
her voice; "who has brought you a custard and a little pot of butter
sent you by mamma."

The good grandmother, who was in bed, because she was ill, cried out:

"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up."

The Wolf pulled the bobbin, and the door opened, and he fell upon the
good woman and ate her up in a moment, for it was above three days that
he had not touched a bit.  He then shut the door and went into the
grandmother's bed, expecting Little Red Riding-Hood, who came some time
afterward and knocked at the door-tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

Little Red Riding-Hood, hearing the big voice of the Wolf, was at first
afraid; but believing her grandmother had got a cold and was hoarse,
answered:

'Tis your grandchild, Little Red Riding-Hood, who has brought you a
custard and a little pot of butter mamma sends you."

The Wolf cried out to her, softening his voice as much as he could:

"Pull the bobbin and the latch will go up."

Little Red Riding-Hood pulled the bobbin and the door opened.

The wolf, seeing her come in, said to her, hiding himself under the
bedclothes:

"Put the custard and the little pot of butter upon the stool, and come
and lie down with me."

Little Red Riding-Hood undressed herself and went into bed, where,
being greatly amazed to see how her grandmother looked in her night
clothes, she said to her:

"Grandmamma, what great arms you've got!"

"That is the better to hug thee, my dear."

"Grandmamma, what great legs you've got!"

"The better to run, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great ears you've got!"

"The better to hear, my child!"

"Grandmamma, what great eyes you've got!"

"The better to see, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great teeth you've got!"

"To eat thee up!"

And saying these words, the wicked Wolf fell upon Little Red Riding-
Hood and ate her all up.

THE STORY OF THE THREE BEARS

By Robert Southey

ONCE upon a time there were three Bears, who lived together in a house
of their own in a wood.  One of them was a Little, Small, Wee Bear; and
one was a Middle-sized Bear, and the other was a Great, Huge Bear.
They had each a pot for their porridge, a little pot for the Little,
Small, Wee Bear; and a middle-sized pot for the Middle Bear; and a
great pot for the Great, Huge Bear.  And they had each a chair to sit
in: a little chair for the Little, Small, Wee Bear; and a middle-sized
chair for the Middle Bear; and a great chair for the Great, Huge Bear.
And they had each a bed to sleep in: a little bed for the Little,
Small, Wee Bear; and a middle-sized bed for the Middle Bear; and a
great bed for the Great, Huge Bear.

One day, after they had made the porridge for their breakfast and
poured it into their porridge pots, they walked out into the wood while
the porridge was cooling, that they might not burn their mouths by
beginning too soon to eat it.  And while they were walking a little old
woman came to the house.  She could not have been a good, honest, old
woman; for, first, she looked in at the window, and then she peeped in
at the keyhole, and, seeing nobody in the house, she lifted the latch.
The door was not fastened, because the bears were good bears, who did
nobody any harm, and never suspected that anybody would harm them.  So
the little old woman opened the door and went in; and well pleased she
was when she saw the porridge on the table.  If she had been a good
little old woman she would have waited till the bears came home, and
then, perhaps, they would have asked her to breakfast, for they were
good hears-a little rough or so, as the manner of bear's is, but for
all that very good-natured and hospitable.  But she was an impudent,
bad old woman, and set about helping herself.

So first she tasted the porridge of the Great Huge Bear, and that was
too hot for her; and she said a bad word about that.  And then she
tasted the porridge of the Middle Bear, and that was too cold for her;
and she said a bad word about that, too.  And then she went to the
porridge of the Little, Small, Wee Bear, and tasted that, and that was
neither too hot nor too cold, but just right; and she liked it so well
that she ate it all up; but the naughty old woman said a bad word about
the little porridge pot, because it did not hold enough for her.

Then the little old woman sat down in the chair of the Great, Huge
Bear, and that was too hard for her.  And then she sat down in the
chair of the Middle Bear, and that was too soft for her.  And then she
sat down in the chair of the Little Small, Wee Bear, and that was
neither too hard nor too soft, but just right.  So she seated herself
in it, and there she sat till the bottom of the chair came out, and
down came she, plump upon the ground.  And the naughty old woman said
wicked words about that, too.

Then the little old woman went upstairs into the bedchamber in which
the three Bears slept.  And first she lay down upon the bed of the
Great, Huge Bear, but that was too high at the head for her.  And next
she lay down upon the bed of the Middle Bear, and that was too high at
the foot for her.  And then she lay down upon the bed of the Little,
Small, Wee Bear, and that was neither too high at the head nor at the
foot, but just right.  So she covered herself up comfortably, and lay
there till she fell asleep.  By this time the three Bears thought their
porridge would be cool enough, so they came home to breakfast.  Now the
little old woman had left the spoon of the Great, Huge Bear standing in
his porridge.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN AT MY PORRIDGE!"

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great gruff voice.  And when the
Middle Bear looked at his, he saw that the spoon was standing in it,
too.  They were wooden spoons; if they had been silver ones the naughty
old woman would have put them in her pocket.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN AT MY PORRIDGE!"

said the middle Bear, in his middle voice.

Then the Little, Small, Wee Bear looked at his, and there was the spoon
in the porridge pot, but the porridge was all gone.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN AT MY PORRIDGE, AND HAS EATEN IT ALL UP!"

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Upon this the three Bears, seeing that some one had entered their house
and eaten up the Little, Small, Wee Bear's breakfast, began to look
about them.  Now the little old woman had not put the hard cushion
straight when she rose from the chair of the Great, Huge Bear.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR!"

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great, rough, gruff voice.

And the little old woman had squatted down the soft cushion of the
Middle Bear.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR!"

said the Middle Bear, in his middle voice.

And you know what the little old woman had done to the third chair.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR, AND HAS SAT THE BOTTOM OUT OF
IT!"

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Then the three bears thought it necessary that they should make further
search; so they went upstairs into their bedchamber.  Now the little
old woman had pulled the pillow of the Great, Huge Bear out of its
place.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN LYING IN MY BED!"

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great, rough, gruff voice.

And the little old woman had pulled the bolster of the Middle Bear out
of its place.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN LYING IN MY BED!"

said the Middle Bear, in his middle voice.

And when the Little, Small, Wee Bear came to look at his bed, there was
the bolster in its place, and upon the pillow was the little old
woman's ugly, dirty head-which was not in its place, for she had no
business there.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN LYING IN MY BED-AND HERE SHE IS!"

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

The little old woman had heard in her sleep the great, rough, gruff
voice of the Great, Huge Bear, but she was so fast asleep that it was
no more to her than the moaning of wind or the rumbling of thunder.
And she had heard the middle voice of the Middle Bear, but it was only
as if she had heard some one speaking in a dream.  But when she heard
the little, small, wee voice of the Little, Small, Wee Bear, it was so
sharp and so shrill that it awakened her at once.  Up she started, and
when she saw the three bears on one side of the bed she tumbled herself
out at the other and ran to the window.  Now the window was open,
because the Bears, like good, tidy bears as they were, always opened
their bedchamber window when they got up in the morning.  Out the
little old woman jumped, and whether she broke her neck in the fall or
ran into the wood and was lost there, or found her way out of the wood
and was taken up by the constable and sent to the House of Correction
for a vagrant as she was, I cannot tell.  But the three Bears never saw
anything more of her.

PUSS IN BOOTS

By Charles Perrault

A MILLER, dying, divided all his property between his three children.
This was very easy, as he had nothing to leave but his mill, his ass,
and his cat; so he made no will, and called in no lawyer.  The eldest
son had the mill; the second, the ass; and the youngest, nothing but
the cat.  The young fellow was quite downcast at so poor a lot.  "My
brothers," said he, "by putting their property together, may gain an
honest living, but there is nothing left for me except to die of
hunger, unless, indeed, I were to kill my cat and eat him, and make a
muff of his skin."

The cat, who heard all this, sat up on his four paws, and looking at
him with a grave and wise air, said: "Master, I think you had better
not kill me; I shall be much more useful to you alive."

"How so?" asked his master.

"You have but to give me a sack and a pair of boots, such as gentlemen
wear when they go shooting, and you will find you are not so ill off as
you suppose."

Now, though the young man did not much depend upon the cat's words,
still he thought it rather surprising that a cat should speak at all.
And he had before now seen him play a great many cunning tricks in
catching rats and mice, so that it seemed advisable to trust him a
little further; especially as-poor young fellow-he had nobody else to
trust.

When the cat got his boots, he drew them on with a grand air, and
slinging his sack over his shoulder, and drawing the cords of it round
his neck, he marched bravely to a rabbit warren hard by, with which he
was well acquainted.  Then, putting some bran and lettuces into his
bag, and stretching himself out beside it as if he were dead, he waited
till some fine, fat young rabbit, ignorant of the wickedness and deceit
of the world, should peep into the sack to eat the food that was
inside.  This happened very shortly, for there are plenty of foolish
young rabbits in every warren; and when one of them, who really was a
splendid fat fellow, put his head inside, Master Puss drew the cords
immediately, and took him and killed him without mercy.  Then, very
proud of his prey, he marched direct to the palace, and begged to speak
with the King.

He was told to ascend to the apartment of his majesty, where, making a
low bow, he said:  "Sire, here is a magnificent rabbit, killed in the
warren, which belongs to my lord the Marquis of Carabas, and which he
told me to offer humbly to your majesty."

"Tell your master," replied the King, politely, "that I accept his
present, and am very much obliged to him."

Another time, Puss went out and hid himself and his sack in a wheat
field, and there caught two splendid fat partridges in the same manner
as he had done the rabbit.  When he presented them to the King, with a
similar message as before, his majesty was so pleased that he ordered
the cat to be taken down into the kitchen and given something to eat
and drink; where, while enjoying himself, the faithful animal did not
cease to talk in the most cunning way of the large preserves and
abundant game which belonged to his lord the Marquis of Carabas.

One day, hearing that the King was intending to take a drive along the
riverside with his daughter, the most beautiful princess in the world,
Puss said to his master:  "Sir, if you would only follow my advice,
your fortune is made."

"Be it so," said the miller's son, who was growing disconsolate, and
cared very little what he did:  "Say your say, cat."

"It is but little," replied Puss, looking wise, as cats can.  "You have
only to go and bathe in the river at a place which I shall show you,
and leave all the rest to me.  Only remember that you are no longer
yourself, but my lord the Marquis of Carabas."

"Just so," said the miller's son, "it's all the same to me;" but he did
as the cat told him.

While he was bathing, the King and all the court passed by, and were
startled to hear loud cries of "Help! help!  my lord the Marquis of
Carabas is drowning."  The King put his head out of the carriage, and
saw nobody but the cat, who had at different times brought him so many
presents of game; however, he ordered his guards to fly quickly to the
succor of my lord the Marquis of Carabas.  While they were pulling the
unfortunate marquis out of the water, the cat came up, bowing, to the
side of the King's carriage, and told a long and pitiful story about
some thieves who, while his master was bathing, had come and carried
away all his clothes, so that it would be impossible for him to appear
before his majesty and the illustrious princess.

"Oh, we will soon remedy that," answered the King, kindly and
immediately ordered one of the first officers of the household to ride
back to the palace with all speed, and bring thence a supply of fine
clothes for the young gentleman, who kept out of sight until they
arrived.  Then, being handsome and well-made, his new clothes became
him so well, that he looked as if he had been a marquis all his days,
and advanced with an air of respectful ease to offer his thanks to his
majesty.

The King received him courteously, and the princess admired him very
much.  Indeed, so charming did he appear to her, that she hinted to her
father to invite him into the carriage with them, which, you may be
sure the young man did not refuse.  The cat, delighted at the success
of his scheme, went away as fast as he could, and ran so swiftly that
he kept a long way ahead of the royal carriage.  He went on and on,
till he came to some peasants who were mowing in a meadow.  "Good
people," said he, in a very firm voice, "the King is coming past here
shortly, and if you do not say that the field you are mowing belongs to
my lord the Marquis of Carabas, you shall all be chopped as small as
mincemeat."

So when the King drove by, and asked whose meadow it was where there
was such a splendid crop of hay, the mowers all answered, trembling,
that it belonged to my lord the Marquis of Carabas.

"You have very fine land, marquis," said his majesty to the miller's
son, who bowed, and answered that "it was not a bad meadow, take it
altogether."

Then the cat came to a wheat field, where the reapers were reaping with
all their might.  He bounced in upon them:  "The King is coming past
to-day, and if you do not tell him that this wheat belongs to my lord
the Marquis of Carabas, I will have you everyone chopped as small as
mincemeat."  The reapers, very much alarmed, did as they were bid, and
the King congratulated the marquis upon possessing such beautiful
fields, laden with such an abundant harvest.

They drove on-the cat always running before and saying the same thing
to everybody he met, that they were to declare that the whole country
belonged to his master; so that even the King was astonished at the
vast estate of my lord the Marquis of Carabas.

But now the cat arrived at a great castle where dwelt an Ogre, to whom
belonged all the land through which the royal carriage had been
driving.  This Ogre was a cruel tyrant, and his tenants and servants
were terribly afraid of him, which accounted for their being so ready
to say whatever they were told to say by the cat, who had taken pains
to inform himself all about the Ogre.  So, putting on the boldest face
he could assume, Puss marched up to the castle with his boots on, and
asked to see the owner of it, saying that he was on his travels, but
did not wish to pass so near the castle of such a noble gentleman
without paying his respects to him.  When the Ogre heard this message,
he went to the door, received the cat as civilly as an Ogre can, and
begged him to walk in and repose himself.

"Thank you, sir," said the cat; "but first I hope you will satisfy a
traveler's curiosity.  I have heard in far countries of your many
remarkable qualities, and especially how you have the power to change
yourself into any sort of beast you choose-a lion, for instance, or an
elephant."

"That is quite true," replied the Ogre; "and lest you should doubt it I
will immediately become a lion."

He did so; and the cat was so frightened that he sprang up to the roof
of the castle and hid himself in the gutter-a proceeding rather
inconvenient on account of his boots, which were not exactly fitted to
walk with on tiles.  At length, perceiving that the Ogre had resumed
his original form, he came down again, and owned that he had been very
much frightened.

"But, sir," said he, "it may be easy enough for such a big gentleman as
you to change himself into a large animal; I do not suppose you could
become a small one-a rat, or mouse, for instance.  I have heard that
you can; still, for my part, I consider it quite impossible."

"Impossible!" cried the other, indignantly.  "You shall see!" and
immediately the cat saw the Ogre no longer, but a little mouse running
along on the floor.

This was exactly what Puss wanted; and he fell upon him at once and ate
him up.  So there was an end to the Ogre.

By this time the King had arrived opposite the castle, and had a strong
wish to go into it.  The cat, hearing the noise of the carriage wheels,
ran forward in a great hurry, and, standing at the gate, said, in a
loud voice:  "Welcome, sire, to the castle of my lord the Marquis of
Carabas."

"What!" cried his majesty, very much surprised, "does the castle also
belong to you?  Truly, marquis, you have kept your secret well up to
the last minute.  I have never seen anything finer than this courtyard
and these battlements.  Let us go in, if you please."

The marquis, without speaking, offered his hand to the princess to help
her to descend, and, standing aside that the King might enter first,
followed his majesty to the great hall, where a magnificent dinner was
laid out, and where, without more delays they all sat down to feast.

Before the banquet was over, the King, charmed with the good qualities
of the Marquis of Carabas, said, bowing across the table at which the
princess and the miller's son were talking very confidentially
together:  "It rests with you, marquis, whether you will marry my
daughter."

"I shall be only too happy," said the marquis, and the princess's cast-
down eyes declared the same.

So they were married the very next day, and took possession of the
Ogre's castle, and of everything that had belonged to him.

As for the cat, he became at once a great lord, and had nevermore any
need to run after mice, except for his own diversion.

JACK THE GIANT-KILLER

Retold by Joseph Jacobs

IN the reign of the famous King Arthur there lived in Cornwall a lad
named Jack, who was a boy of a bold temper and took delight in hearing
or reading of conjurers, giants, and fairies; and used to listen
eagerly to the deeds of the knights of King Arthur's Round Table.

In those days there lived on St. Michael's Mount, off Cornwall, a huge
Giant, eighteen feet high and nine feet round; his fierce and savage
looks were the terror of all who beheld him.

He dwelt in a gloomy cavern on the top of the mountain, and used to
wade over to the mainland in search of prey, when he would throw half a
dozen oxen upon his back, and tie three times as many sheep and hogs
round his waist, and march back to his own abode.

The Giant had done this for many years when Jack resolved to destroy
him.

Jack took a horn, a shovel, a pickaxe, his armor, and a dark lantern,
and one winter's evening he went to the mount.  There he dug a pit
twenty-two feet deep and twenty broad.  He covered the top over so as
to make it look like solid ground.  He then blew such a blast on his
horn that the Giant awoke and came out of his den, crying out:  "You
saucy villain, you shall pay for this!  I'll broil you for my
breakfast!"

He had just finished, when, taking one step farther, he tumbled
headlong into the pit, and Jack struck him a blow on the head with his
pickaxe which killed him.  Jack then returned home to cheer his friends
with the news.

Another Giant, called Blunderbore, vowed to be revenged on Jack if ever
he should have him in his power.

This Giant kept an enchanted castle in the midst of a lonely wood, and
some time after the death of Cormoran, Jack was passing through a wood,
and, being weary, sat down and went to sleep.

The Giant, passing by and seeing Jack, carried him to his castle, where
he locked him up in a large room, the floor of which was covered with
the bodies, skulls, and bones of men and women.

Soon after, the Giant went to fetch his brother, who was likewise a
Giant, to take a meal off his flesh, and Jack saw with terror through
the bars of his prison the two Giants approaching.

Jack, perceiving in one corner of the room a strong cord, took courage,
and making a slip-knot at each end, he threw them over their heads, and
tied it to the window-bars; he then pulled till he had choked them.
When they were black in the face he slid down the rope and stabbed them
to the heart.

Jack next took a great bunch of keys from the pocket of Blunderbore and
went into the castle again.  He made a strict search through all the
rooms, and in one of them found three ladies tied up by the hair of
their heads and almost starved to death.  They told him that their
husbands had been killed by the Giants, who had then condemned them to
be starved to death.

"Ladies," said Jack, "I have put an end to the monster and his wicked
brother, and I give you this castle and all the riches it contains to
make some amends for the dreadful pains you have felt."  He then very
politely gave them the keys of the castle and went farther on his
journey to Wales.

As Jack had but little money, he went on as fast as possible.  At
length he came to a handsome house.

Jack knocked at the door, when there came forth a Welsh Giant.  Jack
said he was a traveler who had lost his way, on which the Giant made
him welcome and let him into a room where there was a good bed to sleep
in.

Jack took off his clothes quickly, but though he was weary he could not
go to sleep.  Soon after this he heard the Giant walking backward and
forward in the next room and saying to himself:

"Though here you shall lodge with me this night,

You shall not see the morning light;

My club shall dash your brains out quite!"

"Say you so?" thought Jack.  "Are these your tricks upon travelers?
But I hope to prove as cunning as you are."  Then, getting out of bed,
he groped about the room and at last found a thick tog of wood.  He
laid it in his own place in the bed, and then hid himself in a dark
corner of the room.

The Giant, about midnight, entered the apartment, and with his bludgeon
struck many blows on the bed, in the very place where Jack had laid the
log; and then he went back to his own room, thinking he had broken all
Jack's bones.

Early in the morning Jack put a bold face upon the matter and walked
into the Giant's room to thank him for his lodging.  The Giant started
when he saw him, and began to stammer out:  "Oh! dear me; is it you?
Pray, how did you sleep last night?  Did you hear or see anything in
the dead of the night?"

"Nothing worth speaking of," said Jack, carelessly; "a rat, I believe,
gave me three or four slaps with its tail, and disturbed me a little;
but I soon went to sleep again."

The Giant wondered more and more at this; yet he did not answer a word,
but went to bring two great bowls of hasty-pudding for their breakfast.
Jack wanted to make the Giant believe that he could eat as much as
himself so he contrived to button a leathern bag inside his coat and
slip the hasty-pudding into this bag while he seemed to put it into his
mouth.

When breakfast was over he said to the Giant:  "Now I will show you a
fine trick.  I can cure all wounds with a touch; I could cut off my
head in one minute, and the next put it sound again on my shoulders.
You shall see an example."  He then took hold of the knife, ripped up
the leathern bag, and all the hasty-pudding tumbled out upon the floor.

"Ods splutter hur nails!" cried the Welsh Giant, who was ashamed to be
outdone by such a little fellow as Jack, "hur can do that hurself;" so
he snatched up the knife, plunged it into his own stomach, and in a
moment dropped down dead.

Jack, having hitherto been successful in all his undertakings, resolved
not to be idle in future; he therefore furnished himself with a horse,
a cap of knowledge, a sword of sharpness, shoes of swiftness, and an
invisible coat, the better to perform the wonderful enterprises that
lay before him.

He traveled over high hills, and on the third day he came to a large
and spacious forest through which his road lay.  Scarcely had he
entered the forest when he beheld a monstrous Giant dragging along by
the hair of their heads a handsome Knight and his lady.  Jack alighted
from his horse, and tying him to an oak-tree, put on his invisible
coat, under which he carried his sword of sharpness.

When he came up to the Giant he made several strokes at him, but could
not reach his body, but wounded his thighs in several places; and at
length, putting both hands to his sword and aiming with all his might,
he cut off both his legs.  Then Jack, setting his foot upon his neck,
plunged his sword into the Giant's body, when the monster gave a groan
and expired.

The Knight and his 1ady thanked Jack for their deliverance, and invited
him to their house to receive a proper reward for his services.  "No,"
Said Jack, "I cannot be easy till I find out this monster's
habitation."  So taking the Knight's directions, he mounted his horse
and soon after came in sight of another Giant, who was sitting on a
block of timber waiting for his brother's return.

Jack alighted from his horse, and, putting on his invisible coat,
approached and aimed a blow at the Giant's head, but missing his aim he
only cut off his nose.  On this the Giant seized his club and laid
about him most unmercifully.

"Nay," said Jack, "if this be the case I'd better dispatch you!"  So
jumping upon the block, he stabbed him in the back, when he dropped
down dead.

Jack then proceeded on his journey, and traveled over hills and dales
till, arriving at the foot of a high mountain, he knocked at the door
of a lonely house, when an old man let him in.

When Jack was seated the hermit thus addressed him:  "My son, on the
top of this mountain is an enchanted castle, kept by the Giant
Galligantus and a vile magician.  I lament the fate of a duke's
daughter, whom they seized as she was walking in her father's garden,
and brought hither transformed into a deer."

Jack promised that in the morning, at the risk of his life, he would
break the enchantment; and after a sound sleep he rose early, put on
his invisible coat, and got ready for the attempt.

When he had climbed to the top of the mountain he saw two fiery
griffins; but he passed between them without the least fear of danger,
for they could not see him because of his invisible coat.  On the
castle gate he found a golden trumpet, under which were written these
lines:

Whoever can this trumpet blow

Shall cause the giant's overthrow.

As soon as Jack had read this he seized the trumpet and blew a shrill
blast, which made the gates fly open and the very castle itself
tremble.

The Giant and the conjurer now knew that their wicked course was at an
end, and they stood biting their thumbs and shaking within fear.  Jack,
with his sword of sharpness, soon killed the Giant, and the magician
was then carried away by a whirlwind; and every knight and beautiful
lady who had been changed into birds and beasts returned to their
proper shapes.  The castle vanished away like smoke, and the head of
the Giant Galligantus was sent to King Arthur.

The knights and ladies rested that night at the old man's hermitage,
and next day they set out for the Court.  Jack then went up to the King
and gave his Majesty an account of all his fierce battles.

Jack's fame had now spread through the whole country, and at the King's
desire the Duke gave him his daughter in marriage, to the joy of all
his kingdom.  After this the King gave him a large estate, on which he
and his lady lived the rest of their days in joy and contentment.

TOM THUMB

Retold by Joseph Jacobs

IN the days of the great Prince Arthur, there lived a mighty magician,
named Merlin, the most learned and skillful enchanter the world has
ever seen.

This famous magician, who could take any form he pleased, was
travelling about as a poor  beggar, and being very tired he stopped at
the cottage of a Ploughman to rest himself, and asked for some food.

The countryman bade him welcome, and his wife, who was a very good-
hearted woman, brought him some milk in a wooden bowl and some coarse
brown bread on a platter.

Merlin was much pleased with the kindness of the Ploughman and his
wife; but he could not help noticing that though everything was neat
and comfortable in the cottage, they both seemed to be very unhappy.
He therefore asked them why they were so melancholy, and learned that
they were miserable because they had no children.

The Poor Woman said, with tears in her eves:  "I should be the happiest
creature in the world if I had a son although he was no bigger than my
husband's thumb."

Merlin was so much amused with the idea of a boy no bigger than a man's
thumb that he determined to grant the Poor Woman's wish.  Accordingly,
in a short time after, the Ploughman's wife had a son, who, wonderful
to relate!  was not a bit bigger than his father's thumb.

The Queen of the fairies, wishing to see the little fellow, came in at
the window, while the mother was sitting up in bed admiring him.  The
Queen kissed the child, and, giving it the name of Tom Thumb, sent for
some of the fairies, who dressed her little godson according to her
orders:

An oak-leaf hat he had for his crown;

His shirt of web by spiders spun;

With jacket wove of thistle's down;

His trousers were of feathers done.

His stockings, of apple rind, they tie

With eyelash from his mother's eye:

His shoes were made of mouse's skin,

Tann'd with the downy hair within.

Tom never grew any larger than his father's thumb, but as he got older
he became very cunning and full of tricks.  When he was old enough to
play with the boys, and had lost all his own cherry stones, he used to
creep into the bags of his play-fellows, fill his pockets, and, getting
out without their noticing him, would again join in the game.

One day, as he was coming out of a bag of cherry stones, where he had
been stealing as usual, the boy to whom it belonged chanced to see him.
"Ah, ah! my little Tommy," said the boy, "so I have caught you stealing
my cherry stones at last, and you shall be rewarded for your thievish
tricks."  On saying this, he drew the string tight round his neck, and
gave the bag such a hearty shake that poor little Tom's legs, thighs
and body were sadly bruised.  He roared out with pain and begged to be
let out, promising never to steal again.

A short time afterwards his mother was making a batter pudding, and
Tom, being anxious to see how it was made, climbed up to the edge of
the bowl; but his foot slipped, and he plumped over head and ears into
the batter, without his mother noticing him, who stirred him into the
pudding-bag, and put him in the pot to boil.

The batter filled Tom's mouth, and prevented him from crying; but, upon
feeling the hot water, he kicked and struggled so much in the pot that
his mother thought that the pudding was bewitched, and, pulling it out
of the pot, she threw it outside the door.  A poor tinker, who was
passing by, lifted up the pudding, put it in his bag, and walked off.
As Tom had now got his mouth cleared of the batter, he began to cry
aloud, which so frightened the tinker that he flung down the pudding
and ran away.  The pudding being broke to pieces by the fall, Tom crept
out covered all over with the batter, and walked home.  His mother, who
was very sorry to see her darling in such a woeful state, put him into
a teacup and soon washed off the batter; after which she kissed him and
laid him in bed.

Soon after the adventure of the pudding, Tom's mother went to milk her
cow in the meadow, and she took him along with her.  As the wind was
very high, for fear of being blown away, she tied him to a thistle with
a piece of fine thread.  The cow soon observed Tom's oak-leaf hat, and
liking the appearance of it, took poor Tom and the thistle at one
mouthful.  While the cow was chewing the thistle Tom was afraid of her
great teeth, which threatened to crush him in pieces, and he roared out
as loud as he could:  "Mother, mother!"

"Where are you, Tommy, my dear Tommy?" said his mother.

"Here, mother," replied he, "in the red cow's mouth."

His mother began to cry and wring her hands; but the cow, surprised at
the odd noise in her throat, opened her mouth and let Tom drop out.
Fortunately his mother caught him in her apron as he was falling to the
ground, or he would have been dreadfully hurt.  She then put Tom in her
bosom and ran home with him.

Tom's father made him a whip of barley straw to drive the cattle with,
and having one day gone into the fields, Tom slipped a foot and rolled
into the furrow.  A raven, which was flying over, picked him up and
flew with him over the sea, and there dropped him.

A large fish swallowed Tom the moment he fell into the sea, which was
soon after caught and bought for the table of King Arthur.  When they
opened the fish in order to cook it, every one was astonished at
finding such a little boy, and Tom was quite delighted at being free
again.  They carried him to the King, who made Tom his dwarf, and he
soon became a great favorite at court; for by his tricks and gambols he
not only amused the King and Queen, but also the Knights of the Round
Table.

It is said that when the King rode out on horseback he often took Tom
along with him, and if a shower came on he used to creep into his
Majesty's waistcoat pocket, where he slept till the rain was over.

King Arthur one day asked Tom about his parents, wishing to know if
they were as small as he was, and whether they were well off.  Tom told
the King that his father and mother were as tall as anybody about the
court, but in rather poor circumstances.  On hearing this, the King
carried Tom to his treasury, the place where he kept all his money, and
told him to take as much money as he could carry home to his parents,
which made the poor little fellow caper with joy.  Tom went immediately
to procure a purse which was made of a water-bubble, and then returned
to the treasury, where he received a silver three-penny piece to put
into it.

Our little hero had some difficulty in lifting the burden upon his
back; but he at last succeeded in getting it placed and set forward on
his journey.  Without meeting with any accident, and after resting
himself more than a hundred times by the way, in two days and two
nights he reached his father's house in safety.

Tom had traveled forty-eight hours with a huge silver piece on his
back, and was almost tired to death, when his mother ran out to meet
him and carried him into the house.  But he soon returned to court.

As Tom's clothes had suffered much in the batter pudding and the inside
of the fish, his Majesty ordered him a new suit of clothes, and to be
mounted as a knight on a mouse.

Of Butterfly's wings his shirt was made,

His boots of chicken's hide;

And by a nimble fairy blade,

Well learned in the tailoring trade,

His clothing was supplied.

A needle dangled by his side;

A dapper mouse he used to ride,

Thus strutted Tom in stately pride!

It was certainly very amusing to see him in this dress and mounted on
the mouse, as he rode out a-hunting with the King and nobility, who
were all ready to expire with laughter at Tom and his fine prancing
charioteer.

The King was so charmed with his address that he ordered a little chair
to be made, in order that Tom might sit upon his table, and also a
palace of gold, a span high, with a door an inch wide, to live in.  He
also gave him a coach, drawn by six small mice.

The Queen was so enraged at the honors conferred on Sir Thomas that she
resolved to ruin him, and told the King that the little knight had been
saucy to her.

The King sent for Tom in great haste, but being fully aware of the
danger of royal anger, he crept into an empty snail shell, where he lay
for a long time until he was almost starved with hunger; at last he
ventured to peep out, and seeing a fine large butterfly on the ground,
near the place of his concealment, he got close to it and jumping
astride on it was carried up into the, air.  The butterfly flew with
him from tree to tree and from field to field, at last returned to the
court, where the King and nobility all strove to catch him; but at last
poor Tom fell from his seat into a watering-pot, in which he was almost
drowned.

When the Queen saw him she was in a rage, and said he should be
beheaded; and he was again put into a mouse trap until the time of his
execution.

However, a cat, observing something alive in the trap, patted it about
till the wires broke, and set Thomas at liberty.

The King received Tom again into favor, which he did not live to enjoy,
for a large spider one day attacked him; and although he drew his sword
and fought well, yet the spider's poisonous breath at last overcame
him.

King Arthur and his whole court were so sorry at the loss of their
little favorite that they went into mourning and raised a fine white
marble monument over his grave with the following epitaph:

Here lies Tom Thumb, King Arthur's knight,

Who died by a spider's cruel bite.

He was well known in Arthur's court,

Where he afforded gallant sport;

He rode a tilt and tournament,

And on a mouse a-hunting went.

Alive he filled the court with mirth;

His death to sorrow soon gave birth.

Wipe, wipe your eyes, and shake your head

And cry,-Alas!  Tom Thumb is dead!

BLUE BEARD

By Charles Perrault

THERE was once a man who had fine houses, both in town and country, a
deal of silver and gold plate, embroidered furniture, and coaches
gilded all over with gold.  But this man was so unlucky as to have a
blue beard, which made him so ugly that all the women and girls ran
away from him.

One of his neighbors, a lady of quality, had two daughters who were
perfect beauties.  He asked her for one of them in marriage, but
neither of them could bear the thought of marrying a man who had a blue
beard.  Besides, he had already been married several times, and nobody
ever knew what became of his wives.

In the hope of making them like him, Blue Beard took them, with their
mother and three or four ladies of their acquaintance, and other young
people of the neighborhood, to one of his country houses, where they
stayed a whole week.

There were parties of pleasure, hunting, fishing, dancing, mirth, and
feasting all the time.  Nobody went to bed, but all passed the time in
merry-making and joking with one another.  Everything succeeded so well
that the youngest daughter began to think the master of the house was a
very civil gentleman.  And his beard not so very blue after all.

As soon as they returned home, the marriage took place.  About a month
afterward Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to take a
journey for six weeks, about affairs of great consequence, desiring her
to amuse herself in his absence, to send for her friends and
acquaintances, to carry them in to the country if she pleased, and to
have a good time wherever she was.

"Here," said he, "are the keys of the two great wardrobes wherein I
have my best furniture; these are of my silver and gold plate, which is
not every day in use; these open my strong boxes, which hold my money,
both gold and silver; these my caskets of jewels; and this is the
master key to all my a