partments.  This little one here is the key of
the closet at the end of the great gallery on the ground floor.  Open
them all; go into all and every one of them, except that little closet,
which I forbid you; if you happen to open it, there's nothing but what
you may expect from my just anger and resentment."

She promised to observe exactly whatever he ordered; so, having
embraced her, he got into his coach and proceeded on his journey.

Her neighbors and good friends did not wait to be sent for, so great
was their impatience to see all the rich furniture of her house.  They
ran through all the rooms, closets, and wardrobes, which were all so
fine and rich that they seemed to surpass one another.

After that they went up into the two great rooms, where were the best
and richest furniture; they could not sufficiently admire the number
and beauty of the tapestries, beds, couches, cabinets, stands, tables,
and looking-glasses, in which you might see yourself from head to foot;
some of them were framed with glass, others with silver, plain and
gilded, the finest and most magnificent ever seen.

They ceased not to compliment and envy their friend, but she was so
much pressed by her curiosity to open the closet on the ground floor
that, without considering that it was very uncivil to leave her
company, she went down a little back staircase with such haste that she
had twice or thrice like to have broken her neck.

Arriving at the closet door, she hesitated, thinking of her husband's
orders and considering what unhappiness might attend her if she was
disobedient; but the temptation was so strong she could not overcome
it.  She took the little key and opened it, trembling, but could not at
first see anything plainly because the windows were shut.  After some
moments she began to perceive that the floor was all covered with
blood, in which lay the bodies of several dead women, ranged against
the walls.  (These were the wives whom Blue Beard had married and
murdered, one after another.)  She thought she would die for fear, and
the key, which she pulled out of the lock, fell out of her hand.

After having somewhat recovered from the shock, she took up the key,
locked the door, and went upstairs to her bedroom to rest.  Having
observed that the key of the closet was stained with blood, she tried
two or three times to wipe it off, but the stain would not come out; in
vain did she wash it, and even rub it with soap and sand, the blood
still remained, for the key was magical; when the blood was removed
from one side it came again on the other.

Blue Beard returned from his journey the same evening, and said he had
received letters upon the road informing him that the affair he went
about was ended to his advantage.  His wife did all she could to
convince him she was extremely glad of his speedy return.

Next morning he asked her for the keys, which she gave him, but with
such a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened.

"What!" said he, "is not the key of my closet among the rest?"

"I must certainly," said she, "have left it above upon the table."

"Fail not," said Blue Beard, "to bring it to me presently."

After several goings backward and forward she was forced to bring him
the key.  Blue Beard attentively considered it and said to his wife:

"How comes this blood upon the key?"

"I do not know," cried the poor woman, paler than death.

"You do not know!" replied Blue Beard.  "I very well know.  You were
resolved to go into the closet, were you not?  Very well, madam; you
shall go in and take your place among the ladies you saw there.

Upon this she threw herself at her husband's feet, and begged his
pardon with all the signs of a true repentance, vowing that she would
never again be disobedient.  She would have melted a rock, so beautiful
and sorrowful was she; but Blue Beard had a heart harder than any rock!

"You must die, madam," said he, "and that; very soon."

"Since I must die," answered she, her eyes bathed in tears, "give me
some little time to say my prayers."

"I give you," replied Blue Beard, "half a quarter of an hour, but not
one moment more."

When she was alone she called out to her sister:

"Sister Anne, go up, I beg you, on top of the tower and see if my
brothers are not coming; they promised me that they would come to-day,
and if you see them, give them a sign to make haste."

Sister Anne went up on the top of the tower, and the poor afflicted
wife cried out from time to time:

"Anne, sister Anne, do you see anyone coming?"

And sister Anne replied:

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which
looks green."

In the meanwhile Blue Beard, holding a great saber in his hand, cried
out as loud as he could bawl to his wife:

"Come down instantly, or I shall come up after you."

"One moment longer, if you please," said his wife; and then she cried
out softly:  "Anne, sister Anne, dost thou see anybody coming?"

And sister Anne answered:

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which is
green."

"Come down quickly," shouted Blue Beard, "or I will come up after you."

"I am coming," answered his wife; and then she cried:  "Anne, sister
Anne, dost thou not see any one coming?"

"I see," replied sister Anne, "a great dust, which comes on this side."

"Are they my brothers?"

"Alas!  no, my dear sister, I see a flock of sheep."

"Will you not come down?' roared Blue Beard.

"One moment longer," said his wife, and then she cried out:  "Anne,
sister Anne, dost thou see nobody coming?"

"I see," said she, "two horsemen, but they are yet a great way off."

"God be praised!" replied the poor wife joyfully; "they are my
brothers; I will make them a sign, as well as I can, for them to make
haste."

Then Blue Beard bawled out so loud that he made the whole house
tremble.  The distressed wife came down and threw herself at his feet,
all in tears, with her hair about her shoulders.

"That will not help you," says Blue Beard; "you must die;" then, taking
hold of her hair with one hand, and lifting up the sword with the
other, he was going to cut off her head.  The poor lady, turning to him
and looking at him with dying eyes, begged him to give her one little
moment more.

"No, no," said he; "say your prayers," and was just about to strike...

At this very instant there was such a loud knocking at the gate that
Blue Beard looked up in alarm.  The gate was opened and two horsemen
entered, who drew their swords and ran directly at Blue Beard.  He knew
them to be his wife's brothers, one a dragoon, the other a musketeer;
so that he quickly ran to save himself; but the two brothers pursued so
close that they overtook him before he could get to the steps of the
porch, and ran their swords through his body and left him dead.  The
poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and had not strength
enough to rise and welcome her brothers.

Blue Beard had no heirs, and so his wife became mistress of all his
estate.  She made use of one part of it to marry her sister Anne to a
young gentleman who had loved her a long while; another part to buy
captains' commissions for her brothers, and the rest to marry herself
to a very worthy gentleman, who made her forget the unhappy time she
had passed with Blue Beard.

THE BRAVE LITTLE TAILOR

Anonymous

ONE summer's day a little Tailor sat on his table by the window in the
best of spirits and sewed for dear life.  As he was sitting thus a
peasant woman came down the street, calling out:  "Good jam to sell!
good jam to sell!"  This sounded sweetly in the Tailor's ears; he put
his little head out of the window and shouted:  "Up here, my good
woman, and you'll find a willing customer!"  The woman climbed up the
three flights of stairs with her heavy basket to the tailor's room, and
he made her spread out the pots in a row before him.  He examined them
all, lifted them up and smelt them, and said at last:  "This jam seems
good; weigh me four ounces of it, my good woman; and even if it's a
quarter of a pound I won't stick at it."  The woman, who had hoped to
find a good market, gave him what he wanted, but went away grumbling
wrathfully.  "Now Heaven shall bless this jam for my use," cried the
little Tailor, "and it shall sustain and strengthen me."  He fetched
some bread out of a cupboard, cut a round off the loaf, and spread the
jam on it.  "That will taste good," he said; "but I'll finish that
waistcoat first before I take a bite."  He placed the bread beside him,
went on sewing, and out of the lightness of his heart kept on making
his stitches bigger and bigger.  In the meantime the smell of the sweet
jam rose to the ceiling, where swarms of flies were gathered, and
attracted them to such an extent that they swarmed on to it in masses.
"Ha! who invited you?" said the Tailor, and chased the unwelcome guests
away.  But the flies, who didn't understand English, refused to let
themselves be warned off, and returned again in even greater numbers.
At last the Tailor, losing all patience, reached out of his chimney-
corner for a duster, and exclaiming, "Wait, and I'll give it to you!"
he beat them mercilessly with it.  When he left off he counted the
slain, and no fewer than seven lay dead before him with outstretched
legs.  "What a brave fellow I am!" said he, and was filled with
admiration at his own courage.  "The whole town must know about this;"
and in great haste the little Tailor cut out a girdle, hemmed it, and
embroidered on it in big letters, "Seven at a blow."  "What did I say,
the town? no, the whole world shall hear of it," he said; and his heart
beat for joy as a lamb wags his tail.

The Tailor strapped the girdle round his waist and set out into the
wide world, for he considered his workroom too small a field for his
bravery.  Before he set forth he looked round about him, to see if
there was anything in the house he could take with him on his journey;
but he found nothing except an old cheese, which he took possession of.
In front of the house he observed a bird that had been caught in some
bushes, and this he put into his wallet beside the cheese.  Then he
went on his way merrily, and being light and quick he never felt tired.
His way led up a hill on the top of which sat a powerful Giant, who was
calmly surveying the landscape.  The little Tailor went up to him, and
greeting him cheerfully said: "Good-day, friend; there you sit at your
ease viewing the whole wide world.  I'm just on my way there.  What do
you say to accompanying me?"  The Giant looked contemptuously at the
Tailor, and said:  "What a poor, wretched little creature you are!"
"That's a good joke," answered the little Tailor, and unbuttoning his
coat he showed the Giant the girdle.  "There, now, you can read what
sort of a fellow I am."  The Giant read:  "Seven at a blow," and
thinking they were human beings the Tailor had slain, he had a certain
respect for the little man.  But first he thought he'd test him; so
taking up a stone in his hand, he squeezed it till some drops of water
ran out.  "Now you do the same," said the Giant, "if you really wish to
be thought strong."  "Is that all?"  said the little Tailor; "that's
child's play to me."   So he dived into his wallet, brought out the
cheese, and pressed it till the whey ran out.  "My squeeze was better
than yours," said he.  The Giant didn't know what to say, for he
couldn't have believed it of the little fellow.  To prove him again,
the Giant lifted a stone and threw it so high that the eye could hardly
follow it.  "Now, my little dwarf, let me see you do that."  "Well
thrown," said the Tailor; "but, after all, your stone fell to the
ground; I'll throw one that won't come down at all."  He dived into his
wallet again, and grasping the bird in his hand he threw it up into the
air.  The bird, enchanted to be free, soared up into the sky, and flew
away never to return.  "Well, what do you think of that little piece of
business, friend?" asked the Tailor.  "You can certainly throw," said
the Giant; "but now let's see if you can carry a proper weight."  With
these words he led the Tailor to a huge oak-tree which had been felled
to the ground, and said:  "If you are strong enough, help me carry the
tree out of the wood."  "Most certainly," said the little Tailor: "just
you take the trunk on your shoulder; I'll bear the top and branches,
which is certainly the heaviest part."  The Giant laid the trunk on his
shoulder, but the Tailor sat at his ease among the branches; and the
Giant, who couldn't see what was going on behind him, had to carry the
whole tree, and the little Tailor into the bargain.  There he sat
behind in the best of spirits, lustily whistling a tune, as if carrying
the tree were mere sport.  The Giant after dragging the heavy weight
for some time, could get on no farther, and shouted out:  "Hi!  I must
let the tree fall."  The Tailor sprang nimbly down, seized the tree
with both hands as if he had carried it the whole way, and said to the
Giant:  "Fancy a big lazy fellow like you not being able to carry a
tree!"

They continued to go on their way together, and as they passed by a
cherry-tree the Giant grasped the top of it, where the ripest fruit
hung, gave the branches into the Tailor's hand, and bade him eat.  But
the little Tailor was far too weak to hold the tree down, and when the
Giant let go the tree swung back into the air, bearing the little
Tailor with it.  When he had fallen to the ground again without hurting
himself, the Giant said:  "What!  do you mean to tell me you haven't
the strength to hold down a feeble twig?"  "It wasn't strength that was
wanting," replied time Tailor; "do you think that would have been
anything for a man who has killed seven at a blow?  I jumped over the
tree because the huntsmen are shooting among the branches near us.  Do
you do the like if you dare."  The Giant made an attempt, but couldn't
get over the tree, and stuck fast in the branches, so that here, too,
the little Tailor had the better of him.

"Well, you're a fine fellow, after all," said the Giant; "come and
spend the night with us in our cave."  The little Tailor willingly
consented to do this, and following his friend they went on till they
reached a cave where several other giants were sitting round a fire,
each holding a roast sheep in his hand, of which he was eating.  The
little Tailor looked about him, and thought:  "Yes, there's certainly
more room to turn round in here than in my workshop."  The Giant showed
him a bed, and bade him lie down and have a good sleep.  But the bed
was too big for the little Tailor, so he didn't get into it, but crept
away into the corner.  At midnight, when the Giant thought the little
Tailor was fast asleep, he rose up, and taking his big iron walking-
stick, he broke the bed in two with a blow, and thought he had made an
end of the little grasshopper.  At early dawn the Giants went off to
the wood, and quite forgot about the little Tailor, till all of a
sudden they met him trudging along in the most cheerful manner.  The
Giants were terrified at seeing him, and, fearing lest he should slay
them, they all took to their heels as fast as they could.

The Little Tailor continued to follow his nose, and after he had
wandered about for a long time he came to the courtyard of a royal
palace, and feeling tired he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
While he lay there the people came, and looking him all over read on
his girdle, "Seven at a blow."  "Oh!" they said, "what can this great
hero of a hundred fights want in our peaceful land?  He must indeed be
a mighty man of valor."  They went and told the King about him, and
said what a weighty and useful man he'd be in time of war and that it
would be well to secure him at any price.  This counsel pleased the
King, and he sent one of his courtiers down to the little Tailor, to
offer him, when he awoke, a commission in their army.  The messenger
remained standing by the sleeper, and waited till he stretched his
limbs and opened his eyes, when he tendered his proposal.  "That's the
very thing I came here for," he answered; "I am quite ready to enter
the King's service."  So he was received with all honor, and given a
special house of his own to live in.

But the other officers were angry at the success of the little Tailor,
and wished him a thousand miles away.  "What's to come of it all?" they
asked one another; "if we quarrel with him, he'll let out at us, and at
every blow seven will fall.  There'll soon be an end of us."  So they
resolved to go in a body to the King, and all to send in their papers.
"We are not made," they said.  "to hold out against a man who kills
seven at a blow."  The King was grieved at the thought of losing all
his faithful servants for the sake of one man, and he wished heartily
that he had never set eyes on him, or that he could get rid of him.
But he didn't dare to send him away, for he feared he might kill him
and place himself on the throne.  He thought long and deeply over the
matter, and finally came to a conclusion.  He sent for the Tailor and
told him that, seeing what a great and warlike hero he was, he was
about to make him an offer.  In a certain wood of his kingdom there
dwelt two Giants who did much harm by the way they robbed, murdered,
burnt, and plundered everything about them; "no one could approach them
without endangering his life.  If he could overcome and kill these two
giants he should have the King's only daughter for a wife, and half his
kingdom into the bargain; he might have a hundred horsemen, too, to
back him up."  "That's the very thing for a man like me," thought the
little Tailor; "one doesn't get the offer of a beautiful princess and
half a kingdom every day."  "Done with you," he answered; "I'll soon
put an end to the Giants.  But I haven't the smallest need of your
hundred horsemen; a fellow who can slay seven men at a blow need not be
afraid of two."

The little Tailor set out, and the hundred horsemen followed him.  When
he came to the outskirts of the wood he said to his followers:  "You
wait here, I'll manage the Giants by myself;" and he went on into the
wood, casting his sharp little eyes right and left about him.  After a
while he spied the two Giants lying asleep under a tree, snoring till
the very boughs bent with the breeze.  The little Tailor lost no time
in filling his wallet with stones, and then climbed up the tree under
which they lay.  When he got to about the middle of it he slipped along
a branch till he sat just above the sleepers, when he threw down one
stone after the other on the nearest Giant.  The Giant felt nothing for
a long time, but at last he woke up, and pinching his companion said:
"What did you strike me for?"  "I didn't strike you," said the other;
"you must be dreaming."  They both lay down to sleep again, and the
Tailor threw down a stone on the second Giant, who sprang up and cried:
"What's that for?  Why did you throw something at me?"  "I didn't throw
anything," growled the first one.  They wrangled on for a time, till as
both were tired, they made up the matter and fell asleep again.  The
little Tailor began his game once more, and flung the largest stone he
could find in his wallet with all his force, and hit the first Giant on
the chest.  "This is too much of a good thing!" he yelled, and
springing up like a madman, he knocked his companion against the tree
till he trembled.  He gave, however, as good as he got, and they became
so enraged that they tore up trees and beat each other with them, till
they both fell dead at once on the ground.  Then the little Tailor
jumped down.  "It's a mercy," he said, "that they didn't root up the
tree on which I was sitting, or I should have had to jump like a
squirrel on to another, which, nimble though I am, would have been no
easy job."  He drew his sword and gave each of the Giants a very fine
thrust or two on the breast, and then went to the horsemen and said:
"The deed is done; I've put an end to the two of them; but I assure you
it has been no easy matter, for they even tore up trees in their
struggle to defend themselves; but all that's of no use against one who
slays seven men at a blow."  "Weren't you wounded?" asked the horsemen.
"No fear," answered the Tailor; "they haven't touched a hair of my
head." But the horsemen wouldn't believe him till they rode into the
wood and found the Giants weltering in their blood, and the trees lying
around, torn up by the roots.

The little Tailor now demanded the promised reward, but the King
repented his promise, and pondered once more how he could rid himself
of the hero.  "Before you obtain the hand of my daughter and half my
kingdom," he said to him, "you must do another deed of valor.  A
unicorn is running about loose in the wood and doing much mischief; you
must first catch it."  "I'm even less afraid of one unicorn than of two
Giants; seven at a blow, that's my motto."  He took a piece of cord and
an axe with him, went out to the wood, and again told the men who had
been sent with him to remain outside.  He hadn't to search long, for
the unicorn soon passed by, and, on perceiving the Tailor, dashed
straight at him as though it were going to spike him on the spot.
"Gently, gently," said he; "not so fast, my friend;" and standing still
he waited till the beast was quite near, when he sprang lightly behind
a tree; the unicorn ran with all its force against the tree, and rammed
its horn so firmly into the trunk that it had no strength left to pull
it out again, and was thus successfully captured.  "Now, I've caught my
bird," said the Tailor, and he came out from behind the tree, placed
the cord round its neck first, then struck the horn out of the tree
within his axe, and when everything was in order led the beast Before
the King.

Still the King didn't want to give him the promised reward and made a
third demand.  The Tailor was to catch a wild boar for him that did a
great deal of harm in the wood; and he might have the huntsmen to help
him.  "Willingly," said the Tailor; "that's mere child's play."  But he
didn't take the huntsmen into the wood with him, and they were well
enough pleased to remain behind, for the wild boar had often received
them in a manner which did not make them desire its further
acquaintance.  As soon as the boar perceived the Tailor it ran at him
with foaming mouth and gleaming teeth, and tried to knock him down; but
our alert little friend ran into a chapel that stood near, and got out
of the window with a jump.  The boar pursued him into the church, but
the Tailor skipped round to the door and closed it securely.  So the
raging beast was caught, for it was far too heavy and unwieldy to
spring out of the window.  The little Tailor summoned the huntsmen
together, that they might see the Prisoner with their own eyes.  Then
the hero betook himself to the King, who was obliged now, whether he
liked it or not, to keep his promise, and hand him over his daughter
and half his kingdom.  Had he known that no hero-warrior, but only a
little tailor, stood before him, it would have gone even more to his
heart.  So the wedding was celebrated with much splendor and little
joy, and the Tailor became a King.

After a time the Queen heard her husband saying one night in his sleep:
"My lad, make that waistcoat and patch these trousers, or I'll box your
ears."  Thus she learned in what rank the young gentleman had been
born, and next day she poured forth her woes to her father, and begged
him to help her to get rid of a husband who was nothing more nor less
than a tailor.  The King comforted her, and said:  "Leave your bedroom
door open tonight; my servants shall stand outside, and when your
husband is fast asleep they shall enter, bind him fast, and carry him
on to a ship, which shall sail away out into the wide ocean."  The
Queen was well satisfied with the idea, but the armor-bearer, who had
overheard everything, being much attached to his young master, went
straight to him and revealed the whole plot.  "I'll soon put a stop to
the business," said the Tailor.  That night he and his wife went to bed
at the usual time; and when she thought he had fallen asleep she got
up, opened the door, and then lay down again.  The little Tailor, who
had only pretended to be asleep, began to call out in a clear voice:
"My lad, make that waistcoat and patch these trousers, or I'll box your
ears.  I have killed seven at a blow, slain two giants, led a unicorn
captive, and caught a wild boar, then why should I be afraid of those
men standing outside my door?"  The men, when they heard the Tailor
saying these words, were so terrified that they fled as if pursued by a
wild army, and didn't dare go near him again.  So the little Tailor was
and remained a King all the days of his life.

THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD

By Charles Perrault

THERE was once in a distant country a King and Queen whose only sorrow
was that they had no children.  At last the Queen gave birth to a
little daughter and the King showed his joy by giving a christening
feast so grand that the like of it was never known.  He asked all the
fairies in the land-there were seven found in the kingdom-to stand
godmothers to the little Princess; hoping that each might bestow on her
some good gift.

After the christening all the guests returned to the palace, where
there was placed before each fairy godmother a magnificent covered
dish, and a knife, fork, and spoon of pure gold, set with precious
stones.  But, as they all were sitting down at table there entered an
old fairy who had not been invited, because it was more than fifty
years since she had gone out of a certain tower, and she was thought to
be dead or enchanted.  The King ordered a cover to be placed for her,
but it was of common earthenware, for he had ordered from his jeweler
only seven gold dishes, for the seven fairies aforesaid.  The old fairy
thought herself neglected, and muttered angry threats, which were
overheard by one of the younger fairies, who chanced to sit beside her.
This good godmother, afraid of harm to the pretty baby, hastened to
hide herself behind the hangings in the hall.  She did this because she
wished to speak last and repair any evil the old fairy might intend.

The fairies now offered their good wishes, which, unlike most wishes,
were sure to come true.  The first wished that the little Princess
should grow up the fairest woman in the world; the second, that she
should have wit like an angel; the third, that she should be perfectly
graceful; the fourth, that she should sing like a nightingale; the
fifth, that she should dance perfectly well; the sixth, that she should
play all kinds of music perfectly.  Then the old fairy's turn came.
Shaking her head spitefully, she uttered the wish that when the baby
grew up into a young lady, and learned to spin, she might prick her
finger with a spindle and die of the wound.

This terrible prophecy made all the company tremble; and every one fell
to crying.  Upon which the wise young fairy appeared from behind the
curtains and said: "Assure yourselves O King and Queen; the Princess
shall not die.  I have no power to undo what my elder has done.  The
Princess must pierce her finger with a spindle and she shall then sink,
not into the sleep of death, but into a sleep that will last a hundred
years.  After that time is ended, the son of a King shall come and
awake her."

Then all the fairies vanished.

The King, in the hope of avoiding his daughter's doom, issued an edict
forbidding all persons to spin, and even to have spinning wheels in
their houses, on pain of instant death.  But it was in vain.  One day
when she was just fifteen years of age, the King and Queen left their
daughter alone in one of their castles, where, wandering about at her
will, she came to a little room in the top of a tower, and there found
a very old woman, who had not heard of the King's edict, busy with her
spinning wheel.

"What are you doing, good old woman?" said the Princess.

"I'm spinning my pretty child."

"Ah, how pretty!  Let me try if I can spin also."

She had no sooner taken up the spindle than, being hasty and unhandy,
she pierced her finger with the point.  Though it was so small a wound,
she fainted away at once and dropped on the floor.  The poor old woman
called for help; shortly came the ladies-in-waiting, who tried every
means to restore their young mistress; but all in vain.  She lay,
beautiful as an angel, the color still lingering in her lips and
cheeks, her fair bosom softly stirred with her breath; only her eyes
were fast closed.  When the King, her father, and the Queen, her
mother, beheld her thus, they knew that all had happened as the cruel
fairy meant, and that their daughter would sleep for one hundred years.
They sent away all the physicians and attendants, and themselves
sorrowing laid her upon a bed in the finest apartment in the palace.
There she slept and looked like a sleeping angel still.

When this misfortune happened, the kindly young fairy who had saved the
Princess by changing her sleep of death into this sleep of a hundred
years, was twelve thousand leagues away, in the kingdom of Mataquin.
But, being informed of everything by a little dwarf who wore seven-
league boots, she arrived speedily in a chariot of fire drawn by
dragons.  The King handed her out of the chariot, and she approved of
all he had done.  Then, being a fairy of great common sense and
foresight, she thought that the Princess, awakening after a hundred
years in this old castle, might not know what to do with herself if she
found herself alone.  Accordingly, she touched with her magic wand
everybody and everything in the palace except the King and Queen:
governesses, ladies of honor, waiting maids, gentlemen ushers, cooks,
kitchen girls, pages, footmen; even the horses that were in the
stables, and the grooms that attended them, she touched each and all.
Nay, the dogs, too, in the outer court, and the little fat lapdog,
Mopsey, who had laid himself down beside his mistress on her splendid
bed, were also touched, and they, like all the rest, fell fast asleep
in a moment.  The very spits that were before the kitchen fire fell
asleep, and the fire itself, and everything became as still as if it
were the middle of the night, or as if the palace were a palace of the
dead.

The King and Queen, having kissed their daughter, went out of the
castle, giving orders that it was to be approached no more.  The
command was unnecessary, for in one quarter of an hour there sprang up
around it a wood so thick and thorny that neither beasts nor men could
attempt to penetrate there.  Above this dense mass of forest could only
be seen the top of the high tower where the lovely Princess slept.

When a hundred years were gone the King had died, and his throne had
passed to another royal family.  The reigning King's son, being one day
out hunting, was stopped in the chase by this great wood, inquired what
wood it was and what were those towers which he saw appearing out of
the midst of it.  Every one answered as he had heard.  Some said it was
an old castle haunted by spirits.  Others said it was the abode of
witches and enchanters.  The most common story was that an Ogre lived
there, a giant with long teeth and claws, who carried away naughty
little boys and girls and ate them up.  The Prince did not know what to
think.  At length an old peasant was found who remembered having heard
his grandfather say to his father that in this tower was a Princess,
beautiful as the day, who was doomed to sleep there for one hundred
years, until awakened by a king's son, who was to marry her.

At this the young Prince, who had the spirit of a hero, determined to
find out the truth for himself.

Spurred on by love and honor, he leaped from his horse and began to
force his way through the thick wood.  To his amazement the stiff
branches all gave way, and the ugly thorns drew back of their own
accord, and the brambles buried themselves in the earth to let him
pass.  This done, they closed behind him, allowing none to follow.
Nevertheless, he pushed boldly on alone.

The first thing he saw was enough to freeze him with fear.  Bodies of
men and horses lay extended on the ground; but the men had faces, not
death white, but red as roses, and beside them were glasses half filled
with wine, showing that they had gone to sleep drinking.  Next he
entered a large court paved with marble, where stood rows of guards
presenting arms, but as still as if cut out of stone; then he passed
through many chambers where gentlemen and ladies, all in the dress of
the past century, slept at their ease, some standing, some sitting.
The pages were lurking in corners, the ladies of honor were stooping
over their embroidery frames or listening to the gentlemen of the
court; but all were as silent and as quiet as statues.  Their clothes,
strange to say, were fresh and new as ever; and not a particle of dust
or spider web had gathered over the furniture, though it had not known
a broom for a hundred years.  Finally, the astonished Prince came to an
inner chamber, where was the fairest sight his eyes ever beheld.

A young girl of wonderful beauty lay asleep on an embroidered bed, and
she looked as if she had only just closed her eyes.  Trembling, the
Prince approached and knelt beside her.  Some say he kissed her; but as
nobody saw it, and she never told, we cannot be quite sure of the fact.
However, as the end of the enchantment had come, the Princess waked at
once, and, looking at him with eyes of the tenderest regard, said,
sleepily: "Is it you, my Prince?  I have waited for you very long."

Charmed with these words, and still more by the tone in which they were
uttered, the Prince assured her that he loved her more than his life.
For a long time did they sit talking, and yet had not said half enough.
Their only interruption was the little dog Mopsey, who had awakened
with his mistress, and now began to be jealous that the Princess did
not notice him as much as she was wont to do.

Meanwhile all the attendants, whose enchantment was also broken, not
being in love, were ready to die of hunger after their fast of a
hundred years.  A lady of honor ventured to say that dinner was served,
whereupon the Prince handed his beloved Princess at once to the great
hall.  She did not wait to dress for dinner, being already perfectly
and magnificently attired, though in a fashion somewhat out of date.
However, her lover had the politeness not to notice this, nor to remind
her that she was dressed exactly like his grandmother whose portrait
still hung on the palace walls.

During dinner a concert by the attendant musicians took place, and,
considering they had not touched their instruments for a century, they
played the old tunes extremely well.  They ended with a wedding march,
for that very evening the Prince and Princess were married.

After a few days they went together out of the castle and enchanted
wood, both of which immediately vanished, and were nevermore beheld by
mortal eyes.  The Princess was restored to her ancestral kingdom, and
after a few years the Prince and she became King and Queen, and ruled
long and happily.


THE FAIR ONE WITH GOLDEN LOCKS

Retold by Miss Mulock

THERE was once a King's daughter so beautiful that they named her the
Fair One with Golden Locks.  These golden locks were the most
remarkable in the world, soft and fine, and falling in long waves down
to her very feet.  She wore them always thus, loose and flowing,
surmounted with a wreath of flowers; and though such long hair was
sometimes rather inconvenient, it was so exceedingly beautiful, shining
in the sun like ripples of molten gold, that everybody agreed she fully
deserved her name.

Now there was a young King of a neighboring country, very handsome,
very rich, and wanting nothing but a wife to make him happy.  He heard
so much of the various perfections of the Fair One with Golden Locks,
that at last, without even seeing her, he fell in love with her so
desperately that he could neither eat nor drink, and resolved to send
an ambassador at once to demand her in marriage.  So he ordered a
magnificent equipage-more than a hundred horses and a hundred footmen-
in order to bring back to him the Fair One with Golden Locks, who, he
never doubted, would be only too happy to become his Queen.  Indeed, he
felt so sure of her that he refurnished the whole palace, and had made
by all the dressmakers of the city, dresses enough to last a lady a
lifetime.  But, alas! when the ambassador arrived and delivered his
message, either the princess was in bad humor, or the offer did not
appear to be to her taste; for she returned her best thanks to his
majesty, but said she had not the slightest wish or intention to get
married.  She also, being a prudent damsel, declined receiving any of
the presents which the King had sent her; except that, not quite to
offend his majesty, she retained a box of English pins, which were in
that country of considerable value.

When the ambassador returned, alone and unsuccessful, all the court was
very much affected, and the King himself began to weep with all his
might.  Now, there was in the palace household a young gentleman named
Avenant, beautiful as the sun, besides being at once so amiable and so
wise that the King confided to him all his affairs; and every one loved
him, except those people-to be found in all courts-who were envious of
his good fortune.  These malicious folk hearing him say gaily: "If the
King had sent me to fetch the Fair One with Golden Locks, I know she
would have come back with me," repeated the saying in such a manner,
that it appeared as if Avenant thought so much of himself and his
beauty, and felt sure the princess would have followed him all over the
world; which when it came to the ears of the King, as it was meant to
do, irritated him so much that he commanded Avenant to be imprisoned in
a high tower and left to die there of hunger.  The guards accordingly
carried off the young man, who had quite forgotten his idle speech, and
had not the least idea what fault he had committed.  They ill-treated
him very much, and then left him with nothing to eat and only water to
drink.  This, however, kept him alive for a few days, during which he
did not cease to complain aloud, and to call upon the King, saying: "Oh
King, what harm have I done?  You have no subject more faithful than I.
Never have I had a thought which could offend you."

And it so befell that the King, coming by chance, or else with a sort
of remorse, past the tower, was touched by the voice of the young
Avenant, whom he had once so much regarded.  In spite of all the
courtiers could do to prevent him, he stopped to listen, and overheard
these words.  The tears rushed into his eyes; he opened the door of the
tower, and called: "Avenant!"  Avenant came, creeping feebly along,
fell at the King's knees, and kissed his feet:

"Oh sire, what have I done that you should treat me so cruelly?"

"You have mocked me and my ambassador; for you said, if I had sent you
to fetch the Fair One with Golden Locks, you would have been successful
and brought her back."

"I did say it, and it was true," replied Avenant fearlessly; "for I
should have told her so much about your majesty and your various high
qualities, which no one knows so well as myself, that I am persuaded
she would have returned with me."

"I believe it," said the King, with an angry look at those who had
spoken ill of his favorite; he then gave Avenant a free pardon and took
him back with him to the court.

After having supplied the famished youth with as much supper as he
could eat, the King admitted him to a private audience, and said: "I am
as much in love as ever with the Fair One with Golden Locks, so I will
take thee at thy word, and send thee to try and win her for me."

"Very well, please your majesty" replied Avenant cheerfully; "I will
depart to-morrow."

The King, overjoyed with his willingness and hopefulness would have
furnished him with a still more magnificent equipage and suite than the
first ambassador but Avenant refused to take anything except a good
horse to ride, and letters of introduction to the Princess's father.
The King embraced him and eagerly saw him depart.

It was on a Monday morning when, without any pomp or show, Avenant thus
started on his mission.  He rode slowly and meditatively, pondering
over every possible means of persuading the Fair One with Golden Locks
to marry the King; but, even after several days journey towards her
country, no clear project had entered into his mind.  One morning, when
he had started at break of day, he came to a great meadow with a stream
running through it, along which were planted willows and poplars.  It
was such a pleasant, rippling stream that he dismounted and sat down on
its banks.  There he perceived gasping on the grass a large golden
Carp, which, in leaping too far after gnats, had thrown itself quite
out of the water, and now lay dying on the greensward.  Avenant took
pity on it, and though he was very hungry, and the fish was very fat,
and he would well enough have liked it for his breakfast, still he
lifted it gently and put it back into the stream.  No sooner had the
Carp touched the fresh cool water than it revived and swam away; but
shortly returning, it spoke to him from the water in this wise:

"Avenant, I thank you for your good deed.  I was dying, and you have
saved me; I will recompense you for this one day."

After this pretty little speech, the fish popped down to the bottom of
the stream, according to the habit of Carp, leaving Avenant very much
astonished, as was natural.

Another day he met with a Raven that was in great distress, being
pursued by an Eagle, which would have swallowed him up in no time.
"See," thought Avenant, "how the stronger oppress the weaker!  What
right has an Eagle to eat up a Raven?"  So taking his bow and arrow,
which he always carried, he shot the Eagle dead, and the Raven,
delighted, perched in safety on an opposite tree.

"Avenant," screeched he, though not in the sweetest voice in the world,
"you have generously succored me, a poor miserable Raven.  I am not
ungrateful, and I will recompense you one day."

"Thank you," said Avenant, and continued his road.

Entering in a thick wood, so dark with the shadows of early morning
that he could scarcely find his way, he heard an Owl hooting, like an
owl in great tribulation.  She had been caught by the nets spread by
bird-catchers to entrap finches, larks, and other small birds.  "What a
pity," thought Avenant, "that men must always torment poor birds and
beasts who have done them no harm!"  So he took out his knife, cut the
net, and let the Owl go free.  She went sailing up in the air, but
immediately returned hovering over his head on her brown wings.

"Avenant," said she, "at daylight the bird-catchers would have been
here, and I should have been caught and killed.  I have a grateful
heart; I will recompense you one day."

These were the three principal adventures that befell Avenant on his
way to the kingdom of the Fair One with Golden Locks.  Arrived there,
he dressed himself with the greatest care, in a habit of silver
brocade, and a hat adorned with plumes of scarlet and white.  He threw
over all a rich mantle, and carried a little basket, in which was a
lovely little dog, an offering of respect to the Princess.  With this
he presented himself at the palace gates, where even though he came
alone, his mien was so dignified and graceful, so altogether charming,
that every one did him reverence, and was eager to run and tell the
Fair One with Golden Locks, that Avenant, another ambassador from the
King, her suitor, awaited an audience.

"Avenant!" repeated the Princess.  "That is a pretty name; perhaps the
youth is pretty too."

"So beautiful," said the ladies of honor, "that while he stood under
the palace window we could do nothing but look at him."

"How silly of you!" sharply said the Princess.  But she desired them to
bring her robe of blue satin, to comb out her long hair, and adorn it
with the freshest garland of flowers; to give her her high-heeled
shoes, and her fan.  "Also," added she, "take care that my audience-
chamber is well swept and my throne well dusted.  I wish in everything
to appear as becomes the Fair One with Golden Locks."

This done she seated herself on her throne of ivory and ebony and gave
orders for her musicians to play, but softly, so as not to disturb
conversation.  Thus, shining in all her beauty, she admitted Avenant to
her presence.

He was so dazzled that at first he could not speak; then he began and
delivered his harangue to perfection.

"Gentle Avenant," returned the Princess, after listening to all his
reasons for her returning with him, "your arguments are very strong,
and I am inclined to listen to them; but you must first find for me a
ring, which I dropped into the river about a month ago.  Until I
recover it, I can listen to no proposition of marriage."

Avenant, surprised and disturbed, made her a profound reverence and
retired, taking with him the basket and the little dog Cabriole, which
she refused to accept.  All night long he sat sighing to himself.  "How
can I ever find a ring which she dropped into the river a month ago?
She has set me an impossibility."

"My dear master," said Cabriole, "nothing is an impossibility to one so
young and charming as you are; let us go at daybreak to the river-
side."

Avenant patted him, but replied nothing; until, worn out with grief, he
slept.  Before dawn Cabriole wakened him, saying: "Master, dress
yourself and let us go to the river."

There Avenant walked up and down, with his arms folded and his head
bent, but saw nothing.  At last he heard a voice, calling from a
distance, "Avenant, Avenant!"

The little dog ran to the water-side.- "Never believe me again, master,
if it is not a golden Carp with a ring in its mouth!"

"Yes, Avenant," said the Carp, "this is the ring which the Princess has
lost.  You saved my life in the willow meadow, and I have recompensed
you.  Farewell!"

Avenant took the ring gratefully and returned to the palace with
Cabriole, who scampered about in great glee.

Craving an audience, he presented the Princess with her ring, and
begged her to accompany him to his master's kingdom.  She took the
ring, looked at it, and thought she was surely dreaming.

"Some fairy must have assisted you, fortunate Avenant," said she.

"Madam, I am only fortunate in my desire to obey your wishes."

"Obey me still," she said graciously.  "There is a prince named
Galifron, whose suit I have refused.  He is a giant as tall as a tower,
who eats a man as a monkey eats a nut: he puts cannons into his pockets
instead of pistols; and when he speaks, his voice is so loud that every
one near him becomes deaf.  Go and fight him, and bring me his head."

Avenant was thunderstruck; but after a time he recovered himself.
"Very well, madam, I shall certainly perish, but I will perish like a
brave man.  I will depart at once to fight the Giant Galifron."

The Princess, now in her turn surprised and alarmed, tried every
persuasion to induce him not to go, but in vain.  Avenant armed himself
and started, carrying his little dog in its basket.  Cabriole was the
only creature that gave him consolation: "Courage, master!  While you
attack the giant, I will bite his legs: he will stoop down to strike
me, and then you can knock him on the head."  Avenant smiled at the
little dog's spirit, but he knew it was useless.

Arrived at the castle of Galifron, he found the road all strewn with
bones, and carcasses of men.  Soon he saw the giant walking.  His head
was level with the highest trees, and he sang in a terrific voice:


"Bring me babies to devour;

More-more-more-more-

Men and women, tender and tough;

All the world holds not enough."


To which Avenant replied, imitating the tune:


"Avenant you here may see,

He is come to punish thee:

Be he tender, be he tough,

To kill thee, giant, he is enough."


Hearing these words, the giant took up his massive club, looked around
for the singer, and perceiving him, would have slain him on the spot,
had not a Raven, sitting on a tree close by, suddenly flown out upon
him and picked out both his eyes.  Then Avenant easily killed him and
cut off his head, while the Raven, watching him, said:

"You shot the Eagle who was pursuing me: I promised to recompense you,
and to-day I have done it.  We are quits."

"No, it is I who am your debtor, Sir Raven," replied Avenant, as,
hanging the frightful head to his saddle-bow, he mounted his horse and
rode back to the city of the Fair One with Golden Locks.

There everybody followed him, shouting: "Here is brave Avenant, who has
killed the giant," until the Princess, hearing the noise, and fearing
it was Avenant himself who was killed, appeared, all trembling; and
even when he appeared with Galifron's head, she trembled still,
although she had nothing to fear.

"Madam," said Avenant, "your enemy is dead; so I trust you will accept
the hand of the King my master."

"I cannot," replied she thoughtfully, "unless you first bring me a
phial of the water in the Grotto of Darkness.  It is six leagues in
length, and guarded at the entrance by two fiery dragons.  Within, it
is a pit, full of scorpions, lizards, and serpents, and at the bottom
of this place flows the Fountain of Beauty and Health.  All who wash in
it become, if ugly, beautiful, and if beautiful, beautiful forever; if
old, young; and if young, young forever.  Judge then, Avenant, if I can
quit my kingdom without carrying with me some of this miraculous
water."

"Madam," replied Avenant, "you are already so beautiful that you
require it not; but I am an unfortunate ambassador whose death you
desire; I will obey you, though I know I shall never return."

So he departed with his only friends-his horse and his faithful dog
Cabriole; while all who met him looked at him compassionately, pitying
so pretty a youth bound on such a hopeless errand.  But, however kindly
they addressed him, Avenant rode on and answered nothing, for he was
too sad at heart.

He reached a mountain-side, where he sat down to rest, leaving his
horse to graze, and Cabriole to run after the flies.  He knew that the
Grotto of Darkness was not far off, yet he looked about him like one
who sees nothing.  At last he perceived a rock, as black as ink, whence
came a thick smoke; and in a moment appeared one of the two dragons,
breathing out flames.  It had a yellow and green body, claws, and a
long tail.  When Cabriole saw the monster, the poor little dog hid
himself in terrible fright.  But Avenant resolved to die bravely; so
taking a phial which the Princess had given him, he prepared to descend
into the cave.

"Cabriole," said he, "I shall soon be dead; then fill this phial with
my blood, and carry it to the Fair One with Golden Locks, and afterward
to the King, my master, to show him I have been faithful to the last."

While he was thus speaking a voice called: "Avenant, Avenant!"-and he
saw an Owl sitting on a hollow tree.  Said the Owl: "You cut the net in
which I was caught, and I vow to recompense you.  Now is the time.
Give me the phial; I know every corner of the Grotto of Darkness-I will
fetch you the water of beauty."

Delighted beyond words, Avenant delivered up his phial; the Owl flew
with it into the grotto, and in less than half an hour reappeared,
bringing it quite full and well corked.  Avenant thanked her with all
his heart, and joyfully took once more the road to the city.

The Fair One with Golden Locks had no more to say.  She consented to
accompany him back, with all her suite, to his master's court.  On the
way thither she saw so much of him, and found him so charming, that
Avenant might have married her himself had he chosen; but he would not
have been false to his master for all the beauties under the sun.  At
length they arrived at the King's city, and the Fair One with Golden
Locks became his spouse and Queen.  But she still loved Avenant in her
heart, and often said to the King her lord: "But for Avenant I should
not be here; he has done all sorts of impossible deeds for my sake; he
has fetched me the water of beauty, and I shall never grow old-in
shor