ld was the
scapegoat of the house, and was blamed for everything.  He was,
however, sharper and wiser than all his brothers, and though he spoke
little, he listened a great deal.

At last there came a bad year, and so great a famine, that the poor
people resolved to rid themselves of their children.  One evening, when
the children were all in bed, and the Wood-cutter with a sorrowful
heart, was sitting by the fire with his wife, he said to her: "You know
that we can no longer support our children.  I cannot let them die of
hunger before my eyes, and I am resolved to take them to the wood to-
morrow, and lose them.  It will be easy to do this, for, while they
amuse themselves tying my sticks, we have only to slip away without
their seeing us.

"Ah!" cried his Wife, "would you then destroy your children?"   In vain
did her husband set forth to her their great poverty: she would not
consent.  She was poor, she said.  But she was their mother.  At last,
having considered what a grief it would be to her to have them die of
hunger before her eyes, she agreed to her husband's plan, and went,
weeping, to bed.

Hop-o'-My-Thumb had listened to all that they had said, for having
heard them, from his bed, talking of family matters, he had risen
softly and slipped under his father's stool, in order to hear without
being seen.  He then went back to bed, but lay awake the rest of the
night, thinking what he should do.  He rose early and went to a brook,
where he filled his pocket with little white pebbles, and then returned
to the house.

Soon after, they all set off, but Hop-o'-My-Thumb did not tell his
brothers anything of what he knew.  They went into a forest, so thick
that they could not see each other at a distance of ten paces.  The
Wood-cutter began to fell a tree, while the children gathered sticks to
make up into bundles.  The father and mother, seeing them thus
employed, slipped away unnoticed, and then fled rapidly, by a little
winding path.

When the children found they were alone, they began to scream and cry
with all their strength.  Hop-o'-My-Thumb let them cry, knowing well
how to get home; for, while walking, he had dropped along the path the
little white pebbles which he had in his pockets.

He therefore said to them, "Fear not, brothers, my father and mother
have left us here, but I will lead you to the house only follow me."

They obeyed at once, and he led them home along the same path by which
they had come into the forest at first.  They did not dare to go into
the house, but placed themselves near the door, in order to hear what
their father and mother were saying.

Now it had so happened that, just as the Woodcutter and his Wife
reached home, the lord of the village had sent them ten crowns, which
he had long owed them, and which they had never hoped to obtain.  This
gave them new life, for the poor creatures were almost dead from
hunger.

The Wood-cutter immediately sent his Wife to the butcher's, where, as
it was long since they had eaten anything, she bought three times as
much meat as was needed for the supper of two people.

When they were seated at table, the Wife said, "Alas!  where now are
our poor children?  They would make good cheer with what we have left.
But it is you who wished to lose them.  I always said we should repent
it.  What are they doing now in the forest?  Alas!  alas!  perhaps the
wolves have already eaten them!  You were most cruel thus to lose your
children."

The Wood-cutter at last grew impatient, for she repeated more than
twenty times that they would repent what they had done, and that she
had told him so.  He threatened to beat her if she was not silent.  The
Wood-cutter did not do this because he was less sorry than his Wife,
but because her reproaches angered him.  His Wife now shed tears, and
cried out, "Alas!  where are my children, my poor children?"

She said this so loud that the children, who were at the door, heard
her, and all cried out together, "Here we are!  here we are!"

She ran quickly to open the door, and said, as she embraced them, "How
overjoyed I am to see you again, my darling children!  you must be very
tired and very hungry; and you, Peter, how muddy you are!  come, let me
brush you."  Peter was her eldest son, whom she loved more than all the
others.

The children then sat down at the table, and ate with an appetite which
delighted their father and mother, to whom they described, all speaking
at once, how frightened they had been in the forest.

These good people were filled with joy to have their children with them
again, and this joy lasted as long as the ten crowns held out.  But
when the money was spent, they fell back into their former misery, and
resolved to lose them once more; and in order not to fail again, they
determined to take them much further into the forest than the first
time.

They could not, however, speak of this so secretly but that they were
overheard by Hop-o'-My-Thumb, who laid his plans to escape as before.
Although he got up early in order to go out and pick up some little
stones, he could not succeed in his purpose, for he found the door of
the house shut and double-bolted.  He was wondering what he should do,
when, his mother having given them each a bit of bread for breakfast,
he thought that he might use his bread instead of pebbles by dropping
crumbs along the paths as they walked.  He therefore slipped the bread
into his pocket.

Their father and mother led them this time into the thickest and
darkest part of the forest, and, as soon as they were there, ran away
and left them.

Hop-o'-My-Thumb was not much troubled, because he believed he could
easily find his way by means of the bread which he had scattered as he
passed along.  What was his surprise when he could not find a single
crumb: the birds had come and eaten it all.

Now was their lot indeed wretched; the more they wandered about, the
deeper they buried themselves in the forest.  Night came, and a great
wind arose which frightened them terribly.  They thought they heard on
all sides the howling of hungry wolves coming to eat them up.  They did
not dare to speak, or even turn their heads.  Rain began to fall, which
wet them to the skin.  They slipped at every step, and, if they fell,
got up so covered with mud that they could hardly move their hands.

Finally, Hop-o'-My-Thumb climbed to the top of a tree, to see if he
could not discover something.  Having looked on all sides, he at last
saw a little gleam of light, like that from a candle, but it was very
far off, beyond the forest.  He got down from the tree: but when he was
on the ground he no longer saw anything, which troubled him greatly.
However, having walked for some time with his brothers in the direction
where he had seen the light, he again saw it as they came out of the
wood.  At last they reached the house where the candle was, though not
without many alarms, for they lost sight of it whenever they descended
unto a hollow place.

They knocked at the door, which was opened to them by a woman.  She
asked them what they wanted.  Hop-o'-My-Thumb replied that they were
poor children who had lost themselves in the forest, and who asked, for
charity's sake, a place to sleep.

The woman, seeing how bitter they were, began to weep, and said to
them, "Alas!  my poor children, whence do you come?  Do you not know
that this is the house of an Ogre, who eats little children?"

"Alas, madam," said Hop-o'-My-Thumb, who like his brothers was shaking
with fear, "what shall we do?  The wolves of the forest will certainly
devour us to-night, if you will not give us shelter.  This being the
case, we had rather be eaten by the Ogre, and he, perhaps, will take
pity on us, if you will beg him to do so."

The Ogre's wife, who thought she might be able to conceal them from her
husband till the next morning, let them come in, and placed them near a
good fire, where a whole sheep was roasting for the Ogre's supper.

When they had begun to get warm, they heard three or four heavy knocks
at the door.  It was the Ogre.  His wife hastily hid the children under
the bed, and then opened the door.

The Ogre asked first if supper was ready, and the wine drawn; and then
sat down at the table.  The mutton was nearly raw, but he liked it all
the better on that account.

He then began to sniff about, saying that he smelled fresh meat.

"It must be this calf which I have just been dressing that you smell,"
said the wife.

"I smell fresh meat, I tell you again," said the Ogre, looking fiercely
at his wife; "and there is something more of which I do not know."

Saying these words, he rose from the table and went straight to the
bed, where he found the poor children.

"Ah!" said he, "this, then, is the way you wish to deceive me, wicked
woman.  I know not what prevents me from eating you, too.  Here is
game, which comes to me very conveniently to treat three Ogres of my
acquaintance, who are coming to visit me about this time."

He then drew the little boys from under the bed, one after another.
The poor children threw themselves on their knees begging for pardon.
But they had to do with the most cruel of all the Ogres, who, far from
having pity, devoured them already with his eyes, and said to his wife
that they would be delicious morsels fried, when she had made a good
sauce for them.

He took out a great knife, and, approaching the poor children, began to
sharpen it on a long stone, which he held in his left hand.  He then
seized one of them, when his wife said to him, "Why do you begin at
this time of night?  Shall you not have time to-morrow?"

"Be silent," replied the Ogre; "they will be more tender if I kill them
now."

"But you have already so much meat on hand," replied his wife.  "Here
are a calf, two sheep, and half a pig."

"You are right," said the Ogre; "give them a good supper, that they may
not grow thin, and put them to bed."

The good woman was overcome with joy, and brought them their supper at
once; but they were too frightened to eat.

As for the Ogre, he set himself to drinking, delighted to have
something with which to regale his friends.  He drank a dozen cups more
than usual, which went to his head, and obliged him to go early to bed.

Now this Ogre had seven daughters, who were still only children.  These
little Ogresses all had beautiful complexions, for they ate fresh meat
like their father.  They had little round gray eyes, crooked noses, and
great mouths filled with long teeth, very sharp and far apart.  They
were not yet very wicked, but they promised well, for they already bit
little children whenever they got the chance.  They had been put to bed
early, and were all seven in one bed, each having a golden crown on her
head.

There was in the same room anther bed of the same size.  Here it was
that the Ogre's wife put the seven little boy's, after which she went
to bed in her own chamber.

Hop-o'-My-Thumb, who had remarked that the Ogre's daughters had golden
crowns on their heads, was afraid that the Ogre might regret not having
killed him and his brothers that evening.  So he rose about the middle
of the night, and, taking his nightcap and those of his brothers, he
went very softly and placed them on the heads of the Ogre's seven
daughters, after having removed their golden crowns.  He then put the
crowns on his brothers' heads and on his own, so that the Ogre might
mistake them for his daughters, and his daughters for the boys whom he
wished to kill.

The plan succeeded as he had expected.  The Ogre, having awakened about
midnight, was sorry that he had put off till next day what he might
have done that evening.  He jumped quickly out of bed, and, taking his
great knife, "Let us see," said he, "how our little friends are getting
on."

He went on tiptoe to the room of his daughters, and approached the bed
where the little boys were all asleep, except Hop-o'-My-Thumb, who was
terribly frightened when he felt the Ogre's hand touching his head, as
he had already touched his brothers'.  But when the Ogre felt the
golden crowns, he said, "Indeed, I was near making a nice piece of work
of it.  I see that I drank too much in the evening."

He then went to the bed of his daughters, where he felt the boys'
little nightcaps.  "Ah!  here they are," said he, "the fine fellows!  I
must go boldly to work.  Saying these words, and without hesitating, he
cut the throats of his seven daughters.  Very well pleased with his
expedition, he went back to bed.  As soon as Hop-o'-My-Thumb heard the
Ogre snoring, he awakened his brothers, and told them to dress
themselves quickly and follow him.  They went softly down unto the
garden, and leaped over the walls.  They hurried away, and ran almost
all night, without knowing whither they went.

The Ogre, when he woke up, said to his wife, "Go upstairs and dress
those little fellows who were here last night.''

The Ogress was very much astonished at the kindness of her husband, not
suspecting for a moment the way in which he meant that she should dress
them.  Believing that he simply wished her to put on their clothes, she
went upstairs, where she was amazed to see her seven daughters with
their throats cut.  She was so overcome that she immediately fainted.
The Ogre, thinking his wife was too slow, went upstairs to assist her.
He was no less astonished than his wife when the frightful sight met
his eyes.

"Ah!  what have I done here?" he cried; "but those little wretches
shall pay for this, and at once."

He then threw a bucket of water into his wife's face, and, having
revived her, said, "Give me quickly my seven-league boots, that I may
go after those boys and catch them."

He then started out into the country at once, and, having rushed about
in all directions, came at last to the road where the poor children
were walking, and then not more than a hundred steps from their
father's house.  They saw the Ogre striding from mountain to mountain,
and crossing rivers as if they were little brooks.

Hop-o'-My-Thumb, who saw a hollow rock near the place where they were,
hid himself and his six brothers there, and watched carefully what
became of their enemy.  The Ogre, who was very tired with his long and
fruitless journey, wished to rest himself, and sat down, by chance, on
the very rock where the little boys were hidden.

As he was overcome with fatigue, he soon fell asleep, and began to
snore so frightfully that the poor children were as much frightened as
when he held his knife ready to cut their throats.  Hop-o'-My-Thumb was
less afraid, and told his brothers to run into the house while the Ogre
slept, and not to worry about him.  They followed his counsel, and
quickly reached the house.

Hop-o'-My-Thumb then approached the Ogre, softly drew off his boots,
and put them on himself.  The boots were very long and very large; but,
as they were fairy boots, they had the gift of becoming larger or
smaller, according to the size of the wearer's leg.  In fact, they
fitted Hop-o'-My-Thumb as if they had been made for him.

He then went straight to the Ogre's house, where he found his wife
weeping over her daughters.

"Your husband," said Hop-o'-My-Thumb, "is in great danger, for he has
been taken by a band of robbers, who will kill him if he does not give
them all his gold and silver.  Just when they held their knives to his
throat he perceived me, and besought me to come and tell you of the
state in which he was, and to direct you to give me all that he has,
without retaining anything, since otherwise they would slay him without
mercy.  As time passed, he wished that I should take his seven-league
boots, as you see, in order to make haste, and also that you might not
think me an impostor."

The good woman, very much frightened, gave him all she had; for this
Ogre was a good husband, although he did eat little children.

Hop-o'-My-Thumb, being then loaded with all the Ogre's treasures,
returned to his father's house, where he was welcomed with great joy
and where they all lived happily ever after.


THE GOOSE-GIRL

Anonymous

THERE was once upon a time an old Queen whose husband had been dead for
many years, and she had a beautiful daughter.  When the princess grew
up she was betrothed to a prince who lived at a great distance.  When
the time came for her to be married, and she had to ,journey forth into
the distant kingdom, the aged Queen packed up for her many costly
vessels of silver and gold, and trinkets also of gold and silver; and
cups and jewels, in short, everything which appertained to a royal
dowry, for she loved her child with all her heart.  She likewise sent
her maid in waiting, who was to ride with her, and hand her over to the
bridegroom, and each had a horse for the journey, but the horse of the
King's daughter was called Falada, and could speak.  So when the hour
of parting had come, the aged mother went into her bedroom, took a
small knife and cut her finger with it until it bled, then she held a
white handkerchief to it into which she left three drops of blood fall,
gave it to her daughter and said: "Dear child, preserve this carefully,
it will be of service to you on your way."

So they took a sorrowful leave of each other: the princess put the
piece of cloth in her bosom, mounted her horse, and then went away to
her bridegroom.  After she had ridden for a while she felt a burning
thirst and said to her waiting-maid: "Dismount, and take my cup which
thou hast brought with thee for me, and get me some water from the
stream, for I should like to drink."  "If you are thirsty," said the
waiting-maid, "get off your horse yourself, and lie down and drink out
of the water; I don't choose to be your servant."  So in her great
thirst the princess alighted, bent down over the water in the stream
and drank, and was not allowed to drink out of the golden cup.  Then
she said, "Ah, Heaven!" and the three drops of blood answered:

"If thy mother knew this, her heart would break."

But the King's daughter was humble, said nothing, and mounted her horse
again.  She rode some miles further, but the day was warm, the sun
scorched her, and she was thirsty once more, and when they came to a
stream of water, she again cried to her waiting-maid: "Dismount, and
give me some water in my golden cup," for she had long ago forgotten
the girl's ill words.  But the waiting-maid said still more haughtily:
"If you wish to drink, drink as you can, I don't choose to be your
maid."  Then in her great thirst the King's daughter alighted, bent
over the flowing stream, wept and said: "Ah, heaven!" and the drops of
blood again replied: "If thy mother knew this, her heart would break."
And as she was thus drinking and leaning right over the stream, the
handkerchief with the three drops of blood fell out of her bosom, and
floated away with the water without her observing it, so great was her
trouble.

The waiting-maid, however, had seen it, and she rejoiced to think that
she had now power over the bride, for since the princess had lost the
drops of blood, she had become weak and powerless.  So now when she
wanted to mount her horse again, the one that was called Falada, the
waiting-maid said: "Falada is more suitable for me, and my nag will do
for thee," and the princess had to be content with that.  Then the
waiting-maid, with many hard words, bade the princess exchange her
royal apparel for her own shabby clothes; and at length she was
compelled to swear by the clear sky above her, that she would not say
one word of this to any one at the royal court, and if she had not
taken this oath she would have been killed on the spot.  But Falada saw
all this, and observed it well.

The waiting-maid now mounted Falada, and the true bride the bad horse,
and thus they traveled onward, until at length they entered the royal
palace.  There were great rejoicings over her arrival, and the prince
sprang forward to meet her, lifted the waiting-maid from her horse, and
thought she was his consort.  She was conducted upstairs, but the real
princess was left standing below.  Then the old King looked out of the
window and saw her standing in the courtyard, and how dainty and
delicate and beautiful she was, and instantly went to the royal
apartment, and asked the bride about the girl she had with her who was
standing down below in the courtyard, and who she was.  "I picked her
up on my way for a companion; give the girl something to work at, that
she may not stand idle."  But the old King had no work for her, and
knew of none, so he said: "I have a little boy who tends the geese, she
may help him."  The boy was called Conrad, and the true bride had to
help him to tend the geese.

Soon afterward the false bride said to the young King: "Dearest
husband, I beg you to do me a favor."  He answered: "I will do so most
willingly."  "Then send for the knacker, and have the head of the horse
on which I rode here cut off, for it vexed me on the way."  In reality
she was afraid that the horse might tell how she had behaved to the
King's daughter.  Then she succeeded in making the King promise that it
should be done, and the faithful Falada was to die; this came to the
ears of the real princess, and she secretly promised to pay the knacker
a piece of gold if he would perform a small service for her.  There was
a great dark-looking gateway in the town, through which morning and
evening she had to pass with the geese: would he be so good as to nail
up Falada's head on it, so that she might see him again, more than
once.  The knacker's man promised to do that, and cut off the head, and
nailed it fast beneath the dark gateway.

Early in the morning, when she and Conrad drove out their flock beneath
this gateway, she said in passing:


"Alas, Falada, hanging there


Then the head answered:


"Alas, young Queen, how ill you fare!

If this your tender mother knew,

Her heart would surely break in two."


Then they went still further out of the town, and drove their geese
into the country.  And when they had come to the meadow, she sat down
and unbound her hair which was like pure gold, and Conrad saw it and
delighted in its brightness, and wanted to pluck out a few hairs.  Then
she said:


"Blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,

Blow Conrad's little hat away,

And make him chase it here and there,

Until I have braided all my hair,

And bound it up again.


And there came such a violent wind that it blew Conrad's hat far away
across country, and he was forced to run after it.  When he came back
she had finished combing her hair and was putting it up again, and he
could not get any of it.  Then Conrad was angry, and would not speak to
her, and thus they watered the geese until the evening, and then they
went home.

Next day when they were driving the geese out through the dark gateway,
the maiden said:


"Alas, Falada, hanging there


Falada answered:


"Alas, young Queen, how ill you fare!

If this your tender mother knew,

Her heart would surely break in two."


And she sat down again in the field and began to comb out her hair, and
Conrad ran and tried to clutch it, so she said in haste:


"Blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,

Blow Conrad's little hat away,

And make him chase it here and there,

Until I have braided all my hair,

And bound it up again.


Then the wind blew, and blew his little hat off his head and far away,
and Conrad was forced to run after it, and when he came back, her hair
had been put up a long time, and he could get none of it, and so they
looked after their geese till evening came.

But in the evening after they had got home, Conrad went to the old
King, and said: "I won't tend the geese with that girl any longer!"
"Why not?" inquired the aged King.  "Oh, because she vexes me the whole
day long."  Then the aged King commanded him to relate what it was that
she did to him.  And Conrad said: "In the morning when we pass beneath
the dark gateway with the flock, there is a sorry horse's head on the
wall and she says to it:


"Alas, Falada, hanging there!"


And the head replies:


"Alas, young Queen, how ill you fare!

If this your tender mother knew,

Her heart would surely break in two."


And Conrad went on to relate what happened on the goose pasture, and
how when there he had to chase his hat.

The aged King commanded him to drive his flock out again next day, and
as soon as morning came, he placed himself behind the dark gateway, and
heard how the maiden spoke to the head of Falada, and then he too went
into the country, and hid himself in the thicket in the meadow.  There
he soon saw with his own eyes the goose-girl and the goose-boy bringing
their flock, and how after a while she sat down and unplaited her hair,
which shone with radiance.  And soon she said:


"Blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,

Blow Conrad's little hat away,

And make him chase it here and there,

Until I have braided all my hair,

And bound it up again."


Then came a blast of wind and carried off Conrad's hat, so that he had
to run far away, while the maiden quietly went on combing and plaiting
her hair, all of which the King observed.  Then, quite unseen, he went
away, and when the goose-girl came home in the evening, he called her
aside, and asked why she did all these things.  "I may not tell you
that, and I dare not lament my sorrows to any human being, for I have
sworn not to do so by the heaven which is above me; if I had not done
that, I should have lost my life."  He urged her and left her no peace,
but he could draw nothing from her.  Then said he: "If thou wilt not
tell me anything, tell thy sorrows to the iron stove there," and he
went away.  Then she crept into the iron stove, and began to weep and
lament, and emptied her whole heart, and said: "Here am I deserted by
the whole world, and yet I am a King's daughter, and a false waiting-
maid has by force brought me to such a pass that I have been compelled
to put off my royal apparel, and she has taken my place with my
bridegroom, and I have to perform menial service as a goose-girl.  If
my mother did but know that, her heart would break."

The aged King, however, was standing outside by the pipe of the stove,
and was listening to what she said and heard it.  Then he came back
again, and bade her come out of the stove.  And royal garments were
placed on her, and it was marvellous how beautiful she was!  The aged
King summoned his son, and revealed to him that he had got the false
bride who was only a waiting-maid, but that the true one was standing
there, as the sometime goose-girl.  The young King rejoiced with all
his heart when he saw her beauty and youth, and a great feast was made
ready to which all the people and all good friends were invited.  At
the head of the table sat the bridegroom with the King's daughter at
one side of him and the waiting-maid on the other, but the waiting-maid
was blinded, and did not recognize the princess in her dazzling array.
When they had eaten and drunk, and were merry, the aged King asked the
waiting-maid as a riddle, what a person deserved who had behaved in
such and such a way to her master, and at the same time related the
whole story, and asked what sentence such an one merited?  Then the
false bride said: "She deserves no better fate than to be stripped
entirely naked, and put in a barrel which is studded inside with
pointed nails, and two white horses should be harnessed to it, which
will drag her along through one street after another, till she is
dead."  "It is thou," said the aged King, "and thou must pronounce
thine own sentence, and thus shall it be done unto thee."  And when the
sentence had been carried out, the young King married his true bride,
and both of them reigned over their kingdom in peace and happiness.


HE WHO KNEW NOT FEAR

Anonymous

A CERTAIN father had two sons, the elder of whom was sharp and
sensible, and could do everything, but the younger was stupid and could
neither learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him they
said: "There's a fellow who will give his father some trouble!"  When
anything had to be done, it was always the elder who was forced to do
it; but if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late, or in
the night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or any other
dismal place, he answered: "Oh, no, father, I'll not go there, it makes
me shudder!" for he was afraid.  Or when stories were told by the fire
at night which made the flesh creep, the listeners often said: "Oh, it
makes us shudder!" the younger sat in a corner and listened with the
rest of them, and could not imagine what they could mean.  "They are
always saying: 'It makes me shudder, it makes me shudder!' It does not
make me shudder," thought he.  "That, too, must be an art of which I
understand nothing!"

Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day: "Hearken to
me, thou fellow in the corner there, thou art growing tall and strong,
and thou, too, must learn something by which thou canst earn thy
living.  Look how thy brother works, but thou dost not even earn thy
salt."  "Well, father," he replied, "I am quite willing to learn
something-indeed, if it could but be managed, I should like to learn
how to shudder.  I don't understand that at all yet."  The elder
brother smiled when he heard that, and thought to himself:

"Good God, what a blockhead that brother of mine is!  He will never be
good for anything as long as he lives!  He who wants to be a sickle
must bend himself betimes."

The father sighed, and answered him: "Thou shalt soon learn what it is
to suffer, but thou wilt not earn thy living by that."

Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the father
bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward
in every respect that he knew nothing and learned nothing.  "Just
think," said he, "when I asked him how he was going to earn his bread,
he actually wanted to learn to shudder."  "If that be all," replied the
sexton, "he can learn that with me.  Send him to me, and I will soon
polish him."  The father was glad to do it, for he thought: "It will
train the boy a little."  The sexton, therefore, took him into his
house, and he had to ring the bell.  After a day or two the sexton
awoke him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into the church
tower and ring the bell.  "Thou shalt soon learn what shuddering is,"
thought he, and secretly went there before him; and when the boy was at
the top of the tower and turned around, and was just going to take hold
of the bell rope, he saw a white figure standing on the stairs opposite
to the sounding hole.  "Who is there?" cried he, but the figure made no
reply, and did not move or stir.  "Give an answer," cried the boy, "or
take thyself off; thou hast no business here at night."

The sexton, however, remained standing motionless, that the boy might
think he was a ghost.  The boy cried a second time: "What dost thou
want here?-speak if thou art an honest fellow, or I will throw thee
down the steps!"  The sexton thought, "He can't intend to be as bad as
his words," uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone.
Then the boy called to him for the third time, and as that was also to
no purpose, he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so
that it fell down ten steps and remained lying there in a corner.
Thereupon he rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went
to bed and fell asleep.  The sexton's wife waited a long time for her
husband, but he did not come back.  At length she became uneasy, and
wakened the boy, and asked, "Dost thou not know where my husband is?
He went up the tower before thou didst."  "No, I don't know," replied
the boy, "but someone was standing by the sounding hole on the other
side of the steps, and as he would neither give an answer nor go away,
I took him for a scoundrel, and threw him down stairs; just go there
and you will see if it was he, I should be sorry if it were."  The
woman ran away and found her husband, who was lying moaning in the
corner, and had broken his leg.

She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the
boy's father.  "Your boy," cried she, "has been the cause of a great
misfortune!  He has thrown my husband down the steps and made him break
his leg.  Take the good-for-nothing fellow away from our house."  The
father was terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy.  "What
wicked tricks are these?" said he; "the devil must have put this into
thy head."  "Father," he replied, "do listen to me.  I am quite
innocent.  He was standing there by night like one who is intending to
do some evil.  I did not know who it was, and I entreated him three
times either to speak or to go away."  "Ah," said the father, "I have
nothing but unhappiness with thee.  Go out of my sight.  I will see
thee no more."

"Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day.  Then will I
go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,
understand one art which will support me."  "Learn what thou wilt,"
spake the father, "it is all the same to me.  Here are fifty thalers
for thee.  Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one from
whence thou comest, and who is thy father, for I have reason to be
ashamed of thee."  "Yes, father, it small be as you will.  If you
desire nothing more than that, I can easily keep it in mind."

When day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty thalers into his
pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to
himself, "If I could but shudder!  If I could but shudder!"

Then a man approached who heard this conversation which the youth was
holding with himself, and when they had walked a little further to
where they could see the gallows, the man said to him, "Look, there is
the tree where seven men have married the ropemaker's daughter, and are
now learning how to fly.  Sit down below it, and wait till night comes,
and thou wilt soon learn how to shudder."  "If that is all that is
wanted," answered the youth, "it is easily done; but if I learn how to
shudder as quickly as that, thou shalt have my fifty thalers.  Just
come back to me early in the morning."  Then the youth went to the
gallows, sat down below it, and waited till evening came.  And as he
was cold, he lighted himself a fire, but at midnight the wind blew so
sharp that in spite of his fire he could not get warm.  And as the wind
knocked the hanged men against each other, and they moved backward and
forward, he thought to himself: "Thou shiverest below by the fire, but
how those up above must freeze and suffer!"  And as he felt pity for
them, he raised the ladder, and climbed up, unbound one of them after
the other, and brought down all seven.  Then he stirred the fire, blew
it, and set them all round it to warm themselves.  But they sat there
and did not stir, and the fire caught their clothes.  So he said:

"Take care, or I will hang you up again."  The dead men, however, did
not hear, but were quite silent, and let their rags go on burning.  On
this he grew angry, and said: "If you will not take care, I cannot help
you, I will not be burned with you, and he hung them up again each in
his turn.

Then he sat down by his fire and fell asleep, and next morning the man
came to him and wanted to have the fifty thalers, and said: "Well, dost
thou know how to shudder?"  "No," answered he, "how was I to get to
know?  Those fellows up there did not open their mouths, and were so
stupid that they let the few old rags which they had on their bodies
get burned."  Then the man saw that he would not carry away the fifty
thalers that day, and went away saying:

"One of this kind has never come in my way before."

The youth likewise went his way, and once more began to mutter to
himself: "Ah, if I could but shudder!  Ah, if I could but shudder!"  A
wagoner who was striding behind him heard that and asked: "Who art
thou?"  "I don't know," answered the youth.  Then the wagoner asked:

"From whence comest thou?"  "I know not."  "Who is thy father?"  "That
I may not tell thee."  "What is it that thou art always muttering
between thy teeth?"  "Ah," replied the youth, "I do so wish I could
shudder, but no one can teach me how to do it."  "Give up thy foolish
chatter," said the wagoner.  "Come go with me, I will see about a place
for thee."  The youth went with the wagoner, and in the evening they
arrived at an inn where they wished to pass the night.  Then at the
entrance of the room the youth again said quite loudly, "If I could but
shudder!  If I could but shudder!"  The host who heard that, laughed
and said: "If that is your desire, there ought to be a good opportunity
for you here."  "Ah, be silent," said the hostess; "so many inquisitive
persons have already lost their lives, it would be a pity and a shame
if such beautiful eyes as these should never see the daylight again."

But the youth said: "However difficult it may be, I will learn it, and
for this purpose indeed have I journeyed forth."  He let the host have
no rest, until the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a
haunted castle where any one could very easily learn what shuddering
was, if he would but watch in it for three nights.  The King had
promised that he who would venture this should have his daughter to
wife, and she was the most beautiful maiden the sun shone on.  Great
treasures likewise lay in the castle, which were guarded by evil
spirits, and these treasures would then be freed, and would make a poor
man rich enough.  Already many men had gone into the castle, but as yet
none had come out again.  Then the youth went next morning to the King,
and said that if he were allowed he would watch three nights in the
enchanted castle.  The King looked at him, and as the youth pleased
him, he said: "Thou mayst ask for three things to take into the castle
with thee, but they must be things without life."  Then he answered,
"Then I ask for a fire, a turning-lathe, and a cutting-board with the
knife."  The King had these things carried into the castle for him
during the day.  When night was drawing near, the youth went up and
made himself a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-
board and knife beside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe.
"Ah, if I could but shudder!" said he, "but I shall not learn it here
either."  Toward midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was
blowing it, something cried suddenly from one cornier, "Au, miau!  how
cold we are!"  "You simpletons!" cried he, "what are you crying about?
If you are cold, come and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves."
And when he had said that, two great black cats came with one
tremendous leap and sat down on each side of him, and looked savagely
at him with their fiery eyes.  After a short time, when they had warmed
themselves, they said: "Comrade, shall we have a game at cards?"  "Why
not?" he replied, "but just show me your paws.  Then they stretched out
their claws.  "Oh," said he, "what long nails you have!  Wait, I must
first cut them a little for you."  Thereupon he seized them by the
throats, put them on the cutting-board and screwed their feet fast.  "I
have looked at your fingers," said he, "and my fancy for card-playing
has gone, and he struck them dead and threw them out into the water.
But when he had made away with these two, and was about to sit down
again by his fire, out from every hole and corner came black cats and
black dogs with red-hot chains, and more and more of them came until he
could no longer stir, and they yelled horribly, and got on his fire,
pulled it to pieces, and wanted to put it out.  He watched them for a
while quietly, but at last when they were going too far, he seized his
cutting knife, and cried: "Away with ye, vermin," and began to cut them
down.  Part of them ran away, the others he killed, and threw out into
the fish pond.  When he came back he blew up the embers of his fire
again and warmed himself.  And as he thus sat, his eyes would keep open
no longer, and he felt a desire to sleep.  Then he looked round and saw
a great bed in the corner.  "That is the very thing for me," said he,
and got into it.  When he was just going to shut his eyes, however, the
bed began to move of its own accord, and went over the whole of the
castle.  'That's right," said he, "but go faster."  Then the bed rolled
on as if six horses were harnessed to it, up and down, over thresholds
and steps, but suddenly, hop, hop, it turned over upside down, and lay
on him like a mountain.  But he threw quilts and pillows up in the air,
got out and said: "Now any one who likes may drive," and lay down by
his fire, and slept until it was day.  In the morning the King came,
and when he saw him lying there on the ground, he thought the spirits
had killed him and he was dead.  Then said he: "After all it is a pity-
he is a handsome man."  The youth heard it, got up, and said: "It has
not come to that yet."  Then the King was astonished, but very glad,
and asked how he had fared.  "Very well indeed," answered he; "one
night is over, the two others will get over likewise."  Then he went to
the innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said: "I never
expected to see thee alive again!  Hast thou learned how to shudder
yet?"  "No," said he, "it is all in vain.  If some one would but tell
me!"

The second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the
fire, and once more began his old song: "If I could but shudder!"  When
midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard; at
first it was low, but it grew louder and louder.  Then it was quiet for
a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came down the
chimney and fell before him.  "Hollo!" cried he, "another half belongs
to this.  This is too little!"  Then the uproar began again, there was
a roaring and howling, and the other half fell down likewise.  "Wait,"
said he, "I will just blow up the fire a little for thee."  When he had
done that and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together,
and a frightful man was sitting in his place.  "That is no part of our
bargain," said the youth, "the bench is mine."  The man wanted to push
him away; the youth, however, would not allow that, but thrust him off
with all his strength, and seated himself again, in his own place.
Then still more men fell down, one after the other; they brought nine
dead men's legs and two skulls, and set them up and played at ninepins
with them.  The youth also wanted to play and said: "Hark you, can I
join you?"  "Yes, if thou hast any money."  "Money enough," replied he,
"but your balls are not quite round."  Then he took the skulls and put
them in the lathe and turned them till they were round.  "There, now,
they will roll better!" said he.  "Hurrah!  now it goes merrily!"  He
played with them and lost some of his money, but when it struck twelve,
everything vanished from his sight.  He lay down and quietly fell
asleep.  Next morning the King came to inquire after him.  "How has it
fared with thee this time?" asked he.  "I have been playing at
ninepins," he answered, "and have lost a couple of farthings."  "Hast
thou not shuddered then?"  "Eh, what?" said he, "I have made merry.  If
I did but know what it was to shudder!"

The third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly:
"If I could but shudder."  When it grew late, six tall men came in and
brought a coffin.  Then said he: "Ha, ha, that is certainly my little
cousin, who only died a few days ago," and he beckoned with his finger,
and cried: "Come, little cousin, come."  They placed the coffin on the
ground, but he went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay
therein.  He felt his face, but it was cold as ice.  "Stop," said he,
"I will warm thee a, little," and went to the fire and warmed his hand
and laid it on the dead man's face, but he remained cold.  Then he took
him out, and sat down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed
his arms that the blood might circulate again.  As this also did no
good, he thought to himself: "When two people lie in bed together, they
warm each other," and carried him to bed, covered him over and lay down
by him.  After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began to
move.  Then said the youth: "See, little cousin, have I not warmed
thee?" The dead man, however, got up and cried, "Now will I strangle
thee."

"What!" said he, "is that the way thou thankest me?  Thou shalt at once
go into thy coffin again," and he took him up, threw him into it, and
shut the lid.

Then came the six men and carried him away again.  "I cannot manage to
shudder," said he.  "I shall never learn it here as long as I live."

Then a man entered who was taller than all others, and looked terrible.
He was old, however, and had a long white beard.  "Thou wretch," cried
he, "thou shalt soon learn what it is to shudder, for thou shalt die."
"Not so fast," replied the youth, "If I am to die, I shall have to have
a say in it."  "I will soon seize thee," said the fiend.  "Softly,
softly, do not talk so big.  I am as strong as thou art, and perhaps
even stronger."  "We shall see," said the old man.  "If thou art
stronger, I will let thee go-come, we will try."  Then he led him by
dark passages to a smith's forge, took an ax, and with one blow struck
an anvil into the ground.  "I can do that better still," said the
youth, and went to the other anvil.  The old man placed himself near
and wanted to look on, and his white heard hung down.  Then the youth
seized the ax, split the anvil with one blow, and struck the old man's
beard in with it.  "Now I have thee," said the youth.  "Now it is thou
who wilt have to die."  Then he seized an iron bar and beat the old man
till he moaned and entreated him to stop, and he would give him great
riches.  The youth drew out the ax and let him go.  The old man led him
back into the castle, and in a cellar showed him three chests full of
gold.  "Of these," said he, "one part is for the poor, the other is for
the king, the third is thine."  In the meantime it struck twelve, and
the spirit disappeared; the youth, therefore, was left in darkness.  "I
shall still be able to find my way out," said he, and felt about, found
the way into the room, and slept there by his fire.  Next morning the
King came and said, "Now thou must have learned what shuddering is?"
"No," he answered; "what can it be?  My dead cousin was here, and a
bearded man came and showed me a great deal of money down below, but no
one told me what it was to shudder."  "Then," said the King, "thou hast
delivered the castle, and shalt marry my daughter."  "That is all very
well," said he, "but still I do not know what it is to shudder!"

Then the gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated; but howsoever
much the young King loved his wife, and however happy he was, he still
said always: "If I could but shudder-if I could but shudder."  And at
last she was angry at this.  Her waiting-maid said, "I will find a cure
for him; he shall soon learn what it is to shudder."  She went out to
the stream which flowed through the garden, and had a whole bucketful
of gudgeons brought to her.  At night when the young King was sleeping,
his wife was to draw the clothes off him and empty the bucketful of
cold water with the gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes
would sprawl about him.  When this was done, he woke up and cried: "Oh,
what makes me shudder so?-what makes me shudder so, dear wife?  Ah! now
I know what it is to shudder!"


AESOP'S FABLES

This has come to be the commonly accepted name for the well-known
collection of stories about animals, though we cannot be sure that any
of them, were written by the Greek slave of that name, who, Herodotus
tells us, lived about the year 55O B.C.  The fable about animals is
probably the oldest form of story known.  Its object is to teach a
lesson to men and women, without seeming to do so, and because of this
concealed lesson it has always been a great favorite with all nations.
In Russia, for example, where a man did not dare say what he thought
about a Government officer, he could tell a fable about the Dog in the
Manger.


THE TOWN MOUSE AND THE COUNTRY MOUSE

NOW you must know that a Town Mouse once upon a time went on a visit to
his cousin in the country.  He was rough and ready, this cousin, but he
loved his town friend and made him heartily welcome.  Beans and bacon,
cheese and bread, were all he had to offer, but he offered them freely.
The Town Mouse rather turned up his long nose at this country fare, and
said: "I cannot understand, Cousin, how you can put up with such poor
food as this, but of course you cannot expect anything better in the
country; come you with me and I will show you how to live.  When you
have been in town a week you will wonder how you could ever have stood
a country life."  No sooner said than done: the two mice set off for
the town and arrived at the Town Mouse's residence late at night.  "You
will want some refreshment after our long journey," said the polite
Town Mouse, and took his friend into the grand dining-room.  There they
found the remains of a fine feast, and soon the two mice were eating up
jellies and cakes and all that was nice.  Suddenly they heard growling
and barking.  "What is that?" said the Country Mouse.  "It is only the
dogs of the house," answered the other.  "Only!" said the Country
Mouse.  "I do not like that music at my dinner."  Just at that moment
the door flew open, in came two huge mastiffs, and the two mice had to
scamper down and run off.  "Good-by, Cousin," said the Country Mouse.
"What!  going so soon?" said .the other.  "Yes," he replied;

"BETTER BEANS AND BACON IN PEACE

THAN CAKES AND ALE IN FEAR."


THE MAN, THE BOY, AND DONKEY

A MAN and his son were once going with their Donkey to market.  As they
were walking along by its side a countryman passed them and said: "You
fools, what is a Donkey for but to ride upon?"

So the Man put the Boy on the Donkey and they went on their way.  But
soon they passed a group of men, one of whom said: "See that lazy
youngster, he lets his father walk while he rides."

So the Man ordered his Boy to get off, and got on himself.  But they
hadn't gone far when they passed two women, one of whom said to the
other: "Shame on that lazy lout to let his poor little son trudge
along."

Well, the Man didn't know what to do, but at last he took his Boy up
before him on the Donkey.  By this time they had come to the town, and
the passers-by began to jeer and point to them.  The Man stopped and
asked what they were scoffing at.  The men said: "Aren't you ashamed of
yourself for overloading that poor Donkey of yours-you and your hulking
son?"

The Man and Boy got off and tried to think what to do.  They thought
and they thought, till at last they cut down a pole, tied the Donkey's
feet to it, and raised the pole and the Donkey to their shoulders.
They went along amid the laughter of all who met them till they came to
Market Bridge, when the Donkey, getting one of his feet loose, kicked
out and caused the Boy to drop his end of the pole.  In the struggle
the Donkey fell over the bridge, and his fore-feet being tied together
he was drowned.

"That will teach you," said an old man who had followed them:

"PLEASE ALL, AND YOU WILL PLEASE

NONE."


THE SHEPHERD'S BOY

THERE was once a young Shepherd Boy who tended his sheep at the foot of
a mountain
near a dark forest.  It was rather lonely for him all day, so he
thought upon a plan by which he could get a little company and some
excitement.  He rushed down toward the village calling out "Wolf,
'Wolf," and the villagers came out to meet him, and some of them
stopped with him for a considerable time.

This pleased the boy so much that a few days afterward he tried the
same trick, and again the villagers came to his help.

But shortly after this a Wolf actually did come out from the forest,
and began to worry the sheep, and the boy of course cried out "Wolf,
Wolf," still louder than before.  But this time the villagers who had
been fooled twice before, thought the boy was again deceiving them, and
nobody stirred to come to bis help.

So the Wolf made a good meal off the boy's flock, and when the boy
complained, the wise man of the village said:

"A LIAR WILL NOT BE BELIEVED, EVEN

WHEN HE SPEAKS THE TRUTH."


ANDROCLES

A SLAVE named Andro