cles once escaped from his master and fled to the
forest.  As he was wandering about there he came upon a Lion lying down
moaning and groaning.

At first he turned to flee, but finding that the Lion did not pursue
him, he turned back and went up to him.

As he came near, the Lion put out his paw, which was all swollen and
bleeding, and Androcles found that a huge thorn had got into it, and
was causing all the pain.  He pulled out the thorn and bound up the paw
of the Lion, who was soon able to rise and lick the hand of Androcles
like a dog.

Then the Lion took Androcles to his cave, and every day used to bring
him meat from which to live.

But shortly afterward both Androcles and the Lion were captured, and
the slave was sentenced to be thrown to the Lion, after the latter had
been kept without food for several days.  The Emperor and all his Court
came to see the spectacle and Androcles was led out into the middle of
the arena.  Soon the Lion was let loose from his den, and rushed
bounding and roaring toward his victim.  But as soon as he came near to
Androcles he recognized his friend, and fawned upon him, and licked his
hands like a friendly dog.  The Emperor, surprised at this, summoned
Androcles to him, who told him the whole story.  Whereupon the slave
was pardoned and freed, and the Lion let loose to his native forest.

"GRATITUDE IS THE SIGN OF NOBLE SOULS."


THE FOX AND THE STORK

AT one time the Fox and the Stork were on visiting terms and seemed
very good friends.  So the Fox invited the Stork to dinner, and for a
joke put nothing before her but some soup in a very shallow dish.  This
the Fox could easily lap up, but the Stork could only wet the end of
her long bill in it, and left the meal as hungry as when she began.

"I am sorry," said the Fox, "the soup is not to your liking."

"Pray do not apologize," said the Stork.  "I hope you will return this
visit, and come and dine with me soon."

So a day was appointed when the Fox should visit the Stork; but when
they were seated at table all that was for their dinner was contained
in a very long-necked jar with a narrow mouth, in which the Fox could
not insert his snout, so all he could manage to do was to lick the
outside of the jar.

"I will not apologize for the dinner," said the Stork:

"ONE BAD TURN DESERVES ANOTHER."


THE CROW AND THE PITCHER

A CROW, half-dead with thirst, came upon a Pitcher which had once been
full of water; but when the Crow put its beak into the mouth of the
Pitcher he found that only very little water was left in it, and that
he could not reach far enough down to get at it.

He tried, and he tried, but at last had to give up in despair.

Then a thought came to him, and he took a pebble and dropped it into
the Pitcher.  Then he took another pebble and dropped it into the
Pitcher.  Then he took another pebble and dropped that into the
Pitcher.  Then he took another pebble and dropped that into the
Pitcher.  Then he took another pebble and dropped that into the
Pitcher.  Then he took another pebble and dropped that into the
Pitcher.

At last, at last, he saw the water mount up near him; and after casting
in a few more pebbles he was able to quench his thirst and save his
life.

"LITTLE BY LITTLE DOES THE TRICK."


THE FROGS DESIRING A KING

THE Frogs were living as happy as could be in a marshy swamp that just
suited them; they went splashing about caring for nobody and nobody
troubling with them.  But some of them thought that this was not right,
that they should have a King and a proper constitution, so they
determined to send up a petition to Jove to give them what they wanted.
"Mighty Jove," they cried, "send unto us a King that will rule over us
and keep us in order."  Jove laughed at their croaking, and threw down
into the swamp a huge Log, which came down-kerplash-into the swamp.
The Frogs were frightened out of their lives by the commotion made in
their midst, and all rushed to the bank to look at the horrible
monster; but after a time, seeing that it did not move, one or two of
the boldest of them ventured out toward the Log, and even dared to
touch it; still it did not move.  Then the greatest hero of the Frogs
jumped upon the Log and commenced dancing up and down upon it,
thereupon all the Frogs came and did the same; and for sometime the
Frogs went about their business every day without taking the slightest
notice of the new King Log lying in their midst.

But this did not suit them, so they sent another petition to Jove, and
said to him: "We want a real King; one that will really rule over us."
Now this made Jove angry, so he sent among them a big Stork that soon
set to work gobbling them all up.  Then the Frogs repented when too
late.

"BETTER NO RULE THAN CRUEL RULE."


THE FROG AND THE OX

"OH, FATHER," said a little Frog to the big one sitting by the side of
a pool, "I have seen such a terrible monster!  It was as big as a
mountain, with horns on its head, and a long tail, and it had hoofs
divided in two."

"Tush, child, tush," said the old Frog, "that was only Farmer White's
Ox.  It isn't so big either; he may be a little bit taller than I, but
I could easily make myself quite as broad; just you see." So he blew
himself out, and blew himself out, and blew himself out.  "Was he as
big as that?" asked he.

"Oh, much bigger than that," said the young Frog.

Again the old one blew himself out, and asked the young one if the Ox
was as big as that.

"Bigger, father, bigger," was the reply.

So the Frog took a deep breath, and blew and blew and blew, and swelled
and swelled and swelled.  And then he said: "I'm sure the Ox is not as
big as ______"  But at this moment he burst.

"SELF-CONCEIT MAY LEAD TO SELF-DESTRUCTION."


THE COCK AND THE PEARL

A COCK was once strutting up and down the farmyard among the hens when
suddenly he espied something shining and the straw.  "Ho! ho!" quoth
he, "that's for me," and soon rooted it out from beneath the straw.
What did it turn out to be but a Pearl that by some chance had been
lost in the yard?  "You may be a treasure," quoth Master Cock, "to men
that prize you, but for me I would rather have a single barley corn
than a peck of pearls."

"PRECIOUS THINGS ARE FOR THOSE THAT CAN PRIZE THEM."


THE FOX WITHOUT A TAIL

IT happened that a Fox caught its tail in a trap, and in struggling to
release himself lost all of it but the stump.  At first he was ashamed
to show himself among his fellow foxes.  But at last he determined to
put a bolder face upon his misfortune, and summoned all the foxes to a
general meeting to consider a proposal which he had to place before
them.

When they had assembled together the Fox proposed that they should all
do away with their tails.  He pointed out how inconvenient a tail was
when they were pursued by their enemies, the dogs; how much it was in
the way when they desired to sit down and hold a friendly conversation
with one another.  He failed to see any advantage in carrying about
such a useless encumbrance.

"That is all very well," said one of the older foxes; "but I do not
think you would have recommended us to dispense with our chief ornament
if you had not happened to lose it yourself."

"DISTRUST INTERESTED ADVICE."


THE FOX AND THE CAT

A FOX was boasting to a Cat of its clever devices for escaping its
enemies.  "I have a whole bag of tricks," he said, "which contains a
hundred ways of escaping my enemies."

"I have only one," said the Cat; "but I can generally manage with
that."  Just at that moment they heard the cry of a pack of hounds
coming toward them, and the Cat immediately scampered up a tree and hid
herself in the boughs.  "This is my plan," said the Cat.  "What are you
going to do?"  The Fox thought first of one way, then of another, and
while he was debating the hounds came nearer and nearer, and at last
the Fox in his confusion was caught up by the hounds and soon killed by
the huntsmen.  Miss Puss, who had been looking on, said:

"BETTER ONE SAFE WAY THAN A HUNDRED

ON WHICH YOU CANNOT

RECKON."


THE DOG IN THE MANGER
A DOG looking out for its afternoon nap jumped into the Manger of an Ox
and lay there cosily upon the straw.  But soon the Ox, returning from
its afternoon work, came up to the Manger and wanted to eat some of the
straw.  The Dog in a rage, being awakened from its slumber, stood up
and barked at the Ox, and whenever it came near attempted to bite it.
At last the Ox had to give up the hope of getting at the straw, and
went away muttering:

"AH, PEOPLE OFTEN GRUDGE OTHERS

WHAT THEY CANNOT ENJOY

THEMSELVES."


THE FOX AND THE GOAT

By an unlucky chance a Fox fell into a deep well from which he could
not get out.  A Goat passed by shortly afterward, and asked the Fox
what he was doing down there.  "Oh, have you not heard?" said the Fox;
"there is going to be a great drought, so I jumped down here in order
to be sure to have water by me.  Why don't you come down, too?"  The
Goat thought well of this advice, and jumped down into the well.  But
the Fox immediately jumped on her back, and by putting his foot on her
long horns managed to jump up to the edge of the well.  "Good-by,
friend," said the Fox ;-"remember next time,

"NEVER TRUST THE ADVICE OF A MAN

IN DIFFICULTIES."


BELLING THE CAT

LONG ago, the mice held a general council to consider what measures
they could take to outwit their common enemy, the Cat.  Some said this,
and some said that; but at last a young mouse got up and said he had a
proposal to make, which he thought would meet the case.  "You will all
agree," said he, "that our chief danger consists in the sly and
treacherous manner in which the enemy approaches us.  Now, if we could
receive some signal of her approach, we could easily escape from her.
I venture, therefore, to propose that a small bell be procured, and
attached by a ribbon round the neck of the Cat.  By this means we
should always know when she was about, and could easily retire while
she was in the neighborhood."

This proposed met with general applause, until an old mouse got up and
said: "That is all very well, but who is to bell the Cat?"  The mice
looked at one another and nobody spoke.  Then the old mouse said:

"IT IS EASY TO PROPOSE IMPOSSIBLE

REMEDIES."


THE JAY AND THE PEACOCK

A JAY venturing into a yard where Peacocks used to walk, found there a
number of feathers which had fallen from the Peacocks when they were
moulting.  He tied them all to his tail and strutted down toward the
Peacocks.  When he came near them they soon discovered the cheat, and
striding up to him pecked at him and plucked away his borrowed plumes.
So the Jay could do no better than go back to the other Jays, who had
watched his behavior from a distance; but they were equally annoyed
with him, and told him

"IT IS NOT ONLY FINE FEATHERS THAT

MAKE FINE BIRDS."


THE ASS AND THE LAP-DOG

A FARMER one day came to the stables to see to his beasts of burden:
among them was his favorite Ass, that was always well fed and often
carried his master.  With the Farmer came his Lap-dog, who danced about
and licked his hand and frisked about as happy as could be.  The Farmer
felt in his pocket, gave the Lap-dog some dainty food, and sat down
while he gave his orders to his servants.  The Lap-dog jumped into his
master's lap, and lay there blinking while the Farmer stroked his ears.
The Ass, seeing this, broke loose from his halter and commenced
prancing about in imitation of the Lap-dog.  The Farmer could not hold
his sides with laughter, so the Ass went up to him, and putting his
feet upon the Farmer's shoulder attempted to climb into his lap.  The
Farmer's servants rushed up with sticks and pitchforks and soon taught
the Ass that

"CLUMSY JESTING IS NO JOKE."


THE ANT AND THE GRASSHOPPER

IN a field one summer's day a Grasshopper was hopping about, chirping
and singing to its heart's content.  An Ant passed by, bearing along
with great toil an ear of corn he was taking to the nest.

"Why not come and chat with me," said the Grasshopper, "instead of
toiling and moiling in that way?"

"I am helping to lay up food for the winter," said the Ant, "and
recommend you to do the same."

"Why bother about winter?"  said the Grasshopper; "we have got plenty
of food at present."

But the Ant went on its way and continued its toil.

Then the winter came the Grasshopper had no food, and found itself
dying of hunger, while it saw the ants distributing every day corn and
grain from the stores they had collected in the summer.  Then the
Grasshopper knew

IT IS BEST TO PREPARE FOR THE DAYS

OF NECESSITY.


THE WOODMAN AND THE SERPENT

ONE wintry day a Woodman was tramping home from his work when he saw
something black lying on the snow.  When he came closer, he saw it was
a Serpent to all appearance dead.  But he took it up and put it in his
bosom to warm while he hurried home.  As soon as he got indoors he put
the Serpent down on the hearth before the fire.  The children watched
it and saw it slowly come to life again.  Then one of them stooped down
to stroke it, but the Serpent raised its head and put out its fangs and
was about to sting the child to death.  So the Woodman seized his axe,
and with one stroke cut the Serpent in two.  "Ah," said he,

"NO GRATITUDE FROM THE WICKED."


THE MILKMAID AND HER PAIL

PATTY, the Milkmaid, was going to market carrying her milk in a Pail on
her head.  As she went along she began calculating what she would do
with the money she would get for the milk.  "I'll buy some fowls from
Farmer Brown," said she, "and they will lay eggs each morning, which I
will sell to the parson's wife.  With the money that I get from the
sale of these eggs I'll buy myself a new dimity frock and a chip hat;
and when I go to market, won't all the young men come up and speak to
me!  Polly Shaw will be that jealous; but I don't care.  I shall just
look at her and toss my head like this."  As she spoke, she tossed her
head back, the Pail fell off it and all the milk was spilt.  So she had
to go home and tell her mother what had occurred.
"Ah, my child," said her mother,

DO NOT COUNT YOUR CHICKENS BEFORE

THEY ARE HATCHED.


THE LION AND THE MOUSE

ONCE when a Lion was asleep a little Mouse began running up and down
upon him; this soon wakened the Lion, who placed his huge paw upon him,
and opened his big jaws to swallow him.  "Pardon, O King," cried the
little Mouse; "forgive me this time, I shall never forget it: who knows
but what I may be able to do you a turn some of these days?"  The Lion
was so tickled at the idea of the Mouse being able to help him, that he
lifted up his paw and let him go.  Some time after the Lion was caught
in a trap, and the hunters, who desired to carry him alive to the King,
tied him to a tree while they went in search of a wagon to carry him
on.  Just then the little Mouse happened to pass by, and seeing the sad
plight in which the Lion was, went up to him and soon gnawed away the
ropes that bound the King of the Beasts.  "Was I not right?" said the
little Mouse.

"LITTLE FRIENDS MAY PROVE GREAT

FRIENDS."


HERCULES AND THE WAGONER

A WAGONER was once driving a heavy load along a very muddy way.  At
last he came to a part of the road where the wheels sank halfway into
the mire, and the more the horses pulled, the deeper sank the wheels.
So the Wagoner threw down his whip, and knelt down and prayed to
Hercules the Strong.  "O Hercules, help me in this my hour of
distress," quote he.  But Hercules appeared to him, and said:

"Tut, man, don't sprawl there.  Get up and put your shoulder to the
wheel."

"THE GODS HELP THEM THAT HELP

THEMSELVES."


THE LION'S SHARE

THE Lion went once a-hunting along with the Fox, the Jackal, and the
Wolf.  They hunted and they hunted till at last they surprised a Stag,
and soon took its life.  Then came the question how the spoil should be
divided.  "Quarter me this Stag," roared the Lion; so the other animals
skinned it and cut it into four parts.  Then the Lion took his stand in
front of the carcass and pronounced judgment: "The first quarter is for
me in my capacity as King of Beasts; the second is mine as arbiter;
another share comes to me for my part in the chase; and as far the
fourth quarter, well, as for that, I should like to see which of you
will dare to lay a paw upon it."

"Humph !" grumbled the Fox as he walked away with his tail between his
legs; but he spoke in a low growl-

"YOU MAY SHARE THE LABORS OF THE

GREAT, BUT YOU WILL NOT SHARE

THE SPOIL."


THE FOX AND THE CROW

A FOX once saw a Crow fly off with a piece of cheese in its beak and
settle on a branch of a tree.  "That's for me, as I am a Fox," said
Master Reynard, and he walked up to the foot of the tree.  "Good-day,
Mistress Crow," he cried.  "How well you are looking to-day: how glossy
your feathers; how bright your eye.  I feel sure your voice must
surpass that of other birds, just as your figure does; let me hear but
one song from you that I may greet you as the Queen of Birds."  The
Crow lifted up her head and began to caw her best, but the moment she
opened her mouth the piece of cheese fell to the ground, only to be
snapped up by Master Fox.  "That will do," said he.  "That was all I
wanted.  In exchange for your cheese I will give you a piece of advice
for the future-

"DO NOT TRUST FLATTERERS.


THE DOG AND THE SHADOW

IT happened that a Dog had got a piece of meat and was carrying it home
in his mouth to eat it in peace.  Now on his way home he had to cross a
plank lying across a running brook.  As he crossed, he looked down and
saw his own shadow reflected in the water beneath.  Thinking it was
another dog with another piece of meat, he made up his mind to have
that also.  So he made a snap at the shadow in the water, but as he
opened his mouth the piece of meat fell out, dropped into the water and
was never seen more.

"BEWARE LEST YOU LOSE THE SUBSTANCE

BY GRASPING AT THE SHADOW."


THE WOLF AND THE LAMB

ONCE upon a time a Wolf was lapping at a spring on a hillside, when,
looking up, what should he see but a Lamb just beginning to drink a
little lower down.  "There's my supper," thought he, "if only I can
find some excuse to seize it."  Then he called out to the Lamb, "How
dare you muddle the water from which I am drinking?"

"Nay, master, nay," said Lambikin; "if the water be muddy up there, I
cannot be the cause of it, for it runs down from you to me."

"Well, then," said the Wolf, "why did you call me bad names this time
last year?"

"That cannot be," said the Lamb; "I am only six months old."

"I don't care," snarled the Wolf; "if it was not you it was your
father;" and with that he rushed upon the poor little Lamb and-

WARRA WARRA WARRA WARRA WARRA-

ate her all up.  But before- she died she gasped out-

"ANY EXCUSE WILL SERVE A TYRANT."


THE BAT, THE BIRDS, AND THE BEASTS

A GREAT conflict was about to come off between the Birds and the
Beasts.  When the two armies were collected together the Bat hesitated
which to join.  The Birds that passed his perch said: "Come with us;"
but he said: "I am a Beast."  Later on, some Beasts who were passing
underneath him looked up and said: "Come with us;" but he said: "I am a
Bird."  Luckily at the last moment peace was made, and no battle took
place, so the Bat came to the Birds and wished to join in the
rejoicings, but they all turned against him and he had to fly away.  He
then went to the Beasts, but soon had to beat a retreat, or else they
would have torn him to pieces.  "Ah," said the Bat, "I see now

HE THAT IS NEITHER ONE THING NOR

THE OTHER HAS NO FRIENDS."


THE BELLY AND THE MEMBERS

ONE fine day it occurred to the Members of the Body that they were
doing all the work and the Belly was having all the food.  So they held
a meeting, and after a long discussion, decided to strike work till the
Belly consented to take its proper share of the work.  So for a day or
two the Hands refused to take the food, the Mouth refused to receive
it, and the Teeth had no work to do.  But after a day or two the
Members began to find that they themselves were not in a very active
condition: the Hands could hardly move, and the Mouth was all parched
and dry, while the Legs were unable to support the rest.  So thus they
found that even the Belly in its dull quiet way was doing necessary
work for the Body, and that all must work together or the Body will go
to pieces.


THE FOX AND THE GRAPES

ONE hot summer's day a Fox was strolling through an orchard till he
came to a bunch of Grapes just ripening on a vine which had been
trained over a lofty branch.  "Just the thing to quench my thirst,"
quoth he.  Drawing back a few paces, he took a run and a jump, and just
missed the bunch.  Turning round again with a One, Two, Three, he
jumped up, but with no greater success.  Again and again he tried after
the tempting morsel, but at last had to give it up, and walked away
with his nose in the air, saying: "I am sure they are sour."

"IT IS EASY TO DESPISE WHAT YOU

CANNOT GET."


THE SWALLOW AND THE OTHER BIRDS

IT happened that a Countryman was sowing some hemp seed in a field
where a Swallow and some other birds were hopping about picking up
their food.  "Beware of that man," quoth the Swallow.  "Why, what is he
doing?" said the others.  "That is hemp seed he is sowing; be careful
to pick up every one of the seeds, or else you will repent it."  The
birds paid no heed to the Swallow's words, and by and by the hemp grew
up and was made into cord, and of the cords nets were made, and many a
bird that had despised the Swallow's advice was caught in nets made out
of that very hemp.  "What did I tell you?" said the Swallow.

"DESTROY THE SEED OF EVIL, OR IT

WILL GROW UP TO YOUR RUIN."










This etext was produced by Douglas E. Levy.





TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

  "Sunrise" is an elegy to James A. Garfield, 20th President of
  the United States, who died on September 19, 1881, from a gunshot
  wound received in an assassination attempt in July of that year.

  "The New Colossus" is engraved on the pedestal of the Statue of Liberty.





THE POEMS of EMMA LAZARUS

in Two Volumes

VOL. I.

Narrative, Lyric, and dramatic




CONTENTS.




BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF EMMA LAZARUS.


EPOCHS.--

     I. Youth.
    II. Regret.
   III. Longing.
    IV. Storm.
     V. Surprise.
    VI. Grief.
   VII. Acceptance.
  VIII. Loneliness.
    IX. Sympathy.
     X. Patience.
    XI. Hope.
   XII. Compensation.
  XIII. Faith.
   XIV. Work.
    XV. Victory.
   XVI. Peace.

HOW LONG!
HEROES.
ADMETUS.
TANNHAUSER.
LINKS.
MATINS.
SAINT ROMUALDO.
AFTERNOON.

PHANTASIES.--

     I. Evening.
    II. Aspiration.
   III. Wherefore?
    IV. Fancies.
     V. In the Night.
    VI. Faerie.
   VII. Confused Dreams.

ON THE PROPOSAL TO ERECT A MONUMENT IN ENGLAND TO LORD BYRON.
ARABESQUE.
AGAMEMNON'S TOMB.
SIC SEMPER LIBERATORIBUS.
DON RAFAEL.
OFF ROUGH POINT
MATER AMABILIS.
FOG.
THE ELIXIR.
SONG.
SPRING LONGING.
Spring Longing.
THE SOUTH.
SPRING STAR.
A JUNE NIGHT.
MAGNETISM
AUGUST MOON.
SUNRISE.
A MASQUE OF VENICE.
AUTUMN SADNESS.

SONNETS.

     Echoes.
     Success.
     The New Colossus.
     Chopin I., II., III., IV.
     Symphonic Studies  Prelude, I., II., III., IV., V., VI.,
          Epilogue.
     Long Island Sound.
     Destiny.
     1879.
     From one Augur to Another.
     The Cranes of Ibycus.
     Critic and Poet.
     St. Michael's Chapel.
     Life and Art.
     Sympathy.
     Youth and Death.
     Age and Death.
     City Visions.
     Influence.
     Restlessness.

THE SPAGNOLETTO: A Play in Five Acts.




  Publisher's note: Thanks are due to the Editors of "The Century,"
  Lippincott's Magazine, and "The Critic," for their courtesy in
  allowing the poems published by them to be reprinted in these
  pages.






          EMMA LAZARUS. (Written for "The Century Magazine")


             Born July 22, 1849; Died November 19, 1887.



One hesitates to lift the veil and throw the light upon a life so
hidden and a personality so withdrawn as that of Emma Lazarus; but
while her memory is fresh, and the echo of her songs still lingers
in these pages, we feel it a duty to call up her presence once more,
and to note the traits that made it remarkable and worthy to shine
out clearly before the world.  Of dramatic episode or climax in her
life there is none; outwardly all was placid and serene, like an
untroubled stream whose depths alone hold the strong, quick tide.
The story of her life is the story of a mind, of a spirit, ever
seeking, ever striving, and pressing onward and upward to new truth
and light.  Her works are the mirror of this progress.  In reviewing
them, the first point that strikes us is the precocity, or rather
the spontaneity, of her poetic gift.  She was a born singer; poetry
was her natural language, and to write was less effort than to speak,
for she was a shy, sensitive child, with strange reserves and
reticences, not easily putting herself "en rapport" with those around
her.  Books were her world from her earliest years; in them she
literally lost and found herself.  She was eleven years old when the
War of Succession broke out, which inspired her first lyric outbursts.
Her poems and translations written between the ages of fourteen and
seventeen were collected, and constituted her first published volume.
Crude and immature as these productions naturally were, and utterly
condemned by the writer's later judgment, they are, nevertheless,
highly interesting and characteristic, giving, as they do, the
keynote of much that afterwards unfolded itself in her life.  One
cannot fail to be rather painfully impressed by the profound
melancholy pervading the book.  The opening poem is "In Memoriam,"--
on the death of a school friend and companion; and the two following
poems also have death for theme.  "On a Lock of my Mother's Hair"
gives
us reflections on growing old.  These are the four poems written at
the age of fourteen.  There is not a wholly glad and joyous strain in
the volume, and we might smile at the recurrence of broken vows,
broken hearts, and broken lives in the experience of this maiden just
entered upon her teens, were it not that the innocent child herself
is in such deadly earnest.  The two long narrative poems, "Bertha" and
"Elfrida," are tragic in the extreme.  Both are dashed off apparently
at white heat: "Elfrida," over fifteen hundred lines of blank verse,
in two weeks; "Bertha," in three and a half.  We have said that Emma
Lazarus was a born singer, but she did not sing, like a bird, for
joy of being alive; and of being young, alas! there is no hint in
these youthful effusions, except inasmuch as this unrelieved gloom,
this ignorance of "values," so to speak, is a sign of youth, common
especially among gifted persons of acute and premature sensibilities,
whose imagination, not yet focused by reality, overreached the mark.
With Emma Lazarus, however, this sombre streak has a deeper root;
something of birth and temperament is in it--the stamp and heritage
of a race born to suffer.  But dominant and fundamental though it was,
Hebraism was only latent thus far.  It was classic and romantic art
that first attracted and inspired her.  She pictures Aphrodite the
beautiful, arising from the waves, and the beautiful Apollo and his
loves,--Daphne, pursued by the god, changing into the laurel, and the
enamored Clytie into the faithful sunflower.  Beauty, for its own
sake, supreme and unconditional, charmed her primarily and to the end.
Her restless spirit found repose in the pagan idea,--the absolute
unity and identity of man with nature, as symbolized in the Greek
myths, where every natural force becomes a person, and where, in turn,
persons pass with equal readiness and freedom back into nature again.

In this connection a name would suggest itself even if it did not
appear,--Heine, the Greek, Heine the Jew, Heine the Romanticist, as
Emma Lazarus herself has styled him; and already in this early volume
of hers we have trace of the kinship and affinity that afterwards so
plainly declared itself.  Foremost among the translations are a
number of his songs, rendered with a finesse and a literalness that
are rarely combined.  Four years later, at the age of twenty-one,
she published her second volume, "Admetus and Other Poems," which
at once took rank as literature both in America and England, and
challenged comparison with the work of established writers.  Of
classic themes we have "Admetus" and "Orpheus," and of romantic the
legend of Tannhauser and of the saintly Lohengrin.  All are treated
with an artistic finish that shows perfect mastery of her craft,
without detracting from the freshness and flow of her inspiration.
While sounding no absolutely new note in the world, she yet makes
us aware of a talent of unusual distinction, and a highly endowed
nature,--a sort of tact of sentiment and expression, an instinct
of the true and beautiful, and that quick intuition which is like
second-sight in its sensitiveness to apprehend and respond to external
stimulus.  But it is not the purely imaginative poems in this volume
that most deeply interest us.  We come upon experience of life in
these pages; not in the ordinary sense, however, of outward activity
and movement, but in the hidden undercurrent of being.  "The epochs
of our life are not in the visible facts, but in the silent thoughts
by the wayside as we walk."  This is the motto, drawn from Emerson,
which she chooses for her poem of "Epochs," which marks a pivotal
moment in her life.  Difficult to analyze, difficult above all to
convey, if we would not encroach upon the domain of private and
personal experience, is the drift of this poem, or rather cycle of
poems, that ring throughout with a deeper accent and a more direct
appeal than has yet made itself felt.  It is the drama of the human
soul,--"the mystic winged and flickering butterfly," "flitting
between earth and sky," in its passage from birth to death.

A golden morning of June!  "Sweet empty sky without a stain."
Sunlight and mist and "ripple of rain-fed rills."  "A murmur and a
singing manifold."


            "What simple things be these the soul to raise
             To bounding joy, and make young pulses beat
             With nameless pleasure, finding life so sweet!"


Such is youth, a June day, fair and fresh and tender with dreams and
longing and vague desire. The morn lingers and passes, but the noon
has not reached its height before the clouds begin to rise, the
sunshine dies, the air grows thick and heavy, the lightnings flash,
the thunder breaks among the hills, rolls and gathers and grows,
until


                   Behold, yon bolt struck home,
             And over ruined fields the storm hath come."


Now we have the phases of the soul,--the shock and surprise of grief
in the face of the world made desolate.  Loneliness and despair for
a space, and then, like stars in the night, the new births of the
spirit, the wonderful outcoming from sorrow: the mild light of
patience
at first; hope and faith kindled afresh in the very jaws of evil;
the new meaning and worth of life beyond sorrow, beyond joy; and
finally duty, the holiest word of all, that leads at last to victory
and peace.  The poem rounds and completes itself with the close of
"the long, rich day," and the release of


           "The mystic winged and flickering butterfly,
            A human soul, that drifts at liberty,
            Ah! who can tell to what strange paradise,
            To what undreamed-of fields and lofty skies!"


We have dwelt at some length upon this poem, which seems to us, in a
certain sense, subjective and biographical; but upon closer analysis
there is still another conclusion to arrive at.  In "Epochs" we have,
doubtless, the impress of a calamity brought very near to the writer,
and profoundly working upon her sensibilities; not however by direct,
but reflex action, as it were, and through sympathetic emotion--the
emotion of the deeply-stirred spectator, of the artist, the poet who
lives in the lives of others, and makes their joys and their sorrows
his own.

Before dismissing this volume we may point out another clue as to the
shaping of mind and character.  The poem of "Admetus" is dedicated
"to my friend Ralph Waldo Emerson."  Emma Lazarus was between
seventeen and eighteen years of age when the writings of Emerson
fell into her hands, and it would be difficult to over-estimate the
impression produced upon her.  As she afterwards wrote: "To how many
thousand youthful hearts has not his word been the beacon--nay,
more, the guiding star--that led them safely through periods of
mental storm and struggle!"  Of no one is this more true than herself.
Left, to a certain extent, without compass or guide, without any
positive or effective religious training, this was the first great
moral revelation of her life.  We can easily realize the chaos and
ferment of an over-stimulated brain, steeped in romantic literature,
and given over to the wayward leadings of the imagination.  Who can
tell what is true, what is false, in a world where fantasy is as real
as fact?  Emerson's word fell like truth itself, "a shaft of light
shot from the zenith," a golden rule of thought and action.  His
books were bread and wine to her, and she absorbed them into her
very being.  She felt herself invincibly drawn to the master, "that
fount of wisdom and goodness," and it was her great privilege during
these years to be brought into personal relations with him.  From
the first he showed her a marked interest and sympathy, which became
for her one of the most valued possessions of her life.  He criticised
her work with the fine appreciation and discrimination that made
him quick to discern the quality of her talent as well as of her
personality, and he was no doubt attracted by her almost transparent
sincerity and singleness of soul, as well as by the simplicity and
modesty that would have been unusual even in a person not gifted.
He constituted himself, in a way, her literary mentor, advised her
as to the books she should read and the attitude of mind she should
cultivate.  For some years he corresponded with her very faithfully;
his letters are full of noble and characteristic utterances, and
give evidence of a warm regard that in itself was a stimulus and a
high incentive.  But encouragement even from so illustrious a source
failed to elate the young poetess, or even to give her a due sense
of the importance and value of her work, or the dignity of her
vocation.  We have already alluded to her modesty in her unwillingness
to assert herself or claim any prerogative,--something even morbid
and exaggerated, which we know not how to define, whether as over-
sensitiveness or indifference.  Once finished, the heat and glow of
composition spent, her writings apparently ceased to interest her.
She often resented any allusion to them on the part of intimate
friends, and the public verdict as to their excellence could not
reassure or satisfy her.  The explanation is not far, perhaps, to
seek.  Was it not the "Ewig-Weibliche" that allows no prestige but
its own?  Emma Lazarus was a true woman, too distinctly feminine to
wish to be exceptional, or to stand alone and apart, even by virtue
of superiority.

A word now as to her life and surroundings.  She was one of a family
of seven, and her parents were both living.  Her winters were passed
in New York, and her summers by the sea.  In both places her life was
essentially quiet and retired.  The success of her book had been
mainly in the world of letters.  In no wise tricked out to catch the
public eye, her writings had not yet made her a conspicuous figure,
but were destined slowly to take their proper place and give her the
rank that she afterwards held.

For some years now almost everything that she wrote was published
in "Lippincott's Magazine," then edited by John Foster Kirk, and we
shall still find in her poems the method and movement of her life.
Nature is still the fount and mirror, reflecting, and again reflected,
in the soul.  We have picture after picture, almost to satiety,
until we grow conscious of a lack of substance and body and of vital
play to the thought, as though the brain were spending itself in
dreamings and reverie, the heart feeding upon itself, and the life
choked by its own fullness without due outlet.  Happily, however,
the heavy cloud of sadness has lifted, and we feel the subsidence
of waves after a storm.  She sings "Matins:"--


                  "Does not the morn break thus,
                   Swift, bright, victorious,
                   With new skies cleared for us
                   Over the soul storm-tost?
                   Her night was long and deep,
                   Strange visions vexed her sleep,
                   Strange sorrows bade her weep,
                   Her faith in dawn was lost.


                  "No halt, no rest for her,
                   The immortal wanderer
                   From sphere to higher sphere
                   Toward the pure source of day.
                   The new light shames her fears,
                   Her faithlessness and tears,
                   As the new sun appears
                   To light her god-like way."


Nature is the perpetual resource and consolation. "'T is good to be
alive!" she says, and why?  Simply,


                            "To see the light
            That plays upon the grass, to feel (and sigh
            With perfect pleasure) the mild breeze stir
              Among the garden roses, red and white,
                With whiffs of fragrancy."


She gives us the breath of the pines and of the cool, salt seas,
"illimitably sparkling."  Her ears drink the ripple of the tide,
and she stops


        "To gaze as one who is not satisfied
         With gazing at the large, bright, breathing sea."


"Phantasies" (after Robert Schumann) is the most complete and perfect
poem of this period.  Like "Epochs," it is a cycle of poems, and the
verse has caught the very trick of music,--alluring, baffling, and
evasive.  This time we have the landscape of the night, the glamour
of moon and stars,--pictures half real and half unreal, mystic
imaginings, fancies, dreams, and the enchantment of "faerie," and
throughout the unanswered cry, the eternal "Wherefore" of destiny.
Dawn ends the song with a fine clear note, the return of day, night's
misty phantoms rolled away, and the world itself, again green,
sparkling and breathing freshness.

In 1874 she published "Alide," a romance in prose drawn from Goethe's
autobiography.  It may be of interest to quote the letter she
received from Tourgeneff on this occasion:--


    "Although, generally speaking, I do not think it advisable
    to take celebrated men, especially poets and artists, as a
    subject for a novel, still I am truly glad to say that I
    have read your book with the liveliest interest.  It is
    very sincere and very poetical at the same time; the life
    and spirit of Germany have no secrets for you, and your
    characters are drawn with a pencil as delicate as it is
    strong.  I feel very proud of the approbation you give to
    my works, and of the influence you kindly attribute to them
    on your own talent; an author who write as you do is not
    a pupil in art any more; he is not far from being himself
    a master."


Charming and graceful words, of which the young writer was justly
proud.

About this time occurred the death of her mother, the first break in
the home and family circle.  In August of 1876 she made a visit to
Concord, at the Emersons', memorable enough for her to keep a journal
and note down every incident and detail.  Very touching to read now,
in its almost childlike simplicity, is this record of "persons that
pass and shadows that remain."  Mr. Emerson himself meets her at the
station, and drives with her in his little one-horse wagon to his
home, the gray square house, with dark green blinds, set amidst noble
trees.  A glimpse of the family,--"the stately, white-haired Mrs.
Emerson, and the beautiful, faithful Ellen, whose figure seems always
to stand by the side of her august father."  Then the picture of
Concord itself, lovely and smiling, with its quiet meadows, quiet
slopes, and quietest of rivers.  She meets the little set of Concord
people: Mr. Alcott, for whom she does not share Mr. Emerson's
enthusiasm; and William Ellery Channing, whose figure stands out like
a gnarled and twisted scrub-oak,--a pathetic, impossible creature,
whose cranks and oddities were submitted to on account of an innate
nobility of character.  "Generally crabbed and reticent with
strangers, he took a liking to me," says Emma Lazarus.  "The bond
of our sympathy was my admiration for Thoreau, whose memory he
actually worships, having been his constant companion in his best
days, and his daily attendant in the last years of illness and heroic
suffering.  I do not know whether I was most touched by the thought
of the unique, lofty character that had inspired this depth and
fervor of friendship, or by the pathetic constancy and pure affection
of the poor, desolate old man before me, who tried to conceal his
tenderness and sense of irremediable loss by a show of gruffness and
philosophy.  He never speaks of Thoreau's death," she says, "but
always 'Thoreau's loss,' or 'when I lost Mr. Thoreau,' or 'when Mr.
Thoreau went away from Concord;' nor would he confess that he missed
him, for there was not a day, an hour, a moment, when he did not
feel that his friend was still with him and had never left him.  And
yet a day or two after," she goes on to say, "when I sat with him in
the sunlit wood, looking at the gorgeous blue and silver summer sky,
he turned to me and said: 'Just half of the world died for me when I
lost Mr. Thoreau.  None of it looks the same as when I looked at it
with him.'. . . He took me through the woods and pointed out to me
every spot visited and described by his friend.  Where the hut stood
is a little pile of stones, and a sign, 'Site of Thoreau's Hut,' and
a few steps beyond is the pond with thickly-wooded shore,--everything
exquisitely peaceful and beautiful in the afternoon light, and not
a sound to be heard except the crickets or the 'z-ing' of the locusts
which Thoreau has described.  Farther on he pointed out to me, in
the distant landscape, a low roof, the only one visible, which was
the roof of Thoreau's birthplace.  He had been over there many times,
he said, since he lost Mr. Thoreau, but had never gone in,--he was
afraid it might look lonely!  But he had often sat on a rock in
front of the house and looked at it."  On parting from his young
friend, Mr. Channing gave her a package, which proved to be a copy
of his own book on Thoreau, and the pocket compass which Thoreau
carried to the Maine woods and on all his excursions.  Before leaving
the Emersons she received the proof-sheets of her drama of "The
Spagnoletto," which was being printed for private circulation.  She
showed them to Mr. Emerson, who had expressed a wish to see them,
and, after reading them, he gave them back to her with the comment
that they were "good."  She playfully asked him if he would not give
her a bigger word to take home to the family.  He laughed, and said
he did not know of any; but he went on to tell her that he had
taken it up, not expecting to read it through, and had not been able
to put it down.  Every word and line told of richness in the poetry,
he said, and as far as he could judge the play had great dramatic
opportunities.  Early in the autumn "The Spagnoletto" appeared,--a
tragedy in five acts, the scene laid in Italy, 1655.

Without a doubt, every one in these days will take up with misgiving,
and like Mr. Emerson "not expecting to read it through," a five-act
tragedy of the seventeenth century, so far removed apparently from
the age and present actualities,--so opposed to the "Modernite,"
which has come to be the last word of art.  Moreover, great names at
once appear; great shades arise to rebuke the presumptuous new-comer
in this highest realm of expression.  "The Spagnoletto" has grave
defects that would probably preclude its ever being represented on
the stage.  The denoument especially is unfortunate, and sins against
our moral and aesthetic instinct.  The wretched, tiger-like father
stabs himself in the presence of his crushed and erring daughter, so
that she may forever be haunted by the horror and the retribution of
his death.  We are left suspended, as it were, over an abyss, our
moral judgment thwarted, our humanity outraged.  But "The Spagnoletto"
is, nevertheless, a remarkable production, and pitched in another
key from anything the writer has yet given us.  Heretofore we have
only had quiet, reflective, passive emotion: now we have a storm
and sweep of passion for which we were quite unprepared. Ribera's
character is charged like a thunder-cloud with dramatic elements.
Maria Rosa is the child of her father, fired at a flash, "deaf, dumb,
and blind" at the touch of passion.


              "Does love steal gently o'er our soul?"

she asks;


                        "What if he come,
                 A cloud, a fire, a whirlwind?"

and then the cry:


                           "O my God!
            This awful joy in mine own heart is love."

Again:


           "While you are here the one thing real to me
            In all the universe is love."


Exquisitely tender and refined are the love scenes--at the ball and
in the garden--between the dashing prince-lover in search of his
pleasure and the devoted girl with her heart in her eyes, on her
lips, in her hand.  Behind them, always like a tragic fate, the
somber figure of the Spagnoletto, and over all the glow and color
and soul of Italy.

In 1881 appeared the translation of Heine's poems and ballads, which
was generally accepted as the best version of that untranslatable
poet.  Very curious is the link between that bitter, mocking, cynic
spirit and the refined, gentle spirit of Emma Lazarus.  Charmed by
the magic of his verse, the iridescent play of his fancy, and the
sudden cry of the heart piercing through it all, she is as yet unaware
or only vaguely conscious of the of the real bond between them: the
sympathy in the blood, the deep, tragic, Judaic passion of eighteen
hundred years that was smouldering in her own heart, soon to break
out and change the whole current of thought and feeling.

Already, in 1879, the storm was gathering.  In a distant province
of Russia at first, then on the banks of the Volga, and finally in
Moscow itself, the old cry was raised, the hideous mediaeval charge
revived, and the standard of persecution unfurled against the Jews.
Province after province took it up.  In Bulgaria, Servia, and, above
all, Roumania, where, we were told, the sword of the Czar had been
drawn to protect the oppressed, Christian atrocities took the place
of Moslem atrocities, and history turned a page backward into the dark
annals of violence and crime.  And not alone in despotic Russia, but
in Germany, the seat of modern philosophic thought and culture, the
rage of Anti-Semitism broke out and spread with fatal ease and
potency.
In Berlin itself tumults and riots were threatened.  We in America
could scarcely comprehend the situation or credit the reports, and
for a while we shut our eyes and ears to the facts; but we were soon
rudely awakened from our insensibility, and forced to face the truth.
It was in England that the voice was first raised in behalf of
justice and humanity.  In January, 1881, there appeared in the
"London Times" a series of articles, carefully compiled on the
testimony of eye-witnesses, and confirmed by official documents,
records, etc., giving an account of events that had been taking place
in southern and western Russia during a period of nine months,
between April and December of 1880.  We do not need to recall the
sickening details.  The headings will suffice: outrage, murder, arson,
and pillage, and the result,--100,000 Jewish families made homeless
and destitute, and nearly $100,000,000 worth of property destroyed.
Nor need we recall the generous outburst of sympathy and indignation
from America.  "It is not that it is the oppression of Jews by
Russia," said Mr. Evarts in the meeting at Chickering Hall Wednesday
evening, February 4; "it is that it is the oppression of men and
women, and we are men and women."  So spoke civilized Christendom,
and for Judaism,-- who can describe that thrill of brotherhood,
quickened anew, the immortal pledge of the race, made one again
through sorrow?  For Emma Lazarus it was a trumpet call that awoke
slumbering and unguessed echoes.  All this time she had been seeking
heroic ideals in alien stock, soulless and far removed; in pagan
mythology and mystic, mediaeval Christianity, ignoring her very
birthright,--the majestic vista of the past, down which, "high above
flood and fire," had been conveyed the precious scroll of the Moral
Law.  Hitherto Judaism had been a dead letter to her.  Of Portuguese
descent, her family had always been members of the oldest and most
orthodox congregation of New York, where strict adherence to custom
and ceremonial was the watchword of faith; but it was only during
her childhood and earliest years that she attended the synagogue,
and conformed to the prescribed rites and usages which she had now
long since abandoned as obsolete and having no bearing on modern
life.  Nor had she any great enthusiasm for her own people.  As late
as April, 1882, she published in "The Century Magazine" an article
written probably some months before, entitled "Was the Earl of
Beaconsfield a Representative Jew?" in which she is disposed to
accept as the type of the modern Jew the brilliant, successful, but
not over-scrupulous chevalier d'industrie.  In view of subsequent,
or rather contemporaneous events, the closing paragraph of the article
in question is worthy  of being cited:--


    "Thus far their religion [the Jewish], whose mere preservation
    under such adverse conditions seems little short of a miracle,
    has been deprived of the natural means of development and
    progress, and has remained a stationary force.  The next
    hundred years will, in our opinion be the test of their
    vitality as a people; the phase of toleration upon which
    they are only now entering will prove whether or not they
    are capable of growth."


By a curious, almost fateful juxtaposition, in the same number of
the magazine appeared Madame Ragozin's defense of Russian barbarity,
and in the following (May) number Emma Lazarus's impassioned appeal
and reply, "Russian Christianity versus Modern Judaism."  From
this time dated the crusade that she undertook in behalf of her race,
and the consequent expansion of all her faculties, the growth of
spiritual power which always ensues when a great cause is espoused
and a strong conviction enters the soul.  Her verse rang out as it
had never rung before,--a clarion note, calling a people to heroic
action and unity, to the consciousness and fulfillment of a grand
destiny.  When has Judaism been so stirred as by "The Crowing of
the Red Cock" and


                      THE BANNER OF THE JEW.

              Wake, Israel, wake!  Recall to-day
              The glorious Maccabean rage,
              The sire heroic, hoary-gray,
              His five-fold lion-lineage;
              The Wise, the Elect, the Help-of-God,
              The Burst-of-Spring, the Avenging Rod.


              From Mizpeh's mountain ridge they saw
              Jerusalem's empty streets; her shrine
              Laid waste where Greeks profaned the Law
              With idol and with pagan sign.
              Mourners in tattered black were there
              With ashes sprinkled on their hair.


              Then from the stony peak there rang
              A blast to ope the graves; down poured
              The Maccabean clan, who sang
              Their battle anthem to the Lord.
              Five heroes lead, and following, see
              Ten thousand rush to victory!


              Oh for Jerusalem's trumpet now,
              To blow a blast of shattering power,
              To wake the sleeper high and low,
              And rouse them to the urgent hour!
              No hand for vengeance, but to save,
          