    A million naked swords should wave.


              Oh, deem not dead that martial fire,
              Say not the mystic flame is spent!
              With Moses' law and David's lyre,
              Your ancient strength remains unbent.
              Let but an Ezra rise anew,
              To lift the BANNER OF THE JEW!


              A rag, a mock at first,--erelong
              When men have bled and women wept,
              To guard its precious folds from wrong,
              Even they who shrunk, even they who slept,
              Shall leap to bless it and to save.
              Strike! for the brave revere the brave!


The dead forms burst their bonds and lived again.  She sings "Rosh
Hashanah" (the Jewish New Year) and "Hanuckah (the Feast of Lights):--


        "Kindle the taper like the steadfast star
         Ablaze on Evening's forehead o'er the earth,
         And add each night a lustre till afar
         An eight-fold splendor shine above thy hearth.
         Clash, Israel, the cymbals, touch the lyre,
         Blow the brass trumpet and the harsh-tongued horn;
         Chant psalms of victory till the heart take fire,
         The Maccabean spirit leap new-born."


  And "The New Ezekiel:"--


        "What! can these dead bones live, whose sap is dried
         By twenty scorching centuries of wrong?
         Is this the House of Israel whose pride
         Is as a tale that's told, an ancient song?
         Are these ignoble relics all that live
         Of psalmist, priest, and prophet?  Can the breath
         Of very heaven bid these bones revive,
         Open the graves, and clothe the ribs of death?
         Yea, Prophesy, the Lord hath said again:
         Say to the wind, come forth and breathe afresh,
         Even that they may live, upon these slain,
         And bone to bone shall leap, and flesh to flesh.
         The spirit is not dead, proclaim the word.
         Where lay dead bones a host of armed men stand!
         I ope your graves, my people, saith the Lord,
         And I shall place you living in your land."


Her whole being renewed and refreshed itself at its very source.  She
threw herself into the study of her race, its language, literature,
and history.

Breaking the outward crust, she pierced to the heart of the faith
and "the miracle" of its survival.  What was it other than the ever-
present, ever-vivifying spirit itself, which cannot die,--the
religious and ethical zeal which fires the whole history of the
people, and of which she herself felt the living glow within her own
soul?  She had come upon the secret and the genius of Judaism,--that
absolute interpenetration and transfusion of spirit with body and
substance which, taken literally, often reduces itself to a question
of food and drink, a dietary regulation, and again, in proper
splendor,
incarnates itself and shines out before humanity in the prophets,
teachers, and saviors of mankind.

Those were busy, fruitful years for Emma Lazarus, who worked, not
with the pen alone, but in the field of practical and beneficent
activity.  For there was an immense task to accomplish.  The tide of
immigration had set in, and ship after ship came laden with hunted
human beings flying from their fellow-men, while all the time, like
a tocsin, rang the terrible story of cruelty and persecution,--horrors
that the pen refuses to dwell upon.  By the hundreds and thousands
they flocked upon our shores,--helpless, innocent victims of injustice
and oppression, panic-stricken in the midst of strange and utterly
new surroundings.

Emma Lazarus came into personal contact with these people, and
visited them in their refuge on Ward Island.  While under the
influence of all the emotions aroused by this great crisis in the
history of her race, she wrote the "Dance of Death," a drama of
persecution of the twelfth century, founded upon the authentic
records,
--unquestionably her finest work in grasp and scope, and, above all,
in moral elevation and purport.  The scene is laid in Nordhausen, a
free city in Thuringia, where the Jews, living, as the deemed, in
absolute security and peace, were caught up in the wave of persecution
that swept over Europe at that time.  Accused of poisoning the wells
and causing the pestilence, or black death, as it was called, they
were condemned to be burned.

We do not here intend to enter upon a critical or literary analysis
of the play, or to point out dramatic merits or defects, but we
should like to make its readers feel with us the holy ardor and
impulse of the writer and the spiritual import of the work.  The
action is without surprise, the doom fixed from the first; but so
glowing is the canvas with local and historic color, so vital and
intense the movement, so resistless, the "internal evidence," if we
may call it thus, penetrating its very substance and form, that we are
swept along as by a wave of human sympathy and grief.  In contrast
with "The Spagnoletto," how large is the theme and how all-embracing
the catastrophe!  In place of the personal we have the drama of
the universal.  Love is only a flash now,--a dream caught sight of
and at once renounced at a higher claim.


        "Have you no smile to welcome love with, Liebhaid?
         Why should you tremble?
         Prince, I am afraid!
         Afraid of my own heart, my unfathomed joy,
         A blasphemy against my father's grief,
         My people's agony!


        "What good shall come, forswearing kith and God,
         To follow the allurements of the heart?"


asks the distracted maiden, torn between her love for he princely
wooer and her devotion to the people among whom her lot has been cast.


                                      "O God!
            How shall I pray for strength to love him less
            Than mine own soul!
                                       No more of that,
            I am all Israel's now.  Till this cloud pass,
            I have no thought, no passion, no desire,
            Save for my people."


Individuals perish, but great ideas survive,--fortitude and courage,
and that exalted loyalty and devotion to principle which alone are
worth living and dying for.

The Jews pass by in procession--men, women, and children--on their
way to the flames, to the sound of music, and in festal array,
carrying
the gold and silver vessels, the roll of the law, the perpetual lamp
and the seven branched silver candle-stick of the synagogue.  The
crowd hoot and jeer at them.


           "The misers! they will take their gems and gold
            Down to the grave!"


                             "Let us rejoice"


sing the Jewish youths in chorus; and the maidens:--


           "Our feet stand within thy gates, O Zion!
             Within thy portals, O Jerusalem!"


The flames rise and dart among them; their garments wave, their jewels
flash, as they dance and sing in the crimson blaze.  The music ceases,
a sound of crashing boards is heard and a great cry,--"Hallelujah!"
What a glory and consecration of the martyrdom!  Where shall we find a
more triumphant vindication and supreme victory of spirit over matter?


                            "I see, I see,
         How Israel's ever-crescent glory makes
         These flames that would eclipse it dark as blots
         Of candle-light against the blazing sun.
         We die a thousand deaths,--drown, bleed, and burn.
         Our ashes are dispersed unto the winds.
         Yet the wild winds cherish the sacred seed,
         The fire refuseth to consume.

            .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

         Even as we die in honor, from our death
         Shall bloom a myriad heroic lives,
         Brave through our bright example, virtuous
         Lest our great memory fall in disrepute."


The "Dance to Death" was published, along with other poems and
translations from the Hebrew poets of mediaeval Spain, in a small
column entitled "Songs of a Semite."  The tragedy was dedicated, "In
profound veneration and respect to the memory of George Eliot, the
illustrious writer who did most among the artists of our day towards
elevating and ennobling the spirit of Jewish nationality."

For this was the idea that had caught the imagination of Emma Lazarus,
--a restored and independent nationality and repatriation in
Palestine.
In her article in "The Century" of February, 1883, on the "Jewish
Problem," she says:--


    "I am fully persuaded that all suggested solutions other
    than this are but temporary palliatives. . . . The idea
    formulated by George Eliot has already sunk into the minds
    of many Jewish enthusiasts, and it germinates with miraculous
    rapidity.  'The idea that I am possessed with,' says Deronda,
    'is that of restoring a political existence to my people;
    making them a nation again, giving them a national centre,
    such as the English have, though they, too, are scattered
    over the face of the globe.  That task which presents itself
    to me as a duty. . . . I am resolved to devote my life to
    it.  AT THE LEAST, I MAY AWAKEN A MOVEMENT IN OTHER MINDS
    SUCH HAS BEEN AWAKENED IN MY OWN.'  Could the noble
    prophetess who wrote the above words have lived but till to-
    day to see the ever-increasing necessity of adopting her
    inspired counsel, . . .she would have been herself astonished
    at the flame enkindled by her seed of fire, and the practical
    shape which the movement projected by her poetic vision is
    beginning to assume."


In November of 1882 appeared her first "Epistle to the Hebrews,"--
one of a series of articles written for the "American Hebrew,"
published weekly through several months.  Addressing herself now
to a Jewish audience, she sets forth without reserve her views and
hopes for Judaism, now passionately holding up the mirror for the
shortcomings and peculiarities of her race.  She says:--


    "Every student of the Hebrew language is aware that we have
    in the conjugation of our verbs a mode known as the 'intensive
    voice,' which, by means of an almost imperceptible modification
    of vowel-points, intensifies the meaning of the primitive root.
    A similar significance seems to attach to the Jews themselves
    in connection with the people among whom they dwell.  They are
    the 'intensive form' of any nationality whose language and
    customs they adopt. . . . Influenced by the same causes, they
    represent the same results; but the deeper lights and shadows
    of the Oriental temperament throw their failings, as well as
    their virtues, into more prominent relief."


In drawing the epistles to a close, February 24, 1883, she thus
summarizes the special objects she has had in view:--


    "My chief aim has been to contribute my mite towards arousing
    that spirit of Jewish enthusiasm which might manifest itself:
    First, in a return to varied pursuits and broad system of
    physical and intellectual education adopted by our ancestors;
    Second, in a more fraternal and practical movement towards
    alleviating the sufferings of oppressed Jews in countries less
    favored than our own; Third, in a closer and wider study of
    Hebrew literature and history and finally, in a truer recognition
    of the large principals of religion, liberty, and law upon
    which Judaism is founded, and which should draw into harmonious
    unity Jews of every shade of opinion."


Her interest in Jewish affairs was at its height when she planned a
visit abroad, which had been a long-cherished dream, and May 15, 1883,
she sailed for England, accompanied by a younger sister.  We have
difficulty in recognizing the tragic priestess we have been portraying
in the enthusiastic child of travel who seems new-born into a new
world.  From the very outset she is in a maze of wonder and delight.
At sea she writes:--


    "Our last day on board ship was a vision of beauty from
    morning till night,--the sea like a mirror and the sky
    dazzling with light.  In the afternoon we passed a ship
    in full sail, near enough to exchange salutes and cheers.
    After tossing about for six days without seeing a human
    being, except those on our vessel, even this was a sensation.
    Then an hour or two before sunset came the great sensation
    of--land!  At first, nothing but a shadow on the far horizon,
    like the ghost of a ship; two or three widely scattered rocks
    which were the promontories of Ireland, and sooner than we
    expected we were steaming along low-lying purple hills."


The journey to Chester gives her "the first glimpse of mellow
England,"--a surprise which is yet no surprise, so well known and
familiar does it appear.  Then Chester, with its quaint, picturesque
streets, "like the scene of a Walter Scott novel, the cathedral
planted in greenness, and the clear, gray river where a boatful of
scarlet dragoons goes gliding by."  Everything is a picture for her
special benefit.  She "drinks in, at every sense, the sights, sounds,
and smells, and the unimaginable beauty of it all."  Then the
bewilderment of London, and a whirl of people, sights, and
impressions.
She was received with great distinction by the Jews, and many of the
leading men among them warmly advocated her views.  But it was not
alone from her own people that she met with exceptional consideration.
She had the privilege of seeing many of the most eminent personages
of the day, all of whom honored her with special and personal regard.
There was, no doubt, something that strongly attracted people to her
at this time,--the force of her intellect at once made itself felt,
while at the same time the unaltered simplicity and modesty of her
character, and her readiness and freshness of enthusiasm, kept her
still almost like a child.

She makes a flying visit to Paris, where she happens to be on the 14th
of July, the anniversary of the storming of the Bastile, and of the
beginning of the republic; she drives to Versailles, "that gorgeous
shell of royalty, where the crowd who celebrate the birth of the
republic wander freely through the halls and avenues, and into the
most sacred rooms of the king. . . . There are ruins on every side in
Paris," she says; "ruins of the Commune, or the Siege, or the
Revolution; it is terrible--it seems as if the city were seared with
fire and blood."

Such was Paris to her then, and she hastens back to her beloved
London,
starting from there on the tour through England that has been mapped
out for her.  "A Day in Surrey with William Morris," published in
"The Century Magazine," describes her visit to Merton Abbey, the
old  Norman monastery, converted into a model factory by the poet-
humanitarian, who himself received her as his guest, conducted her
all over the picturesque building and garden, and explained to her
his views of art and his aims for the people.

She drives through Kent, "where the fields, valleys, and slopes are
garlanded with hops and ablaze with scarlet poppies."  Then
Canterbury,
Windsor, and Oxford, Stratford, Warwick, the valley of the Wye, Wells,
Exeter, and Salisbury,--cathedral after cathedral.  Back to London,
and then north through York, Durham, and Edinburgh, and on the 15th
of September she sails for home.  We have merely named the names,
for it is impossible to convey an idea of the delight and importance
of this trip, "a crescendo of enjoyment," as she herself calls it.
Long after, in strange, dark hours of suffering, these pictures of
travel arose before her, vivid and tragic even in their hold and
spell upon her.

The winter of 1883-84 was not especially productive.  She wrote a
few reminiscences of her journey and occasional poems on the Jewish
themes, which appeared in the "American Hebrew;" but for the most
part gave herself up to quiet retrospect and enjoyment with her
friends of the life she had had a glimpse of, and the experience she
had stored,--a restful, happy period.  In August of the same year
she was stricken with a severe and dangerous malady, from which she
slowly recovered, only to go through a terrible ordeal and affliction.
Her father's health, which had long been failing, now broke down
completely, and the whole winter was one long strain of acute anxiety,
which culminated in his death, in March, 1885.  The blow was a
crushing one for Emma.  Truly, the silver cord was loosed, and the
golden bowl broken.  Life lost its meaning and charm.  Her father's
sympathy and pride in her work had been her chief incentive and
ambition, and had spurred her on when her own confidence and spirit
failed.  Never afterwards did she find complete and spontaneous
expression.  She decided to go abroad as the best means of regaining
composure and strength and sailed once more in May for England,
where she was welcomed now by the friends she had made, almost as
to another home.  She spent the summer very quietly at Richmond,an
ideally beautiful spot in Yorkshire, where she soon felt the
beneficial influence of her peaceful surroundings.  "The very air
seems to rest one here," she writes; and inspired by the romantic
loveliness of the place, she even composed the first few chapters
of a novel, begun with a good deal of dash and vigor, but soon
abandoned, for she was still struggling with depression and gloom.

"I have neither ability, energy, nor purpose," she writes.  "It is
impossible to do anything, so I am forced to set it aside for the
present; whether to take it up again or not in the future remains
to be seen."

In the autumn she goes on the Continent, visiting the Hague, which
"completely fascinates" her, and where she feels "stronger and more
cheerful" than she has "for many a day."  Then Paris, which this time
amazes her "with its splendor and magnificence.  All the ghosts of
the Revolution are somehow laid," she writes, and she spends six
weeks here enjoying to the full the gorgeous autumn weather, the
sights, the picture galleries, the bookshops, the whole brilliant
panorama of the life; and early in December she starts for Italy.

And now once more we come upon that keen zest of enjoyment, that
pure desire and delight of the eyes, which are the prerogative of
the poet,--Emma Lazarus was a poet.  The beauty of the world,--what
a rapture and intoxication it is, and how it bursts upon her in the
very land of beauty, "where Dante and Petrarch trod!"  A magic glow
colours it all; no mere blues and greens anymore, but a splendor of
purple and scarlet and emerald; "each tower, castle, and village
shining like a jewel; the olive, the fig, and at your feet the roses,
growing in mid-December."  A day in Pisa seems like a week, so crowded
is it with sensations and unforgettable pictures.  Then a month in
Florence, which is still more entrancing with its inexhaustible
treasures of beauty and art; and finally Rome, the climax of it all,--


    "wiping out all other places and impressions, and opening
    a whole new world of sensations.  I am wild with the
    excitement of this tremendous place.  I have been here a
    week, and have seen the Vatican and the Capitoline Museums,
    and the Sistine Chapel, and St. Peter's, besides the ruins
    on the streets and on the hills, and the graves of Shelley
    and Keats.

    "It is all heart-breaking.  I don't only mean those beautiful
    graves, overgrown with acanthus and violets, but the mutilated
    arches and columns and dumb appealing fragments looming up in
    the glowing sunshine under the Roman blue sky."


True to her old attractions, it is pagan Rome that appeals to her
most strongly,--


    "and the far-away past, that seems so sad and strange and
    near.  I am even out of humor with pictures; a bit of broken
    stone or a  fragment of a bas-relief, or a Corinthian column
    standing out against this lapis-lazuli sky, or a tremendous
    arch, are the only things I can look at for the moment,--
    except the Sistine Chapel, which is as gigantic as the rest,
    and forces itself upon you with equal might."


Already, in February, spring is in the air; "the almond-trees are in
bloom, violets cover the grass, and oh! the divine, the celestial,
the unheard-of beauty of it all!"  It is almost a pang for her, "with
its strange mixture of longing and regret and delight," and in the
midst of it she says, "I have to exert all my strength not to lose
myself in morbidness and depression."

Early in March she leaves Rome, consoled with the thought of returning
the following winter.  In June she was in England again, and spent
the summer at Malvern.  Disease was no doubt already beginning to
prey upon her, for she was oppressed at times by a languor and
heaviness amounting almost to lethargy.  When she returned to London,
however, in September, she felt quite well again, and started for
another tour in Holland, which she enjoyed as much as before.  She
then settled in Paris, to await the time when she could return to
Italy.  But she was attacked at once with grave and alarming symptoms,
that betokened a fatal end to her malady.  Entirely ignorant, however,
of the danger that threatened her, she kept up courage and hope,
made plans for the journey, and looked forward to setting out at
any moment.  But the weeks passed and the months also; slowly and
gradually the hope faded.  The journey to Italy must be given up;
she was not in condition to be brought home, and she reluctantly
resigned herself to remain where she was and "convalesce," as she
confidently believed, in the spring.  Once again came the analogy,
which she herself pointed out now, to Heine on his mattress-grave
in Paris.  She, too, the last time she went out, dragged herself to
the Louvre, to the feet of the Venus, "the goddess without arms, who
could not help."  Only her indomitable will and intense desire to
live seemed to keep her alive.  She sunk to a very low ebb, but, as
she herself expressed it, she "seemed to have always one little
window looking out into life," and in the spring she rallied
sufficiently to take a few drives and to sit on the balcony of her
apartment.  She came back to life with a feverish sort of thirst and
avidity.  "No such cure for pessimism," she says, "as a severe
illness;
the simplest pleasures are enough,--to breathe the air and see the
sun."

Many plans were made for leaving Paris, but it was finally decided
to risk the ocean voyage and bring her home, and accordingly she
sailed July 23rd, arriving in New York on the last day of that month.

She did not rally after this; and now began her long agony, full
of every kind of suffering, mental and physical.  Only her intellect
seemed kindled anew, and none but those who saw her during the last
supreme ordeal can realize that wonderful flash and fire of the
spirit before its extinction.  Never did she appear so brilliant.
Wasted to a shadow, and between acute attacks of pain, she talked
about art, poetry, the scenes of travel, of which her brain was so
full, and the phases of her own condition, with an eloquence for
which even those who knew her best were quite unprepared.  Every
faculty seemed sharpened and every sense quickened as the "strong
deliveress" approached, and the ardent soul was released from the
frame that could no longer contain it.

We cannot restrain a feeling of suddenness and incompleteness and
a natural pang of wonder and regret for a life so richly and so
vitally endowed thus cut off in its prime.  But for us it is not
fitting to question or repine, but rather to rejoice in the rare
possession that we hold.  What is any life, even the most rounded
and complete, but a fragment and a hint?  What Emma Lazarus might
have accomplished, had she been spared, it is idle and even
ungrateful to speculate.  What she did accomplish has real and
peculiar significance.  It is the privilege of a favored few that
every fact and circumstance of their individuality shall add lustre
and value to what they achieve.  To be born a Jewess was a distinction
for Emma Lazarus, and she in turn conferred distinction upon her
race.  To be born a woman also lends a grace and a subtle magnetism
to her influence.  Nowhere is there contradiction or incongruity.
Her works bear the imprint of her character, and her character of
her works; the same directness and honesty, the same limpid purity
of tone, and the same atmosphere of things refined and beautiful.
The vulgar, the false, and the ignoble,--she scarcely comprehended
them, while on every side she was open and ready to take in and
respond to whatever can adorn and enrich life.  Literature was no
mere "profession" for her, which shut out other possibilities; it
was only a free, wide horizon and background for culture.  She was
passionately devoted to music, which inspired some of her best poems;
and during the last years of her life, in hours of intense physical
suffering, she found relief and consolation in listening to the
strains of Bach and Beethoven.  When she went abroad, painting was
revealed to her, and she threw herself with the same ardor and
enthusiasm into the study of the great masters; her last work (left
unfinished) was a critical analysis of the genius and personality
of Rembrandt.

And now, at the end, we ask, Has the grave really closed over all
these gifts?  Has that eager, passionate striving ceased, and "is
the rest silence?"

Who knows?  But would we break, if we could, that repose, that
silence and mystery and peace everlasting?






                        EPOCHS.

 "The epochs of our life are not in the facts, but in the
    silent thought by the wayside as we walk."--Emerson




               I. Youth.


Sweet empty sky of June without a stain,
  Faint, gray-blue dewy mists on far-off hills,
Warm, yellow sunlight flooding mead and plain,
  That each dark copse and hollow overfills;
  The rippling laugh of unseen, rain-fed rills,
Weeds delicate-flowered, white and pink and gold,
A murmur and a singing manifold.


The gray, austere old earth renews her youth
  With dew-lines, sunshine, gossamer, and haze.
How still she lies and dreams, and veils the truth,
  While all is fresh as in the early days!
  What simple things be these the soul to raise
To bounding joy, and make young pulses beat,
With nameless pleasure finding life so sweet.


On such a golden morning forth there floats,
  Between the soft earth and the softer sky,
In the warm air adust with glistening motes,
  The mystic winged and flickering butterfly,
  A human soul, that hovers giddily
Among the gardens of earth's paradise,
Nor dreams of fairer fields or loftier skies.




               II. Regret.


Thin summer rain on grass and bush and hedge,
  Reddening the road and deepening the green
On wide, blurred lawn, and in close-tangled sedge;
  Veiling in gray the landscape stretched between
  These low broad meadows and the pale hills seen
But dimly on the far horizon's edge.


In these transparent-clouded, gentle skies,
  Wherethrough the moist beams of the soft June sun
Might any moment break, no sorrow lies,
  No note of grief in swollen brooks that run,
  No hint of woe in this subdued, calm tone
Of all the prospect unto dreamy eyes.


Only a tender, unnamed half-regret
  For the lost beauty of the gracious morn;
A yearning aspiration, fainter yet,
  For brighter suns in joyous days unborn,
  Now while brief showers ruffle grass and corn,
And all the earth lies shadowed, grave, and wet;


Space for the happy soul to pause again
  From pure content of all unbroken bliss,
To dream the future void of grief and pain,
  And muse upon the past, in reveries
  More sweet for knowledge that the present is
Not all complete, with mist and clouds and rain.




               III. Longing.


Look westward o'er the steaming rain-washed slopes,
  Now satisfied with sunshine, and behold
Those lustrous clouds, as glorious as our hopes,
  Softened with feathery fleece of downy gold,
  In all fantastic, huddled shapes uprolled,
Floating like dreams, and melting silently,
In the blue upper regions of pure sky.


The eye is filled with beauty, and the heart
  Rejoiced with sense of life and peace renewed;
And yet at such an hour as this, upstart
  Vague myriad longing, restless, unsubdued,
  And causeless tears from melancholy mood,
Strange discontent with earth's and nature's best,
Desires and yearnings that may find no rest.




               IV. Storm.


Serene was morning with clear, winnowed air,
  But threatening soon the low, blue mass of cloud
Rose in the west, with mutterings faint and rare
  At first, but waxing frequent and more loud.
  Thick sultry mists the distant hill-tops shroud;
The sunshine dies; athwart black skies of lead
Flash noiselessly thin threads of lightning red.


Breathless the earth seems waiting some wild blow,
  Dreaded, but far too close to ward or shun.
Scared birds aloft fly aimless, and below
  Naught stirs in fields whence light and life are gone,
  Save floating leaves, with wisps of straw and down,
Upon the heavy air; 'neath blue-black skies,
Livid and yellow the green landscape lies.


And all the while the dreadful thunder breaks,
  Within the hollow circle of the hills,
With gathering might, that angry echoes wakes,
  And earth and heaven with unused clamor fills.
  O'erhead still flame those strange electric thrills.
A moment more,--behold! yon bolt struck home,
And over ruined fields the storm hath come!




               V. Surprise.


When the stunned soul can first lift tired eyes
  On her changed world of ruin, waste and wrack,
Ah, what a pang of aching sharp surprise
  Brings all sweet memories of the lost past back,
With wild self-pitying grief of one betrayed,
Duped in a land of dreams where Truth is dead!


Are these the heavens that she deemed were kind?
  Is this the world that yesterday was fair?
What painted images of folk half-blind
  Be these who pass her by, as vague as air?
What go they seeking? there is naught to find.
Let them come nigh and hearken her despair.


A mocking lie is all she once believed,
  And where her heart throbbed, is a cold dead stone.
This is a doom we never preconceived,
  Yet now she cannot fancy it undone.
Part of herself, part of the whole hard scheme,
All else is but the shadow of a dream.




               VI. Grief.


There is a hungry longing in the soul,
  A craving sense of emptiness and pain,
She may not satisfy nor yet control,
  For all the teeming world looks void and vain.
No compensation in eternal spheres,
She knows the loneliness of all her years.


There is no comfort looking forth nor back,
  The present gives the lie to all her past.
Will cruel time restore what she doth lack?
  Why was no shadow of this doom forecast?
Ah! she hath played with many a keen-edged thing;
Naught is too small and soft to turn and sting.


In the unnatural glory of the hour,
  Exalted over time, and death, and fate,
No earthly task appears beyond her power,
  No possible endurance seemeth great.
She knows her misery and her majesty,
And recks not if she be to live or die.




               VII. Acceptance.


Yea, she hath looked Truth grimly face to face,
  And drained unto the lees the proffered cup.
This silence is not patience, nor the grace
  Of recognition, meekly offered up,
But mere acceptance fraught with keenest pain,
Seeing that all her struggles must be vain.


Her future clear and terrible outlies,--
  This burden to be borne through all her days,
This crown of thorns pressed down above her eyes,
  This weight of trouble she may never raise.
No reconcilement doth she ask nor wait;
Knowing such things are, she endures her fate.


No brave endeavor of the broken will
  To cling to such poor stays as will abide
(Although the waves be wild and angry still)
  After the lapsing of the swollen tide.
No fear of further loss, no hope of gain,
Naught but the apathy of weary pain.




               VIII. Loneliness.


All stupor of surprise hath passed away;
  She sees, with clearer vision than before,
A world far off of light and laughter gay,
  Herself alone and lonely evermore.
Folk come and go, and reach her in no wise,
Mere flitting phantoms to her heavy eyes.


All outward things, that once seemed part of her,
  Fall from her, like the leaves in autumn shed.
She feels as one embalmed in spice and myrrh,
  With the heart eaten out, a long time dead;
Unchanged without, the features and the form;
Within, devoured by the thin red worm.


By her own prowess she must stand or fall,
  This grief is to be conquered day by day.
Who could befriend her? who could make this small,
  Or her strength great? she meets it as she may.
A weary struggle and a constant pain,
She dreams not they may ever cease nor wane.




               IX. Sympathy.


It comes not in such wise as she had deemed,
  Else might she still have clung to her despair.
More tender, grateful than she could have dreamed,
  Fond hands passed pitying over brows and hair,
  And gentle words borne softly through the air,
Calming her weary sense and wildered mind,
By welcome, dear communion with her kind.


Ah! she forswore all words as empty lies;
  What speech could help, encourage, or repair?
Yet when she meets these grave, indulgent eyes,
  Fulfilled with pity, simplest words are fair,
  Caressing, meaningless, that do not dare
To compensate or mend, but merely soothe
With hopeful visions after bitter Truth.


One who through conquered trouble had grown wise,
  To read the grief unspoken, unexpressed,
 The misery of the blank and heavy eyes,--
  Or through youth's infinite compassion guessed
  The heavy burden,--such a one brought rest,
And bade her lay aside her doubts and fears,
While the hard pain dissolved in blessed tears.




               X. Patience.


The passion of despair is quelled at last;
  The cruel sense of undeserved wrong,
The wild self-pity, these are also past;
  She knows not what may come, but she is strong;
She feels she hath not aught to lose nor gain,
Her patience is the essence of all pain.


As one who sits beside a lapsing stream,
  She sees the flow of changeless day by day,
Too sick and tired to think, too sad to dream,
  Nor cares how soon the waters slip away,
Nor where they lead; at the wise God's decree,
She will depart or bide indifferently.


There is deeper pathos in the mild
  And settled sorrow of the quiet eyes,
Than in the tumults of the anguish wild,
  That made her curse all things beneath the skies;
No question, no reproaches, no complaint,
Hers is the holy calm of some meek saint.




               XI. Hope.


Her languid pulses thrill with sudden hope,
  That will not be forgot nor cast aside,
And life in statelier vistas seems to ope,
  Illimitably lofty, long, and wide.
What doth she know?  She is subdued and mild,
Quiet and docile "as a weaned child."


If grief came in such unimagined wise,
  How may joy dawn?  In what undreamed-of hour,
May the light break with splendor of surprise,
  Disclosing all the mercy and the power?
A baseless hope, yet vivid, keen, and bright,
As the wild lightning in the starless night.


She knows not whence it came, nor where it passed,
  But it revealed, in one brief flash of flame,
A heaven so high, a world so rich and vast,
  That, full of meek contrition and mute shame,
In patient silence hopefully withdrawn,
She bows her head, and bides the certain dawn.




               XII. Compensation.


'T is not alone that black and yawning void
  That makes her heart ache with this hungry pain,
But the glad sense of life hath been destroyed,
  The lost delight may never come again.
Yet myriad serious blessings with grave grace
Arise on every side to fill their place.


For much abides in her so lonely life,--
  The dear companionship of her own kind,
Love where least looked for, quiet after strife,
  Whispers of promise upon every wind,
A quickened insight, in awakened eyes,
For the new meaning of the earth and skies.


The nameless charm about all things hath died,
  Subtle as aureole round a shadow's head,
Cast on the dewy grass at morning-tide;
  Yet though the glory and the joy be fled,
'T is much her own endurance to have weighed,
And wrestled with God's angels, unafraid.




               XIII. Faith.


She feels outwearied, as though o'er her head
  A storm of mighty billows broke and passed.
Whose hand upheld her?  Who her footsteps led
  To this green haven of sweet rest at last?
What strength was hers, unreckoned and unknown?
What love sustained when she was most alone?


Unutterably pathetic her desire,
  To reach, with groping arms outstretched in prayer,
Something to cling to, to uplift her higher
  From this low world of coward fear and care,
Above disaster, that her will may be
At one with God's, accepting his decree.


Though by no reasons she be justified,
  Yet strangely brave in Evil's very face,
She deems this want must needs be satisfied,
  Though here all slips from out her weak embrace.
And in blind ecstasy of perfect faith,
With her own dream her prayer she answereth.




               XIV. Work.


Yet life is not a vision nor a prayer,
  But stubborn work; she may not shun her task.
After the first compassion, none will spare
  Her portion and her work achieved, to ask.
She pleads for respite,--she will come ere long
When, resting by the roadside, she is strong.


Nay, for the hurrying throng of passers-by
  Will crush her with their onward-rolling stream.
Much must be done before the brief light die;
  She may not loiter, rapt in the vain dream.
With unused trembling hands, and faltering feet,
She staggers forth, her lot assigned to meet.


But when she fills her days with duties done,
  Strange vigor comes, she is restored to health.
New aims, new interests rise with each new sun,
  And life still holds for her unbounded wealth.
All that seemed hard and toilsome now proves small,
And naught may daunt her,--she hath strength for all.




               XV. Victory.


How strange, in some brief interval of rest,
  Backward to look on her far-stretching past.
To see how much is conquered and repressed,
  How much is gained in victory at last!
The shadow is not lifted,--but her faith,
Strong from life's miracles, now turns toward death.


Though much be dark where once rare splendor shone,
  Yet the new light has touched high peaks unguessed
In her gold, mist-bathed dawn, and one by one
  New outlooks loom from many a mountain crest.
She breathes a loftier, purer atmosphere,
And life's entangled paths grow straight and clear.


Nor will Death prove an all-unwelcome guest;
  The struggle has been toilsome to this end,
Sleep will be sweet, and after labor rest,
  And all will be atoned with him to friend.
Much must be reconciled, much justified,
And yet she feels she will be satisfied.




               XVI. Peace.


The calm outgoing of a long, rich day,
  Checkered with storm and sunshine, gloom and light,
Now passing in pure, cloudless skies away,
  Withdrawing into silence of blank night.
  Thick shadows settle on the landscape bright,
Like the weird cloud of death that falls apace
On the still features of the passive face.


Soothing and gentle as a mother's kiss,
  The touch that stopped the beating of the heart.
A look so blissfully serene as this,
  Not all the joy of living could impart.
With dauntless faith and courage therewithal,
The Master found her ready at his call.


On such a golden evening forth there floats,
  Between the grave earth and the glowing sky
In the clear air, unvexed with hazy motes,
  The mystic-winged and flickering butterfly,
  A human soul, that drifts at liberty,
Ah! who can tell to what strange paradise,
To what undreamed-of fields and lofty skies.!






               HOW LONG?


  How long, and yet how long,
Our leaders will we hail from over seas,
Master and kings from feudal monarchies,
  And mock their ancient song
With echoes weak of foreign melodies?


  That distant isle mist-wreathed,
Mantled in unimaginable green,
Too long hath been our mistress and our queen.
  Our fathers have bequeathed
Too deep a love for her, our hearts within.


  She made the whole world ring
With the brave exploits of her children strong,
And with the matchless music of her song.
  Too late, too late we cling
To alien legends, and their strains prolong.


  This fresh young world I see,
With heroes, cities, legends of her own;
With a new race of men, and overblown
  By winds from sea to sea,
Decked with the majesty of every zone.


  I see the glittering tops
Of snow-peaked mounts, the wid'ning vale's expanse,
Large prairies where free herds of horses prance,
  Exhaustless wealth of crops,
In vast, magnificent extravagance.


  These grand, exuberant plains,
These stately rivers, each with many a mouth,
The exquisite beauty of the soft-aired south,
  The boundless seas of grains,
Luxuriant forests' lush and splendid growth.


  The distant siren-song
Of the green island in the eastern sea,
Is not the lay for this new chivalry.
  It is not free and strong
To chant on prairies 'neath this brilliant sky.


  The echo faints and fails;
It suiteth not, upon this western plain,
Out voice or spirit; we should stir again
  The wilderness, and make the vales
Resound unto a yet unheard-of strain.






               HEROES.


  In rich Virginian woods,
The scarlet creeper reddens over graves,
Among the solemn trees enlooped with vines;
Heroic spirits haunt the solitudes,--
The noble souls of half a million braves,
  Amid the murmurous pines.


  Ah! who is left behind,
Earnest and eloquent, sincere and strong,
To consecrate their memories with words
Not all unmeet? with fitting dirge and song
To chant a requiem purer than the wind,
  And sweeter than the birds?


  Here, though all seems at peace,
The placid, measureless sky serenely fair,
The laughter of the breeze among the leaves,
The bars of sunlight slanting through the trees,
The reckless wild-flowers blooming everywhere,
  The grasses' delicate sheaves,--


  Nathless each breeze that blows,
Each tree that trembles to its leafy head
With nervous life, revives within our mind,
Tender as flowers of May, the thoughts of those
Who lie beneath the living beauty, dead,--
  Beneath the sunshine, blind.


  For brave dead soldiers, these:
Blessings and tears of aching thankfulness,
Soft flowers for the graves in wreaths enwove,
The odorous lilac of dear memories,
The heroic blossoms of the wilderness,
  And the rich rose of love.


  But who has sung their praise,
Not less illustrious, who are living yet?
Armies of heroes, satisfied to pass
Calmly, serenely from the whole world's gaze,
And cheerfully accept, without regret,
  Their old life as it was,


  With all its petty pain,
Its irritating littleness and care;
They who have scaled the mountain, with content
Sublime, descend to live upon the plain;
Steadfast as though they breathed the mountain-air
  Still, wheresoe'er they went.

  They who were brave to act,
And rich enough their action to forget;
Who, having filled their day with chivalry,
Withdraw and keep their simpleness intact,
And all unconscious add more lustre yet
  Unto their victory.


  On the broad Western plains
Their patriarchal life they live anew;
Hunters as mighty as the men of old,
Or harvesting the plenteous, yellow grains,
Gathering ripe vintage of dusk bunches blue,
Or working mines of gold;


  Or toiling in the town,
Armed against hindrance, weariness, defeat,
With dauntless purpose not to serve or yield,
And calm, defiant, they struggle on,
As sturdy and as valiant in the street,
  As in the camp and field.


  And those condemned to live,
Maimed, helpless, lingering still through suffering years,
May they not envy now the restful sleep
Of the dear fellow-martyrs they survive?
Not o'er the dead, but over these, your tears,
  O brothers, ye may weep!


  New England fields I see,
The lovely, cultured landscape, waving grain,
Wide haughty rivers, and pale, English skies.
And lo! a farmer ploughing busily,
Who lifts a swart face, looks upon the plain,--
  I see, in his frank eyes,


  The hero's soul appear.
Thus in the common fields and streets they stand;
The light that on the past and distant gleams,
They cast upon the present and the near,
With antique virtues from some mystic land,
  Of knightly deeds and dreams.






               ADMETUS.

    To my friend, Ralph Waldo Emerson.


  He who could beard the lion in his lair,
To bind him for a girl, and tame the boar,
And drive these beasts before his chariot,
Might wed Alcestis.  For her low brows' sake,
Her hairs' soft undulations of warm gold,
Her eyes clear color and pure virgin mouth,
Though many would draw bow or shiver spear,
Yet none dared meet the intolerable eye,
Or lipless tusk, of lion or boar.
This heard Admetus, King of Thessaly,
Whose broad, fat pastures spread their ample fields
Down to the sheer edge of Amphrysus' stream,
Who laughed, disdainful, at the father's pride,
That set such value on one milk-faced child.


  One morning, as he rode alone and passed
Through the green twilight of Thessalian woods,
Between two pendulous branches interlocked,
As through an open casement, he descried
A goddess, as he deemed,--in truth a maid.
On a low bank she fondled tenderly
A favorite hound, her floral face inclined
above the glossy, graceful animal,
That pressed his snout against her cheek and gazed
Wistfully, with his keen, sagacious eyes.
One arm with lax embrace the neck enwreathed,
With polished roundness near the sleek, gray skin.
Admetus, fixed with wonder,dare not pass,
Intrusive on her holy innocence
And sacred girlhood, but his fretful steed
Snuffed the air, and champed and pawed the ground;
And hearing this, the maiden raised her head.
No let or hindrance then might stop the king,
Once having looked upon those supreme eyes.
The drooping boughs disparting, forth he sped,
And then drew in his steed, to ask the path,
Like a lost traveller in an alien land.
Although each river-cloven vale, with streams
Arrowy glancing to the blue Aegean,
Each hallowed mountain, the abode of gods,
Pelion and Ossa fringed with haunted groves,
The height, spring-crowned, of dedicate Olympus,
And pleasant sun-fed vineyards, were to him
Familiar as his own face in the stream,
Nathless he paused and asked the maid what path
Might lead him from the forest.  She replied,
But still he tarried, and with sportsman's praise
Admired the hound and stooped to stroke its head,
And asked her if she hunted.  Nay, not she:
Her father Pelias hunted in these woods,
Where there was royal game.  He knew her now,--
Alcestis,--and he left her with due thanks:
No goddess, but a mortal, to be won
By such a simple feat as driving boars
And lions to his chariot.  What was that
To him who saw the boar of Calydon,
The sacred boar of Artemis, at bay
In the broad stagnant marsh, and sent his darts
In its tough, quivering flank, and saw its death,
Stung by sure arrows of Arcadian nymph?


  To river-pastures of his flocks and herds
Admetus rode, where sweet-breathed cattle grazed,
Heifers and goats and kids, and foolish sheep
Dotted cool, spacious meadows with bent heads,
And necks' soft wool broken in yellow flakes,
Nibbling sharp-toothed the rich, thick-growing blades.
One herdsman kept the innumerable droves--
A boy yet, young as immortality--
In listless posture on a vine-grown rock.
Around him huddled kids and sheep that left
The mother's udder for his nighest grass,
Which sprouted with fresh verdure where he sat.
And yet dull neighboring rustics never guessed
A god had been among them till he went,
Although with him they acted as he willed,
Renouncing shepherds' silly pranks and quips,
Because his very presence made them grave.
Amphryssius, after their translucent stream,
They called him, but Admetus knew his name,--
Hyperion, god of sun and song and silver speech,
Condemned to serve a mortal for his sin
To Zeus in sending violent darts of death,
A raising hand irreverent, against
The one-eyed forgers of the thunderbolt.
For shepherd's crook he held the living rod
Of twisted serpents, later Hermes' wand.
Him sought the king, discovering soon hard by,
Idle as one in nowise bound to time,
Watching the restless grasses blow and wave,
The sparkle of the sun upon the stream,
Regretting nothing, living with the hour:
For him, who had his light and song within,
Was naught that did not shine, and all things sang.
Admetus prayed for his celestial aid
To win Alcestis, which the god vouchsafed,
Granting with smiles, as grant all gods, who smite
With stern hand, sparing not for piteousness,
But give their gifts in gladness.


                                   Thus the king
Led with loose rein the beasts as tame as kine,
And townsfolk thronged within the city streets,
As round a god; and mothers showed their babes,
And maidens loved the crowned intrepid youth,
And men aloud worship, though the very god
Who wrought the wonder dwelled unnoted nigh,
Divinely scornful of neglect or praise.
Then Pelias, seeing this would be his son,
As he had vowed, called for his wife and child.
With Anaxibia, Alcestis came,
A warm flush spreading o'er her eager face
In looking on the rider of the woods,
And knowing him her suitor and the king.


  Admetus won Alcestis thus to wife,
And these with mated hearts and mutual love
Lived a life blameless, beautiful: the king
Ordaining justice in the gates; the queen,
With grateful offerings to the household gods,
Wise with the wisdom of the pure in heart.
One child she bore,--Eumelus,--and he throve.
Yet none the less because they sacrificed
The firstlings of their flocks and fruits and flowers,
Did trouble come; for sickness seized the king.
Alcestis watched with many-handed love,
But unavailing service, for he lay
With languid limbs, despite his ancient strength
Of sinew, and his skill with spear and sword.
His mother came, Clymene, and with her
His father, Pheres: his unconscious child
They brought him, while forlorn Alcestis sat
Discouraged, with the face of desolation.
The jealous gods would bind his mouth from speech,
And smite his vigorous frame with impotence;
And ruin with bitter ashes, worms, and dust,
The beauty of his crowned, exalted head.
He knew her presence,--soon he would not know,
Nor feel her hand in his lie warm and close,
Nor care if she were near him any more.
Exhausted with long vigils, thus the queen
Held hard and grievous thoughts, till heavy sleep
Possessed her weary sense, and she dreamed.
And even in her dream her trouble lived,
For she was praying in a barren field
To all the gods for help, when came across
The waste of air and land, from distant skies,
A spiritual voice divinely clear,
Whose unimaginable sweetness thrilled
Her aching heart with tremor of strange joy:
"Arise, Alcestis, cast away white fear.
A god dwells with you: seek, and you shall find."
Then quiet satisfaction filled her soul
Almost akin to gladness, and she woke.
Weak as the dead, Admetus lay there still;
But she, superb with confidence, arose,
And passed beyond the mourners' curious eyes,
Seeking Amphryssius in the meadow-lands.
She found him with the godlike mien of one
Who, roused, awakens unto deeds divine:
"I come, Hyperion, with incessant tears,
To crave the life of my dear lord the king.
Pity me, for I see the future years
Widowed and laden with disastrous days.
And ye, the gods, will miss him when the fires
Upon your shrines, unfed, neglected die.
Who will pour large libations in your names,
And sacrifice with generous piety?
Silence and apathy will greet you there
Where once a splendid spirit offered praise.
Grant me this boon divine, and I will beat
With prayer at morning's gates, before they ope
Unto thy silver-hoofed and flame-eyed steeds.
Answer ere yet the irremeable stream
Be crossed: answer, O god, and save!"
                                   She ceased,
With full throat salt with tears, and looked on him,
And with a sudden cry of awe fell prone,
For, lo! he was transmuted to a god;
The supreme aureole radiant round his brow,
Divine refulgences on his face,--his eyes
Awful with splendor, and his august head
With blinding brilliance crowned by vivid flame.
Then in a voice that charmed the listening air:
"Woman, arise! I have no influence
On Death, who is the servant of the Fates.
Howbeit for thy passion and thy prayer,
The grace of thy fair womanhood and youth,
Thus godlike will I intercede for thee,
And sue the insatiate sisters for thi