chains?
What brutes were they for whom such speechless pains,
So royally endured, no human thrill
Awoke, in hearts drunk with the lust to kill?


Not brutes!  No tiger of the wilderness,
No jackal of the jungle, bears such brand
As man's black heart, who shrinks not to confess
The desperate deed of his deliberate hand.
Our kind, our kin, have done this thing.  We stand
Bowed earthward, red with shame, to see such wrong
Prorogue Love's cause and Truth's--God knows how long!






               DON RAFAEL.


      "I would not have," he said,
"Tears, nor the black pall, nor the wormy grave,
Grief's hideous panoply I would not have
      Round me when I am dead.


      "Music and flowers and light,
And choric dances to guitar and flute,
Be these around me when my lips are mute,
      Mine eyes are sealed from sight.


      "So let me lie one day,
One long, eternal day, in sunshine bathed,
In cerements of silken tissue swathed,
      Smothered 'neath flowers of May.

      "One perfect day of peace,
Or ere clean flame consume my fleshly veil,
My life--a gilded vapor--shall exhale,
      Brief as a sigh--and cease.


      "But ere the torch be laid
To my unshrinking limbs by some true hand,
Athwart the orange-fragrant laughing land,
      Bring many a dark-eyed maid


      "From the bright, sea-kissed town;
My beautiful, beloved enemies,
Gemmed as the dew, voluptuous as the breeze,
      Each in her festal gown.


      "All those through whom I learned
The sweet of folly and the pains of love,
My Rose, my Star, my Comforter, my Dove,
      For whom, poor moth, I burned.


      "Loves of a day, and hour,
Or passions (vowed eternal) of a year,
Though each be strange to each, to me all dear
      As to the bee the flower.


      "Around me they shall move
In languid contra dances, and shall shed
Their smiling eyebeams as I were not dead,
      But quick to flash back love.


      "Something not alien quite
To tender ruth, perchance their breast shall fill,
Seeing him that was so mobile grown so still,
      The fiery-veined so white.


      "And when the dance is o'er,
The pinched guitar, the smitten tambourine,
Have ceased their rhythmic beat,--oh, friends of mine,
      On my rich bier, then pour


      "The garlands that ye wear,
The happy rose that on your bosom breathes,
The fresh-culled clusters and the dewy wreaths
      That crown your fragrant hair.


      "Though blind, I still shall see,
Though dead, shall feel your presence and shall know,
I who was beauty's life-long slave, shall so
      Win her in death to me.


      "Thanks, sisters, and farewell!
Back to your joys.  My brother shall make room
For my tried sword upon the high-piled bloom,
      And fire the pinnacle.


      "My soul, pure flame, shall leap
To meet its parent essence once again
My body dust and ashes shall remain,
      Tired heart and brain shall sleep.


      "Life has one gate alone,
Obscure, beset with peril and fierce pain.
Large death has many portals to his fane,
      Why choose we to make moan?


      "Why dwell with worms and clay
When we may soar through air on wings of flame,
Dissolve to small, white dust our perfect frame,
      And never know decay?


      "A brother's pious hand
The pure, fire-winnowed ashes shall inurn,
And lay them in the orange grove where burn
      Globed suns that scent the land.


      "The leaf shall be more green,
Even for my dust--more snowy-soft the flower,
More juicy-sweet the fruit's live pulp--the bower
      Richer that I have been.


      "For I would not," he said,
"Tears and the black pall and the wormy grave,
Grief's hideous panoply I would not have
      Round me when I am dead."






        OFF ROUGH POINT.


We sat at twilight nigh the sea,
  The fog hung gray and weird.
Through the thick film uncannily
  The broken moon appeared.


We heard the billows crack and plunge,
  We saw nor waves nor ships.
Earth sucked the vapors like a sponge,
  The salt spray wet our lips.


Closer the woof of white mist drew,
  Before, behind, beside.
How could that phantom moon break through,
  Above that shrouded tide?


The roaring waters filled the ear,
  A white blank foiled the sight.
Close-gathering shadows near, more near,
  Brought the blind, awful night.


O friends who passed unseen, unknown!
  O dashing, troubled sea!
Still stand we on a rock alone,
Walled round by mystery.






          MATER AMABILIS.


Down the goldenest of streams,
        Tide of dreams,
The fair cradled man-child drifts;
Sways with cadenced motion slow,
        To and fro,
As the mother-foot poised lightly, falls and lifts.


He, the firstling,--he, the light
        Of her sight,--
He, the breathing pledge of love,
'Neath the holy passion lies,
        Of her eyes,--
Smiles to feel the warm, life-giving ray above.


She believes that in his vision,
        Skies elysian
O'er an angel-people shine.
Back to gardens of delight,
        Taking flight,
His auroral spirit basks in dreams divine.


But she smiles through anxious tears;
        Unborn years
Pressing forward, she perceives.
Shadowy muffled shapes, they come
        Deaf and dumb,
Bringing what? dry chaff and tares, or full-eared sheaves?


What for him shall she invoke?
        Shall the oak
Bind the man's triumphant brow?
Shall his daring foot alight
        On the height?
Shall he dwell amidst the humble and the low?


Through what tears and sweat and pain,
        Must he gain
Fruitage from the tree of life?
Shall it yield him bitter flavor?
        Shall its savor
Be as manna midst the turmoil and the strife?


In his cradle slept and smiled
        Thus the child
Who as Prince of Peace was hailed.
Thus anigh the mother breast,
        Lulled to rest,
Child-Napoleon down the lilied river sailed.


Crowned or crucified--the same
        Glows the flame
Of her deathless love divine.
Still the blessed mother stands,
        In all lands,
As she watched beside thy cradle and by mine.


Whatso gifts the years bestow,
        Still men know,
While she breathes, lives one who sees
(Stand they pure or sin-defiled)
        But the child
Whom she crooned to sleep and rocked upon her knee.






                   FOG.


Light silken curtain, colorless and soft,
Dreamlike before me floating! what abides
        Behind thy pearly veil's
        Opaque, mysterious woof?


Where sleek red kine, and dappled, crunch day-long
Thick, luscious blades and purple clover-heads,
        Nigh me I still can mark
        Cool fields of beaded grass.


No more; for on the rim of the globed world
I seem to stand and stare at nothingness.
        But songs of unseen birds
        And tranquil roll of waves


Bring sweet assurance of continuous life
Beyond this silvery cloud.  Fantastic dreams,
        Of tissue subtler still
        Than the wreathed fog, arise,


And cheat my brain with airy vanishings
And mystic glories of the world beyond.
        A whole enchanted town
        Thy baffling folds conceal--


An Orient town, with slender-steepled mosques,
Turret from turret springing, dome from dome,
        Fretted with burning stones,
        And trellised with red gold.


Through spacious streets, where running waters flow,
Sun-screened by fruit-trees and the broad-leaved palm,
        Past the gay-decked bazaars,
        Walk turbaned, dark-eyed men.


Hark! you can hear the many murmuring tongues,
While loud the merchants vaunt their gorgeous wares.
        The sultry air is spiced
        With fragrance of rich gums,


And through the lattice high in yon dead wall,
See where, unveiled, an arch, young, dimpled face,
        Flushed like a musky peach,
        Peers down upon the mart!


From her dark, ringleted and bird-poised head
She hath cast back the milk-white silken veil:
        'Midst the blank blackness there
        She blossoms like a rose.


Beckons she not with those bright, full-orbed eyes,
And open arms that like twin moonbeams gleam?
        Behold her smile on me
        With honeyed, scarlet lips!


Divine Scheherazade! I am thine.
I come!  I come!--Hark! from some far-off mosque
        The shrill muezzin calls
        The hour of silent prayer,


And from the lattice he hath scared my love.
The lattice vanisheth itself--the street,
        The mart, the Orient town;
        Only through still, soft air


That cry is yet prolonged.  I wake to hear
The distant fog-horn peal: before mine eyes
        Stands the white wall of mist,
        Blending with vaporous skies.


Elusive gossamer, impervious
Even to the mighty sun-god's keen red shafts!
        With what a jealous art
        Thy secret thou dost guard!


Well do I know deep in thine inmost folds,
Within an opal hollow, there abides
        The lady of the mist,
        The Undine of the air--


A slender, winged, ethereal, lily form,
Dove-eyed, with fair, free-floating, pearl-wreathed hair,
        In waving raiment swathed
        Of changing, irised hues.


Where her feet, rosy as a shell, have grazed
The freshened grass, a richer emerald glows:
        Into each flower-cup
        Her cool dews she distills.


She knows the tops of jagged mountain-peaks,
She knows the green soft hollows of their sides,
        And unafraid she floats
        O'er the vast-circled seas.


She loves to bask within the moon's wan beams,
Lying, night-long upon the moist, dark earth,
        And leave her seeded pearls
        With morning on the grass.


Ah! that athwart these dim, gray outer courts
Of her fantastic palace I might pass,
        And reach the inmost shrine
        Of her chaste solitude,


And feel her cool and dewy fingers press
My mortal-fevered brow, while in my heart
        She poured with tender love
        Her healing Lethe-balm!


See! the close curtain moves, the spell dissolves!
Slowly it lifts: the dazzling sunshine streams
        Upon a newborn world
        And laughing summer seas.


Swift, snowy-breasted sandbirds twittering glance
Through crystal air.  On the horizon's marge,
        Like a huge purple wraith,
        The dusky fog retreats.






             THE ELIXIR.


"Oh brew me a potion strong and good!
    One golden drop in his wine
Shall charm his sense and fire his blood,
    And  bend his will to  mine."


Poor child of passion! ask of me
    Elixir of death or sleep,
Or Lethe's stream; but love is free,
    And woman must wait and weep.






               SONG.


              Venus.

Frosty lies the winter-landscape,
  In the twilight golden-green.
Down the Park's deserted alleys,
  Naked elms stand stark and lean.


Dumb the murmur of the fountain,
  Birds have flown from lawn and hill.
But while yonder star's ascendant,
  Love triumphal reigneth still.


See the keen flame throb and tremble,
  Brightening in the darkening night,
Breathing like a thing of passion,
  In the sky's smooth chrysolite.


Not beneath the moon, oh lover,
  Thou shalt gain thy heart's desire.
Speak to-night!  The gods are with thee
  Burning with a kindred fire.






                 SPRING LONGING.


   What art thou doing here, O Imagination?  Go
   away I entreat thee by the gods, as thou didst
   come, for I want thee not.  But thou art come
   according to thy old fashion.  I am not angry
   with thee--only go away.
                            --Marcus Antoninus

Lilac hazes veil the skies.
    Languid sighs
Breathes the mild, caressing air.
Pink as coral's branching sprays,
    Orchard ways
With the blossomed peach are fair.


Sunshine, cordial as a kiss,
    Poureth bliss
In this craving soul of mine,
And my heart her flower-cup
    Lifteth up,
Thirsting for the draught divine.


Swift the liquid golden flame
    Through my frame
Sets my throbbing veins afire.
Bright, alluring dreams arise,
    Brim mine eyes
With the tears of strong desire.


All familiar scenes anear
    Disappear--
Homestead, orchard, field, and wold.
Moorish spires and turrets fair
    Cleave the air,
Arabesqued on skies of gold.


Low, my spirit, this May morn,
    Outward borne,
Over seas hath taken wing:
Where the mediaeval town,
    Like a crown,
Wears the garland of the Spring.


Light and sound and odors sweet
    Fill the street;
Gypsy girls are selling flowers.
Lean hidalgos turn aside,
    Amorous-eyed,
'Neath the grim cathedral towers.


Oh, to be in Spain to-day,
    Where the May
Recks no whit of good or evil,
Love and only love breathes she!
    Oh, to be
'Midst the olive-rows of Seville!


Or on such a day to glide
    With the tide
Of the berylline lagoon,
Through the streets that mirror heaven,
    Crystal paven,
In the warm Venetian noon.


At the prow the gondolier
   May not hear,
May not see our furtive kiss;
But he lends with cadenced strain
    The refrain
To our ripe and silent bliss.


Golden shadows, silver light,
    Burnish bright
Air and water, domes and skies;
As in some ambrosial dream,
    On the stream
Floats our bark in magic wise.


Oh, to float day long just so!
    Naught to know
Of the trouble, toil, and fret!
This is love, and this is May:
    Yesterday
And to-morrow to forget!


Whither hast thou, Fancy free,
    Guided me,
Wild Bohemian sister dear?
All thy gypsy soul is stirred
    Since yon bird
Warbled that the Spring was here.


Tempt no more!  I may not follow,
    Like the swallow,
Gayly on the track of Spring.
Bounden by an iron fate,
    I must wait,
Dream and wonder, yearn and sing.






                 THE SOUTH.


Night, and beneath star-blazoned summer skies
  Behold the Spirit of the musky South,
A creole with still-burning, languid eyes,
  Voluptuous limbs and incense-breathing mouth:
        Swathed in spun gauze is she,
From fibres of her own anana tree.


Within these sumptuous woods she lies at ease,
  By rich night-breezes, dewy cool, caressed:
'Twixt cypresses and slim palmetto trees,
  Like to the golden oriole's hanging nest,
        Her airy hammock swings,
And through the dark her mocking-bird yet sings.


How beautiful she is!  A tulip-wreath
  Twines round her shadowy, free-floating hair:
Young, weary, passionate, and sad as death,
  Dark visions haunt for her the vacant air,
        While movelessly she lies
With lithe, lax, folded hands and heavy eyes.


Full well knows she how wide and fair extend
  Her groves bright-flowered, her tangled everglades,
Majestic streams that indolently wend
  Through lush savanna or dense forest shades,
        Where the brown buzzard flies
To broad bayou 'neath hazy-golden skies.


Hers is the savage splendor of the swamp,
  With pomp of scarlet and of purple bloom,
Where blow warm, furtive breezes faint and damp,
  Strange insects whir, and stalking bitterns boom--
        Where from stale waters dead
Oft looms the great-jawed alligator's head.


Her wealth, her beauty, and the blight on these,--
  Of all she is aware: luxuriant woods,
Fresh, living, sunlit, in her dream she sees;
  And ever midst those verdant solitudes
        The soldier's wooden cross,
O'ergrown by creeping tendrils and rank moss.


Was her a dream of empire? was it sin?
  And is it well that all was borne in vain?
She knows no more than one who slow doth win,
  After fierce fever, conscious life again,
        Too tired, too weak, too sad,
By the new light to be stirred or glad.


From rich sea-islands fringing her green shore,
  From broad plantations where swart freemen bend
Bronzed backs in willing labor, from her store
  Of golden fruit, from stream, from town, ascend
        Life-currents of pure health:
Her aims shall be subserved with boundless wealth.


Yet now how listless and how still she lies,
  Like some half-savage, dusky Indian queen,
Rocked in her hammock 'neath her native skies,
  With the pathetic, passive, broken mien
        Of one who, sorely proved,
Great-souled, hath suffered much and much hath loved!


But look! along the wide-branched, dewy glade
  Glimmers the dawn: the light palmetto-trees
And cypresses reissue from the shade,
  And SHE hath wakened.  Through clear air she sees
        The pledge, the brightening ray,
And leaps from dreams to hail the coming day.






       SPRING STAR.


            I.


Over the lamp-lit street,
Trodden by hurrying feet,
Where mostly pulse and beat
    Life's throbbing veins,
See where the April star,
Blue-bright as sapphires are,
Hangs in deep heavens far,
    Waxes and wanes.


Strangely alive it seems,
Darting keen, dazzling gleams,
Veiling anon its beams,
    Large, clear, and pure.
In the broad western sky
No orb may shine anigh,
No lesser radiancy
    May there endure.


Spring airs are blowing sweet:
Low in the dusky street
Star-beams and eye-beams meet.
    Rapt in his dreams,
All through the crowded mart
Poet with swift-stirred heart,
Passing beneath, must start,
    Thrilled by those gleams.


Naught doth he note anear,
Fain through Night's veil to peer,
Reach that resplendent sphere,
    Reading her sign.
Where point those sharp, thin rays,
Guiding his weary maze,
Blesseth she or betrays,
    Who may divine?


"Guard me, celestial light,
Lofty, serenely bright:
Lead my halt feet aright,"
    Prayerful he speaks.
"For a new ray hath shone
Over my spirit lone.
Be this new soul the one
    whom my soul seeks."




                 II.


Beside her casement oped the maiden sits,
  Where the mild evening spirit of the Spring
Gently between the city's homesteads flits
  To kiss her brows, and floats on languid wing,
  Vague longings in her breast awakening.
While her heart trembles 'neath those dim, deep skies,
As the quick sea that 'neath the globed moon lies.


Where her eyes rest the full-orbed evening star
  Burns with white flame: it beckons, shrinks, dilates.
She, dazzled by that shining world afar,
  May not withdraw her gaze: breathless she waits.
  Some promised joy from Heaven's very gates
Unto her soul seems proffered.  When shall be
The bright fulfilment of that star's decree?


Nor glad nor sad is she: she doth not know
  That through the city's throng one threads his way,
Thrilled likewise by that planet's mystic glow,
  And hastes to seek her.  What sweet change shall sway
  Her spirit at his coming?  What new ray
Upon his shadowy life from her shall fall?
The silent star burns on, and knoweth all.






          A JUNE NIGHT.


Ten o'clock: the broken moon
  Hangs not yet a half hour high,
    Yellow as a shield of brass,
In the dewy air of June,
  Poised between the vaulted sky
    And the ocean's liquid glass.


Earth lies in the shadow still;
  Low black bushes, trees, and lawn
    Night's ambrosial dews absorb;
Through the foliage creeps a thrill,
  Whispering of yon spectral dawn
    And the hidden climbing orb.


Higher, higher, gathering light,
  Veiling with a golden gauze
    All the trembling atmosphere,
See, the rayless disk grows white!
  Hark, the glittering billows pause!

    Faint, far sounds possess the ear.


Elves on such a night as this
  Spin their rings upon the grass;
    On the beach the water-fay
Greets her lover with a kiss;
  Through the air swift spirits pass,
    Laugh, caress, and float away.


Shut thy lids and thou shalt see
  Angel faces wreathed with light,
    Mystic forms long vanished hence.
Ah, too fine, too rare, they be
  For the grosser mortal sight,
    And they foil our waking sense.


Yet we feel them floating near,
  Know that we are not alone,
    Though our open eyes behold
Nothing save the moon's bright sphere,
  In the vacant heavens shown,
    And the ocean's path of gold.






          MAGNETISM.


By the impulse of my will,
  By the red flame in my blood,
By me nerves' electric thrill,
  By the passion of my mood,
My concentrated desire,
  My undying, desperate love,
I ignore Fate, I defy her,
  Iron-hearted Death I move.
When the town lies numb with sleep,
  Here, round-eyed I sit; my breath
Quickly stirred, my flesh a-creep,
  And I force the gates of death.
I nor move nor speak--you'd deem
  From my quiet face and hands,
I were tranced--but in her dream,
  SHE responds, she understands.
I have power on what is not,
  Or on what has ceased to be,
From that deep, earth-hollowed spot,
  I can lift her up to me.
And, or ere I am aware
  Through the closed and curtained door,
Comes my lady white and fair,
  And embraces me once more.
Though the clay clings to her gown,
  Yet all heaven is in her eyes;
Cool, kind fingers press mine eyes,
  To my soul her soul replies.
But when breaks the common dawn,
  And the city wakes--behold!
My shy phantom is withdrawn,
  And I shiver lone and cold.
And I know when she has left,
  She is stronger far than I,
And more subtly spun her weft,
  Than my human wizardry.
Though I force her to my will,
  By the red flame in my blood,
By my nerves' electric thrill,
  By the passion of my mood,
Yet all day a ghost am I.
  Nerves unstrung, spent will, dull brain.
I achieve, attain, but die,
  And she claims me hers again.






          AUGUST MOON.


Look! the round-cheeked moon floats high,
In the glowing August sky,
Quenching all her neighbor stars,
Save the steady flame of Mars.
White as silver shines the sea,
Far-off sails like phantoms be,
Gliding o'er that lake of light,
Vanishing in nether night.
Heavy hangs the tasseled corn,
Sighing for the cordial morn;
But the marshy-meadows bare,
Love this spectral-lighted air,
Drink the dews and lift their song,
Chirp of crickets all night long;
Earth and sea enchanted lie
'Neath that moon-usurped sky.


To the faces of our friends
Unfamiliar traits she lends--
Quaint, white witch, who looketh down
With a glamour all her own.
Hushed are laughter, jest, and speech,
Mute and heedless each of each,
In the glory wan we sit,
Visions vague before us flit;
Side by side, yet worlds apart,
Heart becometh strange to heart.


Slowly in a moved voice, then,
Ralph, the artist spake again--
"Does not that weird orb unroll
Scenes phantasmal to your soul?
As I gaze  thereon, I swear,
Peopled grows the vacant air,
Fables, myths alone are real,
White-clad sylph-like figures steal
'Twixt the bushes, o'er the lawn,
Goddess, nymph, undine, and faun.
Yonder, see the Willis dance,
Faces pale with stony glance;
They are maids who died unwed,
And they quit their gloomy bed,
Hungry still for human pleasure,
Here to trip a moonlit measure.
Near the shore the mermaids play,
Floating on the cool, white spray,
Leaping from the glittering surf
To the dark and fragrant turf,
Where the frolic trolls, and elves
Daintily disport themselves.
All the shapes by poet's brain,
Fashioned, live for me again,
In this spiritual light,
Less than day, yet more than night.
What a world! a waking dream,
All things other than they seem,
Borrowing a finer grace,
From yon golden globe in space;
Touched with wild, romantic glory,
Foliage fresh and billows hoary,
Hollows bathed in yellow haze,
Hills distinct and fields of maize,
Ancient legends come to mind.
Who would marvel should he find,
In the copse or nigh the spring,
Summer fairies gamboling
Where the honey-bees do suck,
Mab and Ariel and Puck?
Ah! no modern mortal sees
Creatures delicate as these.
All the simple faith has gone
Which their world was builded on.
Now the moonbeams coldly glance
On no gardens of romance;
To prosaic senses dull,
Baldur's dead, the Beautiful,
Hark, the cry rings overhead,
'Universal Pan is dead!'"
"Requiescant!"  Claude's grave tone
Thrilled us strangely.  "I am one
Who would not restore that Past,
Beauty will immortal last,
Though the beautiful must die--
This the ages verify.
And had Pan deserved the name
Which his votaries misclaim,
He were living with us yet.
I behold, without regret,
Beauty in new forms recast,
Truth emerging from the vast,
Bright and orbed, like yonder sphere,
Making the obscure air clear.
He shall be of bards the king,
Who, in worthy verse, shall sing
All the conquests of the hour,
Stealing no fictitious power
From the classic types outworn,
But his rhythmic line adorn
With the marvels of the real.
He the baseless feud shall heal
That estrangeth wide apart
Science from her sister Art.
Hold! look through this glass for me?
Artist, tell me what you see?"
"I!" cried Ralph.  "I see in place
Of Astarte's silver face,
Or veiled Isis' radiant robe,
Nothing but a rugged globe
Seamed with awful rents and scars.
And below no longer Mars,
Fierce, flame-crested god of war,
But a lurid, flickering star,
Fashioned like our mother earth,
Vexed, belike, with death and birth."


Rapt in dreamy thought the while,
With a sphinx-like shadowy smile,
Poet Florio sat, but now
Spake in deep-voiced accents slow,
More as one who probes his mind,
Than for us--"Who seeks, shall find--
Widening knowledge surely brings
Vaster themes to him who sings.
Was veiled Isis more sublime
Than yon frozen fruit of Time,
Hanging in the naked sky?
Death's domain--for worlds too die.
Lo! the heavens like a scroll
Stand revealed before my soul;
And the hieroglyphs are suns--
Changeless change the law that runs
Through the flame-inscribed page,
World on world and age on age,
Balls of ice and orbs of fire,
What abides when these expire?
Through slow cycles they revolve,
Yet at last like clouds dissolve.
Jove, Osiris, Brahma pass,
Races wither like the grass.
Must not mortals be as gods
To embrace such periods?
Yet at Nature's heart remains
One who waxes not nor wanes.
And our crowning glory still
Is to have conceived his will."






              SUNRISE.


          September 26, 1881.


Weep for the martyr!  Strew his bier
With the last roses of the year;
Shadow the land with sables; knell
The harsh-tongued, melancholy bell;
Beat the dull muffled drum, and flaunt
The drooping banner; let the chant
Of the deep-throated organ sob--
One voice, one sorrow, one heart-throb,
From land to land, from sea to sea--
The huge world quires his elegy.
Tears, love, and honor he shall have,
Through ages keeping green his grave.
Too late approved, too early lost,
His story is the people's boast.
Tough-sinewed offspring of the soil,
Of peasant lineage, reared to toil,
In Europe he had been a thing
To the glebe tethered--here a king!
Crowned not for some transcendent gift,
Genius of power that may lift
A Caesar or a Bonaparte
Up to the starred goal of his heart;
But that he was the epitome
Of all the people aim to be.
Were they his dying trust?  He was
No less their model and their glass.
In him the daily traits were viewed
Of the undistinguished multitude.
Brave as the silent myriads are,
Crushed by the juggernaut world-car;
Strong with the people's strength, yet mild,
Simple and tender as a child;
Wise with the wisdom of the heart,
Able in council, field, and mart;
Nor lacking in the lambent gleam,
The great soul's final stamp--the beam
Of genial fun, the humor sane
Wherewith the hero sports with pain.
His virtues hold within the span
Of his obscurest fellow-man.
To live without reproach, to die
Without a fear--in these words lie
His highest aims, for none too high.
No triumph his beyond the reach
Of patient courage, kindly speech;
And yet so brave the soul outbreathed,
The great example he bequeathed,
Were all to follow, we should see
A universal chivalry.


His trust, the People!  They respond
From Maine to Florida, beyond
The sea-walled continent's broad scope,
Honor his pledge, confirm his hope.
Hark! over seas the echo hence,
The nations do him reverence.
An Empress lays her votive wreath
Where peoples weep with bated breath.
The world-clock strikes a fateful hour,
Bright with fair portents, big with power,--
The first since history's course has run,
When kings' and peoples' cause is one;
Those mourn a brother--these a son!


O how he loved them!  That gray morn,
When his wound-wasted form was borne
North, from the White House to the sea,
Lifting his tired lids thankfully,
"How good," he murmured in his pain,
"To see the people once again!"
Oh, how they loved him!  They stood there,
Thronging the road, the street, the square,
With hushed lips locked in silent prayer,
Uncovered heads and streaming eyes,
Breathless as when a father dies.
The records of the ghostly ride,
Past town and field at morning-tide.


When life's full stream is wont to gush
Through all its ways with boisterous rush,
--The records note that once a hound
Had barked, and once was heard the sound
Of cart-wheels rumbling on the stones--
And once, mid stifled sobs and groans,
One man dared audibly lament,
And cried, "God bless the president!"
Always the waiting crowds to send
A God-speed to his journey's end--
The anxious whisper, brow of gloom,
As in a sickness-sacred room,
Till his ear drank with ecstasy
The rhythmic thunders of the sea.


Tears for the smitten fatherless,
The wife's, the mother's life-distress,
To whom the million-throated moan
From throne and hut, may not atone
For one hushed voice, one empty chair,
One presence missing everywhere.
But only words of joy and sheer,
The people from his grave shall hear.
Were they not worthy of his trust,
From whose seed sprang the sacred dust?
He broke the bars that separate
The humble from the high estate.
And heirs of empire round his bed
Mourn with the "disinherited."


Oh, toil-worn, patient Heart that bleeds,
Whose martyrdom even his exceeds,
Wronged, cursed, despised, misunderstood--
Oh, all-enduring multitude,
Rejoice! amid you tears, rejoice!
There issues from this grave a voice,
Proclaiming your long night is o'er,
Your day-dawn breaks from shore to shore.
You have redeemed his pledge, remained
Secure, erect, and self-sustained,
Holding more dear one thing alone,
Even than the blood of dearest son,
Revering with religious awe
The inviolable might of Law.






             A MASQUE OF VENICE.

                 (A Dream.)


           Not a stain,
In the sun-brimmed sapphire cup that is the sky--
Not a ripple on the black translucent lane
Of the palace-walled lagoon.
           Not a cry
As the gondoliers with velvet oar glide by,
Through the golden afternoon.


           From this height
Where the carved, age-yellowed balcony o'erjuts
Yonder liquid, marble pavement, see the light
Shimmer soft beneath the bridge,
           That abuts
On a labyrinth of water-ways and shuts
Half their sky off with its ridge.


           We shall mark
All the pageant from this ivory porch of ours,
Masques and jesters, mimes and minstrels, while we hark
To their music as they fare.
           Scent their flowers
Flung from boat to boat in rainbow radiant showers
Through the laughter-ringing air.


           See! they come,
Like a flock of serpent-throated black-plumed swans,
With the mandoline, viol, and the drum,
Gems afire on arms ungloved,
           Fluttering fans,
Floating mantles like a great moth's streaky vans
Such as Veronese loved.


           But behold
In their midst a white unruffled swan appear.
One strange barge that snowy tapestries enfold,
White its tasseled, silver prow.
           Who is here?
Prince of Love in masquerade or Prince of Fear,
Clad in glittering silken snow?


           Cheek and chin
Where the mask's edge stops are of the hoar-frosts hue,
And no eyebeams seem to sparkle from within
Where the hollow rings have place.
           Yon gay crew
Seem to fly him, he seems ever to pursue.
'T is our sport to watch the race.


           At his side
Stands the goldenest of beauties; from her glance,
From her forehead, shines the splendor of a bride,
And her feet seem shod with wings,
           To entrance,
For she leaps into a wild and rhythmic dance,
Like Salome at the King's.


           'T is his aim
Just to hold, to clasp her once against his breast,
Hers to flee him, to elude him in the game.
Ah, she fears him overmuch!
           Is it jest,--
Is it earnest? a strange riddle lurks half-guessed
In her horror of his touch.


           For each time
That his snow-white fingers reach her, fades some ray
From the glory of her beauty in its prime;
And the knowledge grows upon us that the dance
          Is no play
'Twixt the pale, mysterious lover and the fay--
But the whirl of fate and chance.


           Where the tide
Of the broad lagoon sinks plumb into the sea,
There the mystic gondolier hath won his bride.
Hark, one helpless, stifled scream!
           Must it be?
Mimes and minstrels, flowers and music, where are ye?
Was all Venice such a dream?






          AUTUMN SADNESS.


Air and sky are swathed in gold
    Fold on fold,
Light glows through the trees like wine.
Earth, sun-quickened, swoons for bliss
    'Neath his kiss,
Breathless in a trance divine.


Nature pauses from her task,
    Just to bask
In these lull'd transfigured hours.
The green leaf nor stays nor goes,
    But it grows
Royaler than mid-June's flowers.


Such impassioned silence fills
    All the hills
Burning with unflickering fire--
Such a blood-red splendor stains
    The leaves' veins,
Life seems one fulfilled desire.


While earth, sea, and heavens shine,
    Heart of mine,
Say, what art thou waiting for?
Shall the cup ne'er reach the lip,
    But still slip
Till the life-long thirst give o'er?


Shall my soul, no frosts may tame,
    Catch new flame
From the incandescent air?
In this nuptial joy apart,
    Oh my heart,
Whither shall we lonely fare?


Seek some dusky, twilight spot,
    Quite forgot
Of the Autumn's Bacchic fire.
Where soft mists and shadows sleep,
    There outweep
Barren longing's vain desire.






                  SONNETS.


                  ECHOES.


Late-born and woman-souled I dare not hope,
The freshness of the elder lays, the might
Of manly, modern passion shall alight
Upon my Muse's lips, nor may I cope
(Who veiled and screened by womanhood must grope)
With the world's strong-armed warriors and recite
The dangers, wounds, and triumphs of the fight;
Twanging the full-stringed lyre through all its scope.
But if thou ever in some lake-floored cave
O'erbrowed by hard rocks, a wild voice wooed and heard,
Answering at once from heaven and earth and wave,
Lending elf-music to thy harshest word,
Misprize thou not these echoes that belong
To one in love with solitude and song.




                 SUCCESS.


Oft have I brooded on defeat and pain,
The pathos of the stupid, stumbling throng.
These I ignore to-day and only long
To pour my soul forth in one trumpet strain,
One clear, grief-shattering, triumphant song,
For all the victories of man's high endeavor,
Palm-bearing, laureled deeds that live forever,
The splendor clothing him whose will is strong.
Hast thou beheld the deep, glad eyes of one
Who has persisted and achieved?  Rejoice!
On naught diviner shines the all-seeing sun.
Salute him with free heart and choral voice,
'Midst flippant, feeble crowds of spectres wan,
The bold, significant, successful man.




              THE NEW COLOSSUS.*


Not like the brazen giant of Greek fame,
With conquering limbs astride from land to land;
Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall stand
A mighty woman with a torch, whose flame
Is the imprisoned lightning, and her name
Mother of Exiles.  From her beacon-hand
Glows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes command
The air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame.
"Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!" cries she
With silent lips.  "Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to be free,
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,
I lift my lamp beside the golden door!"

*Written in aid of the Bartholdi Pedestal Fund, 1883.




             VENUS OF THE LOUVRE.


Down the long hall she glistens like a star,
The foam-born mother of Love, transfixed to stone,
Yet none the less immortal, breathing on.
Time's brutal hand hath maimed but could not mar.
When first the enthralled enchantress from afar
Dazzled mine eyes, I saw not her alone,
Serenely poised on her world-worshipped throne,
As when she guided once her dove-drawn car,--
But at her feet a pale, death-stricken Jew,
Her life adorer, sobbed farewell to love.
Here Heine wept!  Here still we weeps anew,
Nor ever shall his shadow lift or move,
While mourns one ardent heart, one poet-brain,
For vanished Hellas and Hebraic pain.




                  CHOPIN.


                    I.


A  dream of interlinking hands, of feet
Tireless to spin the unseen, fairy woof,
Of the entangling waltz.  Bright eyebeams meet,
Gay laughter echoes from the vaulted roof.
Warm perfumes rise; the soft unflickering glow
Of branching lights sets off the changeful charms
Of glancing gems, rich stuffs, dazzling snow
Of necks unkerchieft, and bare, clinging arms.
Hark to the music!  How beneath the strain
Of reckless revelry, vibrates and sobs
One fundamental chord of constant pain,
The pulse-beat of the poet's heart that throbs.
So yearns, though all the dancing waves rejoice,
The troubled sea's disconsolate, deep voice.



                   II.


Who shall proclaim the golden fable false
Of Orpheus' miracles?  This subtle strain
Above our prose-world's sordid loss and gain
Lightly uplifts us.  With the rhythmic waltz,
The lyric prelude, the nocturnal song
Of love and languor, varied visions rise,
That melt and blend to our enchanted eyes.
The Polish poet who sleeps silenced long,
The seraph-souled musician, breathes again
Eternal eloquence, immortal pain.
Revived the exalted face we know so well,
The illuminated eyes, the fragile frame,
Slowly consuming with its inward flame,
We stir not, speak not, lest we break the spell.



                    III.


A voice was needed, sweet and true and fine
As the sad spirit of the evening breeze,
Throbbing with human passion, yet divine
As the wild bird's untutored melodies.
A voice for him 'neath twilight heavens dim,
Who mourneth for his dead, while round him fall
The wan and noiseless leaves.  A voice for him
Who sees the first green sprout, who hears the call
Of the first robin on the first spring day.
A voice for all whom Fate hath set apart,
Who, still misprized, must perish by the way,
Longing with love, for that they lack the art
Of their own soul's expression.  For all these
Sing the unspoken hope, the vague, sad reveries.



                     IV.


Then Nature shaped a poet's heart--a lyre
From out whose chords the lightest breeze that blows
Drew trembling music, wakening sweet desire.
How shall she cherish him?  Behold! she throws
This precious, fragile treasure in the whirl
Of seething passions; he is scourged and stung,
Must dive in storm-vext seas, if but one pearl
Of art or beauty therefrom may be wrung.
No pure-browed pensive nymph his Muse shall be,
An amazon of thought with sovereign eyes,
Whose kiss was poison, man-brained, worldly-wise,
Inspired that elfin, delicate harmony.
Rich gain for us!  But with him is it well?
The poet who must sound earth, heaven, and hell!






             SYMPHONIC STUDIES.


          (After Robert Schumann.)


                  Prelude.


Blue storm-clouds in hot heavens of mid-July
  Hung heavy, brooding over land and sea:
  Our hearts, a-tremble, throbbed in harmony
With the wild, restless tone of air and sky.
Shall we not call him Prospero who held
  In his enchanted hands the fateful key
  Of that tempestuous hour's mystery,
And with him to wander by a sun-bright shore,
  To hear fine, fairy voices, and to fly
With disembodied Ariel once more
  Above earth's wrack and ruin?  Far and nigh
The laughter of the thunder echoed loud,
And harmless lightnings leapt from cloud to cloud.



                     I.


Floating upon a swelling wave of sound,
  We seemed to overlook an endless sea:
  Poised 'twixt clear heavens and glittering surf were we.
We drank the air in flight: we knew no bound
To the audacious ventures of desire.
  Nigh us the sun was dropping, drowned in gold;
  Deep, deep below the burning billows rolled;
And all the sea sang like a smitten lyre.
Oh, the wild voices of those chanting waves!
  The human faces glimpsed beneath the tide!
Familiar eyes gazed from profound sea-caves,
  And we, exalted, were as we had died.
We knew the sea was Life, the harmonious cry
The blended discords of humanity.



                     II.


Look deeper yet: mark 'midst the wave-blurred mass,
  In lines distinct, in colors clear defined,
  The typic groups and figures of mankind.
Behold within the cool and liquid glass
Bright child-folk sporting with smooth yellow shells,
  Astride of dolphins, leaping up to kiss
  Fair mother-faces.  From the vast abyss
How joyously their thought-free laughter wells!
  Lulled by the overwhelming water's sound,
And some make mouths at dragons, undismayed.
  Oh dauntless innocence!  The gulfs profound
Reecho strangely with their ringing glee,
And with wise mermaids' plaintive melody.



                     III.


What do the sea-nymphs in that coral cave?
  With wondering eyes their supple forms they bend
  O'er something rarely beautiful.  They lend
Their lithe white arms, and through the golden wave
They lift it tenderly.  Oh blinding sight!
  A naked, radiant goddess tranced in sleep,
  Full-limbed, voluptuous, 'neath the mantling sweep
Of auburn locks that kiss her ankles white!
Upward they bear her, chanting low and sweet:
  The clinging waters part before their way,
Jewels of flame are dancing 'neath their feet.
  Up in the sunshine, in soft foam, they lay
Their precious burden, and return forlorn.
Oh, bliss! oh, anguish!  Mortals, LOVE is born!



                     IV.


Hark! from unfathomable deeps a dirge
  Swells sobbing through the melancholy air:
  Where Love has entered, Death is also there.
The wail outrings the chafed, tumultuous surge;
Ocean and earth, the illimitable skies,
  Prolong one note, a mourning for the dead,
  The cry of souls not to be comforted.
What piercing music!  Funeral visions rise,
And send the hot tears raining down our cheek.
  We see the silent grave upon the hill
  With its lone lilac-bush.  O heart, be still!
She will not rise, she will not stir nor speak.
Surely, the unreturning dead are blest.
Ring on, sweet dirge, and knell us to our rest!



                     V.


Upon the silver beach the undines dance
  With interlinking arms and flying hair;
  Like polished marble gleam their limbs left bare;
Upon their virgin rites pale moonbeams glance.
Softer the music! for their foam-bright feet
  Print not the moist floor where they trip their round:
  Affrighted they will scatter at a sound,
Leap in their cool sea-chambers, nimbly fleet,
And we shall doubt that we have ever seen,
  While our sane eyes behold stray wreaths of mist,
  Shot with faint colors by the moon-rays kissed,
Floating snow-soft, snow-white, where these had been.
Already, look! the wave-washed sands are bare,
And mocking laughter ripples through the air.



                  Epilogue.


Forth in the sunlit, rain-bathed air we stepped,
  Sweet with the dripping grass and flowering vine,
  And saw through irised clouds the pale sun shine.
Back o'er the hills the rain-mist slowly crept
Like a transparent curtain's slivery sheen;
  And fronting us the painted bow was arched,
  Whereunder the majestic cloud-shapes marched:
In the wet, yellow light the dazzling green
Of lawn and bush and tree seemed stained with blue.
  Our hearts o'erflowed with peace.  With smiles we spake
Of partings in the past, of courage new,
  Of high achievement, of the dreams that make
A wonder and a glory of our days,
And all life's music but a hymn of praise.




             LONG ISLAND SOUND.


I see it as it looked one afternoon
In August,--by a fresh soft breeze o'erblown.
The swiftness of the tide, the light thereon,
A far-off sail, white as a crescent moon.
The shining waters with pale currents strewn,
The quiet fishing smacks, the Eastern cove,
The semi-circle of its dark, green grove.
The luminous grasses, and the merry sun
In the grave sky; the sparkle far and wide,
Laughter of unseen children, cheerful chirp
Of crickets, and low lisp of rippling tide,
Light summer clouds fantastical as sleep
Changing unnoted while I gazed thereon.
All these fair sounds and sights I made my own.




                   DESTINY.


                    1856.


Paris, from throats of iron, silver, brass,
Joy-thundering cannon, blent with chiming bells,
And martial strains, the full-voiced paean swells.
The air is starred with flags, the chanted mass
Throngs all the churches, yet the broad streets swarm
With glad-eyed groups who chatter, laugh, and pass,
In holiday confusion, class with class,
And over all the spring, the sun-floods warm!
In the Imperial palace that March morn,
The beautiful young mother lay and smiled;
For by her side just breathed the Prince, her child,
Heir to an empire, to the purple born,
Crowned with the Titan's name that stirs the heart
Like a blown clarion--one more Bonaparte.


                    1879.


Born to the purple, lying stark and dead,
Transfixed with poisoned spears, beneath the sun
Of brazen Africa!  Thy grave is one,
Fore-fated youth (on whom were visited
Follies and sins not thine), whereat the world,
Heartless howe'er it be, will pause to sing
A dirge, to breathe a sigh, a wreath to fling
Of rosemary and rue with bay-leaves curled.
Enmeshed in toils ambitious, not thine own,
Immortal, loved boy-Prince, thou tak'st thy stand
With early doomed Don Carlos, hand in hand
With mild-browed Arthur, Geoffrey's murdered son.
Louis the Dauphin lifts his thorn-ringed head,
And welcomes thee, his brother, 'mongst the dead.




         FROM ONE AUGUR TO ANOTHER.


So, Calchas, on the sacred Palatine,
Thou thought of Mopsus, and o'er wastes of sea
A flower brought your message.  I divine
(Through my deep art) the kindly mockery
That played about your lips and in your eyes,
Plucking the frail leaf, while you dreamed of home.
Thanks for the silent greeting!  I shall prize,
Beyond June's rose, the scentless flower of Rome.
All the Campagna spreads before my sight,
The mouldering wall, the Caesars' tombs unwreathed,
Rome and the Tiber, and the yellow light,
Wherein the honey-colored blossom breathed.
But most I thank it--egoists that we be!
For proving then and there you thought of me.




           THE CRANES OF IBYCUS.


There was a man who watched the river flow
Past the huge town, one gray November day.
Round him in narrow high-piled streets at play
The boys made merry as they saw him go,
Murmuring half-loud, with eyes upon the stream,
The immortal screed he held within his hand.
For he was walking in an April land
With Faust and Helen.  Shadowy as a dream
Was the prose-world, the river and the town.
Wild joy possessed him; through enchanted skies
He saw the cranes of Ibycus swoop down.
He closed the page, he lifted up his eyes,
Lo--a black line of birds in wavering thread
Bore him the greetings of the deathless dead!




                 CRITIC AND POET.


                   An Apologue.


("Poetry must be simple, sensuous, or impassioned;
this man is neither simple, sensuous, nor impassioned;
therefore he is not a poet.")


No man had ever heard a nightingale,
When once a keen-eyed naturalist was stirred
To study and define--what is a bird,
To classify by rote and book, nor fail
To mark its structure and to note the scale
Whereon its song might possibly be heard.
Thus far, no farther;--so he spake the word.
When of a sudden,--hark, the nightingale!


Oh deeper, higher than he could divine
That all-unearthly, untaught strain!  He saw
The plain, brown warbler, unabashed.  "Not mine"
(He cried) "the error of this fatal flaw.
No bird is this, it soars beyond my line,
Were it a bird, 't would answer to my law."




           ST. MICHAEL'S CHAPEL.


When the vexed hubbub of our world of gain
Roars round about me as I walk the street,
The myriad noise of Traffic, and the beat
Of Toil's incessant hammer, the fierce strain
Of struggle hand to hand and brain to brain,
Ofttimes a sudden dream my sense will cheat,
The gaudy shops, the sky-piled roofs retreat,
And all at once I stand enthralled again
Within a marble minster over-seas.
I watch the solemn gold-stained gloom that creeps
To kiss an alabaster tomb, where sleeps
A lady 'twixt two knights' stone effigies,
And every day in dusky glory steeps
Their sculptured slumber of five centuries.




              LIFE AND ART.


Not while the fever of the blood is strong,
The heart throbs loud, the eyes are veiled, no less
With passion than with tears, the Muse shall bless
The poet-soul to help and soothe with song.
Not then she bids his trembling lips express
The aching gladness, the voluptuous pain.
Life is his poem then; flesh, sense, and brain
One full-stringed lyre attuned to happiness.
But when the dream is done, the pulses fail,
The day's illusion, with the day's sun set,
He, lonely in the twilight, sees the pale
Divine Consoler, featured like Regret,
Enter and clasp his hand and kiss his brow.
Then his lips ope to sing--as mine do now.




                SYMPATHY.


Therefore I dare reveal my private woe,
The secret blots of my imperfect heart,
Nor strive to shrink or swell mine own desert,
Nor beautify nor hide.  For this I know,
That even as I am, thou also art.
Thou past heroic forms unmoved shalt go,
To pause and bide with me, to whisper low:
"Not I alone am weak, not I apart
Must suffer, struggle, conquer day by day.
Here is my very cross by strangers borne,
Here is my bosom-sun wherefrom I pray
Hourly deliverance--this my rose, my thorn.
This woman my soul's need can understand,
Stretching o'er silent gulfs her sister hand."




              YOUTH AND DEATH.


What hast thou done to this dear friend of mine,
Thou cold, white, silent Stranger?  From my hand
Her clasped hand slips to meet the grasp of thine;
Here eyes that flamed with love, at thy command
Stare stone-blank on blank air; her frozen heart
Forgets my presence.  Teach me who thou art,
Vague shadow sliding 'twixt my friend and me.
  I never saw thee till this sudden hour.
What secret door gave entrance unto thee?
  What power in thine, o'ermastering Love's own power?




                AGE AND DEATH.


Come closer, kind, white, long-familiar friend,
  Embrace me, fold me to thy broad, soft breast.
Life has grown strange and cold, but thou dost bend
  Mild eyes of blessing wooing to my rest.
So often hast thou come, and from my side
So many hast thou lured, I only bide
Thy beck, to follow glad thy steps divine.
  Thy world is peopled for me; this world's bare.
  Through all these years my couch thou didst prepare.
Thou art supreme Love--kiss me--I am thine!




               CITY VISIONS.


                    I.


As the blind Milton's memory of light,
The deaf Beethoven's phantasy of tone,
Wrought joys for them surpassing all things known
In our restricted sphere of sound and sight,--
So while the glaring streets of brick and stone
Vex with heat, noise, and dust from morn till night,
I will give rein to Fancy, taking flight
From dismal now and here, and dwell alone
With new-enfranchised senses.  All day long,
Think ye 't is I, who sit 'twixt darkened walls,
While ye chase beauty over land and sea?
Uplift on wings of some rare poet's song,
Where the wide billow laughs and leaps and falls,
I soar cloud-high, free as the the winds are free.



                     II.


Who grasps the substance? who 'mid shadows strays?
He who within some dark-bright wood reclines,
'Twixt sleep and waking, where the needled pines
Have cushioned all his couch with soft brown sprays?
He notes not how the living water shines,
Trembling along the cliff, a flickering haze,
Brimming a wine-bright pool, nor lifts his gaze
To read the ancient wonders and the signs.
Does he possess the actual, or do I,
Who paint on air more than his sense receives,
The glittering pine-tufts with closed eyes behold,
Breathe the strong resinous perfume, see the sky
Quiver like azure flame between the leaves,
And open unseen gates with key of gold?




                  INFLUENCE.


The fervent, pale-faced Mother ere she sleep,
Looks out upon the zigzag-lighted square,
The beautiful bare trees, the blue night-air,
The revelation of the star-strewn deep,
World above world, and heaven over heaven.
Between the tree-tops and the skies, her sight
Rests on a steadfast, ruddy-shining light,
High in the tower, an earthly star of even.
Hers is the faith in saints' and angels' power,
And mediating love--she breathes a prayer
For yon tired watcher in the gray old tower.
He the shrewd, skeptic poet unaware
Feels comforted and stilled, and knows not whence
Falls this unwonted peace on heart and sense.




                RESTLESSNESS.*


Would I had waked thi