    'T is much to me,
Whose privilege has been in this rare hour,
Beneath the master to discern the man,
And thus add friendship unto admiration.
[He presses RIBERA'S hand and is about to pick up his mantle and
hat.  LUCA springs forward, and, while he is throwing the cloak
around the Princes's shoulders, enter hastily MARIA,  enveloped in
her mantilla, as she went to church.]


MARIA.
Well, father, an I veiled and swathed to suit you,
To cross the Strada?
[She throws off her mantilla and appears all in white.  She goes
to embrace her father, when she suddenly perceives the Prince, and
stands speechless and blushing.]


RIBERA.
         Child, his Royal Highness
Prince John of Austria.


DON JOHN.
         Good-day, signora.
Already twice my gracious stars have smiled.
I saw you in the street.  You wore your mantle,
As the noon sun might wear a veil of cloud,
Covering, but not concealing.


MARIA.
         I, sir, twice
Have unaware stood in your royal presence.
You are welcome to my father's home and mine.
I scarce need crave your pardon for my entrance;
Yourself must see how well assured I felt
My father was alone.


DON JOHN.
         And so you hoped
To find him--shall I read your answer thus?


RIBERA.
Nay, press her not.  Your Highness does her wrong,
So harshly to construe her simpleness.
My daughter and myself are one, and both
Will own an equal pleasure if you bide.


DON JOHN (seating himself).
You chain me with kind words.


MARIA.
         My father, sir,
Hath surely told you our delight and marvel
At the enchantments of your feast.  For me
The night was brief, rich, beautiful, and strange
As a bright dream.


DON JOHN.
         I will gainsay you not.
A beauteous soul can shed her proper glory
On mean surroundings.  I have likewise dreamed,
Nor am I yet awake.  This morn hath been
A feast for mind and eye.  Yon shepherd-prince,
Whom angels visit in his sleep, shall crown
Your father's brow with a still fresher laurel,
And link in equal fame the Spanish artist
With the Lord's chosen prophet.


RIBERA.
         That may be,
For in the form of that wayfarer
I drew myself.  So have I slept beneath
The naked heavens, pillowed by a stone,
With no more shelter than the wind-stirred branches,
While the thick dews of our Valencian nights
Drenched my rude weeds, and chilled through blood and bone.
Yet to me also were the heavens revealed,
And angels visited my dreams.


DON JOHN.
         How strange
That you, dear masters, standing on the crown
Of a long life's continuous ascent,
Should backward glance unto such dark beginnings.


RIBERA.
Obscure are all beginnings.  Yet I muse
With pleasing pain on those fierce years of struggle.
They were to me my birthright; all the vigor,
The burning passion, the unflinching truth,
My later pencil gained, I gleaned from them.
I prized them.  I reclaimed their ragged freedom,
Rather than hold my seat, a liveried slave,
At the rich board of my Lord Cardinal.
A palace was a prison till I reared
Mine own.  But now my child's heart I would pierce
Sooner than see it bear the least of ills,
Such as I then endured.


DON JOHN.
         Donna Maria
May smile, sir, at your threat; she is in a pleasance,
Where no rude breezes blow, no shadow falls
Darker than that of cool and fragrant leaves.
Yea, were it otherwise--had you not reaped
The fruit of your own works, she had not suffered.
Your children are Spain's children.


RIBERA.
         Sir, that word
Is the most grateful you have spoken yet.
Why are thou silent, daughter?


MARIA (absently).
         What should I say?
The Prince is kind.  I scarcely heard your words.
I listened to your voices, and I mused.

DON JOHN (rising).
I overstep your patience.


MARIA.
         You will be gone?
What have I said?


RIBERA.
         You are a child, Maria.
To-morrow I will wait your Highness.


DON JOHN.
         Thanks.
To-morrow noon.  Farewell, signora.
[Exit DON JOHN.]


RIBERA.
What ails you, daughter?  You forget yourself.
Your tongue cleaves to your mouth.  You sit and muse,
A statue of white silence.  Twice to-day
You have deeply vexed me.  Go not thus again
Across the street with that light child, Fiametta.
Faith, you were closely muffled.  What was this--
This tell-tale auburn curl that rippled down
Over the black mantilla?  Were I harsh,
Suspicious, jealous, fearful, prone to wrath,
Or anything of all that I am not,
I should have deemed it no mere negligence,
But a bold token.


MARIA.
         Father you make me quail.
Why do you threat me with such evil eyes?
Would they could read my heart!


RIBERA.
         Elude me not.
Whom have you met beside the Prince this morn?
Who saw you pass?  Whom have you spoken with?


MARIA.
For God's sake, father, what strange thoughts are these?
With none, with none!  Beside the Prince, you say?
Why even him I saw not, as you know.
I hastened with veiled eyes cast on the ground,
Swathed in my mantle still, I told my beads,
And in like manner hasted home to you.


RIBERA.
Well, it may pass; but henceforth say thy matins
In thine own room.  I know what vague cloud
Obscures my sight and weighs upon my brain.
I am very weary. Luca, follow me.
[Exeunt RIBERA and LUCA.]


MARIA.
Poor father!  Dimly he perceives some trouble
Within the threatening air.  Thank heaven, I calmed him,
Yet I spake truth.  What could have roused so soon
His quick suspicion?  Did Fiametta see
The wary page slip in my hand the missive,
As we came forth again?  Nay, even so,
My father hath not spoken with her since.
Sure he knows naught; 't is but my foolish fear
Makes monsters out of shadows.  I may read
The priceless lines and grave them on my heart.
[She draws from her bosom a letter, reads it, and presses it to
her lips.]
He loves me, yes, he loves me!  Oh, my God,
This awful joy in mine own breast is love!
To-night he will await me in our garden.
Oh, for a word, a pressure of the hand!
I fly, my prince, at thy most dear behest!
[Exit.]



SCENE II.

  A room in DON TOMMASO'S HOUSE.  DON TOMMASO and ANNICCA.


DON TOMMASO.
Truly, you wrong your sister; she is young,
Heedless, and wilful, that is all; a touch
Of the Ribera's spirit fired the lass.
Don John was but her weapon of revenge
Against the malice of our haughty matrons,
Who hurled this icy shafts of scorn from heights
Of dignity upon the artist's daughter.


ANNICCA.
I cannot think with you.  In her demeanor,
Her kindled cheek, her melting eye, was more
Than sly revenge or cautious policy.
If that was art, it overreached itself.
Ere the night ended, I had blushed to see
Slighting regards cast on my father's child,
And hear her name and his tossed lightly round.


DON TOMMASO.
Could you not read in such disparagement
The envy of small natures?


ANNICCA.
         I had as lief
Maria were to dance the tarantella
Upon the quay at noonday, as to see her
Gazed at again with such insulting homage.


DON TOMMASO.
You are too strict; your baseless apprehensions
Wrong her far more than strangers' jests.


ANNICCA.
         Not so;
My timely fears prevent a greater ill
And work no harm, since they shall be imparted
Only to him who hath the power to quell them,
Dissolving them to air--my father.


DON TOMMASO.
         How!
You surely will not rouse his fatal wrath?
Annicca, listen: if your doubts were true,
He whose fierce love guards her with sleepless eyes,
More like the passion of some wild, dumb creature,
With prowling jealousy and deadly spring,
Forth leaping at the first approach of ill,
Than the calm tenderness of human fathers;
He surely had been keen to scent the danger.
I saw him at the ball--as is his wont,
He mingled not among the revellers,
But like her shadow played the spy on her.


ANNICCA.
A word would stir less deeply than you dread.


DON TOMMASO.
Ah, there you err; he knows no middle term.
At once he would accept as fact the worst
Of your imaginings; his rage would smite
All near him, and rebound upon himself;
For, as I learn, Don John brings royal orders
For the Queen's gallery; he would dismiss
The Prince as roughly as a begging artist.
Make no such breach just now betwixt the court
And our own kindred.


ANNICCA.
         Be it so, Tommaso.
I will do naught in haste.


DON TOMMASO.
         Watch thou and wait.
A slight reproof might now suffice the child,
Tame as a bird unto a gentle voice.


ANNICCA.
My mind misgives me; yet will I find patience.



SCENE III.

  Night in RIBERA'S Garden. DON JOHN alone.


DON JOHN.
In any less than she, so swift a passion,
So unreserved, so reckless, had repelled.
In her 't is godlike.  Our mutual love
Was born full-grown, as we gazed each on each.
Nay, 't was not born, but like a thing eternal,
It WAS ere we had consciousness thereof;
No growth of slow development, but perfect
From the beginning, neither doomed to end.
Her garden breathes her own warm, southern beauty,
Glowing with dewy and voluptuous bloom.
Here I am happy--happy to dream and wait
In rich security of bliss.  I know
How brief an interval divides us now.
She hastes to meet me with no less impatience
Than mine to clasp her in my arms, to press
Heart unto heart, and see the love within
The unfathomable depths of her great eyes.
She comes.  Maria!

  Enter MARIA, half timid, half joyous.


MARIA.
         My lord! you have been waiting?


DON JOHN.
Darling, not long; 't was but my restless love
That drove me here before the promised hour.
So were I well content to wait through ages
Upon the threshold of a joy like this,
Knowing the gates of heaven might ope to me
At any moment.


MARIA.
         Your love is less than mine,
For I have counted every tedious minute
Since our last meeting.


DON JOHN.
         I had rather speak
Less than the truth to have you chide me thus;
Yet if you enter in the lists with me,
Faith match with faith, and loyal heart with heart,
I warrant you, the jealous god of love,
Who spies us from yon pomegranate bush,
Would crown me victor.


MARIA.
         Why should we compete?
Who could decide betwixt two equal truths,
Two perfect faiths?


DON JOHN.
         The worship of my life
Will be slight payment for your boundless trust.
Look we nor forth nor back, are we not happy?
Heaven smiles above our heads with all her stars.
The envious day forced us apart, the wing
Of obscure night protects and shelters us.
Now like a pure, night-blooming flower, puts forth
The perfect blossom of our love.  Oh, lean
Thy royal head upon my breast; assure me
That this unheard-of bliss is no fond dream.
Cling to me, darling, till thy love's dear burden
Take root about my heart-strings.


MARIA (after a pause).
         Did you not hear
A sound, a cry?  Oh, God! was it my father?


DON JOHN.
Naught save the beating of our hearts I heard.
Be calm, my love; the very air is hushed.
Listen, the tinkle of the fountain yonder,

The sleepy stir of leaves, the querulous pipe
Of some far bird--no more.


MARIA.
         I heard, I heard!
A rude voice called me.  Wherefore did it come
To snatch me from that dream of restful love?
Oh, Juan, you will save me, you will help,--
Tell me you will--I have lost all for you!


DON JOHN.
To-morrow you will laugh at fears like these.
You have lost naught--you have but won my love.
Lose not your faith in that--your shield and weapon.


MARIA.
I tremble still in every limb.  Good-night,
I must be gone.  To-morrow when you come,
Be wary with my father; he is fierce
In love and hatred.  Listen and look, my lord.
If one dared say to me but yester-morn
That I would meet at night a stranger youth
In mine own garden, talk with him of love,
And hint a thought against the Spagnoletto,
I had smitten with this bauble such a one.
[Pointing to a jewelled poniard in her belt.]
Kiss me, my Juan, once again.  Good-night.
[Exit MARIA.]



SCENE IV.

  The studio.  RIBERA and ANNICCA.


ANNICCA.
Has he come often?


RIBERA.
         Nay, I caught the trick
Of his fair face in some half-dozen sittings.
His is a bold and shapely head--it pleased me.
I like the lad; the work upon his portrait
Was pastime--'t is already nigh complete.


ANNICCA.
And has Maria sat here while you worked?


RIBERA (sharply).
Why not?  What would'st thou say?  Speak, fret me not
With ticklish fears.  Is she not by my side,
For work or rest?


ANNICCA.
         Surely, I meant no harm.
Father, how quick you are!  I had but asked
If she, being here, had seen the work progress,
And found it his true counterpart.


RIBERA.
         Annicca,
There is something in your thought you hold from me.
Have the lewd, prying eyes, the slanderous mind
Of public envy, spied herein some mischief?
What hast thou heard?  By heaven, if one foul word
Have darkened the fair fame of my white dove,
Naples shall rue it.  Let them not forget
The chapel of Saint Januarius!


ANNICCA (aside).
Tommaso judged aright. I dare not tell him.
Dear father, listen.  Pray, be calm.  Sit down;
Your own hot rage engenders in my mind
Thoughts, fears, suspicions.


RIBERA (seating himself).
I am foolish, hasty; but it makes me mad.
Listen to me.  Here sits the Prince before me;
We talk, we laugh.  We have discussed all themes,
From the great Angelo's divinity,
Down to the pest of flies that fret us here
At the day's hottest.  Sometimes he will pace
The studio--such young blood is seldom still.
He brought me once his mandoline, and drew
Eloquent music thence.  I study thus
The changeful play of soul.  I catch the spirit
Behind the veil, and burn it on the plate.
Maria comes and goes--will sit awhile
Over her broidery, then will haste away
And serve us with a dish of golden fruit.
That is for me; she knows the sweet, cool juice,
After long hours of work, refreshes me
More than strong wine.  She meets his Royal Highness
As the Ribera's child should meet a Prince--
Nor over bold, nor timid; one would think
Their rank was equal, and that neither sprang
From less than royal lineage.


ANNICCA.
         Why, I know it.
Here is no need to excuse or justify.
Speak rather of your work--is the plate finished?


RIBERA.
So nigh, that were Don John to leave to-morrow,
It might go with him.


ANNICCA.
         What! he leaves Naples?


RIBERA.
Yea, but I know not when; he seems to wait
Momently, orders from his Majesty
To travel onward.


ANNICCA (aside).
         Would he were well away!


RIBERA.
What do you mutter?  I grow deaf this side.


ANNICCA.
I spake not, father.  I regret with you
The Prince should leave us; you have more enjoyed
His young companionship than any strangers
These many years.


RIBERA.
         Well, well, enough of him.
He hath a winning air--so far, so good.
I know not that I place more trust in him
Than in another.  'T is a lying world;
I am too old now to be duped or dazzled
By fair externals.

  Enter MARIA, carrying a kirtle full of flowers.


MARIA.
         Father, see! my roses
Have blossomed over night; I bring you some
To prank your study.  Sister, Don Tommaso
Seeks you below.


ANNICCA (rising).
         I will go to meet him.  Father,
Until to-morrow.
[Embraces MARIA and exits.  MARIA sits by her father's side and
displays her flowers.]


RIBERA.
         Truly, a gorgeous show!
Pink, yellow, crimson, white--which is the fairest?
Those with the deepest blush should best become you--
Nay, they accord not with your hair's red gold;
The white ones suit you best--pale, innocent,
So flowers too can lie!  Is not that strange?
[MARIA looks at him in mingled wonder and affright.  He roughly
brushes aside all the flowers upon the floors, than picks one up
and carefully plucks it to pieces.]
I think not highly of your flowers, girl;
I have plucked this leaf; it has no heart.
See there!
[He laughs contemptuously.]


MARIA.
         What have I done?  Alas! what mean you?
Have you then lost your reason?


RIBERA.
         Nay, but found it.
I, who was dull of wit, am keen at last.
"Don John is comely," and "Don John is kind;"
"A wonderful musician is Don John,"
"A princely artist"--and then , meek of mien,
You enter in his presence, modest, simple.
And who beneath that kitten grace had spied
The claws of mischief?  Who!  Why, all the world,
Save the fond, wrinkled, hoary fool, thy father.
Out, girl, for shame!  He will be here anon;
Hence to your room--he shall not find you here.
Thank God, thank God! no evil hath been wrought
That may not be repaired.  I have sat by
At all your meetings.  You shall have no more;
Myself will look to that.  Away, away!
[Exit Maria.]


RIBERA (looks after her).
As one who has received a deadly hurt,
She walks.  What if my doubts be false?  The terror
Of an unlooked-for blow, a treacherous thrust
When least expected--that is all she showed.
On a false charge, myself had acted thus.
She had been moved far otherwise if guilty;
She had wept, protested, begged--she had not left
With such a proud and speechless show of grief.
I was too harsh, too quick on slight suspicion.
What did Annicca say?  Why, she said naught.
'T was her grave air, her sudden reticence,
Her ill-assumed indifference.  They play on me;
They know me not.  They dread my violent passions,
Not guessing what a firm and constant bridle
I hold them with.  On just cause to be angered,
Is merely human.  Yet they sound my temper;
They try to lead me like some half-tamed beast,
That must be coaxed.  Well, I may laugh thereat.
But I am not myself to-day; strange pains
Shoot through my head and limbs and vex my spirit.
Oh, I have wronged my child!  Return, Maria!
[Exit, calling.]



ACT IV.

SCENE I.

  Night. RIBERA'S bedroom.  RIBERA discovered in his dressing-gown,
  seated reading beside a table, with a light upon it. Enter from
  an open door at the back of the stage, MARIA. She stands
  irresolute for a moment on the threshold behind her father,
  watching him, passes her hand rapidly over her brow and eyes,
  and then knocks.


MARIA.
May I come in, dear father?


RIBERA (putting down his book and looking at her affectionately).
         Child, you ask?


MARIA (advancing).
You study late.  I came to bid good-night.


RIBERA.
Poor child, thou must be weary.  Thou art pale
Still from thy swoon.


MARIA (with a forced laugh).
         I had forgotten it.
Nay, I am well again.


RIBERA.
         But I forget it not,
Neither forgive myself.  Well, it is past,
Enough!  When the Prince left I sent for thee;
Thou wast still sleeping?


MARIA (with confusion).
         Yes, I was outworn.
What didst thou wish of me?


RIBERA.
         Merely to tell thee
Don John leaves Naples.  He expressed regret
Most courteously that thou wast suffering.
He had fain ordered us his parting thanks
For our kind welcome--so he deigned to say.
To-morrow he may steal a moment's grace
To see us both once more; but this is doubtful,
So he entrusted his farewells to me.


MARIA.
May peace go with him.


RIBERA.
         We are alone--
Are we not, darling?  Thanks for the calm content
Wherewith thou biddest him farewell, to nestle
Once more in mine embrace.  Not long, I feel,
May these old horny eyes be blest with sight
Of thy full-flowering grace, these wrinkled lips
Be pressed against thy brow.  I am no more
What I have been; at times both hand and brain
Refuse their task.  Myself will follow soon--
The better part of me already dead.
So the worm claims us by slow torture, child.
Thou'lt bear with me, if as to-day I wrong
Thy gentle spirit?


MARIA.
         Father, no more, no more!
You break my heart.


RIBERA.
         Mine angel-child, weep not
So bitterly.  I thought not thus to move thee.
Still thou art overwrought.  I would have asked
At last a promise of thee.  I am selfish,
But I would sleep less startingly o'nights,
And bear a calmer soul by day, were I secure
That thou wilt bide with me until the end.
[A pause.]
To-night I will not press thee.  Thou art weary;
Thy nerves have scarce regained their tension yet;
But from thy deep emotion I can see
'T will cost thee less than I have feared.  To-morrow
We will talk of this again.


MARIA.
         To-morrow!


RIBERA.
         Now,
Good-night.  'T is time thou shouldst be sleeping.


MARIA.
         Father,
I cannot leave thee!  Every word of thine
Gnaws like a burning coal my sore, soft heart.
What! thou shalt suffer, and thine own Maria
Will leave thee daughterless, uncomforted?
What! thou shalt weep, and other eyes than mine
Shall see the Spagnoletto's spirit broken?


RIBERA.
There, there, poor child!  Look up, cling not so wildly
About my neck.  Thou art too finely touched,
If thus the faint foreshadow of a grief
Can overcome thee.  Listen?  What was that?


MARIA (starts up, shudders violently, and, all at once, masters
      her emotion).
Why, I heard nothing, father.


RIBERA.
         Yes, a sound
Of footsteps, and a stifled call.
[He goes toward the casement.  MARIA tries to detain him.]


MARIA.
         Dear father,
Surely 't was naught.  Your ears deceive you.
The wind is rising, and you heard the leaves
Rustling together.


RIBERA.
         Nay, I will look forth.
[He opens the casement and looks out in silence.  MARIA stands
behind him, with her hands clasped in an agony of fear.]


RIBERA (calling).
Hist, answer!  Who goes there? (a pause.)  No sound.  Thou'rt right,
Maria; I see naught; our garden lies
Vacant and still, save for the swaying branches
Of bush and tree.  'T is a wild, threatening night.
A sultry breeze is blowing, and the sky
Hangs black above Vesuvius.  Yonder cloud
Hath lightnings in it.  Ah, a blinding bolt
Dims the volcano's pillared fire.  Enough.
[He closes the casement and returns to MARIA.]
Hark, how the thunder rolls!  My child, you tremble
Like the blown leaves without.


MARIA.
         I am oppressed
By the same stormy influence.  Thou knowest
I dread the thunder.


RIBERA.
         Thou, who art safely housed,
Why shouldst thou dread it?  Try to sleep, my darling;
Forget the terror of the tempest; morn
Will break again in sunshine.


MARIA.
         Father, say
You love me and you trust me once again,
Before I bid good-night.


RIBERA.
         If it will calm thee,
I love thee and I trust thee.  Thou art to me
My genius--thou, the breathing image still
Of thy saint-mother, whom the angels guard.
Even as thou standest now, vested in white,
With glowing eyes and pale, unsmiling face,
I see her as she stood the day her heart
Went forth from home and kin to bless the stranger
Who craved her father's alms.


MARIA.
         Thanks, thanks.  Good-night.
God bless us through these wild, dark hours.


RIBERA.
         Good-night.



SCENE II.

  RIBERA'S garden.  Half the sky illuminated by an over-clouded
  moon, the rest obscured by an approaching storm.  Occasional
  thunder and lightning.  On on side of the stage a summer-house
  open to the audience, on the other side the exterior of the
  dwelling.  DON JOHN discovered waiting near the house.  The door
  opens, and enter MARIA.


DON JOHN (springing forward and embracing her).
At last! at last!


MARIA.
         Juan, beware!  My father's fears,
I cannot guess by whom or what, are roused.
[She extends her arms gropingly to embrace him.]
Oh, let me feel thee near me--I see naught.
Follow me; here our voices may be heard.
[She hastens towards the summer-house, leaning upon his arm,
and sinks upon a seat.]
Have not slow ages passed with crowding woes
Since we last met!  What have I not endured!
Oh, Juan, save me!


DON JOHN.
         Dearest child, be calm.
Thou art strangely overwrought.  Speak not.  Await
Till this wild fear be past.


MARIA.
         How great you are!
Your simple presence stills and comforts me.
While you are here, the one thing real to me
In all the universe is love.


DON JOHN.
         And yet
My love is here, if I be far or nigh.
Is this the spirit of a soldier's wife?
Nay, fiery courage, iron fortitude,
That soul must own that dares to say, "I love."


MARIA.
And I dare say it.  I can bear the worst
That envious fate may heap upon my head,
If thou art with me, or for hope of thee.


DON JOHN.
Art sure of that?  Thou couldst not part from me,
Even for thy father's sake?


MARIA.
         Talk you of parting?
For God's sake, what is this?  You love no more?


DON JOHN.
Rather I love so truly that I shrink
From asking thee to share a soldier's fate.
I tremble to uproot so fine a flower
From its dear native earth.  I--


MARIA (putting her hand on his lips).
         Hush, no more!
I need no preparation more than this,
Your mere request.


DON JOHN.
         There spake my heroine.
The King, my father, bids me to repair
Unto Palermo.


MARIA.
         Shall we sail to-night?


DON JOHN.
My Princess!  Thou recoilest not from all
Thou must endure, ere I can openly
Claim thee my wife!


MARIA.
         The pangs of purgatory
Were lightly borne with such a heaven in view.
I were content with one brief hour a day,
Snatched from the toils of war and thy high duties,
To gaze on thy dear face--to feel thy hand,
Even as now a stay and a caress.


DON JOHN.
Angel, I have no thanks.  May God forget me
When I forget this hour!  So, thou art firm--
Ready this night to leave thy home, thy kin,
Thy father?


MARIA (solemnly).
         I am ready and resolved.
Yet judge me not so lightly as to deem
I say this with no pang.  My love were naught,
Could I withdraw it painlessly at once
From him round whose colossal strength the tendrils
Of mine own baby heart were taught to twine.
I speak not now as one who swerves or shrinks,
But merely, dear, to show thee what sharp tortures
I, nowise blind, but with deliberate soul,
Embrace for thee.


DON JOHN.
         How can I doubt the anguish
So rude a snapping of all ties must smite
Thy tender heart withal?  Yet, dwell we not
On the brief pain, but on the enduring joys.
If Ribera's love be all thou deemest,
He will forgive thy secret flight, thy--


MARIA.
         Secret!
May I not bid farewell?  May I not tell him
Where we are bound?  How soon he may have hope
To hear from me--to welcome me, thy Princess?
I dare not leave him without hope.


DON JOHN.
         My child,
Thou art mad!  We must be secret as the grave,
Else are we both undone.  I have given out
That I depart in princely state to-morrow.
Far from the quay a bark awaiteth us.
I know my man.  Shrouded by careful night,
We will set secret sail for Sicily.
Once in Palermo, thou mayst write thy father--
Sue for his pardon--tell him that, ere long,
When I have won by cautious policy
King Philip's favor, thou shalt be proclaimed
Princess of Austria.


MARIA (who has hung upon his words with trembling excitement,
      covers her face with her hands, and bursts into tears).
         I cannot! no! I cannot!


DON JOHN (scornfully).
I feared as much.  Well, it is better thus.
I asked thee not to front the "worst of ills
That envious fate could heap upon thy head"--
Only a little patience.  'T was too much;
I cannot blame thee.  'T is a loving father.
I, a mere stranger, had naught else to hope,
Matching my claim with his.


MARIA (looks at him and throws herself at his feet).
         Oh, pardon, pardon!
My Lord, my Prince, my husband!  I am thine!
Lead wheresoe'er thou wilt, I follow thee.
Tell me a life's devotion may efface
The weakness of a moment!


DON JOHN (raising her tenderly and embracing her).
Ah, mine own!



SCENE III.

  Morning.  The studio.  Enter RIBERA.


RIBERA.
How laughingly the clear sun shines to-day
On storm-drenched green, and cool, far-glittering seas!
When she comes in to greet me, she will blush
For last night's terrors.  How she crouched and shuddered
At the mere thought of the wild war without!
Poor, clinging women's souls, what need is theirs
Of our protecting love!  Yet even on me
The shadow of the storm-cloud seemed to breed.
Through my vexed sleep I heard the thunder roll;
My dreams were ugly--  Well, all that is past;
To-day my spirit is renewed.  'T is long
Since I have felt so fresh.
[He seats himself before his easel and takes up his brush and
palette, but holds them idly in his hand.]
         Strange, she still sleeps!
The hour is past when she is wont to come
To bless me with the kiss of virgin love.
Mayhap 't was fever in her eyes last night
Gave them so wild a glance, so bright a lustre.
God! if she should be ill!
[He rises and calls.]
Luca!

Enter LUCA.


LUCA.
         My lord?


RIBERA.
Go ask Fiametta if the mistress sleeps--
If she be ailing--why she has not come
This morn to greet me.
[Exit LUCA.]


RIBERA (begins pacing the stage).
        What fond fears are these
Mastering my spirit?  Since her mother died
I tremble at the name of pain or ill.
How can my rude love tend, my hard hand soothe,
The dear child's fragile--
[A confused cry without.]
         What is that?  My God!
How hast thou stricken me!
[He staggers and falls into a chair.  Enter hastily FIAMETTA,
weeping, and LUCA with gestures of terror and distress.]


FIAMETTA.
         Master!


LUCA.
         Dear master!
[RIBERA rises with a great effort and confronts them.]


RIBERA.
What is it?  Speak!


LUCA.
         Dear master, she is gone.


RIBERA.
How?  Murdered--dead?  Oh, cruel God!  Away!
Follow me not!
[Exit RIBERA.]


FIAMETTA.
         Help, all ye saints of heaven.
Have pity on him!  Oh, what a day is this!


LUCA.
Quiet, Fiametta.  When the master finds
The empty, untouched bed, the silent room,
His wits will leave him.  Hark! was that his cry?

  Reenter RIBERA calling.


Maria! Daughter! Where have they taken thee,
My only one, my darling?  Oh, the brigands!
Naples shall bleed for this.  What do ye here,
Slaves, fools, who stare upon me?  Know ye not
I have been robbed?  Hence!  Ransack every house
From cave to roof in Naples.  Search all streets.
Arrest whomso ye meet.  Let no sail stir
From out the harbor.  Ring the alarum!  Quick!
This is a general woe.
[Exeunt LUCA and FIAMETTA.]
         The Duke's my friend;
He'll further me.  The Prince--oh, hideous fear!--
No, no, I will not dream it.  Mine enemies
Have done this thing; the avengers of that beggar--
Domenichino--they have struck home at last.
How was it that I heard no sound, no cry,
Throughout the night?  The heavens themselves conspired
Against me--the hoarse thunder drowned her shrieks!
Oh, agony!
[He buries his face in his hands.  Enter ANNICCA; she throws
herself speechless and weeping upon his neck.]
         Thou knowest it, Annicca!
The thief has entered in the night--she's gone.
I stand and weep; I stir not hand or foot.
Is not the household roused?  Do they not seek her?
I am helpless, weak; an old man overnight.
The brigands' work was easy.  I heard naught.
But surely, surely, had they murdered her,
I had heard that--that would have wakened me
From out my grave.


ANNICCA.
         Father, she is not dead.


RIBERA (wildly).
Where have they found her?  What dost thou know?  Speak, speak,
Ere my heart break!


ANNICCA.
         Alas! they have not found her;
But that were easy.  Nerve thyself--remember
Thou art the Spagnoletto still.  Last night
Don John fled secretly from Naples.


RIBERA.
         Ah!
Give me a draft of water.
[He sinks down on his chair.]


ANNICCA (calling).
         Help, Tommaso!
Luca! Fiametta! Father, lookup, look up!
Gaze not so hollowly.

  Enter DON TOMMASO and SERVANTS.

         Quick! water, water!
Do ye not see he swoons?
[She kneels before her father, chafing and kissing his hands. Exit
LUCA, who returns immediately with a silver flagon of water. ANNICCA
seizes it and raises it to RIVERA'S lips.  He takes it from her hand
and drinks.]


RIBERA.
         How your hand trembles!
See, mine is firm.  You had spilt it o'er my beard
Had I not saved it.  Thanks.  I am strong again.
I am very old for such a steady grasp.
Why, girl, most men as hoary as thy father
Are long since palsied.  But my firm touch comes
From handling of the brush.  I am a painter,
The Spagnoletto--
[As he speaks his name he suddenly throws off his apathy, rises
to his full height, and casts the flagon to the ground.]
         Ah, the Spagnoletto,
Disgraced, abandoned!  My exalted name
The laughing-stock of churls; my hearthstone stamped
With everlasting shame; my pride, my fame,
Mine honor--where are they?  With yon spilt water,
Fouled in the dust, sucked by the thirsty air.
Now, by Christ's blood, my vengeance shall be huge
As mine affront.  I will demand full justice
From Philip.  We will treat as King with King.
HE shall be stripped of rank and name and wealth,
Degraded, lopped from off the fellowship
Of Christians like a rotten limb, proclaimed
The bastard that he is.  She shall go with him,
Linked in a common infamy, haled round,
A female Judas, who betrayed her father,
Her God, her conscience, with a kiss.  Her shadow
Shall be my curse.  Cursed be her sleep by night,
Accursed her light by day--her meat and drink!
Accursed the fruit of her own womb--the grave
Where she will lie!  Cursed-- Oh, my child, my child!
[He throws himself on the floor and buries his head among the
cushions of the couch.  DON TOMMASO advances and lays his hand 
on RIBERA'S shoulder.]


DON TOMMASO.
Mine honored sir--


RIBERA (looks up without rising).
         Surely you mock me, signor.
Honored!  Yes, honored with a rifled home,
A desecrated heart, a strumpet child.
For honors such as these, I have not stinted
Sweat, blood, or spirit through long years of toil.
I have passed through peril scathless; I was spared
When Naples was plague-stricken; I have 'scaped
Mine enemies' stiletto--fire and flood;
I have survived my love, my youth, my self,
My thrice-blest Leonora, whom I pitied,
Fool that I was! in her void, silent tomb.
The God of mercy hath reserved me truly
For a wise purpose.


ANNICCA.
         Father, rise; take courage;
We know not yet the end.


RIBERA.
         Why should I rise
To front the level eyes of men's contempt?
Oh, I am shamed!  Cover my head, Annicca;
Darken mine eyes, and veil my face.  Oh, God,
Would that I were a nameless, obscure man,
So could I bury with me my disgrace,
That now must be immortal.  Where thou standest,
Annicca, there she stood last night.  She kissed me;
Round mine old neck she wreathed her soft, young arms.
My wrinkled cheeks were wet with her warm tears.
She shuddered, and I thought it was the thunder
Struck terror through her soul.  White-bearded fool!


FIAMETTA.
I found this scrip upon the chamber-floor,
Mayhap it brings some comfort.


RIBERA (starts up and snatches the paper she offers him, reads
       it rapidly, then to ANNICCA wildly).
         Look, look there--
'T is writ in blood: "My duty to my lord
Forbids my telling you our present port."
I would track her down with sleuth-hounds, did I not
Abhor to see her face.  Ah, press thy hands
Against my head--my brain is like to burst--
My throat is choked.  Help! help!
[He swoons.]



SCENE IV.

  A street.  Enter LORENZO and a GENTLEMAN, meeting.  They salute,
  and LORENZO is about to pass on.


LORENZO.
Good-morning, sir.


GENTLEMAN.
         Hail and farewell so soon,
Friend dreamer?  I will lay a goodly sum
The news that flies like fire from tongue to tongue
Hath not yet warmed thine ear.


LORENZO.
         What's that?  I lay
A sum as fair thy news is some dry tale
Of courtly gossip, touching me as nigh
As the dissensions of the antipodes.


GENTLEMAN.
Done for a hundred florins!  In the night,
'Midst the wild storm whose roar must have invaded
Even thy leaden sleep, Prince John left Naples.
We should have had a pageant here to-day,
A royal exit, floral arches thrown
From house to house in all the streets he passed,
Music and guard of honor, homage fitting
The son of Philip--but the bird has flown.


LORENZO.
So!  I regret our busy citizens,
Who sun themselves day-long upon the quays,
Should be deprived of such a festival.
Your wager's lost--how am I moved by this?

GENTLEMAN.
Hark to the end.  'T would move all men whose veins
Flow not clear water.  He hath carried off
The Rose of Naples.


LORENZO.
         What wouldst thou say?  Speak out!
In God's name, who hath followed him?


GENTLEMAN.
         Ah, thou'rt roused.
Thy master hath been robbed--the Spagnoletto--
Maria of the Golden Locks--his daughter.


LORENZO.
How is this known?  'T is a foul slander forged
By desperate malice.  What! in the night, you say?--
She whose bright name was clean as gold, whose heart
Shone a fixed star of loyal love and duty
Beside her father's glory!  This coarse lie
Denies itself.  I will go seek the master,
And if this very noon she walk not forth,
Led by the Spagnoletto, through the streets,
To blind the dazed eyes of her slanderers,--
I am your debtor for a hundred florins.


GENTLEMAN.
Your faith in womanhood becomes you, sir.
(Aside.) A beggar's child the mistress of a Prince;
Humph! there be some might think the weight of scandal
Lay on the other side.  (To Lorenzo.) You need not forth
To seek her father.  See, he comes, alone.
I will not meddle in the broil.  Farewell!
[Exit Gentleman.]

  Enter RIBERA, without hat or mantle, slowly, with folded arms
  and bent head.


LORENZO.
Oh heart, break not for pity!  Shall he thus
Unto all Naples blazon his disgrace?
This must not be (advancing).  Father!


RIBERA (starts and looks up sharply).
         Who calls me father?


LORENZO.
Why, master, I--you know me not?  Lorenzo.


RIBERA.
Nor do I care to know thee.  Thou must be
An arrant coward, thus to league with foes
Against so poor a wretch as I--to call me
By the most curst, despised, unhallowed name
God's creatures can own.  Away! and let me pass;
I injure no man.


LORENZO.
         Look at me, dear master.
Your head is bare, your face is ashy pale,
The sun is fierce.  I am your friend, your pupil;
Let me but guide my reverend master home,
In token of the grateful memory
Wherein I hold his guidance of my mind
Up the steep paths of art.
[While LORENZO speaks, RIBERA slowly gains consciousness of his
situation, raises his hand to his head and shudders violently.
LORENZO'S last words seem to awaken him thoroughly.]


RIBERA.
         I crave your pardon
If I have answered roughly, Sir Lorenzo.
My thoughts were far away--I failed to know you--
I have had trouble, sir.  You do remind me,
I had forgot my hat; that is a trifle,
Yet now I feel the loss.  What slaves are we
To circumstance!  One who is wont to cover
For fashion or for warmth his pate, goes forth
Bareheaded, and the sun will seem to smite
The shrinking spot, the breeze will make him shiver,
And yet our hatless beggars heed them not.
We are the fools of habit.

  Enter two gentlemen together as promenading; they cross the stage,
  looking hard at RIBERA and LORENZO, and exeunt.


LORENZO.
         Pray you, sir
Let me conduct you home.  Here is no place
To hold discourse.  In God's name, come with me.


RIBERA.
What coupled staring fools were they that passed?
They seemed to scare thee.  Why, boy, face them out.
I am the shadow of the Spagnoletto,
Else had I brooked no gaze so insolent.
Well, I will go with thee.  But, hark thee, lad;
A word first in thine ear.  'T is a grim secret;
Whisper it not in Naples; I but tell thee,
Lest thou should fancy I had lost my wits.
My daughter hath deserted me--hath fled
From Naples with a bastard.  Thou hast seen her,
Maria-Rosa--thou must remember her;
She, whom I painted as Madonna once.
She had fair hair and Spanish eyes.  When was it?
I came forth thinking I might meet with her
And find all this a dream--a foolish thought!
I am very weary.  (Yawning.)  I have walked and walked
For hours.  How far, sir, stand we from the Strada
Nardo?  I live there, nigh Saint Francis' church.

LORENZO.
Why, 't is hard by; a stone's throw from this square.
So, lean on me--you are not well.  This way.
Pluck up good heart, sir; we shall soon be there.
[Exeunt.]



SCENE V.

  Night.  A Room in RIBERA'S House.  ANNICCA seated alone, in an
  attitude of extreme weariness and despondency.


ANNICCA.
His heavy sleep still lasts.  Despite the words
Of the physician, I can cast not off
That ghastly fear.  Albeit he owned no drugs,
This deathlike slumber, this deep breathing slow,
His livid pallor makes me dread each moment
His weary pulse will cease.  This is the end,
And from the first I knew it.  The worst evil
My warning tongue had wrought were joy to this.
No heavier curse could I invoke on her
Than that she see him in her dreams, her thoughts,
As he is now.  I could no longer bear it;
I have fled hither from his couch to breathe--
To quicken my spent courage for the end.
I cannot pray--my heart is full of curses.
He sleeps; he rests.  What better could I wish
For his rent heart, his stunned, unbalanced brain,
Than sleep to be eternally prolonged?

  Enter FIAMETTA.  ANNICCA looks up anxiously, half rising.


ANNICCA.
How now?  What news?


FIAMETTA.
         The master is awake
And calls for you, signora.


ANNICCA.
Heaven be praised!
[Exit hastily.]


FIAMETTA.
Would I had followed my young mistress!  Here
I creep about like a scared, guilty thing,
And fancy at each moment they will guess
'T was I who led her to the hut.  I will confess,
If any sin there be, to Father Clement,
And buy indulgence with her golden chain.
'T would burn my throat, the master's rolling eyes
Would haunt me ever, if I went to wear it.
So, all will yet be well.
[Exit.]



SCENE VI.

  RIBERA'S Room.  RIBERA discovered sitting on the couch. He looks
  old and haggard, but has regained his natural bearing and
  expression.  Enter ANNICCA.  She hastens towards him, and kneels
  beside the couch, kissing him affectionately.


ANNICCA.
Father, you called me?


RIBERA.
         Aye, to bid good-night.
Why do you kiss me?  To betray to-morrow?


ANNICCA.
Dear father, you are better; you have slept.
Are you not rested?


RIBERA.
         Child, I was not weary.
There was some cloud pressed here (pointing to his forehead) but
   that is past,
I have no pain nor any sense of ill.
Now, while my brain is clear, I have a word
To speak.  I think not I have been to thee,
Nor to that other one, an unkind father.
I do not now remember any act,
Or any word of mine, could cause thee grief.
But I am old--perchance my memory
Deceives in this?  Speak!  Am I right, Annicca?


ANNICCA (weeping).
Oh, father, father, why will you torture me?
You were too good, too good.


RIBERA.
         Why, so I thought.
Since it appears the guerdon of such goodness
Is treachery, abandonment, disgrace,
I here renounce my fatherhood.  No child
Will I acknowledge mine.  Thou art a wife;
Thy duty is thy husband's.  When Antonio
Returns from Seville, tell him that his father
Is long since dead.  Henceforward I will own
No kin, no home, no tie.  I will away,
To-morrow morn, and live an anchorite.
One thing ye cannot rob me of--my work.
My name shall still outsoar these low, mirk vapors--
Not the Ribera, stained with sin and shame,
As she hath left it, but the Spagnoletto.
My glory is mine own.  I have done with it,
But I bequeath it to my country.  Now
I will make friends with beasts--they'll prove less savage
Than she that was my daughter.  I have spoken
For the last time that word.  Thee I curse not;
Thou hast not set thy heel upon my heart;
But yet I will not bless thee.  Go.  Good-night.


ANNICCA (embracing him).
What! will you spurn me thus?  Nay, I will bide,
And be to thee all that she should have been,
Soothe thy declining years, and heal the wound
Of this sharp sorrow.  Thou shalt bless me still,
Father--
[RIBERA has yielded for a moment to her embrace; but, suddenly
rising, he pushes her roughly from him.]


RIBERA.
Away!  I know thee.  Thou art one
With her who duped me with like words last night.
Then I believed; but now my sense is closed,
My heart is dead as stone.  I cast thee forth.
By heaven, I own thee not!  Thou dost forget
I am the Spagnoletto.  Away, I say,
Or ere I strike thee.
[He threatens her.]


ANNICCA.
        Woe is me!  Help, help!
[Exit.]


RIBERA.
So, the last link is snapt.  Had I not steeled
My heart, I fain had kissed her farewell.
'T is better so.  I leave my work unfinished.
Could I arise each day to face this spectre,
Or sleep with it at night?--to yearn for her
Even while I curse her?  No!  The dead remain
Sacred and sweet in our remembrance still;
They seem not to have left us; they abide
And linger nigh us in the viewless air.
The fallen, the guilty, must be rooted out
From heart and thought and memory.  With them
No hope of blest reunion; they must be
As though they had not been; their spoken name
Cuts like a knife.  When I essay to think
Of what hath passed to-day, my sick brain reels.
The letter I remember, but all since
Floats in a mist of horror, and I grasp
No actual form.  Did I not wander forth?
A mob surrounded me.  All Naples knew
My downfall, and the street was paved with eyes
That stared into my soul.  Then friendly hands
Guided me hither.  When I woke, I felt
As though a stone had rolled from off my brain.
But still this nightmare bides the truth.  I know
They watch me, they suspect me.  I will wait
Till the whole household sleep, and then steal forth,
Nor unavenged return.



ACT V.

SCENE I.

  A Room in DON TOMMASO'S House.  ANNICCA discovered, attired in
  mourning.  Enter DON TOMMASO.


DON TOMMASO.
If he still live, now shall we hear of him.
The news I learn will lure him from his covert,
Where'er it lie, to pardon or avenge.


ANNICCA (eagerly).
What news?  What cheer, Tommaso?


DON TOMMASO.
         Meagre cheer,
But tidings that break through our slow suspense,
Like the first thunder-clap in sultry air.
Don John sets sail from Sicily, to wed
A Princess chosen by the King.  Maria--


ANNICCA.
Talk not of her--I know her not; her name
Will sear thy tongue.  Think'st thou, in truth this news
Will draw my father from his hiding-place?
No--teach me not to hope.  Within my heart
A sure voice tells me he is dead.  Not his
The spirit to drag out a shameful life,
To shrink from honest eyes, to sink his brow
Unto the dust, here where he wore his crown.
Thou knowest him.  Have I not cause to mourn
Uncomforted, that he, the first of fathers,
Self-murdered--nay, child-murdered--Oh, Tommaso,
I would fare barefoot to the ends of the earth
To look again upon his living face,
See in his eyes the light of love restored--
Not blasting me with lightnings as before--
To kneel to him, to solace him, to win
For mine own head, yoked in my sister's curse
The blessing he refused me.


DON TOMMASO.
         Well, take comfort;
This grace may yet be thine.



SCENE II.

  Palermo.  A Nunnery.  Enter ABBESS, followed by a Lay-Sister.


ABBESS.
Is the poor creature roused?


LAY-SISTER.
         Nay, she still sleeps.
'T would break your pious heart to see her, mother.
She begged our meanest cell, though 't is past doubt
She has been bred to delicate luxury.
I deemed her spent, had not the soft breast heaved
As gently as a babe's and even in dreams
Two crystal drops oozed from her swollen lids,
And trickled down her cheeks.  Her grief sleeps not,
Although the fragile body craves its rest.


ABBESS.
Poor child!  I fear she hath sore need of prayer.
Hath she yet spoken?


LAY-SISTER.
         Only such scant words
Of thanks or answer as our proffered service
Or questionings demand.  When we are silent,
Even if she wake, she seemeth unaware
Of any presence.  She will sit and wail,
Rocking upon the ground, with dull, wide eyes,
Wherefrom the streaming tears unceasing course;
The only sound that then escapes her lips
Is, "Father, Father!" in such piteous strain
As though her rent heart bled to utter it.


ABBESS.
Still she abides then by her first request
To take the black veil and its vows to-morrow?


LAY-SISTER.
Yea, to that purpose desperately she clings.
This evening, if she rouse, she makes confession.
Even now a holy friar waits without,
Fra Bruno, of the order of Carthusians,
Beyond Palermo.


ABBESS.
         I will speak with him,
Ere he confess her, since we know him not.
Follow me, child, and see if she have waked.
[Exeunt.]



SCENE III.

  A Cell in the Nunnery.  MARIA discovered asleep on a straw
  pallet.  She starts suddenly from her sleep with a little cry,
  half rises and remains seated on her pallet.


MARIA.
Oh, that wild dream!  My weary bones still ache
With the fierce pain; they wrenched me limb from limb.
Thou hadst full cause, my father.  But thou, Juan,
What was my sin to thee, save too much love?
Oh, would to God my back were crooked with age,
My smooth cheek seamed with wrinkles, my bright hair
Hoary with years, and my quick blood impeded
By sluggish torpor, so were I near the end
Of woes that seem eternal!  I am strong--
Death will not rescue me.  Within my veins
I feel the vigorous pulses of young life,
Refusing my release.  My heart at times
Rebels against the habit of despair,
And, ere I am aware, has wandered back,
Among forbidden paths.  What prayer, what penance,
Will shrive me clean before the sight of heaven?
My hands are black with parricide.  Why else
Should his dead face arise three nights before me,
Bleached, ghastly, dripping as of one that's drowned,
To freeze my heart with horror?  Christ, have mercy!
[She covers her face with her hands in an agony of despair.]

  Enter a MONK.


THE MONK.
May peace be in this place!
[MARIA shudders violently at the sound of his voice; looks up and
sees the MONK with bent head, and hands partially extended, as one
who invokes a blessing.  She rises, falls at his feet, and takes the
hem of his skirt between her hands, pressing it to he lips.]


MARIA.
          Welcome, thrice welcome!
Bid me not rise, nor bless me with pure hands.
Ask not to see my face.  Here let me lie,
Kissing the dust--a cast-away, a trait'ress,
A murderess, a parricide!


MONK.
         Accursed
With all Hell's curses is the crime thou nam'st!
What devil moved thee?  Who and whence art thou,
That wear'st the form of woman, though thou lack'st
The heart of the she-wolf?  Who was thy parent,
What fiend of torture, that thine impious hands
Should quench the living source of thine own life?


MARIA.
Spare me! oh, spare me!  Nay, my hands are clean.
He was the first, best, noblest among men.
I was his light, his soul, his breath of life.
These I withdrew from him, and made his days
A darkness.  Yet, perchance he is not dead,
And blood and tears may wash away my guilt.
Oh, tell me there is hope, though it gleam far--
One solitary ray, one steadfast spark,
Beyond a million years of purgatory!
My burning soul thirsts for the dewy balm
Of comfortable grace.  One word, one word,
Or ere I perish of despair!


MONK.
         What word?
The one wherewith thou bad'st thy father hope?
What though he be not dead?  Is breathing life?
Hast thou not murdered him in spirit? dealt
The death-blow to his heart?  Cheat not thy soul
With empty dreams--thy God hath judged ye guilty!


MARIA.
Have pity, father!  Let me tell thee all.
Thou, cloistered, holy and austere, know'st not
My glittering temptations.  My betrayer
Was of an angel's aspect.  His were all gifts,
All grace, all seeming virtue.  I was plunged,
Deaf, dumb, and blind, and hand-bound in the deep.
If a poor drowning creature craved thine aid,
Thou wouldst not spurn it.  Such a one am I,
And all the waves roll over me.  Wrest me from my doom!
Say not that I am lost!


MONK.
         I can but say
What the just Spirit prompts.  Myself am naught
To pardon or condemn.  The sin is sinned;
The fruit forbid is tasted, yea, and pressed
Of its last honeyed juices. Wilt thou now
Escape the after-bitterness with prayers,
Scourgings, and wringings of the hands?  Shall these
Undo what has been done?--make whole the heart
Thy crime hath snapt in twain?--restore the wits
Thy sin hath scattered?  No!  Thy punishment
Is huge as thine offence.  Death shall not help,
Neither shall pious life wash out the stain.
Living thou'rt doomed, and dead, thou shalt be lost,
Beyond salvation.


MARIA (springing to her feet).
         Impious priest, thou liest!
God will have mercy--as my father would,
Could he but see me in mine agony!
[The MONK throws back his cowl and discovers himself as the
SPAGNOLETTO.  MARIA utters a piercing cry and throws herself
speechless at his feet.]


RIBERA.
Thou know'st me not.  I am not what I was.
My outward shape remains unchanged; these eyes,
Now gloating on thine anguish, are the same
That wept to see a shadow cross thy brow;
These ears, that drink the music of thy groans,
Shrank from thy lightest sigh of melancholy.
Thou think'st to find the father in me still?
Thy parricidal hands have murdered him--
Thou shalt not find a man.  I am the spirit
Of blind revenge--a brut