e, unswerving force.
What deemest thou hath bound me unto life?
Ambition, pleasure, or the sense of fear?
What, but the sure hope of this fierce, glad hour,
That I might track thee down to this--might see
Thy tortured body writhe beneath my feet,
And blast thy stricken spirit with my curse?


MARIA (in a crushed voice).
Have mercy! mercy!


RIBERA.
         Yes, I will have mercy--
The mercy of the tiger or the wolf,
Athirst for blood.


MARIA (terror-struck, rises upon her knees in an attitude of
      supplication.  RIBERA averts his face).
         Oh, father, kill me not!
Turn not away--I am not changed for thee!
In God's name, look at me--thy child, thine own!
Spare me, oh, spare me, till I win of Heaven
Some sign of promise!  I am lost forever
If I die now.


RIBERA (looks at her in silence, then pushing her from him laughs
       bitterly).
         Nay, have no fear of me.
I would not do thee that much grace to ease thee
Of the gross burden of the flesh.  Behold,
Thou shalt be cursed with weary length of days;
And when thou seek'st to purge thy guilty heart,
Thou shalt find there a sin no prayer may shrive--
The murder of thy father.  To all dreams
That haunt thee of past anguish, shall be added
The vision of this horror!
[He draws from his girdle a dagger and stabs himself to the heart;
he falls and dies, and MARIA flings herself, swooning upon his body.]





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael Hart]





This etext was produced by anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteers





The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Complete Works of Artemus Ward
(Charles Farrar Browne) Part 1

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF ARTEMUS WARD

(CHARLES FARRAR BROWNE)

WITH:
PRELIMINARY NOTES BY JOHN CAMDEN HOTTEN.
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH BY MELVILLE D. LANDON, "ELI PERKINS"
AN INTRODUCTION BY T.W. ROBERTSON.
A PREFATORY NOTE BY EDWARD P. HINGSTON.


CONTENTS.

PRELIMINARY NOTES BY JOHN CAMDEN HOTTEN.

A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH BY MELVILLE D. LANDON.

AN INTRODUCTION BY T.W. ROBERTSON.

A PREFATORY NOTE BY EDWARD P. HINGSTON.

PART I.

ESSAYS, SKETCHES, AND LETTERS.

1.1.   One of Mr. Ward's Business Letters.

1.2.   On "Forts."

1.3.   The Shakers.

1.4.   High-handed Outrage at Utica.

1.5.   Celebration at Baldinsville.

1.6.   Among the Spirits.

1.7.   On the Wing.

1.8.   The Octoroon.

1.9.   Experience as an Editor.

1.10.  Oberlin.

1.11.  The Showman's Courtship.

1.12.  The Crisis.

1.13.  Wax Figures vs. Shakespeare.

1.14.  Among the Free Lovers.

1.15.  A Visit to Brigham Young.

1.16.  Scandalous doings at Pittsburg.

1.17.  The Census.

1.18.  An Honest Living.

1.19.  The Press.

1.20.  Edwin Forest as Othello.

1.21.  The Show Business and Popular Lectures.

1.22.  Woman's Rights.

1.23.  Would-be Sea Dogs.

1.24.  The Prince of Wales.

1.25.  Piccolomini.

1.26.  Little Patti.

1.27.  Ossawatomie Brown.

1.28.  Joy in the House of Ward.

1.29.  Boston.  (A. Ward to his Wife.)

1.30.  How Old Abe Received the News of his Nomination.

1.31.  Interview with President Lincoln.

1.32.  Interview with the Prince Napoleon.

1.33.  Agriculture.

1.34.  Busts.

1.35.  A Hard Case.

1.36.  Affairs around the Village Green.

1.37.  About Editors.

1.38.  Editing.

1.39.  Popularity.

1.40.  A Little Difficulty in the Way.

1.41.  Colored People's Church.

1.42.  Spirits.

1.43.  Mr. Blowhard.

1.44.  Market Morning.

1.45.  We See Two Witches.

1.46.  From a Homely Man.

1.47.  The Elephant.

1.48.  How the Napoleon of Sellers was Sold.

1.49.  On Autumn.

1.50.  Paying for his Provender by Praying.

1.51.  Hunting Trouble.

1.52.  Dark Doings.

1.53.  Reporters.

1.54.  He had the Little Voucher In His Pocket.

1.55.  The Gentlemanly Conductor.

1.56.  Morality and Genius.

1.57.  Rough Beginning of the Honeymoon.

1.58.  A Colored man of the Name of Jeffries.

1.59.  Names.

1.60.  He found he Would.

1.61.  "Burial in Richmond and Resurrection in Boston."

1.62.  A Mayoralty Election.

1.63.  Fishing Excursion.

PART II.

WAR.

2.1.   The Show is Confiscated.

2.2.   Thrilling Scenes in Dixie.

2.3.   Fourth of July Oration.

2.4.   The War Fever in Baldinsville.

2.5.   A War Meeting.

2.6.   The Draft in Baldinsville.

2.7.   Surrender of Cornwallis.

2.8.   Things in New York.

2.9.   Touching Letter from a Gory Member.

2.10.  In Canada.

2.11.  The Noble Red Man.

2.12.  Artemus Ward in Richmond.

2.13.  Artemus Ward to the Prince of Wales.

PART III.

STORIES AND ROMANCES.

3.1.   Moses the Sassy; or, The Disguised Duke.

3.2.   Marion:  A Romance of the French School.

3.3.   William Barker, the Young Patriot.

3.4.   A Romance--The Conscript.

3.5.   A Romance--Only a Mechanic.

3.6.   Roberto the Rover; A Tale of Sea and Shore.

3.7.   Red Hand:  A Tale of Revenge.

3.8.   Pyrotechny:  A Romance after the French.

3.9.   The Last of the Culkinses.

3.10.  A Mormon Romance--Reginald Gloverson.

PART IV.

TO CALIFORNIA AND RETURN.

4.1.   On the Steamer.

4.2.   The Isthmus.

4.3.   Mexico.

4.4.   California.

4.5.   Washoe.

4.6.   Mr. Pepper.

4.7.   Horace Greely's Ride to Placerville.

4.8.   To Reese River.

4.9.   Great Salt Lake City.

4.10.  The Mountain Fever.

4.11.  "I am Here."

4.12.  Brigham Young.

4.13.  A Piece is Spoken.

4.14.  The Ball.

4.15.  Phelp's Almanac.

4.16.  Hurrah for the Road.

4.17.  Very Much Married.

4.18.  The Revelation of Joseph Smith.

PART V.

THE LONDON PUNCH LETTERS.

5.1.   Arrival in London.

5.2.   Personal Recollections.

5.3.   The Green Lion and Oliver Cromwell.

5.4.   At the Tomb of Shakespeare.

5.5.   Introduction to the Club.

5.6.   The Tower of London.

5.7.   Science and Natural History.

5.8.   A Visit to the British Museum.

PART VI.

ARTEMUS WARD'S PANORAMA.

6.1.   Prefatory Note by Melville D. Landon.

6.2.   The Egyptian Hall Lecture.

6.3.   "The Times" Notice.

6.4.   Programme of the Egyptian Hall Lecture.

6.5.   Announcement and Programme of the Dodworth Hall Lecture.

PART VII.

MISCELLANEOUS.

7.1.   The Cruise of the Polly Ann.

7.2.   Artemus Ward's Autobiography.

7.3.   The Serenade.

7.4.   O'Bourcy's "Arrah-na-Pogue."

7.5.   Artemus Ward among the Fenians.

7.6.   Artemus Ward in Washington.

7.7.   Scenes Outside the Fair Grounds.

7.8.   The Wife.

7.9.   A Juvenile Composition On the Elephant.

7.10.  A Poem by the Same.

7.11.  East Side Theatricals.

7.12.  Soliloquy of a Low Thief.

7.13.  The Negro Question.

7.14.  Artemus Ward on Health.

7.15.  A Fragment.

7.16.  Brigham Young's Wives.

7.17.  A. Ward's First Umbrella.

7.18.  An Affecting Poem.

7.19.  Mormon Bill of Fare.

7.20.  "The Babes in the Wood."

7.21.  Mr. Ward Attends a Graffick (Soiree.)

7.22.  A. Ward Among the Mormons.--Reported by Himself--or Somebody Else.

*  *  *


PUBLISHERS' PREFACE TO THE NEW (1898) EDITION.

The present edition is of a work which has been for more than
thirty years prominently before the public, and which may justly
be said to have maintained a standard character.  It is issued
because of a demand for a BETTER EDITION than has ever been
published.

In order to supply this acknowledged want, the publishers have
enlarged and perfected this edition by adding some matter not
heretofore published in book form.

More than one hundred thousand copies of the work have been
printed.  The plates had become so worn as to render it
unreadable, yet the sale kept on.  In preparing this new edition,
many of the author's fragmentary pieces, not contained in the old
edition, have been added.  The earliest of the author's writings,
published in periodicals in 1862, are included, together with
many additional illustrations, which now, for the first time,
make the work complete.

It is universally conceded that no country in the world has ever
produced a genius like Artemus Ward.  Writers of ACKNOWLEDGED
GENIUS are never very numerous.  He attained a great and deserved
popularity, which will be lasting.

It has been observed that the wit of one generation is rarely
appreciated by the next, but this is not true of Artemus Ward.
There is a constant demand for his writings, for the reason that
his jokes require no appendix for their elucidation.  No one who
speaks the English language can fail to appreciate his wonderful
humor.  It will always be funny.  There is a fascination about it
which can neither be questioned nor resisted.  His particular
niche in the temple of Fame will not be claimed by another.  His
intellect was sharp and electric.  He saw the humor of anything
at a glance, and his manner of relating these laughter-provoking
absurdities is original and "fetching."

PRELIMINARY NOTES BY JOHN CAMDEN HOTTEN.

Piccadilly, W.  Jan. 30, 1865.

There is a story of two "smart" Yankees, one named Hosea and the
other Hezekiah, who met in an oyster shop in Boston.  Said Hosea,
"As to opening oysters, why nothing's easier if you only know
how."  "And how's how?" asked Hezekiah.  "Scotch snuff," replied
Hosea, very gravely--"Scotch snuff.  Bring a little of it ever so
near their noses, and they'll sneeze their lids off."  "I know a
man who knows a better plan," observed Hezekiah.  "He spreads the
bivalves in a circle, seats himself in the centre, reads a
chapter of Artemus Ward to them, and goes on until they get
interested.  One by one they gape with astonishment at A. Ward's
whoppers, and as they gape my friend whips 'em out, peppers away,
and swallows 'em."

Excellent as all that Artemus Ward writes really is, and
exuberantly overflowing with humour as are nearly all his
articles, it is too bad to accuse him of telling "whoppers."  On
the contrary, the old Horatian question of "Who shall forbid me
to speak truth in laughter?" seems ever present to his mind.  His
latest production is the admirable paper "Artemus Ward among the
Fenians" which appears in Part 7.

If Artemus has on any occasion really told "whoppers," it has
been in his announcements of being about to visit England.  From
time to time he has stated his intention of visiting this
country, and from time to time has he disappointed his English
friends.

He was coming to England after his trip to California, when,
laden with gold, he could think of no better place to spend it
in.

He was on his way to England when he and his companion, Mr.
Hingston, encountered the Pi-ute Indians, and narrowly escaped
scalping.

He was leaving for England with "Betsy Jane" and the "snaiks"
before the American war was ended.

He had unscrewed the head of each of his "wax figgers," and sent
each on board in a carpet-bag, labelled "For England," just as Mr
Lincoln was assassinated.

He was hastening to England when the news came a few weeks ago
that he had been blown up in an oil well!

He has been on his way to England in every newspaper of the
American Union for the last two years.

Here is the latest announcement:

"Artemus Ward, in a private letter, states that Doctor Kumming,
the famous London seer and profit, having foretold that the end
of the world will happen on his own birthday in January 1867, he,
Artemus, will not visit England until the latter end of 1866,
when the people there will be selling off, and dollars will be
plentiful.  Mr. Ward says that he shall leave England in the last
steamer, in time to see the American eagle spread his wings, and
with the stars and stripes in his beek and tallents, sore away to
his knativ empyrehum.--"  American Paper.

But even this is likely to be a "whopper," for a more reliable
private letter from Artemus declares his fixed purpose to leave
for England in the steamship City of Boston early in June; and
the probabilities are that he will be stepping on English shores
just about the time that these pages go to press.

Lest anything should happen to him, and England be for ever
deprived of seeing him, the most recent production of his pen,
together with two or three of his best things, are here embalmed
for preservation, on the principle adopted by the affectionate
widow of the bear-trainer of Perpignan.  "I have nothing left,"
said the woman; "I am absolutely without a roof to shelter me and
the poor animal."  "Animal!" exclaimed the prefect; "you don't
mean to say that you keep the bear that devoured your husband?"
"Alas!" she replied, "it is all that is left to me of the poor
dear man!"

If any other excuse be needed for thus presenting the British
public with A. Ward's "last," in addition to the pertinency of
the article and its real merit, that excuse may be found in the
fact that it is thoroughly new to readers on this side of the
Atlantic.

The general public will undoubtedly receive "Artemus Ward among
the Fenians" with approving laughter.  Should it fall into the
hands of a philo-Fenian the effect may be different.  To him it
would probably have the wrong action of the Yankee bone-picking
machine.

"I've got a new machine," said a Yankee pedlar, "for picking
bones out of fish.  Now, I tell you, it's a leetle bit the
darndest thing you ever did see.  All you have to do is to set it
on a table and turn a crank, and the fish flies right down your
throat and the bones right under the grate.  Well, there was a
country greenhorn got hold of it the other day, and he turned the
crank the wrong way; and, I tell you, the way the bones flew down
his throat was awful.  Why, it stuck that fellow so full of
bones, that he could not get his shirt off for a whole week!"

In addition to the paper on the Fenians, two other articles by
Artemus Ward are reprinted in the present work.  One relates to
the city of Washington, and the other to the author's imaginary
town of Baldinsville.  Both are highly characteristic of the
writer and of his quaint spellings--a heterography not more odd
than that of the postmaster of Shawnee County, Missouri, who,
returning his account to the General Office, wrote, "I hearby
sertify that the four going A-Counte is as nere Rite as I now how
to make It, if there is any mistake it is not Dun a purpers."

Artemus Ward has created a new model for funny writers; and the
fact is noticeable that, in various parts of this country as well
as in his own, he has numerous puny imitators, who suppose that
by simply adopting his comic spelling they can write quite as
well as he can.  Perhaps it would be as well if they remembered
the joke of poor Thomas Hood, who said that he could write as
well as Shakespere if he had the mind to, but the trouble was--he
had not got the mind.

*   *   *

A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH BY MELVILLE D. LANDON.

Charles Farrar Browne, better known to the world as "Artemus
Ward," was born at Waterford, Oxford County, Maine, on the
twenty-sixth of April, 1834, and died of consumption at
Southampton, England, on Wednesday, the sixth of March, 1867.

His father, Levi Browne, was a land surveyor, and Justice of the
Peace.  His mother, Caroline E. Brown, is still living, and is a
descendant from Puritan stock.

Mr. Browne's business manager, Mr. Hingston, once asked him about
his Puritanic origin, when he replied:  "I think we came from
Jerusalem, for my father's name was Levi and we had a Moses and a
Nathan in the family, but my poor brother's name was Cyrus; so,
perhaps, that makes us Persians."

Charles was partially educated at the Waterford school, when
family circumstances induced his parents to apprentice him to
learn the rudiments of printing in the office of the "Skowhegan
Clarion," published some miles to the north of his native
village.  Here he passed through the dreadful ordeal to which a
printer's "devil" is generally subjected.  He always kept his
temper; and his eccentric boy jokes are even now told by the
residents of Skowhegan.

In the spring, after his fifteenth birthday, Charles Browne bade
farewell to the "Skowhegan Clarion;" and we next hear of him in
the office of the "Carpet-Bag," edited by B.P. Shillaber ("Mrs.
Partington").  Lean, lank, but strangely appreciative, young
Browne used to "set up" articles from the pens of Charles G.
Halpine ("Miles O'Reilly") and John G. Saxe, the poet.  Here he
wrote his first contribution in a disguised hand, slyly put it
into the editorial box, and the next day disguised his pleasure
while setting it up himself.  The article was a description of a
Fourth of July celebration in Skowhegan.  The spectacle of the
day was a representation of the battle of Yorktown, with G.
Washington and General Horace Cornwallis in character.  The
article pleased Mr. Shillaber, and Mr. Browne, afterwards
speaking of it, said:  "I went to the theatre that evening, had a
good time of it, and thought I was the greatest man in Boston."

While engaged on the "Carpet-Bag," the subject of our sketch
closely studied the theatre and courted the society of actors and
actresses.  It was in this way that he gained that correct and
valuable knowledge of the texts and characters of the drama,
which enabled him in after years to burlesque them so
successfully.  The humorous writings of Seba Smith were his
models, and the oddities of "John Phoenix" were his especial
admiration.

Being of a roving temper Charles Browne soon left Boston, and,
after traveling as a journeyman printer over much of New York and
Massachusetts, he turned up in the town of Tiffin, Seneca County,
Ohio, where he became reporter and compositor at four dollars per
week.  After making many friends among the good citizens of
Tiffin, by whom he is remembered as a patron of side shows and
traveling circuses, our hero suddenly set out for Toledo, on the
lake, where he immediately made a reputation as a writer of
sarcastic paragraphs in the columns of the Toledo "Commercial."
He waged a vigorous newspaper war with the reporters of the
Toledo "Blade," but while the "Blade" indulged in violent
vituperation, "Artemus" was good-natured and full of humor.  His
column soon gained a local fame and everybody read it.  His fame
even traveled away to Cleveland, where, in 1858, when Mr. Browne
was twenty-four years of age, Mr. J.W. Gray of the Cleveland
"Plaindealer" secured him as local reporter, at a salary of
twelve-dollars per week.  Here his reputation first began to
assume a national character and it was here that they called him
a "fool" when he mentioned the idea of taking the field as a
lecturer.  Speaking of this circumstance while traveling down the
Mississippi with the writer, in 1865, Mr. Browne musingly
repeated this colloquy:

WISE MAN:--"Ah! you poor foolish little girl--here is a dollar
for you."

FOOLISH LITTLE GIRL:--"Thank you, sir; but I have a sister at
home as foolish as I am; can't you give me a dollar for her?"

Charles Browne was not successful as a NEWS reporter, lacking
enterprise and energy, but his success lay in writing up in a
burlesque manner well-known public affairs like prize-fights,
races, spiritual meetings, and political gatherings.  His
department became wonderfully humorous, and was always a favorite
with readers, whether there was any news in it or not.  Sometimes
he would have a whole column of letters from young ladies in
reply to a fancied matrimonial advertisement, and then he would
have a column of answers to general correspondents like this:--

VERITAS:--Many make the same error.  Mr. Key, who wrote the "Star
Spangled Banner," is not the author of Hamlet, a tragedy.  He
wrote the banner business, and assisted in "The Female Pirate,"
BUT DID NOT WRITE HAMLET.  Hamlet was written by a talented but
unscrupulous man named Macbeth, afterwards tried and executed for
"murdering sleep."

YOUNG CLERGYMAN:--Two pints of rum, two quarts of hot water, tea-
cup of sugar, and a lemon; grate in nutmeg, stir thoroughly and
drink while hot.

It was during his engagement on the "Plaindealer" that he wrote,
dating from Indiana, his first communication,--the first
published letter following this sketch, signed "Artemus Ward" a
sobriquet purely incidental, but borne with the "u" changed to an
"a" by an American revolutionary general.  It was here that Mr.
Browne first became, IN WORDS, the possessor of a moral show
"consisting of three moral bares, the a kangaroo (a amoozing
little rascal; 'twould make you larf yourself to death to see the
little kuss jump and squeal), wax figures of G. Washington, &c.
&c."  Hundreds of newspapers copied this letter, and Charles
Browne awoke one morning to find himself famous.

In the "Plaindealer" office, his companion, George Hoyt, writes:
"His desk was a rickety table which had been whittled and gashed
until it looked as if it had been the victim of lightning.  His
chair was a fit companion thereto,--a wabbling, unsteady affair,
sometimes with four and sometimes with three legs.  But Browne
saw neither the table, nor the chair, nor any person who might be
near, nothing, in fact, but the funny pictures which were
tumbling out of his brain.  When writing, his gaunt form looked
ridiculous enough.  One leg hung over the arm of his chair like a
great hook, while he would write away, sometimes laughing to
himself, and then slapping the table in the excess of his mirth."

While in the office of the "Plaindealer," Mr. Browne first
conceived the idea of becoming a lecturer.  In attending the
various minstrel shows and circuses which came to the city, he
would frequently hear repeated some story of his own which the
audience would receive with hilarity.  His best witticisms came
back to him from the lips of another who made a living by quoting
a stolen jest.  Then the thought came to him to enter the lecture
field himself, and become the utterer of his own witticisms--the
mouthpiece of his own jests.

On the 10th of November, 1860, Charles Browne, whose fame,
traveling in his letters from Boston to San Francisco, had now
become national, grasped the hands of his hundreds of New York
admirers.  Cleveland had throned him the monarch of mirth, and a
thousand hearts paid him tributes of adulation as he closed his
connection with the Cleveland Press.

Arriving in the Empire City, Mr. Browne soon opened an engagement
with "Vanity Fair," a humorous paper after the manner of London
"Punch," and ere long he succeeded Mr. Charles G. Leland as
editor.  Mr. Charles Dawson Shanly says:  "After Artemus Ward
became sole editor, a position which he held for a brief period,
many of his best contributions were given to the public; and,
whatever there was of merit in the columns of "Vanity Fair" from
the time he assumed the editorial charge, emanated from his pen."
Mr. Browne himself wrote to a friend:  "Comic copy is what they
wanted for "Vanity Fair."  I wrote some and it killed it.  The
poor paper got to be a conundrum, and so I gave it up."

The idea of entering the field as a lecturer now seized Mr.
Browne stronger than ever.  Tired of the pen, he resolved on
trying the platform.  His Bohemian friends agreed that his fame
and fortune would be made before intelligent audiences.  He
resolved to try it.  What should be the subject of my lecture?
How shall I treat the subject?  These questions caused Mr. Browne
grave speculations.  Among other schemes, he thought of a string
of jests combined with a stream of satire, the whole being
unconnected--a burlesque upon a lecture.  The subject,--that was
a hard question.  First he thought of calling it "My Seven
Grandmothers," but he finally adopted the name of "Babes in the
Woods," and with this subject Charles Browne was introduced to a
metropolitan audience, on the evening of December 23d, 1861.  The
place was Clinton Hall, which stood on the site of the old Astor
Place Opera House, where years ago occurred the Macready riot,
and where now is the Mercantile Library.  Previous to this
introduction, Mr. Frank Wood accompanied him to the suburban town
of Norwich, Connecticut, where he first delivered his lecture,
and watched the result.  The audience was delighted, and Mr.
Browne received an ovation.  Previous to his Clinton Hall
appearance the city was flooded with funny placards reading--

                      ARTEMUS WARD
                          WILL
                      SPEAK A PIECE.

Owing to a great storm, only a small audience braved the
elements, and the Clinton Hall lecture was not a financial
success.  It consisted of a wandering batch of comicalities,
touching upon everything except "The Babes."  Indeed it was
better described by the lecturer in London, when he said, "One of
the features of my entertainment is, that it contains so many
things that don't have anything to do with it."

In the middle of his lecture, the speaker would hesitate, stop,
and say:  "Owing to a slight indisposition we will now have an
intermission of fifteen minutes."  The audience looked in utter
dismay at the idea of staring at vacancy for a quarter of an
hour, when, rubbing his hands, the lecturer would continue:
"but, ah--during the intermission I will go on with my lecture!"

Mr. Browne's first volume, entitled "Artemus Ward; His Book," was
published in New York, May 17th, 1862.  The volume was everywhere
hailed with enthusiasm, and over forty thousand copies were sold.
Great success also attended the sale of his three other volumes
published in '65, '67, and '69.

Mr. Browne's next lecture was entitled "Sixty Minutes in Africa,"
and was delivered in Musical Fund Hall, Philadelphia.  Behind him
hung a large map of Africa, "which region," said Artemus,
"abounds in various natural productions, such as reptiles and
flowers.  It produces the red rose, the white rose, and the neg-
roes.  In the middle of the continent is what is called a
'howling wilderness,' but, for my part, I have never heard it
howl, nor met with any one who has."

After Mr. Browne had created immense enthusiasm for his lectures
and books in the Eastern States, which filled his pockets with a
handsome exchequer, he started, October 3d, 1863, for California,
a faithful account of which trip is given by himself in this
book.  Previous to starting, he received a telegram from Thomas
Maguire, of the San Francisco Opera House, inquiring "what he
would TAKE FOR FORTY NIGHTS IN CALIFORNIA."  Mr. Brown
immediately telegraphed back,--

                   "Brandy and water.
                              A. Ward."

And, though Maguire was sorely puzzled at the contents of the
dispatch, the Press got hold of it, and it went through
California as a capital joke.

Mr. Browne first lectured in San Francisco on "The Babes in the
Woods," November 13th, 1863, at Pratt's Hall.  T. Starr King took
a deep interest in him, occupying the rostrum, and his general
reception in San Francisco was warm.

Returning overland, through Salt Lake to the States, in the fall
of 1864, Mr. Browne lectured again in New York, this time on the
"Mormons," to immense audiences, and in the spring of 1865 he
commenced his tour through the country, everywhere drawing
enthusiastic audiences both North and South.

It was while on this tour that the writer of this sketch again
spent some time with him.  We met at Memphis and traveled down
the Mississippi together.  At Lake Providence the "Indiana"
rounded up to our landing, and Mr. Browne accompanied the writer
to his plantation, where he spent several days, mingling in
seeming infinite delight with the negroes.  For them he showed
great fondness, and they used to stand around him in crowds
listening to his seemingly serious advice.  We could not prevail
upon him to hunt or to join in any of the equestrian amusements
with the neighboring planters, but a quiet fascination drew him
to the negroes.  Strolling through the "quarters," his grave
words, too deep with humor for darkey comprehension, gained
their entire confidence.  One day he called up Uncle Jeff., an
Uncle-Tom-like patriarch, and commenced in his usual vein:  "Now,
Uncle Jefferson," he said, "why do you thus pursue the habits of
industry?  This course of life is wrong--all wrong--all a base
habit, Uncle Jefferson.  Now try to break it off.  Look at me,--
look at Mr. Landon, the chivalric young Southern plantist FROM
NEW YORK, he toils not, neither does he spin; he pursues a career
of contented idleness.  If you only thought so, Jefferson, you
could live for months WITHOUT PERFORMING ANY KIND OF LABOR, and
at the expiration of that time FEEL FRESH AND VIGOROUS ENOUGH TO
COMMENCE IT AGAIN.  Idleness refreshes the physical organization
--IT IS A SWEET BOON!  Strike at the roots of the destroying habit
to-day, Jefferson.  It tires you out; resolve to be idle; no one
should labor; HE SHOULD HIRE OTHERS TO DO IT FOR HIM;" and then
he would fix his mournful eyes on Jeff. and hand him a dollar,
while the eyes of the wonder-struck darkey would gaze in mute
admiration upon the good and wise originator of the only theory
which the darkey mind could appreciate.  As Jeff. went away to
tell the wonderful story to his companions, and backed it with
the dollar as material proof, Artemus would cover his eyes, and
bend forward on his elbows in a chuckling laugh.

"Among the Mormons" was delivered through the States, everywhere
drawing immense crowds.  His manner of delivering his discourse
was grotesque and comical beyond description.  His quaint and sad
style contributed more than anything else to render his
entertainment exquisitely funny.  The programme was exceedingly
droll, and the tickets of admission presented the most ludicrous
of ideas.  The writer presents a fac-simile of an admission
ticket which was presented to him in Natchez by Mr. Browne:--

                   ADMIT THE BEARER
                     AND ONE WIFE.
                           YOURS TROOLY,
                                 A. WARD.

In the spring of 1866, Charles Browne first timidly thought of
going to Europe.  Turning to Mr. Hingston one day he asked:
"What sort of a man is Albert Smith?  Do you think the Mormons
would be as good a subject to the Londoners as Mont Blanc was?"
Then he said:  "I should like to go to London and give my lecture
in the same place.  Can't it be done?"

Mr. Browne sailed for England soon after, taking with him his
Panorama.  The success that awaited him could scarcely have been
anticipated by his most intimate friends.  Scholars, wits, poets,
and novelists came to him with extended hands, and his stay in
London was one ovation to the genius of American wit.  Charles
Reade, the novelist, was his warm friend and enthusiastic
admirer; and Mr. Andrew Haliday introduced him to the "Literary
Club," where he became a great favorite.  Mark Lemon came to him
and asked him to become a contributor to "Punch," which he did.
His "Punch" letters were more remarked in literary circles than
any other current matter.  There was hardly a club-meeting or a
dinner at which they were not discussed.  "There was something so
grotesque in the idea," said a correspondent, "of this ruthless
Yankee poking among the revered antiquities of Britain, that the
beef-eating British themselves could not restrain their laughter."
The story of his Uncle William who "followed commercial pursuits,
glorious commerce--and sold soap," and his letters on the Tower
and "Chowser," were palpable hits, and it was admitted that
"Punch" had contained nothing better since the days of
"Yellowplush."  This opinion was shared by the "Times," the
literary reviews, and the gayest leaders of society.  The
publishers of "Punch" posted up his name in large letters over
their shop in Fleet Street, and Artemus delighted to point it out
to his friends.  About this time Mr. Browne wrote to his friend
Jack Rider, of Cleveland:

"This is the proudest moment of my life.  To have been as well
appreciated here as at home; to have written for the oldest comic
Journal in the English language, received mention with Hood, with
Jerrold and Hook, and to have my picture and my pseudonym as
common in London as in New York, is enough for
                                         "Yours truly,
                                                "A. Ward."

England was thoroughly aroused to the merits of Artemus Ward,
before he commenced his lectures at Egyptian Hall, and when, in
November, he finally appeared, immense crowds were compelled to
turn away.  At every lecture his fame increased, and when
sickness brought his brilliant success to an end, a nation
mourned his retirement.

On the evening of Friday, the seventh week of his engagement at
Egyptian Hall, Artemus became seriously ill, an apology was made
to a disappointed audience, and from that time the light of one
of the greatest wits of the centuries commenced fading into
darkness.  The Press mourned his retirement, and a funeral pall
fell over London.  The laughing, applauding crowds were soon to
see his consumptive form moving towards its narrow resting-place
in the cemetery at Kensal Green.

By medical advice Charles Browne went for a short time to the
Island of Jersey--but the breezes of Jersey were powerless.  He
wrote to London to his nearest and dearest friends--the members
of a literary club of which he was a member--to complain that his
"loneliness weighed on him."  He was brought back, but could not
sustain the journey farther than Southampton.  There the members
of the club traveled from London to see him--two at a time--that
he might be less lonely.

His remains were followed to the grave from the rooms of his
friend Arthur Sketchley, by a large number of friends and
admirers, the literati and press of London paying the last
tribute of respect to their dead brother.  The funeral services
were conducted by the Rev. M.D. Conway, formerly of Cincinnati,
and the coffin was temporarily placed in a vault, from which it
was removed by his American friends, and his body now sleeps by
the side of his father, Levi Browne, in the quiet cemetery at
Waterford, Maine.  Upon the coffin is the simple inscription:--

                    "CHARLES F. BROWNE,
                      AGED 32 YEARS,
          Better Known to the World as 'Artemus Ward.'"

His English executors were T.W. Robertson, the playwright, and
his friend and companion, E.P. Hingston.  His literary executors
were Horace Greeley and Richard H. Stoddard.  In his will, he
bequeathed among other things a large sum of money to his little
valet, a bright little fellow; though subsequent denouments
revealed the fact that he left only a six-thousand-dollar house
in Yonkers.  There is still some mystery about his finances,
which may one day be revealed.  It is known that he withdrew
10,000 dollars from the Pacific Bank to deposit it with a friend
before going to England; besides this, his London "Punch" letters
paid a handsome profit.  Among his personal friends were George
Hoyt, the late Daniel Setchell, Charles W.  Coe, and Mr. Mullen,
the artist, all of whom he used to style "my friends all the year
round."

Personally Charles Farrar Browne was one of the kindest and most
affectionate of men, and history does not name a man who was so
universally beloved by all who knew him.  It was remarked, and
truly, that the death of no literary character since Washington
Irving caused such general and widespread regret.

In stature he was tall and slender.  His nose was prominent,--
outlined like that of Sir Charles Napier, or Mr. Seward; his eyes
brilliant, small, and close together; his mouth large, teeth
white and pearly; fingers long and slender; hair soft, straight,
and blonde; complexion florid; mustache large, and his voice soft
and clear.  In bearing, he moved like a natural-born gentleman.
In his lectures he never smiled--not even while he was giving
utterance to the most delicious absurdities; but all the while
the jokes fell from his lips as if he was unconscious of their
meaning.  While writing his lectures, he would laugh and chuckle
to himself continually.

There was one peculiarity about Charles Browne--HE NEVER MADE AN
ENEMY.  Other wits in other times have been famous, but a
satirical thrust now and then has killed a friend.  Diogenes was
the wit of Greece, but when, after holding up an old dried fish
to draw away the eyes of Anaximenes' audience, he exclaimed "See
how an old fish is more interesting than Anaximenes," he said a
funny thing, but he stabbed a friend.  When Charles Lamb, in
answer to the doting mother's question as to how he liked babies,
replied, "b-b-boiled, madam, BOILED!" that mother loved him no
more:  and when John Randolph said "THANK YOU!" to his
constituent who kindly remarked that he had the pleasure of
PASSING his house, it was wit at the expense of friendship.  The
whole English school of wits--with Douglas Jerrold, Hood,
Sheridan, and Sidney Smith, indulged in repartee.  They were
PARASITIC wits.  And so with the Irish, except that an Irishman
is generally so ridiculously absurd in his replies as to only
excite ridicule.  "Artemus Ward" made you laugh and love him too.

The wit of "Artemus Ward" and "Josh Billings" is distinctively
American.  Lord Kames, in his "Elements of Criticism," makes no
mention of this species of wit, a lack which the future
rhetorician should look to.  We look in vain for it in the
English language of past ages, and in other languages of modern
time.  It is the genus American.  When Artemus says in that
serious manner, looking admiringly at his atrocious pictures,--"I
love pictures--and I have many of them--beautiful photographs--of
myself;" you smile; and when he continues, "These pictures were
painted by the Old Masters; they painted these pictures and then
they--they expired;" you hardly know what it is that makes you
laugh outright; and when Josh Billings says in his Proverbs,
wiser than Solomon's "You'd better not know so much, than know so
many things that ain't so;"--the same vein is struck, but the
text-books fail to explain scientifically the cause of our mirth.

The wit of Charles Browne is of the most exalted kind.  It is
only scholars and those thoroughly acquainted with the SUBTILTY
of our language who fully appreciate it.  His wit is generally
about historical personages like Cromwell, Garrick, or
Shakspeare, or a burlesque on different styles of writing, like
his French novel, when hifalutin phrases of tragedy come from the
clodhopper who--"sells soap and thrice--refuses a ducal coronet."

Mr. Browne mingled the eccentric even in his business letters.
Once he wrote to his Publisher, Mr. G.W. Carleton, who had made
some alterations in his MSS.:  "The next book I write I'm going
to get YOU to write."  Again he wrote in 1863:

"Dear Carl:--You and I will get out a book next spring, which
will knock spots out of all comic books in ancient or modern
history.  And the fact that you are going to take hold of it
convinces me that you have one of the most MASSIVE intellects of
this or any other epoch.

"Yours, my pretty gazelle,

"A. Ward."

When Charles F. Browne died, he did not belong to America, for,
as with Irving and Dickens, the English language claimed him.
Greece alone did not suffer when the current of Diogenes' wit
flowed on to death.  Spain alone did not mourn when Cervantes,
dying, left Don Quixote, the "knight of la Mancha."  When Charles
Lamb ceased to tune the great heart of humanity to joy and
gladness, his funeral was in every English and American household;
 and when Charles Browne took up his silent resting-place in the
sombre shades of Kensal Green, JESTING CEASED, and one great
Anglo-American heart,

             Like a muffled drum went beating
               Funeral marches to his grave.

                                  MELVILLE D. LANDON.



INTRODUCTION  BY T.W. ROBERTSON.

Few tasks are more difficult or delicate than to write on the
subject of the works or character of a departed friend.  The pen
falters as the familiar face looks out of the paper.  The mind is
diverted from the thought of death as the memory recalls some happy
epigram.  It seems so strange that the hand that traced the jokes
should be cold, that the tongue that trolled out the good things
should be silent--that the jokes and the good things should remain,
and the man who made them should be gone for ever.

The works of Charles Farrar Browne--who was known to the world as
"Artemus Ward"--have run through so many editions, have met with
such universal popularity, and have been so widely criticised, that
it is needless to mention them here.  So many biographies have been
written of the gentleman who wrote in the character of the 'cute
Yankee Showman, that it is unnecessary that I should touch upon his
life, belongings, or adventures.  Of "Artemus Ward" I know just as
much as the rest of the world.  I prefer, therefore, to speak of
Charles Farrar Browne, as I knew him, and, in doing so, I can
promise those friends who also knew him and esteemed him, that as I
consider no "public" man so public, that some portion of his work,
pleasures, occupations, and habits may not be considered private, I
shall only mention how kind and noble-minded was the man of whom I
write, without dragging forward special and particular acts in proof
of my words, as if the goodness of his mind and character needed the
certificate of facts.

I first saw Charles Browne at a literary club; he had only been a
few hours in London, and he seemed highly pleased and excited at
finding himself in the old city to which his thoughts had so often
wandered.  Browne was an intensely sympathetic man.  His brain and
feelings were as a "lens," and he received impressions immediately.
No man could see him without liking him at once.  His manner was
straightforward and genial, and had in it the dignity of a
gentleman, tempered, as it were, by the fun of the humorist.  When
you heard him talk you wanted to make much of him, not because he
was "Artemus Ward," but because he was himself, for no one less
resembled "Artemus Ward" than his author and creator, Charles Farrar
Browne.  But a few weeks ago it was remarked to me that authors were
a disappointing race to know, and I agreed with the remark, and I
remember a lady once said to me that the personal appearance of
poets seldom "came up" to their works.  To this I replied that,
after all, poets were but men, and that it was as unreasonable to
expect that the late Sir Walter Scott could at all resemble a
Gathering of the Clans as that the late Lord Macaulay should appear
anything like the Committal of the Seven Bishops to the Tower.  I
told the lady that she was unfair to eminent men if she hoped that
celebrated engineers would look like tubular bridges, or that Sir
Edwin Landseer would remind her of a "Midsummer Night's Dream."  I
mention this because, of all men in the world, my friend Charles
Browne was the least like a showman of any man I ever encountered.
I can remember the odd half disappointed look of some of the
visitors to the Egyptian Hall when "Artemus" stepped upon the
platform.  At first they thought that he was a gentleman who
appeared to apologise for the absence of the showman.  They had
pictured to themselves a coarse old man, with a damp eye and a
puckered mouth, one eyebrow elevated an inch above the other to
express shrewdness and knowledge of the world--a man clad in
velveteen and braid, with a heavy watch-chain, large rings, and
horny hands, the touter to a waxwork show, with a hoarse voice, and
over familiar manner.  The slim gentleman in evening dress, polished
manners, and gentle voice, with a tone of good breeding that hovered
between deference and jocosity; the owner of those thin--those much
too thin--white hands could not be the man who spelt joke with a
"g."  Folks who came to laugh, began to fear that they should remain
to be instructed, until the gentlemanly disappointer began to speak,
then they recovered their real "Artemus," Betsy Jane, wax-figgers,
and all.  Will patriotic Americans forgive me if I say that Charles
Browne loved England dearly!  He had been in London but a few days
when he paid a visit to the Tower.  He knew English history better
than most Englishmen; and the Tower of London was to him the history
of England embalmed in stone and mortar.  No man had more reverence
in his nature; and at the Tower he saw that what he had read was
real.  There were the beef-eaters; there had been Queen Elizabeth
and Sir Walter Raleigh, and Lady Jane Grey, and Shakspere's murdered
princes, and their brave, cruel uncle.  There was the block and the
axe, and the armour and the jewels.  "St George for Merrie England!"
had been shouted in the Holy Land, and men of the same blood as
himself had been led against the infidel by men of the same brain
and muscle as George Washington.  Robin Hood was a reality, and not
a schoolboy's myth like Ali Baba and Valentine and Orson.

There were two sets of feelings in Charles Browne at the Tower.  He
could appreciate the sublimity of history, but, as the "Show" part
of the exhibition was described to him, the humorist, the wit, and
the iconoclast from the other side the Atlantic must have smiled at
the "descriptions."  The "Tower" was a "show," like his own--Artemus
Ward's.  A price was paid for admission, and the "figgers" were
"orated."  Real jewellery is very like sham jewellery after all, and
the "Artemus" vein in Charles Browne's mental constitution--the vein
of humour, whose source was a strong contempt of all things false,
mean, shabby, pretentious, and only external--of bunkum and
Barnumisation--must have seen a gigantic speculation realising
shiploads of dollars if the Tower could have been taken over to the
States, and exhibited from town to town--the Stars and Stripes flying
over it--with a four-horse lecture to describe the barbarity of the
ancient British Barons and the cuss of chivalry.

Artemus Ward's Lecture on the Mormons at the Egyptian Hall,
Piccadilly, was a great success.  His humour was so entirely fresh,
new, and unconventional, it took his hearers by surprise, and
charmed them.  His failing health compelled him to abandon the
lecture after about eight or ten weeks.  Indeed, during that brief
period he was once or twice compelled to dismiss his audience.  I
have myself seen him sink into a chair and nearly faint after the
exertion of dressing.  He exhibited the greatest anxiety to be at
his post at the appointed time, and scrupulously exerted himself to
the utmost to entertain his auditors.  It was not because he was
sick that the public was to be disappointed, or that their enjoyment
was to be diminished.  During the last few weeks of his
lecture-giving he steadily abstained from accepting any of the
numerous invitations he received.  Had he lived through the
following London fashionable season, there is little doubt that the
room at the Egyptian Hall would have been thronged nightly.  Our
aristocracy have a fine delicate sense of humour, and the success,
artistic and pecuniary, of "Artemus Ward" would have rivalled that
of the famous "Lord Dundreary."  There are many stupid people who
did not understand the "fun" of Artemus Ward's books.  In their
vernacular "they didn't see it."  There were many stupid people who
did not understand the fun of Artemus Ward's lecture on the Mormons.
They could not see it.  Highly respectable people--the pride of
their parish, when they heard of a lecture "upon the Mormons"-
-expected to see a solemn person, full of old saws and new
statistics, who would denounce the sin of polygamy, and bray against
polygamists with four-and-twenty boiling-water Baptist power of
denunciation.  These uncomfortable Christians do not like humour.
They dread it as a certain personage is said to dread holy water,
and for the same reason that thieves fear policemen--it finds them
out.  When these good idiots heard Artemus offer, if they did not
like the lecture in Piccadilly, to give them free tickets for the
same lecture in California, when he next visited that country, they
turned to each other indignantly, and said "What use are tickets for
California to us?  We are not going to California.  No! we are too
good, too respectable, to go so far from home.  The man is a fool!"
One of these ornaments of the vestry complained to the doorkeepers,
and denounced the lecture as an imposition; "and," said the wealthy
parishioner, "as for the panorama, it's the worst painted thing I
ever saw in all my life!"

But the entertainment, original, humorous, and racy though it was,
was drawing to a close!  In the fight between youth and death, death
was to conquer.  By medical advice Charles Browne went for a short
time to Jersey--but the breezes of Jersey were powerless.  He wrote
to London to his nearest and dearest friends--the members of a
literary club of which he was a member--to complain that his
"loneliness weighed on him."  He was brought back, but could not
sustain the journey farther than Southampton.  There the members of
the beforementioned club travelled from London to see him--two at a
time--that he might be less lonely--and for the unwearying
solicitude of his friend and agent, Mr. Hingston, and to the kindly
sympathy of the United States Consul at Southampton, Charles
Browne's best and dearest friends had cause to be grateful.  I
cannot close these lines without mention of "Artemus Ward's" last
joke.  He had read in the newspapers that a wealthy American had
offered to present the Prince of Wales with a splendid yacht,
American built.

"It seems," said the invalid, "a fashion now-a-days for everybody to
present the Prince of Wales with something.  I think I shall leave
him--my panorama!"

Charles Browne died beloved and regretted by all who knew him, and
by many who had known him but a few weeks; and when he drew his last
breath, there passed away the Spirit of a true gentleman.

                                           T.W. ROBERTSON
London, August 11, 1868.

PREFATORY NOTE

                   BY EDWARD P. HINGSTON.

In Cleveland, Ohio, the pleasant city beside the lakes, Artemus Ward
first determined to become a public lecturer.  He and I rambled
through Cleveland together after his return from California.  He
called on some old friends at the Herald office, then went over to
the Weddel House, and afterwards strolled across to the offices of
the "Plain Dealer", where, in his position as sub-editor, he had
written many of his earlier essays.  Artemus inquired for Mr. Gray,
the editor, who chanced to be absent.  Looking round at the vacant
desks and inkstained furniture, Artemus was silent for a minute or
two, and then burst into one of those peculiar chuckling fits of
laughter in which he would occasionally indulge; not a loud laugh,
but a shaking of the whole body with an impulse of merriment which
set every muscle in motion.  "Here," said he, "here's where they
called me a fool."  The remembrance of their so calling him seemed
to afford him intense amusement.

>From the office of the Cleveland Plain Dealer we continued our tour
of the town.  Presently we found ourselves in front of Perry's
statue, the monument erected to commemorate the naval engagement on
Lake Erie, wherein the Americans came off victorious.  Artemus
looked up to the statue, laid his finger to the side of his nose,
and, in his quaint manner, remarked, "I wonder whether they called
him 'a fool' too, when he went to fight!"

The remark, following close as it did upon his laughing fit in the
newspaper office, caused me to inquire why he had been called "a
fool," and who had called him so.

"It was the opinion of my friends on the paper," he replied.  "I
told them that I was going in for lecturing.  They laughed at me,
and called me `a fool.'  Don't you think they were right?"

Then we sauntered up Euclid Street, under the shade of its avenue of
trees.  As we went along, Artemus Ward recounted to me the story of
his becoming a lecturer.  Our conversation on that agreeable evening
is fresh in my remembrance.  Memory still listens to the voice of my
companion in the stroll, still sees the green trees of Euclid Street
casting their shadows across our path, and still joins in the laugh
with Artemus, who, having just returned from California, where he
had taken sixteen hundred dollars at one lecture, did not think that
to be evidence of his having lost his senses.

The substance of that which Artemus Ward then told me was, that
while writing for the "Cleveland Plain Dealer" he was accustomed, in
the discharge of his duties as a reporter, to attend the
performances of the various minstrel troups and circuses which
visited the neighbourhood.  At one of these he would hear some story
of his own, written a month or two previously, given by the
"middle-man" of the minstrels and received with hilarity by the
audience.  