ike a speared Eel.]  You wear long
weskits and long faces, and lead a gloomy life indeed.  No
children's prattle is ever hearn around your harthstuns--you air
in a dreary fog all the time, and you treat the jolly sunshine of
life as tho' it was a thief, drivin it from your doors by them
weskits, and meal bags, and pecooler noshuns of yourn.  The gals
among you, sum of which air as slick pieces of caliker as I ever
sot eyes on, air syin to place their heds agin weskits which
kiver honest, manly harts, while you old heds fool yerselves with
the idee that they air fulfillin their mishun here, and air
contented.  Here you air all pend up by yerselves, talkin about
the sins of a world you don't know nothin of.  Meanwhile said
world continners to resolve round on her own axletree onct in
every 24 hours, subjeck to the Constitution of the United States,
and is a very plesant place of residence.  It's a unnatral,
onreasonable and dismal life you're leadin here.  So it strikes
me.  My Shaker frends, I now bid you a welcome adoo.  You hav
treated me exceedin well.  Thank you kindly, one and all.

"A base exhibiter of depraved monkeys and onprincipled wax
works!" sed Uriah.

"Hello, Uriah," sez I, "I'd most forgot you.  Wall, look out for
them fits of yourn, and don't catch cold and die in the flour of
your youth and beauty."

And I resoomed my jerney.


1.4.  HIGH-HANDED OUTRAGE AT UTICA.

In the Faul of 1856, I showed my show in Uticky, a trooly grate
sitty in the State of New York.

The people gave me a cordyal recepshun.  The press was loud in
her prases.

1 day as I was givin a descripshun of my Beests and Snaiks in my
usual flowry stile what was my skorn disgust to see a big burly
feller walk up to the cage containin my wax figgers of the Lord's
Last Supper, and cease Judas Iscarrot by the feet and drag him
out on the ground.  He then commenced fur to pound him as hard as
he cood.

"What under the son are you abowt?" cried I.

Sez he, "What did you bring this pussylanermus cuss here fur?"
and he hit the wax figger another tremenjis blow on the hed.

Sez I, "You egrejus ass, that air's a wax figger--a
representashun of the false 'Postle."

Sez he, "That's all very well fur you to say, but I tell you, old
man, that Judas Iscarrot can't show hisself in Utiky with
impunerty by a darn site!" with which observashun he kaved in
Judassis hed.  The young man belonged to 1 of the first famerlies
in Utiky.  I sood him, and the Joory brawt in a verdick of Arson
in the 3d degree.


1.5.  CELEBRATION AT BALDINSVILLE IN HONOR OF THE ATLANTIC CABLE.

Baldinsville, Injianny, Sep. the onct, 18&58.--I was summund home
from Cinsinnaty quite suddin by a lettur from the Supervizers of
Baldinsville, sayin as how grate things was on the Tappis in that
air town in refferunse to sellebratin the compleshun of the
Sub-Mershine Tellergraph & axkin me to be Pressunt.  Lockin up my
Kangeroo and wax wurks in a sekure stile I took my departer for
Baldinsville--"my own, my nativ lan," which I gut intwo at early
kandle litin on the follerin night & just as the sellerbrashun
and illumernashun ware commensin.

Baldinsville was trooly in a blaze of glory.  Near can I forgit
the surblime speckticul which met my gase as I alited from the
Staige with my umbreller and verlis.  The Tarvern was lit up with
taller kandles all over & a grate bon fire was burnin in frunt
thareof.  A Traspirancy was tied onto the sine post with the
follerin wurds--"Giv us Liberty or Deth."  Old Tompkinsis grosery
was illumernated with 5 tin lantuns and the follerin Transpirancy
was in the winder--"The Sub-Mershine Tellergraph & the
Baldinsville and Stonefield Plank Road--the 2 grate eventz of the
19th centerry--may intestines strife never mar their grandjure."
Simpkinsis shoe shop was all ablase with kandles and lantuns.  A
American Eagle was painted onto a flag in a winder--also these
wurds, viz.--"The Constitooshun must be Presarved."  The Skool
house was lited up in grate stile and the winders was filld with
mottoes amung which I notised the follerin--"Trooth smashed to
erth shall rize agin--YOU CAN'T STOP HER."  "The Boy stood on the
Burnin Deck whense awl but him had Fled."  "Prokrastinashun is
the theaf of Time."  "Be virtoous & you will be Happy."
"Intemperunse has cawsed a heap of trubble--shun the Bole," an
the follerin sentimunt written by the skool master, who graduated
at Hudson Kollige:  "Baldinsville sends greetin to Her Magisty
the Queen, & hopes all hard feelins which has heretofore previs
bin felt between the Supervizers of Baldinsville and the British
Parlimunt, if such there has been, may now be forever wiped frum
our Escutchuns.  Baldinsville this night rejoises over the
gerlorious event which sementz 2 grate nashuns onto one anuther
by means of a elecktric wire under the roarin billers of the
Nasty Deep.  QUOSQUE TANTRUM, A BUTTER, CATERLINY, PATENT
NOSTRUM!"  Squire Smith's house was lited up regardlis of
expense.  His little sun William Henry stood upon the roof firin
orf crackers.  The old 'Squire hisself was dressed up in soljer
clothes and stood on his door-step, pintin his sword sollumly to
a American flag which was suspendid on top of a pole in frunt of
his house.  Frequiently he wood take orf his cocked hat & wave it
round in a impressive stile.  His oldest darter Mis Isabeller
Smith, who has just cum home from the Perkinsville Female
Instertoot, appeared at the frunt winder in the West room as the
goddis of liberty, & sung "I see them on their windin way."
Booteus 1, sed I to myself, you air a angil & nothin shorter. N.
Boneparte Smith, the 'Squire's oldest sun, drest hisself up as
Venus the God of Wars and red the Decleration of Inderpendunse
from the left chambir winder.  The 'Squire's wife didn't jine in
the festiverties.  She sed it was the tarnulest nonsense she ever
seed.  Sez she to the 'Squire, "Cum into the house and go to bed
you old fool, you.  Tomorrer you'll be goin round half-ded with
the rumertism & won't gin us a minit's peace till you get well."
Sez the 'Squire, "Betsy, you little appresiate the importance of
the event which I this night commererate."  Sez she, "Commemerate
a cat's tail--cum into the house this instant, you pesky old
critter."  "Betsy," sez the 'Squire, wavin his sword, "retire."
This made her just as mad as she could stick.  She retired, but
cum out agin putty quick with a panfull of Bilin hot water which
she throwed all over the Squire, & Surs, you wood have split your
sides larfin to see the old man jump up and holler & run into the
house.  Except this unpropishus circumstance all went as merry as
a carriage bell, as Lord Byrun sez.  Doctor Hutchinsis offiss was
likewise lited up and a Transpirancy, on which was painted the
Queen in the act of drinkin sum of "Hutchinsis invigorater," was
stuck into one of the winders.  The Baldinsville Bugle of Liberty
noospaper offiss was also illumernated, & the follerin mottoes
stuck out--"The Press is the Arkermejian leaver which moves the
world."  "Vote Early."  "Buckle on your Armer."  "Now is the time
to Subscribe."  "Franklin, Morse & Field."  "Terms 1.50 dollars a
year--liberal reducshuns to clubs."  In short the villige of
Baldinsville was in a perfect fewroar.  I never seed so many
peple thar befour in my born days.  Ile not attemp to describe
the seens of that grate night.  Wurds wood fale me ef I shood try
to do it.  I shall stop here a few periods and enjoy my "Oatem
cum dig the tates," as our skool master observes, in the buzzum
of my famerly, & shall then resume the show biznis, which Ive bin
into twenty-two (22) yeres and six (6) months.


1.6.  AMONG THE SPIRITS.

My naburs is mourn harf crazy on the new-fangled ideas about
Sperrets.  Sperretooul Sircles is held nitely & 4 or 5 long hared
fellers has settled here and gone into the Sperret biznis
excloosively.  A atemt was made to git Mrs. A. Ward to embark
into the Sperret biznis but the atemt faled.  1 of the long hared
fellers told her she was a ethereal creeter & wood make a sweet
mejium, whareupon she attact him with a mop handle & drove him
out of the house.  I will hear obsarve that Mrs.Ward is a
invalerble womum--the partner of my goys & the shairer of my
sorrers.  In my absunse she watchis my interests & things with a
Eagle Eye & when I return she welcums me in afectionate stile.
Trooly it is with us as it was with Mr. & Mrs. INGOMER in the
Play, to whit,--

             2 soles with but a single thawt
             2 harts which beet as 1.

My naburs injooced me to attend a Sperretooul Sircle at Squire
Smith's.  When I arrove I found the east room chock full includin
all the old maids in the villige & the long hared fellers a4sed.
When I went in I was salootid with "hear cums the benited man"--
"hear cums the hory-heded unbeleever"--"hear cums the skoffer at
trooth," etsettery, etsettery.

Sez I, "my frens, it's troo I'm hear, & now bring on your
Sperrets."

1 of the long hared fellers riz up and sed he would state a few
remarks.  He sed man was a critter of intelleck & was movin on to
a Gole.  Sum men had bigger intellecks than other men had and
thay wood git to the Gole the soonerest.  Sum men was beests &
wood never git into the Gole at all.  He sed the Erth was
materiel but man was immaterial, and hens man was different from
the Erth.  The Erth, continnered the speaker, resolves round on
its own axeltree onct in 24 hours, but as man haint gut no
axeltree he cant resolve.  He sed the ethereal essunce of the
koordinate branchis of super-human natur becum mettymorfussed as
man progrest in harmonial coexistunce & eventooally anty
humanized theirselves & turned into reglar sperretuellers.  (This
was versifferusly applauded by the cumpany, and as I make it a
pint to get along as pleasant as possible, I sung out "bully for
you, old boy.")

The cumpany then drew round the table and the Sircle kommenst
to go it.  Thay axed me if thare was an body in the Sperret land
which I wood like to convarse with.  I sed if Bill Tompkins, who
was onct my partner in the show biznis, was sober, I should like
to convarse with him a few periods.

"Is the Sperret of William Tompkins present?" sed 1 of the long
hared chaps, and there was three knox on the table.

Sez I, "William, how goze it, Old Sweetness?"

"Pretty ruff, old hoss," he replide.

That was a pleasant way we had of addressin each other when he
was in the flesh.

"Air you in the show bizniz, William?" sed I.

He sed he was.  He sed he & John Bunyan was travelin with a
side show in connection with Shakspere, Jonson & Co.'s Circus.
He sed old Bun (meanin Mr. Bunyan,) stired up the animils &
ground the organ while he tended door. Occashunally Mr. Bunyan
sung a comic song.  The Circus was doin middlin well.  Bill
Shakspeer had made a grate hit with old Bob Ridley, and Ben
Jonson was delitin the peple with his trooly grate ax of
hossmanship without saddul or bridal.  Thay was rehersin
Dixey's Land & expected it would knock the peple.

Sez I, "William, my luvly friend, can you pay me that 13
dollars you owe me?"  He sed no with one of the most tremenjis
knox I ever experiunsed.

The Sircle sed he had gone.  "Air you gone, William?" I axed.
"Rayther," he replide, and I knowd it was no use to pursoo the
subjeck furder.

I then called fur my farther.

"How's things, daddy?"

"Middlin, my son, middlin."

"Ain't you proud of your orfurn boy?"

"Scacely."

"Why not, my parient?"

"Becawz you hav gone to writin for the noospapers, my son.
Bimeby you'll lose all your character for trooth and
verrasserty.  When I helpt you into the show biznis I told you
to dignerfy that there profeshun.  Litteratoor is low."

He also statid that he was doin middlin well in the peanut
biznis & liked it putty well, tho' the climit was rather warm.

When the Sircle stopt thay axed me what I thawt of it.

Sez I, "My frends I've bin into the show biznis now goin on 23
years.  Theres a artikil in the Constitooshun of the United
States which sez in effeck that everybody may think just as he
darn pleazes, & them is my sentiments to a hare.  You dowtlis
beleeve this Sperret doctrin while I think it is a little mixt.
Just so soon as a man becums a reglar out & out Sperret rapper
he leeves orf workin, lets his hare grow all over his fase &
commensis spungin his livin out of other peple.  He eats all
the dickshunaries he can find & goze round chock full of big
words, scarein the wimmin folks & little children & destroyin
the piece of mind of evry famerlee he enters.  He don't do
nobody no good & is a cuss to society & a pirit on honest
peple's corn beef barrils.  Admittin all you say abowt the
doctrin to be troo, I must say the reglar perfessional Sperrit
rappers--them as makes a biznis on it--air abowt the most
ornery set of cusses I ever enkountered in my life.  So sayin I
put on my surtoot and went home.

                              Respectably Yures,
                                          Artemus Ward.


1.7.  ON THE WING.

Gents of the Editorial Corpse.--

Since I last rit you I've met with immense success a showin my
show in varis places, particly at Detroit.  I put up at Mr.
Russel's tavern, a very good tavern too, but I am sorry to
inform you that the clerks tried to cum a Gouge Game on me.  I
brandished my new sixteen dollar huntin-cased watch round
considerable, & as I was drest in my store clothes & had a lot
of sweet-scented wagon-grease on my hair, I am free to confess
that I thought I lookt putty gay.  It never once struck me that
I lookt green.  But up steps a clerk & axes me hadn't I better
put my watch in the Safe.  "Sir," sez I, "that watch cost
sixteen dollars!  Yes, Sir, every dollar of it!  You can't cum
it over me, my boy!  Not at all, Sir."  I know'd what the clerk
wanted.  He wanted that watch himself.  He wanted to make
believe as tho he lockt it up in the safe, then he would set
the house a fire and pretend as tho the watch was destroyed
with the other property!  But he caught a Tomarter when he got
hold of me.  From Detroit I go West'ard hoe. On the cars was a
he-lookin female, with a green-cotton umbreller in one hand and
a handful of Reform tracks in the other.  She sed every woman
should have a Spear.  Them as didn't demand their Spears,
didn't know what was good for them.  "What is my Spear?" she
axed, addressing the people in the cars.  "Is it to stay at
home & darn stockins & be the ser-LAVE of a domineerin man?  Or
is it my Spear to vote & speak & show myself the ekal of a man?
Is there a sister in these keers that has her proper Spear?"
Sayin which the eccentric female whirled her umbreller round
several times, & finally jabbed me in the weskit with it.

"I hav no objecshuns to your goin into the Spear bizness," sez
I, "but you'll please remember I ain't a pickeril.  Don't Spear
me agin, if you please."  She sot down.

At Ann Arbor, bein seized with a sudden faintness, I called for
a drop of suthin to drink.  As I was stirrin the beverage up, a
pale-faced man in gold spectacles laid his hand upon my
shoulder, & sed, "Look not upon the wine when it is red!"

Sez I, "This ain't wine.  This is Old Rye."

"'It stingeth like a Adder and biteth like a Sarpent!'" sed the
man.

"I guess not," sed I, "when you put sugar into it.  That's the
way I allers take mine."

"Have you sons grown up, sir?" the man axed.

"Wall," I replide, as I put myself outside my beverage, "my son
Artemus junior is goin on 18."

"Ain't you afraid if you set this example be4 him he'll cum to
a bad end?"

"He's cum to a waxed end already.  He's learnin the shoe makin
bizness," I replide.  "I guess we can both on us git along
without your assistance, Sir," I obsarved, as he was about to
open his mouth agin.

"This is a cold world!" sed the man.

"That's so.  But you'll get into a warmer one by and by if you
don't mind your own bizness better."  I was a little riled at
the feller, because I never take anythin only when I'm onwell.
I arterwards learned he was a temperance lecturer, and if he
can injuce men to stop settin their inards on fire with the
frightful licker which is retailed round the country, I shall
hartily rejoice.  Better give men Prusick Assid to onct, than
to pizen 'em to deth by degrees.

At Albion I met with overwhelmin success.  The celebrated
Albion Female Semenary is located here, & there air over 300
young ladies in the Institushun, pretty enough to eat without
seasonin or sass.  The young ladies was very kind to me,
volunteerin to pin my handbills onto the backs of their
dresses.  It was a surblime site to see over 300 young ladies
goin round with a advertisement of A. Ward's onparaleld show,
conspickusly posted onto their dresses.

They've got a Panick up this way and refooze to take Western
money.  It never was worth much, and when western men, who
knows what it is, refooze to take their own money it is about
time other folks stopt handlin it.  Banks are bustin every day,
goin up higher nor any balloon of which we hav any record.
These western bankers air a sweet & luvly set of men.  I wish I
owned as good a house as some of 'em would break into!

Virtoo is its own reward.

                                                   A. Ward.


1.8.  THE OCTOROON.

It is with no ordernary feelins of Shagrin & indignashun that I
rite you these here lines.  Sum of the hiest and most purest
feelins whitch actoate the humin hart has bin trampt onto.  The
Amerycan flag has bin outrajed.  Ive bin nussin a Adder in my
Boozum.  The fax in the kase is these here:

A few weeks ago I left Baldinsville to go to N.Y. fur to git
out my flamin yeller hanbills fur the Summer kampane, & as I
was peroosin a noospaper on the kars a middel aged man in
speckterkuls kum & sot down beside onto me.  He was drest in
black close & was appeerently as fine a man as ever was.

"A fine day, Sir," he did unto me strateway say.

"Middlin," sez I, not wishin to kommit myself, tho he peered to
be as fine a man as there was in the wurld--"It is a middlin
fine day, Square," I obsarved.

Sez he, "How fares the Ship of State in yure regine of
country?"

Sez I, "We don't hav no ships in our State--the kanawl is our
best holt."

He pawsed a minit and then sed, "Air yu aware, Sir, that the
krisis is with us?"

"No," sez I, getting up and lookin under the seet, "whare is
she?"

"It's hear--it's everywhares," he sed.

Sez I, "Why how you tawk!" and I gut up agin & lookt all round.
"I must say, my fren," I continnered, as I resoomed my seet,
"that I kan't see nothin of no krisis myself."  I felt sumwhat
alarmed, & arose & in a stentoewrian voice obsarved that if any
lady or gentleman in that there kar had a krisis consealed
abowt their persons they'd better projuce it to onct or suffer
the konsequences.  Several individoouls snickered rite out,
while a putty little damsell rite behind me in a pinc gown made
the observashun, "He, he."

"Sit down, my fren," sed the man in black close, "yu
miskomprehend me.  I meen that the perlittercal ellermunts are
orecast with black klouds, 4boden a friteful storm."

"Wall," replide I, "in regard to perlittercal ellerfunts I
don't know as how but what they is as good as enny other kind
of ellerfunts.  But I maik bold to say thay is all a ornery set
& unpleasant to hav around.  They air powerful hevy eaters &
take up a right smart chans of room, & besides thay air as ugly
and revenjeful, as a Cusscaroarus Injun, with 13 inches of corn
whisky in his stummick."  The man in black close seemed to be
as fine a man as ever was in the wurld.  He smilt & sed praps I
was rite, tho it was ellermunts instid of ellerfunts that he
was alludin to, & axed me what was my prinserpuls?

"I haint gut enny," sed I--"not a prinserpul.  Ime in the show
biznis."  The man in black close, I will hear obsarve, seemed
to be as fine a man as ever was in the wurld.

"But," sez he, "you hav feelins into you?  You cimpathize with
the misfortunit, the loly & the hart-sick, don't you?"  He bust
into teers and axed me ef I saw that yung lady in the seet out
yender, pintin to as slick a lookin gal as I ever seed.

Sed I, "2 be shure I see her--is she mutch sick?"  The man in
black close was appeerently as fine a man as ever was in the
wurld ennywhares.

"Draw closter to me," sed the man in black close.  "Let me git
my mowth fernenst yure ear.  Hush--SHESE A OCTOROON!"

"No!" sez I, gittin up in a exsited manner, "yu don't say so!
How long has she bin in that way?"

"Frum her arliest infuncy," sed he.

"Wall, whot upon arth duz she doo it fur?" I inquired.

"She kan't help it," sed the man in black close.  "It's the
brand of Kane."

"Wall, she'd better stop drinkin Kane's brandy," I replide.

"I sed the brand of Kane was upon her--not brandy, my fren.
Yure very obtoose."

I was konsiderbul riled at this.  Sez I, "My gentle Sir, Ime a
nonresistanter as a ginral thing, & don't want to git up no
rows with nobuddy, but I kin nevertheles kave in enny man's hed
that calls me a obtoos," with whitch remarks I kommenst fur to
pull orf my extry garmints. "Cum on," sez I--"Time! hear's the
Beniki Boy fur ye!" & I darnced round like a poppit.  He riz up
in his seet & axed my pardin--sed it was all a mistake--that I
was a good man, etsettery, & sow 4th, & we fixt it all up
pleasant.  I must say the man in black close seamed to be as
fine a man as ever lived in the wurld.  He sed a Octoroon was
the 8th of a negrow.  He likewise statid that the female he was
travlin with was formurly a slave in Mississippy; that she'd
purchist her freedim & now wantid to purchiss the freedim of
her poor old muther, who (the man in black close obsarved) was
between 87 years of age & had to do all the cookin & washin for
25 hired men, whitch it was rapidly breakin down her konstitushun.
He sed he knowed the minit he gazed onto my klassic & beneverlunt
fase that I'd donate librully & axed me to go over & see her,
which I accordingly did.  I sot down beside her and sed, "yure
Sarvant, Marm!  How do yer git along?"

She bust in 2 teers & sed, "O Sur, I'm so retchid--I'm a poor
unfortunit Octoroon."

"So I larn.  Yure rather more Roon than Octo, I take it," sed
I, fur I never seed a puttier gal in the hull endoorin time of
my life.  She had on a More Antic Barsk & a Poplin Nubier with
Berage trimmins onto it, while her ise & kurls was enuff to
make a man jump into a mill pond without biddin his relashuns
good-by.  I pittid the Octoroon from the inmost recusses of my
hart & hawled out 50 dollars kerslap, & told her to buy her old
muther as soon as posserbul.  Sez she "kine sir mutch thanks."
She then lade her hed over onto my showlder & sed I was "old
rats."  I was astonished to heer this obsarvation, which I
knowd was never used in refined society & I perlitely but
emfattercly shovd her hed away.

Sez I "Marm, I'm trooly sirprized."

Sez she, "git out.  Yure the nicist old man Ive seen yit.  Give
us anuther 50!"  Had a seleck assortment of the most tremenjious
thunderbolts descended down onto me I couldn't hav bin more
takin aback.  I jumpt up, but she ceased my coat tales & in a
wild voise cride, "No, Ile never desart you--let us fli together
to a furrin shoor!"

Sez I, "not mutch we wont," and I made a powerful effort to get
awa from her.  "This is plade out," I sed, whereupon she jerkt
me back into the seet.  "Leggo my coat, you scandaluss female,"
I roared, when she set up the most unarthly yellin and hollerin
you ever heerd.  The passinjers & the gentlemunly konducter
rusht to the spot, & I don't think I ever experiunsed sich a
rumpus in the hull coarse of my natral dase.  The man in black
close rusht up to me & sed "How dair yu insult my neece, you
horey heded vagabone.  You base exhibbiter of low wax figgers--
yu woolf in sheep's close," & sow 4th.

I was konfoozed.  I was a loonytick fur the time bein, and
offered 5 dollars reward to enny gentleman of good morrul
carracter who wood tell me whot my name was & what town I livd
into.  The konducter kum to me & sed the insultid parties wood
settle for 50 dollars, which I immejitly hawled out, & agane
implored sumbuddy to state whare I was prinsipully, & if I
shood be thare a grate while my self ef things went on as
they'd bin goin fur sum time back.  I then axed if there was
enny more Octoroons present, "becawz," sez I, "ef there is, let
um cum along, fur Ime in the Octoroon bizniss."  I then threw
my specterculs out of the winder, smasht my hat wildly down
over my Ise, larfed highsterically & fell under a seet.  I lay
there sum time & fell asleep.  I dreamt Mrs. Ward & the twins
had bin carried orf by Ryenosserhosses & that Baldinsville had
bin captered by a army of Octoroons.  When I awoked the lamps
was a burnin dimly.  Sum of the passinjers was a snorein like
pawpusses & the little damsell in the pinc gown was a singin
"Oft in the Silly nite."  The onprinsipuld Octoroon & the
miserbul man in black close was gone, & all of a suddent it
flasht ore my brane that I'de bin swindild.


1.9.  EXPERIENCE AS AN EDITOR.

In the Ortum of 18-- my frend, the editor of the Baldinsville
Bugle, was obleged to leave perfeshernal dooties & go & dig his
taters, & he axed me to edit for him dooring his absence.
Accordingly I ground up his Shears and commenced.  It didn't
take me a grate while to slash out copy enuff from the xchanges
(Perhaps five per cent. of the Western newspapers is original
matter relating to the immediate neighborhood, the rest is
composed of "telegraphs" and clippings from the "exchanges"--a
general term applied to those papers posted in exchange for
others, the accommodation being a mutual benefit.) for one
issoo, and I thawt I'd ride up to the next town on a little
Jaunt, to rest my Branes, which had bin severely rackt by my
mental efforts.  (This is sorter Ironical.)  So I went over to
the Rale Road offiss and axed the Sooprintendent for a pars.

"YOU a editer?" he axed, evijently on the pint of snickerin.

"Yes Sir," sez I; "don't I look poor enuff?"

"Just about," sed he, "but our Road can't pars you."

"Can't, hay?"

"No Sir--it can't."

"Becauz," sez I, lookin him full in the face with a Eagle eye,
"IT GOES SO DARNED SLOW IT CAN'T PARS ANYBODY!"  Methinks I had
him thar.  It's the slowest Rale Road in the West.  With a
mortified air, he told me to git out of his offiss.  I pittid
him and went.


1.10.  OBERLIN.

About two years ago I arrove in Oberlin, Ohio.  Oberlin is
whare the celebrated college is.  In fack, Oberlin IS the
college, everything else in that air vicinity resolvin around
excloosivly for the benefit of that institution.  It is a very
good college, too, & a grate many wurthy yung men go there
annooally to git intelleck into 'em.  But its my onbiassed
'pinion that they go it rather too strong on Ethiopians at
Oberlin.  But that's nun of my bisniss.  I'm into the Show
bizness.  Yit as a faithful historan I must menshun the fack
that on rainy dase white peple can't find their way threw the
streets without the gas is lit, there bein such a numerosity of
cullerd pussons in the town.

As I was sayin, I arroved at Oberlin, and called on Perfesser
Peck for the purpuss of skewerin Kolonial Hall to exhibit my
wax works and beests of Pray into.  Kolonial Hall is in the
college and is used by the stujents to speak peaces and read
essays into.

Sez Perfesser Peck, "Mister Ward, I don't know 'bout this
bizniss.  What are your sentiments?"

Sez I, "I hain't got any."

"Good God!" cried the Perfesser, "did I understan you to say
you hav no sentiments!"

"Nary a sentiment!" sez I.

"Mister Ward, don't your blud bile at the thawt that three
million and a half of your culled brethren air a clankin their
chains in the South?"

Sez I, "Not a bile!  Let 'em clank!"

He was about to continner his flowry speech when I put a
stopper on him.  Sez I, "Perfesser Peck, A. Ward is my name &
Americky is my nashun; I'm allers the same, tho' humble is my
station, and I've bin in the show bizniss goin on 22 years.
The pint is, can I hav your Hall by payin a fair price?  You
air full of sentiments.  That's your lay, while I'm a exhibiter
of startlin curiosities.  What d'ye say?"

"Mister Ward, you air endowed with a hily practical mind, and
while I deeply regret that you air devoid of sentiments I'll
let you hav the hall provided your exhibition is of a moral &
elevatin nater."

Sez I, "Tain't nothin shorter."

So I opened in Kolonial Hall, which was crowded every nite with
stujents, &c.  Perfesser Finny gazed for hours at my Kangaroo,
but when that sagashus but onprincipled little cuss set up one
of his onarthly yellins and I proceeded to hosswhip him, the
Perfesser objected.  "Suffer not your angry pashums to rise up
at the poor annimil's little excentrissities," said the
Perfesser.

"Do you call such conduck as THOSE a little excentrissity?" I
axed.

"I do," sed he; sayin which he walked up to the cage and sez
he, "let's try moral swashun upon the poor creeter."  So he put
his hand upon the Kangeroo's hed and sed, "poor little fellow--
poor little fellow--your master is very crooil, isn't he, my
untootered frend," when the Kangaroo, with a terrific yell,
grabd the Perfesser by the hand and cum very near chawin it
orf.  It was amoozin to see the Perfesser jump up and scream
with pane.  Sez I, "that's one of the poor little fellow's
excentrissities!"

Sez he, "Mister Ward, that's a dangerous quadruped.  He's
totally depraved. I will retire and do my lasserated hand up in
a rag, and meanwhile I request you to meat out summery and
severe punishment to the vishus beest," I hosswhipt the little
cuss for upwards of 15 minutes.  Guess I licked sum of his
excentrissity out of him.

Oberlin is a grate plase.  The College opens with a prayer and
then the New York Tribune is read.  A kolleckshun is then taken
up to buy overkoats with red horn buttons onto them for the
indignant cullured people of Kanady.  I have to contribit
librally two the glowrius work, as they kawl it hear.  I'm
kompelled by the Fackulty to reserve front seets in my show for
the cullered peple.  At the Boardin House the cullered peple
sit at the first table.  What they leeve is maid into hash for
the white peple.  As I don't like the idee of eatin my vittles
with Ethiopians, I sit at the seckind table, and the
konsequence is I've devowered so much hash that my inards is in
a hily mixt up condishun.  Fish bones hav maid their appearance
all over my boddy and pertater peelins air a springin up
through my hair.  Howsever I don't mind it.  I'm gittin along
well in a pecunery pint of view.  The College has konfired upon
me the honery title of T.K., of which I'm suffishuntly prowd.


1.11.  THE SHOWMAN'S COURTSHIP.

Thare was many affectin ties which made me hanker arter Betsy
Jane.  Her father's farm jined our'n; their cows and our'n
squencht their thurst at the same spring; our old mares both
had stars in their forreds; the measles broke out in both
famerlies at nearly the same period; our parients (Betsy's and
mine) slept reglarly every Sunday in the same meetin house, and
the nabers used to obsarve, "How thick the Wards and Peasleys
air!"  It was a surblime site, in the Spring of the year, to
see our sevral mothers (Betsy's and mine) with their gowns
pin'd up so thay couldn't sile 'em, affecshuntly Bilin sope
together & aboozin the nabers.

Altho I hankerd intensly arter the objeck of my affecshuns, I
darsunt tell her of the fires which was rajin in my manly
Buzzum.  I'd try to do it but my tung would kerwollup up agin
the roof of my mowth & stick thar, like deth to a deseast
Afrikan or a country postmaster to his offiss, while my hart
whanged agin my ribs like a old fashioned wheat Flale agin a
barn floor.

'Twas a carm still nite in Joon.  All nater was husht and nary
a zeffer disturbed the sereen silens.  I sot with Betsy Jane on
the fense of her farther's pastur.  We'd bin rompin threw the
woods, kullin flours & drivin the woodchuck from his Nativ Lair
(so to speak) with long sticks.  Wall, we sot thar on the
fense, a swingin our feet two and fro, blushin as red as the
Baldinsville skool house when it was fust painted, and lookin
very simple, I make no doubt.  My left arm was ockepied in
ballunsin myself on the fense, while my rite was woundid
luvinly round her waste.

I cleared my throat and tremblin sed, "Betsy, you're a
Gazelle."

I thought that air was putty fine.  I waitid to see what effeck
it would hav upon her.  It evidently didn't fetch her, for she
up and sed,

"You're a sheep!"

Sez I, "Betsy, I think very muchly of you."

"I don't b'leeve a word you say--so there now cum!" with which
obsarvashun she hitched away from me.

"I wish thar was winders to my Sole," sed I, "so that you could
see some of my feelins.  There's fire enuff in here," sed I,
strikin my buzzum with my fist, "to bile all the corn beef and
turnips in the naberhood.  Versoovius and the Critter ain't a
circumstans!"

She bowd her hed down and commenst chawin the strings to her
sun bonnet.

"Ar could you know the sleeplis nites I worry threw with on
your account, how vittles has seized to be attractiv to me &
how my lims has shrunk up, you wouldn't dowt me.  Gase on this
wastin form and these 'ere sunken cheeks"--

I should have continnered on in this strane probly for sum
time, but unfortnitly I lost my ballunse and fell over into the
pastur ker smash, tearin my close and seveerly damagin myself
ginerally.

Betsy Jane sprung to my assistance in dubble quick time and
dragged me 4th.  Then drawin herself up to her full hite she
sed:

"I won't listen to your noncents no longer.  Jes say rite
strate out what you're drivin at.  If you mean gettin hitched,
I'M IN!"

I considered that air enuff for all practicul purpusses, and we
proceeded immejitely to the parson's, & was made 1 that very
nite.

(Notiss to the Printer:  Put some stars here.)

        *        *        *        *        *        *

I've parst threw many tryin ordeels sins then, but Betsy Jane
has bin troo as steel.  By attendin strickly to bizniss I've
amarsed a handsum Pittance. No man on this footstool can rise &
git up & say I ever knowinly injered no man or wimmin folks,
while all agree that my Show is ekalled by few and exceld by
none, embracin as it does a wonderful colleckshun of livin wild
Beests of Pray, snaix in grate profushun, a endliss variety of
life-size wax figgers, & the only traned kangaroo in Ameriky--
the most amoozin little cuss ever introjuced to a discriminatin
public.


1.12.  THE CRISIS.

[This Oration was delivered before the commencement of the
war.]

On returnin to my humsted in Baldinsville, Injianny, resuntly,
my feller sitterzens extended a invite for me to norate to 'em
on the Krysis.  I excepted & on larst Toosday nite I peared be4
a C of upturned faces in the Red Skool House.  I spoke nearly
as follers:

Baldinsvillins:  Hearto4, as I hav numerously obsarved, I have
abstrained from having any sentimunts or principles, my
pollertics, like my religion, bein of a exceedin accommodatin
character.  But the fack can't be no longer disgised that a
Krysis is onto us, & I feel it's my dooty to accept your invite
for one consecutive nite only.  I spose the inflammertory
individooals who assisted in projucing this Krysis know what
good she will do, but I ain't 'shamed to state that I don't
scacely.  But the Krysis is hear.  She's bin hear for sevral
weeks, & Goodness nose how long she'll stay.  But I venter to
assert that she's rippin things.  She's knockt trade into a
cockt up hat and chaned Bizness of all kinds tighter nor I ever
chaned any of my livin wild Beests.  Alow me to hear dygress &
stait that my Beests at presnt is as harmless as the newborn
Babe.  Ladys & gentlemen needn't hav no fears on that pint.  To
resoom--Altho I can't exactly see what good this Krysis can do,
I can very quick say what the origernal cawz of her is.  The
origernal cawz is Our Afrikan Brother.  I was into BARNIM'S
Moozeum down to New York the other day & saw that exsentric
Etheopian, the What Is It.  Sez I, "Mister What Is It, you
folks air raisin thunder with this grate country.  You're
gettin to be ruther more numeris than interestin.  It is a pity
you coodent go orf sumwhares by yourselves, & be a nation of
What Is Its, tho' if you'll excoose me, I shooden't care about
marryin among you.  No dowt you're exceedin charmin to hum, but
your stile of luvliness isn't adapted to this cold climit.  He
larfed into my face, which rather Riled me, as I had been
perfeckly virtoous and respectable in my observashuns.  So sez
I, turnin a leetle red in the face, I spect, "Do you hav the
unblushin impoodents to say you folks haven't raised a big mess
of thunder in this brite land, Mister What Is It?"  He larfed
agin, wusser nor be4, whareupon I up and sez, "Go home, Sir, to
Afriky's burnin shores & taik all the other What Is Its along
with you.  Don't think we can spair your interestin picters.
You What Is Its air on the pint of smashin up the gratest
Guv'ment ever erected by man, & you actooally hav the owdassity
to larf about it.  Go home, you low cuss!"

I was workt up to a high pitch, & I proceeded to a Restorator &
cooled orf with some little fishes biled in ile--I b'leeve thay
call 'em sardeens.

Feller Sitterzuns, the Afrikan may be Our Brother.  Sevral hily
respectyble gentlemen, and sum talentid females tell us so, &
fur argyment's sake I mite be injooced to grant it, tho' I
don't beleeve it myself.  But the Afrikan isn't our sister &
our wife & our uncle.  He isn't sevral of our brothers & all
our fust wife's relashuns.  He isn't our grandfather, and our
grate grandfather, and our Aunt in the country.  Scacely.  &
yit numeris persons would have us think so.  It's troo he runs
Congress & sevral other public grosserys, but then he ain't
everybody & everybody else likewise.  [Notiss to bizness men of
VANITY FAIR:  Extry charg fur this larst remark.  It's a goak.
--A.W.]

But we've got the Afrikan, or ruther he's got us, & now what
air we going to do about it?  He's a orful noosanse.  Praps he
isn't to blame fur it.  Praps he was creatid fur sum wise
purpuss, like the measles and New Englan Rum, but it's mity
hard to see it.  At any rate he's no good here, & as I statid
to Mister What Is It, it's a pity he cooden't go orf sumwhares
quietly by hisself, whare he cood wear red weskits & speckled
neckties, & gratterfy his ambishun in varis interestin wase,
without havin a eternal fuss kickt up about him.

Praps I'm bearin down too hard upon Cuffy.  Cum to think on it,
I am.  He woodn't be sich a infernal noosanse if white peple
would let him alone.  He mite indeed be interestin.  And now I
think of it, why can't the white peple let him alone.  What's
the good of continnerly stirrin him up with a ten-foot pole?
He isn't the sweetest kind of Perfoomery when in a natral
stait.

Feller Sitterzens, the Union's in danger.  The black devil
Disunion is trooly here, starein us all squarely in the face!
We must drive him back.  Shall we make a 2nd Mexico of
ourselves?  Shall we sell our birthrite for a mess of potash?
Shall one brother put the knife to the throat of anuther
brother?  Shall we mix our whisky with each other's blud?
Shall the star spangled Banner be cut up into dishcloths?
Standin here in this here Skoolhouse, upon my nativ shor so to
speak, I anser--Nary!

Oh you fellers who air raisin this row, & who in the fust place
startid it, I'm 'shamed of you.  The Showman blushes for you,
from his boots to the topmost hair upon his wenerable hed.

Feller Sitterzens:  I am in the Sheer & Yeller leaf.  I shall
peg out 1 of these dase.  But while I do stop here I shall stay
in the Union.  I know not what the supervizers of Baldinsville
may conclude to do, but for one, I shall stand by the Stars &
Stripes.  Under no circumstances whatsomever will I sesesh.
Let every Stait in the Union sesesh & let Palmetter flags flote
thicker nor shirts on Square Baxter's close line, still will I
stick to the good old flag.  The country may go to the devil,
but I won't!  And next Summer when I start out on my campane
with my Show, wharever I pitch my little tent, you shall see
floatin prowdly from the center pole thereof the Amerikan Flag,
with nary a star wiped out, nary a stripe less, but the same
old flag that has allers flotid thar! & the price of admishun
will be the same it allers was--15 cents, children half price.

Feller Sitterzens, I am dun.  Accordinly I squatted.


1.13.  WAX FIGURES VS. SHAKESPEARE.

ONTO THE WING--1859.

Mr. Editor.

I take my Pen in hand to inform yu that I'm in good helth and
trust these few lines will find yu injoyin the same blessins.
I wood also state that I'm now on the summir kampane.  As the
Poit sez--

               ime erflote, ime erflote
               On the Swift rollin tied
                An the Rovir is free.

Bizness is scacely middlin, but Sirs I manige to pay for my
foode and raiment puncktooally and without no grumblin.  The
barked arrers of slandur has bin leviled at the undersined
moren onct sins heze bin into the show bizness, but I make bold
to say no man on this footstule kan troothfully say I ever
ronged him or eny of his folks.  I'm travelin with a tent,
which is better nor hirin hauls.  My show konsists of a serious
of wax works, snakes, a paneramy kalled a Grand Movin Diarea of
the War in the Crymear, komic songs and the Cangeroo, which
larst little cuss continners to konduct hisself in the most
outrajus stile.  I started out with the idear of makin my show
a grate Moral Entertainment, but I'm kompeled to sware so much
at that air infurnal Kangeroo that I'm frade this desine will
be flustratid to some extent.  And while speakin of morrality,
remines me that sum folks turn up their nosis at shows like
mine, sayin they is low and not fit to be patrernized by
peplpeple of high degree.  Sirs, I manetane that this is
infernul nonsense.  I manetane that wax figgers is more
elevatin than awl the plays ever wroten.  Take Shakespeer for
instunse.  Peple think heze grate things, but I kontend heze
quite the reverse to the kontrary.  What sort of sense is thare
to King Leer, who goze round cussin his darters, chawin hay and
throin straw at folks, and larfin like a silly old koot and
makin a ass of hisself ginerally?  Thare's Mrs. Mackbeth--sheze
a nise kind of woomon to have round ain't she, a puttin old
Mack, her husband, up to slayin Dunkan with a cheeze knife,
while heze payin a frendly visit to their house.  O its hily
morral, I spoze, when she larfs wildly and sez, "gin me the
daggurs--Ile let his bowels out," or wurds to that effeck--I
say, this is awl, strickly, propper I spoze?  That Jack
Fawlstarf is likewise a immoral old cuss, take him how ye may,
and Hamlick is as crazy as a loon.  Thare's Richurd the Three,
peple think heze grate things, but I look upon him in the lite
of a monkster.  He kills everybody he takes a noshun to in kold
blud, and then goze to sleep in his tent.  Bimeby he wakes up
and yells for a hoss so he kan go orf and kill some more peple.
If he isent a fit spesserman for the gallers then I shood like
to know whare you find um.  Thare's Iargo who is more ornery
nor pizun.  See how shameful he treated that hily respecterble
injun gentlemun, Mister Otheller, makin him for to beleeve his
wife was too thick with Casheo.  Obsarve how Iargo got Casheo
drunk as a biled owl on corn whiskey in order to karry out his
sneekin desines.  See how he wurks Mister Otheller's feelins up
so that he goze and makes poor Desdemony swaller a piller which
cawses her deth.  But I must stop.  At sum futur time I shall
continner my remarks on the drammer in which I shall show the
varst supeeriority of wax figgers and snakes over theater
plays, in a interlectooal pint of view.

Very Respectively yures,
                                            A WARD, T.K.


1.14.  AMONG THE FREE LOVERS.  (Some queer people, calling
themselves "Free Lovers," and possessing very original ideas
about life and morality, established themselves at Berlin
Heights, in Ohio, a few years since.  Public opinion was
resistlessly against them, however, and the association was
soon disbanded.)

Some years ago I pitched my tent and onfurled my banner to the
breeze, in Berlin Hites, Ohio.  I had hearn that Berlin Hites
was ockepied by a extensive seck called Free Lovers, who
beleeved in affinertys and sich, goin back on their domestic
ties without no hesitation whatsomever.  They was likewise
spirit rappers and high presher reformers on gineral
principles.  If I can improve these 'ere misgided peple by
showin them my onparalleld show at the usual low price of
admitants, methunk, I shell not hav lived in vane.  But
bitterly did I cuss the day I ever sot foot in the retchid
place.  I sot up my tent in a field near the Love Cure, as they
called it, and bimeby the free lovers begun for to congregate
around the door.  A onreer set I have never sawn.  The men's
faces was all covered with hare and they lookt half-starved to
deth.  They didn't wear no weskuts for the purpose (as they
sed) of allowin the free air of hevun to blow onto their
boozums.  Their pockets was filled with tracks and pamplits and
they was bare-footed.  They sed the Postles didn't wear boots,
& why should they?  That was their stile of argyment.  The
wimin was wuss than the men.  They wore trowsis, short gownds,
straw hats with green ribbins, and all carried bloo cotton
umbrellers.

Presently a perfeckly orful lookin female presented herself at
the door.  Her gownd was skanderlusly short and her trowsis was
shameful to behold.

She eyed me over very sharp, and then startin back she sed, in
a wild voice:

"Ah, can it be?"

"Which?" sed I.

"Yes, 'tis troo, O 'tis troo!"

"15 cents, marm," I anserd.

She bust out a cryin & sed:

"And so I hav found you at larst--at larst, O at larst!"

"Yes," I anserd, "you hav found me at larst, and you would hav
found me at fust, if you had cum sooner."

She grabd me vilently by the coat collar, and brandishin her
umbreller wildly round, exclaimed:

"Air you a man?"

Sez I, "I think I air, but if you doubt it, you can address
Mrs. A. Ward, Baldinsville, Injianny, postage pade, & she will
probly giv you the desired informashun."

"Then thou ist what the cold world calls marrid?"

"Madam, I istest!"

The exsentric female then clutched me franticly by the arm and
hollered:

"You air mine, O you air mine!"

"Scacely," I sed, endeverin to git loose from her.  But she
clung to me and sed:

"You air my Affinerty!"

"What upon arth is that?" I shouted.

"Dost thou not know?"

"No, I dostent!"

"Listin man, & I'll tell ye!" sed the strange female; "for
years I hav yearned for thee.  I knowd thou wast in the world,
sumwhares, tho I didn't know whare.  My hart sed he would cum
and I took courage.  He HAS cum--he's here--you air him--you
air my Affinerty!  O 'tis too mutch! too mutch!" and she sobbed
agin.

"Yes," I anserd, "I think it is a darn site too mutch!"

"Hast thou not yearned for me?" she yelled, ringin her hands
like a female play acter.

"Not a yearn!" I bellerd at the top of my voice, throwin her
away from me.

The free lovers who was standin round obsarvin the scene
commenst for to holler "shame" "beast," etsettery, etsettery.

I was very mutch riled, and fortifyin myself with a spare tent
stake, I addrest them as follers:  "You pussylanermus critters,
go way from me and take this retchid woman with you.  I'm a
law-abidin man, and beleeve in good, old-fashioned institutions.
I am marrid & my orfsprings resemble me if I am a showman!  I
think your Affinity bizniss is cussed noncents, besides bein
outrajusly wicked.  Why don't you behave desunt like other
folks?  Go to work and earn a honist livin and not stay round
here in this lazy, shiftless way, pizenin the moral atmosphere
with your pestifrous ideas!  You wimin folks go back to your
lawful husbands if you've got any, and take orf them skanderlous
gownds and trowsis, and dress respectful like other wimin.  You
men folks, cut orf them pirattercal whiskers, burn up them
infurnel pamplits, put sum weskuts on, go to work choppin wood,
splittin fence rales, or tillin the sile."  I pored 4th my
indignashun in this way till I got out of breth, when I stopt.
I shant go to Berlin Hites agin, not if I live to be as old
as Methooseler.


1.15.  A VISIT TO BRIGHAM YOUNG.

It is now goin on 2 (too) yeres, as I very well remember, since
I crossed the Planes for Kaliforny, the Brite land of Jold.
While crossin the Planes all so bold I fell in with sum noble
red men of the forest (N.B.  This is rote Sarcasticul.  Injins
is Pizin, whar ever found,) which thay Sed I was their Brother,
& wanted for to smoke the Calomel of Peace with me.  Thay then
stole my jerkt beef, blankits, etsettery, skalpt my orgin
grinder & scooted with a Wild Hoop.  Durin the Cheaf's techin
speech he sed he shood meet me in the Happy Huntin Grounds.  If
he duz thare will be a fite.  But enuff of this ere.  "Reven
Noose Muttons," as our skoolmaster, who has got Talent into
him, cussycally obsarve.

I arrove at Salt Lake in doo time.  At Camp Scott there was a
lot of U.S. sogers, hosstensibly sent out there to smash the
Mormons but really to eat Salt vittles & play poker & other
beautiful but sumwhat onsartin games.  I got acquainted with
sum of the officers.  Thay lookt putty scrumpshus in their
Bloo coats with brass buttings onto um & ware very talented
drinkers, but so fur as fitin is consarned I'd willingly put my
wax figgers agin the hull party.

My desire was to exhibit my grate show in Salt Lake City, so I
called on Brigham Yung, the grate mogull amung the mormins and
axed his permishun to pitch my tent and onfurl my banner to the
jentle breezis.  He lookt at me in a austeer manner for a few
minits, and sed:

"Do you bleeve in Solomon, Saint Paul, the immaculateness of
the Mormin Church and the Latter-day Revelashuns?"

Sez I, "I'm on it!"  I make it a pint to git along plesunt, tho
I didn't know what under the Son the old feller was drivin at.
He sed I mite show.

"You air a marrid man, Mister Yung, I bleeve?" sez I, preparin
to rite him sum free parsis.

"I hev eighty wives, Mister Ward.  I sertinly am married."

"How do you like it as far as you hev got?" sed I.

He sed "middlin," and axed me wouldn't I like to see his
famerly, to which I replide that I wouldn't mine minglin with
the fair Seck & Barskin in the winnin smiles of his interestin
wives.  He accordingly tuk me to his Scareum.  The house is
powerful big & in a exceedin large room was his wives &
children, which larst was squawkin and hollerin enuff to take
the roof rite orf the house.  The wimin was of all sizes and
ages.  Sum was pretty & sum was Plane--sum was helthy and sum
was on the Wayne--which is verses, tho sich was not my
intentions, as I don't 'prove of puttin verses in Proze
rittins, tho ef occashun requires I can Jerk a Poim ekal to any
of them Atlantic Munthly fellers.

"My wives, Mister Ward," sed Yung.

"Your sarvant, marms," sed I, as I sot down in a cheer which a
red-heded female brawt me.

"Besides these wives you see here, Mister Ward," sed Yung, "I
hav eighty more in varis parts of this consecrated land which
air Sealed to me."

"Which?" sez I, gittin up & starin at him.

"Sealed, Sir! sealed."

"Whare bowts?" sez I.

"I sed, Sir, that they was sealed!"  He spoke in a traggerdy
voice.

"Will they probly continner on in that stile to any grate
extent, Sir?" I axed.

"Sir," sed he, turnin as red as a biled beet, "don't you know
that the rules of our Church is that I, the Profit, may hev as
meny wives as I wants?"

"Jes so," I sed.  "You are old pie, ain't you?"

"Them as is Sealed to me--that is to say, to be mine when I
wants um--air at present my sperretooul wives," sed Mister
Yung.

"Long may thay wave!" sez I, seein I shood git into a scrape ef
I didn't look out.

In a privit conversashun with Brigham I learnt the follerin
fax:  It takes him six weeks to kiss his wives.  He don't do it
only onct a yere & sez it is wuss nor cleanin house.  He don't
pretend to know his children, thare is so many of um, tho they
all know him.  He sez about every child he meats call him Par,
& he takes it for grantid it is so.  His wives air very
expensiv.  Thay allers want suthin & ef he don't buy it for um
thay set the house in a uproar.  He sez he don't have a minit's
peace.  His wives fite amung their selves so much that he has
bilt a fitin roo