m for thare speshul benefit, & when too of 'em
get into a row he has em turnd loose into that place, whare the
dispoot is settled accordin to the rules of the London prize
ring.  Sum times thay abooz hisself individooally.  Thay hev
pulled the most of his hair out at the roots & he wares meny a
horrible scar upon his body, inflicted with mop-handles,
broom-sticks, and sich.  Occashunly they git mad & scald him
with bilin hot water.  When he got eny waze cranky thay'd shut
him up in a dark closit, previsly whippin him arter the stile
of muthers when thare orfsprings git onruly.  Sumptimes when he
went in swimmin thay'd go to the banks of the Lake & steal all
his close, thereby compellin him to sneek home by a sircootius
rowt, drest in the Skanderlus stile of the Greek Slaiv.  "I
find that the keers of a marrid life way hevy onto me," sed the
Profit, "& sumtimes I wish I'd remaned singel."  I left the
Profit and startid for the tavern whare I put up to.  On my way
I was overtuk by a lurge krowd of Mormons, which they
surroundid me & statid that they were goin into the Show free.

"Wall," sez I, "ef I find a individooal who is goin round
lettin folks into his show free, I'll let you know."

"We've had a Revelashun biddin us go into A. Wards's Show
without payin nothin!" thay showtid.

"Yes," hollered a lot of femaile Mormonesses, ceasin me by the
cote tales & swingin me round very rapid, "we're all goin in
free!  So sez the Revelashun!"

"What's Old Revelashun got to do with my show?" sez I, gittin
putty rily.  "Tell Mister Revelashun," sed I, drawin myself up
to my full hite and lookin round upon the ornery krowd with a
prowd & defiant mean, "tell Mister Revelashun to mind his own
bizness, subject only to the Konstitushun of the United
States!"

"Oh now let us in, that's a sweet man," sed several femails,
puttin thare arms round me in luvin style.  "Become 1 of us.
Becum a Preest & hav wives Sealed to you."

"Not a Seal!" sez I, startin back in horror at the idee.

"Oh stay, Sir, stay," sed a tell, gawnt femaile, ore whoos hed
37 summirs must hev parsd, "stay, & I'll be your Jentle
Gazelle."

"Not ef I know it, you won't," sez I. "Awa you skanderlus
femaile, awa!  Go & be a Nunnery!"  THAT'S WHAT I SED, JES SO.

"& I," sed a fat chunky femaile, who must hev wade more than
too hundred lbs, "I will be your sweet gidin Star!"

Sez I, "Ile bet two dollers and a half you won't!"  Whare ear I
may Rome Ile still be troo 2 thee, Oh Betsy Jane!  [N.B. Betsy
Jane is my wife's Sir naime.]

"Wiltist thou not tarry here in the promist Land?" sed several
of the miserabil critters.

"Ile see you all essenshally cussed be4 I wiltist!" roared I,
as mad as I cood be at thare infernul noncents.  I girdid up my
Lions & fled the Seen.  I packt up my duds & Left Salt Lake,
which is a 2nd Soddum & Germorrer, inhabitid by as theavin &
onprincipled a set of retchis as ever drew Breth in eny spot on
the Globe.


1.16.  SCANDALOUS DOINGS AT PITTSBURG.

Hear in the Buzzum of my famerly I am enjoyin myself, at peas
with awl mankind and the wimin folks likewise.  I go down to
the villige ockashunly and take a little old Rye fur the
stummuck's sake, but I avoyd spiritus lickers as a ginral
thing.  No man evir seen me intossikated but onct, and that air
happind in Pittsburg.  A parsel of ornery cusses in that luvly
sity bustid inter the hawl durin the nite and aboosed my wax
works shaimful.  I didn't obsarve the outrajus transacshuns
ontil the next evening when the peple begun for to kongregate.
Suddinly they kommensed fur to larf and holler in a boysterious
stile.  Sez I good peple what's up? Sez thay them's grate wax
wurks, isn't they, old man.  I immejitly looked up ter whare
the wax works was, and my blud biles as I think of the site
which then met my Gase.  I hope two be dodrabbertid (Dod-rabit
is an American euphemism for a profane expression which is
quite as common in this country as on the other side of the
Atlantic.) if them afoursed raskals hadent gone and put a old
kaved in hat onter George Washington's hed and shuved a short
black klay pipe inter his mouth.  His noze thay had painted red
and his trowsis legs thay had shuved inside his butes.  My wax
figger of Napoleon Boneypart was likewise mawltreatid.  His
sword wus danglin tween his legs, and his cockd hat was drawn
klean down over his ize, and he was plased in a stoopin
posishun lookin zactly as tho he was as drunk as a biled owl.
Ginral Taylor was a standin on his hed and Wingfield Skott's
koat tales ware pind over his hed and his trowsis ware
kompleetly torn orf frum hisself.  My wax works representin the
Lord's Last Supper was likewise aboozed.  Three of the Postles
ware under the table and two of um had on old tarpawlin hats
and raggid pee jackits and ware smokin pipes.  Judus Iskarriot
had on a cocked hat and was appeerently drinkin, as a Bottle of
whisky sot befour him.  This ere specktercal was too much fur
me.  I klosed the show and then drowndid my sorrers in the
flowin Bole.


1.17.  THE CENSUS.

The Sences taker in our town bein taken sick, he deppertised me
to go out for him one day, and as he was too ill to giv me
informashun how to perceed, I was consekently compelled to go
it blind.  Sittin down by the road side, I drawd up the
follerin list of questions, which I proposed to ax the peple I
visited:

  Wat's your age?

  Whar was you born?

  Air you marrid, and if so how do you like it?

  How many children hav you, and do they resemble you or your
    naber?

  Did you ever hav the measels, and if so how many?

  Hav you a twin brother several years older than yourself?

  How many parents hav you?

  Do you read Watt's Hims regler?

  Do you use boughten tobacker?
(I.e., that which has been bought.  A very common word in the
interior of New England and New York.  It is applied to
articles purchased from the shops, to distinguish them from
articles of home manufacture.  Many farmers make their own
sugar from the maple-tree, and their coffee from barley or rye.
West India sugar or coffee is then called "boughten sugar," &c.
"This is a home-made carpet; that a 'boughten' one," i.e., one
bought at a shop.  In the North of England, baker's bread is
called "bought bread."

  Wat's your fitin wate?

  Air you trubeld with biles?

  How does your meresham culler?

  State whether you air blind, deaf, idiotic, or got the
  heaves?

  Do you know any Opry singers, and if so how much do they owe
  you?

  What's the average of virtoo on the Ery Canawl?

  If 4 barrils of Emptins pored onto a barn floor will kiver
  it, how many plase can Dion Bourcicault write in a year?
[Emptyings, pronounced "emptins," the lees of beer, cider, &c.;
yeast or anything by which bread is leavened:-

"'Twill take more emptins, by a long chalk, than this new
  party's got,
 To give such heavy cakes as these a start, I tell ye what."
                                        "The Biglow Papers."]

  Is Beans a regler article of diet in your family?

  How many chickins hav you, on foot and in the shell?

  Air you aware that Injianny whisky is used in New York
  shootin galrys instid of pistols, and that it shoots furthest?

  Was you ever at Niagry Falls?

  Was you ever in the Penitentiary?

  State how much pork, impendin crysis, Dutch cheeze, popler
  suvrinty, standard poetry, children's strainers, slave code,
  catnip, red flannel, ancient history, pickled tomaters, old
  junk, perfoomery, coal ile, liberty, hoop skirt, &c., you hav
  on hand?

But it didn't work.  I got into a row at the fust house I stopt
to, with some old maids.  Disbelieven the ansers they giv in
regard to their ages, I endevered to open their mouths and look
at their teeth, same as they do with hosses, but they floo into
a vilent rage and tackled me with brooms and sich.  Takin the
sences requires experiunse, like any other bizniss.


1.18.  AN HONEST LIVING.

I was on my way from the mines to San Francisco, with a light
puss and a hevy hart.  You'd scacely hav recognized my fair
form, so kiverd was I with dust.  Bimeby I met Old Poodles, the
all-firdist gambler in the country.  He was afoot and in his
shirt-sleeves, and was in a wuss larther nor any race hoss I
ever saw.  ("All-fired," enormous, excessive, a low Americanism,
not improbably a puritanical corruption of "hell-fired,"
designed to have the virtue of an oath without offending polite
ears.)

"Whither goist thow, sweet nimp?" sez I, in a play-actin tone.

"To the mines, Sir," he unto me did say, "to the mines, TO EARN
AN HONEST LIVIN."

Thinks I that air aint very cool, I guess, and druv on.


1.19.  THE PRESS.

I want the editers to cum to my Show free as the flours of May,
but I don't want um to ride a free hoss to deth.  Thare is
times when Patience seizes to be virtoous.  I had "in my mind's
eye, Hurrashio" (cotashun from Hamlick) sum editers in a sertin
town which shall be nameless, who air Both sneakin and ornery.
They cum in krowds to my Show and then axt me ten sents a line
for Puffs.  I objectid to payin, but they sed ef I didn't down
with the dust thay'd wipe my Show from the face of the earth!
Thay sed the Press was the Arkymedian Leaver which moved the
wurld.  I put up to their extorshuns until thay'd bled me so I
was a meer shadder, and left in disgust.

It was in a surtin town in Virginny, the Muther of Presidents &
things, that I was shaimfully aboozed by a editor in human
form.  He set my Show up steep & kalled me the urbane &
gentlemunly manajer, but when I, fur the purpuss of showin fair
play all around, went to anuther offiss to git my hanbills
printed, what duz this pussillanermus editer do but change his
toon & abooze me like a Injun.  He sed my wax wurks was a
humbug & called me a horey-heded itinerent vagabone.  I thort
at fust Ide pollish him orf ar-lar the Beneshy Boy, but on
reflectin that he cood pollish me much wuss in his paper, I giv
it up.  & I wood here take occashun to advise peple when thay
run agin, as thay sumtimes will, these miserable papers, to not
pay no attenshun to um.  Abuv all, don't assault a editer of
this kind.  It only gives him a notorosity, which is jest what
he wants, & don't do you no more good than it wood to jump into
enny other mud puddle.  Editers are generally fine men, but
there must be black sheep in every flock.


1.20.  EDWIN FOREST AS OTHELLO.

Durin a recent visit to New York the undersined went to see
Edwin Forrest.  As I'm into the moral show bizness myself, I
ginrally go to Barnum's moral Museum, where only moral peple
air admitted, pertickly on Wednesday arternoons.  But this time
I thot I'd go & see Ed.  Ed has bin actin out on the stage for
many years.  There is varis 'pinions about his actin,
Englishmen ginrally bleevin that he is far superior to Mister
Macready; but on one pint all agree, & that is that Ed draws
like a six ox team.  Ed was actin at Niblo's Garding, which
looks considerable more like a parster, than a garding, but let
that pars.  I sot down in the pit, took out my spectacles &
commenced peroosin the evenin's bill.  The awjince was all-fired
large & the boxes was full of the elitty of New York.  Several
opery glasses was leveld at me by Gothum's farest darters, but
I didn't let on as tho I noticed it, tho mebby I did take out
my sixteen-dollar silver watch & brandish it round more than was
necessary.  But the best of us has our weaknesses & if a man has
gewelry let him show it.  As I was peroosin the bill a grave
young man who sot near me axed me if I'd ever seen Forrest dance
the Essence of Old Virginny?  "He's immense in that," sed the
young man.  "He also does a fair champion jig," the young man
continnerd, "but his Big Thing is the Essence of Old Virginny."
Sez I, "Fair youth, do you know what I'd do with you if you was
my sun?"

"No," sez he.

"Wall," sez I, "I'd appint your funeral tomorrow arternoon, &
the KORPS SHOULD BE READY!  You're too smart to live on this
yearth."  He didn't try any more of his capers on me.  But
another pussylanermus individooul, in a red vest & patent
lether boots, told me his name was Bill Astor & axed me to lend
him 50 cents till early in the mornin.  I told him I'd probly
send it round to him before he retired to his virtoous couch,
but if I didn't he might look for it next fall, as soon as I
cut my corn.  The Orchestry was now fiddling with all their
might, & as the peple didn't understan anything about it they
applaudid versifrussly.  Presently, Old Ed cum out.  The play
was Otheller or More of Veniss.  Otheller was writ by Wm.
Shakspeer.  The scene is laid in Veniss.  Otheller was a likely
man & was a ginral in the Veniss army.  He eloped with Desdemony,
a darter of the Hon. Mister Brabantio, who represented one of
the back districks in the Veneshun legislater.  Old Brabantio
was as mad as thunder at this & tore round considerable, but
finally cooled down, tellin Otheller, howsever, that Desdemony
had come it over her Par, & that he had better look out or
she'd come it over him likewise.  Mr. & Mrs. Otheller git along
very comfortable like for a spell.  She is sweet-tempered and
luvin--a nice, sensible female, never goin in for he-female
conventions, green cotton umbrellers, and pickled beats.
Otheller is a good provider and thinks all the world of his
wife.  She has a lazy time of it, the hired girl doin all the
cookin and washin.  Desdemony, in fact, don't have to git the
water to wash her own hands with.  But a low cuss named Iago,
who I bleeve wants to git Otheller out of his snug government
birth, now goes to work & upsets the Otheller family in the
most outrajus stile.  Iago falls in with a brainless youth
named Roderigo & wins all his money at poker.  (Iago allers
played foul.)  He thus got money enuff to carry out his
onprincipled skeem.  Mike Cassio, a Irishman, is selected as a
tool by Iago.  Mike was a clever feller & orficer in Otheller's
army.  He liked his tods too well, howsever, & they floored
him, as they have many other promisin young men. Iago injuces
Mike to drink with him, Iago slyly throwin his whiskey over his
shoulder.  Mike gits as drunk as a biled owl & allows that he
can lick a yard full of the Veneshun fancy before breakfast,
without sweatin a hair. He meets Roderigo & proceeds for to
smash him.  A feller named Montano undertakes to slap Cassio,
when that infatooated person runs his sword into him.  That
miserble man, Iago, pretents to be very sorry to see Mike
conduck hisself in this way & undertakes to smooth the thing
over to Otheller, who rushes in with a drawn sword & wants to
know what's up.  Iago cunningly tells his story, & Otheller
tells Mike that he thinks a good deal of him, but he can't
train no more in his regiment.  Desdemony sympathizes with poor
Mike & interceeds for him with Otheller.  Iago makes him bleeve
she does this because she thinks more of Mike than she does of
hisself.  Otheller swallers Iago's lyin tail & goes to makin a
noosence of hisself ginrally.  He worries poor Desdemony
terrible by his vile insinuations, & finally smothers her to
deth with a piller.  Mrs. Iago cums in just as Otheller has
finished the fowl deed & givs him fits right & left, showin him
that he has bin orfully gulled by her miserble cuss of a
husband.  Iago cums in, & his wife commences rakin him down
also, when he stabs her.  Otheller jaws him a spell & then cuts
a small hole in his stummick with his sword.  Iago pints to
Desdemony's deth bed & goes orf with a sardonic smile onto his
countenance.  Otheller tells the peple that he has dun the
state sum service & they know it; axes them to do as fair a
thing as they can for him under the circumstances, & kills
hisself with a fish-knife, which is the most sensible thing he
can do.  This is a breef skedule of the synopsis of the play.

Edwin Forrest is a grate acter.  I thot I saw Otheller before
me all the time he was actin, & when the curtin fell, I found
my spectacles was still mistened with salt-water, which had run
from my eyes while poor Desdemony was dyin.  Betsy Jane--Betsy
Jane! let us pray that our domestic bliss may never be busted
up by a Iago!

Edwin Forrest makes money actin out on the stage.  He gits
five-hundred dollars a nite & his board & washin.  I wish I had
such a Forrest in my Garding!


1.21.  THE SHOW BUSINESS AND POPULAR LECTURES.

I feel that the Show Bizniss, which Ive stroven to ornyment, is
bein usurpt by Poplar Lecturs, as thay air kalled, tho in my
pinion thay air poplar humbugs.  Individoouls, who git hard up,
embark in the lecturin biznis.  They cram theirselves with
hi-sounding frazis, frizzle up their hare, git trustid for a soot
of black close & cum out to lectur at 50 dollers a pop.  Thay
aint over stockt with branes, but thay hav brass enuff to make
suffishunt kittles to bile all the sope that will be required
by the ensooin sixteen ginerashuns.  Peple flock to heer um in
krowds.  The men go becawz its poplar & the wimin folks go to
see what other wimin folks have on.  When its over the lecturer
goze & ragales hisself with oysters and sich, while the peple
say, "What a charmin lectur that air was," etsettery,
etsettery, when 9 out of 10 of um don't have no moore idee of
what the lecturer sed than my kangeroo has of the sevunth speer
of hevun.  Thare's moore infurmashun to be gut out of a well
conductid noospaper--price 3 sents--than thare is out of ten
poplar lectures at 25 or 50 dollers a pop, as the kase may be.
These same peple, bare in mind, stick up their nosis at moral
wax figgers & sagashus beests.  Thay say these things is low.
Gents, it greeves my hart in my old age, when I'm in "the Sheer
& yeller leef" (to cote frum my Irish frend Mister McBeth) to
see that the Show biznis is pritty much plade out; howsomever I
shall chance it agane in the Spring.


1.22.  WOMAN'S RIGHTS.

I pitcht my tent in a small town in Injianny one day last
seeson, & while I was standin at the dore takin money, a
deppytashun of ladies came up & sed they wos members of the
Bunkumville Female Moral Reformin & Wimin's Rite's Associashun,
and thay axed me if they cood go in without payin.

"Not exactly," sez I, "but you can pay without goin in."

"Dew you know who we air?" sed one of the wimin--a tall and
feroshus lookin critter, with a blew kotton umbreller under her
arm--"do you know who we air, Sir?"

"My impreshun is," sed I, "from a kersery view, that you air
females."

"We air, Sur," sed the feroshus woman--"we belong to a Society
whitch beleeves wimin has rites--whitch beleeves in razin her
to her proper speer--whitch beleeves she is indowed with as
much intelleck as man is--whitch beleeves she is trampled on
and aboozed--& who will resist henso4th & forever the
incroachments of proud & domineering men."

Durin her discourse, the exsentric female grabed me by the
coat-kollor & was swinging her umbreller wildly over my hed.

"I hope, marm," sez I, starting back, "that your intensions is
honorable!  I'm a lone man hear in a strange place.  Besides,
I've a wife to hum."

"Yes," cried the female, "& she's a slave!  Doth she never
dream of freedom--doth she never think of throwin off the yoke
of tyrrinny & thinkin & votin for herself?--Doth she never
think of these here things?"

"Not bein a natral born fool," sed I, by this time a little
riled, "I kin safely say that she dothunt."

"Oh whot--whot!" screamed the female, swingin her umbreller in
the air.--"O, what is the price that woman pays for her
expeeriunce!"

"I don't know," sez I; "the price of my show is 15 cents pur
individooal."

"& can't our Soisety go in free?" asked the female.

"Not if I know it," sed I.

"Crooil, crooil man!" she cried, & bust into teers.

"Won't you let my darter in?" sed anuther of the exsentric
wimin, taken me afeckshunitely by the hand.  "O, please let my
darter in,--shee's a sweet gushin child of natur."

"Let her gush!" roared I, as mad as I cood stick at their
tarnal nonsense; "let her gush!"  Where upon they all sprung
back with the simultanious observashun that I was a Beest.

"My female friends," sed I, "be4 you leeve, I've a few remarks
to remark; wa them well.  The female woman is one of the
greatest institooshuns of which this land can boste.  Its
onpossible to get along without her.  Had there bin no female
wimin in the world, I should scarcely be here with my
unparalleld show on this very occashun.  She is good in
sickness--good in wellness--good all the time.  O woman,
woman!" I cried, my feelins worked up to a hi poetick pitch,
"you air a angle when you behave yourself; but when you take
off your proper appairel & (mettyforically speaken)--get into
pantyloons--when you desert your firesides, & with your heds
full of wimin's rites noshuns go round like roarin lions,
seekin whom you may devour someboddy--in short, when you
undertake to play the man, you play the devil and air an
emfatic noosance.  My female friends," I continnered, as they
were indignantly departin, "wa well what A. Ward has sed!"


1.23.  WOULD-BE SEA DOGS.

Sum of the captings on the Upper Ohio River put on a heep of
airs.  To hear 'em git orf saler lingo you'd spose they'd bin
on the briny Deep for a lifetime, when the fact is they haint
tasted salt water since they was infants, when they had to take
it for WORMS.  Still they air good natered fellers, and when
they drink they take a dose big enuff for a grown person.


1.24.  THE PRINCE OF WALES.

To my friends of the Editorial Corpse:

I rite these lines on British sile.  I've bin follerin Mrs.
Victory's hopeful sun Albert Edward threw Kanady with my
onparaleled Show, and tho I haint made much in a pecoonary pint
of vew, I've lernt sumthin new, over hear on British Sile,
whare they bleeve in Saint George and the Dragoon.  Previs to
cumin over hear I tawt my organist how to grind Rule Brittany
and other airs which is poplar on British Sile.  I likewise
fixt a wax figger up to represent Sir Edmun Hed the Govner
Ginral.  The statoot I fixt up is the most versytile wax
statoot I ever saw.  I've showd it as Wm. Penn, Napoleon
Bonypart, Juke of Wellington, the Beneker Boy, Mrs. Cunningham
& varis other notid persons, and also for a sertin pirut named
Hix.  I've bin so long amung wax statoots that I can fix 'em up
to soot the tastes of folks, & with sum paints I hav I kin giv
their facis a beneverlent or fiendish look as the kase
requires.  I giv Sir Edmun Hed a beneverlent look, & when sum
folks who thawt they was smart sed it didn't look like Sir
Edmun Hed anymore than it did anybody else, I sed, "That's the
pint.  That's the beauty of the Statoot.  It looks like Sir
Edmun Hed or any other man.  You may kall it what you pleese.
Ef it don't look like anybody that ever lived, then it's
sertinly a remarkable Statoot & well worth seein.  _I_  kall it
Sir Edmun Hed.  YOU may kall it what you pleese!"  [I had 'em
thare.]

At larst I've had a interview with the Prince, tho it putty
nigh cost me my vallerble life.  I cawt a glimpse of him as he
sot on the Pizarro of the hotel in Sarnia, & elbowd myself
threw a crowd of wimin, children, sojers & Injins that was
hangin round the tavern.  I was drawin near to the Prince when
a red-faced man in Millingtery close grabd holt of me and axed
me whare I was goin all so bold?

"To see Albert Edard the Prince of Wales," sez I; "who are
you?"

He sed he was Kurnel of the Seventy Fust Regiment, Her
Magisty's troops.  I told him I hoped the Seventy Onesters was
in good helth, and was passin by when he ceased hold of me
agin, and sed in a tone of indigent cirprise:

"What?  Impossible!  It kannot be!  Blarst my hize, sir, did I
understan you to say that you was actooally goin into the
presents of his Royal Iniss?"

"That's what's the matter with me," I replide.

"But blarst my hize, sir, its onprecedented.  It's orful, sir.
Nothin' like it hain't happened sins the Gun Powder Plot of Guy
Forks.  Owdashus man, who air you?"

"Sir," sez I, drawin myself up & puttin on a defiant air, "I'm
a Amerycan sitterzen.  My name is Ward.  I'm a husband & the
father of twins, which I'm happy to state thay look like me.
By perfeshun I'm a exhibiter of wax works & sich."

"Good God!" yelled the Kurnal, "the idee of a exhibiter of wax
figgers goin into the presents of Royalty!  The British Lion
may well roar with raje at the thawt!"

Sez I, "Speakin of the British Lion, Kurnal, I'd like to make a
bargin with you fur that beast fur a few weeks to add to my
Show."  I didn't meen nothin by this.  I was only gettin orf a
goak, but you roter hev seen the Old Kurnal jump up & howl.  He
actooally fomed at the mowth.

"This can't be real," he showtid.  "No, no.  It's a horrid
dream.  Sir, you air not a human bein--you hav no existents--
yure a Myth!"

"Wall," sez I, "old hoss, yule find me a ruther onkomfortable
Myth ef you punch my inards in that way agin."  I began to git
a little riled, fur when he called me a Myth he puncht me putty
hard.  The Kurnal now commenst showtin fur the Seventy Onesters.
I at fust thawt I'd stay & becum a Marter to British Outraje,
as sich a course mite git my name up & be a good advertisement
fur my Show, but it occurred to me that ef enny of the Seventy
Onesters shood happen to insert a barronet into my stummick it
mite be onplesunt, & I was on the pint of runnin orf when the
Prince hisself kum up & axed me what the matter was.  Sez I,
"Albert Edard, is that you?" & he smilt & sed it was.  Sez I,
"Albert Edard, hears my keerd.  I cum to pay my respecks to
the futer King of Ingland.  The Kurnal of the Seventy Onesters
hear is ruther smawl pertaters, but of course you ain't to blame
fur that.  He puts on as many airs as tho he was the Bully Boy
with the glass eye."

"Never mind," sez Albert Edard, "I'm glad to see you, Mister
Ward, at all events," & he tuk my hand so plesunt like & larfed
so sweet that I fell in love with him to onct.  He handid me a
segar & we sot down on the Pizarro & commenst smokin rite
cheerful.  "Wall," sez I, "Albert Edard, how's the old folks?"

"Her Majesty & the Prince are well," he sed.

"Duz the old man take his Lager beer reglar?"  I inquired.

The Prince larfed & intermatid that the old man didn't let many
kegs of that bevridge spile in the sellar in the coarse of a
year.  We sot & tawked there sum time abowt matters & things, &
bimeby I axed him how he liked bein Prince as fur as he'd got.

"To speak plain, Mister Ward," he sed, "I don't much like it.
I'm sick of all this bowin & scrapin & crawlin & hurrain over a
boy like me.  I would rather go through the country quietly &
enjoy myself in my own way, with the other boys, & not be made
a Show of to be garped at by everybody.  When the PEPLE cheer me
I feel pleesed, fur I know they meen it; but if these one-horse
offishuls cood know how I see threw all their moves & understan
exackly what they air after, & knowd how I larft at 'em in
private, thayd stop kissin my hands & fawnin over me as thay now
do.  But you know, Mr. Ward, I can't help bein a Prince, & I
must do all I kin to fit myself fur the persishun I must sumtime
ockepy."

"That's troo," sez I; "sickness and the docters will carry the
Queen orf one of these dase, sure's yer born."

The time hevin arove fur me to take my departer I rose up &
sed:  "Albert Edard, I must go, but previs to doin so I will
obsarve that you soot me.  Yure a good feller, Albert Edard, &
tho I'm agin Princes as a gineral thing, I must say I like the
cut of your Gib.  When you git to be King try and be as good a
man as yure muther has bin!  Be just & be Jenerus, espeshully
to showmen, who hav allers bin aboozed sins the dase of Noah,
who was the fust man to go into the Menagery bizniss, & ef the
daily papers of his time air to be beleeved Noah's colleckshun
of livin wild beests beet ennything ever seen sins, tho I make
bold to dowt ef his snaiks was ahead of mine.  Albert Edard,
adoo!"  I tuk his hand which he shook warmly, & givin him a
perpetooal free pars to my show, & also parses to take hum for
the Queen & old Albert, I put on my hat and walkt away.

"Mrs. Ward," I solilerquized, as I walkt along, "Mrs. Ward, ef
you could see your husband now, just as he prowdly emerjis from
the presunts of the futur King of Ingland, you'd be sorry you
called him a Beest jest becaws he cum home tired 1 nite and
wantid to go to bed without takin orf his boots.  You'd be
sorry for tryin to deprive yure husband of the priceliss Boon
of liberty, Betsy Jane!"

Jest then I met a long perseshun of men with gownds onto 'em.
The leader was on horseback, & ridin up to me he sed, "Air you
Orange?"

Sez I, "Which?"

"Air you a Orangeman?" he repeated, sternly.

"I used to peddle lemins," sed I, "but I never delt in oranges.
They are apt to spile on yure hands.  What particler Loonatic
Asylum hev you & yure frends escaped frum, ef I may be so
bold?"  Just then a suddent thawt struck me & I sed, "Oh yure
the fellers who air worryin the Prince so & givin the Juke of
Noocastle cold sweats at nite, by yure infernal catawalins, air
you?  Wall, take the advice of a Amerykin sitterzen, take orf
them gownds & don't try to get up a religious fite, which is 40
times wuss nor a prize fite, over Albert Edard, who wants to
receive you all on a ekal footin, not keerin a tinker's cuss
what meetin house you sleep in Sundays.  Go home & mind yure
bisness & not make noosenses of yourselves."  With which
observashuns I left 'em.

I shall leeve British sile 4thwith.


1.25.  PICCOLOMINI.

Gents,--I arroved in Cleveland on Saturday P.M. from
Baldinsville jest in time to fix myself up and put on a clean
biled rag to attend Miss Picklehomony's grate musical sorry at
the Melodeon.  The krowds which pored into the hall augured
well for the show bizniss, & with cheerful sperrets I jined the
enthoosiastic throng.  I asked Mr. Strakhosh at the door if he
parst the perfession, and he sed not much he didn't, whereupon
I bawt a preserved seat in the pit, & obsarving to Mr.
Strakhosh that he needn't put on so many French airs becawz he
run with a big show, and that he'd better let his weskut out a
few inches or perhaps he'd bust hisself some fine day, I went
in and squatted down.  It was a sad thawt to think that in all
that vast aujience Scacely a Sole had the honor of my
acquaintance.  "& this ere," sed I Bitturly, "is Fame!  What
sigerfy my wax figgers and livin wild beasts (which have no
ekels) to these peple?  What do thay care becawz a site of my
Kangeroo is worth dubble the price of admission, and that my
Snaiks is as harmlis as the new born babe--all of which is
strictly troo?"  I should have gone on ralein at Fortin and
things sum more, but jest then Signer Maccarony cum out and
sung a hairey from some opry or other.  He had on his store
close & looked putty slick, I must say.  Nobody didn't
understand nothin abowt what he sed, and so they applawdid him
versiferusly.  Then Signer Brignoly cum out and sung another
hairey.  He appeared to be in a Pensiv Mood & sung a Luv song I
suppose, tho he may have been cussin the aujince all into a
heep for aut I knewd.  Then cum Mr. Maccarony agin and Miss
Picklehomony herself.  Thay sang a Doit together.

Now you know, gents, that I don't admire opry music.  But I
like Miss Picklehomony's stile.  I like her gate.  She suits
me.  There has bin grater singers and there has bin more
bootiful wimin, but no more fassinatin young female ever longed
for a new gown, or side to place her hed agin a vest pattern
than Maria Picklehomony.  Fassinatin peple is her best holt.
She was born to make hash of men's buzzums & other wimin mad
becawz thay ain't Picklehomonies.  Her face sparkles with
amuzin cussedness & about 200 (two hundred) little bit of funny
devils air continually dancing champion jigs in her eyes, sed
eyes bein brite enuff to lite a pipe by.  How I shood like to
have little Maria out on my farm in Baldinsville, Injianny, whare
she cood run in the tall grass, wrastle with the boys, cut up
strong at parin bees, make up faces behind the minister's back,
tie auction bills to the skoolmaster's coat-tales, set all the
fellers crazy after her, & holler & kick up, & go it just as
much as she wanted to!  But I diegress.  Every time she cum
canterin out I grew more and more delighted with her.  When she
bowed her hed I bowed mine.  When she powtid her lips I powtid
mine.  When she larfed I larfed.  When she jerked her hed back
and took a larfin survey of the aujience, sendin a broadside of
sassy smiles in among em, I tried to unjint myself & kollapse.
When, in tellin how she drempt she lived in Marble Halls, she
sed it tickled her more than all the rest to dream she loved
her feller still the same, I made a effort to swaller myself;
but when, in the next song, she look strate at me & called me
her Dear, I wildly told the man next to me he mite hav my close,
as I shood never want 'em again no more in this world.  [The
"Plain Dealer" (The Cleveland "Plain Dealer," a well-known
Ohio newspaper, to which Mr. Artemus Ward wishes us to
understand he contributed.) containin this communicashun is
not to be sent to my famerly in Baldinsville under no
circumstances whatsomever.]

In conclushun, Maria, I want you to do well.  I know you air a
nice gal at hart & you must get a good husband.  He must be a man
of branes and gumpshun & a good provider--a man who will luv you
strong and long--a man who will luv you jest as much in your old
age, when your voice is cracked like an old tea kittle & you can't
get 1 of your notes discounted at 50 per sent a month, as he will
now, when you are young & charmin & full of music, sunshine & fun.
Don't marry a snob, Maria.  You ain't a Angel, Maria, & I am glad
of it.  When I see angels in pettycoats I'm always sorry they
hain't got wings so they kin quietly fly off whare thay will be
appreshiated.  You air a woman, & a mity good one too.  As for
Maccarony, Brignoly, Mullenholler, and them other fellers, they can
take care of theirselves.  Old Mac. kin make a comfortable livin
choppin cord wood if his voice ever givs out, and Amodio looks as
tho he mite succeed in conductin sum quiet toll gate, whare the
vittles would be plenty & the labor lite.

I am preparin for the Summer Campane.  I shall stay in Cleveland a
few days and probly you will hear from me again ear I leave to once
more becum a tosser on life's tempestuous billers, meanin the Show
Bizniss.--Very Respectively Yours,

Artemus Ward.


1.26.  LITTLE PATTI.

The moosic which Ime most use to is the inspirin stranes of the
hand orgin. I hire a artistic Italyun to grind fur me, payin him
his vittles & close, & I spose it was them stranes which fust put a
moosical taste into me.  Like all furriners, he had seen better
dase, havin formerly been a Kount.  But he aint of much akount now,
except to turn the orgin and drink Beer, of which bevrige he can
hold a churnful, EASY.

Miss Patty is small for her size, but as the man sed abowt his
wife, O Lord!  She is well bilt & her complexion is what might be
called a Broonetty.  Her ize is a dark bay, the lashes bein long &
silky.  When she smiles the awjince feels like axing her to doo it
sum moor, & to continner doin it 2 a indefnit extent.  Her waste is
one of the most bootiful wastisis ever seen.  When Mister
Strackhorse led her out I thawt sum pretty skool gal, who had jest
graduatid frum pantalets & wire hoops, was a cumin out to read her
fust composishun in public.  She cum so bashful like, with her hed
bowd down, & made sich a effort to arrange her lips so thayd look
pretty, that I wanted to swaller her.  She reminded me of Susan
Skinner, who'd never kiss the boys at parin bees till the candles
was blow'd out.  Miss Patty sung suthin or ruther in a furrin tung.
I don't know what the sentimunts was.  Fur awt I know she may hav
bin denouncin my wax figgers & sagashus wild beests of Pray, & I
don't much keer ef she did.  When she opened her mowth a army of
martingales, bobolinks, kanarys, swallers, mockin birds, etsettery,
bust 4th& flew all over the Haul.

Go it, little 1, sez I to myself, in a hily exsited frame of mind,
& ef that kount or royal duke which you'll be pretty apt to marry 1
of these dase don't do the fair thing by ye, yu kin always hav a
home on A. Ward's farm, near Baldinsville, Injianny.  When she sung
Cumin threw the Rye, and spoke of that Swayne she deerly luvd
herself individooully, I didn't wish I was that air Swayne.  No I
gess not.  Oh certainly not.  [This is Ironical.  I don't meen
this.  It's a way I hav of goakin.]  Now that Maria Picklehominy
has got married & left the perfeshun, Adeliny Patty is the
championess of the opery ring.  She karries the Belt.  Thar's no
draw fite about it.  Other primy donnys may as well throw up the
spunge first as last.  My eyes don't deceive my earsite in this
matter.

But Miss Patty orter sing in the Inglish tung.  As she kin do so as
well as she kin in Italyun, why under the Son don't she do it?
What cents is thare in singin wurds nobody don't understan when
wurds we do understan is jest as handy?  Why peple will
versifferusly applawd furrin langwidge is a mistery.  It reminds me
of a man I onct knew.  He sed he knockt the bottum out of his pork
Barril, & the pork fell out, but the Brine dident moove a inch.  It
stade in the Barril.  He sed this was a Mistery, but it wasn't
misterior than is this thing I'm speekin of.

As fur Brignoly, Ferri and Junky, they air dowtless grate, but I
think sich able boddied men wood look better tillin the sile than
dressin theirselves up in black close & white kid gluvs & shoutin
in a furrin tung.  Mister Junky is a noble lookin old man, & orter
lead armies on to Battel instid of shoutin in a furrin tung.

Adoo.  In the langwidge of Lewis Napoleon when receivin kumpany at
his pallis on the Bullyvards, "I saloot yu."


1.27.  OSSAWATOMIE BROWN.

I don't pertend to be a cricket & consekently the reader will not
regard this 'ere peace as a Cricketcism.  I cimply desine givin the
pints & Plot of a play I saw actid out at the theatre t'other nite,
called Ossywattermy Brown or the Hero of Harper's Ferry.
Ossywattermy had varis failins, one of which was a idee that he
cood conker Virginny with a few duzzen loonatics which he had pickt
up sumwhares, mercy only nose wher.  He didn't cum it, as the sekel
showed.  This play was jerkt by a admirer of Old Ossywattermy.

First akt opens at North Elby, Old Brown's humsted.  Thare's a
weddin at the house.  Amely, Old Brown's darter, marrys sumbody,
and thay all whirl in the Messy darnce.  Then Ossywattermy and his
3 sons leave fur Kansis.  Old Mrs. Ossywattermy tells 'em thay air
goin on a long jurny & Blesses 'em to slow fiddlin.  Thay go to
Kansis.  What upon arth thay go to Kansis fur when thay was so nice
& comfortable down there to North Elby, is more'n I know.  The suns
air next seen in Kansis at a tarvern.  Mister Blane, a sinister
lookin man with his Belt full of knives & hoss pistils, axes one of
the Browns to take a drink.  Brown refuzis, which is the fust
instance on record whar a Brown deklined sich a invite.  Mister
Blane, who is a dark bearded feroshus lookin person, then axis him
whether he's fur or fernenst Slavery.  Yung Brown sez he's agin it,
whareupon, Mister Blane, who is the most sinisterest lookin man I
ever saw, sez Har, har, har! (that bein his stile of larfin wildly)
& ups and sticks a knife into yung Brown.  Anuther Brown rushes up
& sez, "you has killed me Ber-ruther!"  Moosic by the Band & Seen
changes.  The stuck yung Brown enters supported by his two
brothers. Bimeby he falls down, sez he sees his Mother, & dies.
Moosic by the Band. I lookt but couldn't see any mother.  Next Seen
reveels Old Brown's cabin. He's readin a book.  He sez freedum must
extend its Area & rubs his hands like he was pleesed abowt it.  His
suns come in.  One of 'em goes out & cums in ded, havin bin shot
while out by a Border Ruffin.  The ded yung Brown sez he sees his
mother and tumbles down.  The Border Ruffins then surround the
cabin & set it a fire.  The Browns giv theirselves up for gone
coons, when the hired gal diskivers a trap door to the cabin & thay
go down threw it & cum up threw the bulkhed.  Their merraklis
'scape reminds me of the 'scape of De Jones, the Coarsehair of the
Gulf--a tail with a yaller kiver, that I onct red.  For sixteen
years he was confined in a loathsum dunjin, not tastin food durin
all that time.  When a lucky thawt struck him!  He opend the winder
and got out.  To resoom--Old Brown rushes down to the footlites,
gits down on his nees & swares he'll hav revenge.  The battle of
Ossawatermy takes place.  Old Brown kills Mister Blane, the
sinister individooal aforesed.  Mister Blane makes a able &
elerquent speech, sez he don't see his mother MUCH, and dies like
the son of a gentleman, rapt up in the Star Spangled banner.
Moosic by the Band.  Four or five other Border ruffins air killed,
but thay don't say nothin abowt seein their mothers.  From Kansis
to Harper's Ferry.  Picter of a Arsenal is represented.  Sojers cum
& fire at it.  Old Brown cums out & permits hisself to be shot.  He
is tride by two soops in milingtery close and sentenced to be hung
on the gallus.  Tabloo--Old Brown on a platform, pintin upards, the
staige lited up with red fire.  Goddis of Liberty also on platform,
pintin upards.  A dutchman in the orkestry warbles on a base drum.
Curtin falls.  Moosic by the Band.


1.28.  JOY IN THE HOUSE OF WARD.

Dear Sirs:

I take my pen in hand to inform you that I am in a state of great
bliss, and trust these lines will find you injoyin the same
blessins.  I'm reguvinated.  I've found the immortal waters of
yooth, so to speak, and am as limber and frisky as a two-year-old
steer, and in the futur them boys which sez to me "go up, old Bawld
hed," will do so at the peril of their hazard, individooally.  I'm
very happy.  My house is full of joy, and I have to git up nights
and larf!  Sumtimes I ax myself "is it not a dream?" & suthin
withinto me sez "it air;" but when I look at them sweet little
critters and hear 'em squawk, I know it is a reality--2 realitys, I
may say--and I feel gay.

I returnd from the Summer Campane with my unparaleld show of wax
works and livin wild Beests of Pray in the early part of this
munth.  The peple of Baldinsville met me cordully and I immejitly
commenst restin myself with my famerly.  The other nite while I was
down to the tavurn tostin my shins agin the bar room fire & amuzin
the krowd with sum of my adventurs, who shood cum in bare heded &
terrible excited but Bill Stokes, who sez, sez he, "Old Ward,
there's grate doins up to your house."

Sez I "William, how so?"

Sez he, "Bust my gizzud but it's grate doins," & then he larfed as
if he'd kill hisself.

Sez I, risin and puttin on a austeer look, "William, I woodunt be a
fool if I had common cents."

But he kept on larfin till he was black in the face, when he fell
over on to the bunk where the hostler sleeps, and in a still small
voice sed, "Twins!"  I ashure you gents that the grass didn't grow
under my feet on my way home, & I was follered by a enthoosiastic
throng of my feller sitterzens, who hurrard for Old Ward at the top
of their voises.  I found the house chock full of peple.  Thare was
Mis Square Baxter and her three grown-up darters, lawyer Perkinses
wife, Taberthy Ripley, young Eben Parsuns, Deakun Simmuns folks,
the Skoolmaster, Doctor Jordin, etsetterry, etsetterry.  Mis Ward
was in the west room, which jines the kitchen.  Mis Square Baxter
was mixin suthin in a dipper before the kitchin fire, & a small
army of female wimin were rushin wildly round the house with
bottles of camfire, peaces of flannil, &c. I never seed such a
hubbub in my natral born dase.  I cood not stay in the west room
only a minit, so strung up was my feelins, so I rusht out and
ceased my dubbel barrild gun.

"What upon airth ales the man?" sez Taberthy Ripley.  "Sakes alive,
what air you doin?" & she grabd me by the coat tales.  "What's the
matter with you?" she continnerd.

"Twins, marm," sez I, "twins!"

"I know it," sez she, coverin her pretty face with her apun.

"Wall," sez I, "that's what's the matter with me!"

"Wall, put down that air gun, you pesky old fool," sed she.

"No, marm," sez I, "this is a Nashunal day.  The glory of this here
day isn't confined to Baldinsville by a darn site.  On yonder
woodshed," sed I, drawin myself up to my full hite and speakin in a
show-actin voice, "will I fire a Nashunal saloot!" sayin whitch I
tared myself from her grasp and rusht to the top of the shed whare
I blazed away until Square Baxter's hired man and my son Artemus
Juneyer cum and took me down by mane force.

On returnin to the Kitchin I found quite a lot of peple seated be4
the fire, a talkin the event over.  They made room for me & I sot
down.  "Quite a eppisode," sed Docter Jordin, litin his pipe with a
red-hot coal.

"Yes," sed I, "2 eppisodes, waying abowt 18 pounds jintly."

"A perfeck coop de tat," sed the skoolmaster.

"E pluribus unum, in proprietor persony," sed I, thinking I'd let
him know I understood furrin langwidges as well as he did, if I
wasn't a skoolmaster.

"It is indeed a momentious event," sed young Eben Parsuns, who has
been 2 quarters to the Akademy.

"I never heard twins called by that name afore," sed I, "But I
spose it's all rite."

"We shall soon have Wards enuff," sed the editer of the
Baldinsville "Bugle of Liberty," who was lookin over a bundle of
exchange papers in the corner, "to apply to the legislater for a
City Charter!"

"Good for you, old man!" sed I; "giv that air a conspickius place
in the next "Bugle."

"How redicklus," sed pretty Susan Fletcher, coverin her face with
her knittin work & larfin like all possest.

"Wall, for my part," sed Jane Maria Peasly, who is the crossest old
made in the world, "I think you all act like a pack of fools."

Sez I, "Miss Peasly, air you a parent?"

Sez she, "No, I ain't."

Sez I, "Miss Peasly, you never will be."

She left.

We sot there talkin & larfin until "the switchin hour of nite, when
grave yards yawn & Josts troop 4th," as old Bill Shakespire aptlee
obsarves in his dramy of John Sheppard, esq, or the Moral House
Breaker, when we broke up & disbursed.

Muther & children is a doin well & as Resolushuns is the order of
the day I will feel obleeged if you'll insurt the follerin--

Whereas, two Eppisodes has happined up to the undersined's house,
which is Twins; & Whereas I like this stile, sade twins bein of the
male perswashun & both boys; there4 Be it--

RESOLVED, That to them nabers who did the fare thing by sade
Eppisodes my hart felt thanks is doo.

RESOLVED, That I do most hartily thank Engine Ko. No. 17, who,
under the impreshun from the fuss at my house on that auspishus
nite that thare was a konflagration goin on, kum galyiantly to the
spot, but kindly refraned from squirtin.

RESOLVED, That frum the Bottum of my Sole do I thank the
Baldinsville brass band fur givin up the idea of Sarahnadin me,
both on that great nite & sinse.

RESOLVED, That my thanks is doo several members of the Baldinsville
meetin house who for 3 whole dase hain't kalled me a sinful skoffer
or intreeted me to mend my wicked wase and jine sade meetin house
to onct.

RESOLVED, That my Boozum teams with meny kind emoshuns towards the
follerin individoouls, to whit namelee--Mis. Square Baxter, who
Jenerusly refoozed to take a sent for a bottle of camfire; lawyer
Perkinses wife who rit sum versis on the Eppisodes; the Editer of
the Baldinsville "Bugle of Liberty," who nobly assisted me in
wollupin my Kangeroo, which sagashus little cuss seriusly disturbed
the Eppisodes by his outrajus screetchins & kickins up; Mis. Hirum
Doolittle, who kindly furnisht sum cold vittles at a tryin time,
when it wasunt konvenient to cook vittles at my hous; & the
Peasleys, Parsunses & Watsunses fur there meny ax of kindness.

                           Trooly yures,
                                                Artemus Ward.


1.29.  BOSTON.  (A. WARD TO HIS WIFE.)

Dear Betsy:  I write you this from Boston, "the Modern Atkins," as
it is denomyunated, altho' I skurcely know what those air.  I'll
giv you a kursoory view of this city.  I'll klassify the paragrafs
under seprit headins, arter the stile of those Emblems of Trooth
and Poority, the Washinton correspongdents!

COPP'S HILL.

The winder of my room commands a exileratin view of Copps' Hill,
where Cotton Mather, the father of the Reformers and sich, lies
berrid.  There is men even now who worship Cotton, and there is
wimin who wear him next their harts.  But I do not weep for him.
He's bin ded too lengthy.  I ain't going to be absurd, like old Mr.
Skillins, in our naberhood, who is ninety-six years of age, and
gets drunk every 'lection day, and weeps Bitturly because he haint
got no Parents.  He's a nice Orphan, HE is.

BUNKER HILL.

Bunker Hill is over yonder in Charleston.  In 1776 a thrillin dramy
was acted out over there, in which the "Warren Combination" played
star parts.

MR. FANUEL.

Old Mr. Fanuel is ded, but his Hall is still into full blarst.
This is the Cradle in which the Goddess of Liberty was rocked, my
Dear.  The Goddess hasn't bin very well durin' the past few years,
and the num'ris quack doctors she called in didn't help her any;
but the old gal's physicians now are men who understand their
bizness, Major-generally speakin', and I think the day is near when
she'll be able to take her three meals a day, and sleep nights as
comf'bly as in the old time.

THE COMMON.

It is here, as ushil; and the low cuss who called it a Wacant Lot,
and wanted to know why they didn't ornament it with sum Bildins',
is a onhappy Outcast in Naponsit.

THE LEGISLATUR.

The State House is filled with Statesmen, but sum of 'em wear queer
hats.  They buy 'em, I take it, of hatters who carry on hat stores
down-stairs in Dock Square, and whose hats is either ten years
ahead of the prevailin' stile, or ten years behind it--jest as a
intellectooal person sees fit to think about it.  I had the
pleasure of talkin' with sevril members of the legislatur.  I told
'em the Eye of 1000 ages was onto we American peple of to-day.
They seemed deeply impressed by the remark, and wantid to know if I
had seen the Grate Orgin?

HARVARD COLLEGE.

This celebrated institootion of learnin is pleasantly situated in
the Bar-room of Parker's in School street, and has poopils from all
over the country.

I had a letter yes'd'y, by the way, from our mootual son, Artemus,
Jr., who is at Bowdoin College in Maine.  He writes that he's a
Bowdoin Arab. & is it cum to this?  Is this Boy as I nurtered with
a Parent's care into his childhood's hour--is he goin' to be a
Grate American humorist?  Alars!  I fear it is too troo.  Why
didn't I bind him out to the Patent Travellin Vegetable Pill Man,
as was struck with his appearance at our last County Fair, & wanted
him to go with him and be a Pillist?  Ar, these Boys--they little
know how the old folks worrit about 'em.  But my father he never
had no occasion to worrit about me.  You know, Betsy, that when I
fust commenced my career as a moral exhibitor with a six-legged cat
and a Bass drum, I was only a simple peasant child--skurce 15
Summers had flow'd over my yoothful hed.  But I had sum mind of my
own.  My father understood this. "Go," he sed--"go, my son, and hog
the public!" (he ment, "knock em," but the old man was allus a
little given to slang).  He put his withered han' tremblinly onto
my hed, and went sadly into the house.  I thought I saw tears
tricklin down his venerable chin, but it might hav been tobacker
jooce.  He chaw'd.

LITERATOOR.

The "Atlantic Monthly," Betsy, is a reg'lar visitor to our westun
home.  I like it because it has got sense.  It don't print stories
with piruts and honist young men into 'em, makin' the piruts
splendid fellers and the honist young men dis'gree'ble idiots--so
that our darters very nat'rally prefer the piruts to the honist
young idiots; but it gives us good square American literatoor.  The
chaps that write for the "Atlantic," Betsy, understand their
bizness.  They can sling ink, they can.  I went in and saw 'em.  I
told 'em that theirs was a high and holy mission.  They seemed
quite gratified, and asked me if I had seen the Grate Orgin.

WHERE THE FUST BLUD WAS SPILT.

I went over to Lexington yes'd'y.  My Boozum hove with sollum
emotions.  "& this," I sed to a man who was drivin' a yoke of oxen,
"this is whe