re our revolutionary forefathers asserted their
independence and spilt their Blud.  Classic ground!"

"Wall," the man sed, "it's good for white beans and potatoes, but
was regards raisin' wheat, t'ain't worth a damn.  But hav' you seen
the Grate Orgin?"

THE POOTY GIRL IN SPECTACLES.

I returned in the Hoss Cars, part way.  A pooty girl in spectacles
sot near me, and was tellin' a young man how much he reminded her
of a man she used to know in Walthan.  Pooty soon the young man got
out, and, smilin' in a seductive manner, I said to the girl in
spectacles, "Don't _I_ remind you of somebody you used to know?"

"Yes," she sed, "you do remind me of one man, but he was sent to
the penitentiary for stealin' a Bar'l of mackril--he died there, so
I conclood you ain't HIM."  I didn't pursoo the conversation.  I
only heard her silvery voice once more durin' the remainder of the
jerney.  Turnin' to a respectable lookin' female of advanced
summers, she asked her if she had seen the Grate Orgin.

We old chaps, my dear, air apt to forget that it is sum time since
we was infants, and et lite food.  Nothin' of further int'rist took
place on the cars excep' a colored gentleman, a total stranger to
me, asked if I'd lend him my diamond Brestpin to wear to a funeral
in South Boston.  I told him I wouldn't--not a PURPUSS.

WILD GAME
Altho' fur from the prahayries, there is abundans of wild game in
Boston, such as quails, snipes, plover, ans Props.  (The game of
"props," played with cowrie shells is, I believe, peculiar to the
city of Boston.)

COMMON SKOOLS.

A excellent skool sistim is in vogy here.  John Slurk, my old
pardner, has a little son who has only bin to skool two months, and
yet he exhibertid his father's performin' Bear in the show all last
summer.  I hope they pay partic'lar 'tention to Spelin in these
Skools, because if a man can't Spel wel he's of no 'kount.

SUMMIN' UP.

I ment to have allooded to the Grate Orgin in this letter, but I
haven't seen it.  Mr. Reveer, whose tavern I stop at, informed me
that it can be distinctly heard through a smoked glass in his nativ
town in New Hampshire, any clear day.  But settin' the Grate Orgin
aside (and indeed, I don't think I heard it mentioned all the time
I was there), Boston is one of the grandest, sure-footedest, clear
headedest, comfortablest cities on the globe.  Onlike ev'ry other
large city I was ever in, the most of the hackmen don't seem to
hav' bin speshully intended by natur for the Burglery perfession,
and it's about the only large city I know of where you don't enjoy
a brilliant opportunity of bein swindled in sum way, from the Risin
of the sun to the goin down thereof.  There4 I say, loud and
continnered applaus' for Boston!

DOMESTIC MATTERS.

Kiss the children for me.  What you tell me 'bout the Twins greeves
me sorely.  When I sent 'em that Toy Enjine I had not
contempyulated that they would so fur forgit what wos doo the
dignity of our house as to squirt dishwater on the Incum Tax
Collector.  It is a disloyal act, and shows a prematoor leanin'
tords cussedness that alarms me.  I send to Amelia Ann, our oldest
dawter, sum new music, viz. "I am Lonely sints My Mother-in-law
Died"; "Dear Mother, What tho' the Hand that Spanked me in my
Childhood's Hour is withered now?" &c.  These song writers, by the
way, air doin' the Mother Bizness rather too muchly.

                                   Your Own Troo husban',
                                                 Artemus Ward.


1.30.  HOW OLD ABE RECEIVED THE NEWS OF HIS NOMINATION.

There are several reports afloat as to how "Honest Old Abe"
received the news of his nomination, none of which are correct.  We
give the correct report.

The Official Committee arrived in Springfield at dewy eve, and went
to Honest Old Abe's house.  Honest Old Abe was not in.  Mrs. Honest
Old Abe said Honest Old Abe was out in the woods splitting rails.
So the Official Committee went out into the woods, where sure
enough they found Honest Old Abe splitting rails with his two boys.
It was a grand, a magnificent spectacle.  There stood Honest Old
Abe in his shirt-sleeves, a pair of leather home-made suspenders
holding up a pair of home-made pantaloons, the seat of which was
neatly patched with substantial cloth of a different color.  "Mr
Lincoln, Sir, you've been nominated, Sir, for the highest office,
Sir--."  "Oh, don't bother me," said Honest Old Abe; "I took a
STENT this mornin' to split three million rails afore night, and I
don't want to be pestered with no stuff about no Conventions till I
get my stent done.  I've only got two hundred thousand rails to
split before sundown.  I kin do it if you'll let me alone."  And
the great man went right on splitting rails, paying no attention to
the Committee whatever.  The Committee were lost in admiration for
a few moments, when they recovered, and asked one of Honest Old
Abe's boys whose boy he was?  "I'm my parent's boy," shouted the
urchin, which burst of wit so convulsed the Committee that they
came very near "gin'in eout" completely.  In a few moments Honest
Ole Abe finished his task, and received the news with perfect
self-possession. He then asked them up to the house, where he
received them cordially.  He said he split three million rails every
day, although he was in very poor health.  Mr. Lincoln is a jovial
man, and has a keen sense of the ludicrous.  During the evening he
asked Mr. Evarts, of New York, "why Chicago was like a hen crossing
the street?"  Mr. Evarts gave it up.  "Because," said Mr. Lincoln,
"Old Grimes is dead, that good old man!"  This exceedingly humorous
thing created the most uproarious laughter.


1.31.  INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT LINCOLN.

I hav no politics.  Not a one.  I'm not in the bisiness.  If I was
I spose I should holler versiffrusly in the streets at nite and go
home to Betsy Jane smellen of coal ile and gin, in the mornin.  I
should go to the Poles arly. I should stay there all day.  I should
see to it that my nabers was thar.  I should git carriges to take
the kripples, the infirm and the indignant thar.  I should be on
guard agin frauds and sich.  I should be on the look out for the
infamus lise of the enemy, got up jest be4 elecshun for perlitical
effeck.  When all was over and my candydate was elected, I should
move heving & erth--so to speak--until I got orfice, which if I
didn't git a orfice I should turn round and abooze the
Administration with all my mite and maine.  But I'm not in the
bizniss.  I'm in a far more respectful bizniss nor what pollertics
is.  I wouldn't giv two cents to be a Congresser.  The wuss insult
I ever received was when sertin citizens of Baldinsville axed me to
run fur the Legislater.  Sez I, "My frends, dostest think I'd stoop
to that there?"  They turned as white as a sheet.  I spoke in my
most orfullest tones & they knowed I wasn't to be trifled with.
They slunked out of site to onct.

There4, havin no politics, I made bold to visit Old Abe at his
humstid in Springfield.  I found the old feller in his parler,
surrounded by a perfeck swarm of orfice seekers.  Knowin he had
been capting of a flat boat on the roarin Mississippy I thought I'd
address him in sailor lingo, so sez I, "Old Abe, ahoy!  Let out yer
main-suls, reef hum the forecastle & throw yer jib-poop over-board!
Shiver my timbers, my harty!"  [N.B.  This is ginuine mariner
langwidge.  I know, becawz I've seen sailor plays acted out by them
New York theatre fellers.]  Old Abe lookt up quite cross & sez,
"Send in yer petition by & by.  I can't possibly look at it now.
Indeed, I can't.  It's onpossible, sir!"

"Mr. Linkin, who do you spect I air?" sed I.

"A orfice-seeker, to be sure," sed he.

"Wall, sir," sed I, "you's never more mistaken in your life.  You
hain't gut a orfiss I'd take under no circumstances.  I'm A. Ward.
Wax figgers is my perfeshun.  I'm the father of Twins, and they
look like me--BOTH OF THEM.  I cum to pay a friendly visit to the
President eleck of the United States.  If so be you wants to see
me, say so,--if not, say so & I'm orf like a jug handle."

"Mr. Ward, sit down.  I am glad to see you, Sir."

"Repose in Abraham's Buzzum!" sed one of the orfice seekers, his
idee bein to git orf a goak at my expense.

"Wall," sez I, "ef all you fellers repose in that there Buzzum
thar'll be mity poor nussin for sum of you!" whereupon Old Abe
buttoned his weskit clear up and blusht like a maidin of sweet
16.  Jest at this pint of the conversation another swarm of
orfice-seekers arrove & cum pilin into the parler.  Sum wanted
post orfices, sum wanted collectorships, sum wantid furrin
missions, and all wanted sumthin.  I thought Old Abe would go
crazy. He hadn't more than had time to shake hands with 'em,
before another tremenjis crowd cum porein onto his premises.  His
house and dooryard was now perfeckly overflowed with orfice seekers,
all clameruss for a immejit interview with with Old Abe.  One man
from Ohio, who had about seven inches of corn whisky into him,
mistook me for Old Abe and addrest me as "The Pra-hayrie Flower of
the West!"  Thinks I YOU want a offiss putty bad.  Another man with
a gold-heded cane and a red nose told Old Abe he was "a seckind
Washington & the Pride of the Boundliss West."

Sez I, "Square, you wouldn't take a small post-offiss if you could
git it, would you?"

Sez he, "A patrit is abuv them things, sir!"

"There's a putty big crop of patrits this season, ain't there,
Squire?" sez I, when ANOTHER crowd of offiss seekers pored in.  The
house, dooryard, barng & woodshed was now all full, and when
ANOTHER crowd cum I told 'em not to go away for want of room as the
hog-pen was still empty.  One patrit from a small town in Michygan
went up on top the house, got into the chimney and slid into the
parler where Old Abe was endeverin to keep the hungry pack of
orfice-seekers from chawin him up alive without benefit of clergy.
The minit he reached the fireplace he jumpt up, brusht the soot out
of his eyes, and yelled:  "Don't make eny pintment at the
Spunkville postoffiss till you've read my papers.  All the
respectful men in our town is signers to that there dockyment!"

"Good God!" cried Old Abe, "they cum upon me from the skize--down
the chimneys, and from the bowels of the yerth!"  He hadn't more'n
got them words out of his delikit mouth before two fat
offiss-seekers from Winconsin, in endeverin to crawl atween his
legs for the purpuss of applyin for the tollgateship at Milwawky,
upsot the President eleck, & he would hev gone sprawlin into the
fireplace if I hadn't caught him in these arms.  But I hadn't more'n
stood him up strate before another man cum crashing down the chimney,
his head strikin me viliently again the inards and prostratin my
voluptoous form onto the floor.  "Mr. Linkin," shoutid the
infatooated being, "my papers is signed by every clergyman in our
town, and likewise the skoolmaster!"

Sez I, "You egrejis ass," gittin up & brushin the dust from my
eyes, "I'll sign your papers with this bunch of bones, if you don't
be a little more keerful how you make my bread basket a depot in
the futur.  How do you like that air perfumery?" sez I, shuving my
fist under his nose.  "Them's the kind of papers I'll give you!
Them's the papers YOU want!"

"But I workt hard for the ticket; I toiled night and day!  The
patrit should be rewarded!"

"Virtoo," sed I, holdin' the infatooated man by the coat-collar,
"virtoo, sir, is its own reward.  Look at me!"  He did look at me,
and qualed be4 my gase.  "The fact is," I continued, lookin' round
on the hungry crowd, "there is scacely a offiss for every ile lamp
carrid round durin' this campane.  I wish thare was.  I wish thare
was furrin missions to be filled on varis lonely Islands where
eppydemics rage incessantly, and if I was in Old Abe's place I'd
send every mother's son of you to them.  What air you here for?" I
continnered, warmin up considerable, "can't you giv Abe a minit's
peace?  Don't you see he's worrid most to death?  Go home, you
miserable men, go home & till the sile!  Go to peddlin tinware--go
to choppin wood--go to bilin' sope--stuff sassengers--black boots--
git a clerkship on sum respectable manure cart--go round as
original Swiss Bell Ringers--becum 'origenal and only' Campbell
Minstrels--go to lecturin at 50 dollars a nite--imbark in the
peanut bizniss--WRITE FOR THE 'LEDGER'--saw off your legs and go
round givin concerts, with tuchin appeals to a charitable public,
printed on your handbills--anything for a honest living, but don't
come round here drivin Old Abe crazy by your outrajis cuttings up!
Go home.  Stand not upon the order of your goin,' but go to onct!
Ef in five minits from this time," sez  I, pullin' out my new
sixteen dollar huntin cased watch and brandishin' it before their
eyes, "Ef in five minits from this time a single sole of you
remains on these here premises, I'll go out to my cage near by, and
let my Boy Constructor loose! & ef he gits amung you, you'll think
old Solferino has cum again and no mistake!"  You ought to hev seen
them scamper, Mr. Fair.  They run ort as tho Satun hisself was
arter them with a red hot ten pronged pitchfork.  In five minits
the premises was clear.

"How kin I ever repay you, Mr. Ward, for your kindness?" sed Old
Abe, advancin and shakin me warmly by the hand.  "How kin I ever
repay you, sir?"

"By givin the whole country a good, sound administration.  By
poerin' ile upon the troubled waturs, North and South.  By
pursooin' a patriotic, firm, and just course, and then if any State
wants to secede, let 'em Sesesh!"

"How 'bout my Cabinit, Mister Ward?" sed Abe.

"Fill it up with Showmen, sir!  Showmen, is devoid of politics.
They hain't got any principles.  They know how to cater for the
public.  They know what the public wants, North & South.  Showmen,
sir, is honest men.  Ef you doubt their literary ability, look at
their posters, and see small bills!  Ef you want a Cabinit as is a
Cabinit fill it up with showmen, but don't call on me.  The moral
wax figger perfeshun musn't be permitted to go down while there's a
drop of blood in these vains!  A. Linkin, I wish you well!  Ef
Powers or Walcutt wus to pick out a model for a beautiful man, I
scarcely think they'd sculp you; but ef you do the fair thing by
your country you'll make as putty a angel as any of us!  A. Linkin,
use the talents which Nature has put into you judishusly and
firmly, and all will be well!  A. Linkin, adoo!"

He shook me cordyully by the hand--we exchanged picters, so we
could gaze upon each other's liniments, when far away from one
another--he at the hellum of the ship of State, and I at the hellum
of the show bizniss--admittance only 15 cents.


1.32.  INTERVIEW WITH THE PRINCE NAPOLEON.

Notwithstandin I hain't writ much for the papers of late, nobody
needn't flatter theirselves that the undersined is ded.  On the
contry, "I still live," which words was spoken by Danyil Webster,
who was a able man.  Even the old-line whigs of Boston will admit
THAT.  Webster is ded now, howsever, and his mantle has probly
fallen into the hands of sum dealer in 2nd hand close, who can't
sell it.  Leastways nobody pears to be goin round wearin it to any
perticler extent, now days.  The rigiment of whom I was kurnel,
finerly concluded they was better adapted as Home Gards, which
accounts for your not hearin of me, ear this, where the bauls is
the thickest and where the cannon doth roar.  But as a American
citizen I shall never cease to admire the masterly advance our
troops made on Washinton from Bull Run, a short time ago.  It was
well dun.  I spoke to my wife 'bout it at the time.  My wife sed it
was well dun.

It havin there4 bin detarmined to pertect Baldinsville at all
hazzuds, and as there was no apprehensions of any immejit danger, I
thought I would go orf onto a pleasure tower.  Accordinly I put on
a clean Biled Shirt and started for Washinton.  I went there to see
the Prints Napoleon, and not to see the place, which I will here
take occasion to obsarve is about as uninterestin a locality as
there is this side of J. Davis's future home, if he ever does die,
and where I reckon they'll make it so warm for him that he will si
for his summer close.  It is easy enough to see why a man goes to
the poor house or the penitentiary.  It's becawz he can't help it.
But why he should woluntarily go and live in Washinton, is intirely
beyond my comprehension, and I can't say no fairer nor that.

I put up to a leadin hotel.  I saw the landlord and sed, "How d'ye
do, Square?"

"Fifty cents, sir," was his reply.

"Sir?"

"Half-a-dollar.  We charge twenty-five cents for LOOKIN at the
landlord and fifty cents for speakin to him.  If you want supper, a
boy will show you to the dinin-room for twenty-five cents.  Your
room bein in the tenth story, it will cost you a dollar to be shown
up there."

"How much do you ax for a man breathin in this equinomikal tarvun?"
sed I.

"Ten cents a Breth," was his reply.

Washinton hotels is very reasonable in their charges.  [N.B.--This
is Sarkassum.]

I sent up my keerd to the Prints, and was immejitly ushered before
him.  He received me kindly, and axed me to sit down.

"I hav cum to pay my respecks to you, Mister Napoleon, hopin I see
you hale and harty."

"I am quite well," he sed.  "Air you well, sir?"

"Sound as a cuss!" I answerd.

He seemed to be pleased with my ways, and we entered into
conversation to onct.

"How's Lewis?" I axed, and he sed the Emperor was well.  Eugeny was
likewise well, he sed.  Then I axed him was Lewis a good provider?
did he cum home arly nites? did he perfoom her bedroom at a
onseasonable hour with gin and tanzy?  Did he go to "the Lodge" on
nites when there wasn't any Lodge? did he often hav to go down town
to meet a friend? did he hav a extensiv acquaintance among poor
young widders whose husbands was in Californy? to all of which
questions the Prints perlitely replide, givin me to understand that
the Emperor was behavin well.

"I ax these question, my royal duke and most noble hiness and
imperials, becaws I'm anxious to know how he stands as a man.  I
know he's smart.  He is cunnin, he is long-heded, he is deep--he is
grate.  But onless he is GOOD he'll come down with a crash one of
these days and the Bonyparts will be Bustid up agin.  Bet yer
life!"

"Air you a preacher, sir?" he inquired slitely sarkasticul.

"No, sir.  But I bleeve in morality.  I likewise bleeve in Meetin
Houses.  Show me a place where there isn't any Meetin Houses and
where preachers is never seen, and I'll show you a place where old
hats air stuffed into broken winders, where the children air dirty
and ragged, where gates have no hinges, where the wimin are
slipshod, and where maps of the devil's "wild land" air painted
upon men's shirt bosums with tobacco-jooce!  That's what I'll show
you.  Let us consider what the preachers do for us before we aboose
'em."

He sed he didn't mean to aboose the clergy.  Not at all, and he was
happy to see that I was interested in the Bonypart family.

"It's a grate family," sed I. "But they scooped the old man in."

"How, Sir?"

"Napoleon the Grand.  The Britishers scooped him at Waterloo.  He
wanted to do too much, and he did it!  They scooped him in at
Waterloo, and he subsekently died at St. Heleny!  There's where the
gratest military man this world ever projuced pegged out.  It was
rather hard to consine such a man as him to St. Heleny, to spend
his larst days in catchin mackeril, and walkin up and down the
dreary beach in a military cloak drawn titely round him, (see
picter-books), but so it was.  'Hed of the Army!'  Them was his
larst words.  So he had bin.  He was grate!  Don't I wish we had a
pair of his old boots to command sum of our Brigades!"

This pleased Jerome, and he took me warmly by the hand.

"Alexander the Grate was punkins," I continnered, "but Napoleon was
punkinser!  Alic wept becaws there was no more worlds to scoop, and
then took to drinkin.  He drowndid his sorrers in the flowin bole,
and the flowin bole was too much for him.  It ginerally is.  He
undertook to give a snake exhibition in his boots, but it killed
him.  That was a bad joke on Alic!"

"Since you air so solicitous about France and the Emperor, may I
ask you how your own country is getting along?" sed Jerome, in a
pleasant voice.

"It's mixed," I sed.  But I think we shall cum out all right."

"Columbus, when he diskivered this magnificent continent, could hav
had no idee of the grandeur it would one day assoom," sed the
Prints.

"It cost Columbus twenty thousand dollars to fit out his explorin
expedition," sed I.  "If he had bin a sensible man he'd hav put the
money in a hoss railroad or a gas company, and left this
magnificent continent to intelligent savages, who when they got
hold of a good thing knew enuff to keep it, and who wouldn't hav
seceded, nor rebelled, nor knockt Liberty in the hed with a
slungshot.  Columbus wasn't much of a feller, after all.  It would
hav bin money in my pocket if he'd staid at home.  Chris. ment
well, but he put his foot in it when he saled for America."

We talked sum more about matters and things, and at larst I riz to
go.  "I will now say good-bye to you, noble sir, and good luck to
you.  Likewise the same to Clotildy.  Also to the gorgeous persons
which compose your soot.  If the Emperor's boy don't like livin at
the Tooleries, when he gits older, and would like to imbark in the
show bizness, let him come with me and I'll make a man of him.  You
find us sumwhat mixed, as I before obsarved, but come again next
year and you'll find us clearer nor ever.  The American Eagle has
lived too sumptuously of late--his stummic becum foul, and he's
takin a slite emetic.  That's all.  We're getting ready to strike a
big blow and a sure one.  When we do strike, the fur will fly and
secession will be in the hands of the undertaker, sheeted for so
deep a grave that nothin short of Gabriel's trombone will ever
awaken it!  Mind what I say.  You've heard the showman!"

Then advisin him to keep away from the Peter Funk sections of the
East, and the proprietors of corner-lots in the West, I bid him
farewell, and went away.

There was a levee at Senator What's-his-name's, and I thought I'd
jine in the festivities for a spell.  Who should I see but she that
was Sarah Watkins, now the wife of our Congresser, trippin in the
dance, dressed up to kill in her store close.  Sarah's father use
to keep a little grosery store in our town and she used to clerk it
for him in busy times.  I was rushin up to shake hands with her
when she turned on her heel, and tossin her hed in a contemptooious
manner, walked away from me very rapid.  "Hallo, Sal," I hollered,
"can't you measure me a quart of them best melasses?  I may want a
codfish, also!"  I guess this reminded her of the little red store,
and "the days of her happy childhood."

But I fell in love with a nice little gal after that, who was much
sweeter then Sally's father's melasses, and I axed her if we
shouldn't glide in the messy dance.  She sed we should, and we
Glode.

I intended to make this letter very seris, but a few goaks may have
accidentally crept in.  Never mind.  Besides, I think it improves a
komick paper to publish a goak once in a while.

                                   Yours Muchly,
                                                Ward, (Artemus.)


1.33.  AGRICULTURE.

The Barclay County Agricultural Society having seriously invited
the author of this volume to address them on the occasion of their
next annual Fair, he wrote the President of that Society as
follows:

                                         New York.  June 12, 1865,

Dear Sir:--

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
5th inst., in which you invite me to deliver an address before your
excellent agricultural society.

I feel flattered, and think I will come.

Perhaps, meanwhile, a brief history of my experience as an
agriculturist will be acceptable; and as that history no doubt
contains suggestions of value to the entire agricultural community,
I have concluded to write to you through the Press.

I have been an honest old farmer for some four years.

My farm is in the interior of Maine.  Unfortunately my lands are
eleven miles from the railroad.  Eleven miles is quite a distance
to haul immense quantities of wheat, corn, rye, and oats; but as I
hav'n't any to haul, I do not, after all, suffer much on that
account.

My farm is more especially a grass farm.

My neighbors told me so at first, and as an evidence that they were
sincere in that opinion, they turned their cows on to it the moment
I went off "lecturing."

These cows are now quite fat.  I take pride in these cows, in fact,
and am glad I own a grass farm.

Two years ago I tried sheep-raising.

I bought fifty lambs, and turned them loose on my broad and
beautiful acres.

It was pleasant on bright mornings to stroll leisurely out on to
the farm in my dressing-gown, with a cigar in my mouth, and watch
those innocent little lambs as they danced gayly o'er the hillside.
Watching their saucy capers reminded me of caper sauce, and it
occurred to me I should have some very fine eating when they grew
up to be "muttons."

My gentle shepherd, Mr. Eli Perkins, said, "We must have some
shepherd dogs."

I had no very precise idea as to what shepherd dogs were, but I
assumed a rather profound look, and said:

"We must, Eli.  I spoke to you about this some time ago!"

I wrote to my old friend, Mr. Dexter H. Follett, of Boston, for two
shepherd dogs.  Mr. F. is not an honest old farmer himself, but I
thought he knew about shepherd dogs.  He kindly forsook far more
important business to accommodate, and the dogs came forthwith.
They were splendid creatures--snuff-colored, hazel-eyed,
long-tailed, and shapely-jawed.

We led them proudly to the fields.

"Turn them in, Eli," I said.

Eli turned them in.

They went in at once, and killed twenty of my best lambs in about
four minutes and a half.

My friend had made a trifling mistake in the breed of these dogs.

These dogs were not partial to sheep.

Eli Perkins was astonished, and observed:

"Waal! DID you ever?"

I certainly never had.

There were pools of blood on the greensward, and fragments of wool
and raw lamb chops lay round in confused heaps.

The dogs would have been sent to Boston that night, had they not
suddenly died that afternoon of a throat-distemper.  It wasn't a
swelling of the throat.  It wasn't diptheria.  It was a violent
opening of the throat, extending from ear to ear.

Thus closed their life-stories.  Thus ended their interesting
tails.

I failed as a raiser of lambs.  As a sheepist, I was not a success.

Last summer Mr. Perkins, said, "I think we'd better cut some grass
this season, sir."

We cut some grass.

To me the new-mown hay is very sweet and nice.  The brilliant
George Arnold sings about it, in beautiful verse, down in Jersey
every summer; so does the brilliant Aldrich, at Portsmouth, N.H.
And yet I doubt if either of these men knows the price of a ton of
hay to-day.  But new-mown hay is a really fine thing.  It is good
for man and beast.

We hired four honest farmers to assist us, and I led them gayly to
the meadows.

I was going to mow, myself.

I saw the sturdy peasants go round once ere I dipped my flashing
scythe into the tall green grass.

"Are you ready?" said E. Perkins.

"I am here!"

"Then follow us."

I followed them.

Followed them rather too closely, evidently, for a white-haired old
man, who immediately followed Mr. Perkins, called upon us to halt.
Then in a low firm voice he said to his son, who was just ahead of
me, "John, change places with me.  I hain't got long to live,
anyhow.  Yonder berryin' ground will soon have these old bones, and
it's no matter whether I'm carried there with one leg off and
ter'ble gashes in the other or not!  But you, John--YOU are young."

The old man changed places with his son.  A smile of calm
resignation lit up his wrinkled face, as he sed, "Now, sir, I am
ready!"

"What mean you, old man!" I sed.

"I mean that if you continner to bran'ish that blade as you have
been bran'ishin' it, you'll slash h-- out of some of us before
we're a hour older!"

There was some reason mingled with this white-haired old peasant's
profanity.  It was true that I had twice escaped mowing off his
son's legs, and his father was perhaps naturally alarmed.

I went and sat down under a tree.  "I never know'd a literary man
in my life," I overheard the old man say, "that know'd anything."

Mr. Perkins was not as valuable to me this season as I had fancied
he might be.  Every afternoon he disappeared from the field
regularly, and remained about some two hours.  He sed it was
headache.  He inherited it from his mother.  His mother was often
taken in that way, and suffered a great deal.

At the end of the two hours Mr. Perkins would reappear with his
head neatly done up in a large wet rag, and say he "felt better."

One afternoon it so happened that I soon followed the invalid to
the house, and as I neared the porch I heard a female voice
energetically observe, "You stop!"  It was the voice of the hired
girl, and she added, "I'll holler for Mr. Brown!"

"Oh no, Nancy," I heard the invalid E. Perkins soothingly say, "Mr.
Brown knows I love you.  Mr. Brown approves of it!"

This was pleasant for Mr. Brown!

I peered cautiously through the kitchen-blinds, and, however
unnatural it may appear, the lips of Eli Perkins and my hired girl
were very near together.  She sed, "You shan't do so," and he
DO-SOED.  She also said she would get right up and go away, and as
an evidence that she was thoroughly in earnest about it, she
remained where she was.

They are married now, and Mr. Perkins is troubled no more with the
headache.

This year we are planting corn.  Mr. Perkins writes me that "on
accounts of no skare krows bein put up krows cum and digged fust
crop up but soon got nother in.  Old Bisbee who was frade youd cut
his sons leggs off Ses you bet go an stan up in feeld yrself with
dressin gownd on & gesses krows will keep way.  This made Boys in
store larf.  no More terday from

                        "Yours
                                respecful
                                          "Eli Perkins,"

                      "his letter."

My friend Mr. D.T.T. Moore, of the "Rural New Yorker," thinks if I
"keep on" I will get in the Poor House in about two years.

If you think the honest old farmers of Barclay County want me, I
will come.

                             Truly Yours,
                                            Charles F. Browne.


1.34.  BUSTS.

There are in this city several Italian gentlemen engaged in the bust
business.  They have their peculiarities and eccentricities.  They
are swarthy-faced, wear slouched caps and drab pea-jackets, and
smoke bad cigars.  They make busts of Webster, Clay, Bonaparte,
Douglas, and other great men, living and dead.  The Italian buster
comes upon you solemnly and cautiously.  "Buy Napoleon?" he will
say, and you may probably answer "not a buy."  "How much giv-ee?" he
asks, and perhaps you will ask him how much he wants.  "Nine
dollar," he will answer always.  We are sure of it.  We have
observed this peculiarity in the busters frequently.  No matter how
large or small the bust may be, the first price is invariably "nine
dollar."  If you decline paying this price, as you undoubtedly will
if you are right in your head, he again asks, "how much giv-ee?"  By
way of a joke you say "a dollar," when the buster retreats
indignantly to the door, saying in a low, wild voice, "O dam!"  With
his hand upon the door-latch, he turns and once more asks, "how much
giv-ee?"  You repeat the previous offer, when he mutters, "O ha!"
then coming pleasantly towards you, he speaks thus:  "Say! how much
giv-ee?"  Again you say a dollar, and he cries, "take 'um--take
'um!"--thus falling eight dollars on his original price.

Very eccentric is the Italian buster, and sometimes he calls his
busts by wrong names.  We bought Webster (he called him Web-STAR) of
him the other day, and were astonished when he called upon us the
next day with another bust of Webster, exactly like the one we had
purchased of him, and asked us if we didn't want to buy "Cole, the
wife-pizener!"  We endeavored to rebuke the depraved buster, but our
utterance was choked, and we could only gaze upon him in speechless
astonishment and indignation.


1.35.  A HARD CASE.

We have heard of some very hard cases since we have enlivened this
world with our brilliant presence.  We once saw an able-bodied man
chase a party of little school-children and rob them of their
dinners.  The man who stole the coppers from his deceased
grandmother's eyes lived in our neighborhood, and we have read about
the man who went to church for the sole purpose of stealing the
testaments and hymn-books.  But the hardest case we ever heard of
lived in Arkansas.  He was only fourteen years old.  One night he
deliberately murdered his father and mother in cold blood, with a
meat-axe.  He was tried and found guilty.  The Judge drew on his
black cap, and in a voice choked with emotion asked the young
prisoner if he had anything to say before the sentence of the Court
was passed on him.  The court-room was densely crowded and there was
not a dry eye in the vast assembly.  The youth of the prisoner, his
beauty and innocent looks, the mild, lamblike manner in which he had
conducted himself during the trial--all, all had thoroughly enlisted
the sympathy of the spectators, the ladies in particular.  And even
the Jury, who had found it to be their stern duty to declare him
guilty of the appalling crime--even the Jury now wept aloud at this
awful moment.

"Have you anything to say?" repeated the deeply moved Judge.

"Why, no," replied the prisoner, "I think I haven't, though I hope
yer Honor will show some consideration FOR THE FEELINGS OF A POOR
ORPHAN!"

The Judge sentenced the perfect young wretch without delay.


1.36.  AFFAIRS AROUND THE VILLAGE GREEN.

It isn't every one who has a village green to write about.  I have
one, although I have not seen much of it for some years past.  I am
back again, now.  In the language of the duke who went around with a
motto about him, "I am here!" and I fancy I am about as happy a
peasant of the vale as ever garnished a melodrama, although I have
not as yet danced on my village green, as the melodramatic peasant
usually does on his.  It was the case when Rosina Meadows left home.

The time rolls by serenely now--so serenely that I don't care what
time it is, which is fortunate, because my watch is at present in
the hands of those "men of New York who are called rioters."  We met
by chance, the usual way--certainly not by appointment--and I
brought the interview to a close with all possible despatch.
Assuring them that I wasn't Mr. Greeley, particularly, and that he
had never boarded in the private family where I enjoy the comforts
of a home, I tendered them my watch, and begged they would
distribute it judiciously among the laboring classes, as I had seen
the rioters styled in certain public prints.

Why should I loiter feverishly in Broadway, stabbing the hissing hot
air with the splendid gold-headed cane that was presented to me by
the citizens of Waukegan, Illinois, as a slight testimonial of their
esteem?  Why broil in my rooms?  You said to me, Mrs. Gloverson,
when I took possession of these rooms, that no matter how warm it
might be, a breeze had a way of blowing into them, and that they
were, withal, quite countryfied; but I am bound to say, Mrs.
Gloverson, that there was nothing about them that ever reminded me,
in the remotest degree, of daisies or new-mown hay.  Thus, with
sarcasm, do I smash the deceptive Gloverson.

Why stay in New York when I had a village green?  I gave it up, the
same as I would an intricate conundrum--and, in short, I am here.

Do I miss the glare and crash of the imperial thoroughfare?  The
milkman, the fiery, untamed omnibus horses, the soda fountains,
Central Park, and those things?  Yes I do; and I can go on missing
'em for quite a spell, and enjoy it.

The village from which I write to you is small.  It does not contain
over forty houses, all told; but they are milk-white, with the
greenest of blinds, and for the most part are shaded with beautiful
elms and willows.  To the right of us is a mountain--to the left a
lake.  The village nestles between.  Of course it does, I never read
a novel in my life in which the villages didn't nestle.  Villages
invariably nestle.  It is a kind of way they have.

We are away from the cars.  The iron-horse, as my little sister
aptly remarks in her composition On Nature, is never heard to shriek
in our midst; and on the whole I am glad of it.

The villagers are kindly people.  They are rather incoherent on the
subject of the war, but not more so, perhaps, then are people
elsewhere.  One citizen, who used to sustain a good character,
subscribed for the Weekly New York Herald a few months since, and
went to studying the military maps in that well-known journal for
the fireside.  I need not inform you that his intellect now totters,
and he has mortgaged his farm.  In a literary point of view we are
rather bloodthirsty.  A pamphlet edition of the life of a cheerful
being, who slaughtered his wife and child, and then finished
himself, is having an extensive sale just now.

We know little of Honore de Balzac, and perhaps care less for Victor
Hugo.  M. Claes's grand search for the Absolute doesn't thrill us in
the least; and Jean Valjean, gloomily picking his way through the
sewers of Paris, with the spooney young man of the name of Marius
upon his back, awakens no interest in our breasts.  I say Jean
Valjean picked his way gloomily, and I repeat it.  No man, under
these circumstances, could have skipped gayly.  But this literary
business, as the gentleman who married his colored chambermaid aptly
observed, "is simply a matter of taste."

The store--I must not forget the store.  It is an object of great
interest to me.  I usually encounter there, on sunny afternoons, an
old Revolutionary soldier.  You may possibly have read about
"Another Revolutionary Soldier gone," but this is one who hasn't
gone, and, moreover, one who doesn't manifest the slightest
intention of going.  He distinctly remembers Washington, of course;
they all do; but what I wish to call special attention to, is the
fact that this Revolutionary soldier is one hundred years old, that
his eyes are so good that he can read fine print without spectacles-
-he never used them, by the way--and his mind is perfectly clear.
He is a little shaky in one of his legs, but otherwise he is as
active as most men of forty-five, and his general health is
excellent.  He uses no tobacco, but for the last twenty years he has
drunk one glass of liquor every day--no more, no less.  He says he
must have his tod.  I had begun to have lurking suspicions about
this Revolutionary soldier business, but here is an original Jacobs.
But because a man can drink a glass of liquor a day, and live to be
a hundred years old, my young readers must not infer that by
drinking two glasses of liquor a day a man can live to be two
hundred.  "Which, I meanter say, it doesn't foller," as Joseph
Gargery might observe.

This store, in which may constantly be found calico and nails, and
fish, and tobacco in kegs, and snuff in bladders, is a venerable
establishment.  As long ago as 1814 it was an institution.  The
county troops, on their way to the defence of Portland, then menaced
by British ships-of-war, were drawn up in front of this very store,
and treated at the town's expense.  Citizens will tell you how the
clergyman refused to pray for the troops, because he considered the
war an unholy one; and how a somewhat eccentric person, of dissolute
habits, volunteered his services, stating that he once had an uncle
who was a deacon, and he thought he could make a tolerable prayer,
although it was rather out of his line; and how he prayed so long
and absurdly that the Colonel ordered him under arrest, but that
even while soldiers stood over him with gleaming bayonets, the
reckless being sang a preposterous song about his grandmother's
spotted calf, with its Ri-fol-lol-tiddery-i-do; after which he
howled dismally.

And speaking of the store, reminds me of a little story.  The author
of "several successful comedies" has been among us, and the store
was anxious to know who the stranger was.  And therefore the store
asked him.

"What do you follow, sir?" respectfully inquired the tradesman.

"I occasionally write for the stage, sir."

"Oh!" returned the tradesman, in a confused manner.

"He means," said an honest villager, with a desire to help the
puzzled tradesman out, "he means that he writes the handbills for
the stage drivers!"

I believe that story is new, although perhaps it is not of an
uproariously mirthful character; but one hears stories at the store
that are old enough, goodness knows--stories which, no doubt,
diverted Methuselah in the sunny days of his giddy and thoughtless
boyhood.

There is an exciting scene at the store occasionally.  Yesterday an
athletic peasant, in a state of beer, smashed in a counter and
emptied two tubs of butter on the floor.  His father--a white-haired
old man, who was a little boy when the Revolutionary war closed, but
who doesn't remember Washington MUCH, came round in the evening and
settled for the damages.  "My son," he said, "has considerable
originality."  I will mention that this same son once told me that
he could lick me with one arm tied behind him, and I was so
thoroughly satisfied he could, that I told him he needn't mind going
for a rope.

Sometimes I go a-visiting to a farmhouse, on which occasions the
parlor is opened.  The windows have been close-shut ever since the
last visitor was there, and there is a dingy smell that I struggle
as calmly as possible with, until I am led to the banquet of
steaming hot biscuit and custard pie.  If they would only let me sit
in the dear old-fashioned kitchen, or on the door-stone--if they
knew how dismally the new black furniture looked--but, never mind, I
am not a reformer.  No, I should rather think not.

Gloomy enough, this living on a farm, you perhaps say, in which case
you are wrong.  I can't exactly say that I pant to be an
agriculturist, but I do know that in the main it is an independent,
calmly happy sort of life.  I can see how the prosperous farmer can
go joyously a-field with the rise of the sun, and how his heart may
swell with pride over bounteous harvests and sleek oxen.  And it
must be rather jolly for him on winter evenings to sit before the
bright kitchen fire and watch his rosy boys and girls as they study
out the charades in the weekly paper, and gradually find out why my
first is something that grows in a garden, and my second is a fish.

On the green hillside over yonder there is a quivering of snowy
drapery, and bright hair is flashing in the morning sunlight.  It
is recess, and the Seminary girls are running in the tall grass.

A goodly seminary to look at outside, certainly, although I am
pained to learn, as I do on unprejudiced authority, that Mrs.
Higgins, the Principal, is a tyrant, who seeks to crush the girls
and trample upon them; but my sorrow is somewhat assuaged by
learning that Skimmerhorn, the pianist, is perfectly splendid.

Looking at these girls reminds me that I, too, was once young--and
where are the friends of my youth?  I have found one of 'em,
certainly.  I saw him ride in the circus the other day on a bareback
horse, and even now his name stares at me from yonder board-fence,
in green, and blue, and red, and yellow letters.  Dashington, the
youth with whom I used to read the able orations of Cicero, and who,
as a declaimer on exhibition days, used to wipe the rest of us boys
pretty handsomely out--well, Dashington is identified with the
halibut and cod interest--drives a fish cart, in fact, from a
certain town on the coast, back into the interior.  Hurbertson, the
utterly stupid boy--the lunkhead, who never had his lesson--he's
about the ablest lawyer a sister State can boast.  Mills is a
newspaper man, and is just now editing a Major-General down South.

Singlinson, the sweet-voiced boy, whose face was always washed and
who was real good, and who was never rude--HE is in the penitentiary
for putting his uncle's autograph to a financial document.  Hawkins,
the clergyman's son, is an actor, and Williamson, the good little
boy who divided his bread and butter with the beggarman, is a
failing merchant, and makes money by it.  Tom Slink, who used to
smoke short-sixes and get acquainted with the little circus boys, is
popularly supposed to be the proprietor of a cheap gaming
establishment in Boston, where the beautiful but uncertain prop is
nightly tossed.  Be sure, the Army is represented by many of the
friends of my youth, the most of whom have given a good account of
themselves.  But Chalmerson hasn't done much.  No, Chalmerson is
rather of a failure.  He plays on the guitar and sings love songs.
Not that he is a bad man.  A kinder-hearted creature never lived,
and they say he hasn't yet got over crying for his little curly
haired sister who died ever so long ago.  But he knows nothing about
business, politics, the world, and those things.  He is dull at
trade--indeed, it is a common remark that "everybody cheats
Chalmerson."  He came to the party the other evening, and brought
his guitar.  They wouldn't have him for a tenor in the opera,
certainly, for he is shaky in his upper notes; but if his simple
melodies didn't gush straight from the heart, why were my trained
eyes wet?  And although some of the girls giggled, and some of the
men seemed to pity him I could not help fancying that poor
Chalmerson was nearer heaven than any of us all!


1.37.  ABOUT EDITORS.

We hear a great deal, and something too much, about the poverty of
editors. It is common for editors to parade their poverty and joke
about it in their papers.  We see these witticisms almost every day
of our lives.  Sometimes the editor does the "vater vorks business,"
as Mr. Samuel Weller called weeping, and makes pathetic appeals to
his subscribers.  Sometimes he is in earnest when he makes these
appeals, but why "on airth" does he stick to a business that will
not support him decently?  We read of patriotic and lofty-minded
individuals who sacrifice health, time, money, and perhaps life, for
the good of humanity, the Union, and that sort of thing, but we
don't SEE them very often.  We must say that we could count up all
the lofty patriots in this line that we have ever seen, during our
brief but chequered and romantic career, in less than half a day.  A
man who clings to a wretchedly paying business, when he can make
himself and others near and dear to him fatter and happier by doing
something else, is about as near an ass as possible, and not hanker
after green grass and corn in the ear.  The truth is, editors as a
class are very well fed, groomed and harnessed.  They have some
pains that other folk do not have, and they also have some
privileges which the community in general can't possess.  While we
would not advise the young reader to "go for an editor," we assure
him he can do much worse.  He mustn't spoil a flourishing blacksmith
or popular victualler in making an indifferent editor of himself,
however.  He must be endowed with some fancy and imagination to
enchain the public eye.  It was Smith, we believe, or some other man
with an odd name, who thought Shakespeare lacked the requisite fancy
and imagination for a successful editor.

To those persons who can't live by printing papers we would say, in
the language of the profligate boarder when dunned for his bill,
being told at the same time by the keeper of the house that he
couldn't board people for nothing, "Then sell out to somebody who
can!"  In other words, fly from a business which don't remunerate.
But as we intimated before, there is much gammon in the popular
editorial cry of poverty.

Just now we see a touching paragraph floating through the papers to
the effect that editors don't live out half their years; that, poor
souls! they wear themselves out for the benefit of a cold and
unappreciating world.  We don't believe it.  Gentle reader, don't
swallow it.  It is a footlight trick to work on your feelings.  For
ourselves, let us say, that unless we slip up considerably on our
calculations, it will be a long time before our fellow-citizens will
have the melancholy pleasure of erecting to our memory a towering
monument of Parian marble on the Public Square.


1.38.  EDITING.

Before you go for an Editor, young man, pause and take a big think!
Do not rush into the editorial harness rashly.  Look around and see
if there is not an omnibus to drive--some soil somewhere to be
tilled--a clerkship on some meat cart to be filled--anything that is
reputable and healthy, rather than going for an Editor, which is
hard business at best.

We are not a horse, and consequently have never been called upon to
furnish the motive power for a threshing-machine; but we fancy that
the life of the Editor who is forced to write, write, write, whether
he feels right or not, is much like that of the steed in question.
If the yeas and neighs could be obtained, we believe the intelligent
horse would decide that the threshing-machine is preferable to the
sanctum editorial.

The Editor's work is never done.  He is drained incessantly, and no
wonder that he dries up prematurely.  Other people can attend
banquets, weddings, &c.; visit halls of dazzling light, get
inebriated, break windows, lick a man occasionally, and enjoy
themselves in a variety of ways; but the Editor cannot.  He must
stick tenaciously to his quill.  The press, like a sick baby,
mustn't be left alone for a minute.  If the press is left to run
itself even for a day, some absurd person indignantly orders the
carrier-boy to stop bringing "that infernal paper.  There's nothing
in it.  I won't have it in the house!"

The elegant Mantalini, reduced to mangle-turning, described his life
as "a dem'd horrid grind."  The life of the Editor is all of that.

But there is a good time coming, we feel confident, for the Editor.
A time when he will be appreciated.  When he will have a front seat.
When he will have pie every day, and wear store clothes continually.
When the harsh cry of "stop my paper" will no more grate upon his
ears.  Courage, Messieurs the Editors!  Still, sanguine as we are of
the coming of this jolly time, we advise the aspirant for editorial
honors to pause ere he takes up the quill as a means of obtaining
his bread and butter.  Do not, at least, do so until you have been
jilted several dozen times by a like number of girls; until you have
been knocked down-stairs several times and soused in a horse-pond;
until all the "gushing" feelings within you have been thoroughly
subdued; until, in short, your hide is of rhinoceros thickness.
Then, O aspirants for the bubble reputation at the press's mouth,
throw yourselves among the inkpots, dust, and cobwebs of the
printing office, if you will.

  *  *  *  Good my lord, will you see the Editors well bestowed?  Do
you hear, let them be well used, for they are the abstract and brief
chroniclers of the time.  After your death you had better have a bad
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
                                           Hamlet, slightly altered.


1.39.  POPULARITY.

What a queer thing is popularity; Bill Pug Nose of the "Plug-Uglies"
(The name given to an infamous gang of ruffians which once had its
head-quarters in Baltimore.) acquires a world-wide reputation by
smashing up the "champion of light weights," sets up a Saloon upon
it, and realizes the first month; while our Missionary, who
collected two hundred blankets last August, and at that time saved a
like number of little negroes in the West Indies from freezing, has
received nothing but the yellow fever.  The Hon. Oracular M.
Matterson becomes able to withstand any quantity of late nights and
bad brandy, is elected to Congress, and lobbies through contracts by
which he realizes some 50,000 dollars; while private individuals
lose 100,000 dollars by the Atlantic Cable.  Contracts are popular--
the cable isn't.  Fid