dlers, Prima Donnas, Horse Operas, learned
pigs, and five-legged calves travel through the country, reaping
"golden opinions," while editors, inventors, professors, and
humanitarians generally, are starving in garrets.  Revivals of
religion, fashions, summer resorts, and pleasure trips, are
exceedingly popular, while trade, commerce, chloride of lime, and
all the concomitants necessary to render the inner life of denizens
of cities tolerable, are decidedly non est.  Even water, which was
so popular and populous a few weeks agone, comes to us in such
stinted sprinklings that it has become popular to supply it only
from hydrants in sufficient quantities to raise one hundred
disgusting smells in a distance of two blocks.  Monsieur Revierre,
with nothing but a small name and a large quantity of hair, makes
himself exceedingly popular with hotel-keepers and a numerous
progeny of female Flaunts and Blounts, while Felix Smooth and Mr.
Chink, who persistently set forth their personal and more
substantial marital charms through the columns of "New York Herald,"
have only received one interview each--one from a man in female
attire, and the other from the keeper of an unmentionable house.
Popularity is a queer thing, very.  If you don't believe us, try it!


1.40.  A LITTLE DIFFICULTY IN THE WAY.

An enterprising traveling agent for a well-known Cleveland Tombstone
Manufactory lately made a business visit to a small town in an
adjoining county.  Hearing, in the village, that a man in a remote
part of the township had lost his wife, he thought he would go and
see him, and offer him consolation and a gravestone, on his usual
reasonable terms.  He started.  The road was a frightful one, but
the agent persevered, and finally arrived at the bereaved man's
house.  Bereaved man's hired girl told the agent that the bereaved
man was splitting fence rails "over in pastur, about two milds."
The indefatigable agent hitched his horse and started for the
"pastur."  After falling into all manner of mudholes, scratching
himself with briers, and tumbling over decayed logs, the agent at
length found the bereaved man.  In a subdued voice he asked the man
if he had lost his wife.  The man said he had.  The agent was very
sorry to hear of it, and sympathized with the man deeply in his
great affliction; but death, he said, was an insatiate archer, and
shot down all, both of high and low degree.  Informed the man that
"what was his loss was her gain," and would be glad to sell him a
gravestone to mark the spot where the beloved one slept--marble or
common stone, as he chose, at prices defying competition.  The
bereaved man said there was "a little difficulty in the way."

"Haven't you lost your wife?" inquired the agent.

"Why, yes, I have," said the man, "but no gravestun ain't necessary:
you see the cussed critter ain't dead.  SHE'S SCOOTED WITH ANOTHER
MAN!"

The agent retired.


1.41.  COLORED PEOPLE'S CHURCH.

There is a plain little meeting-house on Barnwell Street (One of the
streets of the city of Cleveland.) in which the colored people--or a
goodly portion of them--worship on Sundays.  The seats are
cushionless, and have perpendicular backs.  The pulpit is plain
white--trimmed with red, it is true, but still a very unostentatious
affair for colored people, who are supposed to have a decided
weakness for gay hues.  Should you escort a lady to this church, and
seat yourself beside her, you will infallibly be touched on the
shoulder, and politely requested to move to the "gentlemen's side."
Gentlemen and ladies are not allowed to sit together in this church.
They are parted remorselessly.  It is hard--we may say it is
terrible--to be torn asunder in this way, but you have to submit,
and of course you had better do so gracefully and pleasantly.

Meeting opens with an old-fashioned hymn, which is very well sung
indeed by the congregation.  Then the minister reads a hymn, which
is sung by the choir on the front seats near the pulpit.  Then the
minister prays.  He hopes no one has been attracted there by idle
curiosity--to see or be seen--and you naturally conclude that he is
gently hitting you.  Another hymn follows the prayer, and then we
have the discourse, which certainly has the merit of peculiarity and
boldness.  The minister's name is Jones.  He don't mince matters at
all.  He talks about the "flames of hell" with a confident
fierceness that must be quite refreshing to sinners.

"There's no half-way about this," says he, "no by-paths.

"There are in Cleveland lots of men who go to church regularly, who
behave well in meeting, and who pay their bills.

"They ain't Christians though.

"They're gentlemen sinners.

"And whar d'ye spose they'll fetch up?

"I'll tell ye--they'll fetch him up in h--ll, and they'll come up
standing too--there's where they'll fetch up.

"Who's my backer?

"Have I got a backer?

"Whar's my backer?

"This is my backer (striking the Bible before him)--the Bible will
back me to any amount!"

To still further convince his hearers that he was in earnest, he
exclaimed, "That's me--that's Jones!"

He alluded to Eve in terms of bitter censure.  It was natural that
Adam should have been mad at her.  "I shouldn't want a woman that
wouldn't mind me, myself," said the speaker.

He directed his attention to dancing, declaring it to be a great
sin.  Whar there's dancing there's fiddling--whar there's fiddling
there's unrighteousness, and unrighteousness is wickedness, and
wickedness is sin!  That's me--that's Jones."

Bosom the speaker invariably called "buzzim," and devil "debil,"
with a fearfully strong accent on the "il."


1.42.  SPIRITS.

Mr. Davenport (One of the afterwards notorious Davenport Brothers.),
who has been for some time closely identified with the modern
spiritual movement, is in the city with his daughter, who is quite
celebrated as a medium.  They are accompanied by Mr. Eighme and his
daughter, and are holding circles in Hoffman's Block every afternoon
and evening.  We were present at the circle last evening.  Miss
Davenport seated herself at a table on which was a tin trumpet, a
tambourine, and a guitar.  The audience were seated around the room.
The lights were blown out, and the spirit of an eccentric
individual, well known to the Davenports, and whom they call George,
addressed the audience through the trumpet.  He called several of
those present by name in a boisterous voice, and dealt several
stunning knocks on the table.  George has been in the spirit-world
some two hundred years.  He is a rather rough spirit, and probably
run with the machine and "killed for Kyser" when in the flesh.
(Kyser is an extensive New York butcher, and "to kill" [or
slaughter] for him has passed into a saying with the roughs, or
"bhoys," of New York.  To "run with a [fire] machine.")  He ordered
the seats in the room to be wheeled round so the audience would face
the table.  He said the people on the front seat must be tied with a
rope.  The order was misunderstood, the rope being merely drawn
before those on the front seat.  He reprimanded Mr. Davenport for
not understanding the instructions.  What he meant was that the rope
should be passed around each person on the front seat and then
tightly drawn, a man at each end of the seat to hold on to it.  This
was done, and George expressed himself satisfied.  There was no one
near the table save the medium.  All the rest were behind the rope,
and those on the front seat were particularly charged not to let any
one pass by them.  George said he felt first-rate, and commenced
kissing the ladies present.  The smack could be distinctly heard,
and some of the ladies said the sensation was very natural.  For the
first time in our eventful life we sighed to be a spirit. We envied
George.  We did not understand whether the kissing was done through
a trumpet.  After kissing considerably, and indulging in some
playful remarks with a man whose Christian name was Napoleon
Bonaparte, and whom George called "Boney," he tied the hands and
feet of the medium.  He played the guitar and jingled the
tambourine, and then dashed them violently on the floor.  The
candles were lit, and Miss Davenport was securely tied.  She could
not move her hands.  Her feet were bound, and the rope (which was a
long one) was fastened to the chair.  No person in the room had been
near her or had anything to do with tying her.  Every person who was
in the room will take his or her oath of that.  She could hardly
have tied herself.  We never saw such intricate and thorough tying
in our life.  The believers present were convinced that George did
it.  The unbelievers didn't exactly know what to think about it.
The candles were extinguished again, and pretty soon Miss Davenport
told George to "don't."  She spoke in an affrighted tone.  The
candles were lit, and she was discovered sitting on the table--hands
and feet tied as before, and herself tied to the chair withal.  The
lights were again blown out, there were sounds as if some one was
lifting her from the table; the candles were relit, and she was seen
sitting in the chair on the floor again.  No one had been near her
from the audience.  Again the lights were extinguished, and
presently the medium said her feet were wet.  It appeared that the
mischievous spirit of one Biddie, an Irish Miss who died when twelve
years old, had kicked over the water-pail.  Miss Eighme took a seat
at the table, and the same mischievous Biddie scissored off a liberal
lock of her hair.  There was the hair, and it had indisputably just
been taken from Miss Eighme's head, and her hands and feet, like
those of Miss D., were securely tied.  Other things of a staggering
character to the sceptic were done during the evening.


1.43.  MR. BLOWHARD.

The reader has probably met Mr. Blowhard.  He is usually round.  You
find him in all public places.  He is particularly "numerous" at
shows.  Knows all the actors intimately.  Went to school with some
of 'em.  Knows how much they get a month to a cent, and how much
liquor they can hold to a teaspoonful.  He knows Ned Forrest like a
book.  Has taken sundry drinks with Ned.  Ned likes him much.  Is
well acquainted with a certain actress. Could have married her just
as easy as not if he had wanted to.  Didn't like her "style," and so
concluded not to marry her.  Knows Dan Rice well. Knows all of his
men and horses.  Is on terms of affectionate intimacy with Dan's
rhinoceros, and is tolerably well acquainted with the performing
elephant.  We encountered Mr. Blowhard at the circus yesterday.  He
was entertaining those near him with a full account of the whole
institution, men, boys, horses, "muils" and all.  He said the
rhinoceros was perfectly harmless, as his teeth had all been taken
out in infancy.  Besides, the rhinoceros was under the influence of
opium while he was in the ring, which entirely prevented his
injuring anybody.  No danger whatever.  In due course of time the
amiable beast was led into the ring.  When the cord was taken from
his nose, he turned suddenly and manifested a slight desire to run
violently in among some boys who were seated near the musicians.
The keeper, with the assistance of one of the Bedouin Arabs, soon
induced him to change his mind, and got him in the middle of the
ring.  The pleasant quadruped had no sooner arrived here than he
hastily started, with a melodious bellow, towards the seats on one
of which sat Mr. Blowhard.  Each particular hair on Mr. Blowhard's
head stood up "like squills upon the speckled porkupine" (Shakspeare
or Artemus Ward, we forget which), and he fell, with a small shriek,
down through the seats to the ground.  He remained there until the
agitated rhinoceros became calm, when he crawled slowly back to his
seat.

"Keep mum," he said, with a very wise shake of the head "I only
wanted to have some fun with them folks above us.  I swar, I'll bet
the whisky they thought I was scared!"  Great character that
Blowhard.


1.44.  MARKET MORNING.

                "Hurrah! this is market day,
                 Up, lads, and gaily away!"--Old Comedy.

On market mornings there is a roar and a crash all about the corner
of Kinsman and Pittsburg Streets.  The market building--so called,
we presume, because it don't in the least resemble a market
building--is crowded with beef and butchers, and almost countless
meat and vegetable wagons, of all sorts, are confusedly huddled
together all around outside.  These wagons mostly come from a few
miles out of town, and are always on the spot at daybreak.  A little
after sunrise the crash and jam commences, and continues with little
cessation until ten o'clock in the forenoon.  There is a babel of
tongues, an excessively cosmopolitan gathering of people, a roar of
wheels, and a lively smell of beef and vegetables.  The soap man,
the headache curative man, the razor man, and a variety of other
tolerable humbugs, are in full blast.  We meet married men with
baskets in their hands.  Those who have been fortunate in their
selections look happy, while some who have been unlucky wear a
dejected air, for they are probably destined to get pieces of their
wives' minds on their arrival home.  It is true, that all married
men have their own way, but the trouble is they don't all have their
own way of having it!  We meet a newly-married man.  He has recently
set up housekeeping.  He is out to buy steak for breakfast.  There
are only himself and wife and female domestic in the family.  He
shows us his basket, which contains steak enough for at least ten
able-bodied men.  We tell him so, but he says we don't know anything
about war, and passes on.  Here comes a lady of high degree, who has
no end of servants to send to the market, but she likes to come
herself, and it won't prevent her shining and sparkling in her
elegant drawing-room this afternoon.  And she is accumulating muscle
and freshness of face by these walks to market.

And here IS a charming picture.  Standing beside a vegetable cart is
a maiden beautiful and sweeter far than any daisy in the fields.
Eyes of purest blue, lips of cherry red, teeth like pearls, silken,
golden hair, and form of exquisite mould.  We wonder if she is a
fairy, but instantly conclude that she is not, for in measuring out
a peck of onions she spills some of them; a small boy laughs at the
mishap, and she indignantly shies the measure at his head.  Fairies,
you know, don't throw peck measures at small boys' heads.  The spell
was broken.  The golden chain which for a moment bound us fell to
pieces.  We meet an eccentric individual in corduroy pantaloons and
pepper-and-salt coat, who wants to know if we didn't sail out of
Nantucket in 1852 in the whaling brig "Jasper Green."  We are
compelled to confess that the only nautical experience we ever had
was to once temporarily command a canal boat on the dark-rolling
Wabash, while the captain went ashore to cave in the head of a
miscreant who had winked lasciviously at the sylph who superintended
the culinary department on board that gallant craft.  The eccentric
individual smiles in a ghastly manner, says perhaps we won't lend
him a dollar till tomorrow; to which we courteously reply that we
CERTAINLY won't, and he glides away.

We return to our hotel, reinvigorated with the early, healthful
jaunt, and bestow an imaginary purse of gold upon our African
Brother, who brings us a hot and excellent breakfast.


1.45.  WE SEE TWO WITCHES.

Two female fortune-tellers recently came hither, and spread "small
bills" throughout the city.  Being slightly anxious, in common with
a wide circle of relatives and friends, to know where we were going
to, and what was to become of us, we visited both of these eminently
respectable witches yesterday and had our fortune told "twict."
Physicians sometimes disagree, lawyers invariably do, editors
occasionally fall out, and we are pained to say that even witches
unfold different tales to one individual.  In describing our
interviews with these singularly gifted female women, who are
actually and positively here in this city, we must speak
considerably of "we"--not because we flatter ourselves that we are
more interesting than people in general, but because in the present
case it is really necessary. In the language of Hamlet's Pa, "List,
O list!"

We went to see "Madame B." first.  She has rooms at the Burnett
House.  The following is a copy of her bill:--

                           MADAME B.,

         THE CELEBRATED SPANISH ASTROLOGIST, CLAIRVOYANT
                     AND FEMALE DOCTRESS,

 Would respectfully announce to the citizens that she has just
 arrived in this city, and designs remaining for a few days only.

 The Madame can be consulted on all matters pertaining to life--
 either past, present, or future--tracing the line of life from
 Infancy to Old Age, particularizing each event, in regard to

  Business, Love, Marriage, Courtship, Losses, Law Matters, and
      Sickness of Relatives and Friends at a distance.

 The Madame will also show her visitors a life-like representation
              of their Future Husbands and Wives.

                  LUCKY NUMBERS IN LOTTERIES

 Can also be selected by her, and hundreds who have consulted her
 have drawn capital prizes.  The Madame will furnish medicine for
 all diseases, for grown persons (male or female) and children.

 Persons wishing to consult her concerning this mysterious art and
 human destiny, particularly with reference to their own individual
bearing in relation to a supposed Providence, can be accommodated by

                  ROOM NO. 23, BURNETT HOUSE,

          Corner of Prospect and Ontario streets, Cleveland.

The Madame has traveled extensively for the last few years, both in
the United States and the West Indies, and the success which has
attended her in all places has won for her the reputation of being
the most wonderful Astrologist of the present age.

The Madame has a superior faculty for this business, having been
born with a Caul on her Face, by virtue of which she can more
accurately read the past, present, and future; also enabling her to
cure many diseases without using drugs or medicines.  The madame
advertises nothing but what she can do.  Call on her if you would
consult the greatest Foreteller of events now living.

        Hours of Consultation, from 8 A.M. to 9 o'clock P.M.

We urbanely informed the lady with the "Caul on her Face" that we
had called to have our fortune told, and she said, "Hand out your
money."  This preliminary being settled, Madame B. (who is a tall,
sharp-eyed, dark-featured and angular woman, dressed in painfully
positive colors, and heavily loaded with gold chain and mammoth
jewelry of various kinds) and Jupiter indicated powerful that we
were a slim constitution, which came down on to us from our father's
side.  Wherein our constitution was not slim, so it came down on to
us from our mother's side.

"Is this so?"

And we said it was.

"Yes," continued the witch, "I know'd 'twas.  You can't deceive
Jupiter, me, nor any other planick.  You may swim same as Leander
did, but you can't deceive the planicks.  Give me your hand!  Times
ain't so easy as they has been.  So--so--but 'tis temp'ry.  'Twon't
last long.  Times will be easy soon.  You may be tramped on to onct
or twict, but you'll rekiver.  You have talenk, me child.  You kin
make a Congresser if sich you likes to be. [We said we would be
excused, if it was all the same to her.]  You kin be a lawyer.  [We
thanked her, but said we would rather retain our present good moral
character.]  You kin be a soldier.  You have courage enough to go to
the Hostrian wars and kill the French.  [We informed her that we had
already murdered some "English."]  You won't have much money till
you're thirty-three years of old.  Then you will have large sums--
forty thousand dollars, perhaps.  Look out for it!  [We promised we
would.]  You have traveled some, and you will travel more, which
will make your travels more extensiver than they has been.  You will
go to Californy by way of Pike's Pick.  [Same route taken by Horace
Greeley.]  If nothin happens onto you, you won't meet with no
accidents and will get through pleasant, which you otherwise will
not do under all circumstances however, which doth happen to all,
both great and small, likewise to the rich as also the poor.
Hearken to me!  There has been deaths in your family, and there will
be more!  But Reserve your constitution and you will live to be
seventy years of old.  Me child, HER hair will be black--black as
the Raving's wing.  Likewise black will also be her eyes, and she'll
be as different from which you air as night and day.  Look out for
the darkish man!  He's yer rival!  Beware of the darkish man!  [We
promised that we'd introduce a funeral into the "darkish man's"
family the moment we encountered him.]  Me child, there's more
sunshine than clouds for ye, and send all your friends up here.

"A word before you goes.  Expose not yourself.  Your eyes is saller,
which is on accounts of bile on your systim.  Some don't have bile
on to their systims which their eyes is not saller.  This bile
ascends down on to you from many generations which is in their
graves, and peace to their ashes."

                          MADAME CROMPTON.

We then proceeded directly to Madame Crompton, the other fortune-
teller.

Below is her bill:--

                        MADAME R. CROMPTON,

             The World-Renowned Fortune-Teller and
                          Astrologist.

  Madame Crompton begs leave to inform the citizens of Cleveland
         and vicinity that she has taken rooms at the

                     FARMERS' ST CLAIR HOUSE,

              Corner of St Clair and Water Streets,

      Where she may be consulted on all matters pertaining to
                    Past and Future Events.

        Also giving Information of Absent friends, whether
                      Living or Dead.

  P.S.--Persons having lost or having property stolen of any kind,
  will do well to give her a call, as she will describe the person or
  persons with such accuracy as will astonish the most devout critic.

                        Terms Reasonable.

She has rooms at the Farmers' Hotel, as stated in the bill above.
She was driving an extensive business, and we were forced to wait
half an hour or so for a chance to see her.  Madame Crompton is of
the English persuasion, and has evidently searched many long years
in vain for her H.  She is small in stature, but considerably
inclined to corpulency, and her red round face is continually
wreathed in smiles, reminding one of a new tin pan basking in the
noonday sun.  She took a greasy pack of common playing cards, and
requested us to "cut them in three," which we did. She spread them
out before her on the table, and said:--

"Sir to you which I speaks.  You 'av been terrible crossed in love,
and your 'art 'as been much panged.  But you'll get over it and
marry a light complected gale with rayther reddish 'air.  Before
some time you'll have a legercy fall down on to you, mostly in
solick Jold.  There may be a lawsuit about it, and you may be
sup-prisoned as a witnesses, but you'll git it--mostly in solick
Jold, which you will keep in chists, and you must look out for them.
[We said we would keep a skinned optic on "them chists."]  You 'as a
enemy, and he's a lightish man.  He wants to defraud you out of your
'onesty.  He is tellink lies about you now in the 'opes of crushin
yourself.  [A weak invention of "the opposition."]  You never did
nothin bad.  Your 'art is right.  You 'ave a great taste for hosses
and like to stay with 'em.  Mister to you I sez:  Gard aginst the
lightish man and all will be well."

The supernatural being then took an oval-shaped chunk of glass
(which she called a stone) and requested us to "hang on to it."  She
looked into it and said:

"If you're not keerful when you git your money, you'll lose it, but
which otherwise you will not, and fifty cents is as cheap as I kin
afford to tell anybody's fortune, and no great shakes made then."


1.46.  FROM A HOMELY MAN.

Dear Plain Dealer,--I am a plain man, and there is a melancholy
fitness in my unbosoming my sufferings to the "Plain" Dealer.  Plain
as you may be in your dealings, however, I am convinced you never
before had to DEAL with a correspondent so hopelessly plain as I.
Yet plain don't half express my looks.  Indeed I doubt very much
whether any word in the English language could be found to convey an
adequate idea on my absolute and utter homeliness.  The dates in the
old family Bible show that I am in the decline of life, but I cannot
recall a period in my existence when I felt really young.  My very
infancy, those brief months when babes prattle joyously and know
nothing of care, was darkened by a shadowy presentiment of what I
was to endure through life, and my youth was rendered dismal by
continued repetitions of a fact painfully evident "on the face of
it," that the boy was growing homelier and homelier every day.
Memory, that with other people recalls so much that is sweet and
pleasant to think of in connection with their youth, with me brings
up nothing but mortification, bitter tears, I had almost said
curses, on my solitary and homely lot.  I have wished--a thousand
times wished--that Memory had never consented to take a seat "in
this distracted globe."

You have heard of a man so homely that he couldn't sleep nights, his
face ached so.  Mr. Editor, I am that melancholy individual.
Whoever perpetrated the joke--for joke it was no doubt intended to
be--knew not how much truth he was uttering, or how bitterly the
idle squib would rankle in the heart of one suffering man.  Many and
many a night have I in my childhood laid awake thinking of my
homeliness, and as the moonlight has streamed in at the window and
fell upon the handsome and placid features of my little brother
slumbering at my side, Heaven forgive me for the wicked thought, but
I have felt an almost unconquerable impulse to forever disfigure and
mar that sweet upturned innocent face that smiled and looked so
beautiful in sleep, for it was ever reminding me of the curse I was
doomed to carry about me.  Many and many a night have I got up in my
nightdress, and lighting my little lamp, sat for hours gazing at my
terrible ugliness of face reflected in the mirror, drawn to it by a
cruel fascination which it was impossible for me to resist.

I need not tell you that I am a single man, and yet I have had what
men call affairs of the heart.  I have known what it is to worship
the heart's embodiment of female loveliness, and purity, and truth,
but it was generally at a distance entirely safe to the object of my
adoration.  Being of a susceptible nature, I was continually falling
in love, but never, save with one single exception, did I venture to
declare my flame.  I saw my heart's palpitator walking in a grove.
Moved by my consuming love, I rushed towards her, and throwing
myself at her feet began to pour forth the long-pent-up emotions of
my heart.  She gave one look and then

             "Shrieked till all the rocks replied;"

at least you'd thought they replied if you had seen me leave that
grove with a speed greatly accelerated by a shower of rocks from the
hands of an enraged brother, who was at hand.  That prepossessing
young lady is now slowly recovering her reason in an institution for
the insane.

Of my further troubles I may perhaps inform you at some future time.

                                                       Homely Man.


1.47.  THE ELEPHANT.

Some two years since, on the strength of what we regarded as
reliable information, we announced the death of the elephant
Hannibal, at Canton, and accompanied the announcement with a short
sketch of that remarkable animal.  We happened to be familiar with
several interesting incidents in the private life of Hannibal, and
our sketch was copied by almost every paper in America and by
several European journals.  A few months ago a "traveled" friend
showed us the sketch in a Parisian journal, and possibly it is
"going the rounds" of the Chinese papers by this time.  A few days
after we had printed his obituary Hannibal came to town with Van
Amburgh's Menagerie, and the same type which killed the monster
restored him to life again.

About once a year Hannibal

                  "Gets on a spree,
                   And goes bobbin around."

to make a short quotation from a once popular ballad.  These sprees,
in fact, "is what's the matter with him."

The other day, in Williamsburg, Long Island, he broke loose in the
canvas, emptied most of the cages, and tore through the town like a
mammoth pestilence.  An extensive crowd of athletic men, by jabbing
him with spears and pitchforks, and coiling big ropes around his
legs, succeeded in capturing him.  The animals he had set free were
caught and restored to their cages without much difficulty.

We doubt if we shall ever forget our first view of Hannibal--which
was also our first view of any elephant--of THE elephant, in short.
It was at the close of a sultry day in June, 18--.  The sun had
spent its fury and was going to rest among the clouds of gold and
crimson.  A solitary horseman might have been seen slowly ascending
a long hill in a New England town.  That solitary horseman was us,
and we were mounted on the old white mare.  Two bags were strapped
to the foaming steed.  That was before we became wealthy, and of
course we are not ashamed to say that we had been to mill, and
consequently THEM bags contained flour and middlins.  Presently a
large object appeared at the top of the hill.  We had heard of the
devil, and had been pretty often told that he would have a clear
deed and title to us before long, but had never heard him painted
like the object which met our gaze at the top of that hill on the
close of sultry day in June.  Concluding (for we were a mere youth)
that it was an eccentric whale, who had come ashore near North
Yarmouth, and was making a tour through the interior on wheels, we
hastily turned our steed and made for the mill at a rapid rate.
Once we threw over ballast, after the manner of balloonists, and as
the object gained on us we cried aloud for our parents.  Fortunately
we reached the mill in safety, and the object passed at a furious
rate, with a portion of a woodshed on its back.  It was Hannibal,
who had run away from a neighboring town, taking a shed with him.

                      .    .    .    .    .

DRANK STANDIN.--Col. -- is a big "railroad man."  He attended a
railroad supper once.  Champagne flowed freely, and the Colonel got
more than his share.  Speeches were made after the removal of the
cloth.  Somebody arose and eulogized the Colonel in the steepest
possible manner--called him great, good, patriotic, enterprising,
&c., &c.  The speaker was here interrupted by the illustrious
Colonel himself, who arising with considerable difficulty, and
beaming benevolently around the table, gravely said, "Let's (hic)
drink that sedimunt standin!"  It was done.


1.48.  HOW THE NAPOLEON OF SELLERS WAS SOLD.

We have read a great many stories of which Winchell, the great wit
and mimic, was the hero, showing always how neatly and entirely he
sold somebody.  Any one who is familiar with Winchell's wonderful
powers of mimicry cannot doubt that these stories are all
substantially true.  But there is one instance which we will relate,
or perish in the attempt, where the jolly Winchell was himself sold.
The other evening, while he was conversing with several gentlemen at
one of the hotels, a dilapidated individual reeled into the room and
halted in front of the stove, where he made wild and unsuccessful
efforts to maintain a firm position.  He evidently had spent the
evening in marching torchlight processions of forty-rod whisky down
his throat, and at this particular time was decidedly and
disreputably drunk.  With a sly wink to the crowd, as much as to
say, "We'll have some fun with this individual," Winchell assumed a
solemn face, and in a ghostly voice said to one of the company:

"The poor fellow we were speaking of is dead!"

"No?" said the individual addressed.

"Yes," said Winchell; "you know both of his eyes were gouged out,
his nose was chawed off, and both of his arms were torn out at the
roots.  Of course, he could'nt recover."

This was all said for the benefit of the drunken man, who was
standing, or trying to stand, within a few feet of Winchell; but he
took no sort of notice of it, and was apparently ignorant of the
celebrated delineator's presence.  Again Winchell endeavored to
attract his attention, but utterly failed as before.  In a few
moments the drunken man staggered out of the room.

"I can generally have a little fun with a drunken man," said
Winchell, "but it is no go in this case."

"I suppose you know what ails the man who just went out?" said the
"gentlemanly host."

"I perceive he is alarmingly inebriated," said Winchell; "does
anything else ail him?"

"Yes," said the host, "HE'S DEAF AND DUMB!"

This was true.  There was a "larf," and Winchell, with the remark
that he was sorry to see a disposition in that assemblage "to
deceive an orphan," called for a light and went gravely to bed.


1.49.  ON AUTUMN.

Poets are wont to apostrophize the leafy month of June, and there is
no denying that if Spring is "some," June is Summer.  But there is a
gorgeous magnificence about the habiliments of Nature, and a teeming
fruitfulness upon her lap during the autumnal months, and we must
confess we have always felt genially inclined towards this season.
It is true, when we concentrate our field of vision to the minute
garniture of earth, we no longer observe the beautiful petals, nor
inhale the fragrance of a gay parterre of the "floral epistles" and
"angel-like collections" which Longfellow (we believe) so
graphically describes, and which Shortfellows so fantastically carry
about in their buttonholes; but we have all their tints reproduced
upon a higher and broader canvas in the kaleidoscopic colors with
which the sky and the forest daily enchant us, and the beautiful and
luscious fruits which Autumn spreads out before us, and

         "Crowns the rich promise of the opening Spring."

In another point of view Autumn is suggestive of pleasant
reflections.  The wearying, wasting heat of Summer, and the deadly
blasts with which her breath has for some years been freighted, are
past, and the bracing north winds begin to bring balm and healing on
their wings.  The hurly-burly of travel, and most sorts of publicity
(except newspapers), are fast playing out, and we can once more hope
to see our friends and relations in the happy sociality of home and
fireside enjoyments.  Yielding, as we do, the full force to which
Autumn is seriously entitled, or rather to the serious reflections
and admonitions which the decay of Nature and the dying year always
inspire, and admitting the poet's decade--

         "Leaves have their time to fall,
          And stars to set,--but all,
          Thou hast all seasons for thine own, O Death!"

There is a brighter Autumn beyond, and brighter opening years to
those who choose them rather than dead leaves and bitter fruits.
Thus we can conclude tranquilly with Bryant, as we began gaily with
another--

         "So live, that when thy summons comes to join
          The innumerable caravan, which moves
          To that mysterious realm, where each shall take
          His chamber in the silent halls of death,
          Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night,
          Scourged to his dungeon; but, sustained and soothed
          By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave
          Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch
          About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams."


1.50.  PAYING FOR HIS PROVENDER BY PRAYING.

We have no intention of making fun of serious matters in telling the
following story; we merely relate a fact.

There is a rule at Oberlin College that no student shall board at
any house where prayers are not regularly made each day.  A certain
man fitted up a boarding-house and filled it with boarders, but
forgot, until the eleventh hour, the prayer proviso.  Not being a
praying man himself, he looked around for one who was.  At length he
found one--a meek young man from Trumbull County--who agreed to pay
for his board in praying.  For a while all went smoothly, but the
boarding-master furnished his table so poorly that the boarders
began to grumble and to leave, and the other morning the praying
boarder actually "struck!"  Something like the following dialogue
occurred at the table:--

LANDLORD.--Will you pray, Mr. Mild?

MILD.--No, sir, I will not.

LANDLORD.--Why not, Mr. Mild?

MILD.--It don't pay, sir.  I can't pray on such victuals as these.
And unless you bind yourself in writing to set a better table than
you have for the last three weeks, NARY ANOTHER PRAYER YOU GET OUT
OF ME!

And that's the way the matter stood at latest advices.


1.51.  HUNTING TROUBLE.

Hunting trouble is too fashionable in this world.  Contentment and
jollity are not cultivated as they should be.  There are too many
prematurely-wrinkled long and melancholy faces among us.  There is
too much swearing, sweating and slashing, fuming, foaming and
fretting around and about us all.

                 "A mad world, my masters."

People rush outdoors bareheaded and barefooted, as it were, and dash
blindly into all sorts of dark alleys in quest of all sorts of
Trouble, when, "Goodness knows," if they will only sit calmly and
pleasantly by their firesides, Trouble will knock soon enough at
their doors.

Hunting Trouble is bad business.  If we ever are induced to descend
from our present proud position to become a member of the
Legislature, or ever accumulate sufficient muscle, impudence, and
taste for bad liquor to go to Congress, we shall introduce "a
william" for the suppression of Trouble-hunting.  We know Miss
Slinkins, who incessantly frets because Miss Slurkins is better
harnessed than she is, won't like it; and we presume the Simpkinses,
who worry so much because the Perkinses live in a freestone-fronted
house whilst theirs is only plain brick, won't like it also.  It is
doubtful, too, whether our long-haired friends the Reformers (who
think the machinery of the world is all out of joint, while we think
it only needs a little greasing to run in first-rate style), will
approve the measure.  It is probable, indeed, that very many
societies, of a reformatory (and inflammatory) character, would
frown upon the measure.  But the measure would be a good one
nevertheless.

Never hunt Trouble.  However dead a shot one may be, the gun he
carries on such expeditions is sure to kick or go off half-cocked.
Trouble will come soon enough, and when he does come, receive him as
pleasantly as possible. Like the tax-collector, he is a disagreeable
chap to have in one's house, but the more amiably you greet him the
sooner he will go away.


1.52.  DARK DOINGS.

Four promising young men of this city attended a ball in the rural
districts not long since.  At a late hour they retired, leaving word
with the clerk of the hotel to call them early in the morning, as
they wanted to take the first train home.  The clerk was an old
friend of the "fellers," and he thought he would have a slight joke
at their expense.  So he burnt some cork, and, with a sponge,
blacked the faces of his city friends after they had got soundly
asleep.  In the morning he called them about ten minutes before the
train came along.  Feller No. 1 awoke and laughed boisterously at
the sight which met his gaze.  But he saw through it--the clerk had
played his good joke on his three comrades, and of course he would
keep mum.  But it was a devilish good joke.  Feller No. 2 awoke, saw
the three black men in the room, comprehended the joke, and laughed
vociferously.  But he would keep mum.  Fellers No. 3 and 4 awoke,
and experienced the same pleasant feeling; and there was the
beautiful spectacle of four nice young men laughing heartily one at
another, each one supposing the "urban clerk" had spared him in his
cork-daubing operations.  They had only time to dress before the
train arrived.  They all got aboard, each thinking what a glorious
joke it was to have his three companions go back to town with black
faces.  The idea was so rich that they all commenced laughing
violently as soon as they got aboard the cars.  The other passengers
took to laughing also, and fun raged fast and furious, until the
benevolent baggage-man, seeing how matters stood, brought a small
pocket-glass and handed it around to the young men.  They suddenly
stopped laughing, rushed wildly for the baggage-car, washed their
faces, and amused and instructed each other during the remainder of
the trip with some eloquent flashes of silence.


1.53.  REPORTERS.

The following paragraph is going the rounds:--"How many a great man
is now basking in the sunshine of fame generously bestowed upon him
by the prolific genius of some reporter!  How many stupid orations
have been made brilliant, how many wandering, pointless, objectless,
speeches put in form and rendered at least readable, by the unknown
reporter!  How many a disheartened speaker, who was conscious the
night before of a failure, before a thin, cold, spiritless audience,
awakes delighted to learn that he has addressed an overwhelming
assemblage of his enthusiastic, appreciating fellow-citizens, to
find his speech sparkling with 'cheers,' breaking out into 'immense
applause,' and concluding amidst 'the wildest excitement!'"

There is considerable truth in the above, we are sorry to state.
Reporters are too apt to smooth over and give a fair face to the
stupidity and bombast of political and other public humbugs.  For
this they are not only seldom thanked, but frequently are kicked.
Of course this sort of thing is wrong.  A Reporter should be
independent enough to meet the approaches of gentlemen of the
Nincompoop persuasion with a flat rebuff.  He should never gloss
over a political humbug, whether he belongs to "our side" or not.
He is not thanked for doing it, and, furthermore, he loses the
respect and confidence of his readers.  There are many amiable
gentlemen ornamenting the various walks of life, who are under the
impression that for a dozen bad cigars or a few drinks of worse
whisky they can purchase the "opinion" of almost any Reporter.  It
has been our pleasure on several occasions to disabuse those
gentlemen of this impression.

Should another occasion of this kind ever offer, we feel that we
should be "adequate" to treat it in a similar manner.  A Reporter,
we modestly submit, is as good as anybody, and ought to feel that he
is, everywhere and at all times.  For one, let us quietly and
without any show of vanity remark, that we are not only just as good
as anybody else, but a great deal better than many we know of.  We
love God and hate Indians:  pay our debts; support the Constitution
of the United States; go in for Progress, Sunshine, Calico, and
other luxuries; are perfectly satisfied and happy, and wouldn't swop
"sits" with the President, Louis Napoleon, the Emperor of China,
Sultan of Turkey, Brigham Young, or Nicholas Longworth.  Success to
us!


1.54.  HE HAD THE LITTLE VOUCHER IN HIS POCKET.

L-- lived in this city several years ago.  He dealt in horses,
carriages, &c.  Hearing of a good chance to sell buggies up West, he
embarked with a lot for that "great" country.  At Toledo he took a
Michigan Southern train.  Somebody had by way of a joke, warned him
against the conductor of that particular train, telling him that
said conductor had an eccentric way of taking up tickets at the
beginning of the journey, and of denying that he had done so and
demanding fare at the end thereof.  This the confiding L--
swallowed.  He determined not to be swindled in this way, and so
when the conductor came around and asked him for his ticket he
declined giving up.  The conductor insisted.  L-- still refused.

"I've got the little voucher in my pocket," he said, with a knowing
look, slily slapping the pocket which contained the ticket.

The conductor glanced at L--'s stalwart frame.  He had heard L--
spoken of as a fighting man.  He preferred not to grapple with him.
The train was a light one, and it so happened that L-- was the only
man in this, the hind car.  So the conductor had the train stopped,
and quietly unhitched this car.

"Good day, Mr. L," he yelled; "just keep that little voucher in your
pocket, and be d--d to you!"

L-- jumped up and saw the other cars moving rapidly away.  He was
left solitary and alone, in a dismal piece of woods known as the
Black Swamp.  He remained there in the car until night, when the
down-train came along and took him to Toledo.  He had to pay fare,
his up through-ticket not being good on that train.  His buggies had
gone unattended to Chicago.  He was very angry.  He finally got
through, but he will never hear the last of that "little voucher."


1.55.  THE GENTLEMANLY CONDUCTOR.

Few have any idea of the trials and tribulations of the railway
conductor--"the gentlemanly conductor," as one-horse newspapers
delight in styling him.  Unless you are gifted with the patience of
the lamented Job, who, tradition informs us, had "biles" all over
his body, and didn't swear once, never go for a Conductor, me boy!

The other evening we enlivened a railroad car with our brilliant
presence. Starting time was not quite up, and the passengers were
amusing themselves by laughing, swearing, singing, and talking,
according to their particular fancy.  The Conductor came in, and the
following were a few of the questions put to him:--One old fellow,
who was wrapped up in a horse-blanket, and who apparently had about
two pounds of pigtail in his mouth, wanted to know, "What pint of
compass the keers was travelin in?"  An old lady, surrounded by
band-boxes and enveloped in flannels, wanted to know what time
the eight o'clock train left Rock Island for "Dubu-kue?"  A
carroty-haired young man wanted to know if "free omyibuses" ran
from the cars to the taverns in Toledo?  A tall, razor-faced
individual, evidently from the interior of Connecticut, desired to
know if "conductin" paid as well eout West as it did deoun in his
country; and a portly, close-shaven man with round keen eyes, and
in whose face you could read the interest-table, asked the price of
corner lots in Omaha.  These and many other equally absurd questions
the conductor answered calmly and in a resigned manner.  And we
shuddered as we thought how he would have to answer a similar string
of questions in each of the three cars ahead.


1.56.  MORALITY AND GENIUS.

We see it gravely stated in a popular Metropolitan journal that
"true genius goes hand in hand, necessarily, with morality."  The
statement is not a startlingly novel one.  It has been made,
probably, about sixty thousand times before.  But it is untrue and
foolish.  We wish genius and morality were affectionate companions,
but it is a fact that they are often bitter enemies.  They don't
necessarily coalesce any more than oil and water do!  Innumerable
instances may be readily produced in support of this proposition.
Nobody doubts that Sheridan had genius, yet he was a sad dog.  Mr.
Byron, the author of Childe Harold "and other poems," was a man of
genius, we think, yet Mr. Byron was a fearfully fast man.  Edgar A.
Poe wrote magnificent poetry and majestic prose, but he was, in
private life, hardly the man for small and select tea parties.
We fancy Sir Richard Steele was a man of genius, but he got
disreputably drunk, and didn't pay his debts.  Swift had genius--an
immense lot of it--yet Swift was a cold-blooded, pitiless, bad man.
The catalogue might be spun out to any length, but it were useless
to do it.  We don't mean to intimate that men of genius must
necessarily be sots and spendthrifts--we merely speak of the fact
that very many of them have been both, and in some instances much
worse than both.  Still we can't well see (though some think they
can) how the pleasure and instruction people derive from reading the
productions of these great lights is diminished because their morals
were "lavishly loose."  They might have written better had their
private lives been purer, but of this nobody can determine for the
pretty good reason that nobody knows.

So with actors.  We have seen people stay away from the theater
because Mrs. Grundy said the star of the evening invariably retired
to his couch in a state of extreme inebriety.  If the star is
afflicted with a weakness of this kind, we may regret it.  We may
pity or censure the star.  But we must still acknowledge the star's
genius, and applaud it.  Hence we conclude that the chronic weakness
of actors no more affects the question of the propriety of
patronizing theatrical representations, than the profligacy of
journeymen shoemakers affects the question of the propriety of
wearing boots.  All of which is respectfully submitted.


1.57.  ROUGH BEGINNING OF THE HONEYMOON.

On last Friday morning an athletic young farmer in the town of
Waynesburg took a fair girl, "all bathed in blushes," from her
parents, and started for the first town across the Pennsylvania line
to be married, where the ceremony could be performed without a
license.  The happy pair were accompanied by a sister of the girl, a
tall, gaunt, and sharp-featured female of some thirty-seven summers.
The pair crossed the line, were married, and returned to Wellsville
to pass the night.  People at the hotel where the wedding party
stopped observed that they conducted themselves in a rather singular
manner.  The husband would take his sister-in-law, the tall female
aforesaid, into one corner of the parlor and talk earnestly to her
gesticulating wildly the while.  Then the tall female would "put her
foot down" and talk to him in an angry and excited manner.  Then the
husband would take his fair young bride into a corner, but he could
no sooner commence talking to her than the gaunt sister would rush
in between them and angrily join in the conversation.  The people at
the hotel ascertained what all this meant about 9 o'clock that
evening.  There was an uproar in the room which had been assigned to
the newly married couple.  Female shrieks and masculine "swears"
startled the people at the hotel, and they rushed to the spot.  The
gaunt female was pressing and kicking against the door of the room,
and the newly-married man, mostly undressed, was barring her out
with all his might.  Occasionally she would kick the door far enough
open to disclose the stalwart husband, in his Gentleman Greek Slave
apparel.  It appeared that the tall female insisted upon occupying
the same room with the newly-wedded pair; that her sister was
favorably disposed to the arrangement, and that the husband had
agreed to it before the wedding took place, and was now indignantly
repudiating the contract.  "Won't you go away now, Susan, peaceful?"
said the newly-married man, softening his voice.

"No," said she, "I won't--so there!"

"Don't you budge an inch!" cried the married sister within the room.

"Now--now, Maria," said the young man to his wife, in a piteous
tone, "don't go for to cuttin' up in this way; now don't!"

"I'll cut up's much I wanter!" she sharply replied.

"Well," roared the desperate man, throwing the door wide open and
stalking out among the crowd, "well, jest you two wimin put on your
duds and go right straight home and bring back the old man and
woman, and your grandfather, who is nigh on to a hundred; bring 'em
all here, AND I'LL MARRY THE WHOLE D--D CABOODLE OF 'EM AND WE'LL
ALL SLEEP TOGETHER!"

The difficulty was finally adjusted by the tall female taking a room
alone. Wellsville is enjoying itself over the "sensation."


1.58.  A COLORED MAN OF THE NAME OF JEFFRIES.

One beautiful day last August, Mr. Elmer of East Cleveland, sent his
hired colored man, of the name of Jeffries, to town with a two-horse
wagon to get a load of lime.  Mr. Elmer gave Jeffries 5 dollars with
which to pay for the lime.  The horses were excellent ones, by the
way, nicely matched, and more than commonly fast.  The colored man
of the name of Jeffries came to town and drove to the Johnson Street
Station where he encountered a frail young woman of the name of
Jenkins, who had 