just been released from jail, where she had been
confined for naughtical conduct (drugging and robbing a sailor).
"Will you fly with me, adorable Jenkins?" he unto her did say, "or
words to that effect," and unto him in reply she did up and say:
"My African brother, I will.  Spirit," she continued, alluding to a
stone jug under the seat in the wagon, "I follow!"  Then into the
two-horse wagon this fair maiden got and knavely telling the
"perlice," to embark by the first packet for an unromantic land
where the climate is intensely tropical, and where even Laplanders,
who like fire, get more of a good thing than they want--doing and
saying thus the woman of the name of Jenkins mounted the seat with
the colored man of the sweet name of Jeffries; and so these two
sweet, gushing children of nature rode gaily away.  Away towards the
setting sun.  Away towards Indiana--bright land of cheap whisky and
corn doin's!


1.59.  NAMES.

Any name which is suggestive of a joke, however poor the joke may
be, is often a nuisance.  We were once "confined" in a printing-
office with a man named Snow.  Everybody who came in was bound to
have a joke about Snow.  If it was Summer the mad wags would say we
ought to be cold, for we had Snow there all the time--which was a
fact, though we sometimes wished Snow was where he would speedily
melt.  Not that we didn't like Snow.  Far from it.  His name was
what disgusted us.  It was also once our misfortune to daily mingle
with a man named Berry, we can't tell how many million times we
heard him called Elderberry, Raspberry, Blueberry, Huckleberry,
Gooseberry, &c.  The thing nearly made him deranged.  He joined the
filibusters and has made energetic efforts to get shot but had not
succeeded at last accounts, although we hear he has been "slewd"
numerously.  There is a good deal in a name, our usually correct
friend W. Shakespeare to the contrary notwithstanding.

Our own name is, unfortunately, one on which jokes, such as they
are, can be made, we cannot present a tabular statement of the times
we have done things brown (in the opinion of partial friends) or
have been asked if we were related to the eccentric old slave and
horse "liberator," whose recent Virginia Reel has attracted so much
of the public attention.  Could we do so the array of figures would
be appalling.  And sometimes we think we will accept the first good
offer of marriage that is made to us, for the purpose of changing
our unhappy name, setting other interesting considerations entirely
aside.


1.60.  HE FOUND HE WOULD.

Several years ago Bill McCracken lived in Peru, Indiana.  (We were
in Peru several years ago, and it was a nice place we DON'T think.)
Mr. McCracken was a screamer, and had whipped all the recognized
fighting men on the Wabash.  One day somebody told him that Jack
Long, blacksmith of Logansport, said he would give him (McCracken) a
protracted fit of sickness if he would just come down there and
smell of his bones.  The McCracken at once laid in a stock of
provisions, consisting of whisky in glass and chickens in the shell,
and started for Logansport.  In a few days, he was brought home in a
bunged-up condition, on a cot-bed.  One eye was gouged out, a
portion of his nose was chawed off, his left arm was in a sling, his
head was done up in an old rag, and he was pretty badly off himself.
He was set down in the village bar-room, and turning to the crowd
he, in a feeble voice, said, hot tears bedewing his face the while,
"Boys, you know Jack Long said if I'd come down to Loginsput he'd
whale h--ll out of me; and boys, you know I didn't believe it, but
I've been down thar and I FOUND HE WOULD."

He recovered after a lapse of years and led a better life.  As he
said himself, he returned from Logansport a changed man.


1.61.  "BURIAL IN RICHMOND AND RESURRECTION IN BOSTON."

A drama with this title, written by a colored citizen (an artist by
profession), the characters being performed by colored citizens, was
played at the Melodeon last evening.  There were several white
persons present, though most of the audience were colored.  The
great variety of colors made a gay, and indeed we may say gorgeous
spectacle.

A hasty sketch of this great moral production may not be
uninteresting.  Act 1st, scene 1st, discloses a log-cabin, with
fifteen minutes' intermission between each log.  "William, a
spirited slave," and "John, the obedient slave," are in the cabin.
William, the spirited slave, says he will be free, "Why," says
William, "am I here thus?  Was this frame made to be in bondage?
Shall THESE voices be hushed?  Never, never, never!"  "Oh, don't say
it thus," says John, the obedient slave, "for thus it should not be.
An' I tole ye what it was, now, jes take keer of them pistiles or
they'll work yer ruins.  Mind what I say, Wilyim.  As for me I shall
stay here with my dear Julia!"  (Immense applause).  "And so it has
come to this, ha?" said William, the spirited slave, standing
himself up and brandishing his arms in a terrific manner.  "And so
it has come to this, ha?  And this is a free land, so it has come to
this--to this--TO THIS."  William appeared to be somewhat confused
at this point, but a wealthy newsboy in the audience helped him out
by crying, "or any other man."  John and William then embraced,
bitter tears moistening their manly breasts.  "Farwel, Wilyim," said
John, the obedient slave, "and bless you, bless you, me child."  The
spirited slave walks off and the obedient slave falls into a swoon.
Tableau:  The Goddess of Liberty appears in a mackinaw blanket and
pours incense on the obedient slave.  A member of the orchestra gets
up and softly warbles on a bass drum.  Angels are heard singing in
the distance.  Curtain falls, the audience being soaking wet with
tears.

Act 2, scene first, discloses the house of Mr. Lyons, a slaveholder
in Virginia.  Mr. Lyons, as we learn by the play, is "a member of
the Whig Congress."  He learns that William, his spirited slave, has
escaped.  This makes him very angry, and he says he will break every
bone in William's body.  He goes out and searches for William, but
cannot find him, and comes back.  He takes a heavy drink, is
stricken with remorse, and declares his intention to become a nun.
John, the obedient slave, comes in and asks permission to marry
Julia.  Mr. Lyons says, certainly, by all means, and preparations
are made for the wedding.

The wedding takes place.  The scene that follows is rather
incomprehensible.  A young mariner has a clandestine interview with
the obedient slave, and receives 10 dollars to make a large box.  An
elderly mariner, not that mariner, but another mariner--rushes madly
in and fires a horse-pistol into the air.  He wheels and is about
going off, when a black Octoroon rushes madly in and fires another
horse-pistol at the retreating mariner, who falls.  He says he is
going to make a die of it.  Says he should have acted differently if
he had only done otherwise, which was right, or else it wouldn't be
so.  He forgets his part and don't say anything more, but he wraps
himself up in the American flag and expires like a son of a
gentleman.  More warblings on the bass drum.  The rest of the
orchestra endeavor to accompany the drum, but are so deeply affected
that they can't.  There is a death-like stillness in the house.  All
was so still that had a cannon been fired off it could have been
distinctly seen.

The next scene discloses a large square box.  Several colored
persons are seen standing round the square box.  The mariner who was
killed in the last scene commences knocking off the cover of the
box.  He pulls the cover off, and up jumps the obedient slave and
his wife!  The obedient slave and his dear Julia fall out of the
box.  Great applause.  They rush to the footlights and kneel.  Quick
music by the orchestra, in which the bass drum don't warble so much
as she did.  "I'm free!  I'M FREE!  I'M FREE!!" shrieks the obedient
slave, "O I'm free!"  The stage is suddenly lighted up in a gorgeous
manner.  The obedient slave and his dear Julia continue kneeling.
The dead mariner blesses them.  The Goddess of Liberty appears
again--this time in a beaver overcoat--and pours some more incense
on the obedient slave.  An allegorical picture of Virtue appears in
a red vest and military boots, on the left proscenium, John Brown
the barber appears as Lady Macbeth, and says there is a blue tinge
into his nails, and consequently he is an Octoroon.  Another actor
wants to define his position on the Euclid Street improvement, but
is hissed down.  Curtain descends amidst the admiring shouts of the
audience, red fire, music, and the violent assertion of the obedient
slave that he is free.

The play will not be repeated this evening, as was announced.  The
notice will be given of its next performance.  It is the greatest
effort of the kind that we ever witnessed.


1.62.  A MAYORALTY ELECTION.

Messrs. Senter and Coffinberry, two esteemed citizens, are the
candidates.  Here's a faint attempt at a specimen scene.  An
innocent German is discovered about half a mile from the polls of
this or that ward.  A dozen ticket-peddlers scent him ("even as the
war-horse snuffs the battle," etc.), see him, and make a grand rush
for him.  They surround him, each shoves a bunch of tickets under
his nose, and all commence bellowing in his ears.  Here's the ticket
yer want--Coffinberry.  Here's Senterberry and Coffinter.  What the
h--l yer tryin' to fool the man for?  Don't yer spose he knows who
he wants ter vote for, say!  'Ere's the ticket--Sen--Coff--don't
crowd--get off my toes, you d--d fool!  Workin' men's tickets is the
ticket you want!  To h--l wid yez workin' men's ticket, 'ere's the
ticket yez want!  No, by Cot, vote for Shorge B. Senter--he says
he'll py all the peer for dems as votes for him as much more dan dey
can trinks, by tam!  Senter be d--d!  Go for Coffinberry!
Coffinberry was killed eight times in the Mexican war, and is in
favor of justice and Pop'lar Sovrinty!  Oh gos! Senter was at the
battle of Tippe-ca-noo, scalped twelve Injuns and wrote a treatise
in Horse-shoeing!  Don't go for Coffinberry.  He's down on all the
Dutch, and swears he'll have all their heads chopped off and run
into sausages if he's lected.  Do you know what George B. Senter
says about the Germans?  He says by -- they're in the habit of
stealing LIVE American infants and hashing 'em up into head cheese.
By --!  That's a lie!  T'aint--I heard that say so with my own
mouth.  Let the man alone--stop yer pullin--I'll bust yer ear for
yer yet.  My Cot, my Cot, what tam dimes dese 'lections is.  Well
yez crowd a poor Jarman till death, yer d--d spalpanes, yez?  Sen--
Coff--Senterberry and Coffinter--Working Men's--Repub--Dem-whoop-h-
l-whooray-bully-y-e-o-u-c-h!!

The strongest side got the unfortunate German's vote and he went
sore and bleeding home and satisfied, no doubt, that this is a great
country, and that the American Eagle will continue to be a deeply
interesting bird while his wings are in the hands of patriots like
the above.  Scenes like the above (only our description is very
imperfect) were played over and over again, at every ward in the
city, yesterday.  Let us be thankful that the country is safe--but
we should like to see some of the ward politicians gauged to-day,
for we are confident the operation would exhibit an astonishing
depth of whiskey.

Hurrah for the Bar--Stangled Spanner!


1.63.  FISHING EXCURSION.

The Leviathan, Capt. Wm. Sholl, left the foot of Superior Street at
6 o'clock yesterday morning for a fishing excursion down the lake.
There were about twenty persons in the party, and we think we never
saw a more lovely lot of men.  The noble craft swept majestically
out of the Cuyahoga into the lake, and as she sped past a retired
coal-dealer's office the Usher borrowed our pocket-handkerchief
(which in the excess of his emotion he forgot to return to us) to
wipe away four large tears which trickled from his light bay eyes.
On dashed the Leviathan at the rate of about forty-five knots an
hour.  The fishing-ground reached, the clarion voice of Sholl was
heard to ejaculate, "Reef home the jib-boom, shorten the main-brace,
splice the forecastle, and throw the hurricane-deck overboard!
Lively, my lads!"  "Aye, aye, Sir!" said Marsh the chaplain of the
expedition, in tones of thunder, and the gallant party sprang to
execute the Captain's orders, the agile form of first-officer
Hilliard being especially conspicuous in reefing the jib-boom.
Lines were cast and the sport commenced.  It seemed as if all the
fish in the lake knew of our coming, and had collected in that
particular spot for the express purpose of being caught!  What teeth
they had--sufficiently good, certainly, to bite a cartridge or
anything else.  The Usher caught the first fish--a small but
beautiful bass, whose weight was about three inches and a half.  The
Usher was elated at this streak of luck, but his hand did not
tremble and he continued to hand in fish until at noon he had caught
thirteen firkins full and he announced that he should fish no more.
Cruelty was no part of his nature and he did not think it right to
slaughter fish in this way.  Cross, Barney, and the rest, were
immensely successful, and hauled in tremendous quantities of bass,
perch, Mackinaw trout, and Connecticut shad.  Bone didn't catch a
fish, and we shall never forget the sorrowful manner in which the
poor fellow gazed upon our huge pile of beautiful bass which
occupied all of the quarter deck and a large portion of the
forcastle.  Having fished enough the party went ashore, where they
found Ab. McIlrath (who was fanning himself with a barn door), the
grand Commandant (who in a sonorous voice requested the parties, as
they alighted from the small boats, to "Keep their heads out of
water"), the General (who was discussing with the Doctor the
propriety of annexing East Cleveland to the United States), and
several distinguished gentlemen from town, who had come down with
life-preservers and ginger pop.  After disposing of a sumptuous
lunch, the party amused and instructed each other by conversation,
and about 3 o'clock the shrill whistle of the Leviathan was sounded
by Mike the urbane and accomplished engineer, and the party were
soon homeward bound.  It was a good time.










This etext was produced by J.C. Byers at jcbyers@capitalnet.com.
Proofreaders were: J.C. Byers, Laura Shaffer, Lan Wang, Doris
Ringbloom







                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                           VOLUME TWO
                                
                                
                                
                      To John Payne, Esq.
                                
My Dear Sir,

     Allow me thus publicly to express my admiration of your
magnum opus, "The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night;" and
to offer you my cordial thanks for honouring me with the
dedication of that scholar-like and admirable version.

                    Ever yours sincerely,

                         Richard F. Burton.

Queen's College, Oxford,
     August 1, 1885.


                 Contents of the Second Volume


7.   Nur Al-Din Ali and the Damsel Anis Al-Jalis
8.   Tale of Ghanim Bin Ayyub, The Distraught, The Thrall O' Love
     a.   Tale of the First Eunuch, Bukhayt
     b.   Tale of the Second Eunuch, Kafur
9.   Tale of King Omar Bin Al-Nu'uman and His Sons Sharrkan and
     Zau Al-Makan
     a.   Tale of Taj Al-Muluk and the Princess Dunya
          aa.  Tale of Aziz and Azizah



                        The Book Of The
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                                
                                

          Nur Al-Din Ali and the Damsel Anis Al-Jalis
                                
Quoth Shahrazad [FN#1]:--It hath reached me, O auspicious King of
intelligence penetrating, that there was, amongst the Kings of
Bassorah[FN#2], a King who loved the poor and needy and cherished
his lieges, and gave of his wealth to all who believed in
Mohammed (whom Allah bless and assain!), and he was even as one
of the poets described him,

"A King who when hosts of the foe invade, * Receives them with
     lance-lunge and sabre-sway;
Writes his name on bosoms in thin red lines, * And scatters the
     horsemen in wild dismay."[FN#3]

His name was King Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, and he had two
Wazirs, one called Al-Mu'in, son of Sawi and the other Al-Fazl
son of Khakan. Now Al-Fazl was the most generous of the people of
his age, upright of life, so that all hearts united in loving him
and the wise flocked to him for counsel; whilst the subjects used
to pray for his long life, because he was a compendium of the
best qualities, encouraging the good and lief, and preventing
evil and mischief.  But the Wazir Mu'in bin Sawi on the contrary
hated folk [FN#4] and loved not the good and was a mere compound
of ill; even as was said of him,

"Hold to nobles, sons of nobles! 'tis ever Nature's test  * That
     nobles born of nobles shall excel in noble deed:
And shun the mean of soul, meanly bred, for 'tis the law, *  Mean
     deeds come of men who are mean of blood and breed."

And as much as the people loved and fondly loved Al-Fazl bin
Khakan, so they hated and thoroughly hated the mean and miserly
Mu'in bin Sawi. It befel one day by the decree of the Decreer,
that King Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, being seated on his
throne with his officers of state about him, summoned his Wazir
Al-Fazl and said to him, "I wish to have a slave-girl of passing
beauty, perfect in loveliness, exquisite in symmetry and endowed
with all praiseworthy gifts."  Said the courtiers, "Such a girl
is not to be bought for less than ten thousand gold pieces:"
whereupon the Sultan called out to his treasurer and said, "Carry
ten thousand dinars to the house of Al-Fazl bin Khakan." The
treasurer did the King's bidding; and the Minister went away,
after receiving the royal charge to repair to the slave-bazar
every day, and entrust to brokers the matter aforesaid.  Moreover
the King issued orders that girls worth above a thousand gold
pieces should not be bought or sold without being first displayed
to the Wazir.  Accordingly no broker purchased a slave-girl ere
she had been paraded before the minister; but none pleased him,
till one day a dealer came to the house and found him taking
horse and intending for the palace.  So he caught hold of his
stirrup saying,

"O thou, who givest to royal state sweet savour, * Thou'rt a
     Wazir shalt never fail of favour!
Dead Bounty thou hast raised to life for men;  * Ne'er fail of
     Allah's grace such high endeavour!"

Then quoth he, "O my lord, that surpassing object for whom the
gracious mandate was issued is at last found; [FN#5]" and quoth
the Wazir, "Here with her to me!"  So he went away and returned
after a little, bringing a damsel in richest raiment robed, a
maid spear-straight of stature and five feet tall; budding of
bosom with eyes large and black as by Kohl traced, and dewy lips
sweeter than syrup or the sherbet one sips, a virginette smooth
cheeked and shapely faced, whose slender waist with massive hips
was engraced; a form more pleasing than branchlet waving upon the
top-most trees, and a voice softer and gentler than the morning
breeze, even as saith one of those who have described her,

"Strange is the charm which dights her brows like Luna's disk
     that shine; * O sweeter taste than sweetest Robb[FN#6] or
     raisins of the vine.
A throne th'Empyrean keeps for her in high and glorious state, *
     For wit and wisdom, wandlike form and graceful bending line:
She in the Heaven of her face[FN#7] the seven-fold stars
     displays, * That guard her cheeks as satellites against
     the spy's design:
If man should cast a furtive glance or steal far look at her, *
     His heart is burnt by devil-bolts shot by those piercing
     eyne."

When the Wazir saw her she made him marvel with excess of
admiration, so he turned, perfectly pleased, to the broker and
asked, "What is the price of this girl?"; whereto he answered,
"Her market-value stands at ten thousand dinars, but her owner
swears that this sum will not cover the cost of the chickens she
hath eaten, the wine she hath drunken and the dresses of honour
bestowed upon her instructor: for she hath learned calligraphy
and syntax and etymology; the commentaries of the Koran; the
principles of law and religion; the canons of medicine, and the
calendar and the art of playing on musical instruments."[FN#8]
Said the Wazir, "Bring me her master."  So the broker brought him
at once and, behold, he was a Persian of whom there was left only
what the days had left; for he was as a vulture bald and scald
and a wall trembling to its fall.  Time had buffetted him with
sore smart, yet was he not willing this world to depart; even as
said the poet,

"Time hath shattered all my frame, *  Oh! how time hath
     shattered me.
Time with lordly might can tame    * Manly strength and vigour
     free.
Time was in my youth, that none    * Sped their way more fleet    
     and fast:
Time is and my strength is gone,   * Youth is sped, and speed
     is past.[FN#9]"

The Wazir asked him, "Art thou content to sell this slave-girl to
the Sultan for ten thousand dinars?"; and the Persian answered,
"By Allah, if I offer her to the King for naught, it were but my
devoir."[FN#10] So the Minister bade bring the monies and saw
them weighed out to the Persian, who stood up before him and
said, "By the leave of our lord the Wazir, I have somewhat to
say;" and the Wazir replied, "Out with all thou hast!"  "It is my
opinion," continued the slave-dealer, "that thou shouldst not
carry the maid to the King this day; for she is newly off a
journey; the change of air[FN#11] hath affected her and the toils
of trouble have fretted her.  But keep her quiet in thy palace
some ten days, that she may recover her looks and become again as
she was.  Then send her to the Hammam and clothe her in the
richest of clothes and go up with her to the Sultan: this will be
more to thy profit."  The Wazir pondered the Persian's words and
approved of their wisdom; so he carried her to his palace, where
he appointed her private rooms, and allowed her every day
whatever she wanted of meat and drink and so forth.  And on this
wise she abode a while.  Now the Wazir Al-Fazl had a son like the
full moon when sheeniest dight, with face radiant in light,
cheeks ruddy bright, and a mole like a dot of ambergris on a
downy site; as said of him the poet and said full right,

"A moon which blights you[FN#12] if you dare behold; * A branch
     which folds you in its waving fold:
Locks of the Zanj[FN#13] and golden glint of hair; * Sweet gait
     and form a spear to have and hold:
Ah! hard of heart with softest slenderest waist, * That evil to
     this weal why not remould?[FN#14]
Were thy form's softness placed in thy heart, * Ne'er would thy
     lover find thee harsh and cold:
Oh thou accuser! be my love's excuser, * Nor chide if love-pangs
     deal me woes untold!
I bear no blame: 'tis all my hear and eyne; * So leave thy
     blaming, let me yearn and pine."

Now the handsome youth knew not the affair of the damsel; and his
father had enjoined her closely, saying, "Know, O my daughter,
that I have bought thee as a bedfellow for our King, Mohammed bin
Sulayman al-Zayni; and I have a son who is a Satan for girls and
leaves no maid in the neighbourhood without taking her
maidenhead; so be on thy guard against him and beware of letting
him see thy face or hear they voice." "Hearkening and obedience,"
said the girl; and he left her and fared forth.  Some days after
this it happened by decree of Destiny, that the damsel repaired
to the baths in the house, where some of the slave women bathed
her; after which she arrayed herself in sumptuous raiment; and
her beauty and loveliness were thereby redoubled.  Then she went
in to the Wazir's wife and kissed her hand; and the dame said to
her, "Naiman!  May it benefit thee,[FN#15] O Anis al-
Jalis![FN#16]  Are not our baths handsome?"  "O my mistress," she
replied, "I lacked naught there save thy gracious presence." 
Thereupon the lady said to her slave-women, "Come with us to the
Hammam, for it is some days since we went there:" they answered,
"To hear is to obey!" and rose and all accompanied her. Now she
had set two little slave-girls to keep the door of the private
chamber wherein was Anis al-Jalis and had said to them, "Suffer
none go in to the damsel."  Presently, as the beautiful maiden
sat resting in her rooms, suddenly came in the Wazir's son whose
name was Nur al-Din Ali,[FN#17] and asked after his mother and
her women, to which the two little slave-girls replied, "They are
in the Hammam."  But the damsel, Anis al-Jalis, had heard from
within Nur al-Din Ali's voice and had said to herself, "O would
Heaven I saw what like is this youth against whom the Wazir
warned me, saying that he hath not left a virgin in the
neighbourhood without taking her virginity: by Allah, I do long
to have sight of him!"  So she sprang to her feet with the
freshness of the bath on her and, stepping to the door, looked at
Nur al-Din Ali and saw a youth like the moon in its full and the
sight bequeathed her a thousand sighs. The young man also glanced
at her and the look make him heir to a thousand thoughts of care;
and each fell into Love's ready snare.  Then he stepped up to the
two little slave-girls and cried aloud at them; whereupon both
fled before him and stood afar off to see what he would do.  And
behold, he walked to the door of the damsel's chamber and,
opening it, went in and asked her "Art thou she my father bought
for me?" and she answered "Yes." Thereupon the youth, who was
warm with wine, came up to her and embraced her; then he took her
legs and passed them round his waist and she wound her arms about
his neck, and met him with kisses and murmurs of pleasure and
amorous toyings.  Next he sucked her tongue and she sucked his,
and lastly, he loosed the strings of her petticoat-trousers and
abated her maidenhead.  When the two little slave-girls saw their
young master get in unto the damsel, Anis al-Jalis, they cried
out and shrieked; so as soon as the youth had had his wicked will
of her, he rose and fled forth fearing the consequences of his
ill-doing.  When the Wazir's wife heard the slave-girls' cries,
she sprang up and came out of the baths with the perspiration
pouring from her face, saying, "What is this unseemly clamour in
the house[FN#18]?"  Then she came up to the two little slave-
girls and asked them saying, "Fie upon you! what is the matter?";
and both answered, "Verily our lord Nur al-Din came in and beat
us, so we fled; then he went up to Anis al-Jalis and threw his
arms round her and we know not what he did after that; but when
we cried out to thee he ran away."  Upon this the lady went to
Anis al-Jalis and said to her, "What tidings?"  "O my lady," she
answered, "as I was sitting here lo! a handsome young man came in
and said to me:--Art thou she my father bought for me?; and I
answered Yes; for, by Allah, O mistress mine, I believed that his
words were true; and he instantly came in and embraced me."  "Did
he nought else with thee but this?" quoth the lady, and quoth
she, "Indeed he did!  But he did it only three times." "He did
not leave thee without dishonouring thee!" cried the Wazir's wife
and fell to weeping and buffetting her face, she and the girl and
all the handmaidens, fearing lest Nur al-Din's father should kill
him.[FN#19]  Whilst they were thus, in came the Wazir and asked
what was the matter, and his wife said to him, "Swear that whatso
I tell thee thou wilt attend to it."  "I will," answered he.  So
she related to him what his son had done, whereat he was much
concerned and rent his raiment and smote his face till his nose
bled, and plucked out his beard by the handful. "Do not kill
thyself," said his wife, "I will give thee ten thousand dinars,
her price, of my own money."  But he raised his head and cried,
"Out upon thee!  I have no need of her purchase-money: my fear is
lest life as well as money go."  "O my lord, and how is that?" 
"Wottest thou not that yonder standeth our enemy Al Mu'in bin
Sawi who, as soon as he shall hear of this matter, will go up to
the Sultan"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Thirty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir said to his wife, "Wottest thou not that yonder standeth
our enemy Al-Mu'in bin Sawi who, as soon as he hears of this
matter will go up to the Sultan and say to him, 'Thy Wazir who,
thou wilt have it loveth thee, took from thee ten thousand ducats
and bought therewith a slave-girl whose like none ever beheld;
but when he saw her, she pleased him and he said to his son,
'Take her: thou art worthier of her than the Sultan.'  So he took
her and did away with her virginity and she is now in his house.' 
The King will say, 'Thou liest!' to which he will reply, 'With
thy leave I will fall upon him unawares and bring her to thee.' 
The King will give him warranty for this and he will come down
upon the house and will take the girl and present her to the
Sultan, who will question her and she will not be able to deny
the past.  Then mine enemy will say, 'O my lord, thou wottest
that I give thee the best of counsel; but I have not found favour
in thine eyes.'  Thereupon the Sultan will make an example of me,
and I shall be a gazing-stock to all the people and my life will
be lost."  Quoth his wife, "Let none know of this thing which
hath happened privily, and commit thy case to Allah and trust in
Him to save thee from such strait; for He who knoweth the future
shall provide for the future."  With this she brought the Wazir a
cup of wine and his heart was quieted, and he ceased to feel
wrath and fear.  Thus far concerning him; but as regards his son
Nur al-Din Ali, fearing the consequence of his misdeed he abode
his day long in the flower garden and came back only at night to
his mother's apartment where he slept; and, rising before dawn,
returned to the gardens.  He ceased not to do thus for two whole
months without showing his face to his parent, till at last his
mother said to his father, "O my lord, shall we lose our boy as
well as the girl?  If matters continue long in this way he will
flee from us."  "And what to do?" asked he; and she answered, "Do
thou watch this night; and, when he cometh, seize on him and
frighten him: I will rescue him from thee and do thou make peace
with him and give him the damsel to wife, for she loveth him as
he loveth her.  And I will pay thee her price." So the Minister
say up that night and, when his son came, he seized him and
throwing him down knelt on his breast and showed as thou he would
cut his throat; but his mother ran to the youth's succour and
asked her husband, "What wouldest thou do with him?"  He answered
her, "I will split his weasand."  Said the son to the father, "Is
my death, then, so light a matter to thee?"; and his father's
eyes welled with tears, for natural affection moved him, and he
rejoined, "O my son, how light was to thee the loss of my good
and my life!"  Quoth Nur al-Din, "Hear, O my father, what the
poet hath said,

'Forgive me! thee-ward sinned I, but the wise * Ne'er to the
     sinner shall deny his grace:
Thy foe may pardon sue when lieth he * In lowest, and thou
     holdest highest place!'"

Thereupon the Wazir rose from off his son's breast saying, "I
forgive thee!"; for his heart yearned to him; and the youth
kissed the hand of his sire who said, "O my son, were I sure that
thou wouldest deal justly by Anis al-Jalis, I would give her to
thee."  "O my father, what justice am I to do to her?"  "I enjoin
thee, O my son, not to take another wife or concubine to share
with her, nor sell her."  "O my father! I swear to thee that
verily I will not do her injustice in either way."  Having sworn
to that effect Nur al-Din went in to the damsel and abode with
her a whole year, whilst Allah Almighty caused the King to forget
the matter of the maiden; and Al-Mu'in, though the affair came to
his ears, dared not divulge it by reason of the high favour in
which his rival stood with the Sultan.  At the end of the year
Al-Fazl went one day to the public baths; and, as he came out
whilst he was still sweating, the air struck him[FN#20] and he
caught a cold which turned to a fever; then he took to his bed. 
His malady gained ground and restlessness was longsome upon him
and weakness bound him like a chain; so he called out, "Hither
with my son;" and when Nur al-Din Ali came he said to him, "O my
son, know that man's lot and means are distributed and decreed;
and the end of days by all must be dree'd; and that every soul
drain the cup of death is nature's need."  The he repeated these
lines,

"I die my death, but He alone is great who dieth not! * And well
     I wot, soon shall I die, for death was made my lot:
A King there's not that dies and holds his kingdom in his hand, *
     For Sovranty the Kingdom is of Him who dieth not."

Then he continued, "O my son, I have no charge to leave thee save
that thou fear Allah and look to the issues of thine acts and
bear in mind my injunctions anent Anis al-Jalis."  "O my father!"
said Nur al-Din, "who is like unto thee?  Indeed thou art famed
for well doing and preachers offer prayers for thee in their
pulpits!"  Quoth Al-Fazl, "O my son, I hope that Allah Almighty
may grant me acceptance!"  Then he pronounced the Two
Testimonies,[FN#21] or Professions of the Faith, and was recorded
among the blessed.  The palace was filled with crying and
lamentation and the news of his death reached the King, and the
city-people wept, even those at their prayers and women at
household cares and the school-children shed tears for Bin-
Khakan.  Then his son Nur al-Din Ali arose and made ready his
funeral, and the Emirs and Wazirs and high Officers of State and
city-notables were present, amongst them the Wazir al-Mu'in bin
Sawi.  And as the bier went forth from the house some one in the
crowd of mourners began to chant these lines,

"On the fifth day I quitted al my friends for evermore, * And
     they laid me out and washed me on a slab without my
     door:[FN#22]
They stripped me of the clothes I was ever wont to wear, * And
     they clothed me in the clothes which till then I never wore.
On four men's necks they bore me and carried me from home * To
     chapel; and some prayed for him on neck they bore:
They prayed for me a prayer that no prostration knows;[FN#23] *
     They prayed for me who praised me and were my friends of
     yore;
And they laid me in a house with a ceiling vaulted o'er, * And
     Time shall be no more ere it ope to me its door."

When they had shovelled in the dust over him and the crowd had
dispersed, Nur al-Din returned home and he lamented with sobs and
tears; and the tongue of the case repeated these couplets,

"On the fifth day at even-tide they went away from me: * 
     farewelled them as faring they made farewell my lot:
But my spirit as they went, with them went and so I cried, * 'Ah
     return ye!' but replied she, 'Alas! return is not
To a framework lere and lorn that lacketh blood and life, * A
     frame whereof remaineth naught but bones that rattle and
     rot:
Mine eyes are blind and cannot see quencht by the flowing tear! *
     Mine ears are dull and lost to sense: they have no power to
     hear!'"

He abode a long time sorrowing for his father till, one day, as
he was sitting at home, there came a knocking at the door; so he
rose in haste and opening let in a man, one of his father's
intimates and who had been the Wazir's boon-companion.  The
visitor kissed Nur al-Din's hand and said to him, "O my lord, he
who hath left the like of thee is not dead; and this way went
also the Chief of the Ancients and the Moderns. [FN#24] O my lord
Ali, be comforted and leave sorrowing."  Thereupon Nur al-Din
rose and going to the guest-saloon transported thither all he
needed. Then he assembled his companions and took his handmaid
again; and, collecting round him ten of the sons of the
merchants, began to eat meat and drink wine, giving entertainment
after entertainment and lavishing his presents and his favours. 
One day his Steward came to him and said, "O my lord Nur al-Din,
hast thou not heard the saying, Whoso spendeth and reckoneth not,
to poverty wendeth and recketh not?"  And he repeated what the
poet wrote,

"I look to my money and keep it with care, * For right well I wot
     'tis my buckler and brand:
Did I lavish my dirhams on hostilest foes,[FN#25] * I should
     truck my good luck by mine ill luck trepanned:
So I'll eat it and drink it and joy in my wealth; * And no
     spending my pennies on others I'll stand:
I will keep my purse close 'gainst whoever he be; * And a niggard
     in grain a true friend ne'er I fand:
Far better deny him than come to say:--Lend, * And five-fold the
     loan shall return to thy hand!
And he turns face aside and he sidles away, * While I stand like
     a dog disappointed, unmanned,
Oh, the sorry lot his who hath yellow-boys none, * Though his
     genius and virtues shine bright as the sun!

O my master," continued the Steward, "this lavish outlay and
these magnificent gifts waste away wealth."  When Nur al-Din Ali
heard these words he looked at his servant and cried, "Of all
thou hast spoken I will not heed one single word, for I have
heard the saying of the poet who saith,

'An my palm be full of wealth and my wealth I ne'er bestow, * A
     palsy take my hand and my foot ne'er rise again!
Show my niggard who by niggardise e'er rose to high degree, * Or
     the generous gifts generally hath slain.'"

And he pursued, "Know, O Steward, it is my desire that so long as
thou hast money enough for my breakfast, thou trouble me not with
taking thought about my supper."  Thereupon the Steward asked,
"Must it be so?"; and he answered, "It must."  So the honest man
went his way and Nur al-Din Ali devoted himself to extravagance;
and, if any of his cup-companions chanced to say, "This is a
pretty thing;" he would reply, "'Tis a gift to thee!"; or if
another said, "O my lord, such a house is handsome;" he would
answer, "Take it: it is thine!"  After this reckless fashion he
continued to live for a whole year, giving his friends a banquet
in the morning and a banquet in the evening and a banquet at
midnight, till one day, as the company was sitting together, the
damsel Anis al-Jalis repeated these lines,

"Thou deemedst well of Time when days went well, * And feardest
     not what ills might deal thee Fate:
Thy nights so fair and restful cozened thee, *  For peaceful
     nights bring woes of heavy weight."

When she had ended her verse behold, somebody knocked at the
door. So Nur al-Din rose to open it and one of his boon-
companions followed him without being perceived.  At the door he
found his Steward and asked him, "What is the matter?"; and he
answered, "O my lord, what I dreaded for thee hath come to pass!" 
"How so?"  "Know that there remains not a dirham's worth, less or
more in my hands.  Here are my Daftars and account books showing
both income and outlay and the registers of thine original
property."  When Nur al-Din heard these words he bowed his head
and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah!"  When the man who had followed him privily to spy on him
heard the Steward's words, he returned to his friends and warned
them saying, "Look ye well to what ye do: Nur al-Din is
penniless;" and, as the young host came back to his guests,
vexation showed itself in his face.  Thereupon one of the
intimates rose; and, looking at the entertainer, said to him, "O
my lord, may be thou wilt give me leave to retire?"  "And why so
early retirement this day?"; asked he and the other answered him,
"My wife is in childbirth and I may not be absent from her:
indeed I must return and see how she does."  So he gave him
leave, whereupon another rose and said, "O my lord Nur al-Din, I
wish now to go to my brother's for he circumciseth his son to-
day."[FN#26]  In short each and every asked permission to retire
on some pretence or other, till all the ten were gone leaving Nur
al-Din alone.  Then he called his slave-girl and said to her, "O
Anis al-Jalis, hast thou seen what case is mine?"  And he related
to her what the Steward had told him.  Then quoth she, "O my
lord, for many nights I had it in my mind to speak with thee of
this matter, but I heard thee repeating,

'When the World heaps favours on thee, pass on * Thy favours to
     friends ere her hand she stay:
Largesse never let her when fain she comes, * Nor niggardise kept
     her from turning away!'

When I heard these verses I held my peace and cared not to
exchange a word with thee."  "O Anis al-Jalis," said Nur al-Din,
"thou knowest that I have not wasted my wealth save on my
friends, especially these ten who have now left me a pauper, and
I think they will not abandon and desert me without relief."  "By
Allah," replied she, "they will not profit thee with aught of
aid."  Said he, "I will rise at once and go to them and knock at
their doors; it may be I shall get from them somewhat wherewith I
may trade and leave pastime and pleasuring."  So he rose without
stay or delay, and repaired to a street wherein all his ten
friends lived.  He went up to the nearest door and knocked;
whereupon a handmaid came out and asked him, "Who art thou?"; and
he answered, "Tell thy master that Nur al-Din Ali standeth at the
door and saith to him, 'Thy slave kisseth thy hand and awaiteth
thy bounty.'"  The girl went in and told her master, who cried at
her, "Go back and say, 'My master is not at home.'"  So she
returned to Nur al-Din, and said to him, "O my lord, my master is
out."  Thereupon he turned away and said to himself, "If this one
be a whoreson knave and deny himself, another may not prove
himself such knave and whoreson."  Then he went up to the next
door and sent in a like message to the house-master, who denied
himself as the first had done, whereupon he began repeating,

"He is gone who when to his gate thou go'st, * Fed thy famisht
     maw with his boiled and roast."

When he had ended his verse he said, "By Allah, there is no help
but that I make trial of them all: perchance there be one amongst
them who will stand me in the stead of all the rest."  So he went
the round of the ten, but not one of them would open his door to
him or show himself or even break a bit of bread before him;
whereupon he recited,

"Like a tree is he who in wealth doth wone, * And while fruits he
     the folk to his fruit shall run:
But when bared the tree of what fruit it bare, * They leave it to
     suffer from dust and sun.
Perdition to all of this age!  I find * Ten rogues for every
     righteous one."

Then he returned to his slave-girl and his grief had grown more
grievous and she said to him, "O my lord, did I not tell thee,
none would profit thee with aught of aid?"  And he replied, "By
Allah, not one of them would show me his face or know me!"  "O my
lord," quoth she, "sell some of the moveables and household
stuff, such as pots and pans, little by little; and expend the
proceeds until Allah Almighty shall provide."  So he sold all of
that was in the house till nothing remained when he turned to
Anis al-Jalis and asked her "What shall we do now?"; and she
answered, "O my lord, it is my advice that thou rise forthwith
and take me down to the bazar and sell me.  Thou knowest that
they father bought me for ten thousand dinars: haply Allah may
open thee a way to get the same price, and if it be His will to
bring us once more together, we shall meet again."  "O Anis al-
Jalis," cried he, "by Allah it is no light matter for me to be
parted from thee for a single hour!"  "By Allah, O my lord," she
replied, "nor is it easy to me either, but Need hath its own law,
as the poet said,

'Need drives a man into devious roads, * And pathways doubtful of
     trend and scope:
No man to a rope[FN#27] will entrust his weight, * Save for cause
     that calleth for case of rope.'"

Thereupon he rose to his feet and took her,[FN#28] whilst the
tears rolled down his cheek like rain; and he recited with the
tongue of the case these lines,

"Stay! grant one parting look before we part, * Nerving my heart
     this severance to sustain:
But, an this parting deal thee pain and bane, * Leave me to die
     of love and spare thee pain!"

Then he went down with her to the bazar and delivered her to the
broker and said to him, "O Hajj Hasan,[FN#29] I pray thee note
the value of her thou hast to cry for sale."  "O my lord Nur al-
Din," quoth the broker, "the fundamentals are remembered;"[FN#30]
adding, "Is not this the Anis al-Jalis whom thy father bought of
me for ten thousand dinars?" "Yes," said Nur al-Din.  Thereupon
the broker went round to the merchants, but found that all had
not yet assembled.  So he waited till the rest had arrived and
the market was crowded with slave-girls of all nations, Turks,
Franks and Circassians; Abyssinians, Nubians and Takruris;[FN#31]
Tartars, Georgians and others; when he came forward and standing
cried aloud, "O merchants! O men of money! every round thing is
not a walnut and every long thing a banana is not; all reds are
not meat nor all whites fat, nor is every brown thing a
date![FN#32]  O merchants, I have here this union-pearl that hath
no price: at what sum shall I cry her?" "Cry her at four thousand
five hundred dinars," quoth one of the traders. The broker opened
the door of sale at the sum named and, as he was yet calling, lo!
the Wazir Al-Mu'in bin Sawi passed through the bazar and, seeing
Nur al-Din Ali waiting at one side, said to himself, "Why is
Khakan's son[FN#33] standing about here?  Hath this gallows-bird
aught remaining wherewith to buy slave-girls?"  Then he looked
round and, seeing the broker calling out in the market with all
the merchants around him, said to himself, "I am sure that he is
penniless and hath brought hither the damsel Anis al-Jalis for
sale;" adding, "O how cooling and grateful is this to my heart!" 
Then he called the crier, who came up and kissed the ground
before him; and he said to him, "I want this slave-girl whom thou
art calling for sale."  The broker dared not cross him, so he
answered, "O my lord, Bismillah! in Allah's name so be it;" and
led forward the damsel and showed her to him.  She pleased him
much whereat he asked, "O Hasan, what is bidden for this girl?"
and he answered, "Four thousand five hundred dinars to open the
door of sale." Quoth Al-Mu'in, "Four thousand five hundred is MY
bid."  When the merchants heard this, they held back and dared
not bid another dirham, wotting what they did of the Wazir's
tyranny, violence and treachery. So Al-Mu'in looked at the broker
and said to him, "Why stand still? Go and offer four thousand
dinars for me and the five hundred shall be for thyself." 
Thereupon the broker went to Nur al-Din and said, "O my lord, thy
slave is going for nothing!"  "And how so?" asked he. The broker
answered, "We had opened the biddings for her at four thousand
five hundred dinars; when that tyrant, Al-Mu'in bin Sawi, passed
through the bazar and, as he saw the damsel she pleased him, so
he cried to me, 'Call me the buyer at four thousand dinars and
thou shalt have five hundred for thyself.'  I doubt not but that
he knoweth that the damsel if thine, and if he would pay thee
down her price at once it were well; but I know his injustice and
violence; he will give thee a written order upon some of his
agents and will send after thee to say to them, 'Pay him
nothing.'  So as often as though shalt go in quest of the coin
they will say, 'We'll pay thee presently!' and they will put thee
off day after day, and thou art proud of spirit; till at last,
when they are wearied with thine importunity, they will say,
'Show us the cheque.' Then, as soon as they have got hold of it
they will tear it up and so thou wilt lose the girl's price."
When Nur al-Din heard this he looked at the broker and asked him,
"How shall this matter be managed?"; and he answered, "I will
give thee a counsel which, if thou follow, it shall bring thee
complete satisfaction." "And what is that?" quoth Nur al-Din.
Quoth the broker, "Come thou to me anon when I am standing in the
middle of the market and, taking the girl from my hand, give her
a sound cuffing and say to her, 'Thou baggage, I have kept my vow
and brought thee down to the slave-market, because I swore an
oath that I would carry thee from home to the bazar, and make
brokers cry thee for sale.'  If thou do this, perhaps the device
will impose upon the Wazir and the people, and they will believe
that thou broughtest her not to the bazar, but for the quittance
of thine oath." He replied, "Such were the best way." Then the
broker left him and, returning into the midst of the market, took
the damsel by the hand, and signed to the Wazir and said, "O my
lord, here is her owner." With this up came Nur al-Din Ali and,
snatching the girl from the broker's hand, cuffed her soundly and
said to her, "Shame on thee, O thou baggage!  I have brought thee
to the bazar for quittance of mine oath; now get thee home and
thwart me no more as is thy wont.  Woe to thee! do I need thy
price, that I should sell thee? The furniture of my house would
fetch thy value many times over!" When Al-Mu'in saw this he said
to Nur al-Din, "Out on thee!  Hast thou anything left for selling
or buying?"  And he would have laid violent hands upon him, but
the merchants interposed (for they all loved Nur al-Din), and the
young man said to them, "Here am I in your hands and ye all know
his tyranny."  "By Allah," cried the Wazir, "but for you I had
slain him!"  Then all signed with significant eyes to Nur al-Din
as much as to say, "Take thy wreak of him; not one of us will
come between thee and him."  Thereupon Nur al-Din, who was stout
of heart as he was stalwart of limb, went up to the Wazir and,
dragging him over the pommel of his saddle, threw him to the
ground.  Now there was in that place a puddling- pit for brick-
clay,[FN#34] into the midst of which he fell, and Nur al-Din kept
pummelling and fisti-cuffing him, and one of the blows fell full
on his teeth, and his beard was dyed with his blood.  Also there
were with the minister ten armed slaves who, seeing their master
entreated after this fashion, laid hand on sword-hilt and would
have bared blades and fallen on Nur al-Din to cut him down; but
the merchants and bystanders said to them, "This is a Wazir and
that is the son of a Wazir; haply they will make friends some
time or other, in which case you will forfeit the favour of both. 
Or perchance a blow may befal your lord, and you will all die the
vilest of deaths; so it were better for you not to interfere."
Accordingly they held aloof and, when Nur al-Din had made an end
of thrashing the Wazir, he took his handmaid and fared homewards.
Al-Mu'in also went his ways at once, with his raiment dyed of
three colours, black with mud, red with blood and ash coloured
with brick-clay. When he saw himself in this state, he bound a
bit of matting[FN#35] round his neck and, taking in hand two
bundles of coarse Halfah-grass,[FN#36] went up to the palace and
standing under the Sultan's windows cried aloud, "O King of the
age, I am a wronged man!  I am foully wronged!"  So they brought
him before the King who looked at him; and behold, it was the
chief Minister; whereupon he said, "O Wazir who did this deed by
thee?"  Al-Mu'in wept and sobbed and repeated these lines,

"Shall the World oppress me when thou art in't? * In the lion's
     presence shall wolves devour?
Shall the dry all drink of thy tanks and I * Under rain-cloud
     thirst for the cooling shower?"

"O my lord," cried he, "the like will befal every one who 