is breast against hers, but when he
felt waist touch waist, his strength failed him; and she, waxing
ware of this, lifted him with her hands swiftlier than the
blinding leven-flash, and threw him to the ground.  He fell on
his back,[FN#174] and then she said to him, "Rise: I give thee
thy life a second time.  I spared thee in the first count because
of thy Prophet, for that he made unlawful the slaying of women;
and I do so on the second count because of thy weakliness and the
greenness of thine years and thy strangerhood; but I charge thee,
if there be in the Moslem army sent by Omar bin al-Nu'uman to
succour the King of Constantinople, a stronger than thou, send
him hither and tell him of me: for in wrestling there are shifts
and trips, catches and holds, such as the feint or falsing and
the snap or first grip, the hug, the feet-catch, the thigh
Lite,[FN#175] the jostle and the leg-lock." "By Allah, O my
lady," quoth Sharrkan (and indeed he was highly incensed against
her), "had I been Master al-Safdi, Master Mohammed Kimal or Ibn
al-Saddi,[FN#176] as they were in their prime, I had kept no note
of these shifts thou mentionest; for O my mistress, by Allah,
thou hast not grassed me by thy strength, but by the
blandishments of thy back parts; for we men of Mesopotamia so
love a full formed thigh that nor sense was left me nor
foresight.  But now, an thou wish, thou shalt try a third fall
with me while my wits are about me, and this last match is
allowed me by the laws of the game which sayeth the best of
three: moreover I have regained my presence of mind." When she
heard his words she said to him, "Hast thou not had a belly full
of this wrestling, O vanquished one?  However come on, an thou
wilt; but know that this must be the last round." Then she bent
forward and challenged him and Sharrkan did likewise, setting to
it in real earnest and being right cautious about the throw: so
the two strove awhile and the damsel found in him a strength such
as she had not observed before and said to him, "O Moslem, thou
art now on thy mettle." "Yes," he replied, "thou knowest that
there remaineth to me but this one round, after which each of us
will wend a different way." She laughed and he laughed
too;[FN#177] then she overreached at his thigh and caught firm
hold of it unawares, which made him greet the ground and fall
full on his back.  She laughed at him and said, "Art thou an
eater of bran?  Thou are like a Badawi's bonnet which falleth off
with every touch or else the Father of Winds[FN#178] that
droppeth before a puff of air.  Fie upon thee, O thou poor
thing!" adding, "Get thee back to the Moslem army and send us
other than thyself, for thou fairest of thews; and proclaim for
us, among the Arabs and Persians, the Turks and
Daylamites,[FN#179] whoso hath might in him, let him come to us."
Then she made a spring and landed on the other side of the stream
and said to Sharrkan, laughing, "Parting with thee is right
grievous to me, O my lord; but get thee to thy mates before dawn,
lest the Knights come upon thee and pick thee up on their lance
points.  Thou hast no strength to defend thee against a woman, so
how couldst thou hold thine own amongst men of might and
Knights?" Sharrkan was confounded and called to her (as she
turned from him making towards the convent), "O my lady, wilt
thou go away and leave the miserable stranger, the broken hearted
slave of love?" So she turned to him laughing and said, "What is
thy want?  I will grant thee thy prayer." "Have I set foot in thy
country and tasted the sweetness of thy courtesy," replied he,
"and shall I return without eating of thy victual and tasting thy
hospitality; I who have become one of thy servitors!" "None baulk
kindliness save the base," she rejoined, "honour us in Allah's
name, on my head and eyes be it!  Mount thy steed and ride along
the brink of the stream over against me, for now thou art my
guest." At this Sharrkan was glad and, hastening back to his
horse, mounted and walked him abreast of her, and she kept faring
on till they came to a drawbridge[FN#180] built of beams of the
white poplar, hung by pullies and steel chains and made fast with
hooks and padlocks.  When Sharrkan looked, he saw awaiting her
upon the bridge the same ten handmaids whom she had thrown in the
wrestling bouts; and, as she came up to them, she said to one in
the Greek tongue, "Arise and take the reins of his horse and
conduct him across into the convent." So she went up to Sharrkan
and led him over, much puzzled and perturbed with what he saw,
and saying to himself, "O would that the Wazir Dandan were here
with me that his eyes might look upon these fairest of favours."
Then he turned to the young lady and said to her, "O marvel of
loveliness, now I have two claims upon thee; first the claim of
good fellowship, and secondly for that thou hast carried me to
thy home and offered me thy hospitality.  I am now under thy
commandance and thy guidance; so do me one last favour by
accompanying me to the lands of Al-Islam; where thou shalt look
upon many a lion hearted warrior and thou shalt learn who I am."
When she heard this she was angered and said to him, "By the
truth of the Messiah, thou hast proved thyself with me a man of
keen wit; but now I see what mischief there is in thy heart, and
how thou canst permit thyself a speech which proveth thy
traitorous intent.  How should I do as thou sayest, when I wot
that if I came to that King of yours, Omar bin al- Nu'uman, I
should never get free from him?  For truly he hath not the like
of me or behind his city walls or within his palace halls, Lord
of Baghdad and of Khorasan though he be, who hath built for
himself twelve pavilions, in number as the months of the year,
and in each a concubine after the number of the days; and if I
come to him he would not prove shy of me, for your folk believe I
am lawful to have and to hold as is said in your writ, 'Or those
women whom your right hand shall possess as slaves.'[FN#181] So
how canst thou speak thus to me?  As for thy saying, 'Thou shalt
look upon the braves of the Moslems,' by the truth of the
Messiah, thou sayest that which is not true, for I saw your army
when it reached our land, these two days ago; and I did not see
that your ordinance was the ordinance of Kings, but I beheld only
a rabble of tribesmen gathered together.  And as to thy words,
'Thou shalt know who I am,' I did not do thee kindness because of
thy dignity but out of pride in myself; and the like of thee
should not talk thus to the like of me, even wert thou Sharrkan,
Omar bin al- Nu'uman's son, the prowess name in these days!"
"Knowest thou Sharrkan?" asked he; and she answered Yes! and I
know of his coming with an army numbering ten thousand horsemen;
also that he was sent by his sire with this force to gain
prevalence for the King of Constantinople." "O my lady," said
Sharrkan, "I adjure thee by thy religion, tell me the cause of
all this, that sooth may appear to me clear of untruth, and with
whom the fault lies." "Now by the virtue of thy faith," she
replied, "did I not fear lest the news of me be bruited abroad
that I am of the daughters of Roum, I would adventure myself and
sally forth single handed against the ten thousand horsemen and
slay their leader, the Wazir Dandan and vanquish their champion
Sharrkan.[FN#182] Nor would aught of shame accrue to me thereby,
for I have read books and studied the rules of good breeding in
the language of the Arabs.  But I have no need to vaunt my own
prowess to thee, more by token as thou hast proved in thy proper
person my skill and strength in wrestling; and thou hast learnt
my superiority over other women.  Nor, indeed, had Sharrkan
himself been here this night and it were said to him, 'Clear this
stream,' could he have done it; and I only long and lust that the
Messiah would throw him into my hands in this very convent, that
I might go forth to him in the habit of a man and drag him from
his saddle seat and make him my captive and lay him in bilboes."-
-And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

              When it was the Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Nazarene damsel said to Sharrkan (and he listening impatiently
enow), "Verily if Sharrkan fell into my hands, I would go forth
to him in the habit of a man and drag him from his saddle seat
and make him my captive and lay him in bilboes," pride and
passion and knightly jealousy took possession of him and he
desired to discover and declare himself and to lay on load; but
her loveliness restrained him and he began repeating,

"An faulty of one fault the Beauty prove, * Her charms a thousand
     advocates shall move."

So she went up and Sharrkan after her; and, when he saw the
maiden's back and hinder cheeks that clashed against each other,
like rollers in the rolling sea, he extemporised these couplets:-
-

"For her sins is a pleader that brow, * And all hearts its fair
     pleading must bow:
When I saw it I cried, "To night * The moon at its fullest doth
     show;
Tho' Balkis' own Ifrit[FN#183] try a bout, * Spite his force she
     would deal him a throw."

The two fared on till they reached a gate over which rose a
marble archway.  This she opened and ushered Sharrkan into a long
vestibule, vaulted with ten connected arches, from each of which
hung a crystal lamp glistening like a spark of fire.  The
handmaids met her at the further end bearing wax candles of
goodly perfume, and wearing on their heads golden fillets crusted
with all manner bezel gems,[FN#184] and went on before her
(Sharrkan still following), till they reached the inner convent. 
There the Moslem saw couches and sofas ranged all around, one
opposite the other and all over hung with curtains flowered in
gold.  The monastery floor was paved with every kind of vari
coloured marbles and mosaic work, and in the midst stood a basin
that held four and twenty jetting fountains of gold, whence the
water ran like molten silver; whilst at the upper end stood a
throne spread with silks fit only for Kings.  Then said the
damsel, "Ascend, O my lord, this throne." So he went up to it and
sat down and she withdrew to remain absent for some time. 
Sharrkan asked of her from one of the servants who answered him,
"She hath gone to her dormitory; but we will serve thee even as
she ordered." So they set before him viands of rare varieties,
and he ate his sufficiency, when they brought him a basin of gold
and an ewer of silver, and he washed his hands.  Then his
thoughts reverted to his army, knowing not what had befallen it
in his absence and calling to mind also how he had forgotten his
father's injunctions: so he was troubled about his case,
repenting of what he had done till the dawn broke and the day
appeared; when he lamented and sighed and became drowned in sea
of sadness and repeated,

"I am not lost to prudence, but indeed * Here I'm bewildered,
     what shall be my rede?
Would any aid me in mine ails of love, * By my own might and
     sleight would I be free'd:
But ah! my heart is lost and passion-shent: * To none save Allah
     can I trust my need!"

When he ended his verse behold, there came up to him a rare show
and a fair, more than twenty maidens like crescents encompassing
the young lady, who shone in their midst as the full moon among
the constellations guarding and girding her.  She was clad in
brocades befitting Kings; her breasts were like twin
pomegranates, a woven zone set with all kinds of jewels tightly
clasped her waist which expanded below into jutting hips; and her
hinder cheeks stood out as a mound of crystal[FN#185] supporting
a silvern shaft.  When Sharrkan looked at her his wits went nigh
to fly away from him with delight; and he forgot army and Wazir
as he gazed on her fair head decked and dight with a net work of
pearls set off by divers sorts of gems.  Handmaids on her right
and handmaids on her left bore her train, as she paced with
dainty graceful gait in all the pride of seemlihead.  He sprang
to his feet seeing such beauty and loveliness, and cried aloud,
"Beware and beware of that zone rarely fair!" and broke out into
these couplets,

"With heavy back parts, high breasts delicate, * And lissome form
     that sways with swimming gait
She deftly hides love longing in her breast; * But I may never
     hide its ban and bate
While hosts of followers her steps precede,[FN#186] * Like pearls
     now necklaced and now separate."

She gazed upon him for a long time and considered him till she
was assured of him, when she came up to him and said, "In very
sooth the place is honoured and illumined by thee, O Sharrkan! 
How sped thy night, O hero, after we went away and left thee?";
adding, "Verily lying is a vile thing and a shameful, especially
in great Kings! and thou art Crown Prince Sharrkan, son and heir
of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; so henceforth make no secret of thy
rank and condition, nor let me hear aught from thee but the
truth; for leasing bequeatheth hate and despite.  And as thou art
pierced by the shaft of Fate, be resignation thine and abide
content to wait." When he heard her words he saw that artifice
availed him naught and he acknowledged the truth, saying, "I am
Sharrkan, bin Omar bin al-Nu'uman, whom fortune hath afflicted
and cast into this place; so whatso thou willest, do it in my
case!" She hung her head groundwards a long while, then turned to
him and said, "Be of good cheer and let thine eyes be cool and
clear;[FN#187] for thou art the guest of my hospitality, and
bread and salt hath made a tie between me and thee; wherefore
thou art in my ward and under my safeguard.  Have no fear for, by
the truth of the Messiah, if all on earth sought to do thee hurt
they should not come at thee, till life had left my body for thy
sake: indeed thou art now under the charge of the Messiah and of
me." Hereat she sat her down by his side and fell to playing with
him, till his alarm subsided and he knew that had she desired to
slay him, she would have done so during the past night. 
Presently she bespoke in the Grecian tongue one of her slave
girls, who went away and soon came back bringing a beaker and a
tray of food; but Sharrkan abstained from eating and said to
himself, "Haply she hath put somewhat in this meat." She knew
what was in his thought; so she turned to him and said, "By the
truth of the Messiah, the case is not on such wise, nor is there
aught in this meat of what thou suspectest!  Had my mind been set
on slaying thee, I had slain thee ere now." Then she walked up to
the tray and ate of every dish a mouthful; where upon Sharrkan
came forward and ate too.  She was pleased at this and both ate
till they were satisfied.  They washed their hands and after that
she rose and ordered a handmaid to bring perfumes and herbs of
sweet savour, wines of all colours and kinds and a wine-service
with vessels of gold, silver and crystal.  She filled a first
goblet and drank it off before offering it to him, even as she
had done with the food: then she crowned a second and handed it
to him.  He drank and she said to him, "O Moslem, see how thou
art here in all solace and delight of life!" And she ceased not
to drink and ply him with drink, till he took leave of his wits,-
-And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day, and ceased saying her
permitted say.

               When it was the Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
ceased not to drink and ply Sharrkan with drink till he took
leave of his wits, for the wine and the intoxication of love he
bore her.  Presently she said to the slave girl, "O
Marjanah[FN#188]!  bring us some instruments of music!" "To hear
is to obey," said the hand maid and going out, returned in the
twinkling of an eye with a Damascus lute,[FN#189] a Persian harp,
a Tartar pipe, and an Egyptian dulcimer.  The young lady took the
lute and, after tuning each several string, began in gentle
undersong to sing, softer than zephyr's wing and sweeter than
Tasmin[FN#190] spring, with heart safe and secure from everything
the couplets following,

"Allah assain those eyne!  What streams of blood they shed! * How
     many an arrowy glance those lids of thine have sped.
I love all lovers who to lovers show them cure; * 'Twere wrong to
     rue the love in wrong head born and bred:
Haply fall hapless eye for thee no sleeping kens! * Heaven help
     the hapless heart by force of thee misled!
Thou doomest me to death who art my king, and I * Ransom with
     life the deemster who would doom me dead."

Thereupon each and every of the maidens rose up and taking an
instrument, played and recited couplets in the Roumi tongue; then
their mistress sang also and seeing Sharrkan in ecstasies asked
him, "O Moslem, dost thou understand what I say?"; and he
answered, "Nay, my ecstasy cometh from the beauty of thy finger
sips." She laughed and continued, "If I sing to thee in Arabic
what wouldst thou do?" "I should no longer," quoth he, "be master
of my senses." Then she took an instrument and, changing the
measure, began singing these verses,

"The smack of parting's myrrh to me, * How, then, bear patience'
     aloe?
I'm girt by ills in trinity          * Severance, distance,
     cruelty!
My freedom stole that fairest she,   * And parting irks me
     bitterly."

When she ended her verse, she looked at Sharrkan and found him
lost to existence, and he lay for a while stretched at full
length and prone among the maidens.[FN#191] Then he revived and,
remembering the songs, again inclined to mirth and merriment; and
the twain returned to their wine and wassail, and continued their
playing and toying, their pastime and pleasure till day ceased
illuminating and night drooped her wing.  Then the damsel went
off to her dormitory and when Sharrkan asked after her they
answered, "She is gone to her sleeping chamber," whereto he
rejoined, "Under Allah's ward and His good guard!" As soon as it
was morning, a handmaid came to him and said to him, "My mistress
biddeth thee to her." So he rose and followed her and, as he drew
near her lodging, the damsels welcomed him with smitten tabrets
and songs of greeting, and led him through a great door of ivory
studded with pearls and jewels.  Thence they passed with him into
a tall and spacious hall, at the upper end of which was a wide
dais carpeted with all kinds of silks, and round it open lattices
commanding a view of trees and streams.  About the saloon were
figures carved in human form, and fashioned on such wise that the
air passed through them and set in motion musical instruments
within, so that the beholder would fancy they spoke.[FN#192] Here
sat the young lady, looking at the figures; but when she saw
Sharrkan, she sprang to her feet and, taking him by the hand,
made him sit down by her side, and asked him how he had passed
the night.  He blessed her and the two sat talking awhile till
she asked him, "Knowest thou aught touching lovers and slaves of
love?"; and he answered "Yes!  I wot somewhat in verse on that
matter." "Let me hear it," quoth she, so he began quoting,

"Pleasure and health, good cheer, good appetite * To Azzah,
     freest with our name and fame!
By Allah!  would I near her off she flies * At tangent, granting
     less the more I claim:
I dote on Azzah, but when clear I off * My rivals, clears me too
     that dearest dame;
Like wandering wight that chose for shade a cloud * Which, ere
     siesta done, thin air became."

When she heard this she said, "Verily Al-Kuthayyir[FN#193] was
conspicuous for sweet speech and chaste, and he was superlative
in his praise of Azzah when he sang" (and she began to recite),

"Did Azzah deal behest to Sun o' noon, * The judge had judged her
     beauty's bestest boon;
And girls who come to me and carp at her, * God make their rosy
     cheeks her sandal-shoon!

And indeed," quoth she, "'twas said that Azzah boasted exceeding
beauty and loveliness." Then she asked Sharrkan saying, "O
Prince, cost thou know aught of Jamil's[FN#194] verses to
Buthaynah?  if so repeat to us somewhat of them;" and he
answered, "Yes, I know them better than any;" whereupon he began
repeating these couplets,

"Jamil, in Holy war go fight!" to me they say: * What war save
     fight for fair ones would I e'er essay?
To me their every word and work are mere delight, * And martyrs
     crepe I all they slay in fight and fray:
An ask I, 'O Buthaynah!  what's this love, I pray, * Which eats
     my heart?' quoth she ' 'Twill stay for ever and aye!'
And when I cry, 'Of wits return some small display * For daily
     use,' quoth she, 'Far, far 'tis fled away!
Thou seekst my death; naught else thy will can satisfy * While I
     no goal espy save thee and thee alway.'"

"Thou hast spoken right well," said she, "O King's son, and Jamil
also spoke excellently well.  But what would Buthaynah have done
with him that he saith in his hemistich,

'Thou seekst my death; naught else thy will can satisfy?'"

"O my lady," quoth Sharrkan, "she willed to do him what thou
willest to do with me, and even that will not satisfy thee." She
laughed at his opportune reply and they ceased not carousing till
Day put out her light and Night came in darkness dight.  Then she
rose and went to her dormitory and slept, while Sharrkan slept in
his place till morning dawned.  As soon as he awoke, the hand
maids came to him with tabrets and other instruments of mirth and
merriment, as wont; and, kissing the ground between his hands,
said to him, "Bismillah!  in Allah's name be so kind as to
come[FN#195]: our mistress biddeth thee to her presence!" So he
rose and accompanied the slave girls who surrounded him, playing
on tabrets and other instruments of music, till they passed from
that saloon into another and a yet more spacious hall, decorated
with pictured likenesses and figures of birds and beasts, passing
all description.  Sharrkan marvelled at the art and artifice of
the place and began reciting,

"He plucks fruits of her necklace in rivalry, * And her breast-
    pearls that bedded in gold mine lie.
Pure water on silvern bars is her brow, * And her cheeks show
     roses with rubies vie:
Meseems in her eyne that the violet's hue * Lies purpling set in
     the Ithmid's[FN#196] dye."

When the lady saw Sharrkan, she stood up to him in honour and,
taking his hand, seated him by her side and asked, "O son of King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman, hast thou any cunning in the game of chess?"
"Yes," he answered, "but do not thou with me as said the poet,

'I speak and longing love upties me and unties me; * Till with
     her honey dew of inner lip she plies me:
I brought the chess board and my liefest lover plays me * With
     white and black,[FN#197] but black cum white ne'er satisfies
     me:
'Twas as if King for Castle I were fain to place me * Till wilful
     loss of game atwixt two queens surprise me:
And if I seek to read intent in eyes that eye me * Oh man!  that
     glance askance with hint of wish defies me.'"

Then she brought the chessboard and played with him; but
Sharrkan, instead of looking at her moves, kept gazing at her
fair mouth, and putting knight in place of elephant and
elephant[FN#198] instead of knight.  She laughed and said to him,
"If thy play be after this fashion, thou knowest naught of the
game." "This is only our first," replied he, "judge not by this
bout." When she beat him he replaced the pieces in position and
played again with her; but she beat him a second time, a third, a
fourth and a fifth.  So she turned to him and said, "Thou art
beaten in everything;" and he replied, "O my lady, how should one
playing with the like of thee avoid being beaten?" Then she bade
bring food, and they ate and washed their hands; after which the
wine was set before them and they drank.  Presently, she took the
dulcimer, for her hand was cunning in smiting it, and she began
repeating to an accompaniment these couplets,

"Twixt the close tied and open wide no medium Fortune knoweth, *
     Now ebb and flow then flow and ebb this wise her likeness
     showeth.
Then drink her wine the syne she's thine and smiling thou dost
     find her * Anon she'll fall and fare away when all thy good
     forth goeth."

They ceased not to carouse till nightfall and this day was
pleasanter even than the first.  When darkness set in, the lady
betook her to her dormitory, leaving him alone with the hand
maids; so he threw himself on the ground and slept till dawn,
when the damsels came to him with tambourines and other
instruments according to custom.  Seeing them he roused him
hastily and sat up; and they carried him to their mistress, who
came to meet him and, taking him by the hand, seated him by her
side.  Then she asked him how he had passed his night, whereat he
prayed that her life be prolonged; and she took the lute and sang
to it these verses which she improvised,

"Ne'er incline thee to part * Which embitters the heart
E'en the sun when he sets   * Shall in pallor depart."

While they were solacing themselves after this fashion, behold,
there arose a great and sudden clamour, and a confused crowd of
knights and men rushed in, holding drawn swords that glittered
and gleamed in their hands, and cried aloud in the Grecian tongue
"Thou hast fallen into our hands, O Sharrkan, so make thee sure
of death!" When he heard this, he said to himself, "By Allah, she
hath entrapped me and held me in play, till her men should come. 
These are the Knights with whom she threatened me; but 'tis I who
have thrown myself into this strait." Then he turned towards the
young lady to reproach her, but saw that she had changed colour
and her face was pale; and she sprang to her feet and asked the
crowd, "Who are ye?" "O most gracious Princess and peerless onion
pearl," answered the leading Knight, "dost thou weet who is yon
man by thy side?" "Not I," she replied, "who may he be?" Quoth
the Patrician, "This is of towns the highwayman!  This is he who
rideth in the horseman's van!  This is Sharrkan, son of King Omar
bin al-Nu'uman!  This is he that forceth fortalice and
penetrateth every impregnable place!  The news of him reached
King Hardub, thy father, by report of the ancient dame Zat al-
Dawahi; and thy sire, our sovereign, hath made sure that thou
hast rendered good service to the army of the Greeks by taking
captive this ominous lion." When she heard this, she looked at
the Knight and asked him, "What be thy name?" and he answered, "I
am Masurah, son of thy slave Mausurah bin Kashardah, Knight of
Knights." "And how?" quoth she, "durst thou enter my presence
without leave?" Quoth he, "O my lady, when I came to the gate,
none forbade me, neither chamberlain nor porter, but all the door
keepers rose and forewent us as of wont; although, when others
come, they leave them standing at the gate while they ask
permission to admit them.  But this is not a time for long
talking, when the King is expecting our return with this Prince,
the scorpion sting[FN#199] of the Islamitic host, that he may
kill him and drive back his men whither they came, without the
bane of battling with them." "These words be ill words," rejoined
the Princess, "and Dame Zat al-Dawahi lied, avouching an idle
thing and a vain, whereof she weeteth not the truth; for by the
virtue of the Messiah, this man who is with me is not Sharrkan,
nor is he a captive, but a stranger who came to us seeking our
hospitality, and I made him my guest.  So even were we assured
that this be Sharrkan and were it proved to us that it is he
beyond a doubt, I say it would ill befit mine honour that I
should deliver into your hands one who hath entered under my
protection.  So make me not a traitor to my guest and a disgrace
among men; but return to the King, my father, and kiss the ground
before him, and inform him that the case is contrariwise to the
report of the Lady Zat al-Dawahi." "O Abrizah," replied Masurah,
the Knight, "I cannot return to the King's majesty without his
debtor and enemy." Quoth she (and indeed she had waxed very
wroth).  "Out on thee!  Return to him with my answer, and no
blame shall befal thee!" Quoth Masurah, "I will not return
without him." Thereupon her colour changed and she exclaimed,
"Exceed not in talk and vain words; for verily this man had not
come in to us, were he not assured that he could of himself and
single handed make head against an hundred riders; and if I said
to him, 'Thou art Sharrkan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,' he
would answer, 'Yes.' But 'tis not of your competence to let or
hinder him; for if you do so, he will not turn back from you till
he hath slain all that are in this place.  Behold, here he is by
my side, and I will bring him before you sword and targe in
hand." "Albeit I were safe from thy wrath," answered Masurah the
Knight, "I am not safe from that of thy father, and when I see
him, I shall sign to the Knights to take him captive, and we will
carry him to the King bound and in abject sort." When she heard
this, she said, "The matter shall not pass thus, for 'twould be
blazoning mere folly.  This man is but one and ye are an hundred
Knights: so if you would attack him come out against him, one
after one, that it may appear to the King which is the valiant
amongst you."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

                When it was the Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princess
Abrizah said to the Knight, "This man is but one, and ye are an
hundred: so if ye would attack him, come out against him, one
after one, that it may appear to the King which is the valiant."
Quoth Masurah, the Knight, "By the truth of the Messiah, thou
sayest sooth, and none but I shall sally out against him first."
Quoth she, "Wait till I go to him and acquaint him with the case
and hear what answer he will make.  If he consent, 'tis well; but
if he refuse, ye shall on no wise come to him, for I and my hand
maids and whosoever is in the convent will be his ransom." So she
went to Sharrkan and told him the news, whereat he smiled and
knew that she had not informed any of the Emirs; but that tidings
of him had been bruited and blazed abroad, till the report
reached the King, against her wish and intent.  So he again began
reproaching himself and said, "How came I to adventure and play
with my life by coming to the country of the Greeks?" But hearing
the young lady's proposal he said to her, "Indeed their onset,
one after one, would be overburdensome to them.  Will they not
come out against me, ten by ten?" "That would be villainy," said
she; "Let one have at one." When he heard this, he sprang to his
feet and made for them with his sword and battle gear; and
Masurah, the Knight, also sprang up and bore down upon him. 
Sharrkan met him like a lion and delivered a shoulder cut[FN#200]
which clove him to the middle, and the blade came out gleaming
and glittering from his back and bowels.  When the lady beheld
that swashingblow, Sharrkan's might was magnified in her sight
and she knew that when she overthrew him in the wrestle it was
not by her strength but by her beauty and loveliness.  So she
turned to the Knights and said, "Take wreak for your chief!"
Thereupon out came the slain man's brother, a fierce and furious
Knight, and rushed upon Sharrkan, who delayed not, but smote him
also with the shoulder cut and the sword came out glittering from
his vitals.  Then cried the Princess, "O ye servants of the
Messiah, avenge your comrade!" So they ceased not charging down
upon him, one after one; and Sharrkan also ceased not playing
upon them with the blade, till he had slain fifty Knights, the
lady looking on the while.  And Allah cast a panic into the
hearts of the survivors, so that they held back and dared not
meet him in the duello, but fell upon him in a body; and he laid
on load with heart firmer than a rock, and smote them and trod
them down like straw under the threshing sled,[FN#201] till he
had driven sense and soul out of them.  Then the Princess called
aloud to her damsels, saying, "Who is left in the convent?"; and
they replied, "None but the gate keepers;" whereupon she went up
to Sharrkan and took him to her bosom, he doing the same, and
they returned to the palace, after he had made an end of the
melee.  Now there remained a few of the Knights hiding from him
in the cells of the monastery, and when the Princess saw this she
rose from Sharrkan's side and left him for a while, but presently
came back clad in closely meshed coat of ring mail and holding in
her hand a fine Indian scymitar.  And she said, "Now by the truth
of the Messiah, I will not be a niggard of myself for my guest;
nor will I abandon him though for this I abide a reproach and a
by word in the land of the Greeks." Then she took reckoning of
the dead and found that he had slain fourscore of the Knights,
and other twenty had taken to flight.[FN#202] When she saw what
work he had made with them she said to him, "Allah bless thee, O
Sharrkan!  The Cavaliers may well glory in the like of thee."
Then he rose and wiping his blade clean of the blood of the slain
began reciting these couplets,

"How oft in the mellay I've cleft the array, * And given their
     bravest to lions a prey:
Ask of me and of them when I proved me prow * O'er creation, on
     days of the foray and fray:
When I left in the onslaught their lions to lie * On the sands of
     the low lands[FN#203] in fieriest day."

When he ended his verse, the Princess came up to him with smiles
and kissed his hand; then she doffed her hauberk and he said to
her, "O lady mine, wherefore didst thou don that coat of mail and
bare thy brand?" "To guard thee against these caitiffs,"[FN#204]
she replied.  Then she summoned the gate keepers and asked them,
"How came ye to admit the King's Knights into my dwelling without
leave of me?"; and they answered, "O Princess, it is not our
custom to ask leave of thee for the King's messengers, and
especially for the chief of his Knights." Quoth she, "I think ye
were minded only to disgrace me and murder my guest;" and bade
Sharrkan smite their necks.  He did so and she cried to the rest
of her servants, "Of a truth, they deserved even more than that!"
Then turning to Sharrkan, she said to him, "Now that there hath
become manifest to thee what was concealed, thou shalt be made
acquainted with my history.  Know, then, that I am the daughter
of King Hardub of Roum; my name is Abrizah and the ancient dame,
yclept Zat al-Dawahi, is my grandmother by the sword side.  She
it certainly is who told my father of thee, and as surely she
will compass a sleight to slay me, more by token as thou hast
slain my father's chivalry and it is noised abroad that I have
separated myself from the Nazarenes and have become no better
than I should be with the Moslems.  Wherefore it were wiser that
I leave this dwelling while Zat al-Dawahi is on my track; but I
require of thee the like kindness and courtesy I have shown thee,
for enmity will presently befal between me and my father on thine
account.  So do not thou neglect to do aught that I shall say to
thee, remembering all this betided me not save by reason of
thee." Hearing her words, Sharrkan joyed greatly; his breast
broadened and his wits flew from him for delight, and he said,
"By Allah, none shall come at thee, while life is in my bosom! 
But hast thou patience to bear parting from thy parents and thy
people?" "Even so," she answered; and Sharrkan swore to her and
the two plighted their troth.  Then said she, "Now is my heart at
ease; but there remaineth one other condition for thee." "What is
it?" asked he and she answered, "It is that thou return with thy
host to thine own country." Quoth he, "O lady mine, my father,
King Omar bin al- Nu'uman, sent me to wage war upon thy sire, on
account of the treasure he plundered from the King of
Constantinople, and amongst the rest three great jewels, noted
givers of good fortune." Quoth she, "Cheer thy heart and clear
thine eyes: I will tell thee the whole of the tale and the cause
of our feud with the King of Constantinople.  Know that we have a
yearly festival, highs the Convent Feast, whereat Kings from all
quarters and the noblest women are wont to congregate; thither
also come merchants and traders with their wives and families,
and the visitors abide there seven days.  I was wont to be one of
them; but, when there befel enmity between us, my father forbade
me to be present at the festival for the space of seven years. 
One year, it chanced that amongst the daughters of the great who
resorted to the patron, as was their custom, came a daughter of
the King of Constantinople, a beautiful girl called Sophia.  They
tarried at the monastery six days and on the seventh the folk
went their ways;[FN#205] but Sophia said, 'I will not return to
Constantinople save by water.' So they equipped for her a ship in
which she embarked with her suite; and making sail they put out
to sea; but as they were voyaging behold, a contrary wind caught
them and drove the vessel from her course till, as Fate and
Fortune would have it, she fell in with a Nazarene craft from the
Camphor Island[FN#206] carrying a crew of five hundred armed
Franks, who had been cruising about a long time.  When they
sighted the sails of the ship, wherein Sophia and her women were,
they gave chase in all haste and in less than an hour they came
up with her, then they laid the grappling irons aboard her and
captured her.  Then taking her in tow they made all sail for
their own island and were but a little distant from it when the
wind veered round and, splitting their sails, drove them on to a
shoal which lies off our coast.  Thereupon we sallied forth and,
looking on them as spoil driven to us by Fate,[FN#207] boarded
and took them; and, slaying the men, made prize of the wreck,
wherein we found the treasures and rarities in question and forty
maidens, amongst whom was the King's daughter, Sophia.  After the
capture we carried the Princess and her women to my father, not
knowing her to be a daughter of King Afridun of Constantinople;
and he chose out for himself ten including her; and divided the
rest among his dependents.  Presently he set apart five damsels,
amongst whom was the King s daughter, and sent them to thy
father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, together with other gifts, such
as broadcloth[FN#208] and woollen stuffs and Grecian silks.  Thy
father accepted them and chose out from amongst the five girls
Sophia, daughter of King Afridun; nor did we hear more of her
till the beginning of this year, when her father wrote to my
father in words unfitting for me to repeat, rebuking him with
menaces and saying to him: Two years ago, you plundered a ship of
ours which had been seized by a band of Frankish pirates in which
was my daughter, Sophia, attended by her maidens numbering some
threescore.  Yet ye informed me not thereof by messenger or
otherwise; nor could I make the matter public, lest reproach
befal me amongst the Kings, by reason of my daughter's honour. 
So I concealed my case till this year, when I wrote to certain
Frankish corsairs and sought news of my daughter from the Kings
of the Isles.  They replied, 'By Allah we carried her not forth
of thy realm; but we have heard that King Hardub rescued her from
certain pirates.  And they told me the whole tale.' Then he added
in the writing which he writ to my father: 'Except you wish to be
at feud with me and design to disgrace me and dishonour my
daughter, you will, the instant my letter reacheth you, send my
daughter back to me.  But if you slight my letter and disobey my
commandment, I will assuredly make you full return for your foul
dealing and the baseness of your practices.'[FN#209] When my
father read this letter and understood the contents,[FN#210] it
vexed him and he regretted not having known that Sophia, King
Afridun's daughter, was among the captured damsels, that he might
have sent her back to her sire; and he was perplexed about the
case because, after so long a time, he could not send to King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman and demand her back from him, especially as
he had lately heard that Heaven had granted him boon of babe by
this Sophia.  So when we pondered that truth, we knew that this
letter was none other than a grievous calamity; and my father
found nothing for it but to write an answer to King Afridun,
making his excuses and swearing to him by strong oaths that he
knew not his daughter to be among the bevy of damsels in the ship
and setting forth how he had sent her to King Omar bin al
Nu'uman, who had gotten the blessing of issue by her.  When my
father's reply reached King Afridun he rose up and sat
down,[FN#211] and roared and foamed at the mouth crying:--'What!
shall he take captive my daughter and even her with slave girls
and pass her on from hand to hand sending her for a gift to
Kings, and they lie with her without marriage contract?  By the
Messiah and the true Faith,' said he, 'I will not desist till I
have taken my blood vengeance for this and have wiped out my
shame; and indeed I will do a deed which the chroniclers shall
chronicle after me!' So he bided his time till he devised a
device and laid notable toils and snares, when he sent an embassy
to thy father, King Omar, to tell him that which thou hast heard:
accordingly thy father equipped thee and an army with thee and
sent thee to King Afridun, whose object is to seize thee and
thine army to boot.  As for the three jewels whereof he told thy
father when asking his aid, there was not one soothfast word in
that matter, for they were with Sophia, his daughter; and my
father took them from her, when he got possession of her and of
her maidens, and gave them to me in free gift, and they are now
with me.  So go thou to thy host and turn them back ere they be
led deep into, and shut in by, the land of the bevy of damsels in
the ship and setting forth the Franks and the country of the
Greeks; for as soon as you have come far enough into their
interior, they will stop the roads upon you and there will be no
escape for you till the Day of retribution and retaliation.  I
know that thy troops are still halting where thou leftest them,
because thou didst order a three days' rest; withal they have
missed thee all this time and they wot not what to do." When
Sharrkan heard her words, he was absent awhile in thought; then
he kissed Princess Abrizah's hand and said, "Praise be to Allah
who hath bestowed thee on me and appointed thee to be the cause
of my salvation and the salvation of whoso is with me!  But 'tis
grievous to me to part from thee and I know not what will become
of thee after my departure." "Go now to thine army," she replied,
"and turn them back, while ye are yet near your own country.  If
the envoys be still with them, lay hands on them and keep them,
that the case may be made manifest to you; and, after three days,
I will be with you all and we will enter Baghdad together." As he
turned to depart she said, "Forget not the compact which is
between me and thee," then she rose to bid[FN#212] him farewell
and embrace him and quench the fire of desire, so she took leave
of him and, throwing her arms round his neck, wept with exceeding
weeping, and repeated these verses,

"I bade adieu, my right hand wiped my tears away, * The while my
     left hand held her in a close embrace:
'Fearest thou naught,' quoth she, 'of shame?'  I answered 'Nay, *
     The lover's parting day is lover's worst disgrace.'"

Then Sharrkan left her and walked down from the convent.  They
brought his steed, so he mounted and rode down stream to the
drawbridge which he crossed and presently threaded the woodland
paths and passed into the open meadow.  As soon as he was clear
of the trees he was aware of horsemen which made him stand on the
alert, and he bared his brand and rode cautiously, but as they
drew near and exchanged curious looks he recognized them and
behold, it was the Wazir Dandan and two of his Emirs.  When they
saw him and knew him, they dismounted and saluting him, asked the
reason of his absence; whereupon he told them all that had passed
between him and Princess Abrizah from first to last.  The Wazir
returned thanks to Almighty Allah for his safety and
said,[FN#213] "Let us at once leave these lands; for the envoys
who came with us are gone to inform the King of our approach, and
haply he will hasten to fall on us and take us prisoners." So
Sharrkan cried to his men to saddle and mount, which they did
and, setting out at once, they stinted not faring till they
reached the sole of the valley wherein the host lay.  The
Ambassadors meanwhile had reported Sharrkan's approach to their
King, who forthright equipped a host to lay hold of him and those
with him.  But Sharrkan, escorted by the Wazir Dandan and the two
Emirs, had no sooner sighted the army, than he raised the cry
"March!  March!" They took horse on the instant and fared through
the first day and second and third day, nor did they cease faring
for five days; at the end of which time they alighted in a well
wooded valley, where they rested awhile.  Then they again set out
and stayed not riding for five and twenty days which placed them
on the frontiers of their own country.  Here, deeming themselves
safe, they halted to rest; and the country people came out to
them with guest gifts for the men and provender and forage for
the beasts.  They tarried there two days after which, as all
would be making for their homes, Sharrkan put the Wazir Dandan in
command, bidding him lead the host back to Baghdad.  But he
himself remained behind with an hundred riders, till the rest of
the army had made one day's march: then he called "To horse!" and
mounted with his hundred men.  They rode on two
parasangs'[FN#214] space till they arrived at a gorge between two
mountains and lo!  there arose before them a dark cloud of sand
and dust.  So they checked their steeds awhile till the dust
opened and lifted, discovering beneath it an hundred cavaliers,
lion faced and in mail coats cased.  As soon as they drew within
earshot of Sharrkan and his meiny they cried out to them, saying,
"By the virtue of John and Mary, we have won to our wish!  We
have been following you by forced marches, night and day, till we
forewent you to this place.  So dismount and lay down your arms
and yield yourselves, that we may grant you your lives." When
Sharrkan heard this, his eyes stood out from his head and his
cheeks flushed red and he said 'How is it, O.  Nazarene dogs, ye
dare enter our country and overmatch our land?  And doth not this
suffice you, but ye must adventure yourselves and address us in
such unseemly speech?  Do you think to escape out of our hands
and return to your country?" Then he shouted to his hundred
horsemen, "Up and at these hounds, for they even you in number!"
So saying, he bared his sabre and bore down on them, he and his,
but the Franks met them with hearts firmer than rocks, and wight
dashed against wight, and knight dashed upon knight, and hot
waxed the fight, and sore was the affright, and nor parley nor
cries of quarter helped their plight; and they stinted not to
charge and to smite, right hand meeting right, nor to hack and
hew with blades bright white, till day turned to night and gloom
oppressed the sight.  Then they drew apart and Sharrkan mustered
his men and found none wounded save four only, who showed hurts
but not death hurts.  Said he to them, "By Allah, my life long
have I waded in the clashing sea of fight and I have met many a
gallant sprite, but none so unfrightened of the sword that smites
and the shock of men that affrights like these valiant Knights!"
"Know, O King," said they, that there is among them a Frankish
cavalier who is their leader and, indeed, he is a man of valour
and fatal is his spear thrust: but, by Allah, he spares us great
and small; for whoso falls into his hands he lets him go and
forbears to slay him.  By Allah, had he willed he had killed us
all." Sharrkan was astounded when he heard what the Knight had
done and such high report of him, so he said, "When the morn
shall morrow, we will draw out and defy them, for we are an
hundred to their hundred; and we will seek aid against them from
the Lord of the Heavens." So they rested that night in such
intent; whilst the Franks gathered round their Captain and said,
"Verily this day we did not win our will of these;" and he
replied, "At early dawn when the morrow shall morn, we will draw
out and challenge them, one after one." They also rested in that
mind, and both camps kept guard until Almighty Allah sent the
light of day dawn.  Thereupon King Sharrkan and his hundred
riders took horse and rode forth to the plain, where they found
the Franks ranged in line of battle; and Sharrkan said to his
followers, "Our foes have determined like ourselves to do their
devoir; so up and at them and lay on load." Then came forth an
Herald of the Franks and cried out, saying, "Let there be no
general engagement betwixt us this day, save by the duello, a
champion of yours against a champion of ours." Whereupon one of
Sharrkan's riders dashed out from the ranks and crave between the
two lines crying, "Ho!  who is for smiting?  Let no dastard
engage me this day nor niderling!" Hardly had he made an end of
his vaunt, when there sallied forth to him a Frankish cavalier,
armed cap-a-pie and clad in a surcoat of gold stuff, riding on a
grey white steed,[FN#215] and he had no hair on his cheeks.  He
urged his charger on to the midst of the battle plain and the two
fell to derring do of cut and thrust, but it was not long before
the Frank foined the Moslem with the lance point; and, toppling
him from his steed, took him prisoner and led him off
crestfallen.  His folk rejoiced in their comrade and, forbidding
him to go out again to the field, sent forth another, to whom
sallied out another Moslem, brother to the captive, and offered
him battle.  The two fell to, either against other, and fought
for a little while, till the Frank bore down upon the Moslem and,
falsing him with a feint, tumbled him by a thrust of the lance
heel from his destrier and took him prisoner.  After this fashion
the Moslems ceased not dashing forwards, one after one, and the
Franks to unhorse them and take them captive, till day departed
and the night with darkness upstarted.  Now they had captured of
the Moslems twenty cavaliers, and when Sharrken saw this, it was
grievous to him and he mustered his men and said to them, "What
is this thing that hath befallen us?  To- morrow, I myself will
go forth to the field and offer singular combat to their chief
and learn what is the cause of his entering our land and warn him
against doing battle with our band.  If he persist, we will
punish him with death, and if he prove peaceable we will make
peace with him." They righted on this wise till Allah Almighty
caused the morn to dawn, when mounted the twain and drew up for
battle fain; and Sharrkan was going forth to the plain, but
behold, more than one half of the Franks dismounted and remained
on foot before one of them who was mounted, till they reached the
midst of the battle plain.  Sharrken looked at that horseman and
lo!  he was their chief.  He was clad in a surcoat of blue satin
and a close ringed mail shirt; his face was as the moon when it
rises and no hair was upon his cheeks.  He hent in hand an Indian
scymitar and he rode a sable steed with a white blaze on brow,
like a dirham; and he smote the horse with heel till he stood
almost in the midst of the field when, signing to the Moslems, he
cried out in fluent Arab speech "Ho, Sharrkan!  Ho, son of Omar
bin al- Nu'uman!  Ho, thou who forcest fortalice and overthrowest
cities and countries!  up and out to battle bout, and blade
single handed wield with one who halves with thee the field! 
Thou art Prince of thy people and I am Prince of mine; and whoso
overcometh his adversary, him let the other's men obey and come
under his sway." Hardly had he ended his speech, when out came
Sharrkan with a heart full of fury, and urging his steed into the
midst of the field, closed like a raging lion with the Frank who
encountered him with wariness and steadfastness and met him with
the meeting of warriors.  Then they f