smount and walk." Said Zau al-Makan, "May
Allah bless thee and aid me to requite thee!  for verily thou
hast dealt with me more lovingly than one with his brother." Then
he waited till it was dark night, when he laid the provisions and
baggage on that ass and set forth upon their journey.  This much
befel Zau al-Makan and the Fireman; but as regards what happened
to his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman, when she left her brother in the
Khan where they abode and, wrapped in the old camlet, went out to
seek service with some one, that she might earn wherewithal to
buy him the roast meat he longed for, she fared on, weeping and
knowing not whither to go, whilst her mind was occupied with
thoughts of her brother and of her family and her native land. 
So she implored Allah Almighty to do away with these calamities
from them and began versifying,

"Dark falls the night and Passion comes sore pains to gar me
     dree, * And pine upstirs those ceaseless pangs which work my
     tormentry,
And cease not separation flames my vitals to consume, * And
     drives me on destruction way this sorrow's ecstacy
And longing breeds me restlessness; desire for ever fires, * And
     tears to all proclaim what I would keep in secrecy
No cunning shift is known to me a meeting to secure, * That I may
     quit this sickly state, may cure my malady:
The love which blazeth in my heart is fed with fancy fuel, * The
     lover from its hell of fire must bear Hell's agony![FN#240]
O thou who blamest me for all befel me, 'tis enough, * Patient I
     bear what ever wrote the Reed of Doom for me:
By Love I swear I'll never be consoled, no, never more; * I swear
     the oath of Love's own slaves who know no perjury:
O Night, to chroniclers of Love the news of me declare; * That
     sleep hath fed mine eyelids of thy knowledge witness bear!"

Then she walked on, weeping and turning right and left as she
went, when behold, there espied her an old Badawi[FN#241] who had
come into the town from the desert with wild Arabs other five. 
The old man took note of her and saw that she was lovely, but she
had nothing on her head save a piece of camlet, and, marvelling
at her beauty, he said to himself, "This charmer dazzleth men's
wits but she is in squalid condition, and whether she be of the
people of this city or she be a stranger, I needs must have her."
So he followed her, little by little, till he met her face to
face and stopped the way before her in a narrow lane, and called
out to her, asking her case, and said, "Tell me, O my little
daughter!  art thou a free woman or a slave?" When she heard
this, she said to him, "By thy life, do not add to my sorrows!"
Quoth he, "Allah hath blessed me with six daughters, of whom five
died and only one is left me, the youngest of all; and I came to
ask thee if thou be of the folk of this city or a stranger; that
I might take thee and carry thee to her, to bear her company so
as to divert her from pining for her sisters.  If thou have no
kith and kin, I will make thee as one of them and thou and she
shall be as my two children." Nuzhat al-Zaman bowed her head in
bashfulness when she heard what he said and communed with
herself, "Haply I may trust myself to this old man." Then she
said to him, "O nuncle, I am a maiden of the Arabs and a stranger
and I have a sick brother; but I will go with thee to thy
daughter on one condition, which is, that I may spend only the
day with her and at night may return to my brother.  If thou
strike this bargain I will fare with thee, for I am a stranger
and I was high in honour among my tribe, and I awoke one morning
to find myself vile and abject.  I came with my brother from the
land of Al-Hijaz and I fearless he know not where I am." When the
Badawi heard this, he said to himself, "By Allah, I have got my
desire!" Then he turned to her and replied, "There shall none be
dearer to me than thou; I wish thee only to bear my daughter
company by day and thou shalt go to thy brother at earliest
nightfall.  Or, if thou wilt, bring him over to dwell with us."
And the Badawi ceased not to console her heart and coax her, till
she trusted in him and agreed to serve him.  Then he walked on
before her and, when she followed him, he winked to his men to go
in advance and harness the dromedaries and load them with their
packs and place upon them water and provisions, ready for setting
out as soon as he should come up with the camels.  Now this
Badawi was a base born churl, a highway thief and a traitor to
the friend he held most fief, a rogue in grain, past master of
plots and chicane.  He had no daughter and no son and was only
passing through the town when, by the decree of the Decreer, he
fell in with this unhappy one.  And he ceased not to hold her in
converse on the highway till they came without the city of
Jerusalem and, when outside, he joined his companions and found
they had made ready the dromedaries.  So the Badawi mounted a
camel, having seated Nuzhat al-Zaman behind him and they rode on
all night.  Then she knew that the Badawi's proposal was a snare
and that he had tricked her; and she continued weeping and crying
out the whole night long, while they journeyed on making for the
mountains, in fear any should see them.  Now when it was near
dawn, they dismounted from their dromedaries and the Badawi came
up to Nuzhat al-Zaman and said to her, "O city strumpet, what is
this weeping?  By Allah, an thou hold not thy peace, I will beat
thee to death, O thou town filth!" When she heard this she
loathed life and longed for death; so she turned to him and said,
"O accursed old man, O gray beard of hell, how have I trusted
thee and thou hast played me false, and now thou wouldst torture
me?" When he heard her reply he cried out, "O lazy baggage, dost
thou dare to bandy words with me?" And he stood up to her and
beat her with a whip, saying, "An thou hold not thy peace, I will
kill thee!" So she was silent awhile, then she called to mind her
brother and the happy estate she had been in and she shed tears
secretly.  Next day, she turned to the Badawi and said to him,
"How couldst thou play me this trick and lure me into these bald
and stony mountains, and what is thy design with me?" When he
heard her words he hardened his heart and said to her, "O lazy
baggage of ill omen and insolent!  wilt thou bandy words with
me?" and he took the whip and came down with it on her back till
she felt faint.  Then she bowed down over his feet and
kissed[FN#242] them; and he left beating her and began reviling
her and said, "By the rights of my bonnet,[FN#243] if I see or
hear thee weeping, I will cut out thy tongue and stuff it up thy
coynte, O thou city filth!" So she was silent and made him no
reply, for the beating pained her; but sat down with her arms
round her knees and, bowing her head upon her collar, began to
look into her case and her abasement after her lot of high
honour; and the beating she had endured; and she called to mind
her brother and his sickness and forlorn condition, and how they
were both strangers in a far country, which crave her tears down
her cheeks and she wept silently and began repeating,

"Time hath for his wont to upraise and debase, * Nor is lasting
     condition for human race:
In this world each thing hath appointed turn; * Nor may man
     transgress his determined place:
How long these perils and woes?  Ah woe * For a life, all woeful
     in parlous case!
Allah bless not the days which have laid me low * I' the world,
     with disgrace after so much grace!
My wish is baffled, my hopes cast down, * And distance forbids me
     to greet his face:
O thou who passeth that dear one's door, * Say for me, these
     tears shall flow evermore!"

When she had finished her verses, the Badawi came up to her and,
taking compassion on her, bespoke her kindly and wiped away her
tears.  Then he gave her a barley scone and said, "I love not one
who answereth at times when I am in wrath: so henceforth give me
no more of these impertinent words and I will sell thee to a good
man like myself, who will do well with thee, even as I have
done." "Yes; whatso thou doest is right," answered she; and when
the night was longsome upon her and hunger burnt her, she ate
very little of that barley bread.  In the middle of the night the
Badawi gave orders for departure,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Badawi gave the barley scone to Nuzhat al-Zaman and promised he
would sell her to a good man like himself, she replied, "Whatso
thou doest is right!" and, about midnight when hunger burned
her,[FN#244] she ate a very little of that barley bread and the
Badawi ordered his party to set out; so they loaded their loads
and he mounted a camel setting Nuzhat al-Zaman behind him.  Then
they journeyed and ceased not journeying for three days, till
they entered the city of Damascus and alighted at the Sultan's
Khan, hard by the Viceroy's Gate.  Now she had lost her colour by
grief and the fatigue of such travelling, and she ceased not to
weep over her misfortunes.  So the Badawi came up to her and
said, "O thou city filth, by the right of my bonnet, if thou
leave not this weeping, I will sell thee to none but a Jew!" Then
he arose and took her by the hand and carried her to a chamber,
and walked off to the bazar, and he went round to, the merchants
who dealt in slave girls, and began to parley with them, saying,
"I have brought a slave girl whose brother fell ill, and I sent
him to my people about Jerusalem, that they might tend him till
he is cured.  As for her I want to sell her, but after the dog
her brother fell sick, the separation from him was grievous to
her, and since then she doth nothing but weep, and now I wish
that whoso is minded to buy her of me speak softly to her and
say, 'Thy brother is with me in Jerusalem ill'; and I will be
easy with him about her price." Then one of the merchants came up
to him and asked, "How old is she?" He answered "She is a virgin,
just come to marriageable age, and she is endowed with sense and
breeding and wit and beauty and loveliness.  But from the day I
sent her brother to Jerusalem, her heart hath been yearning for
him, so that her beauty is fallen away and her value lessened."
Now when the merchant heard this, he set forth with the Badawi
and said, "O Shaykh[FN#245] of the Arabs, I will go with thee and
buy of thee this girl whom thou praisest so highly for wit and
manners and beauty and loveliness; and I will pay thee her price
but it must be upon conditions which if thou accept, I will give
thee ready money, and if thou accept not I will return her to
thee." Quoth the Badawi, "An thou wilt, take her up to the Sultan
Sharrkan, son of Omar bin al-Nu'uman lord of Baghdad and of the
land of Khorasan, and condition me any conditions thou likest,
for when thou hast brought her before King Sharrkan, haply she
will please him, and he will pay thee her price and a good profit
for thyself to boot." Rejoined the merchant, "It happens that I
have just now something to ask from him, and it is this that he
write me an order upon the office, exempting me from custom dues
and also that he write me a letter of recommendation to his
father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman.  So if he take the girl, I will
weigh[FN#246] thee out her price at once." "I agree with thee to
this condition," answered the Badawi.  So they returned together
to the place where Nuzhat al-Zaman was and the wild Arab stood at
the chamber door and called out, saying, "O Najiyah[FN#247]!"
which was the name wherewith he had named her.  When she heard
him, she wept and made no answer.  Then he turned to the merchant
and said to him, "There she sitteth; go to her and look at her
and speak to her kindly as I enjoined thee." So the trader went
up to her in courteous wise and saw that she was wondrous
beautiful and loveable, especially as she knew the Arabic tongue;
and he said to the Badawi, "If she be even as thou saddest, I
shall get of the Sultan what I will for her." Then he bespake
her, "Peace be on thee, my little maid!  How art thou?" She
turned to him and replied, "This also was registered in the Book
of Destiny." Then she looked at him and, seeing him to be a man
of respectable semblance with a handsome face, she said to
herself, "I believe this one cometh to buy me;" and she
continued, "If I hold aloof from him, I shall abide with my
tyrant and he will do me to death with beating.  In any case,
this person is handsome of face and maketh me hope for better
treatment from him than from my brute of a Badawi.  May be he
cometh only to hear me talk; so I will give him a fair answer."
All this while her eyes were fixed on the ground; then she raised
them to him and said in a sweet voice, "And upon thee be peace, O
my lord, and Allah's mercy and His benediction![FN#248] This is
what is commanded of the Prophet, whom Allah bless and preserve! 
As for thine enquiry how I am, if thou wouldst know my case, it
is such as thou wouldst not wish but to thy foe." And she held
her peace.  When the merchant heard what she said, his fancy took
wings for delight in her and, turning to the Badawi, he asked
him, "What is her price, for indeed she is noble?" Thereupon the
Badawi waxed angry and answered, "Thou wilt turn me the girl's
head with this talk!  Why dost thou say that she is
noble,[FN#249] while she is of the scum of slave girls and of the
refuse of folk?  I will not sell her to thee!" When the merchant
heard this, he knew the man to be weak of wits and said to him,
"Calm thyself, for I will buy her of thee with these blemishes
thou mentionest." "And how much wilt thou give me for her?"
enquired the Badawi.  Replied the merchant, "Name thy price for
her: none should name the son save his sire." Rejoined the
Badawi, "None shall name it but thou thyself." Quoth the merchant
to himself, "This wildling is a rudesby and a maggotty head.  By
Allah, I cannot tell her price, for she hath won my heart with
her fair speech and good looks; and, if she can read and write,
it will be complete fair luck to her and to her purchaser.  But
this Badawi does not know her worth." Then he turned and said to
him, "O Shaykh of the Arabs, I will give thee in ready money,
clear of the tax and the Sultan's dues, two hundred gold pieces."
Now when the Badawi heard this, he flew into a violent rage and
cried at the merchant, saying, "Get up and go thy ways!  By
Allah, wert thou to offer me two hundred diners for the bit of
camlet she weareth, I would not sell it to thee.  And now I will
not sell her, but will keep her by me, to pasture the camels and
grind my grist." And he cried out to her, saying, "Come here,
thou stinkard!  I will not sell thee." Then he turned to the
merchant and said to him, "I used to think thee a man of
judgment; but, by the right of my bonnet, if thou begone not from
me, I will let thee hear what shall not please thee!" Quoth the
merchant to himself, "Of a truth this Badawi is mad and knoweth
not her value, and I will say no more to him about her price at
the present time; for by Allah, were he a man of sense, he would
not say, 'By the rights of my bonnet!' By the Almighty, she is
worth the kingdom of the Chosroes and I have not her price by me,
but if he ask even more, I will give him what he will, though it
be all my goods." Then he turned and said to him, "O Shaykh of
the Arabs, take patience and calm thyself and tell me what
clothes she hath with thee?" Cried the Badawi, "And what hath the
baggage to do with clothes?  By Allah, this camlet in which she
is wrapped is ample for her." "With thy leave," said the
merchant, "I will unveil her face and examine her even as folk
examine slave girls whom they think of buying."[FN#250]  Replied
the other, "Up and do what thou wilt and Allah keep thy youth! 
Examine her outside and inside and, if thou wilt, strip off her
clothes and look at her when she is naked." Quoth the trader,
"Allah forfend!  I will look at naught save her face."[FN#251] 
Then he went up to her and was put to shame by her beauty and
loveliness,--And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
merchant went up to Nuzhat al-Zaman and was put to shame by her
beauty and loveliness, so he sat by her side and asked her, "O my
mistress, what is thy name?" She answered, "Doss thou ask what is
my name this day or what it was before this day?" Thereupon the
merchant enquired, "Hast thou then two names: to day's and
yesterday's?" "Yes," replied she, "my name in the past was Nuzhat
al-Zaman, the Delight of the Age; but my name at this present is
Ghussat[FN#252] al-Zaman, the Despight of the Age." When the
merchant heard this his eyes brimmed over with tears and quoth he
to her, "Hast thou not a sick brother?" "Ay by Allah, O my lord,
I have," quoth she, "but fortune hath parted me and him and he
lieth sick in Jerusalem." The merchant's head was confounded at
the sweetness of her speech and he said to himself, "Verily, the
Badawi spake the truth of her." Then she called to mind her
brother and his sickness and his strangerhood and her separation
from him in his hour of weakness and her not knowing what had
befallen him; and she thought of all that had happened to her
with the Badawi and of her severance from her mother and father
and native land; and the tears coursed down her cheeks and fast
as they started they dropped; and she began reciting,

"Allah, where'er thou be, His aid impart * To thee, who distant
     dwellest in my heart!
Allah be near thee how so far thou fare; * Ward off all shifts of
     Time, all dangers thwart!
Mine eyes are desolate for thy vanisht sight, * And start my
     tears-ah me, how fast they start!
Would Heaven I kenned what quarter or what land * Homes thee, and
     in what house and tribe thou art
An fount of life thou drain in greenth of rose, * While drink I
     tear drops for my sole desert?
An thou 'joy slumber in those hours, when I * Peel 'twixt my side
     and couch coals' burning smart?
All things were easy save to part from thee, * For my sad heart
     this grief is hard to dree."

When the merchant heard her verses, he wept and put out his hand
to wipe away the tears from her cheeks; but she let down her veil
over her face, saying, "Heaven forbid, O my lord!''[FN#253]  Then
the Badawi, who was sitting at a little distance watching them,
saw her cover her face from the merchant while about to wipe the
tears from her cheeks; and he concluded that she would have
hindered him from handling her: so he rose and running to her,
dealt her, with a camel's halter he had in his hand, such a blow
on the shoulders that she fell to the ground on her face.  Her
eyebrow struck a stone which cut it open, and the blood streamed
down her cheeks; whereupon she screamed a loud scream and felt
faint and wept bitterly.  The merchant was moved to tears for her
and said in himself, "There is no help for it but that I buy this
damsel, though at her weight in gold, and free her from this
tyrant." And he began to revile the Badawi whilst Nazhat al-
Zaman lay in sensible.  When she came to herself, she wiped away
the tears and blood from her face; and she bound up her head:
then, raising her glance to heaven, she besought her Lord with a
sorrowful heart and began repeating,

"And pity one who erst in honour throve, * And now is fallen into
     sore disgrace.
She weeps and bathes her cheeks with railing tears, * And asks
     'What cure can meet this fatal case?'"

When she had ended her verse, she turned to the merchant and said
in an undertone, "By the Almighty, do not leave me with a tyrant
who knoweth not Allah the Most High!  If I pass this night in his
place, I shall kill myself with my own hand: save me from him, so
Allah save thee from Gehenna-fire." Then quoth the merchant to
the Badawi, "O Shaykh of the Arabs, this slave is none of thine
affair; so do thou sell her to me for what thou wilt." "Take
her," quoth the Badawi, "and pay me down her price, or I will
carry her back to the camp and there set her to feed the camels
and gather their dung."[FN#254]  Said the merchant, "I will give
thee fifty thousand diners for her." "Allah will open!"[FN#255]
replied the Badawi.  "Seventy thousand," said the merchant. 
"Allah will open!" repeated the Badawi: "this is not the capital
spent upon her, for she hath eaten with me barley bread to the
value of ninety thousand gold pieces." The merchant rejoined,
"Thou and thine and all thy tribe in the length of your lives
have not eaten a thousand ducats' worth of barley; but I will say
thee one word, wherewith if thou be not satisfied, I will set the
Viceroy of Damascus on thee and he will take her from thee by
force." The Badawi continued, "Say on!" "An hundred thousand,"
quoth the merchant.  "I have sold her to thee at that price,"
answered the Badawi; "I shall be able to buy salt with her." The
merchant laughed and, going to his lodgings, brought the money
and put it into the hand of the Badawi, who took it and made off,
saying to himself, "Needs must I go to Jerusalem where, haply, I
shall happen on her brother, and I will bring him here and sell
him also." So he mounted and journeyed till he arrived at
Jerusalem, where he went to the Khan and asked for Zau al-Makan,
but could not find him.  Such was the case with him; but for what
regards the merchant and Nazhat al-Zaman, when he took her he
threw some of his clothes over her and carried her to his
lodgings,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
trader saved Nuzhat al-Zaman from the Badawi and bore her to his
lodgings and robed her in the richest raiment, he went down with
her to the bazar, where he bought her what ornaments she chose
and put them in a satin bag, which he set before her, saying,
"All is for thee and I ask nothing of thee in return but that,
when I lead thee to the Sultan, Viceroy of Damascus, thou
acquaint him with the price I paid for thee, albeit it was little
compared with thy value: and, if seeing thee he buy thee of me,
thou tell him how I have dealt with thee and ask of him for me a
royal patent, and a written recommendation wherewith I can repair
to his father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad, to the
intent that he may forbid the tax on my stuffs or any other goods
in which I traffic." When she heard his words, she wept and
sobbed, and the merchant said to her, "O my lady, I observe that,
every time I mention Baghdad, thine eyes are tearful: is there
any one there whom thou lovest?  If it be a trader or the like,
tell me; for I know all the merchants and so forth there and, if
thou wouldst send him a message, I will bear it for thee."
Replied she, "By Allah, I have no acquaintance among merchant
folk and the like!  I know none there but King Omar bin Nu'uman,
Lord of Baghdad." When the merchant heard her words, he laughed
and rejoiced with exceeding joy and said in himself, "By Allah, I
have won my wish!" Then he said to her, "Hast thou been shown to
him in time past?" She answered, "No, but I was brought up with
his daughter and he holdeth me dear and I have high honour with
him; so if thou wouldst have the King grant thee thy desire, give
me ink case and paper and I will write thee a letter; and when
thou reachest the city of Baghdad, do thou deliver it into the
hand of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and say to him, 'Thy handmaid,
Nuzhat al-Zaman, would have thee to know that the chances and
changes of the nights and days have struck her as with a hammer,
and have smitten her so that she hath been sold from place to
place, and she sendeth thee her salams.' And, if he ask further
of her, say that I am now with the Viceroy at Damascus." The
merchant wondered at her eloquence, and his affection for her
increased and he said to her I cannot but think that men have
played upon thine understanding and sold thee for money.  Tell
me, dost thou know the Koran by heart?" "Yes," answered she; "and
I am also acquainted with philosophy and medicine and the
prolegomena of science and the commentaries of Galen, the
physician, on the canons of Hippocrates; and I have commented him
and I have read the Tazkirah and have commented the Burhan; and I
have studied the Simples of Ibn Baytar, and I have something to
say of the canon of Meccah, by Avicenna.  I can ree riddles and
can solve ambiguities, and discourse upon geometry and am skilled
in anatomy I have read the books of the Shafi'i[FN#256] school
and the Traditions of the Prophet and syntax; and I can argue
with the Olema and discourse of all manner learning.  Moreover I
am skilled in logic and rhetoric and arithmetic and the making of
talismans and almanacs, and I know thoroughly the Spiritual
Sciences[FN#257] and the times appointed for religious duties and
I understand all these branches of knowledge."  Then quoth she to
the merchant, "Bring me ink case and paper, that I write thee a
letter which shall aid thee on thy journey to Baghdad and enable
thee to do without passports." Now when the merchant heard this,
he cried out "Brava!  Brava![FN#258] Then O happy he in whose
palace thou shalt!  Thereupon he brought her paper and ink case
and a pen of brass and bussed the earth before her face to do her
honour.  She took a sheet and handled the reed and wrote
therewith these verses,

"I see all power of sleep from eyes of me hath flown; * Say, did
     thy parting teach these eyne on wake to wone?
What makes thy memory light such burnings in my heart?  * Hath
     every lover strength such memories to own?
How sweet the big dropped cloud which rained on summer day; *
     'Tis gone and ere I taste its sweets afar 'tis flown:
I pray the wind with windy breath to bring some news * From thee,
     to lover wightwi' love so woe begone
Complains to thee a lover of all hope forlorn, * For parting
     pangs can break not only heart but stone."

And when she had ended writing the verses she continued, "These
words are from her who saith that melancholy destroyeth her and
that watching wasteth her; in the murk of whose night is found no
light and darkness and day are the same in her sight.  She
tosseth on the couch of separation and her eyes are blackened
with the pencils of sleeplessness; she watcheth the stars arise
and into the gloom she strains her eyes: verily, sadness and
leanness have consumed her strength and the setting forth of her
case would run to length.  No helper hath she but tears and she
reciteth these verses,

'No ring dove moans from home on branch in morning light, * But
     shakes my very frame with sorrow's killing might:
No lover sigheth for his love or gladdeth heart * To meet his
     mate, but breeds in me redoubled blight
I bear my plaint to one who has no ruth for me, * Ah me, how Love
     can part man's mortal frame and sprite!' "

Then her eyes welled over with tears, and she wrote also these
two couplets,

"Love smote my frame so sore on parting day, * That severance
     severed sleep and eyes for aye.
I waxt so lean that I am still a man, * But for my speaking, thou
     wouldst never say."

Then she shed tears and wrote at the foot of the sheet, "This
cometh from her who is far from her folk and her native land, the
sorrowful hearted woman Nuzhat al-Zaman." In fine, she folded the
sheet and gave it to the merchant, who took it and kissed it and
understood its contents and exclaimed, "Glory to Him who
fashioned thee!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman
wrote the letter and gave it to the merchant; and he took it and
read it and understood the contents and exclaimed, "Glory to Him
who fashioned thee!"  Then he redoubled his kindness and made
himself pleasant to her all that day, and when night came he
sallied out to the bazar and bought some food, wherewith he fed
her; after which he carried her to the Hammam and said to the
bath woman, "As soon as thou hast made an end of washing her
head, dress her and send and let me know of it." And she replied
"Hearing is obeying." Meanwhile he fetched food and fruit and wax
candles and set them on the bench in the outer room of the bath;
and when the tire woman had done washing her, she dressed her and
led her out of the bath and seated her on the bench.  Then she
sent to tell the merchant, and Nuzhat al-Zaman went forth to the
outer room, where she found the tray spread with food and fruit. 
So she ate and the tire woman with her, and gave the rest to the
people and keeper of the bath.  Then she slept till the morning,
and the merchant lay the night in a place apart from her.  When
he aroused himself from sleep he came to her and waking her,
presented her with a shift of fine stuff and a head kerchief
worth a thousand diners, a suit of Turkish embroidery and walking
boots purfled with red gold and set with pearls and gems. 
Moreover, he hung in each of her ears a circlet of gold with a
fine pearl therein, worth a thousand diners, and threw round her
neck a collar of gold with bosses of garnet and a chain of amber
beads that hung down between her breasts over her navel.  Now to
this chain were attached ten balls and nine crescents, and each
crescent had in its midst a bezel of ruby, and each ball a bezel
of balass: the value of the chain was three thousand diners and
each of the balls was priced at twenty thousand dirhams, so that
the dress she wore was worth in all a great sum of money.  When
she had put these on, the merchant bade her adorn herself, and
she adorned herself to the utmost beauty; then she let fall her
fillet over her eyes and she fared forth with the merchant
preceding her.  But when folk saw her, all wondered at her beauty
and exclaimed, "Blessed be Allah, the most excellent Creator!  O
lucky the man in whose house the hall be!" And the trader ceased
not walking (and she behind him) till they entered the palace of
Sultan Sharrkan; when he sought an audience and, kissing the
earth between his hands, said, "O auspicious King, I have brought
thee a rare gift, unmatched in this time and richly gifted with
beauty and with good qualities." Quoth the King, "Let me see it."
So the merchant went out and brought her, she following him till
he made her stand before King Sharrkan.  When he beheld her,
blood yearned to blood, though she had been parted from him in
childhood and though he had never seen her, having only heard a
long time after her birth that he had a sister called Nuzhat al-
Zaman and a brother Zau al-Makan, he having been jealous of them,
because of the succession.  And such was the cause of his knowing
little about them.  Then, having placed her before the presence,
the merchant said, "O King of the age, besides being peerless in
her time and beauty and loveliness, she is also versed in all
learning, sacred and profane, including the art of government and
the abstract sciences." Quoth the King to the trader, "Take her
price, according as thou boughtest her, and go thy ways." "I hear
and I obey," replied the merchant; "but first write me a patent,
exempting me for ever from paying tithe on my merchandise." Said
the King, "I will do this, but first tell me what price thou
paidest for her." Said the merchant, "I bought her for an hundred
thousand diners, and her clothes cost me another hundred
thousand." When the Sultan heard these words, he declared, "I
will give thee a higher price than this for her;" and, calling
his treasurer, said to him, "Pay this merchant three hundred and
twenty thousand ducats; so will he have an hundred and twenty
thousand diners profit." Thereupon the Sultan summoned the four
Kazis and paid him the money in their presence and then he said,
"I call you to witness that I free this my slave girl and purpose
to marry her." So the Kazis wrote out the deed of emancipation
and the contract of marriage, when the Sultan scattered much gold
on the heads of those present; and the pages and the eunuchs
picked up this largesse.  Then, after paying him his monies,
Sharrkan bade them write for the merchant a perpetual patent,
exempting him from toll, tax or tithe upon his merchandise and
forbidding each and every in all his government to molest him,
and lastly bestowed on him a splendid dress of honour.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

                When it was the Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Sharrkan bade them write for the merchant a mandate, after paying
him his monies; and they wrote a perpetual patent, exempting him
from the tithe upon his merchandise and forbidding any in his
government to molest him; and lastly bestowed upon him a splendid
dress of honour.  Then all about him retired, and none remained
save the Kazis and the merchant, whereupon said he to the judges,
"I wish you to hear such discourse from this damsel as may prove
her knowledge and accomplishments in all aimed for her by this
trader, that we ascertain the truth of his assertions." They
answered, "There is no evil in that!"; and he commanded the
curtain to be let down between him and those with him and the
maiden and those with her; and the women about the damsel behind
the curtains began to wish her joy and kiss her hands and feet,
when they learned that she was become the King's wife.  Then they
came round her and took off her dresses easing her of the weight
of her clothes and began to look upon her beauty and loveliness. 
Presently the wives of the Emirs and Wazirs heard that King
Sharrkan had bought a hand maiden unmatched for her beauty and
learning and philosophy and account keeping, and versed in all
branches of knowledge, that he had paid for her three hundred and
twenty thousand dinars, and that he had set her free and had
written a marriage contract with her and had summoned the four
Kazis to make trial of her, how she would answer all their
questions and hold disputetion with them.  So they asked leave of
their husbands and repaired to the palace wherein was Nuzhat al-
Zaman.  When they came in to her, they found the eunuchs standing
before her; and, as soon as she saw the wives of the Emirs and
Wazirs and Grandees of the realm coming to call upon her, she
arose to them on her feet and met them with courtesy, her
handmaidens standing behind her, and she received them saying,
"Ye be welcome!" The while she smiled in their faces so as to win
their hearts; and she promised them all manner of good and seated
them in their proper stations, as if she had been brought up with
them; so all wondered at her beauty and loveliness and said to
one another, "This damsel is none other than a Queen, the
daughter of a King." Then they sat down, magnifying her worth and
said to her, "O our lady, this our city is illumined by thee, and
our country and abode and birth place and reign are honoured by
thy presence.  The kingdom indeed is thy kingdom and the palace
is thy palace, and we all are thy handmaids; so, by Allah, do not
shut us out from thy favours and the sight of thy beauty." And
she thanked them for this.  All this while the curtains were let
down between Nuzhat al-Zaman and the women with her, on the one
side, and King Sharrkan and the four Kazis and the merchant
seated by him on the other.  Presently King Sharrkan called to
her and said, "O Queen, the glory of thine age, this merchant
hath described thee as being learned and accomplished; and he
claimeth that thou art skilled in all branches of knowledge, even
to astrology: so let us hear something of all this he hath
mentioned, and favour us with a short discourse on such
subjects." She replied, saying: "O King, to hear is to
obey.[FN#259] The first subjects whereof I will treat are the art
of government and the duties of Kings and what behoveth governors
of command meets according to religious law, and what is
incumbent on them in respect of satisfactory speech and manners. 
Know then, O King, that all men's works tend either to religious
or to laical life, for none attaineth to religion save through
this world, because it is the best road to futurity.  Now the
works of this world are not ordered save by the doings of its
people, and men's doings are divided into four divisions,
government, commerce, husbandry and craftsmanship.  Now
government requireth perfect administration with just and true
judgment; for government is the pivot of the edifice of the
world, which world is the road to futurity; since Allah Almighty
hath made the world for His servants as viaticum to the traveller
for the attainment of his goal; and it befitteth each man that he
receive of it such measure as shall bring him to Allah, and that
he follow not herein his own mind and his individual lust.  If
folk would take of worldly goods with justice and equity, all
cause of contention would be cut off; but they take thereof with
violence ant after their own desires, and their persistence
therein giveth rise to contentions; so they have need of the
Sultan, that he do justice between them and order their affairs;
and, if the King restrain not his folk from one another, the
strong will drive the weak to the wall.  Hence Ardeshir[FN#260]
saith, 'Religion and Kingship be twins'; religion is a hidden
treasure and the King is its keeper; and the Divine Ordinances
and men's intelligence point out that it behoveth the people to
adopt a Sultan who shall withhold oppressor from oppressed and do
the weak justice against the strong and restrain the violence of
the proud and the rebels against rule.  For know, O King, that
according to the measure of the Sultan's good morals, even so
will be the time; as saith the Apostle of Allah (on whom be peace
and salvation!), 'There be two classes who, if they be good, the
people will be good; and if they be bad, the people will be bad,
even the Olema and the Emirs.' And it is said by a certain sage,
'There be three kinds of Kings, the King of the Faith, the King
who protecteth things to which reverence is due, and the King of
his own lusts.' The King of the Faith obligeth his subjects to
follow their faith, and it behoveth he be the most
faithful,[FN#261] for it is by him that they take pattern in the
things of the Faith; and it becometh the folk to obey him in
whatso he commandeth according to Divine Ordinance; but he shall
hold the discontented in the same esteem as the contented,
because of submission to the decrees of Destiny.  As for the King
who protecteth things to be reverenced, he upholdeth the things
of the Faith and of the World and compelleth his folk to follow
the Divine Law and to preserve the rights of humanity; and it
fitteth him to unite Pen and Sword; for whoso declineth from what
Pen hath written his feet slip and the King shall rectify his
error with the sharp Sword and dispread his justice over all
mankind.  As for the King of his own lusts, he hath no religion
but the following his desire and, as he feareth not the wrath of
his Lord who set him on the throne, so his Kingdom inclineth to
deposition and the end of his pride is in the house of perdition. 
And sages say, 'The King hath need of many people, but the people
have need of but one King' wherefore it beseemeth that he be well
acquainted with their natures, that he reduce their discord to
concord, that with his justice be encompass them all and with his
bounties overwhelm them all.  And know, O King, that Ardeshir,
styled Jamr Shadid, or the Live Coal, third of the Kings of
Persia, conquered the whole world and divided it into four
divisions and, for this purpose, get for himself four seal rings,
one for each division.  The first seal was that of the sea and
the police of prohibition and on it was written, Alterna lives. 
The second was the seal of tribute and of the receipt of monies,
and on it was written, Building up.  The third was the seal of
the provisioning department and on it was written, Plenty.  The
fourth was the seal of the oppressed, and on it was written,
Justice.  And these usages remained valid in Persia until the
revelation of Al-Islam.  Chosroes also wrote his son, who was
with the army, 'Be not thou too open handed with thy troops, or
they will be too rich to need thee.'--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Sixty-first night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Chosroes
wrote his son, 'Be not thou too open handed with thy troops, or
they will be too rich to need thee; nor be thou niggardly with
them, or they will murmur against thee.  Give thy giving
deliberately and confer thy favours advisedly; open thy hand to
them in time of success and stint them not in time of distress.'
There is a legend that a desert Arab came once to the Caliph Al-
Mansur[FN#262] and said, 'Starve thy dog and he shall follow
thee.' When the Caliph heard his words, he was enraged with the
Arab, but Abu 'l-Abbas of Tus said to him, 'I fear that if some
other than thou should show him a scone, the dog would follow him
and leave thee alone.' Thereupon the Caliph Al-Mansur's wrath
subsided and he knew that the wild Arab had intended no offence
and ordered him a present.  And know, O King, that Abd al-Malik
bin Marwan wrote to his brother Abd al-Aziz, when he despatched
him to Egypt, as follows, 'Pay heed to thy Secretaries and thy
Chamberlains, for the Secretaries will acquaint thee with estate
fished matters and the Chamberlains with matters of official
ceremony, whilst thine expenditure will make thy troops known to
thee.' Omar bin Al-Khattab[FN#263] (whom Allah accept!) when
engaging a servant was in the habit of conditioning him with four
conditions; the first that he should not ride the baggage beasts,
the second that he should not wear fine clothes, the third that
he should not eat of the spoil and the fourth that he should not
put off praying till after the proper period.  It is said that
there is no wealth more profitable than understanding, and there
is no understanding like common sense and prudence, and there is
no prudence like piety; that there is no means of drawing near to
God like good morals, no measure like good breeding, no traffic
like good works and no profit like earning the Divine favour;
that there is no temperance like standing within the limits of
the law, no science like that of meditation, no worship like
obeying the Divine commends, no faith like modesty, no
calculation like self abasement and no honour like knowledge.  So
guard the head and what it containeth and the belly and what it
compriseth; and think of death and doom ere it ariseth.  Saith
Ali (whose face Allah honour!), 'Beware of the wickedness of
women and be on thy guard against them: consult them not in
aught;[FN#264] but grudge not complaisance to them, lest they
greed for intrigue.' And eke quoth he, 'Whoso leaveth the path of
moderation his wits become perplexed'; and there be rules for
this which we will mention, if it be Allah's will.  And Omar
(whom Allah accept!) saith, 'There are three kinds of women,
firstly the true believing, Heaven fearing, love full and fruit
full, who helpeth her mate against fate, not helping fate against
her mate; secondly, she who loveth her children but no more and,
lastly, she who is a shackle Allah setteth on the neck of whom He
will.' Men be also three: the wise when he exerciseth his own
judgement; the wiser who, when befalleth somewhat whereof he
knoweth not the issue, seeketh folk of good counsel and acteth by
their advice; and the unwise irresolute ignoring the right way
nor heeding those who would guide him straight.  Justice is
indispensable in all things; even slave girls have need of
justice; and men quote as an instance highway robbers who live by
violenting mankind, for did they not deal equitably among
themselves and observe justice in dividing their booty, their
order would fall to pieces.[FN#265] In short, for the rest, the
Prince of noble qualities is Beneficence cum Benevolence; and how
excellent is the saying of the poet,

By open hand and ruth the youth rose to his tribe's command; * Go
     and do likewise for the same were easy task to thee.'

And quoth another,

'In ruth and mildness surety lies and mercy wins respect, * And
     Truth is best asylum for the man of soothfast soul:
Whoso for wealth of gold would win and wear the world's good
     word, * On glory's course must ever be the first to gain the
     goal.'"

And Nazhat al-Zaman discoursed upon the policy of Kings till the
bystanders said, "Never have we seen one reason of rule and
government like this damsel!  Haply she will let us hear some
discourse upon subject other than this." When she heard their
words and understood them she said, "As for the chapter of good
breeding, it is wide of comprehension, being a compend of things
perfect.  Now it so happened that one day there came to the
Caliph Mu'awiyah[FN#266] one of his companions, who mentioned the
people of Irak and the goodness of their wit; and the Caliph's
wife Maysun, mother of Yezid, heard his words.  So, when he was
gone, she said to the Caliph, 'O Prince of the Faithful, I would
thou let some of the people of Irak come in and talk to thee,
that I may hear their discourse.' Therewith Mu'awiyah said to his
attendants, 'See who is at the door?' And they answered, 'The
Banu Tamim.' 'Let them come in,' said he.  So they came in and
with them Al-Ahnaf son of Kays.[FN#267]  Then quoth Mu'awiyah,
'Enter, O Abu Bahr,' and drew a curtain between himself and
Maysun, that she might hear what they said without being seen
herself; then he said to Al-Ahnaf, 'O Son of the Sea, draw near
and tell me what counsel thou hast for me.' Quoth Al-Ahnaf, 'Part
thy hair and trim thy moustachio and pare thy nails and pluck
thine armpits and shave thy pubes[FN#268] and ever use the
toothstick because therein be two and seventy virtues, and make
the Ghusl or complete ablution on Friday, as an expiation for all
between the Fridays.'--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ahnaf bin
Kays replied to Al-Mu'awiyah's[FN#269] question, 'And ever use
the toothstick, because therein be two end seventy virtues and
make the complete Friday ablution as an expiation for all between
the two Fridays.' Quoth Mu'awiyah, 'What is thy counsel to
thyself?' 'To set my feet firmly on the ground, to move them
deliberately and watch over them with mine eyes!' 'How dost thou
order thyself when thou goest in to one not of the nobles of thy
tribe?' 'I lower mine eyes modestly and I salute first; I avoid
what concerneth me not and I spare my words!' 'And how when thou
goest in to thine equals?' 'I give ear to them when they speak
and I do not assail them when they err!'  'When thou goest in to
thy chiefs?' 'I salute without making any sign and await the
reply: if they bid me draw near, I draw near, and if they draw
off from me I withdraw!' 'How dost thou with thy wife?' Quoth
Ahnaf, 'Excuse me from answering this, O Commander of the
Faithful!'; but Mu'awiyah cried, 'I conjure thee inform me.' He
said, 'I entreat her kindly and show her familiarity and am large
in expenditure, for woman was created of a crooked rib.'[FN#270] 
'And how dost thou when thou hast a mind to lie with her?' 'I bid
her perfume herself and kiss her till she is moved to desire;
then, should it be as thou knowest,[FN#271] I throw her on her
back.  If the seed abide in her womb I say, 'O Allah make it
blessed and let it not be a wastrel, but fashion it into the best
of fashions!'[FN#272]  Then I rise from her to ablution and first
I pour water over my hands and then over my body and lastly, I
praise Allah for the joy He hath given me.' Said Mu'awiyah, 'Thou
hast answered right well and now tell me what be thy
requirements?' Said Ahnaf, 'I would have thee rule thy subjects
in the fear of Allah and do even handed justice between them.'
Thereupon Ahnaf rose to his feet and left the Caliph's presence,
and when he had gone Maysun said, 'Were there but this man in
Irak, he would suffice to it.' Then continued Nuzhat al-Zaman,
"And all this is a section of the chapter of good breeding, and
know O King, that Muaykib was intendant of the public treasury
during the Caliphate of Omar bin al-Khattab,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-
Zaman continued, "Know, O King, that Mu'aykib was intendant of
the public treasury during the Caliphate of Omar bin al-Khattab;
and it so befel him that he saw Omar's son and gave him a dirham
out of the treasury.  Thereupon, quoth Mu'aykib, 'I returned to
my own house, and while I was sitting there behold, a messenger
came to me from Omar and I was afraid and went to him, and when I
came into his presence, in his hand was the dirham I had given
his son.  He said to me, 'Woe to thee Mu'aykib!  I have found
somewhat concerning thy soul.' I asked 'And what is that?'; and
he answered, 'It is that thou hast shown thyself a foe to the
followers of Mohammed (on whom be peace and salvation!) in the
matter of this dirham, and thou wilt have to account for it on
Resurrection Day.'[FN#273] And Omar also wrote a letter to Abu
Musa al-Ashari[FN#274] as follows, 'When these presents reach
thee, give the people what is theirs and remit to me the rest.'
And he did so.  Now when Othman succeeded to the Caliphate, he
wrote a like letter to Abu Musa, who did his bidding and sent him
the tribute accordingly, and with it came Ziyad.[FN#275]  And
when Ziyad laid the tribute before Othman, the Caliph's son came
in and took a dirham, whereupon Ziyad shed tears.  Othman asked
'Why weepest thou?'; and Ziyad answered, 'I once brought Omar bin
al-Khattab the like of this and his son took a dirham, where upon
Omar bade snatch it from his hand.  Now thy son hath taken of the
tribute, yet I have seen none say aught to him or snatch the
money from him.' Then Othman[FN#276] cried, 'And where wilt thou
find the like of Omar?' Again Zayd bin Aslam relates of his
father that he said, 'I went out one night with Omar till we
approached a blazing fire.  Quoth Omar, 'O Aslam, I think these
must be travellers who are suffering from the cold.  Come, let us
join them.' So we walked on till we came to them and behold!  we
found a woman who had lighted a fire under a cauldron and by her
side were two children, both a wailing.  Said Omar, 'Peace be
with you, O folk of light (for it was repugnant to him to say
'folk of fire'),[FN#277] what aileth you?' Said she, 'The cold
and the night trouble us.' He asked, 'What aileth these little
people that they weep?'; and she answered, 'They are hungry.' He
enquired, 'And what is in this cauldron?'; and she replied, 'It
is what I quiet them withal, and Allah will question Omar bin al-
Khattab of them, on the Day of Doom.' He said, 'And what should
Omar know of their case?' 'Why then,' rejoined she, 'should he
manage people's affairs and yet be unmindful of them?' Thereupon
Omar turned to me (continned Aslam) and cried, 'Come with us!' So
we set off running till we reached the pay department of his
treasury, where he took out a sack containing flour and a pot
holding fat and said to me, 'Load these on my back!' Quoth I, 'O
Commander of the Faithful, I will carry them for thee.' He
rejoined, 'Wilt thou bear my load for me on the Day of
Resurrection?' So I put the things on his back, and we set off,
running, till we threw down the sack hard by her.  Then he took
out some of the flour and put it in the cauldron; and, saying to
the woman, 'Leave it to me,' he began blowing the fire under the
cauldron.  Now he was a long bearded man[FN#278] and I saw the
smoke issuing from between the hairs of his beard till the flour
was cooked, when he took some of the fat and threw it