 of fear for his life and grief for his separation from Zau
al-Makan; and he was saying to himself, "Indeed, I warned him for
the love of Allah, but he would not listen to me; Oh would I knew
what is become of him!" Ere he had done speaking the Eunuch was
standing by his head whilst the pages surrounded him The Fireman
turned and seeing the Eunuch and the pages gathered around him
became yellow with fear,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Stoker girthed his ass for flight and bespake himself, saying,
"Oh would I knew what is become of him!"; ere he had done
speaking the Castrato was standing by his head and his side
muscles quivered for fear and he lifted up his voice and cried,
"Verily he knoweth not the value of the good offices I have done
him!  I believe he hath denounced me to the Eunuch (hence these
pages et about me) and he hath made me an accomplice in his
crime." Then the effeminated one cried at him, saying, "Who was
it recited the verses?  O liar!  why didst thou say, 'I never
repeated these couplets, nor do I know who repeated them;' when
it was thy companion?  But now I will not leave thee between this
place and Baghdad, and what betideth thy comrade shall betide
thee." Quoth the Fireman, "What I feared hath befallen me." And
he repeated this couplet,

"'Twas as I feared the coming ills discerning: * But unto Allah
     we are all returning."

Then the Eunuch cried upon the pages, saying, "Take him off the
ass." So they carried him along with the caravan, surrounded by
the pages, as the white contains the black of the eye; and the
Castrato said to them, "If a hair of him be lost, you will be
lost with it." And he bade them privily treat him with honour and
not humiliate him.  But when the Stoker saw himself beset by the
pages, he despaired of his life and turning to the Eunuch, said
to him, "O Chief, I am neither this youth's brother nor am I akin
to him, nor is he sib to me; but I was a Fireman in a Hammam and
found him cast out, in his sickness, on the dung heap." Then the
caravan fared on and the Stoker wept and imagined in himself a
thousand things, whilst the Eunuch walked by his side and told
him nothing, but said to him, "Thou disturbedst our mistress by
reciting verses, thou and this youth: but fear nothing for thy
self;" and kept laughing at him the while to himself.  Whenever
the caravan halted, they served him with food, and he and the
Castrato ate from one dish.[FN#322] Then the Eunuch bade his lads
bring a gugglet of sugared sherbet and, after drinking himself,
gave it to the Fireman, who drank; but all the while his tears
never dried, out of fear for his life and grief for his
separation from Zau al-Makan and for what had befallen them in
their strangerhood.  So they both travelled on with the caravan,
whilst the Chamberlain now rode by the door of his wife's litter,
in attendance on Zau al-Makan and his sister, and now gave an eye
to the Fireman; and Nuzhat al-Zaman and her brother occupied
themselves with converse and mutual condolence; and they ceased
not after this fashion till they came within three days' journey
from Baghdad.  Here they alighted at eventide and rested till the
morning morrowed; and as they awoke and they were about to load
the beasts, behold, there appeared afar off a great cloud of dust
that darkened the firmament till it became black as gloomiest
night.[FN#323] Thereupon the Chamberlain cried out to them,
"Stay, and your loading delay!"; then, mounting with his
Mamelukes, rode forward in the direction of the dust cloud.  When
they drew near, suddenly appeared under it a numerous conquering
host like the full tide sea, with flags and standards, drums and
kettledrums, horsemen and footmen.  The Chamberlain marvelled at
this; and when the troops saw him, there detached itself from
amongst them a plump of five hundred cavaliers, who fell upon him
and his suite and surrounded them, five for one; whereupon said
he to them, "What is the matter and what are these troops, that
ye do this with us?" Asked they, "Who art thou; and whence comest
thou, and whither art thou bound?" and he answered, "I am the
Chamberlain of the Emir of Damascus, King Sharrkan, son of Omar
bin al-Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad and of the land of Khorasan, and
I bring tribute and presents from him to his father in Baghdad."
When the horsemen heard his words they let their head kerchiefs
fall over their faces and wept, saying, "In very sooth King Omar
is dead and he died not but of poison.  So fare ye forwards; no
harm shall befal you till you join his Grand Wazir, Dandan." Now
when the Chamberlain heard this, he wept sore and exclaimed, "Oh
for our disappointment in this our journey!" Then he and all his
suite wept till they had come up with the host and sought access
to the Wazir Dandan, who granted an interview and called a halt
and, causing his pavilion to be pitched, sat down on a couch
therein and commanded to admit the Chamberlain.  Then he bade him
be seated and questioned him; and he replied that he was
Chamberlain to the Emir of Damascus and was bound to King Omar
with presents and the tribute of Syria.  The Wazir, hearing the
mention of King Omar's name, wept and said, "King Omar is dead by
poison, and upon his dying the folk fell out amongst themselves
as to who should succeed him, until they were like to slay one
another on this account; but the notables and grandees and the
four Kazis interposed and all the people agreed to refer the
matter to the decision of the four judges and that none should
gainsay them.  So it was agreed that we go to Damascus and fetch
thence the King's son, Sharrkan, and make him Sultan over his
father's realm.  And amongst them were some who would have chosen
the cadet, Zau Al-Makan, for, quoth they, his name be Light of
the Place, and he hath a sister Nuzhat al-Zaman highs, the
Delight of the Time; but they set out five years ago for Al-Hijaz
and none wotteth what is become of them." When the Chamberlain
heard this, he knew; that his wife had told him the truth of her
adventures; and he grieved with sore grief for the death of King
Omar, albeit he joyed with exceeding joy, especially at the
arrival of Zau al-Makan, for that he would now become Sultan of
Baghdad in his father's stead--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

             When it was the Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sharrkan's Chamberlain heard of the death of King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman he mourned, but he rejoiced because of his wife and her
brother Zau al-Makan who would become Sultan of Baghdad in his
father's stead.  So he turned to the Wazir Dandan and said to
him, "Verily your tale is a wonder of wonders!  Know, O Chief
Wazir, that here, where you have encountered me, Allah hath given
you rest from fatigue and bringeth you your desire after the
easiest of fashions, for that His Almighty Will restoreth to you
Zau al-Makan and his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman; whereby we will
settle the matter as we easily can." When the Minister heard
these words he rejoiced with great joy and said, "O Chamberlain,
tell me the tale of the twain and what befel them and the cause
of their long absence." So he repeated to him the whole story and
told him that Nuzhat al-Zaman was his wife and related to him the
adventures of Zau al-Makan from first to last.  As soon as he had
ended his tale, the Wazir sent for the Emirs and Wazirs and Chief
Officers and acquainted them with the matter; whereat they
rejoiced with great joy and wondered at the happy chance.  Then
they gathered in a body and went in to the Chamberlain and did
their service to him, kissing the ground between his hands; and
the Wazir Dandan also rose and went out to meet him and stood
before him in honour.  After this, the Chamberlain held on that
day a Divan council; and he and the Wazir sat upon a throne,
whilst all the Emirs and Grandees and Officers of State took
their places before them, according to their several
ranks.[FN#324] Then they melted sugar in rose water and drank,
after which the Emirs sat down to hold council and permitted the
rest of the host to mount and ride forward leisurely, till they
should make an end of their debate and overtake them.  So the
officers kissed the ground between their hands and mounting, rode
onwards, preceded by the standards of war.  When the grandees had
finished their conference, they took horse and rejoined the host;
and the Chamberlain approached the Wazir Dandan and said, "I deem
it well to ride on before you, and precede you, that I may get
ready a place for the Sultan and notify him of your coming and of
your choosing him as Sultan over the head of his brother
Sharrkan." "Aright thou reckest," answered the Wazir Then the
Chamberlain rose up in haste and Dandan also stood up to do him
honour and brought him presents, which he conjured him to accept. 
In similar guise did all the Emirs and Grandees and Officers of
State, bringing him gifts and calling down blessings on him and
saying to him, "Haply thou wilt mention our case to Sultan Zau
al-Makan and speak to him to continue us in our
dignities."[FN#325] The Chamberlain promised all they required
and bade his pages be ready to march, whereupon the Wazir Dandan
sent with him tents and bade the tent pitchers set them up at a
day's journey from the city.  And they did his bidding.  Then the
Chamberlain mounted and rode forward, full of joy and saying to
himself, "How blessed is this gurney!", and indeed his wife was
exalted in his eyes, she and her brother Zau al-Makan.  They made
all haste over their wayfare, till they reached a place distant a
day's journey from Baghdad, where the Chamberlain called a halt
for rest, and bade his men alight and make ready a sitting place
for the Sultan Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,
while he rode forward with his Mamelukes and, alighting at a
distance from Nuzhat al-Zaman's litter, commanded the eunuchs to
ask leave of admission to the presence.  They did so and she gave
permission; whereupon he went in to her and conversed with her
and her brother; and told them of the death of their father; and
of Zau al-Makan, how the heads of the people had made him King
over them in the stead of his sire; and he gave them joy of the
kingdom.  They both wept for their father and asked the manner of
his being killed; but the Chamberlain answered, "The news rests
with the Wazir Dandan who will be here tomorrow leading all the
host; and it only remaineth for thee, O King, to do what they
counsel, since they have unanimously chosen thee Sultan; for if
thou do not this, they will choose some one else and thou canst
not be sure of thy life with another Sultan.  Haply he will kill
thee, or discord may befal between you twain and the kingdom pass
out of the hands of both." Zau al-Makan bowed his head awhile and
then said, "I accept this position;" for indeed there was no
refusing; and he was certified that the Chamberlain had
counselled him well and wisely and set him on the right way. 
Then he added, "O my uncle, how shall I do with my brother
Sharrkan?" "O my son," replied the Chamberlain, "thy brother will
be Sultan of Damascus and thou Sultan of Baghdad; so take heart
of grace and get ready thy case." Zau al-Makan accepted this and
the Chamberlain presented him with a suit of royal raiment and a
dagger[FN#326] of state, which the Wazir Dandan had brought with
him; then leaving him he bade the tent pitchers choose a spot of
rising ground and set up thereon a spacious pavilion, wherein the
Sultan might sit to receive the Emirs and Grandees.  Moreover he
ordered the kitcheners to cook rich viands and serve them and he
commanded the water carriers to dispose the water troughs.  They
did as he bade them and presently arose a cloud of dust from the
ground and spread till it walled the horizon round.  After
awhile, the dust dispersed and there appeared under it the army
of Baghdad and Khorasan, a conquering host like the full tide
sea.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

             When it was the Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Chamberlain bade the tent pitchers set up a pavilion spacious
enough to receive the subjects flocking to their Sultan, they
planted a splendid Shahmiyanah[FN#327] befitting Kings.  And as
they ended their labours behold, a dust cloud spired aloft and
the breeze made it lift and beneath it showed a conquering host;
and presently it appeared that this was the army of Baghdad and
Khorasan preceded by the Wazir Dandan.  And in it all rejoiced at
the accession of the "Light of the Place." Now Zau al-Makan had
donned robes of royal estate and girt himself with the sword of
state: so the Chamberlain brought him a steed and he mounted
surrounded by the Mamelukes and all the company from the tents on
foot, to do him service, and he rode on until he came to the
great pavilion, where he sat down and he laid the royal dagger
across his thighs, whilst the Chamberlain stood in attendance on
him and his armed slaves stationed themselves under the entrance
awning of the Shahmiyanah, with drawn swords in their hands. 
Presently, up came the troops and the host and craved admission
so the Chamberlain went in to Zau al-Makan and asked his leave
whereupon he bade admit them, ten by ten.  The Chamberlain
acquainted them with the King's commands, to which they replied,
"We hear and we obey;" and all drew up before the pavilion
entrance.  Then he took ten of them and carried them through the
vestibule into the presence of Sultan Zau al-Makan, whom when
they saw, they were awed; but he received them with most gracious
kindness and promised them all good.  So they gave him joy of his
safe return and invoked Allah's blessings upon him after which
they took the oath of fealty never to gainsay him in aught and
they kissed ground before him and withdrew.  Then other ten
entered and he entreated them as he had entreated the ethers; and
they ceased not to enter, ten by ten, till none was left but the
Wazir Dandan.  Lastly the Minister went in and kissed the ground
before Zau al-Makan, who rose to meet him, saying, "Welcome, O
Wazir and sire sans peer!  Verily, thine acts are those of a
counsellor right dear, and judgement and foreseeing clear are in
the hands of the Subtle of Lere." Then bade he the Chamberlain
forthwith go out and cause the tables to be spread and order all
the troops thereto.  So they came and ate and drank.  Moreover
the Sultan commanded his Wazir Dandan call a ten days' halt of
the army, that he might be private with him and learn from him
how and wherefore his father had been slain.  The Wazir obeyed
the commands of the Sultan with submission and wished him
eternity of glory and said, "This needs must be!" He then
repaired to the heart of the encampment and ordered the host to
halt ten days.  They did as he bade them and, moreover, he gave
them leave to divert themselves and ordered that none of the
lords in waiting should attend upon the King for service during
the space of three days.  Then the Wazir went to the Sultan and
reported all to him, and Zau al-Makan waited until nightfall,
when he went in to his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman and asked her,
"Dost thou know the cause of my father's murder or not?" "I have
no knowledge of the cause," she answered, and drew a silken
curtain before herself, whilst Zau al-Makan seated himself
without the curtain and commanded the Wazir to the presence and,
when he came, said to him, "I desire thou relate to me in detail
the cause of the killing of my sire, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman!"
"Know then, O King," replied Dandan, "that King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman, when he returned to Baghdad from his chasing and hunting
and entered the city, enquired for thee and thy sister, but could
not find you and knew that you twain had gone on the Pilgrimage;
whereat he was greatly grieved and much angered, and his breast
was straitened and he abode thus half a year, seeking news of you
from all who came and went but none could give him any tidings. 
Now while we were in attendance upon him one day, after a whole
year had sped since ye were lost to his sight, lo!  there came to
us an ancient dame with signs of being a devotee, accompanied by
five damsels, high bosomed virgins like moons, endowed with such
beauty and loveliness as tongue faileth to describe; and, to
crown their perfections of comeliness, they could read the Koran
and were versed in various kinds of learning and in the histories
of bygone peoples.  Then that old woman sought audience of the
King, and he bade admit her; whereupon she entered the presence
and kissed the ground between his hands.  I was then sitting by
his side and he, seeing in her the signs of asceticism and
devoutness, made her draw near and take seat hard by him.  And
when she had sat down she addressed him and said, 'Know, O King,
that with me are five damsels, whose like no King among the Kings
possesseth; for they are endowed with wit and beauty and
loveliness and perfection.  They read the Koran--and the
Traditions and are skilled in all manner of learning and in the
history of bygone races.  They stand here between thy hands to do
thee service, O King of the Age, and it is by trial that folk are
prized or despised.  'Thy father, who hath found mercy;[FN#328]
looked at the damsels and their favour pleased him; so he said to
them, Let each and every of you make me hear something of what
she knoweth anent the history of the folk of yore and of peoples
long gone before!'--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan said unto King Zau al-Makan, "Thy father, who hath found
mercy, glanced at the damsels and their favour pleased him and he
said to them, 'Let each and every of you make me hear something
of what she knoweth anent the history of the folk of yore and of
peoples long gone before!' Thereupon one of them came forward
and, kissing the ground before him, spake as follows[FN#329]
'Know, O King, that it behoveth one of good breeding to eschew
impertinence and adorn himself with excellencies, and observe the
Divine injunctions and avoid mortal sins; and to this he should
apply himself with the assiduity of one who, if he stray
therefrom, falleth into perdition; for the foundation of good
breeding is virtuous behaviour.  And know that the chief cause
and reason of man's existence is the endeavour after life
everlasting, and the right way thereto is the service of Allah. 
Wherefore it behoveth thee to deal beneficently with the people:
and swerve not from this canon, for the mightier men are in
dignity, the more their need of prudence and foresight; and
indeed Monarchs need this more than the many, for the general
cast themselves into affairs, without taking thought to the issue
thereof.  Be thou prodigal of thy life and thy good in the way of
Allah, and know that, if an enemy dispute with thee, thou mayst
dispute with him and refute him with proofs and be proof against
him; but as for thy friend, there is none can judge between thee
and him save righteousness and fair dealing.  Choose, therefore,
thy friend for thyself, after thou hast proved him.  If he be of
the brotherhood of futurity,[FN#330] let him be zealous in
observing the externals of the Holy Law and versed in its inner
meaning, as far as may be; and if he be of the brotherhood of the
world, let him be free born, sincere, neither a fool nor a
perverse, for the fool man is such that even his parents might
well flee from him, and a liar cannot be a true friend.  Indeed
the word, Siddik[FN#331] ('friend') deriveth from Sidk ('truth')
that welleth up from the bottom of the heart; and how can this be
the case, when falsehood is manifest upon the tongue?  And know,
that the observance of the Law profiteth him who practiseth it:
so love thy brother, if he be of this quality and do not cast him
off, even if thou see in him that which irketh thee, for a friend
is not I like a wife, whom one can divorce and re-marry: nay, his
heart is like glass: once broken, it may not be mended.  And
Allah bless him who saith,

'Ware how thou hurtest man with hurt of heart; * 'Tis hard to win
     thee back the heart offended:
For hearts indeed, whence love is alien made, * Like broken glass
     may nevermore be mended.'

The maiden continued and concluded with pointing out to us what
sages say, 'The best of brethren is he who is the most constant
in good counsel; the best of action is that which is fairest in
its consequence, and the best of praise is not that which is in
the mouths of men.  It is also said, 'It behoveth not the servant
to neglect thanking Allah especially for two favours, health and
reason.' Again it is said, 'Whoso honoureth himself, his lust is
a light matter to him, and he who maketh much of his small
troubles, Allah afflicteth him with the greater; he who obeyeth
his own inclination neglecteth his duties and he who listeneth to
the slanderer loseth the true friend.  He who thinketh well of
thee, do thou fulfill his thought of thee.  He who exceedeth in
contention sinneth, and he who against upright standeth not on
ward, is not safe from the sword.  Now will I tell thee somewhat
of the duties of Kazis and judges.  Know, O King, that no
judgement serveth the cause of justice save it be given after
proof positive, and it behoveth the judge to treat all people on
the same level, to the intent that the great may not hunger for
oppression nor the small despair of justice.  Furthermore he
should extract proof from the complainant and impose an oath upon
the defendant; and mediation is admissible between Moslems,
except it be a compromise sanctioning the unlawful or forbidding
the lawful.[FN#332] If thou shalt have done aught during the day,
of which thy reason is doubtful but thy good intention is proved,
thou (O Kazi) shouldst revert to the right, for to do justice is
a religious obligation and to return to that which is right is
better than persistence in wrong.  Then (O judge) thou shouldest
study precedents and the law of the case and do equal justice
between the suitors, withal fixing thine eyes upon the truth and
committing thine affair to Allah (be He extolled and exalted!). 
And require thou proof of the complainant, and if he adduce
evidence let him have due benefit of it; and if not, put the
defendant to his oath; for this is the ordinance of Allah. 
Receive thou the testimony of competent Moslem witnesses, one
against other, for Almighty Allah hath commanded judges to judge
by externals, He Himself taking charge of the inner and secret
things.  It behoveth the judge also to avoid giving judge meet,
whilst suffering from stress of pain or hunger,[FN#333] and that
in his decisions between folk he seek the face of Allah Almighty
for he whose intent is pure and who is at peace with himself,
Allah shall guarantee him against what is between him and the
people.' Quoth al-Zuhri,[FN#334] 'There are three things for
which, if they be found in a Kazi, he should be deposed; namely,
if he honour the base, if he love praise and if he fear
dismissal.  And Omar bin Abd al-Aziz once deposed a Kazi, who
asked him, 'Why hast thou dismissed me?  It hath reached me,'
answered Omar, 'that thy converse is greater than thy condition.'
It is said also that Iskandar[FN#335] said to his Kazi, 'I have
invested thee with this function and committed to thee in it my
soul and mine honour and my manliness; so do thou guard it with
thy sense and thine understanding.' To his Cook he said, 'Thou
art the Sultan of my body; so look thou tender it as thine own
self.' To his Secretary he said, 'Thou art the controller of my
wit: so do thou watch over me in what thou writest for me and
from me.'" Thereupon the first damsel backed out from the
presence and a second damsel came forward.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

                When it was the Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir Dandan said to Zau al-Makan, "Thereupon the first damsel
backed out from the presence and a second damsel came forward
and, kissing the ground seven times before the King thy father,
spake as follows, 'The sage Lukman[FN#336] said to his son,
'There be three who are known only in three several cases; the
merciful man is unknown save in time of wrath, the brave only in
battle, and thy friend in time of need.' It is said that the
oppressor shall be depress though by people praised, and that the
oppress is at rest though by people blamed.  Quoth Allah
Almighty,[FN#337] 'Assuredly deem not that those who rejoice in
what they have done, and who love to be praised for what they
have not done, shall escape reckoning of punishment: indeed there
is reserved for them a grievous penalty.' And he said[FN#338] (on
whom be salvation and salutation!), 'Works are according to
intention and to each man is attributed that which he intendeth.'
He said also, 'In the body is a part which being sound the rest
is sound, and which being unsound the whole is unsound.' And this
is the heart.  Now this heart is the most marvellous of what is
in man, since it is that which ordereth his whole affair: If
covetise stir in it, desire destroyeth him, and if affliction
master it, anguish slayeth him; if anger rage in it, danger is
hard upon him; if it be blest with contentment, he is safe from
discontent; if fear surprise it, he is full of mourning; and if
calamity overtake it, affliction betideth him.  If a man gain the
use of wealth, peradventure he is diverted thereby from the
remembrance of his Lord; if poverty choke him his heart is
distracted by woe, or if disquietude waste his heart, weakness
causeth him to fall.  Thus, in any case, nothing profiteth him
but that he be mindful of Allah and occupy himself with gaining
his livelihood in this world and securing his place in the next. 
It was asked of a certain sage, 'Who is the most ill conditioned
of men?'; and he answered, 'The man whose lusts master his
manhood and whose mind soareth over high, so that his knowledge
dispreadeth and his excuse diminisheth; and how excellently saith
the poet,

Freest am I of all mankind fro' meddling wight * Who, seeing
     others err, self error ne'er can sight:
Riches and talents are but loans to creature lent, * Each wears
     the cloak of that he bears in breast and sprite:
If by mistaken door attempt on aught thou make, * Thou shalt go
     wrong and if the door be right, go right!'

Continued the maiden, 'As for anecdotes of devotees, quoth Hisham
bin Bashar, 'I asked Omar bin Ubayd, What is true piety?'; and he
answered, 'The Apostle of Allah (to whom be salutation and
salvation!) hath explained it when he sayeth, The pious is he who
forgetteth not the grave nor calamity and who preferreth that
which endureth to that which passeth away; who counteth not the
morrow as of his days but reckoneth himself among the dead.' And
it is related that Abu Zarr[FN#339] used to say, Want is dearer
to me than wealth, and unheal is dearer to me than health.' Quoth
one of the listeners, 'May Allah have mercy on Abu Zarr!'.  For
my part, I say, 'Whoso putteth his trust in the goodness of the
election of Almighty Allah should be content with that condition
which Allah hath chosen for him.' Quoth one of the Companions of
the Prophet, 'Ibn Abi Aufa[FN#340] once prayed with us the dawn
prayer.  When he had done, he recited, 'O Thou
Enwrapped!'[FN#341] till he came to where Allah saith, 'When
there shall be a trumping on the trumpet,' and fell down dead. 
It is said that Sabit al-Banani wept till he well nigh lost his
eyes.  They brought him a man to medicine him who said to him, 'I
will cure thee, provided thou obey my bidding' Asked Sabit, 'In
what matter?' Quoth the leach, 'In that thou leave weeping!'
'What is the worth of mine eyes?', rejoined Sabit, 'if they do
not weep?' Quoth a man to Mohammed bin Abdillah, 'Exhort thou
me!'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir Dandan said to Zau al-Makan, "Thus spake the second hand
maid to the King who hath found mercy, Omar bin al-Nu'uman. 
'Quoth a man to Mohammed bin Abdillah, Exhort thou me!' 'I exhort
thee,' replied he, 'to be a self ruler, an abstainer in this
world, and in the next a greedy slave.' 'How so?' asked the other
and Mohammed answered, 'The abstinent man in this world
conquereth both the world that is and the world to come.' And
quoth Ghaus bin Abdillah, 'There were two brothers among the sons
of Israel, one of whom said to the other, 'What be the most
perilous[FN#342] thing thou hast done?' Replied the brother, 'I
once came upon a nest of young birds; so I took out one and threw
it back into the nest; but among the chickens were some which
drew apart from it.  This is the most perilous thing I ever did;
now what be the most perilous thing thou hast ever done?' He
rejoined, 'When I arise for prayer I am fearful that it is only
for the sake of the reward.' Now their father heard these words
and exclaimed, 'O Allah, an say they sooth take them to Thyself!'
It was declared by one of the wise men, 'Verily, these were of
the most virtuous of children.' Quoth Sa'id bin Jubayr,[FN#343]
'I was once in company with Fuzalah bin 'Ubaydand said to him,
'Exhort thou me!, Replied he, 'Bear in mind these two
necessaries, Shun syntheism[FN#344] and harm not any of Allah's
creatures.' And he repeated these two couplets,

'Be as thou wilt, for Allah still is bounteous Lord, * And care
     dispeller dread not therefore bane and ban
To two things only never draw thee nigh, nor give * Partner to
     Allah trouble to thy brother man.'

And how well saith the poet,

'An thou of pious works a store neglect * And after death meet
     one who did collect,
Thou shalt repent thou diddest not as he, * Nor madest ready as
     he did elect.'

Then the third damsel came forward, after the second had with
drawn, and said, 'Of a truth, the chapter of piety is exceeding
wide; but I will mention what occurreth to me thereof, concerning
the pious of old.  Quoth a certain holy man, 'I congratulate
myself in death, though I am not assured of rest therein, save
that I know death interveneth between a man and his works; so I
hope for the doubling of good works and the docking off of ill
works.' And Ita'a al Salami, when he had made an end of an
exhortation, was wont to tremble and grieve and weep sore; and as
they asked him why he did this he answered, 'I desire to enter
upon a grave matter, and it is the standing up before Almighty
Allah to do in accordance with my exhortation.' In similar guise
Zayn al-Abidin,[FN#345] son of Al-Husayn, was wont to tremble
when he rose to pray.  Being asked the cause of this, he replied,
'Know ye not before whom I stand and whom I address?' It is said
that there lived near Sufyan al-Thauri[FN#346] a blind man who,
when the month of Ramazan came, went out with the folk to
pray,[FN#347] but remained silent and hung back.  Said Sufyan,
'On the Day of Resurrection he shall come with the people of the
Koran and they will be distinguished by increase of honour from
their fellows.' Quoth Sufyan, 'Were the soul established in the
heart as befitteth, it would fly away for joy and pining for
Paradise, and for grief and fear of hell-fire.' It is related
also of Sufyan Al-Thauri that he said, 'To look upon the face of
a tyrant is a sin.' Then the third damsel retired and came for
ward the fourth, who said, 'Here am I to treat of sundry
traditions of pious men which suggest themselves to me.  It is
related that Bishr Barefoot[FN#348] said, 'I once heard Khalid
say, 'Beware of secret polytheism.' I asked, 'What may secret
polytheism be?'; and he answered, 'When one of you in praying
prolong his inclinations and prostrations till a cause of
impurity[FN#349] come upon him.' And one of the sages said,
'Doing works of weal expiateth what is ill.' Quoth
Ibrahim,[FN#350] 'I supplicated Bishr Barefoot to acquaint me
with some theological mysteries; but he said, 'O my son, this
knowledge it behoveth us not to teach to every one; of every
hundred five, even as the legal alms upon money.' Said Ibrahim,
'I thought his reply excellent and approved of it and while I was
praying behold, Bishr was also praying: so I stood behind
him[FN#351] making the prayer bow till the Mu'ezzin called his
call.  Then rose a man of tattered appearance and said, O folk,
beware of a truth which bringeth unweal, for there is no harm in
a lie bringing weal,[FN#352] and in time of need no choice we
heed: speech booteth not in the absence of good qualities even as
silence hurteth not in the presence of good.  Presently I saw
Bishr drop a danik,[FN#353] so I picked it up and exchanged it
for a dirham which I gave him.  Quoth he, 'I will not take it.'
Quoth I, 'It is perfectly lawful change'; but he rejoined 'I
cannot take in exchange the riches of the present world for those
of the future world.' It is related also that Bishr Barefoot's
sister once went to Ahmad bin Hanbal"[FN#354]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to bespeak Zau al-Makan on this wise, "And quoth
the maiden to thy father, 'Bishr Barefoot's sister once went to
Ahmad bin Hanbal and said to him, 'O Imam of the Faith, we are a
family that spin thread by night and work for our living by day;
and oftentimes the cressets of the watch of Baghdad pass by and
we on the roof spinning by their light.  Is this forbidden to
us?' Asked Ahmad:'Who are thou?' 'I am the sister of Bishr
Barefoot,' answered she.  Rejoined the Iman, 'O household of
Bishr, I shall never cease to drink full draughts of piety from
your hearts.' Quoth one of the sages, 'When Allah willeth well to
His servant He openeth upon him the gate of action.' Malik bin
Dinar,[FN#355] when he passed through the bazar and saw aught he
desired, was wont to say, 'O soul, take patience, for I will not
accord to thee what thou desirest.' He said also (Allah accept
him!), 'The salvation of the soul lies in resistance to it and
its damnation in submission to it.' Quoth Mansur bin
Ammar,[FN#356] 'I made a pilgrimage and was faring Meccahwards by
way of Cufa, and the night was overcast, when I heard a voice
crying out from the deeps of the darkness saying, 'O Allah, I
swear by Thy Greatness and Thy Glory, I meant not through my
disobedience to transgress against Thee; for indeed I am not
ignorant of Thee; but my fault is one Thou didst foreordain to me
from eternity without beginning;[FN#357] so do Thou pardon my
transgression, for indeed I disobeyed Thee of my ignorance!' When
he had made an end of his prayer he recited aloud the verse, 'O
true believers, save your souls and those of your families from
the fire whose fuel is men and stones.'[FN#358] Then I heard a
fall, but not knowing what it was I passed on.  When the morning
morrowed, as we went our way, behold, we fell in with a funeral
train, followed by an old woman whose strength had left her.  I
asked her of the dead, and she answered, 'This is the funeral of
a man who passed by us yesterday whilst my son was standing at
prayer and after his prayers he recited a verse from the Book of
Allah Almighty when the man's gall bladder burst and he fell
dead.' Therewith the fourth damsel retired and the fifth came
forward and said, 'I here will also repeat what occurreth to me
regarding the acts of devotees in olden time.  Maslamah bin Dinar
used to say, 'By making sound the secret thoughts, sins great and
small are covered'; and, 'when the servant of Allah is resolved
to leave sinning, victory cometh to him.' Also quoth he, 'Every
worldly good which doth not draw one nearer to Allah is a
calamity, for a little of this world distracteth from a mickle of
the world to come and a mickle of the present maketh thee forget
the whole of the future.' It was asked of Abu Hazim,[FN#359] 'Who
is the most prosperous of men?'; and he answered, 'Whoso spendeth
his life in submission to Allah.' The other enquired, 'And who is
the most foolish of mankind?' 'Whoso selleth his future for the
worldly goods of others,' replied Abu Hazim.  It is reported of
Moses[FN#360] (on whom be peace!) that when he came to the waters
of Midian he exclaimed, 'O Lord, verily I stand in need of the
good which thou shalt send down to me.'[FN#361] And he asked of
his Lord and not of his folk.  There came two damsels and he drew
water for them both and allowed not the shepherds to draw first. 
When the twain returned, they informed their father Shu'ayb (on
whom be peace!) who said, 'Haply, he is hungry,' adding to one of
them, 'Go back to him and bid him hither.' Now when she came to
Moses, she veiled her face and said, 'My father biddeth thee to
him that he may pay thee thy wage for having drawn water for us.'
Moses was averse to this and was not willing to follow her.  Now
she was a woman large in the back parts, and the wind blowing
upon her garment[FN#362] covered the hinder cheeks to Moses;
which when Moses saw, he lowered his eyes and said to her, 'Get
thee behind while I walk in front.' So she followed him till he
entered the house of Shu'ayb where supper was ready."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan, "Now, quoth the fifth damsel to
thy sire, 'When Moses (on whom be peace!) entered the home of
Shu'ayb where supper was ready, Shu'ayb said to him, 'O Moses, I
desire to pay thee thy wage for having drawn water for these
two.' But Moses answered, 'I am of a household which selleth
nothing of the fashion of the next world[FN#363] for what is on
earth of gold and silver.' Then quoth Shu'ayb, 'O youth! 
nevertheless thou art my guest, and it is my wont and that of my
forbears to honour the guest by setting food before him.' So
Moses sat down and ate.  Then Shu'ayb hired Moses for eight
pilgrimages, that is to say, eight years, and made his wage
marriage with one of his two daughters, and Moses' service to him
was to stand for her dowry.  As saith the Holy Writ of him,
'Verily I will give thee one of these my two daughters in
marriage, on condition that thou serve me for hire eight
pilgrimages: and if thou fulfil ten years, it is in thine own
breast; for I seek not to impose a hardship on thee.'[FN#364] A
certain man once said to one of his friends whom he had not met
for many days, 'Thou hast made me desolate, for that I have not
seen thee this long while.' Quoth the other, 'I have been
distracted from thee by Ibn Shihab: dost thou know him?' Quoth
his friend, 'Yes, he hath been my neighbour these thirty years,
but I have never spoken to him.' He replied, 'Verily thou
forgettest Allah in forgetting--thy neighbour!  If thou lovedst
Allah thou wouldst love thy neighbour.  Knowest thou not that a
neighbour hath a claim upon his neighbour,[FN#365] even as the
right of kith and kin?' Said Huzayfah, 'We entered Meccah with
Ibrahim bin Adham, and Shakik al-Balkhi was also making a
pilgrimage that year.  Now we met whilst circumambulating the
Ka'abah and Ibrahim said to Shakik, 'What is your fashion in your
country?' Replied Shakik, 'When we are blest with our daily bread
we eat, and when we hunger we take patience.' 'This wise,' said
Ibrahim, 'do the dogs of Balkh; but we, when blest with plenty,
do honour to Allah and when an hungered we thank Him.' And Shakik
seated himself before Ibrahim and said to him, 'Thou art my
master.' Also said Mohammed bin Imran, 'A man once asked of Hatim
the Deaf[FN#366] 'What maketh thee to trust in Allah?' 'Two
things,' answered he, 'I know that none save myself shall eat my
daily bread, so my heart is at rest as to that; and I know that I
was not created without the knowledge of Allah, and am abashed
before Him.' Then the fifth damsel retired and the ancient dame
came forward and, kissing the ground before thy father nine
times, said, 'Thou hast heard, O King, what these all have spoken
on the subject of piety; and I will follow their example in
relating what hath reached me of the famous men of past times. 
It is said that the Imam al-Shafi'i departed the night into three
portions, the first for study, the second for sleep and the third
for prayer.  The Imam Abu Hanifah[FN#367] was wont also to pass
half the night in prayer.  One

day a man pointed him out to another, as he walked by and
remarked, 'Yonder man watcheth the whole night.' When he heard
this Abu Hanifah said, 'I was abashed before Allah to hear myself
praised for what was not in me'; so after this he used to watch
the whole night.  And one of the Sages hath said,

'Who seeketh for pearl in the Deep dives deep; * Who on high
     would hie robs his night of sleep.'

Al-Rabi a relates that Al-Shafi'i used to recite the whole Koran
seventy times during the month of Ramazan, and that in his daily
prayers.  Quoth Al-Shafi'i (Allah accept him!), 'During ten years
I never ate my fill of barley bread, for fullness hardeneth the
heart and deadeneth the wit and induceth sleep and enfeebleth one
from standing up to pray.'[FN#368] It is reported of Abdullah bin
Mohammed al-Sakra that he said, 'I was once talking with Omar and
he observed to me, 'Never saw I a more God fearing or eloquent
man than Mohammed bin Idris al-Shafi'i.' It so happened I went
out one day with Al-Haris bin Labib al-Saffar, who was a disciple
of Al-Muzani[FN#369] and had a fine voice and he read the saying
of the Almighty, 'This shall be a day whereon they shall not
speak to any purpose, nor shall they be permitted to excuse
themselves.'[FN#370] I saw Al-Shafi'i's colour change; his skin
shuddered with horripilation, he was violently moved and he fell
down in a fainting fit When he revived he said, 'I take refuge
with Allah from the stead of the liars and the lot of the
negligent!  O Allah, before whom the hearts of the wise abase
themselves, O Allah, of Thy bene ficence accord to me the
remission of my sins, adorn me with the curtain of Thy protection
and pardon me my shortcomings, by the magnanimity of Thy Being!'
Then I rose and went away.  Quoth one of the pious, 'When I
entered Baghdad, Al-Shafi'i was there.  So I sat down on the
river bank to make the ablution before prayer; and behold, there
passed me one who said, 'O youth, make thy Wuzu-ablution well and
Allah will make it well for thee in this world and in the next.'
I turned and lo!  there was a man behind whom came a company of
people.  So I hastened to finish my ablution and followed him. 
Presently, he turned and asked me, 'Say, dost thou want aught?'
'Yes,' answered I, 'I desire that thou teach me somewhat of that
which Allah Almighty hath taught thee.' He said, 'Know then that
whoso believeth in Allah shall be saved, and whoso jealously
loveth his faith shall be delivered from destruction, and whoso
practiseth abstinence in this world, his eyes shall be solaced on
the morrow of death.  Shall I tell thee any more?' I replied,
'Assuredly;' and he continued, 'Be thou of the world that is,
heedless; and of the world to come, greediest.  Be truthful in
all thy dealings, and thou shalt be saved with the
Salvationists.' Then he went on and I asked about him and was
told that he was the Imam Al-Shafi'i.  Al-Shafi'i was wont to
remark, 'I love to see folk profit by this learning of mine, on
condition that nothing of it be attributed to me."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan, "The old woman bespake thy
sire, saying, 'The Imam Al-Shafi'i was wont to remark, I love to
see folk profit by this learning of mine on condition that
nothing of it be attributed to me.' He also said, 'I never
disputed with any one, but I would that Almighty Allah should
give him the knowledge of the Truth and aid him to dispread it:
nor did I ever dispute with anyone at all but for the showing
forth of the Truth, and I reck not whether Allah manifest it by
my tongue or by His.' He said also (whom Allah accept!), 'If thou
fear to grow conceited of thy lore, then bethink thee Whose grace
thou seekest and for what good thou yearnest and what punishment
thou dreadest.' It was told to Abu Hanifah that the Commander of
the Faithful, Abu Ja'afar al-Mansur, had appointed him Kazi and
ordered him a salary of ten thousand dirhams; but he would not
accept of this; and, when the day came on which the money was to
be paid him, he prayed the dawn prayer, then covered his head
with his robe--and spoke not.  When the Caliph's messenger came
with the money, he went in to the Imam and accosted him, but he
would not speak to him.  So the messenger said, 'Verily this
money is lawfully thine.' 'I know that it is lawfully mine,'
replied he: 'but I abhor that the love of tyrants get a hold upon
my heart.'[FN#371]  Asked the other, 'If thou go in to them canst
thou not guard thyself from loving them?' Answered Abu Hanifah,
'Can I look to enter the sea without my clothes being wet?'
Another of Al-Shafi'i's sayings (Allah accept him!) is,

'Oh soul of me, an thou accept my rede, * Thou shalt be wealthy
     and of grace entire:
Cast off ambitious hopes and vain desires, * How many a death was
     done by vain desire!'

Among the sayings of Sufyan al-Thauri, with which he admonished
Ali bin al-Hasan al-Salami was, 'Be thou a man of truth and 'ware
lies and treachery and hypocrisy and pride.  Be not indebted save
to Him who is merciful to His debtors; and let thine associate be
one who shall dissociate thee from the world.  Be ever mindful of
death and be constant in craving pardon of Allah and in
beseeching of Allah peace for what remaineth of thy life. 
Counsel every True Believer, when he asketh thee concerning the
things of his faith; and beware of betraying a Believer, for
whoso betrayeth a Believer, betrayeth Allah and His Apostle. 
Avoid dissensions and litigation; and leave that which causeth
doubt in thee for things which breed no doubt:[FN#372] so shalt
thou be at peace.  Enjoin beneficence and forbid malevolence: so
shalt thou be loved of Allah.  Adorn thine inner man and Allah
shall adorn thine outer man.  Accept the excuse of him who
excuseth self to thee and hate not any one of the Moslems.  Draw
near unto those who withdraw from thee and excuse those that
misuse thee: so shalt thou be the friend of the Prophets.  Let
thine affairs, both public and private, be in Allah's charge, and
fear Him with the fear of one who knoweth he is dead and who
fareth towards Resurrection and Judgement stead between the hands
of the Lord of Dread; and remember that to one of two houses thou
art sped, either for Heavens eterne or to the Hell fires that
burn.' Thereupon the old woman sat down beside the damsels.  Now
when thy father, who hath found mercy, heard their discourse, he
knew that they were the most accomplished of the people of their
time; and, seeing their beauty and loveliness and the extent of
their wisdom and lore, he showed them all favour.  Moreover, he
turned to the ancient dame and treated her with honour, and set
apart for her and her damsels the palace which had lodged
Princess Abrizah, daughter of the King of Greece, to which he
bade carry all the luxuries they needed.  They abode with him ten
days and the old woman abode with them; and, whenever the King
visited them, he found her absorbed in prayer, watching by night
and fasting by day; whereby love of her took hold upon his heart
and he said to me, 'O Wazir, verily this old woman is of the
pious, and awe of her is strong in my heart.' Now on the eleventh
day, the King visited her, that he might pay her the price of the
damsels; but she said to him, 'O King, know that the price of
these maidens surpasseth the competence of men; indeed I seek not
for them either gold or silver or jewels, be it little or much.'
Now when thy father heard these words he wondered and asked her,
'O my lady and what is their price?'; whereto she answered, 'I
will not sill them to thee save on condition that thou fast,
watching by night a whole month, and abstaining by day, all for
the love of Allah Almighty; and, if thou do this, they are thy
property to use in thy palace as thou please.' So the King
wondered at the perfection of her rectitude and piety and
abnegation; she was magnified in his eyes and he said, 'Allah
make this pious woman to profit us!' Then he agreed with her to
fast for a month as she had stipulated, and she said to him, 'I
will help thee with the prayers I pray for thee and now bring me
a gugglet of water.' They brought one and she took it and recited
over it and muttered spells, and sat for an hour speaking in
speech no one understood or knew aught thereof.  Lastly she
covered it with a cloth and, sealing it with her signet ring,
gave it to thy sire, saying, 'When thou hast fasted the first ten
days, break thy fast on the eleventh night with what is in this
gugglet, for it will root out the love of the world from thy
heart and fill it with light and faith.  As for me, tomorrow I
will go forth to my brethren, the Invisible[FN#373] Controuls,
for I yearn after them, and I will return to thee when the first
ten days are past.  Thy father took the gugglet and arose and set
it apart in a closet of his palace, then locked the door and put
the key in his pocket.  Next day the King fasted and the old
woman went her ways."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan thus continued to Zau al-Makan, "Now when came the day for
the Sultan's fast, the old woman went her ways.  And after he had
accomplished the ten days thereof, on the eleventh he opened the
gugglet and drank what was therein and found it cordial to his
stomach.  Within the second ten days of the month the old woman
returned, bringing sweetmeats wrapped in a green leaf, like no
leaf of known tree.  She went in to thy sire and saluted him;
and, when he saw her, he rose to her saying, 'Welcome, O pious
lady!' 'O King,' quoth she, 'the Invisible Controuls salute thee,
for I told them of thee, and they rejoiced in thee and have sent
thee their Halwa,[FN#374] which is of the sweetmeats of the other
world.  Do thou break thy fast on it at the end of the day.' The
King rejoiced at this with great joy, and exclaimed, 'Praised be
Allah, who hath given me brethren of the Invisible World!'
Thereupon he thanked the ancient dame and kissed her hands; and
he honoured her and the damsels with exceeding honour.  She went
forth for the twenty days of thy father's fast at the end of
which time she came to him and said, 'Know, O King, that I told
the Invisible Controuls of the love which is between me and thee,
and informed them how I had left the maidens with thee, and they
were glad that the damsels should belong to a King like thee; for
they were wont, when they saw them, to be strenuous in offering
on their behalf prayers and petitions ever granted.  So I would
fain carry them to the Invisible Controuls that they may benefit
by the breath of their favour, and peradventure, they shall not
return to thee without some treasure of the treasures of the
earth, that thou, after completing thy fast, mayst occupy thyself
with their raiment and help thyself by the money they shall bring
thee, to the extent of thy desires.' When thy sire heard her
words, he thanked her for them and said, 'Except that I fear to
cross thee, I would not accept the treasure or aught else; but
when wilt thou set out wit