 bate
Unless escape be near I soon shall die; * And Death were better
     than this doleful strait:
O Lightning an thou light my home and folk, * An their still
     brighter charms thy shine abate,
Say, what my path to meet them, being barred * By wars, and
     barricado'd succour's gate?'

"When once ye have brought me into the Moslem camp, and I mix
with them you shall see," the old woman continued, "how I will
make shift to beguile them and slay them all, even to the last
man." The Nazarenes hearing whet she said, kissed her hands and
set her in the chest, after they had beaten her with a grievous
beating in obedience to her commands, for they saw it was
incumbent on them to do her bidding in this; then they all made
for the Moslem host as hath erst been said.  Such was the case
with the damned hag, Zat al-Dawahi and her companions; but as
regards the Mohammeden army, they indeed, after Allah had given
them victory over their enemies and they had plundered everything
in the ships of money and hoards, all sat down to converse with
one another and Zau al-Makan said to his brother Sharrkan,
"Verily, Allah hath granted us to prevail because of our just
dealing and discipline and concord amongst ourselves; wherefore
continue, O Sharrkan, to obey my commandment, in submission to
Allah (be He exalted and extolled!), for I mean to slay ten Kings
in blood revenge for my sire, to cut the throat of fifty thousand
Greeks and to enter Constantinople." Replied Sharrkan, "My life
be thy ransom against death!  Needs must I follow out the Holy
War, though I wone many a year in their country.  But I have, O
my brother, in Damascus a daughter, named Kuzia Fakan, whom I
love heartily for she is one of the marvels of the time and she
will soon be of age.' Said Zau al-Makan, "And I also have left my
wife with child and near her time, nor do I know what Allah will
vouchsafe me by her.  But promise me, O my brother, that if Allah
bless me with a son, thou wilt grant me thy daughter for wife to
him, and make covenant with me and pledge me thy faith thereon."
"With love and good will, replied Sharrkan; and, stretching out
his hand to his brother, he said, If she bring thee a son, I will
give him my daughter Kuzia Fakan, to wife." At this Zau al-Makan
rejoiced, and they fell to congratulating each other on the
victory over the enemy.  And the Wazir Dandan also congratulated
the two brothers and said to them, "Know, O ye Kings, that Allah
hath given us the victory, for that we have devoted our lives to
Him (be He exalted and ex tolled!); and we have left our homes
and households; and it is my counsel that we follow up the foe
and press upon him and harass him, so haply Allah shall enable us
to win our wishes, and we shall destroy our enemies, branch and
root.  If it please you, do ye go down in these ships and sail
over the sea, whilst we fare forward by land and bear the brunt
of battle and the thrust of fight." And the Minister Dandan
ceased not to urge them to combat and repeated his words who
said,

"To slay my foes is chiefest bliss I wist, * And on the courser's
     back be borne a list;
Comes promising tryst a messenger from friend * Full oft, when
     comes the friend withouten tryst."

And these words of another,

"War for my mother (an I live) I'll take; * Spear for my brother;
     scymitar for sire
With every shag haired brave who meets his death * Smiling, till
     won from Doom his dear desire!"

And when the Wazir ended his verses, he said, "Praise be to Him
who aided us dear victory to uphold and who hath given us spoil
of silver and fine gold!" Then Zau al-Makan commanded the army to
depart; and they fared on forcing their marches for
Constantinople, till they came to a wide and spacious champaign,
full of all things fair and fain, with wild cattle frisking and
gazelles pacing to and fro across the plain.  Now they had
traversed great deserts and drink had been six days cut off from
them, when they drew near this meadow and saw therein waters
founting and ripe fruits daunting and that land as it were
Paradise; for it had donned its adornments and decked
itself.[FN#417]  Gently waved the branches of its trees drunken
with the new wine of the dew, and combined with the nectar of
Tasnim the soft breathings of the morning breeze.  Mind and gazer
were confounded by its beauty, even as saith the poet,

"Behold this lovely garden!  'tis as though * Spring o'er its
     frame her greeny cloak had spread.
Looking with fleshly eyne, thou shalt but sight * A lake whose
     waters balance in their bed,
But look with spirit eyes and lo!  shalt see * Glory in every
     leaf o'erwaves thy head."

And as another saith,

"The stream's a cheek by sunlight rosy dyed, * Whose down[FN#418]
     is creeping shade of tamarisk stems
Round legs of tree trunks waveless roll in rings * Silvern, and
     blossoms are the diadems."

When Zau al-Makan saw this champaign, with its trees bowing and
its flowers blooming and its birds warbling, he called to his
brother Sharrkan and said, "O my brother, verily in Damascus is
naught the like of this place.  We will not march from it save
after three days, that we may take rest ourselves and that the
army of Al-Islam may regain strength and their souls be fortified
to encounter the blamed Infidels." So they halted therein and
while camping behold, they heard a noise of voices from afar, and
Zau al-Makan asked the cause thereof, and was answered that a
caravan of merchants from the Land of Syria had halted there to
rest and that the Moslem troops had come on them and had haply
seized something of the goods which they had brought from the
country of the Infidels.  After a while up came the merchants,
crying out and appealing to the King for aidance.  When Zau al-
Makan saw this, he bade them be brought before him and, when in
presence they said to him, "O King, we have been in the country
of the Infidels and they plundered us of nothing: why then do our
brothers the Moslems despoil our goods, and we in their own land? 
Of a truth when we saw your troops, we went up to them and they
robbed us of what we had with us and we have now reported to thee
all that hath befallen us." Thereupon they brought out to him the
letter of the King of Constantinople, and Sharrkan read it and
said, "We will presently restore to you what hath been taken from
you; but yet it behoveth you not to carry merchandise to the
country of the Infidels." Replied they, "O our Lord, in very
sooth Allah despatched us thither that we might win what
Ghazi[FN#419] never won the like of, not even thou in all thy
razzias." Asked Sharrkan, "What was it ye won?" "O King,"
answered they, "we will not tell thee save in private; for if
this matter be noised among the folk, haply it may come to the
ears of some,[FN#420] and this will be the cause of our ruin and
of the ruin of all Moslems who resort to the land of the Greeks."
Now they had hidden the chest wherein was the damned Zat al-
Dawahi.  So Zau al-Makan and his brother brought them to a
private place, where they laid bare to both of them the story of
the devotee, and wept till they made the two Kings weep.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Nazarenes who wore merchants' weed, when brought to a private
place by Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan, laid bare to both
of them the story of the devotee and wept till they made the two
Kings weep and repeated to them all which had been taught by the
old witch Zat al-Dawahi.  Thereupon Sharrkan's heart yearned to
the devotee and he was moved to ruth for him and was fired with
zeal for the service of Almighty Allah.  So quoth he to them,
"Did ye rescue this holy man or is he still in the hermitage?"
Quoth they, "We delivered him and slew the hermit, fearing for
our lives; after which we made haste to fly for dread of death;
but a trusty man told us that in this hermitage are quintals of
gold and silver and stones of price." Then they fetched the chest
and brought out the accursed old woman, as she were a cassia
pod[FN#421] for excess of blackness and leanness, and she was
laden with the same fetters and shackles.  When Zau al-Makan and
the bystanders saw her, they took her for a man of the best of
Allah's devotees and surpassing in pious qualities, more
especially because of the shining of her forehead for the
ointment wherewith she had anointed her face.  So Zau al-Makan
and Sharrkan wept sore; then they rose up in honour and kissed
her hands and feet, sobbing aloud: but she signed to them and
said, "Cease this weeping and hear my words. Hereat they dried
their tears in obedience to her bidding, and she said, "Know ye
both that I was content to accept what my Lord did unto me, for I
kenned that the affliction which befel me was a trial from Him
(be He exalted and extolled!); and whoso hath not patience under
calamity and tribulation, for him there is no coming to the
delights of Paradise.  I had indeed supplicated Him that I might
return to my native land, not as a compensation for the
sufferings decreed to me, but that I might die under the horse
hoofs of warriors fighting for the Faith who, being slain in
fray, live again without suffering death."[FN#422] Then she
repeated the following couplets,

"Our Fort is Tor,[FN#423] and flames the fire of fight: * Moses
     art thou and this is time for aid:
Cast down thy rod, 'twill swallow all they wrought, * Nor dread
     for men their ropes be vipers made.[FN#424]
For Chapters read on fight day lines of foes, * And on their
     necks 'grave versets[FN#425] wi' thy blade!"

When the old woman had ended her verse, her eyes overflowed with
tears and her forehead under the unguent shone like gleaming
light, and Sharrkan rose and kissed her hand and caused food be
brought before her: but she refused it, saying, "I have not
broken my fast by day for fifteen years; and how should I break
it at such a time when my Lord hath been bountiful to me in
delivering me from the captivity of the Infidels and removing
from me that which was more grievous to me than torment of fire? 
I will wait till sun down." So when it was nightfall, Sharrkan
and Zau al-Makan came and served her with food and said, "Eat, O
ascetic!" But she said, "This is no time for eating; it is the
time for worshipping the Requiting King." Then she stood up in
the prayer niche and remained praying till the night was spent;
and she ceased not to do after this fashion for three days and
nights, sitting not but at the time of the Salam or
salutation[FN#426] ending with several prayers.  When Zau al-
Makan saw her on this wise, firm belief in her get hold of his
heart and he said to Sharrkan, "Cause a tent of perfumed leather
to be pitched for this Religious, and appoint a body servant to
wait upon him." On the fourth day she called for food; so they
brought her all kinds of meats that could seduce the sense or
delight the sight; but of all this she would eat only a scone
with salt.  Then she again turned to her fast and, as the night
came, she rose anew to pray; when Sharrkan said to Zau al-Makan,
"Verily, this man carrieth renunciation of the world to the
extreme of renouncing, and, were it not for this Holy War, I
would join myself to him and worship Allah in his service, till I
came before His presence.  And now I desire to enter his tent and
talk with him for an hour." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "And I also:
tomorrow we sally forth to fight against Constantinople, and we
shall find no time like the present." Said the Wazir Dandan, "And
I no less desire to see this ascetic; haply he will pray for me
that I find death in this Holy War and come to the presence of my
Lord, for I am aweary of the world." So as soon as night had
darkened, they repaired to the tent of that witch, Zat al-Dawahi;
and, seeing her standing to pray, they drew near her and fell a
weeping for pity of her; but she paid no heed to them till
midnight was past, when she ended her orisons by pronouncing the
salutation.  Then she turned to them and after wishing them long
life, asked them "Wherefore come ye?", whereto they answered, "O
thou holy man!  diddest thou not hear us weep around thee?" She
rejoined, "To him who standeth in the presence of Allah,
remaineth no existence in time, either for hearing any or for
seeing aught about him." Quoth they, "We would have thee recount
to us the cause of thy captivity and pray for us this night, for
that will profit us more than the possession of Constantinople."
Now when she heard their words she said, "By Allah, were ye not
the Emirs of the Moslems, I would not relate to you aught of this
at any time; for I complain not but to Allah alone.  However, to
you I will relate the circumstances of my captivity.  Know, then,
that I was in the saintly City of Jerusalem with certain
ecstatics and inspired men, and did not magnify myself among
them, for that Allah (be He exalted and extolled!) had endowed me
with humility and abnegation, till I chanced to go down to the
sea one night and walked upon the water.  Then entered into me
pride; whence I know not, and I said to myself, 'Who like me can
walk the water?' And my heart from that time hardened and Allah
afflicted me with the love of travel.  So I journeyed to Roum
land and visited every part for a whole year, and left no place
but therein I worshiped Allah.  When I came to this spot,[FN#427]
I clomb the mountain and saw there an hermitage, inhabited by a
monk called Matrubina, who, when he sighted me, came out and
kissed my hands and feet and said, 'Verily, I have seen thee
since thou enteredst the land of the Greeks, and thou hast filled
me with longing for the land of Al-Islam.' Then he took my hand
and carried me into that hermitage, and brought me to a dark
room; and, when I entered it unawares, he locked the door on me
and left me there forty days, without meat or drink; for it was
his intent to kill me by delay.  It chanced one day, that a
Knight called Dakianus[FN#428] came to the hermitage, accompanied
by ten squires and his daughter Tamasil, a girl whose beauty was
incom parable.  When they entered that hermitage, the monk
Matruhina told them of me, and the Knight said, 'Bring him out,
for surely there is not on him a bird's meal of meat.' So they
opened the door of the dark room and found me standing in the
niche, praying and reciting the Koran and glorifying Allah and
humbling myself before the Almighty.  When they saw me in this
state Matrohina exclaimed, 'This man is indeed a sorcerer of the
sorcerers!'; and hearing his words, they all came in on me,
Dakianus and his company withal, and they beat me with a grievous
beating, till I desired death and reproached myself, saying,
'This is his reward who exalteth himself and who prideth himself
on that which Allah hath vouchsafed to him, beyond his own
competence!  And thou, O my soul, verily self esteem and
arrogance have crept into thee.  Dost thou not know that pride
angereth the Lord and hardeneth the heart and bringeth men to the
Fire?' Then they laid me in fetters and returned me to my place
which was the dungeon under ground.  Every three days, they threw
me down a scone of barley bread and a draught of water; and every
month or two the Knight came to the hermitage.  Now his daughter
Tamasil had grown up, for she was nine years old when I first saw
her, and fifteen years passed over me in captivity, so that she
had reached her four and twentieth year.  There is not in our
land nor in the land of the Greeks a fairer than she, and her
father feared lest the King take her from him; for she had vowed
herself to the Messiah and rode with Dakianus in the habit of a
cavalier, so that albeit none might compare with her in
loveliness, no one who saw her knew her for a woman.  And her
father had laid up his monies in this hermitage, every one who
had aught of price or treasured hoard being wont to deposit it
therein; and I saw there all manner of gold and silver and jewels
and precious vessels and rarities, none may keep count of them
save Almighty Allah.  Now ye are worthier of these riches than
those Infidels; so lay hands on that which is in the hermitage
and divide it among the Moslems and especially on fighters in the
Holy War.  When these merchants came to Constantinople and sold
their merchandise, that image which is on the wall spoke to them,
by grace of a marvel which Allah granted to me; so they made for
that hermitage and slew Matruhina, after torturing him with most
grievous torments, and dragging him by the beard, till he showed
them the place where I was; when they took me and found no path
but flight for dread of death.  Now tomorrow night Tamasil will
visit that hermitage as is her habit, and her father and his
squires will come after her, as he feareth for her; so, if ye
would witness these things, take me with you and I will deliver
to you the monies and the riches of the Knight Dakianus which be
in that mountain; for I saw them bring out vessels of gold and
silver to drink therefrom, and I heard a damsel of their company
sing to them in Arabic and well-away!  that so sweet a voice
should not be busied in chaunting the Koran.  If, then, ye will;
enter into that hermitage and hide there against the coming of
Dakianus and his daughter; and take her, for she is fit only for
the King of the Age, Sharrkan, or King Zau al-Makan." Thereat
they all rejoiced with the exception of the Wazir Dandan, who put
scant faith in her story, for her words took no hold on his
reason, and signs of doubt in her and disbelief showed in his
face.[FN#429]  Yet he was confounded at her discourse, but he
feared to speak with her for awe of the King.  Then quoth the
ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi, "Verily, I fear lest the Knight come
and, seeing these troops encamped in the meadow, be afraid to
enter the hermitage." So Zau al-Makan ordered the army to march
upon Constantinople and said, "I have resolved to take with me an
hundred horse and many mules and make for that mountain, where we
will load the beasts with the monies which be in the hermitage."
Then he sent at once for the Chief Chamberlain whom they brought
into the presence; and he summoned likewise the leaders of the
Turks and Daylamites and said, "As soon as it is dawn, do ye set
forth for Constantinople; and thou, O Chamberlain, shalt take my
place in council and contrivance, while thou, O Rustam, shalt be
my brother's deputy in battle.  But let none know that we are not
with you and after three days we will rejoin you." Then he chose
out an hundred of the doughtiest riders, and he and Sharrkan and
the Minister Dandan set out for the hermitage, and the hundred
horsemen led the mules with chests for transporting the
treasure.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
and his brother, Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan set off with
an hundred horse for the hermitage described to them by that
accursed Zat al-Dawahi, and they took with them mules and chests
for transporting the treasure.  Now as soon as dawned the morn,
the Chamberlain signalled to the host an order for departure, and
they set out thinking that the two Kings and the Wazir were with
them; knowing not that the three had made for the monastery. 
Such was the case with the host, but as regards the two Kings and
the Minister, they tarried in their place till the end of that
day.  Now the Infidels who were with Zat al-Dawahi took their
departure privily, after they had gone in to her and kissed her
hands and feet and obtained her leave to march.  So she not only
gave them permission but also taught them all she minded of wile
and guile.  And when it was dark night, she arose and went in to
Zau al-Makan and his companions and said to them, "Come, let us
set out for the mountain, and take with you a few men at arms."
They obeyed her and left five horsemen at the foot of the
mountain, whilst the rest rode on before Zat al-Dawahi, who
gained new strength for excess of joy, so that Zau al-Makan said,
"Glory be to Him who sustaineth this holy man, whose like we
never saw!" Now the witch had written a letter to the King of
Constantinople and despatched it on the wings of a bird,[FN#430]
acquainting him with what had passed and ending, "I wish thee to
send me ten thousand horsemen of the bravest of the Greeks and
let them steal along the foot of the mountains with caution, lest
the host of Al-Islam get sight of them; and, when they reach the
hermitage, let them ambush themselves there, till I come to them
with the Moslem King and his brother, for I shall inveigle them
and will bring them thither, together with the Wazir and an
hundred horse and no more, that I may presently deliver to them
the crosses which be in the hermitage.  I am resolved to slay the
Monk Matruhina, since my scheme cannot be carried out but by
taking his life.  If my plot work well, not one of the Moslems
shall return to his own country; no, not a living wight nor one
who blows the fire alight; and Matruhina shall be a sacrifice for
the followers of the Nazarene faith and the servants of the
Cross, and praise be to the Messiah, first and last." When this
letter reached Constantinople, the keeper of the carrier pigeons
carried it to King Afridun, who read it and forthwith inspected
his host and equipped ten thousand cavaliers with horses and
dromedaries and mules and provaunt and bade them repair to that
hermitage and, after reaching the tower, to hide therein.  Thus
far concerning them; but as regards King Zau al-Makan and his
brother Sharrkan and the Wazir Dandan and the escort, when they
reached the hermitage they entered and met the Monk Matruhina,
who came out to see who and what they were; whereupon quoth that
pious man Zat al-Dawahi, "Slay this damned fellow."[FN#431] So
they smote him with their swords and made him drink the cup of
death.  Then the accursed old woman carried them to the place of
offerings and ex votos, and brought out to them treasures and
precious things more than she had described to them; and after
gathering the whole together, they set the booty in chests and
loaded the mules therewith.  As for Tamasil, she came not, she or
her father, for fear of the Moslems; so Zau al-Makan tarried
there, awaiting her all that day and the next and a third, till
Sharrkan said to him, "By Allah, I am troubled anent the army of
Al-Islam, for I know not what is become of them." His brother
replied, "And I also am concerned for them: we have come by this
great treasure and I do not believe that Tamasil or any one else
will approach the hermitage, after that befel which hath befallen
the host of the Christians.  It behoveth us, then, to content
ourselves with what Allah hath given us and depart; so haply He
will help us conquer Constantinople." Accordingly they came down
from the mountain, while Zat al-Dawahi was impotent to oppose
their march for fear of betraying her deceit; and they fared
forwards till they reached the head of a defile, where the old
woman had laid an ambush for them with the ten thousand horse. 
As soon as these saw the Moslems they encircled them from all
sides, couching lance and baring the white sabre blade; and the
Infidels shouted the watch word of their faithless Faith and set
the shafts of their mischief astring.  When Zau al-Makan and his
brother Sharrkan and the Minister Dandan looked upon this host,
they saw that it was a numerous army and said, "Who can have
given these troops information of us?" Replied Sharrkan, "O my
brother, this be no time for talk; this is the time for smiting
with swords and shooting with shafts) so gird up your courage and
hearten your hearts, for this strait is like a street with two
gates; though, by the virtue of the Lord of Arabs and Ajams, were
not the place so narrow I would bring them to naught, even though
they were an hundred thousand men!" Said Zau al-Makan, "Had we
wotted this we would have brought with us five thousand horse;"
and the Wazir Dandan continued, "If we had ten thousand horse
they had availed us naught in these narrows; but Allah will
succour us against them.  I know this defile and its straitness,
and I know there be many places of refuge in it; for I have been
here on razzia with King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, what while we
besieged Constantinople.  We abode in this place, and here is
water colder than snow.  So come, let us push out of this defile
ere the Infidel host increase on us and get the start of us to
the mountain top, whence they will hurl down rocks upon us, and
we powerless to come at them." So they began hurrying on to get
out of those narrows; but the pious man, Zat al-Dawahi, looked at
them and said, "What is it ye fear, ye who have vowed yourselves
to the Lord, and to working His will?  By Allah, I abode
imprisoned underground for fifteen years, yet never gainsaid the
Almighty in aught he did with me!  Fight ye in Allah's way; so
whoever of you is slain Paradise shall be his abode, and whoso
slayeth, his striving shall be to his honour." When they heard
from the ascetic these words, their care and anxiety ceased from
them and they stood firm till the Infidels charged down from all
sides, whilst the swords played upon their necks and the cup of
death went round amongst them.  The Moslems fought for the
service of Allah a right good fight, and wrought upon His foes
with sway of sword and lunge of lance; whilst Zau al-Makan smote
upon the men and garred the knights bite the dust and their heads
from their bodies take flight, five by five and ten by ten, till
he had done to death a number of them past numbering and an
accompt beyond counting.  Now while so doing, he looked at the
accursed old woman who was waving her sword and heartening them,
and all who feared fled to her for shelter; but she was also
signing the Infidels to slay Sharrkan.  So troop after troop
rushed on him with design to do him die; but each troop that
charged, he charged and drove back; and when another troop
attacked him he repelled the assault with the sword in their
backs; for he thought it was the devotee's blessing that gave him
the vic tory, and he said in himself, "Verily on this holy men
Allah looketh with eyes of His favour and strengtheneth my
prowess against the Infidels with the purity of his pious intent:
for I see that they fear me and cannot prevail against me, but
every one who assaileth me turneth tail and taketh flight." So
they battled the rest of the day and, when night fell, the
Moslems took refuge in a cave of that defile being weary with
stress of war and cast of stone: and that day were slain of them
five and forty.  And when they were gathered together, they
sought the devotee, but could find no trace of him; and this was
grievous to them and they said, "Belike, he hath died a martyr."
Quoth Sharrkan, "I saw him heartening the horsemen with divine
instances and using as talisman verses of Holy Writ." Now while
they were talking, behold, the accursed old woman, Zat al-Dawahi,
stood before them, hending in hand the head of the Chief Captain
of the ten thousand horse, a noble knight, a champion fierce in
fight and a Satan for blight.  One of the Turks had slain him
with an arrow, and Allah hurried his soul to the fire; and when
the Infidels saw what that Moslem had done with their leader,
they all fell on him and wrought his bane and hewed him in pieces
with their swords, and Allah hurried his soul to Heaven.  Then
the accursed old woman cut off that Knight's head and brought it
and threw it at the feet of Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan and the
Wazir Dandan.  Now when Sharrkan sew her, he sprang up hastily
before her and exclaimed, "Praised be Allah for thy safety and
for our sighting thee, O holy man and devout champion of the
Religion!" Replied she, O my son, I have sought martyrdom this
day, and have thrown my life away amid the Infidel array, but
they feared me with dismay.  When ye dispersed, I waxed jealous
for your honour; so I rushed on the Chief Knight their leader,
albeit he was a match for a thousand horse, and I smote him till
I severed head from trunk.  Not one of the Infidels could near
me; so I brought his head to you,"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

             When it was the Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damned witch, Zat al-Dawahi, took the head of the Knight, the
leader of the twenty thousand Infidels, she brought it and threw
it down before Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and the
Wazir Dandan, saying, "When I saw your condition, I waxed jealous
for your honour; so I rushed on the Chief Knight and smote him
with the sword till I severed head from trunk.  And none could
near me, so I brought his head to you, that you may be
strengthened in Holy War and work out with your swords the will
of the Lord of the Faithful.  And now I purpose leaving you to
strive against the Infidels, whilst I go to your army, though
they be at the gates of Constantinople, and return with twenty
thousand horse to destroy these Unfaithfuls." Quoth Sharrkan,
"How wilt thou pass to them, O thou holy man, seeing that the
valley is blocked up on all sides by the Miscreants?" Quoth the
accursed hag, "Allah will veil me from their eyes and they shall
not sight me;[FN#432] nor, if any saw me, would he dare to attack
me at that time, for I shall be as one non existing, absorbed in
Allah, and He will fend off from me His foes." "Thou sayest
sooth, O holy man," rejoined Sharrkan, "for indeed I have been
witness of that; so, if thou can pass out at the first of the
night, 'twill be best for us." Replied she, "I will set out at
this very hour and, if thou desire, thou shalt go with me and
none shall see thee.  Furthermore if thy brother also have a mind
to go with us we will take him, but none else; for the shadow of
a saint can cover only twain." Sharrkan said, "As for me I will
not leave my comrades; but, if my brother will, there is no harm
in his going with thee and setting us free of this strait; for he
is the stronghold of the Moslems and the sword of the Lord of the
three Worlds; and if it be his pleasure, let him take with him
the Wazir Dandan, or whom else he may elect and send us ten
thousand horse to succour us against these caitiffs." So after
debate they agreed on this and the old woman said, "Give me
leisure to go before you and consider the condition of the
Infidels, if they be asleep or awake." Quoth they, "We will not
go forth save with thee and trust our affair to Allah." "If I do
your bidding," replied she, "blame me not but blame yourselves;
for it is my rede that you await me till I bring you tidings of
the case." Then said Sharrkan, "Go to them and delay not from us,
for we shall be awaiting thee." Thereupon she fared forth and
Sharrkan turned to his brother addressing him and said, "Were not
this holy man a miracle worker, he had never slain yonder furious
knight.  This is proof sufficient of the ascetic's power; and of
a truth the pride of the Infidels is laid low by the slaying of
this cavalier, for he was violent, an evil devil and a stubborn."
Now whilst they were thus devising of the mighty works of the
devotee, behold, the accursed Zat al-Dawahi came upon them and
promised them victory over the Unbelievers; wherefor they thanked
her (not knowing that all this was wile and guile) and the damned
hag asked, "Where be the King of the Age, Zau al-Makan, and the
Minister Dandan?" Answered he, "Here am I!" Take with thee thy
Wazir," said she, "and follow after me, that we may fare forth to
Constantinople." Now she had acquainted the Infidels with the
cheat she had put upon the Moslems, and they rejoiced with
exceeding great joy, and said, Our hearts will not be contented
till we shall have slain their King in return for the Knight's
death; because we had no stouter rider than he;" and they added
(bespeaking the ill omened hag as she told them her plan of
faring to the land of the Moslems), "When thou bringest him to
us, we will bear him to King Afridun." Then she went out and went
out with her Zau al-Makan and the Minister Dandan, and she walked
on before the two saying, "Fare forth with the blessing of
Almighty Allah!" So they did her bidding, for the shaft of Pate
and Fortune of man's lot had shot them, and she ceased not
leading them both through the midst of the Grecian camp, till
they came to the defile, the narrow pass aforesaid, whilst the
Infidel enemy watched them, but did them no hindrance; for the
infernal old woman had enjoined this.  Now when Zau al-Makan and
the Wazir Dandan saw that the Infidel host offered them no let
and stay and yet had them in sight, the Wazir exclaimed, "By
Allah, this is one of the holy man's saintly miracles!  and
doubtless he be of the elect." Rejoined Zau al-Makan, "By Allah,
I think the Infidels be naught but blind, for we see them and
they see us not." And while they were thus praising the holy man
and recounting his mighty works and his piety and his prayers,
behold, the Infidels charged down on them from all sides and
surrounded them and seized them, saying, "Is there anyone else
with you twain, that we may seize upon him too?" And the Wazir
Dandan replied, "See you not yon other man that is before us?  '
Replied the Unbelievers, "By the truth of the Messiah and the
Monks, and the Primate and the Metropolitan, we see none save you
two!" Then Zau Al-Makan said, "By Allah, this is a chastisement
decreed to us by Almighty Allah!"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Unfaithful had seized upon King Zau al-Makan and the Wazir
Dandan, they said to the two, "Is there anyone else with you
twain, that we may seize upon him also?" And the Wazir Dandan
replied, "See you not yon other man who be with us?" They
rejoined, "By the truth of the Messiah and the Monks and the
Primate and the Metropolitan, we see none save you two!" Then the
Infidels laid shackles on their feet and set men to guard them
during the night, whilst Zat al-Dawahi fared on and disappeared
from their sight.  So they fell to lamenting and saying to each
other, "Verily, the opposing of pious men leadeth to greater
distress than this, and we are punished by the strait which hath
befallen us." So far concerning Zau al-Makan and the Wazir
Dandan; but as regards King Sharrkan, he passed that night in the
cavern with his comrades, and when dawned the day and he had
prayed the morn prayer, he and his men made ready to do battle
with the Infidel and he heartened them and promised them all
good.  Then they sallied out till they were hard upon the
Unbelievers and, when these saw them from afar, they cried out to
them, saying, "O Moslems, we have taken captives your Sultan and
your Wazir who hath the ordering of your affairs; and except ye
leave off fighting us, we will slay you to the last man; but an
you yield yourselves we will take you to our King, who will make
peace with you on condition that you quit our country and return
home and harm us in naught, and we will do you no harm in aught. 
If ye accept, it will be well for you; but if ye refuse there
remaineth nothing for you but death.  So we have told you sooth,
and this is our last word to you." Now when Sharrkan heard this
and was certified of the captivity of his brother and the Wazir
Dandan, he was weighed down with woe and wept; his force failed
him and, making sure of death, he said to himself, "Would I knew
the cause of their capture!  Did they fail of respect to the holy
man or disobey him, or what was the matter?" Then they sprang up
to battle with the Unbelievers and slew great numbers of them. 
The brave was known that day from craven men, and sword and spear
were dyed with bloody stain; for the Infidels flocked up on them,
as flies flock to drink, from hill and from plain; but Sharrkan
and his men ceased not to wage the fight of those who fear not to
die, nor let death hinder them from the pursuit of victory, till
the valley ran gore and earth was full of the slain she bore. 
And when night fell the armies separated each making for his own
place; and the Moslems returned to the cavern where gain and loss
were manifest to them: few remained of them and there was no
dependence for them but on Allah and the scymitar.  Now there had
been slain of them that day five and thirty men of the chiefest
Emirs, and they had killed thousands of the Infidels, footmen and
fighters on horse.  When Sharrkan saw this, the case was grievous
to him and he asked his comrades "What shall we do?"; whereto all
answered, "That which Almighty Allah willeth shall befal us." On
the morning of the second day, Sharrkan said to the remnant of
his troop, "If ye go forth to fight, not one of you will remain
alive and we have but little left of food and water; so I deem ye
would do better to bare your brands and go forth and stand at the
mouth of this cavern, to hinder any from entering.  Haply the
holy man may have reached the Moslem host, and may return with
ten thousand horses to succour us in fight with the Infidels, for
belike the Unfaithful may have failed to see him and those with
him." They said, This were the better course to take, and of its
expediency no doubt we make." So the troop went out and held the
cavern mouth standing by its walls; and every one of the Infidels
who sought to enter in, they slew.  Thus did they fend off the
foe from the gape of the cave and they patiently supported all
such assaults, till day was done and night came on dusky and
dun;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the army of
the Moslems held the cavern mouth and stood by its walls and they
fended off the foe, and every one of the Infidels attempted to
charge them, him they slew; and they patiently supported all such
assaults till day was done and night came on dusky and dun, by
which time King Sharrkan had only five and twenty men and no more
left.  Then quoth the Infidels to one another, "When shall these
battle days have an end?  We are weary of warring the Moslems."
And quoth one of them, "Up and at them, for there remain of them
but five and twenty men!  If we cannot prevail on them to fight,
let us light a fire upon them;[FN#433] and if they submit
themselves and yield to us, we will take them prisoners; but if
they refuse we will leave them for fuel to the fire, so shall
they become to men of foreseeing mind a warning dire.  May the
Messiah on their fathers have no grace, and may the sojourn of
the Nazarenes be for them no abiding place!" So they carried fuel
to the jaws of the cavern and set fire to it.  Thereupon Sharrkan
and his companions made sure of perdition and yielded themselves
prisoners.  And while they were in this condition, lo!  the
knight their captain said to those who counselled their
slaughter, "It is not for any save for King Afridun to kill them,
that he may gratify his wrath; therefore it behoveth us to keep
them in durance by us till the morrow, when we will journey with
them to Constantinople and deliver them to our King, who shall
deal with them as he please." Said they, "This is the right
course;" and he commanded to pinion them and set guards over
them.  Then, as soon as it was black night, the Infidels busied
themselves with feasting and making festival; and they called for
wine and drank it till all fell upon their backs.  Now Sharrkan
and his brother, Zau al-Makan, were in confinement and so also
were his companion knights; whereupon the elder turned to the
younger brother and said to him, "O my brother, how win free?"
"By Allah," replied Zau al Makan, "I know not; for here we be
like birds in cage." Then Sharrkan waxed wroth and sighed for
excess of rage and stretched himself, till his pinion bonds brass
asunder; whereupon being free he arose and went up to the Captain
of the guard, and taking from his pocket the keys of the fetters,
freed Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan and the rest of his men. 
Then he turned to the two and said, "I desire to slay three of
these Infidels and take and don their dress, we three; so that we
shall be guised as Greeks and we will pass through them, with out
their knowing us, and fare forth to our own force." Replied Zau
al-Makan, "This is no safe counsel for if we kill them, I fear
some of their comrades may hear their shrieks and the foe be
aroused upon us and kill us.  'Twere the surer way to pass out of
the defile." So they agreed upon this and set out; and, when they
had left the head of the strait a little distance behind, they
saw horses picketed and the riders sleeping: and Sharrkan said to
his brother, "Better we take each one of us a steed." There were
five and twenty horsemen, so they took five and twenty horses,
whilst Allah sent sleep upon the Infidels for a purpose He knew
and the Faithful mounted and fared on till they were out of
reach.  Meanwhile Sharrkan set to gathering from the Infidels as
many weapons, swords, and spears, as were wanted.  And while they
took saddle and struck forwards none of the Infidels supposed
that anyone could release Zau al-Makan and his brother and their
men; or that their prisoners had power to escape.  Now when all
the captives were safe from the Unfaithful, Sharrkan came up with
his comrades, and found them awaiting his arrival, on coals of
flame, expecting him in anxious grame, so he turned to them and
said, "Feel no fear since Allah protecteth us.  I have that to
propose which haply shall effect our purpose." "What is it?"
asked they and he answered, "I desire that ye all climb to the
mountain top and cry out with one voice, 'Allaho Akbar!' and ye
add, 'The army of Al Islam is upon you!  Allaho Akbar!' This wise
their company will surely be dissolved nor will they find out the
trick for they are drunk, but they will think that the Moslem
troops have encompassed them about on all sides and have mingled
with them; so they will fall on one another brand in hand during
the confusion of drunkenness and sleep, and we will cleave them
asunder with their own swords and the scymitar will go round
amongst them till dawn." Replied Zau al-Makan, "This plan is not
good; we should do better to make our way to our army and speak
not a word; for if we cry out 'Allaho Akbar,' they will wake and
fall on us and not one of us will escape." Rejoined Sharrkan, "By
Allah, though they should awake tis no matter, and I long that ye
fall in with my plan, for naught save good can come of it!" So
they agreed thereon and clomb the mountain and shouted, "Allaho
Akbar!" And hills and trees and rocks reworded their Allaho Akbar
for fear of the Almighty.  But when the Kafirs heard this slogan
they cried out to one another,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the One Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
spake thus, "I long that ye fall in with this my plan, for naught
save good can come of it." So they agreed thereon and clomb the
mountain head and shouted, "Allaho Akbar!"; and hills and trees
and rocks re worded their Allaho Akbar for fear of the Almighty. 
The Infidels heard it and cried out one to other and donned their
armour and said, "The foe is upon us, by the truth of the
Messiah!" Then they fell on one another and slew of their own men
more than any knoweth save Almighty Allah.  As soon as it was
dawn, they sought for the captives, but found no trace of them,
and their captains said, "They who did this were the prisoners in
our possession; up, then, and after them in all haste till ye
overtake them, when we will make them quaff the cup of requital;
and let not fright nor the panic of sudden awaking possess you."
So they took horse and rode after the fugitives and it wanted but
an eye twinkling before they overtook them and surrounded them. 
Now when Zau al-Makan saw this, he was seized with increase of
terror and said to his brother, "What I feared would come, is
come upon us, and now it remaineth only for us to fight for the
Faith." But Sharrkan preferred to hold his peace.  Then Zau al-
Makan and his companions rushed down from the hill crest,
shouting, "Allaho Akbar!" and his men repeated the war cry and
addressed themselves to fight and to sell their lives in the
service of the Lord of Faithful Men; and while they were in this
case, behold, they heard many voices voicing, "There is no god
but the God!  God is most great!  Salutation and salvation upon
the Apostle, the Bringer of glad Tidings, the Bearer of bad
Tidings!''[FN#434]  So they turned towards the direction of the
sound and saw a company of Moslems who believed in one God,
pushing towards them, whereat their hearts were heartened and
Sharrkan charged upon the Infidels crying out, "There is no god
but the God!  God is most great! he and those with him, so that
earth quaked as with an earthquake and the Unbeliever host brake
asunder and fled into the mountains and the Moslems followed them
with lunge and blow; and Zau al-Makan and his comrades of the
Moslems ceased not to smite the hosts of the Infidel foe, and
parted heads from bodies till day darkened and night coming on
starkened sight.  Thereupon the Moslems drew together and passed
the night in congratulations, and, when morning dawned and
daybreak shone with its shine and sheen, they saw Bahram, the
captain of the Daylamites, and Rustam, the captain of the Turks,
advancing to join them, with twenty thousand cavaliers like lions
grim.  As soon as they saw Zau al-Makan, the riders dismounted
and saluted him, and kissed ground between his hands when he said
to them, "Rejoice ye in the glad tidings of the victory of the
Moslem and the discomfiture of the tribe of Unbelievers!" Then
they gave one another joy of their deliverance and of the
greatness of their reward after Resurrection Day.  Now the cause
of the coming of the succours to that place was this.  When the
Emir Bahram and the Emir Rustam and the Chief Chamberlain, with
the Moslem host and flags flaunting high ahead, came in sight of
Constantinople they saw that the Nazarenes had mounted the walls
and manned the towers and the forts, and had set all their
defenders in order of defence, as soon as they learned of the
approach of the host of Al-Islam and the banners Mohammedan, and
they heard the clash of arms and the noise of war voices and
tramp of horse hoofs and from their look outs they beheld the
Moslems, with their standards and ensigns of the Faith of Unity
under the dust clouds and lo!  they were like a flight of locusts
or rain clouds raining rain, and the voices of the Moslems
chanting the Koran and glorifying the Compassionate One, struck
their ears.  Now the Infidels knew of the approach of this host
through Zat al-Dawahi with her craft and whoredom,[FN#435]
calumny and contrivance.  And the armies of Al-Islam drew near,
as it were the swollen sea, for the multitude of footmen and
horsemen and women and children.  Then quoth the General of the
Turks to the General of the Daylamites, "O Emir, of a truth, we
are in jeopardy from the multitude of the foe who is on the
walls.  Look at yonder bulwarks and at this world of folk like
the seas that clash with dashing billows.  Indeed yon Infidel
outnumbereth us an hundredfold and we cannot be safe from spies
who may inform them that we are without a Sultan.  In very sooth,
we run danger from these enemies, whose numbers may not be told
and whose resources none can withhold, especially in the absence
of King Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and the illustrious
Wazir Dandan.  If they know of this, they will be emboldened to
attack us in their absence and with the sword they will
annihilate us to the last man; not one of us safety shall see. 
So it is my counsel that thou take ten thousand riders of the
allies and the Turks, and march them to the hermitage of
Matruhina and the meadow of Malukhina in quest of our brothers
and comrades.  If thou act by my advice, it may be we shall
approve ourselves the cause of their deliverance, in case they be
hard pressed by the Infidels; and if thou act not, blame will not
attach to me.  But, an ye go, it behoveth that ye return quickly,
for ill suspicion is part of prudence." The Emir aforesaid fell
in with his counsel; so they chose twenty thousand horse and they
set out covering the roads and making for the monastery above
mentioned.  So much for the cause of their coming; but as regards
the ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi, as soon as she had delivered
Sultan Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and the Wazir Dandan
into the hands of the Infidels, the foul whore mounted a swift
steed, saying to the Faithless, "I design to rejoin the Moslem
army which is at Constantinople and contrive for their
destruction; for I will inform them that their chiefs are dead,
and when they hear that from me, their joining will be disjointed
and the cord of their confederation cut and their host scattered. 
Then will I go to King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople, and to my
son Hardub, King of Roum, and relate to them their tidings and
they will sally forth on the Moslems with their troops and will
destroy them and will not leave one of them alive." So she
mounted and struck across country on her good steed all the
livelong night; and, when day dawned, appeared the armies of
Bahram and Rustam advancing towards her.  So she turned into a
wayside brake and hid her horse among the trees and she walked a
while saying to herself, "Haply the Moslem hosts be returning,
routed, from the assault of Constantinople." However, as she drew
near them she looked narrowly and made sure that their standards
were not reversed,[FN#436] and she knew that they were coming not
as conquered men, but fearing for their King and comrades.  When
she was assured of this, she hastened towards them, running at
speed, like a devil of ill rede, till reaching them she cried
out, "Haste ye!  haste ye!  O soldiers of the Compassionate One,
hasten to the Holy War against the hosts of Satan!" When Bahram
saw her he dismounted and kissed the ground before her and asked
her, "O friend of Allah what is behind thee?" Answered she,
"Question not of sad case and sore condition; for when our
comrades had taken the treasure from the hermitage of Matruhina,
and designed to win their way Constantinople wards, thereupon
came out on them a driving host and a dreadful of the Infidels."
And the damned witch repeated to them the story to fill them with
trouble and terror, adding, "The most of them are dead, and there
are but five and twenty men left." Said Bahram, "O holy man! 
when didst thou leave them?" "But this night,"[FN#437] replied
she.  He cried, "Glory be to Allah!  to Him who hath rolled up
the far distance for thee like a rug, so that thou hast sped thus
walking upon thy feet and props upon a mid-rib of palm-tree!  But
thou art one of the saints which fly like birds when inspired and
possessed by His directions."[FN#438]  Then he mounted his horse,
and he was perplexed and confounded by what he had heard from the
beldam so strong in lies and ill calumnies, and he said, "There
is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great!  Verily our labour is lost and our hearts are heavy
within us, for our Sultan is a prisoner and those who are with
him." Then they cut across the country, wide and side, night and
day, and when morning dawned they reached the head of the defile
and saw Zau al-Makan and Sharrkan shouting.  "There is no god but
the God!  Allaho Akbar!  and Salutation and Salvation upon the
Congratulator, the Comminator."[FN#439]  Whereupon he and his
drove at the Unbelievers and whelmed them, as the rain torrent
whelms the waste; and cried out their war cries, till fear get
hold of the prowess Knights and the mountains were cloven in
affright.  And when shone the day and showed its shine and sheen,
the breeze of morning blew upon t