hem sweet and fragrant, and each
recognised other as hath been said before.  Then they kissed the
ground before the King and before his brother Sharrkan, who told
them all that had befallen the party in the cave.  Now thereat
they marvelled and said to one another, "Hasten we back to
Constantinople, for we left our companions there, and our hearts
are with them." So they hurried departure, commending themselves
to the Subtle, the All-wise, and Zau al-Makan exhorted the
Moslems to steadfast- ness and versified in the following
couplets,[FN#440]

"Be praises mine to all praiseworthy Thee, * O Lord, who stinted
     not mine aid to be!
Though was I lost abroad, Thou west to me * Strongest support
     which vouchsafed victory:
Thou gav'st me wealth and reign and goodly gifts, * And slungest
     con quering sword of valiancy:
Thou mad'st me blest beneath Thy kingly shade, * Engraced with
     generous boons dealt fain and free:
Thou savedst *from every fear I feared, by aid * Of my Wazir, the
     Age's noblest he!
Garred us Thy grace in fight to throw the Greek, * Who yet came
     back dight in War's cramoisie:
Then made I feint to fly from out the fight; * But like grim lion
     turning made them flee,
And left on valley sole my foemen, drunk * Not with old
     wine[FN#441] but Death-cup's revelry:
Then came the Saintly Hermit, and he showed * His marvels wrought
     for town and wold to see;
When slew they hero-wights who woke to dwell * In Eden bowers
     wherein sweet rill-lets well."

But, when Zau al-Makan had made an end of versifying, his brother
Sharrkan congratulated him on his safety and thanked him for the
deeds he had done; after which both set out forcing their marches
to rejoin their army.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
congratulated his brother, Zau al-Makan, on his safety and
thanked him for the deeds he had done; after which both set out
forcing their marches to rejoin their army.  Such was their case;
but as regards the old woman, Zat al-Dawahi, after she had
foregathered with the hosts of Rustam and Bahram, she returned to
the coppice, where she took her steed and mounted and sped on at
speed, till she drew near the Moslem army that beleaguered
Constantinople, when she lighted down from her destrier and led
it to the pavilion tent of the Chief Chamberlain.  And when he
saw her, he stood up to her in honour and signed to her with his
right hand and said, "Welcome O pious recluse!" Then he
questioned her of what had befallen, and she repeated to him her
disquieting lies and deluding calumnies, saying, "In sooth I fear
for the Emir Rustam, and the Emir Bahram, for that I met them and
theirs on the way and sent them and their following to relieve
the King and his companions.  Now there are but twenty thousand
horse and the Unbelievers outnumber them; so I would have thee at
this moment send off the rest of thy troops at full speed to
their suc cour, lest they be slain to the last man." And she
cried to them, "Haste!  Haste!" When the Chamberlain and the
Moslems heard these words, their spirits fell and they wept; but
Zat al-Dawahi said to them, "Ask aidance of Allah and bear
patiently this triburation; for ye have the example of those who
have been before you of the people of Mohammed; and Paradise with
its palaces is laid out by Allah for those who die martyrs; and
needs must all die, but most praiseworthy is dying while fighting
for the Faith." The Chamberlain, hearing this speech of the
accursed old woman, called for the Emir Bahram's brother, a
knight by name Tarkash; and, choosing out for him ten thousand
horse, riders famed for force, bade him set out at once.  So he
fared forth and marched all that day and the whole of the next
night, till he neared the Moslems.  When daylight dawned,
Sharrkan saw the dust cloud about them and feared for the men of
Al-Islam and said, "If these troops which are coming upon us be
Moslem men our victory is assured by them; but, if these be
Nazarenes, there is no gainsaying Destiny's decrees." Then he
turned to his brother, Zau al- Makan, and said, Never fear, for
with my life I will ransom thee from death.  If these be
Mohammedan troops, then were it an increase of heavenly favours;
but, if they be our foes, there is no help save that we fight
them.  Yet do I long to meet the Holy Man ere I die, so I may beg
him to pray that I die not save by death of martyrdom." Whilst
the twain were thus speaking, behold, there appeared the banners
inscribed with the words, "There is no god but the God and
Mohammed is the Apostle of God;" and Sharrkan cried out, "How is
it with the Moslems?" "All are sound and safe," replied they,
"and we came not but out of concern for you." Then the Chief of
the army dismounted and, kissing ground before Sharrkan, asked,
"O my lord, how be the Sultan and the Wazir Dandan and Rustam and
my brother Bahram; are they all in safety?" He answered, "All
well; but who brought thee tidings of us?" Quoth Tarkash; "It was
the Holy Man who told us that he had met my brother Bahram and
Rustam and had sent them both to you and he also assured us that
the Infidels had encompassed you and out numbered you; but I see
not the case save the contrary thereof and that you are
victorious." They questioned him, "And how did the Holy Man reach
you?"; and he replied, "Walking on his feet and he had compassed
in a day and a night, ten days' journey for a well girt
horseman." "There is no doubt but that he is a Saint of Allah,"
said Sharrkan, "but where is he now?" They rejoined, "We left him
with our troops, the folk of the Faith, moving them to do battle
with the rebels and the Faithless." Thereat Sharrkan rejoiced and
all thanked Allah for their own deliverance and the safety of the
Holy Man; and commended the dead to His mercy saying, "This was
writ in the Book." Then they set out making for Constantinople by
forced marches, and whilst they were on this enterprise, behold,
a dust cloud arose to such height that it walled the two
horizons, the eastern and the western, from man's sight and the
day was darkened by it to night.  But Sharrkan looked at it and
said, "Verily, I fear lest this be the Infidels who have routed
the army of Al-Islam for that this dust walleth the world, east
and west, and hideth the two horizons, north and south."
Presently appeared under the dust a pillar of darkness, blacker
than the blackness of dismal days; nor ceased to come upon them
that column more dreadful than the dread of the Day of Doom. 
Horse and foot hastened up to look at it and know the terrors of
the case, when behold, they saw it to be the recluse aforesaid;
so they thronged round him to kiss his hands and he cried out, "O
people of the Best of Mankind,[FN#442] the lamp which shineth in
darkness blind, verily the Infidels have outwitted the Moslems by
guile, for they fell upon the host of the One God whilst they
deemed themselves safe from the Faithless, and attacked them in
their tents and made a sore slaughter of them what while they
looked for no wile; so hasten to the aid of the Believers in the
unity of God, and deliver them from those who deny Him!" Now when
Sharrkan heard these words, his heart flew from his breast with
sore trouble; and, alighting from his steed in amazement, he
kissed the Recluse's hands and feet.  On like wise did his
brother, Zau al-Makan, and the rest of the foot and horse troops;
except the Wazir Dandan, who dismounted not but said, "By Allah,
my heart flieth from this devotee, for I never knew show of
devotion to religion that bred not bane.  So leave him and rejoin
your comrades the Moslems, for this man is of the outcasts from
the gate of the mercy of the Lord of the Three Worlds!  How often
have I here made razzias with King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and
trodden the earth of these lands!" Said Sharrkan, "Put away from
thee such evil thought, hast thou not seen this Holy Man exciting
the Faithful to fight, and holding spears and swords light?  So
slander him not, for backbiting is blameable and poisoned is the
flesh of the pious.[FN#443]  Look how he inciteth us to fight the
foe; and, did not Almighty Allah love him, He had cast him
aforetime into fearful torment." Then Sharrkan bade bring a
Nubian mule for the ascetic to ride and said, "Mount, O pious
man, devout and virtuous!" But the devotee refused to ride and
feigned self denial, that he might attain his end; and they knew
not that this holy personage was like him of whom the poet saith,

"He prayeth and he fasteth for an end he doth espy; * When once
     his end is safely won then fast and prayer good
     bye."[FN#444]

So the devotee ceased not to walk among the horsemen and the
footmen, like a wily fox meditating guile, and began to uplift
her voice, chanting the Koran and praising the Compassionate One. 
And they continued pressing forward till they approached the camp
of Al-Islam, where Sharrkan found the Moslem in conquered plight
and the Chamberlain upon the brink of falling back in flight,
whilst the sword of Greece havoc dight among the Faithful, the
righteous and those who work upright,--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the One Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sharrkan saw the Moslems in conquered plight and the Chamberlain
upon the brink of retreat and flight and the sword havoc dight
among the righteous and the workers of upright, the cause of this
weakness among the Moslems was that the accursed old woman, Zat
al- Dawahi, the foe of the Faith, after seeing that Bahram and
Rustam had set forward with their troops to join Sharrkan and his
brother Zau al-Makan, repaired to the camp of the Mahometans
before Constantinople and caused the mission of the Emir Tarkash,
as hath been before said.  In this her purpose was to divide the
Moslem forces the better to weaken them.  Then she left them and
entered Constantinople, and called with a loud voice on the
knights of the Greeks, saying, "Let me down a cord that I may tie
thereto this letter, and do ye bear it to your King Afridun, that
he may read it and to my son King Hardub that they both do what
is written therein of bidding and forbidding." So they let down
for her a string and she tied thereto a letter whose purport was
the following: "From the terriblest of tribulations[FN#445] and
the chiefest of all calamities, Zat al-Dawahi, to King Afridun
greeting.  But afterwards, of a truth I have contrived a device
for destroying the Moslems; so bide ye quiet and content.  I have
cozened and captured their Sultan and the Wazir Dandan; and then
I returned to their camp and acquainted them therewith, whereby
their pride had a fall and their withers were wrung.  And I have
so wrought upon the host 'leaguering Constantinople that they
have sent ten thousand men under the Emir Tarkash to succour the
capitves, of whom there be now left but few; it is therefore my
object that ye sally forth against them with all your power while
this day endureth; and that ye fall on them in their tents and
that ye leave them not till ye shall have slain them to the last
man; for, verily the Messiah looketh down upon you and the
Blessed Virgin favoureth you; and I hope of the Messiah that he
forget not what deed I have done." When her letter came to King
Afridun, he rejoiced with great joyance; and, sending at once for
King Hardub of Greece, son of Zat al-Dawahi, read the letter to
him as soon as he came,whereathe was exceeding glad and said,
"See my mother's craft; verily it dispenseth with swords, and her
aspect standeth in stead of the terrors of the Day of Dread."
Rejoined Afridun, "May the Messiah not bereave us of thy
venerable parent nor deprive her of her wile and guile!" Then he
bade the Knights give orders for sallying outside the city, and
the news was noised abroad in Constantinople.  So the Nazarenes
and the cohorts of the Cross burst forth and unsheathed their
keen sabres in their numbers, shouting out their professions of
impiety and heresies, and blaspheming the Lord of all Creatures. 
When the Chamberlain saw the sally, he said, "Behold, the Greek
is upon us and they surely have learned that our Sultan is far
away; and haply they have attacked us, for that the most part of
our troops have marched to the succour of King Zau al-Makan!"
Therewith he waxed wroth and cried out, "Ho, soldiers of Al-Islam
and favourers of the True Faith, an you flee you are lost, but if
ye stand fast, ye win!  Know ye that valiancy lieth in endurance
of outrance and that no case is so strait but that the Almighty
is able to make it straight; Allah assain you and look upon you
with eyes of compassion fain!" Thereupon the Moslems cried out,
"Allaho Akbar!" and the believer in the One God shouted his
slogan, and whirled the mill wheels of fight with cutting and
thrusting in main and might; scymitars and spears played sore and
the plains and valleys were swamped with gore.  The priests and
monks priested it, tight girding their girdles and uplifting the
Crucifixes, while the Moslem shouted out the professions of the
Requiting King and verses of the Koran began to sing.  The hosts
of the Compassion are One fought against the legions of Satan;
and head flew from body of man, while the good Angels hovered
above the people of the Chosen Prophet, nor did the sword cease
to smite till the day darkened and night came on and starkened. 
Now the miscreants had encompassed the Moslems and made sure of
escaping the pains that awaited them; and the Faithless greeded
for victory over the Faithful until day dawned and dazzled. 
There upon the Chamberlain mounted, he and his men, trusting thee
Allah would help them to victory; and host was mingled with host
and battle rose a foot and took post.  And heads flew from trunks
whilst the brave stood fast in stead; the craven turned tail and
fled; and the Judge of death judged and sentence sped, so that
the champions fell from their saddles slain and corpses cumbered
meadow and plain.  Then the Moslem began to give ground and
rearwards bent; and the Greek took possession of some of their
tents; whereupon the Moslems were about to break and retreat and
take flight, when meanwhile behold, up came Sharrkan with the
rest of the host of Al-Islam and the standards of the Believers
in Unity.  And having come up with them, he charged the Infidels;
and followed him Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan and the Emirs
Bahram and Rustam with his brother Tarkash.  When the foe saw
this, they lost head and their reason fled, and the dust clouds
towered till they covered the country whilst the righteous
Believers joined their pious comrades.  Then Sharrkan accosted
the Chamberlain and praised him for his steadfastness; and he in
turn gave the Prince joy of his timely succour and his gaining
the day.  Thereat the Moslems were glad and their hearts were
heartened; so they rushed upon their enemies and devoted
themselves to Allah in their Fight for the Faith.  But when the
Idolaters beheld the standards Mohammedan and there on the
profession of Faith Islamitan, proclaiming the Unity, they
shrieked "Woe!" and "Ruin!" and besought succour of the
Patriarchs of the Monasteries.  Then fell they to calling upon
John and Mary and the Cross abhorrent and stayed their hands from
slaughter, whilst King Afridun went up to consult King Hardub of
Greece, for the two Kings stood one at the head of each wing,
right and left.  Now there was with them also a famous cavalier,
Lawiya highs, who commanded the centre; and they drew out in
battle array, but indeed they were full of alarm and affray. 
Meanwhile, the Moslems aligned their forces and thereupon
Sharrkan came to his brother, Zau al-Makan, and said, "O King of
the Age, doubtless they mean to champion it, and that is also the
object of our desire; but it is my wish to push forward the
stoutest hearted of our fighters, for by forethought is one half
of life wrought." Replied the Sultan, "As thou wilt, O companion
of good counsel!" "It is my wish," added Sharrkan, "to stand in
mid line opposite the Infidel, with the Wazir Dandan on my left
and thee on my right, whilst the Emir Bahram leads the dexter
wing and the Emir Rustam leads the wing sinistral; and thou, O
mighty King, shalt be under the standards and the ensigns, for
that thou art the pillar of our defence; upon thee, after Allah,
is our dependence and we will all be thy ransom from aught that
can harm thee."  Zau al-Makan thanked him therefor, and the
slogan arose and the sabre was drawn; but, as things stood thus,
behold, there came forth a cavalier from the ranks of Roum; and,
as he drew near, they saw that he was mounted on a slow paced she
mule, fleeing with her master from the shock of swords.  Her
housings were of white silk covered by a prayer-carpet of Cash
mere stuff, and on her back sat a Shaykh, an old man of comely
presence and reverend aspect, garbed in a gown of white wool.  He
stinted not pushing her and hurrying her on till he came near the
Moslem and said, "I am an ambassador to you all, and an
ambassador hath naught to do save to deliver; so give me safe
conduct and permit of speech, that I communicate to you my
message." Replied Sharrkan, "Thou art in safety: fear neither
sway of sword nor lunge of lance." Thereupon the old man
dismounted and, taking the Cross from his neck, placed it before
the Sultan and humbled himself with much humility.  Then quoth to
him the Moslems, "What is with thee of news?"; and quoth he, "I
am an ambassador from King Afridun, for I counselled him to avert
the destruction of all these frames of men and temples of the
Compassionate One; and to him it seemed righteous to stay the
shedding of blood and limit it to the encounter of two knights in
shock of fight singular; so he agreed to that and he saith to
you, 'Verily, I will ransom my army with my life; so let the
Moslem King do as I do and with his life ransom his host.  And if
he kill me, there will be no stay left in the army of Roum, and
if I kill him, there will be no stability with the Moslems." When
Sharrkan heard this he said, "O monk, I agree to that, for it is
just nor may it be gainsaid; and behold, I will meet him in
duello and do with him derring do, for I am Champion of the
Faithful even as he is Champion of the Faithless; and if he slay
me, he will have won the day and naught will remain for the
Moslems forces save flight.  So return to him, O thou monk, and
say that the single combat shall take place to morrow, for this
day we have come off our journey and are aweary; but after rest
neither reproach nor blame fear ye." So the monk returned (and he
rejoicing) to King Afridun and King Hardub, and told them both
what Sharrkan had said, whereat King Afridun was glad with
exceeding gladness and fell from him anxiety and sadness, and he
said to himself, "No doubt but this Sharrkan is their doughtiest
swayer of the sword and the dourest at lunge of lance; and when I
shall have slain him, their hearts will be disheartened and their
strength will be shattered." Now Zat al-Dawahi had written to
King Afridun of that and had told him how Sharrkan was a Knight
of the Braves and the bravest of knights and had warned him
against him; but Afridun was a stalwart cavalier who fought in
many a fashion; he could hurl rocks and throw spears and smite
with the iron mace and he feared not the prowess of the prow.  So
when he heard the report of the monk that Sharrkan agreed to the
duello, he was like to fly for exceeding joy because he had self
confidence and he knew that none could with stand him.  The
Infidels passed that night in joy and jubilee and wine bibbing;
and, as soon as it was dawn, the two armies drew out with the
swart of spear and the blanch of blade.  And behold a cavalier
rode single handed into the plain, mounted on a steed of purest
strain, and for foray and fray full ready and fain.  And that
Knight had limbs of might and he was clad in an iron cuirass made
for stress of fight.  On his breast he wore a jewelled mirror and
in his hand he bore a keen scymitar and his lance of Khalanj
wood,[FN#446] the curious work of the Frank, weighing a quintal. 
Then the rider uncovered his face and cried out, saying, "Whoso
knoweth me verily hath enough of me, and whoso knoweth me not
right soon[FN#447] shall ken who I be.  I am Afridun the
overwhelmed by the well omened Shawahi,[FN#448] Zat al-Dawahi."
But he had not ended speaking ere Sharrkan, the Champion of the
Moslems, fared forth to meet him, mounted on a sorrel horse worth
a thousand pieces of red gold with accoutrements purfled in
pearls and precious stone; and he bore in baldrick a blade of
watered Indian steel that through necks shore and made easy the
hard and sore.  He crave his charger between the two hosts in
line whilst the horsemen all fixed on him their eyne, and he
cried out to Afridun, "Woe to thee, O accursed!  dost thou deem
me one of the horsemen thou hast overta'en who cannot stand
against thee on battle plain?" Then each rushed upon other and
they bashed together like two mountains crashing or two billows
dash ing and clashing: they advanced and retreated; and drew
together and withdrew; and stinted not of fray and fight and
weapon play, and strife and stay, with stroke of sword and lunge
of lance.  Of the two armies looking on, some said, "Sharrkan is
victor!" and others, "Afridun will conquer!"; and the two riders
stayed not their hands from the hustle until ceased the clamour
and the bustle; and the dust columns rose and the day waned and
the sun waxed yellow and wan.  Then cried out King Afridun to
Sharrkan, saying, "By the truth of the Messiah and the Faith
which is no liar, thou art nought save a doughty rider and a
stalwart fighter; but thou art fraudful and thy nature is not
that of the noble.  I ken thy work is other than praiseworthy nor
is thy prowess that of a Prince; for thy people behave to thee as
though thou wert a slave;[FN#449] and see!  they bring thee out a
charger which is not thine, that thou mayst mount and return to
the fight.  But by the truth of my Faith, thy fighting irketh and
fatigueth me and I am weary of cutting and thrusting with thee;
and if thou purpose to lay on load with me to night, thou wouldst
not change aught of thy harness nor thy horse, till thou approve
to the cavaliers, thy generous blood and skill in brunt." When
Sharrkan heard him say these words concerning his own folk
behaving to him though he were a slave, he waxt wroth and turned
towards his men, meaning to sign to them and bid them not prepare
him change of harness or horse, when lo!  Afridun shook his throw
spear high in air and cast it at Sharrkan.  Now when the Moslem
turned his back, he found none of the men near him, and he knew
this to be a trick of the accursed Infidel; so he wheeled round
in haste and behold, the javelin came at him, so he swerved from
it, till his head was bent low as his saddle bow.  The weapon
grazed his breast, and pierced the skin of his chest, for
Sharrkan was high bosomed: whereupon he gave one cry and swooned
away.  Thereat the accursed Afridun was joyful, thinking he had
slain him; and shouted to the Infidels bidding them rejoice,
whereat the Faithless were encouraged and the Faithful wept. 
When Zau al-Makan saw his brother reeling in selle so that he
well nigh fell, he despatched cavaliers towards him and the
braves hurried to his aid and came up with him.  Thereupon the
Infidels drove at the Moslems; the two hosts joined battle and
the two lines were mingled, whilst the keen scymitar of Al-Yaman
did good work.  Now the first to reach Sharrkan was the Wazir
Dandan,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Zau al-Makan saw that the accursed Infidel had struck with
javelin his brother Sharrkan, he deemed him dead, and despatched
cavaliers towards him; and the first to reach him were the Wazir
Dandan and the Emir of the Turks, Bahram, and the Emir of the
Daylamites, Rustam.  They found him falling from his horse; so
they stayed him in his saddle and returned with him to his
brother, Zau al-Makan; then they gave him in charge to his pages,
and went again to do the work of cut and thrust.  So the strife
redoubled and the weapons together clashed and ceased not bate
and debate and naught was to be seen but blood flowing and necks
bowing; nor did the swords cease on the napes of men to make play
nor the strife to rage with more and more affray, till the most
part of the night was past away and the two hosts were aweary of
the mellay.  So they called a truce and each army returned to its
tents, whilst all the Infidels repaired to King Afridun and
kissed the ground before him, and the priests and monks wished
him joy of his victory over Sharrkan.  Then the King fared for
Constantinople and sat upon the throne of his realm, when King
Hardub came to him and said, "May the Messiah strengthen thy fore
arm and never cease to be thy helper and hearken to what prayers
my pious mother, Zat al-Dawahi, shall pray for thee!  Know that
the Moslems can make no stay without Sharrkan." Replied Afridun,
"To morrow shall end the affair when to fight I fare: I will seek
Zau al-Makan and slay him, and their army shall turn tail and of
flight shall avail." Such was the case with the Kafirs; but as
regards the host of Al-Islam, when Zau al-Makan returned to his
tent, he thought of naught but his brother and, going into the
pavilion, found him in evil case and sore condition; whereupon he
summoned for counsel the Wazir Dandan and Rustam and Bahram. 
When they entered, they opined to assemble the physicians that
they might medicine Sharrkan, and they wept and said, "The world
will not readily afford his like!" and they watched by him all
that night, and about the later hours came to them the Recluse in
tears.  When Zau al-Makan saw him, he rose in honour; and the
Religious stroked Sharrkan's wound with his hand, chanting
somewhat of the Koran and repeating by way of talisman some of
the verses of the Compassionate One.  And the pretender ceased
not to watch over him till dawn, when he came to himself and,
opening his eyes, moved his tongue in his mouth and spake.  At
this Zau al-Makan rejoiced, saying, "Of a truth the blessing of
the Holy Man hath taken effect on him!" And Sharrkan said,
"Praised be Allah for recovery; indeed, I am well at this hour. 
That accursed one played me false; and, but that I swerved aside
lighter than lightening, the throw spear had pierced through my
breast.  So praised be Allah for saving me!  And how is it with
the Moslems?" Answered Zau al-Makan, "All are weeping for thee."
Quoth Sharrkan, "I am well and in good case; but where is the
Holy Man?" Now he was sitting by him and said, "At thy head." So
the Prince turned to him and kissed his hand when he said, "O my
son!  Be of good patience and Allah shall increase thy reward;
for the wage is measured by the work." Sharrkan rejoined, "Pray
for me," and he prayed for him.  As soon as morning dawned and
day brake in shine and sheen, the Moslems sallied out to the
plain and the Kafirs made ready to thrust and cut.  Then the
Islamite host advanced and offered fight with weapons ready
dight, and King Zau al-Makan and Afridun made to charge one at
other.  But when Zau al-Makan fared forth into the field, there
came with him the Wazir Dandan and the Chamberlain and Bahram,
saying, "We will be thy sacrifice." He replied, "By the Holy
House and Zemzem and the Place![FN#450]  I will not be stayed
from going forth against these wild asses." And when he rode out
into the field he played with sword and spear till riders
marvelled and both armies wondered; then he rushed upon the foe's
right wing and of it slew two knights and in like manner he dealt
with the left wing.  Presently he stayed his steed in the midst
of the field and cried out, "Where is Afridun, that I may make
him taste the cup of disgrace?" But when King Hardub saw the case
he conjured Afridun not to attack him, saying, "O King, yesterday
it was thy turn to fight: it is mine to day.  I care naught for
his prowess." So he rushed out towards Zau al-Makan brand in hand
and under him a stallion like Abjar, which was Antar's charger
and its coat was jet black even as saith the poet,

"On the glancing racer outracing glance * He speeds, as though he
     would collar Doom:
His steed's black coat is of darkest jet, * And likest Night in
     her nightliest gloom:
Whose neigh sounds glad to the hearer's ears * Like thunders
     rolling in thun d'rous boom:
If he race the wind he will lead the way, * And the lightning
     flash will behind him loom.''[FN#451]

Then each rushed upon the opponent, parrying blows and proving
the marvellous qualities were stored in him; and they fell to
drawing on and withdrawing till the breasts of the bystanders
were straitened and they were weary of waiting for the event.  At
last Zau al-Makan cried out his war cry and rushed upon Hardub,
King of Caesarea,[FN#452] and struck him a stroke that shore head
from trunk and slew him on the spot.  When the Infidels saw this,
they charged in a body, compact and united, upon Zau al-Makan,
who met them amidfield, and they engaged in hewing and foining,
till blood ran in rills.  Then the Moslems cried out, "Allaho
Akbar!" (God is most Great) and "There is no god but the God!",
and invoked salvation for the Prophet, the Bringer of Glad
Tidings, the Bearer of Bad Tidings.  And there befel a great
fight, but Allah assigned victory to the Faithful and defeat to
the Faithless.  The Wazir Dandan shouted, "Take your blood
revenge for King Omar bin al Nu'uman and his son Sharrkan!"; and
bared his head and cried out to the Turks.  Now there were by his
side more than twenty thousand horse, and all charged with him as
men, when the Faithless found naught to save their lives but
flight.  So they turned tail to fly while the biting sabre
wrought its havoc and the Moslems slew of them that day some
fifty thousand horse and took more than that number: much folk
also were slain while going in at the gates, for the flock was
great.  Then the Greeks hove to the doors and swarmed up the
walls to await the assault; and in fine the Moslem hosts returned
to their tents aided to glory and victory, and King Zau al-Makan
went in to his brother whom he found in most joyous case.  So he
made a prostration of thanks to the Bountiful and the Exalted;
and then he came forward and gave Sharrkan joy of his recovery. 
Answered he, "Verily we are all under the benediction of this
Religious, holy and righteous, nor would you have been
victorious, but for his accepted orisons; indeed all day he
remained at prayer to invoke victory on the Moslems."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the One Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zau
al- Makan went in to his brother Sharrkan, he found him sitting
with the Holy Man by his side; so he rejoiced and drew near him
and gave him joy of his recovery.  Answered he, "Verily we are
all under the benediction of this Recluse nor would you have been
victorious but for his prayers, indeed he felt no fear this day
and he ceased not supplication for the Moslems.  I found strength
return to me, when I heard your 'Allaho Akbar,' for then I knew
you to be victorious over your enemies.  But now recount to me, O
my brother, what befel thee." So he told him all that had passed
between him and the accursed Hardub and related how he had slain
him and sent him to the malediction of Allah; and Sharrkan
praised him and thanked him for his prowess.  When Zat al-Dawahi
heard tell of her son's death (and she still drest as a devotee),
her face waxed yellow and her eyes ran over with railing tears:
she kept her counsel, however, and feigned to the Moslems that
she was glad and wept for excess of joy.  But she said to
herself, "By the truth of the Messiah, there remaineth no profit
of my life, if I burn not his heart for his brother, Sharrkan,
even as he hath burned my heart for King Hardub, the mainstay of
Christendom and the hosts of Crossdom!" Still she kept her
secret.  And the Wazir Dandan and King Zau al-Makan and the
Chamberlain remained sitting with Sharrkan till they had dressed
and salved his wound; after which they gave him medicines and he
began to recover strength; whereat they joyed with exceeding joy
and told the troops who congratulated themselves, saying, "To
morrow he will ride with us and do manly devoir in the siege."
Then said Sharrkan to them, "Ye have fought through all this day
and are aweary of fight; so it behoveth that you return to your
places and sleep and not sit up." They accepted his counsel and
then each went away to his own pavilion, and none remained with
Sharrkan but a few servants and the old woman Zat al-Dawahi.  He
talked with her through part of the night, then he stretched
himself to rest: and his servants did likewise and presently
sleep overcame them all and they lay like the dead.  Such was the
case with Sharrkan and his men; but as regards the old woman she
alone abode awake while they slumbered in the tent and, looking
at Sharrkan she presently saw that he was drowned in sleep. 
Thereupon she sprang to her feet, as she were a scald she bear or
a speckled snake, and drew from her waist cloth a dagger so
poisoned that if laid thereon it would have melted a rock.  Then
she unsheathed the poniard and went up to Sharrkan's head and she
drew the knife across his throat and severed his weasand and
hewed off his head from his body.  And once more she sprang to
her feet; and, going the round of the sleeping servants, she cut
off their heads also, lest they should awake.  Then she left the
tent and made for the Sultan's pavilion, but finding the guards
on the alert, turned to that of the Wazir Dandan.  Now she found
him reading the Koran and when his sight fell upon her he said,
"Welcome to the Holy Man!" Hearing this from the Wazir, her heart
trembled and she said, "The reason of my coming hither at this
time is that I heard the voice of a saint amongst Allah's Saints
and am going to him." Then she turned her back, but the Wazir
said to himself, "By Allah, I will follow our Devotee this
night!" So he rose and walked after her; but when the accursed
old woman sensed his footsteps, she knew that he was following
her: wherefore she feared the disgrace of discovery and said in
herself, "Unless I serve some trick upon him he will disgrace
me." So she turned and said to him from afar, "Ho, thou Wazir, I
am going in search of this Saint that I may learn who he is; and,
after learning this much, I will ask his leave for thee to visit
him.  Then I will come back and tell thee: for I fear thine
accompanying me, without having his permission, lest he take
umbrage at me seeing thee in my society." Now when the Wazir
heard these words, he was ashamed to answer her; so he left her
and returned to his tent, and would have slept; but sleep was not
favourable to him and the world seemed heaped upon him. 
Presently he rose and went forth from the tent saying in himself,
"I will go to Sharrkan and chat with him till morning." But when
he entered into Sharrkan's pavilion, he found the blood running
like an aqueduct and saw the servants lying with their throats
cut like beasts for food.  At this he cried a cry which aroused
all who were asleep; the folk hastened to him and, seeing the
blood streaming, set up a clamour of weeping and wailing.  Then
the noise awoke the Sultan, who enquired what was the matter, and
it was said to him, "Sharrkan thy brother and his servants are
murthered." So he rose in haste and entered the tent, and found
the Wazir Dandan shrieking aloud and he saw his brother's body
without a head.  Thereat he swooned away and all the troops
crowded around him, weeping and crying out, and so remained for a
while, till he came to himself, when he looked at Sharrkan and
wept with sore weeping, while the Wazir and Rustam and Bahram did
the like.  But the Chamberlain cried and lamented more than the
rest and asked leave to absent himself, such was his alarm.  Then
said Zau al-Makan, "Know ye who did this deed and how is it I see
not the Devotee, him who the things of this world hath put away?"
Quoth the Wazir, "And who should have been the cause of this
affliction, save that Devotee, that Satan?  By Allah, my heart
abhorred him from the first, because I know that all who pretend
to be absorbed in practices religious are vile and treacherous!"
And he repeated to the King the tale of how he would have
followed the Religious, but he forbade him, whereupon the folk
broke out into a tumult of weeping and lamentation and humbled
themselves before Him who is ever near, Him who ever answereth
prayer, supplicating that He would cause the false Devotee who
denied Allah's testimony to fall into their hands.  Then they
laid Sharrken out and buried him in the mountain aforesaid and
mourned over his far-famed virtues.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they laid
Sharrkan out and buried him in the mountain aforesaid and mourned
over his far-famed virtues.  Then they looked for the opening of
the city gate; but it opened not and no sign of men appeared to
them on the walls; whereat they wondered with exceeding wonder. 
But King Zau al-Makan said, "By Allah, I will not turn back from
them, though I sit here for years and years, till I take blood
revenge for my brother Sharrkan and waste Constantinople and kill
the King of the Nazarenes, even if death overcome me and I be at
rest from this woeful world!" Then he bade be brought out the
treasure taken from the Monastery of Matruhina; and mustered the
troops and divided the monies among them, and he left not one of
them but he gave him gifts which contented him.  Moreover, he
assembled in the presence three hundred horse of every division
and said to them, "Do ye send supplies to your households, for I
am resolved to abide by this city, year after year, till I have
taken man bote for my brother Sharrkan, even if I die in this
stead." And when the army heard these words and had received his
gifts of money they replied, "To hear is to obey!" Thereupon he
summoned couriers and gave them letters and charged them to
deliver the same, together with the monies, to the soldiers'
families and inform them that all were safe and satisfied, and
acquaint them saying, "We are encamped before Constantinople and
we will either destroy it or die; and, albeit we be obliged to
abide here months and years, we will not depart hence till we
take it." Moreover, he bade the Wazir Dandan write to his sister,
Nuzhat al-Zaman, and said to him, "Acquaint her with what hath
befallen us, and what be our situation and commend my child to
her care since that, when I went out to war, my wife was near her
delivery and by this time she must needs have been brought to
bed; and if she hath given birth to a boy, as I have heard say,
hasten your return and bring me the acceptable news." Then he
gave them somewhat of money, which they pouched and set out at
once; and all the people flocked forth to take leave of them and
entrust them with the monies and the messages.  After they had
departed, Zau al-Makan turned to the Wazir Dandan and commanded
him to advance with the army against the city walls.  So the
troops pushed forward, but found none on the ramparts, whereat
they marvelled, while Zau al-Makan was troubled at the case, for
he deeply mourned the severance from his brother Sharrkan and he
was sore perturbed about that traitor the Ascetic.  In this
condition they abode three days without seeing anyone.  So far
concerning the Moslems; but as regards the Greeks and the cause
of their refusing to fight during these three days the case was
this.  As soon as Zat al-Dawahi had slain Sharrkan, she hastened
her march and reached the walls of Constantinople, where she
called out in the Greek tongue to the guards to throw her down a
rope.  Quoth they, "Who art thou?"; and quoth she, "I am Zat al-
Dawahi." They knew her and let down a cord to which she tied
herself and they drew her up; and, when inside the city, she went
in to the King Afridun and said to him, "What is this I hear from
the Moslems?  They say that my son King Hardub is slain." He
answered, "Yes;" and she shrieked out and wept right grievously
and ceased not weeping thus till she made Afridun and all who
were present weep with her.  Then she told the King how she had
slain Sharrkan and thirty of his servants, whereat he rejoiced
and thanked her; and, kissing her hands, exhorted her to
resignation for the loss of her son.  Said she, "By the truth of
the Messiah, I will not rest content with killing that dog of the
Moslem dogs in blood revenge for my son, a King of the Kings of
the age!  Now there is no help for it but that I work some guile
and I contrive a wile whereby to slay the Sultan Zau al-Makan and
the Wazir Dandan and the Chamberlain and Rustam and Bahram and
ten thousand cavaliers of the army of Al-Islam; for it shall
never be said that my son's head be paid with the bloodwit of
Sharrkan's head; no, never!" Then said she to King Afridun,
"Know, O King of the Age, that it is my wish to set forth
mourning for my son and to cut my Girdle and to break the
Crosses." Replied Afridun, "Do what thou desire; I will not
gainsay thee in aught.  And if thou prolong thy mourning for many
days it were a little thing; for though the Moslems resolve to
beleaguer us years and years, they will never win their will of
us nor gain aught of us save trouble and weariness." Then the
Accursed One (when she had ended with the calamity she had
wrought and the ignominies which in herself she had thought) took
ink case and paper and wrote thereon: "From Shawahi, Zat al-
Dawahi, to the host of the Moslems.  Know ye that I entered your
country and duped by my cunning your nobles and at first hand I
slew your King Omar bin al-Nu'uman in the midst of his palace. 
Moreover, I slew, in the affair of the mountain pass and of the
cave, many of your men; and the last I killed were Sharrkan and
his servants.  And if fortune do not stay me and Satan obey me, I
needs must slay me your Sultan and the Wazir Dandan, for I am she
who came to you in disguise of a Recluse and who heaped upon you
my devices and deceits.  Wherefore, an you would be in safety
after this, fare ye forth at once; and if you seek your own
destruction cease not abiding for the nonce; and though ye tarry
here years and years, ye shall not do your desire on us.  And so
peace be yours!" After writing her writ she devoted three days to
mourning for King Hardub; arid, on the fourth, she called a
Knight and bade him take the letter and make it fast to a shaft
and shoot it into the Moslem camp.  When this was done, she
entered the church and gave herself up to weeping and wailing for
the loss of her son, saying to him who took the kingship after
him, "Nothing will serve me but I must kill Zau al-Makan and all
the nobles of Al-Islam." Such was the case with her; but as
regards what occurred to the Moslems, all passed three days in
trouble and anxiety, and on the fourth when gazing at the walls
behold, they saw a knight holding a bow and about to shoot an
arrow along whose side a letter was bound.  So they waited till
he had shot it among them and the Sultan bade the Wazir Dandan
take the missive and read it.  He perused it accordingly; and,
when Zau al-Makan heard it to end and understood its purport, his
eyes filled with tears and he shrieked for agony at her perfidy;
and the Minister Dandan said, "By Allah, my heart shrank from
her!" Quoth the Sultan, "How could this whore play her tricks
upon us twice?  But by the Almighty I will not depart hence till
I fill her cleft with molten lead and jail her with the jailing
of a bird encaged, then bind her with her own hair and crucify
her over the gate of Constantinople." And he called to mind his
brother and wept with excessive weeping.  But when Zat al-Dawahi
arrived amongst the Infidels and related to them her adventures
at length, they rejoiced at her safety and at the slaying of
Sharrkan.  There upon the Moslems addressed themselves again to
the siege of the city and the Sultan promised his men that, if it
should be taken, he would divide its treasures among them in
equal parts.  But he dried not his tears grieving for his brother
till his body was wasted and sick, growing thin as a tooth pick. 
Presently the Wazir Dandan came in to him and said, "Be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear; in very sooth thy
brother died not but because his hour was come, and there is no
profit in this mourning.  How well saith the poet,

"Whatso is not to be no sleight shall bring to pass; * What is to
     be without a failure shall become;
Soon the becoming fortune shall be found to be, * And Folly's
     brother[FN#453] shall abide forlorn and glum."

Wherefore do thou leave this weeping and wailing and hearten thy
heart to bear arms." He replied, "O Wazir, my heart is heavy for
the death of my father and my brother and for our absence from
hearth and home; and my mind is concerned for my subjects."
Thereupon the Wazir and the bystanders wept; but they ceased not
from pushing forward the siege of Constantinople for a length of
days.  And they being thus, behold, news arrived from Baghdad, by
one of the Emirs to the effect that the King's wife had been
blessed with a boy, and that his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman, had
named him Kanmakan.[FN#454] Moreover, that the boy bid fair to be
famous, already showing wondrous signs and marvellous tokens; and
that she had commanded the Olema and the preachers to pray for
mother and child from the pulpits and bless them in all wise;
furthermore that the twain were well, that the land had enjoyed
abundant rains, and that his comrade the Fireman was established
in all prosperity, with eunuchs and slaves to wait upon him; but
that he was still ignorant of what had befallen him.  And she
ended with the greeting of peace.  Then quoth Zau al- Makan to
the Wazir Dandan, "Now is my back strengthened for that I have
been blest with a son whose name is Kanmakan."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when they
brought him the news of his wife having borne him a boy child,
Zau al- Makan rejoiced with great joy and cried, "Now is my back
strengthened, for that I have been blessed with a son[FN#455]
whose name is Kanmakan." And he spake to the Wazir Dandan,
saying, "I am minded to leave this mourning and order perfections
of the Koran for my brother and command almsdeeds on his
account." Quoth the Wazir, "Thy design is good." Thereupon he
caused tents to be pitched over his brother's tomb; so they
raised them and gathered together such of the men at arms as
could repeat the Koran; and some began reciting the Holy volume;
whilst others chanted litanies containing the names of Allah, and
thus they did till the morning.  Then Zau al-Makan went up to the
grave of his brother Sharrkan and poured forth copious tears, and
improvised these couplets,

"They bore him bier'd, and all who followed wept * With Moses'
     shrieks what day o'erhead shook Tor;[FN#456]
Till reached the grave which Pate had made his home, * Dug in
     men's souls who one sole God adore:
Ne'er had I thought before to see my joy * Borne on the bier
     which heads of bearers bore:
Ah no!  nor ere they homed thee in the dust * That stars of
     heaven earth ever covered o'er.
Is the tomb dweller hostage of a stead, * Where light and
     splendour o'er thy face shall pour?
Praise to restore his life her word hath pledged: * Cribbed and
     confined he shall dispread the more!"

When Zau al-Makan had made an end of his versifying he wept and
wept with him all the troops; then he came to the grave and threw
himself upon it wild with woe, and the Wazir repeated the words
of the poet,

"Pain leaving life that fleets thou hast th' eternal won; * Thou
     didst as whilom many a doer like thee hath done
Leftest this worldly house without reproach or blame; * Ah, may
     th' ex change secure thee every benison!
Thou west from hostile onset shield and firm defence, * For us to
     baffle shafts and whistling spears to shun.
I see this world is only cheat and vanity, * Where man naught
     else must seek but please the Truthful One:
Th' Empyrean's Lord allow thee bower of heavenly bliss, * And wi'
     thy faithful friends The Guide show goodly wone:
I bid thee last good e'en with sigh of bitter grief, * Seeing the
     West in woe for lack of Easting Sun."

When the Wazir Dandan had finished his reciting, he wept with
sore weeping and the tears rained from his eyes like cushioned
pearls.  Then came forward one who had been of Sharrkan's boon
companions in his cups and he wept till ran in rills the drops,
and he enumerated the dead man's generous qualities, reciting the
following pentastichs,

"Where gone is Bounty since thy hand is turned to clay?  * And I
     in misery lie since thou west ta'en away.
See'st not, O litter guide[FN#457] (Heaven keep thee glad and
     gay!), * How tears adorn my cheeks, these furrowed wrinkles
     fray?
        A sight to joy shine eyes and fill thee with
        dismay.[FN#458]
By Allah ne'er this heart within I spoke of thee; * Ah no!  nor
     dared my sight to see thy brilliancy:
Save that my tear drops sorest wound have garred me dree * Yea!
     and if e'er on other rest these eyne of me,
        May yearning draw their reins nor suffer sleep to see."

And when the man stinted reciting, Zau al-Makan and the Minister
Dandan wept and the whole army was moved to tears; after which
all retired to their tents, and the King turning to the Wazir
took counsel with him concerning the conduct of the campaign.  On
this wise the two passed days and nights, while Zau al-Makan was
weighed down with grief and mourning till at last he said, "I
long to hear stories and adventures of Kings and tales of lover
folk enslaved by love; haply Allah may make this to solace that
which is on my heart of heavy anxiety, and stint and stay my
weeping and wailing." Quoth the Wazir, "If naught can dispel thy
trouble but hearing curious tales of Kings and people long gone
before and stories of folk enslaved by love of yore, and so
forth, this thing were easy, for I had no other business, in the
lifetime of thy father (who hath found mercy) than to relate
stories and to repeat verses to him.  This very night I will tell
thee a tale of a lover and his beloved, so shall thy breast be
broadened." When Zau al-Makan heard these words from the
Minister, his heart was set upon that which had been promised to
him and he did nothing but watch for the coming of the night,
that he might hear what the Wazir Dandan had to tell of the Kings
of yore and distracted lovers long gone before.  And hardly would
he believe that night had fallen ere he bade light the wax
candles and the lamps and bring all that was needful of meat and
drink and perfume gear, and what not; and when all was in
presence, he summoned the Wazir Dandan, and the Emirs Rustam and
Bahram and Tarkash and the Grand Chamberlain; then waited till
the whole party was seated before him; whereupon he turned to the
Minister and said, "Know, O Wazir, that night is come and hath
let down over us its veil of gloom, and we desire that thou tell
us those tales which thou promisedst us." Replied the Wazir,
"With joy and good will."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the One Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Zau Al-Makan summoned the Wazir and the Chamberlain and Rus