r than of speed. The
Prophet is said to have limited betting in these words, "There
shall be no wagering save on the Kuff (camel's foot), the Hafir
(hoof of horse, ass, etc.) or the Nasal (arrow-pile or lance
head)."

[FN#452] In the Mac. Edit. "Arman"=Armenia, which has before
occurred. The author or scribe here understands by "Caesarea" not
the old Turris Stratonis, Herod's city called after Augustus, but
Caesareia the capital of Cappadocia (Pliny, vi. 3), the royal
residence before called Mazaca (Strabo).

[FN#453] An idiom meaning "a very fool."

[FN#454] i.e. Kana (was) ma (that which) was (kana).

[FN#455] A son being "the lamp of a dark house."

[FN#456] When the Israelites refused to receive the Law (the souls
of all the Prophets even those unborn being present at the
Covenant), Allah tore up the mountain (Sinai which is not
mentioned) by the roots and shook it over their heads to terrify
them, saying, "Receive the Law which we have given you with a
resolution to keep it" (Koran chaps. xlx. 170). Much of this story
is from the Talmud (Abodah Sar. 2, 2, Tract Sabbath, etc.) whence
Al-Islam borrowed so much of its Judaism, as it took Christianity
from the Apocryphal New Testament. This tradition is still held by
the Israelites, says Mr. Rodwell (p. 333) who refers it to a
misunderstanding of Exod. xix. 17, rightly rendered in the E.
version "at the nether part of the mountain."

[FN#457] Arab. "Azghan" = the camel-litters in which women travel.

[FN#458] i.e. to joy foes and dismay friends.

[FN#459] Whose eyes became white (i.e. went blind) with mourning
for his son Joseph (Koran, chaps. xii. 84). He recovered his sight
when his face was covered with the shirt which Gabriel had given to
the youth after his brethren had thrown him into the well.

[FN#460] "Poison King" (Persian); or "Flower-King" (Arabic).

[FN#461] A delicate allusion to the size of her hips and back
parts, in which volume is, I have said, greatly admired for the
best of reasons.

[FN#462] All Prophets had some manual trade and that of David was
making coats of mail, which he invented, for before his day men
used plate-armour. So "Allah softened the iron for him" and in his
hands it became like wax (Koran xxi. xxxiv., etc.). Hence a good
coat of mail is called "Davidean." I have noticed (First Footsteps,
p. 33 and elsewhere) the homage paid to the blacksmith on the
principle which made Mulciber (Malik Kabir) a god. The myth of
David inventing mail possibly arose from his peculiarly fighting
career. Moslems venerate Daud on account of his extraordinary
devotion, nor has this view of his character ceased : a modern
divine preferred him to "all characters in history."

[FN#463] "Travel by night," said the Prophet, "when the plagues of
earth (scorpions, serpents, etc.) afflict ye not." Yet the night-
march in Arabia is detestable (Pilgrimage iii.).

[FN#464] This form of ceremony is called "Istikbal" (coming forth
to greet) and is regulated by the severest laws of etiquette. As a
rule the greater the distance (which may be a minimum of one step)
the higher the honour. Easterns infinitely despise strangers who
ignore these vitals of politeness.

[FN#465] i.e. he will be a desert Nimrod and the game will delight
to be killed by him.

[FN#466] This serves to keep the babe's eyes free from
inflammation.

[FN#467] i.e. Crown of the Kings of amorous Blandishment.

[FN#468] Lane (i. 531) translates "the grey down." The Arabs use
"Akhzar" (prop. "green") in many senses, fresh, gray-hued, etc.

[FN#469] Allusion to the well-known black banners of the house of
Abbas. The Persians describe the growth of hair on a fair young
face by, "His cheeks went into mourning for the loss of their
charms."

[FN#470] Arab. "Kafir" a Koranic word meaning Infidel, the active
participle of Kufr= Infidelity i.e. rejecting the mission of
Mohammed. It is insulting and in Turkish has been degraded to
"Giaour." Here it means black, as Hafiz of Shiraz terms a cheek
mole "Hindu" i.e. dark-skinned and idolatrous.

[FN#471] Alluding to the travel of Moses (Koran chaps. xviii.) with
Al-Khizr (the "evergreen Prophet") who had drunk of the Fountain of
Life and enjoyed flourishing and continual youth. Moses is
represented as the external and superficial religionist; the man of
outsight; Al-Khizr as the spiritual and illuminated man of insight.

[FM#472] The lynx was used like the lion in Ancient Egypt and the
Chita-leopard in India: I have never seen or heard of it in these
days.

[FN#473] Arab. "Sukur," whence our "Saker" the falcon, not to be
confounded with the old Falco Sacer, the Gr. {Greek letters}.
Falconry which, like all arts, began in Egypt, is an extensive
subject throughout Moslem lands. I must refer my readers to
"Falconry in the Valley of the Indus" (Van Voorst, 1852) and a long
note in Pilgrimage iii. 71.

[FN#474] It was not respectful to pitch their camp within dog-bark.

[FN#475] Easterns attach great importance to softness and
smoothness of skin and they are right: a harsh rough epidermis
spoils sport with the handsomest woman.

[FN#476] Canticles vii. 8: Hosea xiv. 6.

[FN#477] The mesmeric attraction of like to like.

[FN#478] Arab. "Taswif"=saying "Sauf," I will do it soon. It is a
beautiful word etymologically.

[FN#479] A very far fetched allusion. The face of the beloved
springing from an unbuttoned robe is the moon rising over the camp
in the hollow (bat'ha).

[FN#480] Arab. "Kasabat" = "canes," long beads, bugles.

[FN#481] Koran, xcvi. 5.

[FN#482] Both words (masc. and fem.) mean "dear, excellent, highly-
prized." The tale is the Arab form of the European "Patient
Griselda" and shows a higher conception of womanly devotion,
because Azizah, despite her wearisome weeping, is a girl of high
intelligence and Aziz is a vicious zany, weak as water and wilful
as wind. The phenomenon (not rare in life) is explained by the
couplet:--

     I love my love with an S 
     Because he is stupid and not intellectual.

This fond affection of clever women for fools can be explained only
by the law of unlikeness which mostly governs sexual unions in
physical matters; and its appearance in the story gives novelty and
point. Aziz can plead only the violence of his passion which
distinguished him as a lover among the mob of men who cannot love
anything beyond themselves. And none can pity him for losing a
member which he so much abused.

[FN#483] Arab. "Shahid," the index, the pointer raised in
testimony: the comparison of the Eastern and the Western names is
curious.

[FN#484] Musk is one of the perfumes of the Moslem Heaven; and
"musky" is much used in verse to signify scented and dark-brown.

[FN#485] Arab. "Mandil": these kerchiefs are mostly oblong, the
shore sides being worked with gold and coloured silk, and often
fringed, while the two others are plain.

[FN#486] Arab. "Rayhani," of the Ocymum Basilicum or sweet basil:
a delicate handwriting, so called from the pen resembling a leaf
(?) See vol. i. p. 128. [Volume 1, note 229 & 230]

[FN#487] All idiom meaning "something unusual happened."

[FN#488] An action common in grief and regret: here the lady would
show that she sighs for union with her beloved.

[FN#489] Lane (i. 608) has a valuable note on the language of
signs, from M. du Vigneau's "Secretaire Turc," etc. (Paris, 1688),
Baron von Hammer-Purgstall ("Mines de ['Orient," No. 1, Vienna,
1809) and Marcel's "Comes du Cheykh El-Mohdy" (Paris, 1833). It is
practiced in Africa as well as in Asia. At Abeokuta in Yoruba a man
will send a symbolical letter in the shape of cowries, palm-nuts
and other kernels strung on rice- straw, and sharp wits readily
interpret the meaning. A specimen is given in p. 262 of Miss
Tucker's "Abbeokuta; or Sunrise within the Tropics."

[FN#490] Mr. Payne (ii. 227) translates "Hawa al-'Urzi" by "the
love of the Beni Udhra, an Arabian tribe famous for the passion and
devotion with which love was practiced among them." See Night
dclxxxiii. I understand it as "excusable love" which, for want of
a better term, is here translated "platonic." It is, however, more
like the old "bundling" of Wales and Northern England; and allows
all the pleasures but one, the toyings which the French call les
plaisirs de la petite ode; a term my dear old friend Fred. Hankey
derived from la petite voie. The Afghans know it as "Namzad-bazi"
or betrothed play (Pilgrimage, ii. 56); the Abyssinians as eye-
love; and the Kafirs as Slambuka a Shlabonka, for which see The
traveller Delegorgue.

[FN#491] "Turk" in Arabic and Persian poetry means a plunderer, a
robber. Thus Hafiz: "Agar an Turk-i-Shirazi ba-dast arad dil-i-
mara," If that Shirazi (ah, the Turk!) would deign to take my heart
in hand, etc.

[FN#492] Arab. "Nazir," a steward or an eye (a "looker"). The idea
is borrowed from Al-Hariri (Assemblies, xiii.), and,--

[FN#493] Arab. "Hajib," a groom of the chambers, a chamberlain;
also an eyebrow. See Al-Hariri, ibid. xiii. and xxii.

[FN#494] This gesture speaks for itself: it is that of a dyer
staining a cloth. The "Sabbagh's" shop is the usual small recess,
open to the street and showing pans of various dyes sunk like "dog-
laps" in the floor.

[FN#495] The Arab. "Sabt" (from sabata, he kept Sabt) and the Heb.
"Sabbath" both mean Saturn's day, Saturday, transferred by some
unknown process throughout Christendom to Sunday. The change is one
of the most curious in the history of religions. If there be a
single command stronger than all others it is "Keep the Saturday
holy." It was so kept by the Founder of Christianity; the order was
never abrogated and yet most Christians are not aware that Sabbath,
or "Sawbath," means Saturn's day, the "Shiyar" of the older Arabs.
And to complete its degradation "Sabbat" in French and German means
a criaillerie, a "row," a disorder, an abominable festival of Hexen
(witches). This monstrous absurdity can be explained only by
aberrations of sectarian zeal, of party spirit in religion.

[FN#496] The men who cry to prayer. The first was Bilal, the
Abyssinian slave bought and manumitted by Abu Bakr. His simple cry
was "I testify there is no Ilah (god) but Allah (God)! Come ye to
prayers!" Caliph Omar, with the Prophet's permission, added, "I
testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of Allah." The prayer-cry
which is beautiful and human, contrasting pleasantly with the
brazen clang of the bell. now is

     Allah is Almighty (bis).
     I declare no god is there but Allah (bis).
     Hie ye to Rogation (Hayya=halumma).
     Hie ye to Salvation (Falah=prosperity, Paradise).
     ("Hie ye to Edification," a Shi'ah adjunct).
     Prayer is better than sleep (in the morning, also bis).
     No god is there but Allah

This prayer call is similarly worded and differently pronounced and
intoned throughout Al-Islam.

[FN#497] i.e. a graceful youth of Al-Hijaz, the Moslem Holy Land,
whose "sons" claim especial privileges.

[FN#498] Arab. "harf'= a letter, as we should say a syllable.

[FN#499] She uses the masculine "fata," in order to make the
question more mysterious.

[FN#500] The fountain-bowl is often ornamented by a rude mosaic of
black and white marble with enlivenments of red stone or tile in
complicated patterns.

[FN#501] Arab. "Kubad" = shaddock (citrus decumana): the huge
orange which Captain Shaddock brought from the West Indies; it is
the Anglo-Indian pompelmoose, vulg. pummelo. An excellent bitter is
made out of the rind steeped in spirits. Citronworts came from
India whence they spread throughout the tropics: they were first
introduced into Europe by the heroic Joam de Castro and planted in
his garden at Cintra where their descendants are still seen.

[FN#502] Arab. "Baklawah," Turk. "Baklava," a kind of pastry with
blanched almonds bruised small between layers of dough, baked in
the oven and cut into lozenges. It is still common

[FN#503] Her just fear was that the young woman might prove "too
clever by half" for her simpleton cousin.

[FN#504] The curse is pregnant with meaning. On Judgment-day the
righteous shall arise with their faces shining gloriously: hence
the blessing, "Bayyaz' Allaho wajh-ak" (=Allah whiten thy
countenance!). But the wicked shall appear with faces scorched
black and deformed by horror (Koran xxiv.): hence "God blacken thy
brow!" I may observe that Easterns curse, the curse being
everywhere the language of excited destructiveness; but only
Westerns, and these chiefly English, swear, a practice utterly
meaningless. "Damn it" without specifying what the "it" is, sounds
like the speech of a naughty child anxious only to use a "wicked
word." "Damn you!" is intelligible all the world over. It has given
rise to "les goddams" in France, "Godames" in the Brazil and
"Gotama" amongst the Somal of Eastern Africa, who learn it in Aden,

[FN#505] Arab. "Zardah," usually rice dressed with saffron and
honey, from Pers. "Zard," saffron, yellow. See Night dcxii.

[FN#506] Vulgarly called "knuckle-bone," concerning which I shall
have something to say.

[FN#507] A bit of wood used in the children's game called "Tab"
which resembles our tip-cat (Lane M. E. chaps. xvii.).

[FN#508] Arab. "Balah," the unripened date, which is considered a
laxative and eaten in hot weather.

[FN#509] Lane (i. 611), quoting Al-Kazwini, notes that the date-
stone is called "Nawa" (dim. "Nawayah") which also means distance,
absence, severance. Thus the lady threatens to cast off her greedy
and sleepy lover.

[FN#510] The pad of the carob-bean which changes little after being
plucked is an emblem of constancy.

[FN#511] This dirham=48 grains avoir.

[FN#512] The weight would be round: also "Hadid" (=iron) means
sharp or piercing (Koran chaps. Vi]. 21). The double "swear" is
intended to be very serious. Moreover iron conjures away fiends:
when a water-spout or a sand-devil (called Shaytan also in Arabia)
approaches, you point the index at the Jinn and say, "Iron, O thou
ill-omened one!" Amongst the Ancient Egyptians the metal was ill-
omened being the bones of Typhon, 80 here, possibly, we have an
instance of early homoeopathy--similia similibus.

[FN#513] Probably fermented to a kind of wine. The insipid fruit
(Unnab) which looks like an apple in miniature, is much used in
stews, etc. It is the fruit (Nabak classically Nabik) of Rhamnus
Nabeca (or Sidrat) also termed Zizyphus Jujuba, seu Spina Christi
because fabled to have formed the crown of thorns: in the English
market this plum is called Chinese Japonica. I have described it in
Pilgrimage ii. 205, and have noticed the infusion of the leaves for
washing the dead (ibid. ii. 105): this is especially the use of the
"Ber" in India, where the leaves are superstitiously held
peculiarly pure. Our dictionaries translate "Sidr" by "Lote-tree";
and no wonder that believers in Homeric writ feel their bile
aroused by so poor a realisation of the glorious myth. The Homerids
probably alluded to Hashish or Bhang.

[FN#514] Arab. "Azrar": the open collar of the Saub ("Tobe") or
long loose dress is symptomatic. The Eastern button is on the same
principle as ours (both having taken the place of the classical
fibula); but the Moslem affects a loop (like those to which we
attach our "frogs") and utterly ignores a button-hole.

[FN#515] Alluding to the ceremonious circumambulation of the Holy
House at Meccah: a notable irreverence worthy of Kneph-town
(Canopus).

[FN#516] The ear-drop is the penis and the anklet its crown of
glory.

[FN#517] Equivalent to our "Alas! Alas!" which, by the by, no one
ever says. "Awah," like "Yauh," is now a woman's word although used
by Al-Hariri (Assembly of Basrah) and so Al-awwah=one who cries
from grief "Awah." A favourite conversational form is "Yehh" with
the aspirate exasperated, but it is an expression of astonishment
rather than sorrow. It enters into Europe travel-books. 

[FN#518] In the text "burst her gall-bladder."

[FN#519] The death of Azizah is told with true Arab pathos and
simplicity: it still draws tear. *from the eyes of the Badawi, and
I never read it without a "lump in the throat."

[FN#520] Arab. "Inshallah bukra!" a universal saying which is the
horror of travellers.

[FN#521] I have explained "Nu'uman's flower" as the anemone which
in Grecised Arabic is "Anumiya." Here they are strewed over the
tomb; often the flowers are planted in a small bed of mould sunk in
the upper surface.

[FN#522] Arab. "Barzakh" lit. a bar, a partition: in the Koran
(chapts. xxiii. and xxxv.) the space or the place between death and
resurrection where souls are stowed away. It corresponds after a
fashion with the classical Hades and the Limbus (Limbo) of
Christendom, e.g.. Limbus patrum, infantum, fatuorum. But it must
not be confounded with Al-A'araf, The Moslem purgatory.

[FN#523] Arab. "Zukak al-Nakib," the latter word has been explained
as a chief, leader, head man.

[FN#524] Moslems never stand up at such times, for a spray of urine
would make their clothes ceremonially impure: hence the scrupulous
will break up with stick or knife the hard ground in front of them.
A certain pilgrim was reported to have made this blunder which is
hardly possible in Moslem dress. A high personage once asked me if
it was true that he killed a man who caught him in a standing
position; and I found to my surprise that the absurd scandal was
already twenty years old. After urinating the Moslem wipes the os
penis with one to three bits of stone, clay or handfuls of earth,
and he must perform Wuzu before he can pray. Tournefort (Voyage au
Levant iii. 335) tells a pleasant story of certain Christians at
Constantinople who powdered with "Poivre-d'Inde" the stones in a
wall where the Moslems were in the habit of rubbing the os penis by
way of wiping The same author (ii. 336) strongly recommends a
translation of Rabelais' Torcheculative chapter (Lib i., chaps. 13)
for the benefit of Mohammedans.

[FN#525] Arab. "Nuhas ahmar," lit. red brass.

[FN#526] The cup is that between the lady's legs.

[FN#527] A play upon "Sak" = calf, or leg, and "Saki," a cup-
bearer. The going round (Tawaf) and the running (Sa'i) allude to
the circumambulation of the Ka'abah, and the running between Mount
Safa and Marwah (Pilgrimage ii. 58, and iii. 343). A religious
Moslem would hold the allusion highly irreverent.

[FN#528] Lane (i. 614) never saw a woman wearing such kerchief
which is deshabille. It is either spread over the head or twisted
turband-wise.

[FN#529] The "Kasabah" was about two fathoms of long measure, and
sometimes 12 « feet; but the length has been reduced.

[FN#530] "Bat and ball," or hockey on horseback (Polo) is one of
the earliest Persian games as shown by every illustrated copy of
Firdausi's "Shahnameh." This game was played with a Kurrah or small
hand-ball and a long thin bat crooked at the end called in Persian
Chaugan and in Arabic Saulajan. Another sense of the word is given
in the Burhan-i-Kati translated by Vullers (Lex. Persico-Latinum),
a large bandy with bent head to which is hung an iron ball, also
called Kaukabah (our "morning-star") and like the umbrella it
denotes the grandees of the court. The same Kaukabah particularly
distinguished one of the Marquesses of Waterford. This Polo
corresponds with the folliculus, the pallone, the baloun-game
(moyen age) of Europe, where the horse is not such a companion of
man; and whereof the classics sang:--

     Folle decet pueros ludere, folle senes.

In these days we should spell otherwise the "folle" of seniors
playing at the ball or lawn-tennis.

[FN#531] "Dalil" means a guide; `'Dalilah," a woman who misguides,
a bawd. See the Tale of Dalilah the Crafty, Night dcxcviii.

[FN#532] i.e. she was a martyr.

[FN#533] Arab. "Ghashim" a popular and insulting term, our "Johnny
Raw." Its use is shown in Pilgrimage i. 110.

[FN#534] Bathers pay on leaving the Hammam; all enter without
paying.

[FN#535] i.e. she swore him upon his sword and upon the Koran: a
loaf of bread is sometimes added. See Lane (i. 615).











This etext was produced by J.C. Byers at jcbyers@capitalnet.com.
Proofreaders were: J.C. Byers, Laura Shaffer, Lan Wang, Doris
Ringbloom







                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                           VOLUME TWO
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                      To John Payne, Esq.
                                
My Dear Sir,

     Allow me thus publicly to express my admiration of your
magnum opus, "The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night;" and
to offer you my cordial thanks for honouring me with the
dedication of that scholar-like and admirable version.

                    Ever yours sincerely,

                         Richard F. Burton.

Queen's College, Oxford,
     August 1, 1885.


                 Contents of the Second Volume


7.   Nur Al-Din Ali and the Damsel Anis Al-Jalis
8.   Tale of Ghanim Bin Ayyub, The Distraught, The Thrall O' Love
     a.   Tale of the First Eunuch, Bukhayt
     b.   Tale of the Second Eunuch, Kafur
9.   Tale of King Omar Bin Al-Nu'uman and His Sons Sharrkan and
     Zau Al-Makan
     a.   Tale of Taj Al-Muluk and the Princess Dunya
          aa.  Tale of Aziz and Azizah



                        The Book Of The
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                                
                                

          Nur Al-Din Ali and the Damsel Anis Al-Jalis
                                
Quoth Shahrazad [FN#1]:--It hath reached me, O auspicious King of
intelligence penetrating, that there was, amongst the Kings of
Bassorah[FN#2], a King who loved the poor and needy and cherished
his lieges, and gave of his wealth to all who believed in
Mohammed (whom Allah bless and assain!), and he was even as one
of the poets described him,

"A King who when hosts of the foe invade, * Receives them with
     lance-lunge and sabre-sway;
Writes his name on bosoms in thin red lines, * And scatters the
     horsemen in wild dismay."[FN#3]

His name was King Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, and he had two
Wazirs, one called Al-Mu'ín, son of Sáwí and the other Al-Fazl
son of Khákán. Now Al-Fazl was the most generous of the people of
his age, upright of life, so that all hearts united in loving him
and the wise flocked to him for counsel; whilst the subjects used
to pray for his long life, because he was a compendium of the
best qualities, encouraging the good and lief, and preventing
evil and mischief.  But the Wazir Mu'ín bin Sáwí on the contrary
hated folk [FN#4] and loved not the good and was a mere compound
of ill; even as was said of him,

"Hold to nobles, sons of nobles! 'tis ever Nature's test  * That
     nobles born of nobles shall excel in noble deed:
And shun the mean of soul, meanly bred, for 'tis the law, *  Mean
     deeds come of men who are mean of blood and breed."

And as much as the people loved and fondly loved Al-Fazl bin
Khákán, so they hated and thoroughly hated the mean and miserly
Mu'ín bin Sáwí. It befel one day by the decree of the Decreer,
that King Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, being seated on his
throne with his officers of state about him, summoned his Wazir
Al-Fazl and said to him, "I wish to have a slave-girl of passing
beauty, perfect in loveliness, exquisite in symmetry and endowed
with all praiseworthy gifts."  Said the courtiers, "Such a girl
is not to be bought for less than ten thousand gold pieces:"
whereupon the Sultan called out to his treasurer and said, "Carry
ten thousand dinars to the house of Al-Fazl bin Khákán." The
treasurer did the King's bidding; and the Minister went away,
after receiving the royal charge to repair to the slave-bazar
every day, and entrust to brokers the matter aforesaid.  Moreover
the King issued orders that girls worth above a thousand gold
pieces should not be bought or sold without being first displayed
to the Wazir.  Accordingly no broker purchased a slave-girl ere
she had been paraded before the minister; but none pleased him,
till one day a dealer came to the house and found him taking
horse and intending for the palace.  So he caught hold of his
stirrup saying,

"O thou, who givest to royal state sweet savour, * Thou'rt a
     Wazir shalt never fail of favour!
Dead Bounty thou hast raised to life for men;  * Ne'er fail of
     Allah's grace such high endeavour!"

Then quoth he, "O my lord, that surpassing object for whom the
gracious mandate was issued is at last found; [FN#5]" and quoth
the Wazir, "Here with her to me!"  So he went away and returned
after a little, bringing a damsel in richest raiment robed, a
maid spear-straight of stature and five feet tall; budding of
bosom with eyes large and black as by Kohl traced, and dewy lips
sweeter than syrup or the sherbet one sips, a virginette smooth
cheeked and shapely faced, whose slender waist with massive hips
was engraced; a form more pleasing than branchlet waving upon the
top-most trees, and a voice softer and gentler than the morning
breeze, even as saith one of those who have described her,

"Strange is the charm which dights her brows like Luna's disk
     that shine; * O sweeter taste than sweetest Robb[FN#6] or
     raisins of the vine.
A throne th'Empyrean keeps for her in high and glorious state, *
     For wit and wisdom, wandlike form and graceful bending line:
She in the Heaven of her face[FN#7] the seven-fold stars
     displays, * That guard her cheeks as satellites against
     the spy's design:
If man should cast a furtive glance or steal far look at her, *
     His heart is burnt by devil-bolts shot by those piercing
     eyne."

When the Wazir saw her she made him marvel with excess of
admiration, so he turned, perfectly pleased, to the broker and
asked, "What is the price of this girl?"; whereto he answered,
"Her market-value stands at ten thousand dinars, but her owner
swears that this sum will not cover the cost of the chickens she
hath eaten, the wine she hath drunken and the dresses of honour
bestowed upon her instructor: for she hath learned calligraphy
and syntax and etymology; the commentaries of the Koran; the
principles of law and religion; the canons of medicine, and the
calendar and the art of playing on musical instruments."[FN#8]
Said the Wazir, "Bring me her master."  So the broker brought him
at once and, behold, he was a Persian of whom there was left only
what the days had left; for he was as a vulture bald and scald
and a wall trembling to its fall.  Time had buffetted him with
sore smart, yet was he not willing this world to depart; even as
said the poet,

"Time hath shattered all my frame, *  Oh! how time hath
     shattered me.
Time with lordly might can tame    * Manly strength and vigour
     free.
Time was in my youth, that none    * Sped their way more fleet    
     and fast:
Time is and my strength is gone,   * Youth is sped, and speed
     is past.[FN#9]"

The Wazir asked him, "Art thou content to sell this slave-girl to
the Sultan for ten thousand dinars?"; and the Persian answered,
"By Allah, if I offer her to the King for naught, it were but my
devoir."[FN#10] So the Minister bade bring the monies and saw
them weighed out to the Persian, who stood up before him and
said, "By the leave of our lord the Wazir, I have somewhat to
say;" and the Wazir replied, "Out with all thou hast!"  "It is my
opinion," continued the slave-dealer, "that thou shouldst not
carry the maid to the King this day; for she is newly off a
journey; the change of air[FN#11] hath affected her and the toils
of trouble have fretted her.  But keep her quiet in thy palace
some ten days, that she may recover her looks and become again as
she was.  Then send her to the Hammam and clothe her in the
richest of clothes and go up with her to the Sultan: this will be
more to thy profit."  The Wazir pondered the Persian's words and
approved of their wisdom; so he carried her to his palace, where
he appointed her private rooms, and allowed her every day
whatever she wanted of meat and drink and so forth.  And on this
wise she abode a while.  Now the Wazir Al-Fazl had a son like the
full moon when sheeniest dight, with face radiant in light,
cheeks ruddy bright, and a mole like a dot of ambergris on a
downy site; as said of him the poet and said full right,

"A moon which blights you[FN#12] if you dare behold; * A branch
     which folds you in its waving fold:
Locks of the Zanj[FN#13] and golden glint of hair; * Sweet gait
     and form a spear to have and hold:
Ah! hard of heart with softest slenderest waist, * That evil to
     this weal why not remould?[FN#14]
Were thy form's softness placed in thy heart, * Ne'er would thy
     lover find thee harsh and cold:
Oh thou accuser! be my love's excuser, * Nor chide if love-pangs
     deal me woes untold!
I bear no blame: 'tis all my hear and eyne; * So leave thy
     blaming, let me yearn and pine."

Now the handsome youth knew not the affair of the damsel; and his
father had enjoined her closely, saying, "Know, O my daughter,
that I have bought thee as a bedfellow for our King, Mohammed bin
Sulayman al-Zayni; and I have a son who is a Satan for girls and
leaves no maid in the neighbourhood without taking her
maidenhead; so be on thy guard against him and beware of letting
him see thy face or hear they voice." "Hearkening and obedience,"
said the girl; and he left her and fared forth.  Some days after
this it happened by decree of Destiny, that the damsel repaired
to the baths in the house, where some of the slave women bathed
her; after which she arrayed herself in sumptuous raiment; and
her beauty and loveliness were thereby redoubled.  Then she went
in to the Wazir's wife and kissed her hand; and the dame said to
her, "Naiman!  May it benefit thee,[FN#15] O Anis al-
Jalis![FN#16]  Are not our baths handsome?"  "O my mistress," she
replied, "I lacked naught there save thy gracious presence." 
Thereupon the lady said to her slave-women, "Come with us to the
Hammam, for it is some days since we went there:" they answered,
"To hear is to obey!" and rose and all accompanied her. Now she
had set two little slave-girls to keep the door of the private
chamber wherein was Anis al-Jalis and had said to them, "Suffer
none go in to the damsel."  Presently, as the beautiful maiden
sat resting in her rooms, suddenly came in the Wazir's son whose
name was Nur al-Din Ali,[FN#17] and asked after his mother and
her women, to which the two little slave-girls replied, "They are
in the Hammam."  But the damsel, Anis al-Jalis, had heard from
within Nur al-Din Ali's voice and had said to herself, "O would
Heaven I saw what like is this youth against whom the Wazir
warned me, saying that he hath not left a virgin in the
neighbourhood without taking her virginity: by Allah, I do long
to have sight of him!"  So she sprang to her feet with the
freshness of the bath on her and, stepping to the door, looked at
Nur al-Din Ali and saw a youth like the moon in its full and the
sight bequeathed her a thousand sighs. The young man also glanced
at her and the look make him heir to a thousand thoughts of care;
and each fell into Love's ready snare.  Then he stepped up to the
two little slave-girls and cried aloud at them; whereupon both
fled before him and stood afar off to see what he would do.  And
behold, he walked to the door of the damsel's chamber and,
opening it, went in and asked her "Art thou she my father bought
for me?" and she answered "Yes." Thereupon the youth, who was
warm with wine, came up to her and embraced her; then he took her
legs and passed them round his waist and she wound her arms about
his neck, and met him with kisses and murmurs of pleasure and
amorous toyings.  Next he sucked her tongue and she sucked his,
and lastly, he loosed the strings of her petticoat-trousers and
abated her maidenhead.  When the two little slave-girls saw their
young master get in unto the damsel, Anis al-Jalis, they cried
out and shrieked; so as soon as the youth had had his wicked will
of her, he rose and fled forth fearing the consequences of his
ill-doing.  When the Wazir's wife heard the slave-girls' cries,
she sprang up and came out of the baths with the perspiration
pouring from her face, saying, "What is this unseemly clamour in
the house[FN#18]?"  Then she came up to the two little slave-
girls and asked them saying, "Fie upon you! what is the matter?";
and both answered, "Verily our lord Nur al-Din came in and beat
us, so we fled; then he went up to Anis al-Jalis and threw his
arms round her and we know not what he did after that; but when
we cried out to thee he ran away."  Upon this the lady went to
Anis al-Jalis and said to her, "What tidings?"  "O my lady," she
answered, "as I was sitting here lo! a handsome young man came in
and said to me:--Art thou she my father bought for me?; and I
answered Yes; for, by Allah, O mistress mine, I believed that his
words were true; and he instantly came in and embraced me."  "Did
he nought else with thee but this?" quoth the lady, and quoth
she, "Indeed he did!  But he did it only three times." "He did
not leave thee without dishonouring thee!" cried the Wazir's wife
and fell to weeping and buffetting her face, she and the girl and
all the handmaidens, fearing lest Nur al-Din's father should kill
him.[FN#19]  Whilst they were thus, in came the Wazir and asked
what was the matter, and his wife said to him, "Swear that whatso
I tell thee thou wilt attend to it."  "I will," answered he.  So
she related to him what his son had done, whereat he was much
concerned and rent his raiment and smote his face till his nose
bled, and plucked out his beard by the handful. "Do not kill
thyself," said his wife, "I will give thee ten thousand dinars,
her price, of my own money."  But he raised his head and cried,
"Out upon thee!  I have no need of her purchase-money: my fear is
lest life as well as money go."  "O my lord, and how is that?" 
"Wottest thou not that yonder standeth our enemy Al Mu'ín bin
Sáwí who, as soon as he shall hear of this matter, will go up to
the Sultan"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Thirty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir said to his wife, "Wottest thou not that yonder standeth
our enemy Al-Mu'ín bin Sáwí who, as soon as he hears of this
matter will go up to the Sultan and say to him, 'Thy Wazir who,
thou wilt have it loveth thee, took from thee ten thousand ducats
and bought therewith a slave-girl whose like none ever beheld;
but when he saw her, she pleased him and he said to his son,
'Take her: thou art worthier of her than the Sultan.'  So he took
her and did away with her virginity and she is now in his house.' 
The King will say, 'Thou liest!' to which he will reply, 'With
thy leave I will fall upon him unawares and bring her to thee.' 
The King will give him warranty for this and he will come down
upon the house and will take the girl and present her to the
Sultan, who will question her and she will not be able to deny
the past.  Then mine enemy will say, 'O my lord, thou wottest
that I give thee the best of counsel; but I have not found favour
in thine eyes.'  Thereupon the Sultan will make an example of me,
and I shall be a gazing-stock to all the people and my life will
be lost."  Quoth his wife, "Let none know of this thing which
hath happened privily, and commit thy case to Allah and trust in
Him to save thee from such strait; for He who knoweth the future
shall provide for the future."  With this she brought the Wazir a
cup of wine and his heart was quieted, and he ceased to feel
wrath and fear.  Thus far concerning him; but as regards his son
Nur al-Din Ali, fearing the consequence of his misdeed he abode
his day long in the flower garden and came back only at night to
his mother's apartment where he slept; and, rising before dawn,
returned to the gardens.  He ceased not to do thus for two whole
months without showing his face to his parent, till at last his
mother said to his father, "O my lord, shall we lose our boy as
well as the girl?  If matters continue long in this way he will
flee from us."  "And what to do?" asked he; and she answered, "Do
thou watch this night; and, when he cometh, seize on him and
frighten him: I will rescue him from thee and do thou make peace
with him and give him the damsel to wife, for she loveth him as
he loveth her.  And I will pay thee her price." So the Minister
say up that night and, when his son came, he seized him and
throwing him down knelt on his breast and showed as thou he would
cut his throat; but his mother ran to the youth's succour and
asked her husband, "What wouldest thou do with him?"  He answered
her, "I will split his weasand."  Said the son to the father, "Is
my death, then, so light a matter to thee?"; and his father's
eyes welled with tears, for natural affection moved him, and he
rejoined, "O my son, how light was to thee the loss of my good
and my life!"  Quoth Nur al-Din, "Hear, O my father, what the
poet hath said,

‘Forgive me! thee-ward sinned I, but the wise * Ne'er to the
     sinner shall deny his grace:
Thy foe may pardon sue when lieth he * In lowest, and thou
     holdest highest place!'"

Thereupon the Wazir rose from off his son's breast saying, "I
forgive thee!"; for his heart yearned to him; and the youth
kissed the hand of his sire who said, "O my son, were I sure that
thou wouldest deal justly by Anis al-Jalis, I would give her to
thee."  "O my father, what justice am I to do to her?"  "I enjoin
thee, O my son, not to take another wife or concubine to share
with her, nor sell her."  "O my father! I swear to thee that
verily I will not do her injustice in either way."  Having sworn
to that effect Nur al-Din went in to the damsel and abode with
her a whole year, whilst Allah Almighty caused the King to forget
the matter of the maiden; and Al-Mu'ín, though the affair came to
his ears, dared not divulge it by reason of the high favour in
which his rival stood with the Sultan.  At the end of the year
Al-Fazl went one day to the public baths; and, as he came out
whilst he was still sweating, the air struck him[FN#20] and he
caught a cold which turned to a fever; then he took to his bed. 
His malady gained ground and restlessness was longsome upon him
and weakness bound him like a chain; so he called out, "Hither
with my son;" and when Nur al-Din Ali came he said to him, "O my
son, know that man's lot and means are distributed and decreed;
and the end of days by all must be dree'd; and that every soul
drain the cup of death is nature's need."  The he repeated these
lines,

"I die my death, but He alone is great who dieth not! * And well
     I wot, soon shall I die, for death was made my lot:
A King there's not that dies and holds his kingdom in his hand, *
     For Sovranty the Kingdom is of Him who dieth not."

Then he continued, "O my son, I have no charge to leave thee save
that thou fear Allah and look to the issues of thine acts and
bear in mind my injunctions anent Anis al-Jalis."  "O my father!"
said Nur al-Din, "who is like unto thee?  Indeed thou art famed
for well doing and preachers offer prayers for thee in their
pulpits!"  Quoth Al-Fazl, "O my son, I hope that Allah Almighty
may grant me acceptance!"  Then he pronounced the Two
Testimonies,[FN#21] or Professions of the Faith, and was recorded
among the blessed.  The palace was filled with crying and
lamentation and the news of his death reached the King, and the
city-people wept, even those at their prayers and women at
household cares and the school-children shed tears for Bin-
Khákán.  Then his son Nur al-Din Ali arose and made ready his
funeral, and the Emirs and Wazirs and high Officers of State and
city-notables were present, amongst them the Wazir al-Mu'ín bin
Sáwí.  And as the bier went forth from the house some one in the
crowd of mourners began to chant these lines,

"On the fifth day I quitted al my friends for evermore, * And
     they laid me out and washed me on a slab without my
     door:[FN#22]
They stripped me of the clothes I was ever wont to wear, * And
     they clothed me in the clothes which till then I never wore.
On four men's necks they bore me and carried me from home * To
     chapel; and some prayed for him on neck they bore:
They prayed for me a prayer that no prostration knows;[FN#23] *
     They prayed for me who praised me and were my friends of
     yore;
And they laid me in a house with a ceiling vaulted o'er, * And
     Time shall be no more ere it ope to me its door."

When they had shovelled in the dust over him and the crowd had
dispersed, Nur al-Din returned home and he lamented with sobs and
tears; and the tongue of the case repeated these couplets,

"On the fifth day at even-tide they went away from me: * 
     farewelled them as faring they made farewell my lot:
But my spirit as they went, with them went and so I cried, * 'Ah
     return ye!' but replied she, 'Alas! return is not
To a framework lere and lorn that lacketh blood and life, * A
     frame whereof remaineth naught but bones that rattle and
     rot:
Mine eyes are blind and cannot see quencht by the flowing tear! *
     Mine ears are dull and lost to sense: they have no power to
     hear!'"

He abode a long time sorrowing for his father till, one day, as
he was sitting at home, there came a knocking at the door; so he
rose in haste and opening let in a man, one of his father's
intimates and who had been the Wazir's boon-companion.  The
visitor kissed Nur al-Din's hand and said to him, "O my lord, he
who hath left the like of thee is not dead; and this way went
also the Chief of the Ancients and the Moderns. [FN#24] O my lord
Ali, be comforted and leave sorrowing."  Thereupon Nur al-Din
rose and going to the guest-saloon transported thither all he
needed. Then he assembled his companions and took his handmaid
again; and, collecting round him ten of the sons of the
merchants, began to eat meat and drink wine, giving entertainment
after entertainment and lavishing his presents and his favours. 
One day his Steward came to him and said, "O my lord Nur al-Din,
hast thou not heard the saying, Whoso spendeth and reckoneth not,
to poverty wendeth and recketh not?"  And he repeated what the
poet wrote,

"I look to my money and keep it with care, * For right well I wot
     'tis my buckler and brand:
Did I lavish my dirhams on hostilest foes,[FN#25] * I should
     truck my good luck by mine ill luck trepanned:
So I'll eat it and drink it and joy in my wealth; * And no
     spending my pennies on others I'll stand:
I will keep my purse close 'gainst whoever he be; * And a niggard
     in grain a true friend ne'er I fand:
Far better deny him than come to say:--Lend, * And five-fold the
     loan shall return to thy hand!
And he turns face aside and he sidles away, * While I stand like
     a dog disappointed, unmanned,
Oh, the sorry lot his who hath yellow-boys none, * Though his
     genius and virtues shine bright as the sun!

O my master," continued the Steward, "this lavish outlay and
these magnificent gifts waste away wealth."  When Nur al-Din Ali
heard these words he looked at his servant and cried, "Of all
thou hast spoken I will not heed one single word, for I have
heard the saying of the poet who saith,

'An my palm be full of wealth and my wealth I ne'er bestow, * A
     palsy take my hand and my foot ne'er rise again!
Show my niggard who by niggardise e'er rose to high degree, * Or
     the generous gifts generally hath slain.'"

And he pursued, "Know, O Steward, it is my desire that so long as
thou hast money enough for my breakfast, thou trouble me not with
taking thought about my supper."  Thereupon the Steward asked,
"Must it be so?"; and he answered, "It must."  So the honest man
went his way and Nur al-Din Ali devoted himself to extravagance;
and, if any of his cup-companions chanced to say, "This is a
pretty thing;" he would reply, "'Tis a gift to thee!"; or if
another said, "O my lord, such a house is handsome;" he would
answer, "Take it: it is thine!"  After this reckless fashion he
continued to live for a whole year, giving his friends a banquet
in the morning and a banquet in the evening and a banquet at
midnight, till one day, as the company was sitting together, the
damsel Anis al-Jalis repeated these lines,

"Thou deemedst well of Time when days went well, * And feardest
     not what ills might deal thee Fate:
Thy nights so fair and restful cozened thee, *  For peaceful
     nights bring woes of heavy weight."

When she had ended her verse behold, somebody knocked at the
door. So Nur al-Din rose to open it and one of his boon-
companions followed him without being perceived.  At the door he
found his Steward and asked him, "What is the matter?"; and he
answered, "O my lord, what I dreaded for thee hath come to pass!" 
"How so?"  "Know that there remains not a dirham's worth, less or
more in my hands.  Here are my Daftars and account books showing
both income and outlay and the registers of thine original
property."  When Nur al-Din heard these words he bowed his head
and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah!"  When the man who had followed him privily to spy on him
heard the Steward's words, he returned to his friends and warned
them saying, "Look ye well to what ye do: Nur al-Din is
penniless;" and, as the young host came back to his guests,
vexation showed itself in his face.  Thereupon one of the
intimates rose; and, looking at the entertainer, said to him, "O
my lord, may be thou wilt give me leave to retire?"  "And why so
early retirement this day?"; asked he and the other answered him,
"My wife is in childbirth and I may not be absent from her:
indeed I must return and see how she does."  So he gave him
leave, whereupon another rose and said, "O my lord Nur al-Din, I
wish now to go to my brother's for he circumciseth his son to-
day."[FN#26]  In short each and every asked permission to retire
on some pretence or other, till all the ten were gone leaving Nur
al-Din alone.  Then he called his slave-girl and said to her, "O
Anis al-Jalis, hast thou seen what case is mine?"  And he related
to her what the Steward had told him.  Then quoth she, "O my
lord, for many nights I had it in my mind to speak with thee of
this matter, but I heard thee repeating,

'When the World heaps favours on thee, pass on * Thy favours to
     friends ere her hand she stay:
Largesse never let her when fain she comes, * Nor niggardise kept
     her from turning away!'

When I heard these verses I held my peace and cared not to
exchange a word with thee."  "O Anis al-Jalis," said Nur al-Din,
"thou knowest that I have not wasted my wealth save on my
friends, especially these ten who have now left me a pauper, and
I think they will not abandon and desert me without relief."  "By
Allah," replied she, "they will not profit thee with aught of
aid."  Said he, "I will rise at once and go to them and knock at
their doors; it may be I shall get from them somewhat wherewith I
may trade and leave pastime and pleasuring."  So he rose without
stay or delay, and repaired to a street wherein all his ten
friends lived.  He went up to the nearest door and knocked;
whereupon a handmaid came out and asked him, "Who art thou?"; and
he answered, "Tell thy master that Nur al-Din Ali standeth at the
door and saith to him, 'Thy slave kisseth thy hand and awaiteth
thy bounty.'"  The girl went in and told her master, who cried at
her, "Go back and say, 'My master is not at home.'"  So she
returned to Nur al-Din, and said to him, "O my lord, my master is
out."  Thereupon he turned away and said to himself, "If this one
be a whoreson knave and deny himself, another may not prove
himself such knave and whoreson."  Then he went up to the next
door and sent in a like message to the house-master, who denied
himself as the first had done, whereupon he began repeating,

"He is gone who when to his gate thou go'st, * Fed thy famisht
     maw with his boiled and roast."

When he had ended his verse he said, "By Allah, there is no help
but that I make trial of them all: perchance there be one amongst
them who will stand me in the stead of all the rest."  So he went
the round of the ten, but not one of them would open his door to
him or show himself or even break a bit of bread before him;
whereupon he recited,

"Like a tree is he who in wealth doth wone, * And while fruits he
     the folk to his fruit shall run:
But when bared the tree of what fruit it bare, * They leave it to
     suffer from dust and sun.
Perdition to all of this age!  I find * Ten rogues for every
     righteous one."

Then he returned to his slave-girl and his grief had grown more
grievous and she said to him, "O my lord, did I not tell thee,
none would profit thee with aught of aid?"  And he replied, "By
Allah, not one of them would show me his face or know me!"  "O my
lord," quoth she, "sell some of the moveables and household
stuff, such as pots and pans, little by little; and expend the
proceeds until Allah Almighty shall provide."  So he sold all of
that was in the house till nothing remained when he turned to
Anis al-Jalis and asked her "What shall we do now?"; and she
answered, "O my lord, it is my advice that thou rise forthwith
and take me down to the bazar and sell me.  Thou knowest that
they father bought me for ten thousand dinars: haply Allah may
open thee a way to get the same price, and if it be His will to
bring us once more together, we shall meet again."  "O Anis al-
Jalis," cried he, "by Allah it is no light matter for me to be
parted from thee for a single hour!"  "By Allah, O my lord," she
replied, "nor is it easy to me either, but Need hath its own law,
as the poet said,

'Need drives a man into devious roads, * And pathways doubtful of
     trend and scope:
No man to a rope[FN#27] will entrust his weight, * Save for cause
     that calleth for case of rope.'"

Thereupon he rose to his feet and took her,[FN#28] whilst the
tears rolled down his cheek like rain; and he recited with the
tongue of the case these lines,

"Stay! grant one parting look before we part, * Nerving my heart
     this severance to sustain:
But, an this parting deal thee pain and bane, * Leave me to die
     of love and spare thee pain!"

Then he went down with her to the bazar and delivered her to the
broker and said to him, "O Hajj Hasan,[FN#29] I pray thee note
the value of her thou hast to cry for sale."  "O my lord Nur al-
Din," quoth the broker, "the fundamentals are remembered;"[FN#30]
adding, "Is not this the Anis al-Jalis whom thy father bought of
me for ten thousand dinars?" "Yes," said Nur al-Din.  Thereupon
the broker went round to the merchants, but found that all had
not yet assembled.  So he waited till the rest had arrived and
the market was crowded with slave-girls of all nations, Turks,
Franks and Circassians; Abyssinians, Nubians and Takruris;[FN#31]
Tartars, Georgians and others; when he came forward and standing
cried aloud, "O merchants! O men of money! every round thing is
not a walnut and every long thing a banana is not; all reds are
not meat nor all whites fat, nor is every brown thing a
date![FN#32]  O merchants, I have here this union-pearl that hath
no price: at what sum shall I cry her?" "Cry her at four thousand
five hundred dinars," quoth one of the traders. The broker opened
the door of sale at the sum named and, as he was yet calling, lo!
the Wazir Al-Mu'ín bin Sáwí passed through the bazar and, seeing
Nur al-Din Ali waiting at one side, said to himself, "Why is
Khákán's son[FN#33] standing about here?  Hath this gallows-bird
aught remaining wherewith to buy slave-girls?"  Then he looked
round and, seeing the broker calling out in the market with all
the merchants around him, said to himself, "I am sure that he is
penniless and hath brought hither the damsel Anis al-Jalis for
sale;" adding, "O how cooling and grateful is this to my heart!" 
Then he called the crier, who came up and kissed the ground
before him; a