nd he said to him, "I want this slave-girl whom thou
art calling for sale."  The broker dared not cross him, so he
answered, "O my lord, Bismillah! in Allah's name so be it;" and
led forward the damsel and showed her to him.  She pleased him
much whereat he asked, "O Hasan, what is bidden for this girl?"
and he answered, "Four thousand five hundred dinars to open the
door of sale." Quoth Al-Mu'ín, "Four thousand five hundred is MY
bid."  When the merchants heard this, they held back and dared
not bid another dirham, wotting what they did of the Wazir's
tyranny, violence and treachery. So Al-Mu'ín looked at the broker
and said to him, "Why stand still? Go and offer four thousand
dinars for me and the five hundred shall be for thyself." 
Thereupon the broker went to Nur al-Din and said, "O my lord, thy
slave is going for nothing!"  "And how so?" asked he. The broker
answered, "We had opened the biddings for her at four thousand
five hundred dinars; when that tyrant, Al-Mu'ín bin Sáwí, passed
through the bazar and, as he saw the damsel she pleased him, so
he cried to me, 'Call me the buyer at four thousand dinars and
thou shalt have five hundred for thyself.'  I doubt not but that
he knoweth that the damsel if thine, and if he would pay thee
down her price at once it were well; but I know his injustice and
violence; he will give thee a written order upon some of his
agents and will send after thee to say to them, 'Pay him
nothing.'  So as often as though shalt go in quest of the coin
they will say, 'We'll pay thee presently!' and they will put thee
off day after day, and thou art proud of spirit; till at last,
when they are wearied with thine importunity, they will say,
'Show us the cheque.' Then, as soon as they have got hold of it
they will tear it up and so thou wilt lose the girl's price."
When Nur al-Din heard this he looked at the broker and asked him,
"How shall this matter be managed?"; and he answered, "I will
give thee a counsel which, if thou follow, it shall bring thee
complete satisfaction." "And what is that?" quoth Nur al-Din.
Quoth the broker, "Come thou to me anon when I am standing in the
middle of the market and, taking the girl from my hand, give her
a sound cuffing and say to her, 'Thou baggage, I have kept my vow
and brought thee down to the slave-market, because I swore an
oath that I would carry thee from home to the bazar, and make
brokers cry thee for sale.'  If thou do this, perhaps the device
will impose upon the Wazir and the people, and they will believe
that thou broughtest her not to the bazar, but for the quittance
of thine oath." He replied, "Such were the best way." Then the
broker left him and, returning into the midst of the market, took
the damsel by the hand, and signed to the Wazir and said, "O my
lord, here is her owner." With this up came Nur al-Din Ali and,
snatching the girl from the broker's hand, cuffed her soundly and
said to her, "Shame on thee, O thou baggage!  I have brought thee
to the bazar for quittance of mine oath; now get thee home and
thwart me no more as is thy wont.  Woe to thee! do I need thy
price, that I should sell thee? The furniture of my house would
fetch thy value many times over!" When Al-Mu'ín saw this he said
to Nur al-Din, "Out on thee!  Hast thou anything left for selling
or buying?"  And he would have laid violent hands upon him, but
the merchants interposed (for they all loved Nur al-Din), and the
young man said to them, "Here am I in your hands and ye all know
his tyranny."  "By Allah," cried the Wazir, "but for you I had
slain him!"  Then all signed with significant eyes to Nur al-Din
as much as to say, "Take thy wreak of him; not one of us will
come between thee and him."  Thereupon Nur al-Din, who was stout
of heart as he was stalwart of limb, went up to the Wazir and,
dragging him over the pommel of his saddle, threw him to the
ground.  Now there was in that place a puddling- pit for brick-
clay,[FN#34] into the midst of which he fell, and Nur al-Din kept
pummelling and fisti-cuffing him, and one of the blows fell full
on his teeth, and his beard was dyed with his blood.  Also there
were with the minister ten armed slaves who, seeing their master
entreated after this fashion, laid hand on sword-hilt and would
have bared blades and fallen on Nur al-Din to cut him down; but
the merchants and bystanders said to them, "This is a Wazir and
that is the son of a Wazir; haply they will make friends some
time or other, in which case you will forfeit the favour of both. 
Or perchance a blow may befal your lord, and you will all die the
vilest of deaths; so it were better for you not to interfere."
Accordingly they held aloof and, when Nur al-Din had made an end
of thrashing the Wazir, he took his handmaid and fared homewards.
Al-Mu'ín also went his ways at once, with his raiment dyed of
three colours, black with mud, red with blood and ash coloured
with brick-clay. When he saw himself in this state, he bound a
bit of matting[FN#35] round his neck and, taking in hand two
bundles of coarse Halfah-grass,[FN#36] went up to the palace and
standing under the Sultan's windows cried aloud, "O King of the
age, I am a wronged man!  I am foully wronged!"  So they brought
him before the King who looked at him; and behold, it was the
chief Minister; whereupon he said, "O Wazir who did this deed by
thee?"  Al-Mu'ín wept and sobbed and repeated these lines,

"Shall the World oppress me when thou art in't? * In the lion's
     presence shall wolves devour?
Shall the dry all drink of thy tanks and I * Under rain-cloud
     thirst for the cooling shower?"

"O my lord," cried he, "the like will befal every one who loveth
and serveth thee well."  "Be quick with thee," quoth the Sultan,
"and tell me how this came to pass and who did this deed by one
whose honour is part of my honour."  Quoth the Wazir, "Know, O my
lord, that I went out this day to the slave-market to buy me a
cookmaid, when I saw there a damsel, never in my life long saw I
a fairer; and I designed to buy her for our lord the Sultan; so I
asked the broker of her and of her owner, and he answered, "She
belongeth to Ali son of Al-Fazl bin Khákán.  Some time ago our
lord the Sultan gave his father ten thousand dinars wherewith to
buy him a handsome slave-girl, and he bought this maiden who
pleased him; so he grudged her to our lord the Sultan and gave
her to his own son. When the father died, the son sold all he had
of houses and gardens and household gear, and squandered the
price till he was penniless.  Then he brought the girl to the
market that he might sell her, and he handed her over to the
broker to cry and the merchants bid higher and higher on her,
until the price reached four thousand dinars; whereupon quoth I
to myself, 'I will buy this damsel for our lord the Sultan, whose
money was paid for her.'  So I said to Nur al-Din, 'O my son,
sell her to me for four thousand dinars.'  When he heard my words
he looked at me and cried, 'O ill-omened oldster, I will sell her
to a Jew or to a Nazarene, but I will not sell her to thee!'  'I
do not buy her for myself,' said I, 'I buy her for our lord and
benefactor the Sultan.'  Hearing my words he was filled with
rage; and, dragging me off my horse (and I a very old man), beat
me unmercifully with his fists and buffeted me with his palms
till he left me as thou seest, and all this hath befallen me only
because I thought to buy this damsel for thee!"  Then the Wazir
threw himself on the ground and lay there weeping and shivering. 
When the Sultan saw his condition and heard his story, the vein
of rage started out between his eyes[FN#37] and he turned to his
body-guard who stood before him, forty white slaves, smiters with
the sword, and said to them, "Go down forthright to the house
built by the son of Khákán and sack it and raze it and bring to
me his son Nur al-Din with the damsel; and drag them both on
their faces with their arms pinioned behind them."  They replied,
"To hear is to obey;" and, arming themselves, they set out for
the house of Nur al-Din Ali.  Now about the Sultan was a
Chamerlain, Alam[FN#38] al-Din Sanjar hight, who had aforetime
been Mameluke to Al-Fazl; but he had risen in the world and the
Sultan had advanced him to be one of his Chamberlains.  When he
heard the King's command and saw the enemies make them ready to
slay his old master's son, it was grievous to him: so he went out
from before the Sultan and, mounting his beast, rode to Nur al-
Din's house and knocked at the door.  Nur al-Din came out and
knowing him would have saluted him: but he said, "O my master
this is no time for greeting or treating.  Listen to what the
poet said,

  'Fly, fly with thy life if by ill overtaken!
   Let thy house speak thy death by its builder forsaken!
   For a land else than this land thou may'st reach, my brother,
   But thy life tho'lt ne'er find in this world another.'"[FN#39]

"O Alam al-Din what cheer?" asked Nur al-Din, and he answered,
"Rise quickly and fly for thy life, thou and the damsel; for Al-
Mu'ín hath set a snare for you both; and, if you fall into his
hands, he will slay you.  The Sultan hath despatched forty
sworders against you and I counsel you to flee ere harm can hurt
you."  Then Sanjar put his hand to his purse and finding there
forty gold pieces took them and gave them to Nur al-Din, saying,
"O my lord receive these and journey with them.  Had I more I
would give them to thee, but this is not the time to take
exception." Thereupon Nur al-Din went in to the damsel and told
her what had happened, at which she wrung her hands.  Then they
fared forth at once from the city, and Allah spread over them His
veil of protection, so that they reached the river-bank where
they found a vessel ready for sea.  Her skipper was standing
amidships and crying, "Whoso hath aught to do, whether in the way
of provisioning or taking leave of his people; or whoso hath
forgotten any needful thing, let him do it at once and return,
for we are about to sail"; and all of them saying, "There is
naught left to be done by us, O captain!", he cried to his crew,
"Hallo there! cast off the cable and pull up the mooring-
pole!"[FN#40] Quoth Nur al-Din, "Whither bound, O captain?" and
quoth he, "To the House of Peace, Baghdad,"—-And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
skipper answered, "To the House of Peace, Baghdad," Nur al-Din
Ali and the damsel went on board, and they launched the craft and
shook out the sails, and the ship sped forth as though she were a
bird on wing; even as said one of them and said right well,

"Watch some tall ship, she'll joy the sight of thee, * The breeze
     outstripping in her haste to flee;
As when a bird, with widely-spreading wings, * Leaveth the sky to
     settle on the sea."

So the vessel sailed on her fastest and the wind to her was
fairest. Thus far concerning them; but as regards the Mamelukes,
they went to Nur al-Din's mansion and, breaking open the doors,
entered and searched the whole place, but could find no trace of
him and the damsel; so they demolished the house and, returning
to the Sultan, reported their proceedings; whereupon quoth he,
"Make search for them both, wherever they may be;" and they
answered, "Hearing is obeying."  The Wazir Al-Mu'ín had also gone
home after the Sultan had bestowed upon him a robe of honour, and
had set his heart at rest by saying, "None shall take blood-wreak
for thee save I;" and he had blessed the King and prayed for his
long life and prosperity.  Then the Sultan bade proclaim about
the city, "Oyez, O ye lieges one and all!  It is the will of our
lord the Sultan that whoso happeneth on Nur al-Din Ali son of Al-
Fazl bin Khákán, and bringeth him to the Sultan, shall receive a
robe of honour and one thousand gold pieces; and he who hideth
him or knoweth his abiding place and informeth not, deserveth
whatsoever pains and penalties shall befal him."  So all began to
search for Nur al-Din Ali, but they could find neither trace nor
tidings of him.  Meanwhile he and his handmaid sailed on with the
wind right aft, till they arrived in safety at Baghdad, and the
captain said to them, "This is Baghdad and 'tis the city where
security is to be had: Winter with his frosts hath turned away
and Prime hath come his roses to display; and the flowers are a-
glowing and the trees are blowing and the streams are flowing." 
So Nur al-Din landed, he and his handmaid and, giving the captain
five dinars, walked on a little way till the decrees of Destiny
brought them among the gardens, and they came to a place swept
and sprinkled, with benches along the walls and hanging jars
filled with water.[FN#41]  Overhead was a trellis of reed-work
and canes shading the whole length of the avenue, and at the
upper end was a garden gate, but this was locked.  "By Allah,"
quoth Nur al-Din to the damsel, "right pleasant is this place!";
and she replied, "O my lord sit with me a while on this bench and
let us take our ease."  So they mounted and sat them down on the
bench, after which they washed their faces and hands; and the
breeze blew cool on them and they fell asleep and glory be to Him
who never sleepeth!  Not this garden was named the Garden of
Gladness[FN#42] and therein stood a belvedere hight the Palace of
Pleasure and the Pavilion of Pictures, the whole belonging to the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid who was wont, when his breast was
straitened with care, to frequent garden and palace and there to
sit.  The palace had eighty latticed windows and fourscore lamps
hanging round a great candelabrum of gold furnished with wax-
candles; and, when the Caliph used to enter, he would order the
handmaids to throw open the lattices and light up the rooms; and
he would bid Ishak bin Ibrahim the cup-companion and the slave-
girls to sing till his breast was broadened and his ailments were
allayed.  Now the keeper of the garden, Shaykh Ibrahim, was a
very old man, and he had found from time to time, when he went
out on any business, people pleasuring about the garden gate with
their bona robas; at which he was angered with exceeding
anger.[FN#43]  But he took patience till one day when the Caliph
came to his garden; and he complained of this to Harun al-Rashid
who said, "Whomsoever thou surprisest about the door of the
garden, deal with him as thou wilt."  Now on this day the
Gardener chanced to be abroad on some occasion and returning
found these two sleeping at the gate covered with a single
mantilla; whereupon said he, "By Allah, good!  These twain know
not that the Caliph hath given me leave to slay anyone I may
catch at the door; but I will give this couple a shrewd whipping,
that none may come near the gate in future."  So he cut a green
palm-frond[FN#44] and went up to them and, raising his arm till
the white of his arm-pit appeared, was about to strike them, when
he bethought himself and said, "O Ibrahim, wilt thou beat them
unknowing their case?  Haply they are strangers or of the Sons of
the Road,[FN#45] and the decrees of Destiny have thrown them
here.  I will uncover their faces and look at them."  So he
lifted up the mantilla from their heads and said, "They are a
handsome couple; it were not fitting that I should beat them." 
Then he covered their faces again and, going to Nur al-Din's
feet, began to rub and shampoo them,[FN#46] whereupon the youth
opened his eyes and, seeing an old man of grave and reverend
aspect rubbing his feet, he was ashamed and drawing them in, sat
up.  Then he took Shaykh Ibrahim's hand and kissed it.  Quoth the
old man, "O my son, whence art thou?"; and quoth he, "O my lord,
we two are strangers," and the tears started from his eyes.  "O
my son," said Shaykh Ibrahim, "know that the Prophet (whom Allah
bless and preserve!) hath enjoined honour to the stranger;" and
added, "Wilt not thou arise, O my son, and pass into the garden
and solace thyself by looking at it and gladden thy heart?"  "O
my lord," said Nur al-Din, "to whom doth this garden belong?;"
and the other replied, "O my son, I have inherited it from my
folk."  Now his object in saying this was to set them at their
ease and induce them to enter the garden.  So Nur al-Din thanked
him and rose, he and the damsel, and followed him into the
garden; and lo! it was a garden, and what a garden!  The gate was
arched like a great hall and over walls and roof ramped vines
with grapes of many colours; the red like rubies and the black
like ebonies; and beyond it lay a bower of trelliced boughs
growing fruits single and composite, and small birds on branches
sang with melodious recite, and the thousand-noted nightingale
shrilled with her varied shright; the turtle with her cooing
filled the site; the blackbird whistled like human wight[FN#47]
and the ring-dove moaned like a drinker in grievous plight.  The
trees grew in perfection all edible growths and fruited all
manner fruits which in pairs were bipartite; with the camphor-
apricot, the almond-apricot and the apricot "Khorasani" hight;
the plum, like the face of beauty, smooth and bright; the cherry
that makes teeth shine clear by her sleight, and the fig of three
colours, green, purple and white.  There also blossomed the
violet as it were sulphur on fire by night; the orange with buds
like pink coral and marguerite; the rose whose redness gars the
loveliest cheeks blush with despight; and myrtle and gilliflower
and lavender with the blood-red anemone from Nu'uman hight.  The
leaves were all gemmed with tears the clouds had dight; the
chamomile smiled showing teeth that bite, and Narcissus with his
negro[FN#48] eyes fixed on Rose his sight; the citrons shone with
fruits embowled and the lemons like balls of gold; earth was
carpeted with flowers tinctured infinite; for Spring was come
brightening the place with joy and delight; and the streams ran
ringing, to the birds' gay singing, while the rustling breeze
upspringing attempered the air to temperance exquisite.  Shaykh
Ibrahim carried them up into the pavilion, and they gazed on its
beauty, and on the lamps aforementioned in the latticed windows;
and Nur al-Din, remembering his entertainments of time past,
cried, "By Allah, this is a pleasant place; it hath quenched in
me anguish which burned as a fire of Ghaza-wood.[FN#49]"  Then
they sat down and Shaykh Ibrahim set food before them; and they
ate till they were satisfied and washed their hands: after which
Nur al-Din went up to one of the latticed windows, and, calling
to his handmaid fell to gazing on the trees laden with all manner
fruits.  Presently he turned to the Gardener and said to him, "O
Shaykh Ibrahim hast thou no drink here, for folk are wont to
drink after eating?"  The Shaykh brought him sweet water, cool
and pleasant, but he said, "This is not the kind of drink I
wanted." "Perchance thou wishest for wine?"  "Indeed I do, O
Shaykh!"  "I seek refuge from it with Allah: it is thirteen years
since I did this thing, for the Prophet (Abhak[FN#50]) cursed its
drinker, presser, seller and carrier!"  "Hear two words of me." 
"Say on."  "If yon cursed ass[FN#51] which standeth there be
cursed, will aught of his curse alight upon thee?" "By no means!" 
"Then take this dinar and these two dirhams and mount yonder ass
and, halting afar from the wine-shop, call the first man thou
seest buying liquor and say to him, 'Take these two dirhams for
thyself, and with this dinar buy me some wine and set it on the
ass.' So shalt thou be neither the presser, nor the buyer, nor
the carrier; and no part of the curse will fall  upon thee."  At
this Shaykh Ibrahim laughed and said, "By Allah, O my son, I
never saw one wilier of wit than thou art, nor heard aught
sweeter than thy speech."  So he did as he was bidden by Nur al-
Din who thanked him and said, "We two are now dependent on thee,
and it is only meet that thou comply with our wishes; so bring us
here what we require."  "O my son," replied he, "this is my
buttery before thee" (and it was the store-room provided for the
Commander of the Faithful); "so go in, and take whatso thou wilt,
for there is over and above what thou wantest."  Nur al-Din then
entered the pantry and found therein vessels of gold and silver
and crystal set with all kinds of gems, and was amazed and
delighted with what he saw.  Then he took out what he needed and
set it on and poured the wine into flagons and glass ewers,
whilst Shaykh Ibrahim brought them fruit and flowers and aromatic
herbs. Then the old man withdrew and sat down at a distance from
them, whilst they drank and made merry, till the wine got the
better of them, so that their cheeks reddened and their eyes
wantoned like the gazelle's; and their locks became dishevelled
and their brightness became yet more beautiful.  Then said Shaykh
Ibrahim to himself, "What aileth me to sit apart from them?  Why
should I not sit with them?  When shall I ever find myself in
company with the like of these two that favour two moons?" So he
stepped forward and sat down on the edge of the dais, and Nur al-
Din said to him, "O my lord, my life on thee, come nearer to us!" 
He came and sat by them, when Nur al-Din filled a cup and looked
towards the Shaykh and said to him, "Drink, that thou mayest try
the taste of it!" "I take refuge from it with Allah!" replied he;
"for thirteen years I have not done a thing of the kind."  Nur
al-Din feigned to forget he was there and, drinking off the cup,
threw himself on the ground as if the drink had overcome him;
whereupon Anis al-Jalis glanced at him and said, "O Shaykh
Ibrahim see how this husband of mine treateth me;" and he
answered, "O my lady, what aileth him?"  "This is how he always
serveth me," cried she, "he drinketh awhile, then falleth asleep
and leaveth me alone with none to bear me company over my cup nor
any to whom I may sing when the bowl goeth round."  Quoth the
Shaykh (and his mien unstiffened for that his soul inclined
towards her), "By Allah, this is not well!" Then she crowned a
cup and looking towards him said, "By my life thou must take and
drink it, and not refuse to heal my sick heart!"  So he put forth
his hand and took it and drank it off and she filled a second and
set it on the chandelier and said, "O master mine, there is still
this one left for thee."  "By Allah, I cannot drink it;" cried
he, "what I have already drunk is enough for me;" but she
rejoined, "By Allah, there is no help for it."  So he took the
cup and drank; and she filled him a third which he took and was
about to drink when behold, Nur al-Din rolled round and sat
upright,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

             When it was the Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nur al-Din
sat upright and said, "Ho, Shaykh Ibrahim, what is this?  Did I
not adjure thee a while ago and thou refusedst, saying, 'What I!
'tis thirteen years ago since I have done such a thing!'"  "By
Allah," quoth the Shaykh (and indeed he was abashed), "no sin of
mine this, she forced me to do it." Nur al-Din laughed and they
sat down again to wine and wassail, but the damsel turned to her
master and said in a whisper, "O my lord, drink and do not press
him, that I may show thee some sport with him."  Then she began
to fill her master's cup and he hers and so they did time after
time, till at last Shaykh Ibrahim looked at them and said, "What
fashion of good fellowship is this?  Allah curse the glutton who
keepeth the cup to himself!  Why dost thou not give me to drink,
O my brother? What manners are these, O blessed one?"  At this
the two laughed until they fell on their backs; then they drank
and gave him to drink and ceased not their carousal till a third
part of the night was past.  Then said the damsel, "O Shaykh
Ibrahim, with thy leave I will get up and light one of these
candles."  "Do so," he replied, "but light no more than one." So
she sprang to her feet and, beginning with one candle, lighted
all the eighty and sat down again.  Presently Nur al-Din said, "O
Shaykh Ibrahim, in what favour am I with thee?  May I not light
one of these lamps?" "Light one," replied he, "and bother me no
more in thy turn!"  So he rose and lighted one lamp after
another, till he had lighted the whole eight and the palace
seemed to dance with brilliancy.  Quoth the Shaykh (and indeed
intoxication had overcome him), "Ye two are bolder than I am."
Then he rose to his feet and opened all the lattices and sat down
again; and they fell to carousing and reciting verses till the
place rang with their noisy mirth.  Now Allah, the Decreer who
decreeth all things and who for every effect appointeth a cause,
had so disposed that the Caliph was at that moment sitting in the
light of the moon at one of the windows of his palace overlooking
the Tigris.  He saw the blaze of the lamps and wax candles
reflected in the river and, lifting his eyes, perceived that it
came from the Garden Palace which was all ablaze with brilliancy.
So he cried, "Here to me with Ja'afar the Barmaki!"; and the last
word was hardly spoken ere the Wazir was present before the
Commander of the Faithful, who cried at him, "O dog of a
Minister, hast thou taken from me this city of Baghdad without
saying aught to me?"  "What words are these words?" asked
Ja'afar; and the Caliph answered, "If Baghdad city were not taken
from me, the Palace of Pictures would not be illuminated with
lamps and candles, nor would its windows be thrown open.  Woe to
thee! who durst do a deed like this except the Caliphate had been
taken from me?" Quoth Ja'afar (and indeed his side-muscles
trembled as he spoke), "Who told thee that the Palace of Pictures
was illuminated and the windows thrown open?"  "Come hither and
see," replied the Caliph.  Then Ja'afar came close to the Caliph
and, looking towards the garden, saw the palace blazing with
illumination that rayed through the gloom of the night; and,
thinking that this might have been permitted by the keeper for
some reason of his own, he wished to make an excuse for him; so
quoth he, "O Commander of the Faithful, Shaykh Ibrahim said to me
last week, 'O my lord Ja'afar, I much wish to circumcise my sons
during the life of the Commander of the Faithful and thy life.' 
I asked, 'What dost thou want?'; and he answered, 'Get me leave
from the Caliph to hold the festival in the Garden Palace.' So
said I to him, 'Go circumcise them and I will see the Caliph and
tell him.'  Thereupon he went away and I forgot to let thee
know."  "O Ja'afar," said the Caliph, "thou hast committed two
offences against me; first in that thou didst no report to me,
secondly, thou didst not give him what he sought; for he came and
told thee this only as excuse to ask for some small matter of
money, to help him with the outlay; and thou gavest him nothing
nor toldest me."  "O Commander of the Faithful," said Ja'afar, "I
forgot."  "Now by the rights of my forefathers and the tombs of
my forbears," quoth the Caliph, "I will not pass the rest of this
night save in company with him; for truly he is a pious man who
frequenteth the Elders of the Faith and the Fakirs and other
religious mendicants and entertaineth them; doubtless they are
not assembled together and it may be that the prayer of one of
them will work us weal both in this world and in the next. 
Besides, my presence may profit and at any rate be pleasing to
Shaykh Ibrahim."  "O Commander of the Faithful," quoth Ja'afar,
"the greater part of the night is passed, and at this time they
will be breaking up."  Quoth the Caliph, "It matters not: I needs
must go to them."  So Ja'afar held his peace, being bewildered
and knowing not what to do.  Then the Caliph rose to his feet
and, taking with him Ja'afar and Masrur the eunuch sworder, the
three disguised themselves in merchants' gear and leaving the
City-palace, kept threading the streets till they reached the
garden. The Caliph went up to the gate and finding it wide open,
was surprised and said, "See, O Ja'afar, how Shaykh Ibrahim hath
left the gate open at this hour contrary to his custom!"  They
went in and walked on till they came under the pavilion, when the
Caliph said, "O Ja'afar, I wish to look in upon them unawares
before I show myself, that I may see what they are about and get
sight of the elders; for hitherto I have heard no sound from
them, nor even a Fakir calling upon the name of Allah.[FN#52]" 
Then he looked about and, seeing a tall walnut-tree, said to
Ja'afar, "I will climb this tree, for its branches are near the
lattices and so look in upon them."  Thereupon he mounted the
tree and ceased not climbing from branch to branch, till he
reached a bough which was right opposite one of the windows, and
here he took seat and looked inside the palace. He saw a damsel
and a youth as they were two moons (glory be to Him who created
them and fashioned them!), and by them Shaykh Ibrahim seated cup
in hand and saying, "O Princess of fair ones, drinking without
music is nothing worth; indeed I have heard a poet say,

'Round with bit and little, the bowl and cup, * Take either than
     moon[FN#53] in his sheen hath crowned:
Nor drink without music, for oft I've seen, * The horse drink
     best to the whistle's sound!'"

When the Caliph saw this, the vein of wrath started up between
his eyes and he came down and said to the Wazir, "O Ja'afar,
never beheld I yet men of piety in such case; so do thou mount
this tree and look upon them, lest the blessings of the blest be
lost to thee."  Ja'afar, hearing the words of the Commander of
the Faithful and being confounded by them, climbed to the tree-
top and looking in, saw Nur al-Din and the damsel, and Shaykh
Ibrahim holding in his hand a brimming bowl.  At this sight he
made sure of death and, descending, stood before the Commander of
the Faithful, who said to him, "O Ja'afar, praise be to Allah who
hath made us of those that observe external ordinances of Holy
Law and hath averted from us the sin of disguising ourselves
after the manner of hypocrites!"[FN#54]  But Ja'afar could not
speak a word for excess of confusion; so the Caliph looked at him
and said, "I wonder how they came hither, and who admitted them
into my pavilion!  But aught like the beauty of this youth and
this damsel my eyes never yet saw!"  "Thou sayest sooth, O our
Lord the Sultan!" replied Ja'afar (and he hoped to propitiate the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid).  Then quoth the Caliph, "O Ja'afar, let
us both mount the branch opposite the window, that we may amuse
ourselves with looking at them."  So the two climbed the tree
and, peering in, heard Shaykh Ibrahim say, "O my lady, I have
cast away all gravity mine by the drinking of wine, but 'tis not
sweet save with the soft sounds of the lute-strings it combine." 
"By Allah," replied Anis al-Jalis, "O Shaykh Ibrahim, an we had
but some instrument of music our joyance were complete."  Hearing
this he rose to his feet and the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "I
wonder what he is about to do!" and Ja'afar answered, "I know
not."  The Shaykh disappeared and presently reappeared bringing a
lute; and the Caliph took not of it and knew it for that of Abu
Ishak the Cup-companion.[FN#55]  "By Allah," said the Caliph, "if
this damsel sing ill I will crucify all of you; but if she sing
well I will forgive them and only gibbet thee."  "O Allah cause
her to sing vilely!" quoth Ja'afar. Asked the Caliph, "Why so?";
and he answered, "If thou crucify us all together, we shall keep
one another company."  The Caliph laughed at his speech. 
Presently the damsel took the lute and, after looking at it and
tuning it, she played a measure which made all hearts yearn to
her; then she sang these lines,

"O ye that can aid me, a wretched lover, * Whom longing burns nor
     can rest restore me!
Though all you have done I have well deserved, * I take refuge
     with you, so exult not o'er me:
True, I am weak and low and vile, * But I'll bear your will and
     whatso you bore me:
My death at your hands what brings it of glory? * I fear but your
     sin which of life forlore me!"

Quoth the Caliph, "By Allah, good!  O Ja'afar, never in my life
have I heard a voice so enchanting as this."  "Then haply the
Caliph's wrath hath passed away," said Ja'afar, and he replied,
"Yes, 'tis gone."  Thereupon they descended from the tree, and
the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "I wish to go in and sit with them
and hear the damsel sing before me." "O Commander of the
Faithful," replied Ja'afar, "if thou go in to them they will be
terribly troubled, and Shaykh Ibrahim will assuredly die of
fright."  But the Caliph answered, "O Ja'afar, thou must teach me
some device wherewith to delude them and whereby I can foregather
with them without their knowing me."  So they walked towards the
Tigris pondering the matter, and presently came upon a fisherman
who stood fishing under the pavilion windows.  Now some time
before this, the Caliph (being in the pavilion) had called to
Shaykh Ibrahim and asked him, "What noise is this I hear under
the windows?" and he had answered, "It is voices of fisher folk
catching fish:" so quoth the Caliph, "Go down and forbid them
this place;" and he forbade them accordingly.  However that night
a fisherman named Karim, happening to pass by and seeing the
garden gate open, said to himself, "This is a time of negligence;
and I will take advantage of it to do a bit of fishing."  So he
took his net and cast it, but he had hardly done so when behold,
the Caliph come up single-handed and, standing hard by, knew him
and called aloud to him, "Ho, Karim!"  The fisherman, hearing
himself named, turned round, and seeing the Caliph, trembled and
his side-muscles quivered, as he cried, "By Allah, O Commander of
the Faithful, I did it not in mockery of the mandate; but poverty
and a large family drove me to what thou seest!"  Quoth the
Caliph, "Make a cast in my name."  At this the fisherman was glad
and going to the bank threw his net, then waiting till it had
spread out at full stretch and settled down, hauled it up and
found in it various kinds of fish.  The Caliph was pleased and
said, "O Karim, doff thy habit."  So he put off a gaberdine of
coarse woollen stuff patched in an hundred places whereon the
lice were rampant, and a turband which had never been untwisted
for three years but to which he had sown every rag he came upon. 
The Caliph also pulled off his person two vests of Alexandrian
and Ba'lbak silk, a loose inner robe and a long-sleeved outer
coat, and said to the fisherman, "Take them and put them on,"
while he assumed the foul gaberdine and filthy turband and drew a
corner of the head-cloth as a mouth-veil[FN#56] before his face.
Then said he to the fisherman, "Get thee about thy business!; and
the man kissed the Caliph's feet and thanked him and improvised
the following couplets, 

"Thou hast granted more favours than ever I craved; * Thou hast
     satisfied needs which my heart enslaved:
I will thank thee and thank whileas life shall last, * And my
     bones will praise thee in grave engraved!"

Hardly had the fisherman ended his verse, when the lice began to
crawl over the Caliph's skin, and he fell to catching them on his
neck with his right and left and throwing them from him, while he
cried, "O fisherman, woe to thee! what be this abundance of lice
on thy gaberdine." "O my lord," replied he, "they may annoy thee
just at first, but before a week is past thou wilt not feel them
nor think of them."  The Caliph laughed and said to him, "Out on
thee!  Shall I leave this gaberdine of thine so long on my body?" 
Quoth the fisherman, "I would say a word to thee but I am ashamed
in presence of the Caliph!"; and quoth he, "Say what thou hast to
say."  "It passed through my thought, O Commander of the
Faithful," said the fisherman, "that, since thou wishest to learn
fishing so thou mayest have in hand an honest trade whereby to
gain thy livelihood, this my gaberdine besitteth thee right
well."[FN#57] The Commander of the Faithful laughed at this
speech, and the fisherman went his way.  Then the Caliph took up
the basket of fish and, strewing a little green grass over it,
carried it to Ja'afar and stood before him. Ja'afar thinking him
to be Karim the fisherman feared for him and said, "O Karim, what
brought thee hither?  Flee for thy life, for the Caliph is in the
garden to-night and, if he see thee, thy neck is gone."  At this
the Caliph laughed and Ja'afar recognized him and asked, "Can it
be thou, our lord the Sultan?"; and he answered, "Yes, O Ja'afar,
and thou art my Wazir and I and thou came hither together; yet
thou knowest me not; so how should Shaykh Ibrahim know me, and he
drunk?  Stay here, till I came back to thee."  "To hear is to
obey," said Ja'afar.  Then the Caliph went up to the door of the
pavilion and knocked a gentle knock, whereupon said Nur al-Din,"
O Shaykh Ibrahim, some one taps at the door." "Who goes there?"
cried the Shaykh and the Caliph replied, "It is I, O Shaykh
Ibrahim!"  "Who art thou," quoth he, and quoth the other, "I am
Karim the fisherman: I hear thou hast a feast, so I have brought
thee some fish, and of a truth 'tis good fish."  When Nur al-Din
heard the mention of fish, he was glad, he and the damsel, and
they both said to the Shaykh, "O our lord, open the door and let
him bring us his fish." So Shaykh Ibrahim opened and the Caliph
came in (and he in fisherman guise), and began by saluting them. 
Said Shaykh Ibrahim, "Welcome to the blackguard, the robber, the
dicer!  Let us see thy fish."  So the Caliph showed them his
catch and behold, the fishes were still alive and jumping,
whereupon the damsel exclaimed, "By Allah!  O my lord, these are
indeed fine fish: would they were fried!" and Shaykh Ibrahim
rejoined, "By Allah, O my lady, thou art right."  Then said he to
the Caliph, "O fisherman, why didst thou not bring us the fish
ready fried?  Up now and cook them and bring them back to us." 
"On my head be thy commands!" said the Caliph, "I will fry thee a
dish and bring it."  Said they, "Look sharp." Thereupon he went
and ran till he came up to Ja'afar when he called to him, "Hallo,
Ja'afar!"; and he replied, "Here am I, O Commander of the
Faithful, is all well?"  "They want the fish fried," said the
Caliph, and Ja'afar answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, give
it to me and I'll fry it for them."  "By the tombs of my
forbears," quoth the Caliph, "none shall fry it but I, with mine
own hand!"  So he went to the gardener's hut, where he searched
and found all that he required, even to salt and saffron and wild
marjoram and else besides.  Then he turned to the brasier and,
setting on the frying-pan, fried a right good fry.  When it was
done, he laid it on a banana-leaf, and gathering from the garden
wind-fallen fruits, limes and lemons, carried the fish to the
pavilion and set the dish before them.  So the youth and the
damsel and Shaykh Ibrahim came forward and ate; after which they
washed their hands and Nur al-Din said to the Caliph, "By Allah,
O fisherman, thou hast done us a right good deed this night." 
Then he put hand in pouch and, taking out three of the dinars
which Sanjar had given him, said, "O fisherman, excuse me.  By
Allah had I known thee before that which hath lately befallen me,
I had done away the bitterness of poverty from thy heart; but
take thou this as the best I can do for thee."  Then he threw the
gold pieces to the Caliph, who took them and kissed them and put
them in pouch. Now his sole object in doing all this was to hear
the damsel sing; so he said to Nur al-Din, "Thou hast rewarded me
most liberally, but I beg of thy boundless bounty that thou let
this damsel sing an air, that I may hear her."[FN#58]  So Nur al-
Din said, "O Anis al-Jalis!" and she answered "Yes!" and he
continued, "By my life, sing us something for the sake of this
fisherman who wisheth so much to hear thee." Thereupon she took
the lute and struck the strings, after she had screwed them tight
and tuned them, and sang these improvised verses,

"The fawn of a maid hent her lute in hand * And her music made us
     right mettlesome:
For her song gave hearing to ears stone-deaf, * While Brava!
     Brava! exclaimed the dumb."

Then she played again and played so ravishingly, that she charmed
their wits and burst out improvising and singing these couplets,

"You have honoured us visiting this our land, * And your
     splendour illumined the glooms that blent:
So 'tis due that for you I perfume my place * With rose-water,
     musk and the camphor-scent!"

Hereupon the Caliph was agitated, and emotion so overpowered him
that he could not command himself for excess of pleasure, and he
exclaimed, "By Allah, good! by Allah, good! by Allah,
good!"[FN#59]  Asked Nur al-Din, "O fisherman, doth this damsel
please thee?" and the Caliph answered, "Ay, by Allah!"  Whereupon
said Nur al-Din, "She is a gift to thee, a gift of the generous
who repenteth him not of his givings and who will never revoke
his gift!"  Then he sprang to his feet and, taking a loose robe,
threw it over the fisherman and bade him receive the damsel and
be gone.  But she looked at him and said, "O my lord, art thou
faring forth without farewell?  If it must be so, at least stay
till I bid thee good-bye and make known my case."  And she began
versifying in these verses, 

"When love and longing and regret are mine, * Must not this body
     show of ills a sign?
My love! say not, 'Thou soon shalt be consoled'; * When state
     speaks state none shall allay my pine.
If living man could swim upon his tears, * I first should float
     on waters of these eyne:
O thou, who in my heart infusedst thy love, * As water mingles in
     the cup with wine,
This was the fear I feared, this parting blow. * O thou whose
     love my heart-core ne'er shall tyne!
O Bin Khákán! my sought, my hope, my will, * O thou whose love
     this breast make wholly thine!
Against thy lord the King thou sinn'dst for me, * And winnedst
     exile in lands peregrine:
Allah ne'er make my lord repent my loss * To cream[FN#60] o' men
     thou gavest me, one right digne."

When she had ended her verses, Nur al-Din answered her with these
lines,

"She bade me farewell on our parting day, * And she wept in the
     fire of our bane and pains:
'What wilt thou do when fro' thee I'm gone?' * Quoth I, 'say this
     to whom life remains!'"

When the Caliph heard her saying in her verse,

   "To Karim, the cream of men thou gavest me;"

his inclination for her redoubled and it seemed a hard matter and
a grievous to part them; so quoth he to the youth, "O my lord,
truly the damsel said in her verses that thou didst transgress
against her master and him who owned her; so tell me, against
whom didst thou transgress and who is it hath a claim on thee?" 
"By Allah, O fisherman," replied Nur al-Din, "there befel me and
this damsel a wondrous tale and a marvellous matter: an 't were
graven with needle-gravers on the eye-corners it would be a
warner to whoso would be warned."  Cried the Caliph, "Wilt thou
not tell me thy story and acquaint me with thy case? Haply it may
bring thee relief, for Allah's aid is ever nearhand." "O
fisherman," said Nur al-Din, "Wilt thou hear our history in verse
or in prose?"  "Prose is a wordy thing, but verses," rejoined the
Caliph, "are pearls on string."  Then Nur al-Din bowed his head,
and made these couplets,

"O my friend! reft of rest no repose I command, * And my grief is
     redoubled in this far land:
Erst I had a father, a kinder ne'er was; * But he died and to
     Death paid the deodand:
When he went from me, every matter went wrong * Till my heart was
     nigh-broken, my nature unmanned:
He bought me a handmaid, a sweeting who shamed * A wand of the
     willow by Zephyr befanned:
I lavisht upon her mine heritage, * And spent like a nobleman
     puissant and grand:
Then to sell her compelled, my sorrow increased; * The parting
     was sore but I mote not gainstand:
Now as soon as the crier had called her, there bid * A wicked old
     fellow, a fiery brand:
So I raged with a rage that I could not restrain, * And snatched
     her from out of his hireling's hand;
When the angry curmudgeon made ready for blows, * And the fire of
     a fight kindled he and his band,
I smote him in fury with right and with left, * And his hide,
     till well satisfied, curried and tanned:
Then in fear I fled forth and lay hid in my house, * To escape
     from the snares which my foeman had spanned:
So the King of the country proclaimed my arrest; * When access to
     me a good Chamberlain fand:
And warned me to flee from the city afar, * Disappear, disappoint
     what my enemies planned:
Then we fled from our home 'neath the wing of the night, * And
     sought us a refuge by Baghdad strand:
Of my riches I've nothing on thee to bestow, * O Fisher, except
     the fair gift thou hast scanned:
The loved of my soul, and when I from her part, * Know for sure
     that I give thee the blood of my heart."[FN#61]

When he had ended his verse, the Caliph said to him, "O my lord
Nur al-Din, explain to me thy case more fully,"  So he told him
the whole story from beginning to end, and the Caliph said to
him, "Whither dost thou now intend?"  "Allah's world is wide,"
replied he.  Quoth the Caliph, "I will write thee a letter to
carry to the Sultan Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, which when he
readeth, he will not hurt nor harm thee in aught."—-And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

             When it was the Thirty-eighth Night, 

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Caliph said to Nur al-Din Ali, "I will write thee a letter to
carry to the Sultan Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, which when he
readeth, he will not hurt nor harm thee in aught," Nur al-Din
asked "What! is there in the world a fisherman who writeth to
Kings?  Such a thing can never be!"; and the Caliph answered,
"Thou sayest sooth, but I will tell thee the reason. Know that I
and he learnt in the same school under one schoolmaster, and that
I was his monitor.  Since that time Fortune befriended him and he
is become a Sultan, while Allah hath abased me and made me a
fisherman; yet I never send to him to ask aught but he doeth my
desire; nay, though I should ask of him a thousand favours every
day, he would comply." When Nur al-Din heard this he said, "Good!
write that I may see." So the Caliph took ink-case and reed-pen
and wrote as follows,--"In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate!  But after.[FN#62] This
letter is written by Harun al-Rashid, son of Al-Mahdi, to his
highness Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, whom I have encompassed
about with my favour and made my viceroy in certain of my
dominions.  The bearer of these presents is Nur al-Din Ali, son
of Fazl bin Khákán the Wazir. As soon as they come to thy hand
divest thyself forthright of the kingly dignity and invest him
therewith; so oppose not my commandment and peace be with thee." 
He gave the letter to Nur al-Din, who took it and kissed it, then
put it in his turband and set out at once on his journey. So far
concerning him; but as regards the Caliph, Shaykh Ibrahim stared
to him (and he still in fisher garb) and said, "O vilest of
fishermen, thou hast brought us a couple of fish worth a score of
half-dirhams,[FN#63] and hast gotten three dinars for them; and
thinkest thou to take the damsel to boot?"  When the Caliph heard
this, he cried out at him, and signed to Masrur who discovered
himself and rushed in upon him. Now Ja'afar had sent one of the
gardener-lads to the doorkeeper of the palace to fetch a suit of
royal raiment for the Prince of the Faithful; so the man went
and, returning with the suit, kissed the ground before the Caliph
and gave it him.  Then he threw of the clothes he had on[FN#64]
and donned kingly apparel.  Shaykh Ibrahim was still sitting upon
his chair and the Caliph tarried to behold what would come next. 
But seeing the Fisherman become the Caliph, Shaykh Ibrahim was
utterly confounded and he could do nothing but bite his finger-
ends[FN#65] and say, "Would I knew whether am I asleep or am I
awake!"  At last the Caliph looked at him and cried, "O Shaykh
Ibrahim, what state is this in which I see thee?" Thereupon he
recovered from his drunkenness and, throwing himself upon the
ground, repeated these verses,

"Pardon the sinful ways I did pursue; * Ruth from his lord to
     every slave is due:
Confession pays the fine that sin demands; * Where, then, is that
     which grace and mercy sue?"[FN#66]

The Caliph forgave him and bade carry the damsel to the city-
palace, where he set apart for her an apartment and appointed
slaves to serve her, saying to her, "Know that we have sent thy
lord to be Sultan in Bassorah and, Almighty Allah willing, we
will dispatch him the dress of investiture and thee with it." 
Meanwhile, Nur al-Din Ali ceased not travelling till he reached
Bassorah, where he repaired to the Sultan's palace and he shouted
a long shout.[FN#67]  The Sultan heard him and sent for him; and
when he came into his presence, he kissed the ground between his
hands and, producing the letter, presented it to him.  Seeing the
superscription in the writing of the Commander of the Faithful,
the Sultan rose to his feet and kissed it three times; and after
reading it said, "I hear and I obey Allah Almighty and the
Commander of the Faithful!"  Then he summoned the four
Kazis[FN#68] and the Emirs and was about to divest himself of the
rule royal, when behold, in came Al Mu'ín bin Sáwí.  The Sultan
gave him the Caliph's letter and he read it, then tore it to
pieces and putting it into his mouth, chewed it[FN#69] and spat
it out.  "Woe to thee," quoth the Sultan (and indeed he was sore
angered); "what induced thee to do this deed?"  "Now by thy life!
O our lord the Sultan," replied Mu'ín, "this man hath never
foregathered with the Caliph nor with his Wazir; but he is a
gallows-bird, a limb of Satan, a knave who, having come upon a
written paper in the Caliph's hand, some idle scroll, hath made
it serve his own end.  The Caliph would surely not send him to
take the Sultanate from thee without the imperial
autograph[FN#70] and the diploma of investiture, and he certainly
would have despatched with him a Chamberlain or a Minister.  But
he hath come alone and he never came from the Caliph, no, never!
never! never!"  "What is to be done?" asked the Sultan, and the
Minister answered, "Leave him to me and I will take him and keep
him away from thee, and send him in charge of a Chamberlain to
Baghdad-city.  Then, if what he says be sooth, they will bring us
back autograph and investiture; and if not, I will take my due
out of this debtor."  When the Sultan heard the Minister's words
he said, "Hence with thee and him too." Al Mu'ín took trust of
him from the King and, carrying him to his own house, cried out
to his pages who laid him flat and beat him till he fainted. 
Then he let put upon his feet heavy shackles and carried him to
the jail, where he called the jailor, one Kutayt,[FN#71] who came
and kissed the ground before him.  Quoth the Wazir, "O Kutayt, I
wish thee to take this fellow and throw him into one of the
underground cells[FN#72] in the prison and torture him night and
day."  "To hear is to obey," replied the jailor and, taking Nur
al-Din into the prison, locked the door upon him.  Then he gave
orders to sweep a bench behind the door and, spreading on it a
sitting-rug and a leather-cloth, seated Nur al-Din thereon and
loosed his shackles and entreated him kindly.  The Wazir sent
every day enjoining the jailor to beat him, but he abstained from
this, and so continued to do for forty days.  On the forty-first
day there came a present from the Caliph; which when the Sultan
saw, it pleased him and he consulted his Ministers on the matter,
when one of them said, "Perchance this present was for the new
Sultan."  Cried Al-Mu'ín, "We should have done well had we put
him to death at his first coming;" and the Sultan cried "By
Allah, thou hast reminded me of him!  Go down to the prison and
fetch him, and I will strike off his head."  "To hear is to
obey," replied Al-Mu'ín: then he stood up and said, "I will make
proclamation 