t adventure yourselves and address us in
such unseemly speech?  Do you think to escape out of our hands
and return to your country?" Then he shouted to his hundred
horsemen, "Up and at these hounds, for they even you in number!"
So saying, he bared his sabre and bore down on them, he and his,
but the Franks met them with hearts firmer than rocks, and wight
dashed against wight, and knight dashed upon knight, and hot
waxed the fight, and sore was the affright, and nor parley nor
cries of quarter helped their plight; and they stinted not to
charge and to smite, right hand meeting right, nor to hack and
hew with blades bright white, till day turned to night and gloom
oppressed the sight.  Then they drew apart and Sharrkan mustered
his men and found none wounded save four only, who showed hurts
but not death hurts.  Said he to them, "By Allah, my life long
have I waded in the clashing sea of fight and I have met many a
gallant sprite, but none so unfrightened of the sword that smites
and the shock of men that affrights like these valiant Knights!"
"Know, O King," said they, that there is among them a Frankish
cavalier who is their leader and, indeed, he is a man of valour
and fatal is his spear thrust: but, by Allah, he spares us great
and small; for whoso falls into his hands he lets him go and
forbears to slay him.  By Allah, had he willed he had killed us
all." Sharrkan was astounded when he heard what the Knight had
done and such high report of him, so he said, "When the morn
shall morrow, we will draw out and defy them, for we are an
hundred to their hundred; and we will seek aid against them from
the Lord of the Heavens." So they rested that night in such
intent; whilst the Franks gathered round their Captain and said,
"Verily this day we did not win our will of these;" and he
replied, "At early dawn when the morrow shall morn, we will draw
out and challenge them, one after one." They also rested in that
mind, and both camps kept guard until Almighty Allah sent the
light of day dawn.  Thereupon King Sharrkan and his hundred
riders took horse and rode forth to the plain, where they found
the Franks ranged in line of battle; and Sharrkan said to his
followers, "Our foes have determined like ourselves to do their
devoir; so up and at them and lay on load." Then came forth an
Herald of the Franks and cried out, saying, "Let there be no
general engagement betwixt us this day, save by the duello, a
champion of yours against a champion of ours." Whereupon one of
Sharrkan's riders dashed out from the ranks and crave between the
two lines crying, "Ho!  who is for smiting?  Let no dastard
engage me this day nor niderling!" Hardly had he made an end of
his vaunt, when there sallied forth to him a Frankish cavalier,
armed cap-à-pie and clad in a surcoat of gold stuff, riding on a
grey white steed,[FN#215] and he had no hair on his cheeks.  He
urged his charger on to the midst of the battle plain and the two
fell to derring do of cut and thrust, but it was not long before
the Frank foined the Moslem with the lance point; and, toppling
him from his steed, took him prisoner and led him off
crestfallen.  His folk rejoiced in their comrade and, forbidding
him to go out again to the field, sent forth another, to whom
sallied out another Moslem, brother to the captive, and offered
him battle.  The two fell to, either against other, and fought
for a little while, till the Frank bore down upon the Moslem and,
falsing him with a feint, tumbled him by a thrust of the lance
heel from his destrier and took him prisoner.  After this fashion
the Moslems ceased not dashing forwards, one after one, and the
Franks to unhorse them and take them captive, till day departed
and the night with darkness upstarted.  Now they had captured of
the Moslems twenty cavaliers, and when Sharrken saw this, it was
grievous to him and he mustered his men and said to them, "What
is this thing that hath befallen us?  To- morrow, I myself will
go forth to the field and offer singular combat to their chief
and learn what is the cause of his entering our land and warn him
against doing battle with our band.  If he persist, we will
punish him with death, and if he prove peaceable we will make
peace with him." They righted on this wise till Allah Almighty
caused the morn to dawn, when mounted the twain and drew up for
battle fain; and Sharrkan was going forth to the plain, but
behold, more than one half of the Franks dismounted and remained
on foot before one of them who was mounted, till they reached the
midst of the battle plain.  Sharrken looked at that horseman and
lo!  he was their chief.  He was clad in a surcoat of blue satin
and a close ringed mail shirt; his face was as the moon when it
rises and no hair was upon his cheeks.  He hent in hand an Indian
scymitar and he rode a sable steed with a white blaze on brow,
like a dirham; and he smote the horse with heel till he stood
almost in the midst of the field when, signing to the Moslems, he
cried out in fluent Arab speech "Ho, Sharrkan!  Ho, son of Omar
bin al- Nu'uman!  Ho, thou who forcest fortalice and overthrowest
cities and countries!  up and out to battle bout, and blade
single handed wield with one who halves with thee the field! 
Thou art Prince of thy people and I am Prince of mine; and whoso
overcometh his adversary, him let the other's men obey and come
under his sway." Hardly had he ended his speech, when out came
Sharrkan with a heart full of fury, and urging his steed into the
midst of the field, closed like a raging lion with the Frank who
encountered him with wariness and steadfastness and met him with
the meeting of warriors.  Then they fell to foining and hewing,
and they stinted not of onset and offset, and give and take, as
they were two mountains clashing together or two seas together
dashing; nor did they cease fighting until day darkened and night
starkened.  Then they drew apart and each returned to his own
party; but as soon as Sharrkan foregathered with his comrades, he
said, "Never looked I on the like of this cavalier: he hath one
quality I have not yet seen in any and this it is that, when his
foemen uncovereth a place for the death blow, he reverseth his
weapon and smiteth with the lance-heel!  In very deed I know not
what will be the issue 'twixt him and me; but 'tis my wish that
we had in our host his like and the like of his men." Then he
went to his rest for the night and, when morning dawned, the
Frank came forth and rode down to the mid field, where Sharrkan
met him; and they fell to fighting and to wheeling, left and
right; and necks were stretched out to see the sight, nor did
they stint from strife and sword play and lunge of lance with
main and might, till the day turned to night and darkness
overwhelmed the light.  Then the twain drew asunder and returned
each to his own camp, where both related to their comrades what
had befallen them in the duello; and at last the Frank said to
his men, "Tomorrow shall decide the matter!" So they both passed
that night restfully till dawn; and, as soon as it was day, they
mounted and each bore down on other and ceased not to fight till
half the day was done.  Then the Frank bethought him of a ruse;
first urging his steed with heel and then checking him with the
rein, so that he stumbled and fell with his rider; thereupon
Sharrkan threw himself on the foe, and would have smitten him
with the sword fearing lest the strife be prolonged, when the
Frank cried out to him, "O Sharrkan, champions are not wont to do
thus!  This is the act of a man accustomed to be beaten by a
woman."[FN#216] When Sharrkan heard this, he raised his eyes to
the Frank's face and gazing steadfastly at him, recognized in him
Princess Abrizah with whom that pleasant adventure had befallen
him in the convent; whereupon he cast brand from hand and,
kissing the earth before her, asked her, "What moved thee to a
deed like this?"; and she answered, "I desired to prove thy
prowess afield and test thy doughtiness in tilting and jousting. 
These that are with me are my handmaids, and they are all clean
maids; yet they have vanquished thy horsemen in fair press and
stress of plain; and had not my steed stumbled with me, thou
shouldst have seen my might and prowess in combat." Sharrkan
smiled at her speech and said, "Praise be to Allah for safety and
for my reunion with thee, O Queen of the age!" Then she cried out
to her damsels to loose the twenty captives of Sharrkan's troop
and dismount.  They did as she bade and came and kissed the earth
before her and Sharrkan who said to them, "It is the like of you
that Kings keep in store for the need hour." Then he signed to
his comrades to salute the Princess; so all alighted and kissed
the earth before her, for they knew the story.  After this, the
whole two hundred took horse, and fared on night and day for six
days' space, till they drew near to Baghdad, when they halted and
Sharrkan bade Abrizah and her handmaids doff the Frankish garb
that was on them,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
bade Princess Abrizah and her damsels doff the garb that was on
them and don the garments of daughters of Greece; and thus did
they.  Then he despatched a company of his companions to Baghdad
to acquaint his father Omar bin al-Nu'uman, with his arrival and
report that he was accompanied by Princess Abrizah, daughter of
King Hardub, Lord of Graecia-land.  They halted forthright in the
place they had reached, and Sharrkan also halted and all righted
there; and when Almighty Allah made morning dawn, Sharrkan and
his company and Abrizah and her company took horse and fared on
towards the city; when lo!  on the way they met the Wazir Dandan,
who had come out amongst a thousand horse to honour Abrizah and
Sharrkan, by especial commandment of King Omar Son of Al-
Nu'uman.  When the two drew near, they turned towards them and
kissed ground before them; then they mounted again and escorted
them into the city and went up with them to the palace.  Sharrkan
walked in to his father, who rose and embraced him and questioned
him of his case.  So he told him all that Abrizah had told him,
and what had passed between them and said, "She hath parted from
her sire and departed from her reign and hath chosen to take part
with us and make her abode with us; and indeed," he said to his
father, "the King of Constantinople hath plotted to do us a
mischief, because of his daughter Sophia, for that the King of
Greece had made known to him her story and the cause of her being
given to thee; and he (the Grecian King) not knowing her to be
daughter of King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople; and, had he
known that, he would not have bestowed her upon thee, but he
would have restored her to her parent.  And of a verity," he
continued, "we were saved from these perils only by the Lady
Abrizah, and never saw we a more valiant than she." And he went
on to tell his father all that had passed from first to last of
the wrestling and the single fighting.  When King Omar heard the
story of Sharrkan, Abrizah was exalted in his eyes, and he longed
to see her and question her.  Thereupon Sharrkan went out to her
and said, "The King calleth for thee;" she replied, "I hear and I
obey;" and he took her and brought her in to his father, who was
seated on his throne and who, having dismissed his high officers,
was attended only by his eunuchs.  The Princess entered and
kissing the ground between his hands, saluted him in choice
terms.  He was amazed at her eloquent speech and thanked her for
her dealing with his son Sharrkan and bade her be seated.  So she
sat down and unveiled her face;[FN#217] and, when the King saw
her beauty, his reason fled his head and he made her draw near
and showed her favour, appointing her an especial palace for
herself and her damsels, and assigning them solde and allowances. 
Then began he to ask her of the three jewels aforesaid, and she
answered, "Here be they with me, O King of the age!" So saying,
she rose and going to her lodging, unpacked her baggage and from
it brought out a box and from the box a casket of gold.  She
opened the casket and taking out those three jewels, kissed them
and gave them to the King.  Then she went away bearing his heart
with her.  After her going the King sent for his son Sharrkan and
gave him one jewel of the three, and when he enquired of the
other two replied, "O my son!  I mean to give one to thy brother
Zau al-Makan, and the other to thy sister Nuzhat al- Zaman." But
when Sharrkan heard that he had a brother (for to that time he
knew only of his sister) he turned to his sire and said to him,
"O King, hast thou a son other than myself?" He answered, "Yes,
and he is now six years old;" adding that his name was Zau al-
Makan and that he and Nuzhat al-Zaman were twins, born at a
birth.  This news was grievous to Sharrkan, but he kept his
secret and said, "The bless- ing of Allah Most High be upon
them!", and he cast the jewel from his hand and shook the dust
off his clothes.  Quoth the King, "How do I see thee change thy
manner when hearing of this, considering that after me thou
becomes" heir of the kingdom.  Of a truth the troops have sworn
to thee and the Emirs and Grandees have taken the oath of
succession to thee; and this one of the three jewels is thine."
Sharrkan bowed his head to the ground and was ashamed to bandy
words with his parent so he accepted the jewel and went away,
knowing not what to do for exceeding wrath, and stayed not
walking till he had entered Abrizah's palace.  As he approached
she stood up to meet him and thanked him for what he had done and
prayed for blessings on him and his sire.  Then she sat down and
seated him by her side; but when he had taken his place she saw
rage in his face and questioned him, whereupon he told her that
Allah had blessed his father with two children by Sophia, a boy
and a girl, and that he had named the boy Zau al-Makan and the
girl Nuzhat al-Zaman; adding, "He hath kept the other two jewels
for them and hath given me one of thine, so I left it behind; I
knew naught of Zau al-Makan's birth till this day, and the twain
are now six years old.  So when I learnt this, wrath possessed
me; and I tell thee the reason of my rage and hide nothing from
thee.  But now I fear lest my father take thee to wife, for he
loveth thee and I saw in him signs of desire for thee: so what
wilt thou say, if he wish this?" Quoth she, "Know, O Sharrkan,
that thy father hath no dominion over me, nor can he have me
without my consent; and if he prevail over me by force, I will
take my own life.  As for the three jewels, it was not my intent
that he should give any of them to either of his children and I
had no thought but that he would lay them up in his treasury with
his things of price; but now I desire of thy favour that thou
make me a present of the jewel which he gave thee, if thou have
accepted it." "Hearkening and obedience," replied Sharrkan, and
gave it to her.  Then said she, "Fear nothing," and talked with
him awhile and continued, "I fear lest my father hear that I am
with you and sit not patiently under my loss, but do his
endeavours to find me; and to that end he may ally himself with
King Afridun, on account of his daughter Sophia, and both come on
thee with armies and so there befal great turmoil." When Sharrken
heard these words, he said to her, "O my lady, if it please thee
to sojourn with us, take no thought of them; though there gather
together against us all that be on land and on sea." " 'Tis
well," rejoined she; "if ye entreat me fair, I will tarry with
you, and if ye deal evilly by me, I will depart from you." Then
she bade her slave maidens bring food; so they set the tables,
and Sharrkan ate a little and went away to his own house,
disturbed and perturbed.  Such was his case; but regarding the
affairs of his father, Omar bin al-Nu'uman, after dismissing his
son Sharrkan he arose and, taking the other two jewels, betook
himself to the Lady Sophia, who stood up when she saw him and
remained standing till he was seated.  Presently, his two
children, Zau al-Makan and Nuzhat al-Zaman, came to him and he
kissed them and hung a jewel round each one's neck, at which they
rejoiced and kissed his hands.  Then went they to their mother,
who joyed in their joy and wished the King long life; so he asked
her, "Why hast thou not informed me all this time that thou art
the daughter of King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople, that I
might have honoured thee still more and enlarged thee in dignity
and raised thy rank?" "O King," answered Sophia, "and what could
I desire greater or higher than this my standing with thee,
overwhelmed as I am with thy favours and thy benefits?  And,
furthermore, Allah hath blessed me with two children by thee, a
son and a daughter." Her reply pleased the King and after leaving
her, he set apart for her and her children a wondrous fine
palace.  Moreover, he appointed for them eunuchs and attendants
and doctors of law and doctors of philosophy and astrologers and
physicians and surgeons to do them service; and in every way he
redoubled his favour and entreated them with the best of
treatment.  And presently he returned to the palace of his
dominion and to his Court where he distributed justice among the
lieges.  So far concerning him and Sophia and her children; but
in the matter of Abrizah the King was greatly occupied with love
of her and burnt with desire of her night and day; and every
night, he would go in to her and converse with her and pay his
court to her, but she gave him no answer, only saying, "O King of
the age!  I have no desire for men at this present." When he saw
her withdraw from him, his passion waxed hotter and his longing
and pining increased until, when weary of this, he summoned his
Wazir Dandan and, opening his very heart to him, told him of his
love for Princess Abrizah, daughter of Hardub, and informed him
how she refused to yield to his wishes and how desire for her was
doing him to die, for that he could get no grace of her.  The
Wazir, hearing these words, said to the King, "As soon as it is
dark night, take thou a piece of Bhang the measure of a miskal,
about an ounce, and go in to her and drink somewhat of wine with
her.  When the hour of ending the carousel shall draw near, fill
her a last cup and dropping therein the Bhang, give it to her to
drink, and she will not reach her sleeping chamber ere the drug
take effect on her.  Then do thou go in to her and take thy will
of her; and such is my advice."[FN#218] "Thy rede is aright,"
quoth the King, and seeking his treasury, he took thence a piece
of concentrated Bhang, if an elephant smelt it he would sleep
from year to year.  This he put in his bosom pocket and waited
till some little of the night went by, when he betook himself to
the palace of Princess Abrizah, who seeing him stood up to
receive him; but he bade her sit down.  So she sat down, and he
sat by her, and he began to talk with her of wine and wassail,
whereupon she furnished the carousing table[FN#219] and placed it
before him.  Then she set on the drinking vessels and lighted the
candles and ordered to bring dried fruits and sweet meats and all
that pertaineth to drinking.  So they fell to tippling and the
King ceased not to pledge her till drunkenness crept into her
head; and seeing this he took out the bit of Bhang from his
pocket and, holding it between his fingers, filled a cup with his
own hand and drank it off.  Then filling a second he said, "To
thy companionship!"; and dropped the drug into her cup, she
knowing naught of it.  She took it and drank it off; then she
rose and went to her sleeping chamber.  He waited for less than
an hour till he was assured that the dose had taken effect on her
and had robbed her of her senses, when he went in to her and
found her thrown on her back: and she had doffed her petticoat
trousers and the air raised the skirt of her shift and discovered
what was between her thighs.  When the King saw the state of
things and found a lighted candle at her head and another at her
feet, shining upon what her thighs enshrined he took leave of his
five senses for lust and Satan seduced him and he could not
master himself, but put off his trousers and fell upon her and
abated her maiden head.  Then he rose off her and went to one of
her women, by name Marjánah, and said, "Go in to thy lady and
speak with her." So she went in to her mistress and found her
lying on her back insensible, with the blood running down to the
calves of her legs, whereupon she took a kerchief and wiped away
the blood and lay by her that night.  As soon as Almighty Allah
brought the dawn, the handmaid Marjanah washed her mistress's
hands and feet and brought rose water and bathed her face and
mouth with it, where upon she sneezed and yawned and cast up from
her inside that bit of Bhang like a bolus.[FN#220] Then she
revived and washed her hands and mouth and said to Marjanah,
"Tell me what hath befallen me." So she told her what had passed
and how she had found her, lying on her back, with the blood
running down, wherefore she knew that King Omar bin al-Nu'uman
had lain with her and had undone her and taken his will of her. 
At this she grieved with exceeding grief and retired into
privacy, saying to her damsels, "Deny me to whoso would come in
to me and say to him that I am ill, till I see what Allah will do
with me." Presently the news of her sickness came to the King; so
he sent her sherbets and sugar electuaries.  Some months she thus
passed in solitude, during which time the King's flame cooled and
his desire for her was quenched, so that he abstained from her. 
Now she had conceived by him, and when the months of child
breeding had gone by, her pregnancy appeared and her belly
swelled, and the world was straitened upon her, so she said to
her handmaid Marjanah, "Know that it is not the folk who have
wronged me, but I who sinned against my own self[FN#221] in that
I left my father and mother and country.  Indeed, I abhor life,
for my spirit is broken and neither courage nor strength is left
me.  I used, when I mounted my steed, to have the mastery of him,
but now I am unable to ride.  If I be brought to bed among them I
shall be dishonoured before my hand women and every one in the
palace will know that he hath taken my maidenhead in the way of
shame; and if I return to my father, with what face shall I meet
him or with what face shall I have recourse to him?  How well
quoth the poet,

'Say, what shall solace one who hath nor home nor stable stead *
     Nor cup companion, nor a cup, nor place to house his head?'"

Marjanah answered her, "It is thine to command; I will obey;" and
Abrizah said, "I desire at once to leave this place secretly, so
that none shall know of me but thou; and return to my father and
my mother, for when flesh stinketh, there is naught for it but
its own folk and Allah shall do with me e'en as He will." "O
Princess," Marjanah replied, "what thou wouldest do is well."
Then she made matters ready and kept her secret and waited for
some days till the King went out to chase and hunt, and his son
Sharrkan betook himself to certain of the fortresses to sojourn
there awhile.  Then said she to Marjanah, "I wish to set out this
night, but how shall I do against my destiny?  For already I feel
the pangs of labour and child birth, and if I abide other four or
five days, I shall be brought to bed here, and I shall be unable
to travel to my country.  But this is what was written on my
forehead." Then she considered awhile, and said to Marjanah,
"Look us out a man who will go with us and serve us by the way,
for I have no strength to bear arms." "By Allah, O my lady,"
replied Marjanah, "I know none but a black slave called Al-
Ghazbán,[FN#222] who is one of the slaves of King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman; he is a valiant wight, and he keepeth guard at our
palace gate.  The King appointed him to attend us, and indeed we
have overwhelmed him with our favours; so, lookye, I will go out
and speak with him of this matter, and promise him some monies
and tell him that, if he have a mind to tarry with us, I will
marry him to whom he will.  He told me before to day that he had
been a highwayman; so if he consent to us we shall win our wish
and reach to our own land." She rejoined, "Call him that I may
talk with him;" whereupon Marjanah fared forth and said to the
slave, 'O Ghazban, Allah prosper thee, so thou fall in with what
my lady saith to thee!" Then she took him by the hand and brought
him to the Princess, whose hands he kissed but as she beheld him,
her heart took fright at him.  "How ever," she said to herself,
"of a truth, Need giveth the law;" and she approached to speak
with him, yet her heart started away from him.  Presently she
said, "O Ghazban, say me, wilt thou help me against the perfidies
of Fortune and conceal my secret if I discover it to thee?" When
the slave saw her, his heart was taken by storm and he fell in
love with her forthright and could not but reply; "O my mistress,
whatsoever thou biddest me do, I will not depart therefrom."
Quoth she, "I would have thee take me at this hour and take this
my handmaid and saddle us two camels and two of the King's horses
and set on each horse a saddle bag of goods and somewhat of
provaunt, and go with us to our own country; where, if thou
desire to abide with us, I will marry thee to her thou shalt
choose of my handmaidens, or, if thou prefer return to thine own
land, we will marry thee and give thee whatso thou desires" after
thou hast taken of money what shall satisfy thee." When Al
Ghazban, heard this, he rejoiced with great joy and replied, "O
my lady, I will serve both of you with mine eyes and will go at
once and saddle the horses." Then he went away gladsome and
saying to himself, "I shall get my will of them and if they will
not yield to me, I will kill them both and take their riches."
But he kept this his intent to himself, and presently returned
with two camels and three head of horses, one of which he rode,
and Princess Abrizah made Marjanah mount the second she mounting
the third, albeit she was in labour pains and possessed not her
soul for anguish.  And the slave ceased not travelling with them
night and day through the passes of the mountains, till there
remained but musingly march between them and their own country;
when the travail pangs came upon Abrizah and she could no longer
resist; so she said to Al-Ghazban, "Set me down, for the pains of
labour are upon me;" and cried to Marjanah, "Do thou alight and
sit by me and deliver me." Then Marjanah dismounted from her
horse, and Al-Ghazban did in like sort, and they made fast the
bridles and helped the Princess to dismount, for she was aswoon
from excess of anguish.  When Al-Ghazban saw her on the ground,
Satan entered into him and he drew his falchion and brandishing
it in her face, said "O my lady, vouchsafe me thy favours."
Hearing these words she turned to him and said, "It remaineth for
me only that I yield me to negro slaves, after having refused
Kings and Braves!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Fifty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princess
Abrizah said to the black slave Al Ghazban, "It remaineth for me
only that I yield me to negro slaves, after having refused Kings
and Braves!" And she was wroth with him and cried, "Woe to thee! 
what words are these thou sayest?  Out on thee, and talk not thus
in my presence and know that I will never consent to what thou
sayest, though I drink the cup of death.  Wait till I have cast
my burden and am delivered of the after birth, and then, if thou
be able thereto, do with me as thou wilt; but, an thou leave not
lewd talk at this time assuredly I will slay myself with my own
hand and quit the world and be at peace from all this." And she
began reciting extempore,[FN#223]

"O spare me, thou Ghazban, indeed enow for me * Are heavy strokes
     of time, mischance and misery!
Whoredom my Lord forfends to all humanity; * Quoth He, 'Who
     breaks my bidding Hell for home shall see!'
And if thou leave not suing me to whoredom's way * Against th'
     Almighty's choicest gift, my chastity,
Upon my tribesmen I with might and main will call * And gather
     all, however far or near they be;
And with Yamáni blade were I in pieces hewn, * Ne'er shall he
     sight my face who makes for villeiny,
The face of free born come of noble folk and brave; * What then
     can be to me the seed of whoreson slave?"

When Ghazban heard these lines he was wroth exceedingly; his eyes
reddened with blood and his face became a dusty grey[FN#224]; his
nostrils swelled, his lips protruded and the repulsiveness of his
aspect redoubled.  And he repeated these couplets,

"Ho thou, Abrizah, mercy! leave me not for I * Of thy love and
     Yamáni[FN#225] glance the victim lie
My heart is cut to pieces by thy cruelty, * My body wasted and my
     patience done to die:
From glances ravishing all hearts with witchery * Reason far
     flies, the while desire to thee draws nigh;
Though at thy call should armies fill the face of earth * E'en
     now I'd win my wish and worlds in arms defy!"

When Abrizah heard these words, she wept with sore weeping and
said to him, "Woe to thee, O Ghazban!  How dareth the like of
thee to address me such demand, O base born and obscene bred? 
Dost thou deem all folk are alike?" When the vile slave heard
this from her, he waxt more enraged and his eyes grew redder: and
he came up to her and smiting her with the sword on her neck
wounded her to the death.  Then he drove her horse before him
with the treasure and made off with himself to the mountains. 
Such was the case with Al-Ghazban; but as regards Abrizah, she
gave birth to a son, like the moon, and Marjanah took the babe
and did him the necessary offices and laid him by his mother's
side; and lo and behold!  the child fastened to its mother's
breast and she dying.[FN#226]  When Marjanah saw this, she cried
out with a grievous cry and rent her raiment and cast dust on her
head and buffeted her cheeks till blood flowed, saying, "Alas, my
mistress!  Alas, the pity of it!  Thou art dead by the hand of a
worthless black slave, after all thy knightly prowess!" And she
ceased not weeping when suddenly a great cloud of dust arose and
walled the horizon;[FN#227] but, after awhile, it lifted and
discovered a numerous conquering host.  Now this was the army of
King Hardub, Princess Abrizah's father, and the cause of his
coming was that when he heard of his daughter and her handmaids
having fled to Baghdad, and that they were with King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman, he had come forth, leading those with him, to seek
tidings of her from travellers who might have seen her with the
King.  When he had gone a single day's march from his capital, he
espied three horse men afar off and made towards them, intending
to ask whence they came and seek news of his daughter.  Now these
three whom he saw at a distance were his daughter and Marjanah
and the slave Al- Ghazban; and he made for them to push inquiry. 
Seeing this the villain blackamoor feared for himself; so he
killed Abrizah and fled for his life.  When they came up, King
Hardub saw his daughter lying dead and Marjanah weeping over her,
and he threw himself from his steed and fell fainting to the
ground.  All the riders of his company, the Emirs and Waxirs,
took foot and forth right pitched their tents on the mountain and
set up for the King a great pavilion, domed and circular, without
which stood the grandees of the realm.  When Marjanah saw her
master, she at once recognized him and her tears redoubled; and,
when he came to himself, he questioned her and she told him all
that had passed and said, "Of a truth he that hath slain thy
daughter is a black slave belonging to King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,
and she informed him how Sharrkan's father had dealt with the
Princess.  When King Hardub heard this, the world grew black in
his sight and he wept with sore weeping.  Then he called for a
litter and, therein laying his dead daughter, returned to
Caesarea and carried her into the palace, where he went in to his
mother, Zat al-Dawahi, and said to that Lady of Calamities,
"Shall the Moslems deal thus with my girl?  Verily King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman despoiled her of her honour by force, and after this,
one of his black slaves slew her.  By the truth of the Messiah, I
will assuredly take blood revenge for my daughter and clear away
from mine honour the stain of shame; else will I kill myself with
mine own hand!" And he wept passing sore.  Quoth his mother,
"None other than Marjanah killed thy daughter, for she hated her
in secret;" and she continued to her son, "Fret not for taking
the blood wit of thy daughter, for, by the truth of the Messiah,
I will not turn back from King Omar bin al-Nu'uman till I have
slain him and his sons; and of a very truth I will do with him a
deed, passing the power of Sage and Knight, whereof the
chroniclers shall tell chronicles in all countries and in every
place: but needs must thou do my bidding in all I shall direct,
for whoso be firmly set on the object of his desire shall surely
compass his desire." "By the virtue of the Messiah," replied he,
"I will not cross thee in aught thou shalt say." Then quoth she,
"Bring me a number of hand maids, high bosomed virgins, and
summon the wise men of the age and let them teach them philosophy
and the rules of behaviour before Kings, and the art of
conversation and making verses; and let them talk with them of
all manner science and edifying knowledge.  And the sages must be
Moslems, that they may teach them the language and traditions of
the Arabs, together with the history of the Caliphs and the
ancient annals of the Kings of Al-Islam; and if we persevere in
this for four years' space, we shall gain our case.  So possess
thy soul in patience and wait; for one of the Arabs saith, 'If we
take man bote after years forty the time were short to ye.' When
we have taught the girls these things, we shall be able to work
our will with our foe, for he doteth on women and he hath three
hundred and sixty concubines, whereto are now added an hundred of
the flowers of thy handmaidens who were with thy daughter, she
that hath found mercy.[FN#228] As soon as I have made an end of
their education, as described to thee, I will take them and set
out with them in person." When King Hardub heard his mother's
words, he rejoiced and arose and kissed her head; and at once
despatched messengers and couriers to lands sundry and manifold
to fetch him Moslem sages.  They obeyed his commands and fared to
far countries and thence brought him the sages and the doctors he
sought.  When these came into presence, he honoured them with
notable honorurs and bestowed dresses on them and appointed to
them stipends and allowances and promised them much money whenas
they should have taught the damsels.  Then he committed the
handmaidens to their hands--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Fifty-third Night.

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
sages and the doctors stood in presence of King Hardub, he
honoured them with notable honours and committed the hand maidens
to their hands, enjoining that these be instructed in all manner
of knowledge, philosophy and polite accomplishments; and they set
themselves to do his bidding.  Such was the case with King
Hardub; but as for King Omar bin al Nu'uman, when he returned
from coursing and hunting and entered his palace, he sought
Princess Abrizah but found her not, nor any one knew of her nor
could any give him news of her.  This was grievous to him and he
said, "How could the lady leave the palace unknown of any?  Had
my kingdom been at stake in this case, it were in perilous
condition there being none to govern it!  I will never again go
to sport and hunt till I have stationed at the gates those who
shall keep good guard over them!"  And he was sore vexed and his
breast was straitened for the loss of Princess Abrizah.  Hereupon
behold, his son Sharrkan returned from his journey; and the
father told him what had happened, and informed him how the lady
had fled, whilst he was chasing and hunting, whereat he grieved
with exceeding grief.  Then King Omar took to visiting his
children every day and making much of them and brought them
learned men and doctors to teach them, appointing for them
stipends.  When Sharrkan saw this, he raged with exceeding rage
and envied thereupon his brother and sister till the signs of
chagrin appeared in his face and he ceased not to languish by
reason of this matter: so one day his father said to him, "Why do
I see thee grown weak in body and yellow of face?" "O my father,"
replied Sharrkan, "every time I see thee fondle my brother and
sister and make much of them, jealousy seizeth on me, and I fear
lest it grow on me till I slay them and thou slay me in return. 
And this is the reason of my weakness of body and change of
complexion.  But now I crave of thy favour that thou give me one
of thy castles outlying the rest, that I may abide there the
remnant of my life, for as the sayer of bywords saith, 'Absence
from my friend is better and fitter for me'; and, 'Whatso eye
doth not perceive, that garreth not heart to grieve.'" And he
bowed his head towards the ground.  When King Omar bin al-Nu'uman
heard his words and knew the cause of his ailment and of his
being broken down, he soothed his heart and said to him, "O my
son, I grant thee this and I have not in my reign a greater than
the Castle of Damascus, and the government of it is thine from
this time." Thereupon he forthright summoned his secretaries of
state and bade them write Sharrkan's patent of investiture to the
viceroyalty of Damascus of Syria.  And when they had written it,
he equipped him and sent with him the Wazir Dandan, and invested
him with the rule and government and gave him instructions as to
policy and regulations; and took leave of him, and the grandees
and officers of state did likewise, and he set out with his host. 
When he arrived at Damascus, the townspeople beat the drums and
blew the trumpets and decorated the city and came out to meet him
in great state; whilst all the notables and grandees paced in
procession, and those who stood to the right of the throne walked
on his right flank, and the others to the left.  Thus far
concerning Sharrkan; but as regards his father, Omar bin al-
Nu'uman, soon after the departure of his son, the children's
tutors and governors presented themselves before him and said to
him, "O our lord, thy children have now learnt knowledge and they
are completely versed in the rules of manners and the etiquette
of ceremony." The King rejoiced thereat with exceeding joy and
conferred bountiful largesse upon the learned men, seeing Zau al-
Makan grown up and flourishing and skilled in horsemanship.  The
Prince had reached the age of fourteen and he occupied himself
with piety and prayers, loving the poor, the Olema and the Koran
students, so that all the people of Baghdad loved him, men and
women.  One day, the procession of the Mahmil[FN#229] of Irák
passed round Baghdad before its departure for the pilgrimage to
Meccah and visitation of the tomb of the Prophet (whom Allah
bless and preserve!).  When Zau al-Makan the Mahmil procession he
was seized with longing desire to become a pilgrim,[FN#230] so he
went in to his sire and said, "I come to ask thy leave to make
the pilgrimage." But his father forbade him saying, "Wait till
next year and I will go and thou too." When the Prince saw that
the matter was postponed, he betook himself to his sister Nuzhat
al-Zaman, whom he found standing at prayer.  As soon as she had
ended her devotions he said to her, "I am dying with desire of
pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah at Meccah and to visit the
tomb of the Prophet, upon whom be peace!  I asked my father's
leave, but he forbade me that, so I mean to take privily somewhat
of money and set out on the pilgrimage without his knowledge."
"Allah upon thee," exclaimed she, "take me with thee and deprive
me not of visitation to the tomb of the Prophet, whom Allah bless
and keep!" And he answered, "As soon as it is dark night, do thou
come forth from this place, without telling any."
Accordingly,When it was the middle of the night she arose and
took somewhat of money and donned a man's habit; and she ceased
not walking to the palace gate, where she found Zau al-Makan with
camels ready for marching.  So he mounted and mounted her; and
the two fared on till they were in the midst of the Iraki[FN#231]
pilgrim-party, and they ceased not marching and Allah wrote
safety for them, till they entered Meccah the Holy and stood upon
Arafát and performed the pilgrimage rites.  Then they made a
visitation to the tomb of the Prophet (whom Allah bless and
assain!) and thought to return with the pilgrims to their native
land.  But Zau al-Makan said to his sister, "O my sister, it is
in my mind to visit the Holy House,[FN#232] Jerusalem, and
Abraham the Friend of Allah[FN#233] (on whom be peace!)." "I also
desire so to do," replied she.  So they agreed upon this and he
fared forth and took passage for himself and her and they made
ready and set out in the ship with a company of Jerusalem
palmers.  That very night the sister fell sick of an aguish
chill, and was grievously ill but presently recovered, after
which the brother also sickened.  She tended him during his
malady and they ceased not wayfaring till they arrived at
Jerusalem, but the fever increased on him and he grew weaker and
weaker.  They alighted at a Khan and there hired a lodging; but
Zau al- Makan's sickness ceased not to increase on him, till he
was wasted with leanness and became delirious.  At this, his
sister was greatly afflicted and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty
and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! 
This is the decree of Allah!" They sojourned in that place
awhile, his weakness ever increasing and she attending him and
buying necessaries for him and for herself, till all the money
she had was expended and she became so poor that she had not so
much as a dirham left.  Then she sent a servant of the Khan to
the bazar with some of her clothes, and he sold them and she
spent the price upon her brother; then sold she something more
and she ceased not selling all she had, piece by piece, till
nothing was left but an old rug.  Whereupon she wept and
exclaimed, "Verily is Allah the Orderer of the past and the
future!" Presently her brother said to her, "O my sister, I feel
recovery drawing near and my heart longeth for a little roast
meat." "By Allah!  O my brother," replied she, "I have no face to
beg; but tomorrow I will enter some rich man's house and serve
him and earn somewhat for our living." Then she bethought herself
awhile and said, "Of a truth 'tis hard for me to leave thee and
thou in this state, but I must despite myself!" He rejoined,
"Allah forbid!  Thou wilt be put to shame; but there is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!" And he wept and she
wept too.  Then she said, "O my brother, we are strangers who
have dwelt here a full year, but none hath yet knocked at our
door.  Shall we then die of hunger?  I know no resource but that
I go out and do service and earn somewhat to keep us alive, till
thou recover from thy sickness, when we will travel back to our
native land." She sat weeping awhile and he wept too, propped
upon his elbow.  Then Nuzhat al-Zaman arose and, veiling her head
with a bit of camlet,[FN#234] which had been of the cameleer's
clothes and which the owner had forgotten and left with them; she
kissed the head of her brother and embraced him and went forth
from him, weeping and knowing not whither she should wend.  And
she stinted not going and her brother Zau al-Makan awaiting her
return till the supper time; but she came not, and he watched for
her till the morning morrowed but still she returned not; and
this endured till two days went by.  He was greatly troubled
thereat and his heart fluttered for her, and hunger was sore upon
him.  At last he left the chamber and, calling the servant of the
caravanserai, said, "I wish thee to bear me to the bazar." So he
carried him to the market street and laid him down there; and the
people of Jerusalem gathered round him and were moved to tears
seeing his condition.  He signed to them begging for somewhat to
eat; so they brought him some money from certain of the merchants
who were in the bazar, and bought food and fed him therewith;
after which they carried him to a shop, where they spread him a
mat of palm leaves and set an ewer of water at his head.  When
night fell, all the folk went away, sore concerned for him and,
in the middle of the night, he called to mind his sister and his
sickness redoubled on him, so that he abstained from eating and
drinking and became insensible to the world around him.  Then the
bazar people arose and took for him from the merchants thirty
seven dirhams, and hiring a camel, said to the driver, "Carry
this sick man to Damascus and leave him in the hospital; haply he
may be cured and recover health." "On my head be it!" replied the
camel man; but he said to himself, "How shall I take this sick
man to Damascus, and he nigh upon death?" So he carried him away
to a place and hid with him till the night, when he threw him
down on the ash heap near the fire hole of a Hammam and went his
way.  When morning dawned the Stoker[FN#235] of the bath came to
his work and, finding Zau al-Makan cast on his back, exclaimed,
"Why did they not throw their dead body anywhere but here?" So
saying, he gave him a kick and he moved; whereupon quoth the
Fireman, "Some one of you who hath eaten a bit of Hashish and
hath thrown himself down in whatso place it be!" Then he looked
at his face and saw his hairless cheeks and his grace and
comeliness; so he took pity on him and knew that he was sick and
a stranger in the land.  And he cried, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah!  verily, I have sinned against
this youth, for indeed the Prophet (whom Allah bless and keep!)
enjoineth honour to the stranger, more especially when the
stranger is sick." Then he carried him home and went in with him
to his wife and bade her tend him.  So she spread him a sleeping
rug and set a cushion under his head, then warmed water for him
and washed therewith his hands and feet and face.  Meanwhile, the
Stoker went to the market and bought some rose water and sugar,
and sprinkled Zau al-Makan's face with the water and gave him to
drink of the sherbet.  Then he fetched a clean shirt and put it
on him.  With this, Zau al-Makan sniffed the zephyr of health and
recovery returned to him; and he sat up and leant against the
pillow.  Hereat the Fireman rejoiced and exclaimed, "Praise be to
Allah for the welfare of this youth!  O Allah, I beseech Thee by
Thy knowledge of hidden things, that Thou make the salvation of
this youth to be at my hands!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Fireman
exclaimed, "O Allah, I beseech Thee of Thy knowledge of hidden
things, that Thou make this young man's life the work of my
hands!" And he ceased not to nurse him for three days, giving him
to drink of sherbet of sugar and willow flower water and rose
water; and doing him all manner of service and kindness, till
health began to return to his body and Zau al-Makan opened his
eyes.  Presently came in the Fireman and, seeing him sitting up
and showing signs of amendment, said to him, "What is now thy
state, O my son?" "Praise be to Allah," replied Zau al-Makan, "I
am well and like to recover, if such be the will of Allah
Almighty at this time." The Stoker praised the Lord of All for
this and, wending fast to the market, bought ten chickens, which
he carried to his wife and said, "Kill two of these for him every
day, one at dawn of day and the other at fall of day." So she
rose up and killed a fowl and brought it to him boiled, and fed
him with the flesh and made him drink its broth.  When he had
done eating, she fetched hot water and he washed his hands and
lay back upon the pillow, whereupon she covered him up with the
coverlet, and he slept till the time of the mid afternoon prayer. 
Then she arose and killed another fowl and boiled it; after which
she cut it up and, bringing it to Zau al-Makan, said, "Eat, O my
son!" While he was eating; behold, her husband entered and seeing
her feeding him, sat down at his head and said to him, "How is it
with thee now, O my son?" "Thanks be to Allah for recovery!" he
replied: "may the Almighty requite thee thy kindness to me." At
this the Fireman rejoiced and going out, bought sherbet of
violets and rose water and made him drink it.  Now the Stoker
used to work at the Hammam all day for a wage of five dirhams,
whereof he spent every day, for Zau al-Makan, one dirham upon
sugar and sherbet of rose water and willow flower water,[FN#236]
and another dirham for fowls; and he ceased not to entreat him
thus kindly during a whole month, till the traces of illness
ceased from him and he was once more sound and whole.  Thereupon
the Fireman and his wife rejoiced and asked him, "O my son, wilt
thou go with me to the bath?"; whereto he answered, "Yes!" So the
Stoker went to the bazar and fetched a donkey boy, and he mounted
Zau al-Makan on the ass and supported him in the saddle till they
came to the bath.  Then he made him sit down and seated the
donkey boy in the furnace-room and went forth to the market and
bought Iote leaves and lupin-flour,[FN#237] with which he
returned to the bath and said to Zau al-Makan, "O my master, in
Allah's name, walk in and I will wash thy body." So they entered
the inner room of the bath, and the Fireman took to rubbing Zau
al-Makan's legs and began to wash his body with the leaves and
meal, when there came to them a bathman, whom the bath keeper had
sent to Zau al-Makan; and he, seeing the Stoker washing and
rubbing him, said, "This is doing injury to the keeper's rights."
Replied the Fireman, "The master overwhelmeth us with his
favours!" Then the bathman proceeded to shave Zau al-Makan's
head, after which he and the Stoker washed themselves and
returned to the house, where he clad Zau al-Makan in a shirt of
fine stuff and a robe of his own; and gave him a handsome turband
and girdle and a light kerchief which he wound about his neck. 
Meanwhile the Fireman's wife had killed and cooked two chickens;
so, as soon as Zau al-Makan entered and seated himself on the
carpet, the husband arose and, dissolving sugar in willow flower
water, made him drink of it.  Then he brought the food tray and,
cutting up the chickens, fed him with the flesh and gave him the
broth to drink till he was satisfied; when he washed his hands
and praised Allah for recovery, and said to the Fireman, "Thou
art he whom the Almighty vouchsafed to me and made the cause of
my cure!" "Leave this talk," replied the other, "and tell us the
cause of thy coming to this city and whence thou art.  Thy face
showeth signs of gentle breeding." "Tell me first how thou camest
to fall in with me," said Zau al-Makan; "and after I will tell
thee my story." Rejoined the Fireman, "As for that, I found thee
lying on the rubbish heap by the door of the fire house, as I
went to my work near the morning, and knew not who had thrown
thee there.  So I carried thee home with me; and this is all my
tale." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "Glory to Him who quickeneth the
bones, though they be rotten!  Indeed, O my brother, thou hast
not done good save to one worthy of it, and thou shalt presently
gather its fruitage." And he added, "But where am I now?" "Thou
art in the city of Jerusalem," replied the Stoker; where upon Zau
al-Makan called to mind his strangerhood and remembered his
separation from his sister and wept.  Then he discovered his
secret to t