 the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when they
brought him the news of his wife having borne him a boy child,
Zau al- Makan rejoiced with great joy and cried, "Now is my back
strengthened, for that I have been blessed with a son[FN#455]
whose name is Kanmakan." And he spake to the Wazir Dandan,
saying, "I am minded to leave this mourning and order perfections
of the Koran for my brother and command almsdeeds on his
account." Quoth the Wazir, "Thy design is good." Thereupon he
caused tents to be pitched over his brother's tomb; so they
raised them and gathered together such of the men at arms as
could repeat the Koran; and some began reciting the Holy volume;
whilst others chanted litanies containing the names of Allah, and
thus they did till the morning.  Then Zau al-Makan went up to the
grave of his brother Sharrkan and poured forth copious tears, and
improvised these couplets,

"They bore him bier'd, and all who followed wept * With Moses'
     shrieks what day o'erhead shook Tor;[FN#456]
Till reached the grave which Pate had made his home, * Dug in
     men's souls who one sole God adore:
Ne'er had I thought before to see my joy * Borne on the bier
     which heads of bearers bore:
Ah no!  nor ere they homed thee in the dust * That stars of
     heaven earth ever covered o'er.
Is the tomb dweller hostage of a stead, * Where light and
     splendour o'er thy face shall pour?
Praise to restore his life her word hath pledged: * Cribbed and
     confined he shall dispread the more!"

When Zau al-Makan had made an end of his versifying he wept and
wept with him all the troops; then he came to the grave and threw
himself upon it wild with woe, and the Wazir repeated the words
of the poet,

"Pain leaving life that fleets thou hast th' eternal won; * Thou
     didst as whilom many a doer like thee hath done
Leftest this worldly house without reproach or blame; * Ah, may
     th' ex change secure thee every benison!
Thou west from hostile onset shield and firm defence, * For us to
     baffle shafts and whistling spears to shun.
I see this world is only cheat and vanity, * Where man naught
     else must seek but please the Truthful One:
Th' Empyrean's Lord allow thee bower of heavenly bliss, * And wi'
     thy faithful friends The Guide show goodly wone:
I bid thee last good e'en with sigh of bitter grief, * Seeing the
     West in woe for lack of Easting Sun."

When the Wazir Dandan had finished his reciting, he wept with
sore weeping and the tears rained from his eyes like cushioned
pearls.  Then came forward one who had been of Sharrkan's boon
companions in his cups and he wept till ran in rills the drops,
and he enumerated the dead man's generous qualities, reciting the
following pentastichs,

"Where gone is Bounty since thy hand is turned to clay?  * And I
     in misery lie since thou west ta'en away.
See'st not, O litter guide[FN#457] (Heaven keep thee glad and
     gay!), * How tears adorn my cheeks, these furrowed wrinkles
     fray?
        A sight to joy shine eyes and fill thee with
        dismay.[FN#458]
By Allah ne'er this heart within I spoke of thee; * Ah no!  nor
     dared my sight to see thy brilliancy:
Save that my tear drops sorest wound have garred me dree * Yea!
     and if e'er on other rest these eyne of me,
        May yearning draw their reins nor suffer sleep to see."

And when the man stinted reciting, Zau al-Makan and the Minister
Dandan wept and the whole army was moved to tears; after which
all retired to their tents, and the King turning to the Wazir
took counsel with him concerning the conduct of the campaign.  On
this wise the two passed days and nights, while Zau al-Makan was
weighed down with grief and mourning till at last he said, "I
long to hear stories and adventures of Kings and tales of lover
folk enslaved by love; haply Allah may make this to solace that
which is on my heart of heavy anxiety, and stint and stay my
weeping and wailing." Quoth the Wazir, "If naught can dispel thy
trouble but hearing curious tales of Kings and people long gone
before and stories of folk enslaved by love of yore, and so
forth, this thing were easy, for I had no other business, in the
lifetime of thy father (who hath found mercy) than to relate
stories and to repeat verses to him.  This very night I will tell
thee a tale of a lover and his beloved, so shall thy breast be
broadened." When Zau al-Makan heard these words from the
Minister, his heart was set upon that which had been promised to
him and he did nothing but watch for the coming of the night,
that he might hear what the Wazir Dandan had to tell of the Kings
of yore and distracted lovers long gone before.  And hardly would
he believe that night had fallen ere he bade light the wax
candles and the lamps and bring all that was needful of meat and
drink and perfume gear, and what not; and when all was in
presence, he summoned the Wazir Dandan, and the Emirs Rustam and
Bahram and Tarkash and the Grand Chamberlain; then waited till
the whole party was seated before him; whereupon he turned to the
Minister and said, "Know, O Wazir, that night is come and hath
let down over us its veil of gloom, and we desire that thou tell
us those tales which thou promisedst us." Replied the Wazir,
"With joy and good will."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the One Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Zau Al-Makan summoned the Wazir and the Chamberlain and Rustam
and Bahram, he turned towards the Minister Dandan and said,
"Know, O Wazir, that night is come and hath let down over us its
veil of gloom, and we desire that thou tell us those tales which
thou promisedst us." Replied the Wazir, "With love and gladness! 
Know, O auspicious King, that there reached my ears a relation of
a lover and a loved one and of the discourse between them and
what befel them of things rare and fair, a story such as
repelleth care from the heart and dispelleth sorrow like unto
that of the patriarch Jacob[FN#459]; and it is as follows":

Tale of Taj al-Muluk and the Princess Dunya
(The Lover and the Loved).

There stood in times long gone by behind the Mountains of
Ispahán, a city highs the Green City, wherein dwelt a King named
Suláyman Sháh.  Now he was a man of liberality and beneficence,
of justice and integrity, of generosity and sincerity, to whom
travellers repaired from every country, and his name was noised
abroad in all regions and cities and he reigned many a year in
high worship and prosperity, save that he owned neither wives nor
children.  He had a Minister who rivalled him in goodness and
generosity and it so happened that one day, he sent for him and
when he came into the presence said to him, "O my Wazir, my heart
is heavy and my patience is past and my force faileth me, for
that I have neither wife nor child.  This is not the way of Kings
who rule over all men, princes.  and paupers; for they rejoice in
leaving behind them children and successors whereby are doubled
their number and their strength.  Quoth the Prophet (whom Allah
bless and keep!); 'Marry ye, increase ye, and multiply ye, that I
may boast me of your superiority over the nations on the Day of
Resurrection.' So what is thy rede, O Wazir?  Advise me of what
course and contrivance be advisable!" When the Minister heard
these words, the tears sprang from his eyes in streams, and he
replied, "Far be it from me, O King of the Age, that I debate on
that which appertaineth to the Compassionate One!  Wilt thou have
me cast into the fire by the All powerful King's wrath and ire? 
Buy thee a concubine." Rejoined the King, "Know, O Wazir, that
when a sovereign buyeth a female slave, he knoweth neither her
rank nor her lineage and thus he cannot tell if she be of simple
origin that he may abstain from her, or of gentle strain that he
may be intimate in her companionship.  So, if he have commerce
with her, haply she will conceive by him and her son be a
hypocrite, a man of wrath and a shedder of blood.  Indeed the
like of such woman may be instanced by a salt and marshy soil,
which if one till for ever it yieldeth only worthless growth and
no endurance show eth; for it may be that her son will be
obnoxious to his Lord's anger, doing not what He biddeth him or
abstaining from what He for biddeth him.  Wherefore will I never
become the cause of this through the purchase of a concubine; and
it is my desire that thou demand for me in marriage the daughter
of some one of the Kings, whose lineage is known and whose
loveliness hath renown.  If thou can direct me to some maiden of
birth and piety of the daughters of Moslem Sovranty, I will ask
her in marriage and wed her in presence of witnesses, so may
accrue to me the favour of the Lord of all Creatures." Said the
Wazir, "O King, verily Allah hath fulfilled thy wish and hath
brought thee to thy desire;" presently adding, "Know, O King, it
hath come to my knowledge that King Zahr Shah,[FN#460] Lord of
the White Land, hath a daughter of surpassing loveliness whose
charms talk and tale fail to express: she hath not her equal in
this age, for she is perfect in proportion and symmetry, black
eyed as if Kohl dyed and long locked, wee of waist and heavy of
hip.  When she draweth nigh she seduceth and when she turneth her
back[FN#461] she slayeth; she ravisheth heart and view and she
looketh even as saith of her the poet,

'A thin waist maid who shames the willow wand; * Nor sun nor moon
     can like her rising shine:
'Tis as her honey dew of lips were blent * With wine, and pearls
     of teeth were bathed in wine:
Her form, like heavenly Houri's, graceful slim; * Fair face; and
     ruin dealt by glancing eyne:
How many a dead done man her eyes have slain * Upon her way of
     love in ruin li'en:
An live I she's my death!  I'll say no more * But dying without
     her vain were life of mine.' "

Now when the Wazir had made an end of describing that maiden, he
said to Sulayman Shah, "It is my counsel, O King, that thou
despatch to her father an ambassador, sagacious, experienced and
trained in the ways of the world, who shall courteously demand
her in marriage for thee of her sire; for in good sooth she hath
not her equal in the far parts of the world nor in the near.  So
shalt thou enjoy her lovely face in the way of grace, and the
Lord of Glory be content with thy case; for it is reported of the
Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!) that he said, 'There be
no monkery in Al-Islam."' At this the King was transported to
perfect joy; his breast was broadened and lightened; care and
cark ceased from him and he turned to the Wazir and said, "Know
thou, O Minister, that none shall fare about this affair save
thou, by reason of thy consummate intelligence and good breeding;
wherefore hie thee home and do all thou hast to do and get thee
ready by the morrow and depart and demand me in marriage this
maiden, with whom thou hast occupied my heart and thought; and
return not to me but with her." Replied the Wazir, "I hear and I
obey." Then he tried to his own house and bade make ready
presents befitting Kings, of precious stones and things of price
and other matters light of load but weighty of worth, besides
Rabite steeds and coats of mail, such as David made[FN#462] and
chests of treasure for which speech hath no measure.  And the
Wazir loaded the whole on camels and mules, and set out attended
by an hundred slave girls with flags and banners flaunting over
his head.  The King charged him to return to him after a few
days; and, when he was gone, Sulayman Shah lay on coals of fire,
engrossed night and day with desire; while the envoy fared on
without ceasing through gloom and light, spanning fertile field
and desert site, till but a day's march remained between him and
the city whereto he was bound.  Here he sat him down on the banks
of a river and, summoning one of his confidants, bade him wend
his way to King Zahr Shah and announce his approach without
delay.  Quoth the messenger, "I hear and I obey!" And he rode on
in haste to that city and, as he was about to enter therein, it
so chanced that the King, who was sitting in one of his
pleasaunces before the city gate, espied him as he was passing
the doors, and knowing him for a stranger, bade bring him before
the presence.  So the messenger coming forward informed him of
the approach of the Wazir of the mighty King Sulayman Shah, Lord
of the Green Land and of the Mountains of Ispahan: whereat King
Zahr Shah rejoiced and welcomed him.  Then he carried him to his
palace and asked him, "Where leavedst thou the Wazir?"; and he
answered, "I left him in early day on the banks of such a river
and tomorrow he will reach thee, Allah continue his favours to
thee and have mercy upon thy parents!" Thereupon King Zahr Shah
commanded one of his Wazirs to take the better part of his
Grandees and Chamberlains and Lieutenants and Lords of the land,
and go out to meet the ambassador in honour of King Sulayman
Shah; for that his dominion extended over the country.  Such was
the case with Zahr Shah; but as regards the Wazir he abode in his
stead till night was half spent[FN#463] and then set out for the
city; but when morning shone and the sun rose upon hill and down,
of a sudden he saw King Zahr Shah's Wazir approaching him, with
his Chamberlains and high Lords and Chief Officers of the
kingdom; and the two parties joined company at some parasangs'
distance from the city.[FN#464]  Thereat the Wazir made sure of
the success of his errand and saluted the escort, which ceased
not preceding him till they reached the King's palace and passed
in before him through the gate to the seventh vestibule, a place
where none might enter on horseback, for it was near to where the
King sat.  So the Minister alighted and fared on a foot till he
came to a lofty saloon, at whose upper end stood a marble couch,
set with pearls and stones of price, and having for legs four
elephant's tusks.  Upon it was a coverlet of green satin purfled
with red gold, and above it hung a canopy adorned with pearls and
gems, whereon sat King Zahr Shah, whilst his officers of state
stood in attendance before him.  When the Wazir went in to him,
he composed his mind and, unbinding his tongue, displayed the
oratory of Wazirs and saluted the King in the language of
eloquence.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say,

         When it was the One Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Wazir of King Sulayman Shah entered the presence of King Zahr
Shah he composed his mind and, unbinding his tongue, displayed
the oratory of Wazirs and saluted the King in the language of
eloquence and improvised these couplets,

"He cometh robed and bending gracefully: * O'er crop and cropper
     dews of grace sheds he:
He charms; nor characts, spells nor gramarye * May fend the
     glances of those eyne from thee:
Say to the blamer, "Blame me not, for I * From love of him will
     never turn to flee":
My heart hath played me false while true to him, * And Sleep, in
     love with him, abhorreth me:
O heart!  th'art not the sole who loveth him, * So bide with him
     while I desertion dree:
There's nought to joy mine ears with joyous sound * Save praise
     of King Zahr Shah in jubilee:
A King albeit thou leave thy life to win * One look, that look
     were all sufficiency:
And if a pious prayer thou breathe for him, * Shall join all
     Faithfuls in such pious gree:
Folk of his realm!  If any shirk his right * For other hoping,
     gross Unfaith I see."

When the Wazir had ended his poetry, King Zahr Shah bade him draw
near and honoured him with the highmost honours; then, seating
him by his own side, smiled in his face and favoured him with a
gracious reply.  They ceased not on this wise till the time of
the under meal when the attendants brought forward the tables of
food in that saloon and all ate till they were sated; after which
the tables were removed and those who were in the assembly
withdrew, leaving only the chief officers.  Now when the Minister
saw this, he rose to his feet and, after complimenting the King a
second time and kissing the ground before him, spake as follows,
"O mighty King and dread Lord!  I have travelled hither and have
visited thee upon a matter which shall bring thee peace, profit
and prosperity: and it is this, that I come as ambassador to
thee, seeking in marriage thy daughter, the noble and illustrious
maid, from Sulayman Shah, a Prince famed for justice and
integrity, sincerity and generosity, Lord of the Green Land and
of the Mountains of Ispahan, who sendeth thee of presents a
store, and gifts of price galore, ardently desiring to become thy
son in law.  But art thou inclined to him as he to thee?" He then
kept silence, awaiting a reply.  When King Zahr Shah heard these
words, he sprang to his feet and kissed the ground respectfully
before the Wazir, while the bystanders were confounded at his
condescension to the ambassador and their minds were amazed. 
Then he praised Him who is the Lord of Honour and Glory and
replied (and he still standing), "O mighty Wazir and illustrious
Chief; hear thou what I say!  Of a truth we are to King Sulayman
Shah of the number of his subjects, and we shall be ennobled by
his alliance and we covet it ardently; for my daughter is a
handmaid of his handmaidens, and it is my dearest desire that he
may become my stay and my reliable support." Then he summoned the
Kazis and the witnesses, who should bear testimony that King
Sulayman Shah had despatched his Wazir as proxy to conclude the
marriage, and that King Zahr Shah joyfully acted and officiated
for his daughter.  So the Kazis concluded the wedding contract
and offered up prayers for the happiness and prosperity of the
wedded feres; after which the Wazir arose and, fetching the gifts
and rarities and precious things, laid them all before the King. 
Then Zahr Shah occupied himself anent the fitting out of his
daughter and honourably entertained the Wazir and feasted his
subjects all, great and small; and for two months they held high
festival, omitting naught that could rejoice heart and eye.  Now
when all things needful for the bride were ready, the King caused
the tents to be carried out and they pitched the camp within
sight of the city, where they packed the bride's stuffs in chests
and get ready the Greek handmaids and Turkish slave girls, and
provided the Princess with great store of precious treasures and
costly jewels.  Then he had made for her a litter of red gold,
inlaid with pearls and stones of price, and set apart two mules
to carry it; a litter which was like one of the chambers of a
palace, and within which she seemed as she were of the loveliest
Houris and it became as one of the pavilions of Paradise.  And
after they had made bales of the treasures and monies, and had
loaded them upon the mules and camels, King Zahr Shah went forth
with her for a distance of three parasangs; after which he bade
farewell to her and the Wazir and those with him, and returned to
his home in gladness and safety.  Thereupon the Wazir, faring
with the King's daughter, pushed on and ceased not his stages
over desert ways,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
fared on with the King's daughter and ceased not forcing his
stages over desert ways and hastened his best through nights and
days, till there remained between him and his city but three
marches.  Thereupon he sent forward to King Sulayman Shah one who
should announce the coming of the bride.  The King rejoiced
thereat and bestowed on the messenger a dress of honour; and bade
his troops march forth in grand procession to meet the Princess
and her company for due worship and honour, and don their richest
apparel with banners flying over their heads.  And his orders
were obeyed.  He also commanded to cry throughout the city that
neither curtained damsel nor honoured lady nor time-ruptured
crone should fail to fare forth and meet the bride.  So they all
went out to greet her and the grandest of them vied in doing her
service and they agreed to bring her to the King's palace by
night.  More over, the chief officers decided to decorate the
road and to stand in espalier of double line, whilst the bride
should pass by preceded by her eunuchs and serving women and clad
in the gear her father had given her.  So when she made her
appearance, the troops surrounded her, these of the right wing
and those of the left, and the litter ceased not advancing with
her till she approached the palace; nor remained any but came
forth to gaze upon the Princess.  Drums were beaten and spears
were brandished and horns blared and flags fluttered and steeds
pranced for precedence and scents shed fragrance till they
reached the Palace gate and the pages entered with the litter
through the Harim wicket.  The place shone with its splendours
and the walls glittered for the glamour of its gear.  Now when
night came, the eunuchs threw open the doors of the bridal
chamber and stood surrounding the chief entrance whereupon the
bride came forward and amid her damsels she was like the moon
among stars or an union shining on a string of lesser pearls, and
she passed into the bridal closet where they had set for her a
couch of alabaster inlaid with unions and jewels.  As soon as she
had taken seat there, the King came in to her and Allah filled
his heart with her love so he abated her maidenhead and ceased
from him his trouble and disquiet.  He abode with her well nigh a
month but she had conceived by him the first night; and, when the
month was ended, he went forth and sat on his sofa of state, and
dispensed justice to his subjects, till the months of her
pregnancy were accomplished.  On the last day of the ninth month,
towards day break, the Queen was seized with the pangs of labour;
so she sat down on the stool of delivery and Allah made the
travail easy to her and she gave birth to a boy child, on whom
appeared auspicious signs.  When the King heard of this, he joyed
with exceeding joy and rewarded the bearer of the good tidings
with much treasure; and of his gladness he went in to the child
and kissed him between the eyes and wondered at his brilliant
loveliness; for in him was approved the saying of the poet,

"In the towering forts Allah throned him King, * A lion, a star
     in the skies of reign:
At his rising the spear and the throne rejoiced, * The gazelle,
     the ostrich, The men of main:[FN#465]
Mount him not on the paps, for right soon he'll show * That to
     throne on the war steed's loins he's fain:
And wean him from sucking of milk, for soon * A sweeter drink,
     the foe's blood, he'll drain."

Then the midwives took the newborn child and cut the navel cord
and darkened his eyelids with Kohl powder[FN#466] and named him
Táj al-Mulúk Khárán.[FN#467]  He was suckled at the breast of
fond indulgence and was reared in the lap of happy fortune; and
thus his days ceased not running and the years passing by till he
reached the age of seven.  Thereupon Sulayman Shah summoned the
doctors and learned men and bade them teach his son writing and
science and belle-lettres.  This they continued to do for some
years, till he had learnt what was needful; and, when the King
saw that he was well grounded in whatso he desired, he took him
out of the teachers' and professors' hands and engaged for him a
skilful master, who taught him cavalarice and knightly exercises
till the boy attained the age of fourteen; and when he fared
abroad on any occasion, all who saw him were ravished by his
beauty and made him the subject of verse; and even pious men were
seduced by his brilliant loveliness.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, That when Taj
al-Muluk Kharan, son of Sulayman Shah, became perfect in riding
craft and excelled all those of his time, his excessive beauty,
when he fared abroad on any occasion, caused all who saw him to
be ravished and to make him the subject of verse; and even pious
men were seduced by his brilliant loveliness.  Quoth the poet of
him,

"I clipt his form and wax'd drunk with his scent, * Fair branch
     to whom Zephyr gave nutriment:
Nor drunken as one who drinks wine, but drunk * With night
     draught his lips of the honey dew lent:
All beauty is shown in the all of him, * Hence all human hearts
     he in hand hath hens:
My mind, by Allah!  shall ne'er unmind * His love, while I wear
     life's chains till spent:
If I live, in his love I'll live; if I die * For pine and
     longing, 'O blest!' I'll cry

When he reached the eighteenth year of his age, tender
down[FN#468] sprouted, on his side face fresh with youth, from a
mole upon one rosy cheek and a second beauty spot, like a grain
of ambergris adorned the other; and he won the wits and eyes of
every wight who looked on him, even as saith the poet,

"He is Caliph of Beauty in Yúsufs lieu, * And all lovers fear
     when they sight his grace:
Pause and gaze with me; on his cheek thou'lt sight * The
     Caliphate's banner of sable hue."[FN#469]

And as saith another,

"Thy sight hath never seen a fairer sight, * Of all things men
     can in the world espy,
Than yon brown mole, that studs his bonny cheek * Of rosy red
     beneath that jet black eye."

And as saith another,

"I marvel seeing yon mole that serves his cheeks' bright flame *
     Yet burneth not in fire albeit Infidel[FN#470]
I wonder eke to see that apostolic glance, * Miracle working,
     though it work by magic spell:
How fresh and bright the down that decks his cheek, and yet *
     Bursten gall bladders feed which e'en as waters well."

And as saith another,

"I marvel hearing people questioning of * The Fount of Life and
     in what land 'tis found:
I see it sprung from lips of dainty fawn, * Sweet rosy mouth with
     green mustachio down'd:
And wondrous wonder 'tis when Moses viewed * That Fount, he
     rested not from weary round."[FN#471]

Now having developed such beauty, when he came to man's estate
his loveliness increased, and it won for him many comrades and
intimates; while every one who drew near to him wished that Taj
al-Muluk Kharan might become Sultan after his father's death, and
that he himself might be one of his Emirs.  Then took he
passionately to chasing and hunting which he would hardly leave
for a single hour.  His father, King Sulayman Shah, would have
forbidden him the pursuit fearing for him the perils of the waste
and the wild beasts; but he paid no heed to his warning voice. 
And it so chanced that once upon a time he said to his attendants
"Take ye ten days food and forage;" and, when they obeyed his
bidding, he set out with his suite for sport and disport.  They
rode on into the desert and ceased not riding four days, till
they came to a place where the ground was green, and they saw in
it wild beasts grazing and trees with ripe fruit growing and
springs flowing.  Quoth Taj al-Muluk to his followers, "Set up
the nets here and peg them in a wide ring and let our trysting
place be at the mouth of the fence, in such a spot." So they
obeyed his words and staked out a wide circle with toils; and
there gathered together a mighty matter of all kinds of wild
beasts and gazelles, which cried out for fear of the men and
threw themselves for fright in the face of the horses.  Then they
loosed on to them the hounds and lynxes[FN#472] and
hawks;[FN#473] and they shot the quarry down with shafts which
pierced their vitals; and, by the time they came to the further
end of the net ring, they had taken a great number of the wild
beasts, and the rest fled.  Then Taj al-Muluk dismounted by the
water side and bade the game be brought before himself, and
divided it, after he had set apart the best of the beasts for his
father, King Sulayman Shah, and despatched the game to him; and
some he distributed among the officers of his court.  He passed
the night in that place, and when morning dawned there came up a
caravan of merchants conveying negro slaves and white servants,
and halted by the water and the green ground.  When Taj al-Muluk
saw them, he said to one of his companions, "Bring me news of
yonder men and question them why they have halted in this
place."[FN#474]  So the messenger went up to them and addressed
them, "Tell me who ye be, and answer me an answer without delay."
Replied they, "We are merchants and have halted to rest, for that
the next station is distant and we abide here because we have
confidence in King Sulayman Shah and his son, Taj al-Muluk, and
we know that all who alight in his dominions are in peace and
safety; more over we have with us precious stuffs which we have
brought for the Prince." So the messenger returned and told these
news to the King's son who, hearing the state of the case and
what the merchants had replied, said, "If they have brought stuff
on my account I will not enter the city nor depart hence till I
see it shown to me." Then he mounted horse and rode to the
caravan and his Mamelukes followed him till he reached it. 
Thereupon the merchants rose to receive him and invoked on him
Divine aid and favour with continuance of glory and virtues;
after which they pitched him a pavilion of red satin, embroidered
with pearls and jewels, wherein they spread him a kingly divan
upon a silken carpet worked at the upper end with emeralds set in
gold.  There Taj al-Muluk seated himself whilst his white
servants stood in attendance upon him, and sent to bid the
merchants bring out all that they had with them.  Accordingly,
they produced their merchandise, and displayed the whole and he
viewed it and took of it what liked him, paying them the price. 
Then he looked about him at the caravan, and remounted and was
about to ride onwards, when his glance fell on a handsome youth
in fair attire, and a comely and shapely make, with flower white
brow and moon like face, save that his beauty was wasted and that
yellow hues had overspread his cheeks by reason of parting from
those he loved;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Taj Al-
Muluk, when he looked about him at the caravan, saw a handsome
youth in neat attire and of shapely make, with flower like
forehead and moon like face, save that his beauty was wasted and
yellow hues had overspread his cheeks by reason of parting from
those he loved; and great was his groaning and moaning, and the
tears streamed from his eyelids as he repeated these couplets,

"Longsome is Absence; Care and Fear are sore, * And ceaseless
     tears, O friend, mine eyes outpour:
Yea, I farewelled my heart on parting day * And heartless,
     hopeless, now I bide forlore:
Pause, O my friend, with me farewelling one * Whose words my cure
     can work, my health restore!"

Now when the youth ended his poetry he wept awhile and fell down
in a fainting fit, whilst Taj al-Muluk looked at him and wondered
at his case.  Then, coming to himself, he stared with distracted
air, and versified in these couplets,

"Beware her glance I rede thee, 'tis like wizard wight, * None
     can escape unscathed those eye shafts' glancing flight:
In very sooth black eyes, with languorous sleepy look, * Pierce
     deeper than white swords however these may bite.
Be not thy senses by her sweets of speech beguiled, * Whose
     brooding fever shall ferment in thought and sprite:
Soft sided Fair[FN#475] did silk but press upon her skin, *
     'Twould draw red blood from it, as thou thyself canst sight.
Chary is she of charms twixt neck and anklets dwell, * And ah!
     what other scent shall cause me such delight?[FN#476]"

Then he sobbed a loud sob and swooned away.  But when Taj al-
Muluk saw him in this case, he was perplexed about his state and
went up to him; and, as the youth came to his senses and saw the
King's son standing at his head, he sprang to his feet and kissed
the ground between his hands.  Taj al-Muluk asked him, 'Why didst
thou not show us thy merchandise?" end he answered, O my lord,
there is naught among my stock worthy of thine august highness."
Quoth the Prince, "Needs must thou show me what thou hast and
acquaint me with thy circumstance; for I see thee weeping eyed
and heavyhearted.  If thou have been oppressed, we will end thine
oppression, and if thou be in debt, we will pay thy debt; for of
a truth my heart burneth to see thee, since I first set eyes on
thee."[FN#477]  Then Taj al-Muluk bade the seats be set, and they
brought him a chair of ivory and ebony with a net work of gold
and silk, and spread him a silken rug for his feet.  So he sat
down on the chair and bidding the youth seat himself on the rug
said to him, "Show me thy stock in trade!" The young merchant
replied, "O my Lord, do not name this to me, for my goods be
unworthy of thee." Rejoined Taj al-Muluk "It needs must be
thus!"; and bade some of the pages fetch the goods.  So they
brought them in despite of him; and, when he saw them, the tears
streamed from his eyes and he wept and sighed and lamented: sobs
rose in his throat and he repeated these couplets,

"By what thine eyelids show of Kohl and coquetry!  * By what thy
     shape displays of lissome symmetry!
By what thy liplets store of honey dew and wine!  * By what thy
     mind adorns of gracious kindly gree!
To me thy sight dream-visioned, O my hope!  exceeds * The
     happiest escape from horriblest injury."

Then the youth opened his bales and displayed his merchandise to
Taj Al-Muluk in detail, piece by piece, and amongst them he
brought out a gown of satin brocaded with gold, worth two
thousand dinars.  When he opened the gown there fell a piece of
linen from its folds.  As soon as the young merchant saw this he
caught up the piece of linen in haste and hid it under his thigh;
and his reason wandered, and he began versifying,

"When shall be healed of thee this heart that ever bides in woe?
      * Than thee the Pleiad-stars more chance of happy meeting
     show
Parting and banishment and longing pain and lowe of love, *
     Procrastinating[FN#478] and delay these ills my life lay
     low:
Nor union bids me live in joy, nor parting kills by grief, * Nor
     travel draws me nearer thee nor nearer comest thou:
Of thee no justice may be had, in thee dwells naught of rush, *
     Nor gain of grace by side of thee, nor flight from thee I
     know:
For love of thee all goings forth and comings back are strait *
     On me, and I am puzzled sore to know where I shall go."

Taj al-Muluk wondered with great wonder at his verse, and could
not comprehend the cause.  But when the youth snatched up the bit
of linen and placed it under thigh, he asked him, "What is that
piece of linen?" "O my Lord," answered the merchant, "thou hast
no concern with this piece." Quoth the King's son, "Show it me;"
and quoth the merchant, "O my lord, I refused to show thee my
goods on account of this piece of linen; for I cannot let thee
look upon it."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say,

         When it was the One Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant said to Taj al-Muluk, "I did not refuse to show thee my
goods save on this account, for I cannot let thee look upon it."
Whereupon Taj al Muluk retorted, "Perforce I must and will see
it;" and insisted and became angry.  So the youth drew it out
from under his thigh, and wept and moaned and redoubled his sighs
and groans, and repeated these verses,

"Now blame him not; for blame brings only irk and pain! * Indeed,
     I spake him sooth but ne'er his ear could gain:
May Allah guard my moon which riseth in the vale * Beside our
     camp, from loosed robe like skyey plain:[FN#479]
I left him but had Love vouchsafed to leave for me * Some peace
     in life such leave of him I ne'er had ta'en:
How long he pleaded for my sake on parting morn, * While down his
     cheeks and mine tears ran in railing rain:
Allah belie me not: the garb of mine excuse * This parting rent,
     but I will Mend that garb again!
No couch is easy to my side, nor on such wise * Aught easeth him,
     when all alone without me lain:
Time with ill omened hand hath wrought between us two, * And made
     my waxing joys to wane and his to wane,
And poured mere grief and woe, what time Time fain had crowned *
     The bowl he made me drink and gave for him to drain."

When he ended his recitation, quoth Taj al-Muluk, "I see thy
conduct without consequence; tell me then why weepest thou at the
sight of this rag!" When the young merchant heard speak of the
piece of linen, he sighed and answered, "O my lord, my story is a
strange and my case out of range, with regard to this piece of
linen and to her from whom I brought it and to her who wrought on
it these figures and emblems." Hereupon, he spread out the piece
of linen, and behold, thereon was the figure of a gazelle wrought
in silk and worked with red gold, and facing it was another
gazelle traced in silver with a neck ring of red gold and three
bugles[FN#480] of chrysolite upon the ring.  When Taj al-Muluk
saw the beauty of these figures, he exclaimed, "Glory be to Allah
who teacheth man that which he knoweth not!"[FN#481]  And his
heart yearned to hear the youth's story; so he said to him, "Tell
me thy story with her who owned these gazelles." Replied the
young man: "Hear, O my Lord, the





 Tale of Aziz and Azizah.[FN#482]



My father was a wealthy merchant and Allah had vouchsafed him no
other child than myself; but I had a cousin, Azízah highs,
daughter of my paternal uncle and we twain were brought up in one
house; for her father was dead and before his death, he had
agreed with my father that I should marry her.  So when I reached
man's estate and she reached womanhood, they did not separate her
from me or me from her, till at last my father spoke to my mother
and said, "This very year we will draw up the contract of
marriage between Aziz and Azizah." So having agreed upon this he
betook himself to preparing provision for the wedding feast. 
Still we ceased not to sleep on the same carpet knowing naught of
the case, albeit she was more thoughtful, more intelligent and
quicker witted than I.  Now when my father had made an end of his
preparations, and naught remained for him but to write out the
contract and for me but to consummate the marriage with my
cousin, he appointed the wedding for a certain Friday, after
public prayers; and, going round to his intimates among the mer
chants and others, he acquainted them with that, whilst my mother
went forth and invited her women friends and summoned her kith
and kin.  When the Friday came, they cleaned the saloon and
prepared for the guests and washed the marble floor; then they
spread tapestry about our house and set out thereon what was
needful, after they had hung its walls with cloth of gold.  Now
the folk had agreed to come to us after the Friday prayers; so my
father went out and bade them make sweetmeats and sugared dishes,
and there remained nothing to do but to draw up the contract. 
Then my mother sent me to the bath and sent after me a suit of
new clothes of the richest; and, when I came out of the Hammam, I
donned those habits which were so perfumed that as I went along,
there exhaled from them a delicious fragrance scenting the
wayside.  I had designed to repair to the Cathedral mosque when I
bethought me of one of my friends and returned in quest of him
that he might be present at the writing of the contract; and
quoth I to myself, "This matter will occupy me till near the time
of congregational prayer." So I went on and entered a by street
which I had never before entered, perspiring profusely from the
effects of the bath and the new clothes on my body; and the sweat
streamed down whilst the scents of my dress were wafted abroad: I
therefore sat me at the upper end of the street resting on a
stone bench, after spreading under me an embroidered kerchief I
had with me.  The heat oppressed me more and more, making my
forehead perspire and the drops trickled along my cheeks; but I
could not wipe my face with my kerchief because it was dispread
under me.  I was about to take the skirt of my robe and wipe my
cheeks with it, when unexpectedly there fell on me from above a
white kerchief, softer to the touch than the morning breeze and
pleasanter to the sight than healing to the diseased.  I hent it
in hand and raised my head to see whence it had fallen, when my
eyes met the eyes of the lady who owned these gazelles.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say

       When it was the One Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
continued to Taj al-Muluk: "So I raised my head to see whence
this kerchief had fallen, when my eyes met those of the lady who
owned these gazelles.  And lo! she was looking out of a wicket in
a lattice of brass and never saw my eyes a fairer than she, and
in fine my tongue faileth to describe her beauty.  When she
caught sight of me looking at her, she put her forefinger into
her mouth, then joined her middle finger and her witness
finger[FN#483] and laid them on her bosom, between her breasts;
after which she drew in her head and closed the wicket shutter
and went her ways.  There upon fire broke out in and was heaped
upon my heart, and greater grew my smart; the one sight cost me a
thousand sighs and I abode perplexed, for that I heard no word by
her spoken, nor understood the meaning of her token.  I looked at
the window a second time, but found it shut and waited patiently
till sundown, but sensed no sound and saw no one in view.  So
when I despaired of seeing her again, I rose from my place and
taking up the handkerchief, opened it, when there breathed from
it a scent of musk which caused me so great delight I became as
one in Paradise.[FN#484] Then I spread it before me and out
dropped from it a delicate little scroll; whereupon I opened the
paper which was perfumed with a delicious perfume, and therein
were writ these couplets,

"I sent to him a scroll that bore my plaint of love, * Writ in
     fine delicate hand; for writing proves man's skill:
Then quoth to me my friend, 'Why is thy writing thus; * So fine,
     so thin drawn 'tis to read unsuitable?'
Quoth I, 'for that I'm fine-drawn wasted, waxed thin, * Thus
     lovers' writ Should be, for so Love wills his will.

And after casting my eyes on the beauty of the kerchief,[FN#485]
I saw upon one of its two borders the following couplets worked
in with the needle,

"His cheek down writeth (O fair fall the goodly scribe!) * Two
     lines on table of his face in Rayhán-hand:[FN#486]
O the wild marvel of the Moon when comes he forth!  * And when he
     bends, O shame to every Willow wand!"

And on the opposite border these two couplets were traced,

"His cheek down writeth on his cheek with ambergris on pearl *
     Two lines, like jet on apple li'en, the goodliest design:
Slaughter is in those languid eyne whene'er a glance they deal, *
     And drunkenness in either cheek and not in any wine."

When I read the poetry on the handkerchief the flames of love
darted into my heart, and yearning and pining redoubled their
smart.  So I took the kerchief and the scroll and went home,
knowing no means to win my wish, for that I was incapable of
conducting love affairs and inexperienced in interpreting hints
and tokens.  Nor did I reach my home ere the night was far spent
and I found the daughter of my uncle sitting in tears.  But as
soon as she saw me she wiped away the drops and came up to me,
and took off my walking dress and asked me the reason of my
absence, saying, "All the folk, Emirs and notables and merchants
and others, assembled in our house; and the Kazi and the
witnesses were also present at the appointed time.  They ate and
tarried awhile sitting to await thine appearance for the writing
of the contract; and, when they despaired of thy presence, they
dispersed and went their ways.  And indeed," she added, "thy
father raged with exceeding wrath by reason of this, and swore
that he would not celebrate our marriage save during the coming
year, for that he hath spent on these festivities great store of
money." And she ended by asking, "What hath befallen thee this
day to make thee delay till now?; and why hast thou allowed that
to happen which happened because of thine absence?" Answered I,
"O daughter of mine uncle, question me not concerning what hath
befallen me."[FN#487] Then I told her all that had passed from
beginning to end, and showed her the handkerchief.  She took the
scroll and read what was written therein; and tears ran down her
cheeks and she repeated these cinquains,

"Who saith that Love at first of free will came, * Say him: Thou
     liest!  Love be grief and grame:
Yet shall such grame and grief entail no shame; * All annals
     teach us one thing and the same
        Good current coin clips coin we may not crepe!

An please thou, say there's pleasure in thy pain, * Find
     Fortune's playful gambols glad and fain:
Or happy blessings in th' unhappy's bane, * That joy or grieve,
     with equal might and main:
        Twixt phrase and antiphrase I'm all a heap!

But he, withal, whose days are summer bright, * Whom maids e'er
     greet with smiling lips' delight;
Whom spicey breezes fan in every site * And wins whate'er he
     wills, that happy wight
        White blooded coward heart should never keep!"

Then she asked me, "What said she, and what signs made she to
thee?" I answered, "She uttered not a word, but put her fore
finger in her mouth, then joining it to her middle finger, laid
both fingers on her bosom and pointed to the ground.  Thereupon
she withdrew her head and shut the wicket; and after that I saw
her no more.  However, she took my heart with her, so I sat till
sun down, expecting her again to look out of the window; but she
did it not; and, when I despaired of her, I rose from my seat and
came home.  This is my history and I beg thee to help me in this
my sore calamity." Upon this she raised her face to me and said,
"O son of mine uncle, if thou soughtest my eye, I would tear it
for thee from its eyelids, and perforce I cannot but aid thee to
thy desire and aid her also to her desire; for she is whelmed in
passion for thee even as thou for her." Asked I, "And what is the
interpretation of her signs?"; and Azizah answered, "As for the
putting her finger in her mouth,[FN#488] it showed that thou art
to her as her soul to her body and that she would bite into union
with thee with her wisdom teeth.  As for the kerchief, it
betokeneth that her breath of life is bound up in thee.  As for
the placing her two fingers on her bosom between her breasts, its
explanation is that she saith; 'The sight of thee may dispel my
grief.' For know, O my cousin, that she loveth thee and she
trusteth in thee.  This is my interpretation of her signs and,
could I come and go at Will, I would bring thee and her together
in shortest time, and curtain you both with my skirt." Hearing
these words I thanked her (continued the young merchant) for
speaking thus, and said to myself, "I will wait two days." So I
abode two days in the house, neither going out nor coming in;
neither eating nor drinking but I laid my head on my cousin's
lap, whilst she comforted me and said to me, "Be resolute and of
good heart and hope for the best!"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say,

       When it was the One Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
pursued to Taj al-Muluk:--"And when the two days were past she
said to me, "Be of good cheer and clear thine eyes of tears and
take courage to dress thyself and go to her, according to thy
tryst." Then she rose and changed my clothes and perfumed me with
incense smoke.  So I braced myself up and heartened my heart and
went out and walked on till I came to the by-street, where I sat
down on the bench awhile.  And behold, the wicket suddenly opened
and I looked up and seeing her, fell down in a swoon.  When I
revived, I called up resolution and took courage and gazed again
at her and again became insensible to the world around me.  Then
I came to myself and looking at her, saw that she held in hand a
mirror and a red kerchief.  Now when she caught my glance, she
bared her forearms and opened her five fingers and smote her
breast with palm and digits; and after this she raised her hands
and, holding the mirror outside the wicket, she took the red
kerchief and retired into the room with it, but presently
returned and putting out her hand with the kerchief, let it down
towards the lane three several times, dipping it and raising it
as often.  Then she wrung it out and folded it in her hands,
bending down her head the while; after which she drew it in from
the lattice and, shutting the wicket shutter, went away without a
single word; nay, she left me confounded and knowing not what
signified her signs.[FN#489].  I tarried sitting there till
supper time and did not return home till near midnight; and there
I found the daughter of my uncle with her cheek props in her hand
and her eyelids pouring forth tears; and she was repeating these
couplets,

"Woe's me! why should the blamer gar thee blaming bow?  * How be
     consoled for thee that art so tender bough?
Bright being! on my vitals cost thou prey, and drive * My heart
     before platonic passion's[FN#490] force to bow.
Thy Turk like[FN#491] glances havoc deal in core of me, * As
     furbished sword thin ground at curve could never show:
Thou weigh's" me down with weight of care, while I have not *
     Strength e'en to bear my shift, so weakness lays me low:
Indeed I weep blood tears to hear the blamer say; * 'The lashes
     of thy lover's eyne shall pierce thee through!'
Thou hast, my prince of loveliness! an Overseer,[FN#492] * Who
     wrongs me, and a Groom[FN#493] who beats me down with brow.
He foully lies who says all loveliness belonged * To Joseph, in
     thy loveliness is many a Joe:
I force myself to turn from thee, in deadly fright * Of spies;
     and what the force that turns away my sight!"

When I heard her verse, cark increased and care redoubled on me
and I fell down in a corner of our house; whereupon she arose in
haste and, coming to me lifted me up and took off my outer
clothes and wiped my face with her sleeve.  Then she asked me
what had befallen me, and I described all that had happened from
her.  Quoth she, "O my cousin, as for her sign to thee with her
palm and five fingers its interpretation is, Return after five
days; and the putting forth of her head out of the window, and
her gestures with the mirror and the letting down and raising up
and wringing out of the red kerchief,[FN#494] signify, Sit in the
dyer's shop till my messenger come to thee." When I heard her
words fire flamed up in my heart and I exclaimed, "O daughter of
my uncle, thou sayest sooth in this thine interpretation; for I
saw in the street the shop of a Jew dyer." Then I wept, and she
said, "Be of good cheer and strong heart: of a truth others are
occupied with love for years and endure with constancy the ardour
of passion, whilst thou hast but a week to wait; why then this
impatience?" Thereupon she went on cheering me with comfortable
talk and brought me food: so I took a mouthful and tried to eat
but could not; and I abstained from meat and drink and estranged
myself from the solace of sleep, till my colour waxed yellow and
I lost my good looks; for I had never been in love before nor had
I ever savoured the ardour of passion save this time.  So I fell
sick and my cousin also sickened on my accoun