t; but she would
relate to me, by way of consolation, stories of love and lovers
every night till I fell asleep; and when ever I awoke, I found
her wakeful for my sake with tears running down her cheeks.  This
ceased not till the five days were past, when my cousin rose and
warmed some water and bathed me with it.  Then she dressed me in
my best and said to me, "Repair to her and Allah fulfil thy wish
and bring thee to thy desire of thy beloved!" So I went out and
ceased not walking on till I came to the upper end of the by
street.  As it was the Sabbath[FN#495] I found the dyer's shop
locked and sat before it, till I heard the call to mid afternoon
prayer.  Then the sun yellowed and the Mu'ezzins[FN#496] chanted
the call to sundown prayer and the night came; but I saw no sign
nor heard one word, nor knew any news of her.  So I feared for my
life sitting there alone; and at last I arose and walked home
reeling like a drunken man.  When I reached the house, I found my
cousin Azizah standing, with one hand grasping a peg driven into
the wall and the other on her breast; and she was sighing and
groaning and repeating these couplets,

"The longing of an Arab lass forlorn of kith and kin * (Who to
     Hijazian willow wand and myrtle[FN#497] cloth incline,
And who, when meeting caravan, shall with love-lowe set light *
     To bivouac fire, and bang for conk her tears of pain and
     pine)
Exceeds not mine for him nor more devotion shows, but he * Seeing
     my heart is wholly his spurns love as sin indign."

Now when she had finished her verse she turned to me and, seeing
me, wiped away her tears and my tears with her sleeve.  Then she
smiled in my face and said, "O my cousin, Allah grant thee
enjoyment of that which He hath given thee!  Why didst thou not
pass the night by the side of thy beloved and why hast thou not
fulfilled thy desire of her?" When I heard her words, I gave her
a kick in the breast and she fell down in the saloon and her brow
struck upon the edge of the raised pavement and hit against a
wooden peg therein.  I looked at her and saw that her forehead
was cut open and the blood running,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: "Now when I kicked the
daughter of my uncle in the breast she fell on the edge of the
raised pavement in the saloon and her brow struck upon a wooden
peg.  Thereby her forehead was cut open and the blood ran down,
but she was silent and did not utter a single sound.[FN#498] 
Presently she rose up, and made some tinder of rags, then
staunching with it the bleeding wound, bound her forehead with a
bandage; after which she wiped up the blood that had fallen on
the carpet, and it was as if nothing had been.  Presently she
came up to me and smiling in my face, said with gentle voice, "By
Allah, O son of my uncle, I spake not these words to mock at thee
or at her!  But I was troubled with an ache in my head and was
minded to be blooded, but now thou hast eased my head and
lightened my brow; so tell me what hath befallen thee to day."
Thereupon I told her all that had passed between me and her that
day; and she wept as she heard my words and said, "O son of my
uncle, rejoice at the good tidings of thy desire being fulfilled
and thine aim being attained.  Of a truth this is a sign of
acceptance; for that she stayed away only because she wisheth to
try thee and know if thou be patient or not, and sincere in thy
love for her or otherwise.  Tomorrow, repair to her at the old
place and see what sign she maketh to thee; for indeed thy
gladness is near and the end of thy sadness is at hand." And she
went on to comfort me; but my cark and care ceased not to
increase on me.  Presently she brought me food which I kicked
away with my foot so that the contents of every saucer were
scattered in all directions, and I said, "Every lover is a
madman; he inclineth not to food neither enjoyeth he sleep." And
my cousin Azizah rejoined, "By Allah, O son of my uncle, these be
in very deed the signs of love!" And the tears streamed down her
cheeks whenas she gathered the fragments of the saucers and wiped
up the food; then she took seat and talked to me, whilst I prayed
Allah to hasten the dawn.  At last, when morning arose with its
sheen and shine, I went out to seek her and hastening to her by
street sat down on that bench, when lo!  the wicket opened and
she put out her head laughing.  Then she disappeared within and
returned with a mirror, a bag; and a pot full of green plants and
she held in hand a lamp.  The first thing she did was to take the
mirror and, putting it into the bag, tie it up and throw it back
into the room; then she let down her hair over her face and set
the lamp on the pot of flowers during the twinkling of an eye;
then she took up all the things and went away shutting the window
without saying a word.  My heart was riven by this state of the
case, and by her secret signals, her mysterious secrets and her
utter silence; and thereby my longing waxed more violent and my
passion and distraction redoubled on me.  So I retraced my steps,
tearful-eyed and heavy hearted, and returned home, where I found
the daughter of my uncle sitting with her face to the wall; for
her heart was burning with grief and galling jealousy; albeit her
affection forbade her to acquaint me with what she suffered of
passion and pining when she saw the excess of my longing and
distraction.  Then I looked at her and saw on her head two
bandages, one on account of the accident to her forehead and the
other over her eye in consequence of the pain she endured for
stress of weeping; and she was in miserable plight shedding tears
and repeating these couplets,

"I number nights; indeed I count night after night; * Yet lived I
     long ere learnt so sore accompt to see, ah!
Dear friend, I compass not what Allah pleased to doom * For
     Laylá, nor what Allah destined for me, ah!
To other giving her and unto me her love, * What loss but Layla's
     loss would He I ever dree, ah!"

And when she had finished her reciting, she looked towards me and
seeing me through her tears, wiped them away and came up to me
hastily, but could not speak for excess of love.  So she remained
silent for some while and then said, "O my cousin, tell me what
befel thee with her this time." I told her all that had passed
and she said, "Be patient, for the time of thy union is come and
thou hast attained the object of thy hopes.  As for her signal to
thee with the mirror which she put in the bag, it said to thee,
When the sun is set; and the letting down of her hair over her
face signified, When night is near and letteth fall the blackness
of the dark and hath starkened the daylight, come hither.  As for
her gesture with the pot of green plants it meant, When thou
comest, enter the flower garden which is behind the street; and
as for her sign with the lamp it denoted, When thou enterest the
flower garden walk down it and make for the place where thou
seest the lamp shining; and seat thyself beneath it and await me;
for the love of thee is killing me." When I heard these words
from my cousin, I cried out from excess of passion and said, "How
long wilt thou promise me and I go to her, but get not my will
nor find any true sense in thine interpreting." Upon this she
laughed and replied, "It remaineth for thee but to have patience
during the rest of this day till the light darken and the night
starker and thou shalt enjoy union and accomplish thy hopes; and
indeed all my words be without leasing." Then she repeated these
two couplets,

"Let days their folds and plies deploy, * And shun the house that
     deals annoy!
Full oft when joy seems farthest far * Thou nighmost art to hour
     of joy."'

Then she drew near to me and began to comfort me with soothing
speech, but dared not bring me aught of food, fearing lest I be
angry with her and hoping I might incline to her; so when coming
to me she only took off my upper garment and said to me, "Sit O
my cousin, that I may divert thee with talk till the end of the
day and, Almighty Allah willing, as soon as it is night thou
shalt be with thy beloved." But I paid no heed to her and ceased
not looking for the approach of darkness, saying, "O Lord, hasten
the coming of the night!" And when night set in, the daughter of
my uncle wept with sore weeping and gave me a crumb of pure musk,
and said to me, "O my cousin, put this crumb in thy mouth, and
when thou hast won union with thy beloved and hast taken thy will
of her and she hath granted thee thy desire, repeat to her this
couplet,

'Ho, lovers all!  by Allah say me sooth * What shall he do when
     love sore vexeth youth?'"[FN#499]

And she kissed me and swore me not to repeat this couplet till I
should be about to leave my lover and I said, "Hearing is
obeying!" And when it was supper-tide I went out and ceased not
walking on till I came to the flower garden whose door I found
open.  So I entered and, seeing a light in the distance, made
towards it and reaching it, came to a great pavilion vaulted over
with a dome of ivory and ebony, and the lamp hung from the midst
of the dome.  The floor was spread with silken carpets
embroidered in gold and silver, and under the lamp stood a great
candle, burning in a candelabrum of gold.  In mid pavilion was a
fountain adorned with all manner of figures;[FN#500] and by its
side stood a table covered with a silken napkin, and on its edge
a great porcelain bottle full of wine, with a cup of crystal
inlaid with gold.  Near all these was a large tray of silver
covered over, and when I uncovered it I found therein fruits of
every kind, figs and pomegranates, grapes and oranges, citrons
and shaddocks[FN#501] disposed amongst an infinite variety of
sweet scented flowers, such as rose, jasmine, myrtle, eglantine,
narcissus and all sorts of sweet smelling herbs.  I was charmed
with the place and I joyed with exceeding joy, albeit I found not
there a living soul and my grief and anxiety ceased from me.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day, and ceased to say her
permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: "I was charmed with the place
and joyed with great joy albeit there I found not a living soul
of Almighty Allah's creatures, and saw nor slave nor hand maid to
oversee these things or to watch and ward these properties.  So I
sat down in the pavilion to await the coming of the beloved of my
heart; but the first hour of the night passed by, and the second
hour, and the third hour, and still she came not.  Then hunger
grew sore upon me, for that it was long since I had tasted food
by reason of the violence of my love: but when I found the place
even as my cousin had told me, and saw the truth of her in
terpretation of my beloved's signs, my mind was set at rest and I
felt the pangs of hunger; moreover, the odour of the viands on
the table excited me to eat.  So making sure of attaining my
desire, and being famished for food I went up to the table and
raised the cover and found in the middle a china dish containing
four chickens reddened with roasting and seasoned with spices,
round the which were four saucers, one containing sweetmeats,
another conserve of pomegranate seeds, a third almond
pastry[FN#502] and a fourth honey fritters; and the contents of
these saucers were part sweet and part sour.  So I ate of the
fritters and a piece of meat, then went on to the almond cakes
and ate what I could; after which I fell upon the sweetmeats,
whereof I swallowed a spoonful or two or three or four, ending
with part of a chicken and a mouthful of something beside.  Upon
this my stomach became full and my joints loose and I waxed too
drowsy to keep awake; so I laid my head on a cushion, after
having washed my hands, and sleep over came me; I knew not what
happened to me after this, and I awoke not till the sun's heat
scorched me, for that I had never once tasted sleep for days
past.  When I awoke I found on my stomach a piece of salt and a
bit of charcoal; so I stood up and shook my clothes and turned to
look right and left, but could see no one; and discovered that I
had been sleeping on the marble pavement without bedding beneath
me.  I was perplexed thereat and afflicted with great affliction;
the tears ran down my cheeks and I mourned for myself.  Then I
returned home, and when I entered, I found my cousin beating her
hand on her bosom and weeping tears like rain shedding clouds;
and she versified with these couplets,

"Blows from my lover's land a Zephyr cooly sweet, * And with its
     every breath makes olden love new glow:
O Zephyr of the morning hour, come show to us * Each lover hath
     his lot, his share of joy and woe:
Could I but win one dearest wish, we had embraced * With what
     embrace and clip of breast fond lovers know.
Allah forbids, while bides unseen my cousin's face, * All joys
     the World can give or hand of Time bestow.
Would Heaven I knew his heart were like this heart of me, *
     Melted by passion-flame and charged with longing owe."

When she saw me, she rose in haste and wiped away her tears and
addressed me with her soft speech, saying, "O son of my uncle,
verily Allah hath been gracious to thee in thy love, for that she
whom thou lovest loveth thee, whilst I pass my time in weeping
and bewailing my severance from thee who blamest me and chidest
me; but may Allah not punish thee for my sake!" Thereupon she
smiled in my face a smile of reproach and caressed me; then
taking off my walking clothes, she spread them out and said, "By
Allah, this is not the scent of one who hath enjoyed his lover! 
So tell me what hath befallen thee, O my cousin." I told her all
that had passed, and she smiled again a smile of reproach and
said, "Verily, my heart is full of pain; but may he not live who
would hurt thy heart!  Indeed, this woman maketh herself
inordinately dear and difficult to thee, and by Allah, O son of
my uncle, I fear for thee from her.[FN#503]  Know, O my cousin,
that the meaning of the salt is thou west drowned in sleep like
insipid food, disgustful to the taste; and it is as though she
said to thee; 'It behoveth thou be salted lest the stomach eject
thee; for thou professes to be of the lovers noble and true; but
sleep is unlawful and to a lover undue; therefore is thy love but
a lie.' However, it is her love for thee that lieth; for she saw
thee asleep yet aroused thee not and were her love for thee true,
she had indeed awoken thee.  As for the charcoal, it means 'Allah
blacken thy face'[FN#504] for thou makest a lying presence of
love, whereas thou art naught but a child and hast no object in
life other than eating and drinking and sleeping!  such is the
interpretation of her signs, and may Allah Almighty deliver thee
from her!" When I heard my cousin's words, I beat my hand upon my
breast and cried out, "By Allah, this is the very truth, for I
slept and lovers sleep not!  Indeed I have sinned against myself,
for what could have wrought me more hurt than eating and
sleeping?  Now what shall I do?" Then I wept sore and said to the
daughter of my uncle, "Tell me how to act and have pity on me, so
may Allah have pity on thee: else I shall die." As my cousin
loved me with very great love,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued his tale to Taj al-Muluk: "Thereupon quoth I
to the daughter of my uncle, "Tell me what to do and have pity on
me, so may Allah have pity on thee!" As the daughter of my uncle
loved me with great love, she replied, "On my head and eyes! 
But, O my cousin, I repeat what I have told thee oftentimes, if I
could go in and out at will, I would at once bring you two
together and cover you both with my skirt: nor would I do this
but hoping to win thy favour.  Inshallah, I will do my utmost
endeavour to unite you; but hear my words and do my bidding.  Go
thou to the very same place and sit down where thou sattest
before and at supper tide look thou eat not, for eating induceth
sleep; and have a care-thou slumber not, for she will not come to
thee till a fourth part of the night be passed.  And the Almighty
avert her mischief from thee!" Now when I heard these words I
rejoiced and besought Allah to hasten the night; and, as soon as
it was dark, I was minded to go, and my cousin said to me, "When
thou shalt have met her, repeat to her the couplet I taught thee
before, at the time of thy leave taking." Replied I, "On my head
and eyes!" and went out and repaired to the garden, where I found
all made ready in the same state as on the previous night, with
every requisite of meat and drink, dried fruits, sweet scented
flowers and so forth.  I went up into the pavilion and smelt the
odour of the viands and my spirit lusted after them; but I
possessed my soul in patience for a while, till at last I could
no longer withstand temptation.  So I arose from my seat and went
up to the table and, raising its cover, found a dish of fowls,
surrounded by four saucers containing four several meats.  I ate
a mouthful of each kind and as much as I would of the sweetmeats
and a piece of meat: then I drank from the saucer a sauce
yellowed with saffron[FN#505] and as it pleased me, I supped it
up by the spoonful till I was satisfied and my stomach was full. 
Upon this, my eyelids drooped; so I took a cushion and set it
under my head, saying, "Haply I can recline upon it without going
to sleep." Then I closed my eyes and slept, nor did I wake till
the sun had risen, when I found on my stomach a cube of
bone,[FN#506] a single tip-cat stick,[FN#507] the stone of a
green date[FN#508] and a carob pod.  There was no furniture nor
aught else in the place, and it was as if there had been nothing
there yesterday.  So I rose and shaking all these things off me,
fared forth in fury; and, going home, found my cousin groaning
and versifying with these couplets,

"A wasted body, heart enpierced to core, * And tears that down my
     poor cheeks pour and pour:
And lover cure of access; but, but still * Naught save what's
     fair can come from fairest flow'r:
O cousin mine thou fill'st my soul with pate, * And from these
     tears mine eyelids ache full sore!"

I chid the daughter of my uncle and abused her, whereat she wept;
then, wiping away her tears, she came up to me and kissed me and
began pressing me to her bosom, whilst I held back from her
blaming myself.  Then said she to me, "O my cousin, it seemeth
thou sleptest again this night?" Replied I, "Yes; and when I
awoke, I found on my stomach a cube of bone, a single tip-cat
stick, a stone of a green date and a carob pod, and I know not
why she did this." Then I wept and went up to her and said,
"Expound to me her meaning in so doing and tell me how shall I
act and aid me in my sore strait." She answered, "On my head and
eyes!  By the single tip cat stick and the cube of bone which she
placed upon thy stomach she saith to thee 'Thy body is present
but thy heart is absent'; and she meaneth, 'Love is not thus: so
do not reckon thyself among lovers.' As for the date stone, it is
as if she said to thee, 'An thou wert in love thy heart would be
burning with passion and thou wouldst not taste the delight of
sleep; for the sweet of love is like a green date[FN#509] which
kindleth a coal of fire in the vitals.' As for the carob
pod[FN#510] it signifieth to thee, 'The lover's heart is
wearied'; and thereby she saith, 'Be patient under our separation
with the patience of Job.' " When I heard this interpretation,
fires darted into my vitals like a dart and grief redoubled upon
my heart and I cried out, saying, "Allah decreed sleep to me for
my ill fortune." Then I said to her, "O my cousin, by my life,
devise me some device whereby I may win my will of her!" She wept
and answered, "O Aziz, O son of my uncle, verily my heart is full
of sad thought which I cannot speak: but go thou again to night
to the same place and beware thou sleep not, and thou shalt
surely attain thy desire.  This is my counsel and peace be with
thee!" Quoth I, "If Allah please I will not sleep, but will do as
thou biddest me." Then my cousin rose, and brought me food,
saying, "Eat now what may suffice thee, that nothing may divert
thy heart." So I ate my fill and, when night came, my cousin rose
and bringing me a sumptuous suit of clothes clad me therein. 
Then she made me swear I would repeat to my lover the verse
aforesaid and bade me beware of sleeping.  So I left her and
repaired to the garden and went up into that same pavilion where
I occupied myself in holding my eyelids open with my fingers and
nodding my head as the night darkened on me."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al Muluk: "So I repaired to the garden
and went up into that same pavilion and occupied myself in gazing
upon the flower beds and in holding my eyelids open with my
fingers and nodding my head as the night darkened on me.  And
presently I grew hungry with watching and the smell of the meats
being wafted towards me, my appetite increased: so I went up to
the table and took off the cover and ate a mouthful of every dish
and a bit of meat; after which I turned to the flagon of wine,
saying to myself, I will drink one cup.  I drank it, and then I
drank a second and a third, till I had drunk full ten, when the
cool air smote me and I fell to the earth like a felled man.  I
ceased not to lie thus till day arose, when I awoke and found
myself out side the garden, and on my stomach were a butcher's
knife and a dram-weight of iron.[FN#511]  Thereat I trembled and,
taking them with me, went home, where I found my cousin saying,
"Verily, I am in this house wretched and sorrowful, having no
helper but weeping." Now when I entered, I fell down at full
length and throwing the knife and the dram weight from my hand, I
fainted clean away.  As soon as I came to myself, I told her what
had befallen me and said, Indeed, I shall never enjoy my desire."
But when she saw my tears and my passion, they redoubled her
distress on my account, and she cried, "Verily, I am helpless!  I
warned thee against sleeping; but thou wouldst not hearken to my
warning, nor did my words profit thee aught." I rejoined, "By
Allah, I conjure thee to explain to me the meaning of the knife
and the iron dram-weight." "By the dram weight," replied my
cousin, "she alludeth to her right eye,[FN#512] and she sweareth
by it and saith, 'By the Lord of all creatures and by my right
eye!  if thou come here again and sleep, I will cut thy throat
with this very knife.' And indeed I fear for thee, O my cousin,
from her malice; my heart is full of anguish for thee and I
cannot speak.  Nevertheless, if thou can be sure of thyself not
to sleep when thou returnest to her, return to her and beware of
sleeping and thou shalt attain thy desire; but if when returning
to her thou wilt sleep, as is thy wont, she will surely slaughter
thee." Asked I, "What shall I do, O daughter of my uncle: I beg
thee, by Allah, to help me in this my calamity." Answered she,
"On my head and eyes!  if thou wilt hearken to my words and do my
bidding, thou shalt have thy will." Quoth I, "I will indeed
hearken to thy words and do thy bidding;" and quoth she, "When it
is time for thee to go, I will tell thee." Then she pressed me to
her bosom and laying me on the bed, shampoo'd my feet, till
drowsiness overcame me and I was drowned in sleep, then she took
a fan and seated herself at my head with the fan in her hand and
she was weeping till her clothes were wet with tears.  Now when
she saw that I was awake, she wiped away the drops and fetched me
some food and set it before me.  I refused it, but she said to
me, "Did I not tell thee that thou must do my bidding?  Eat!" So
I ate and thwarted her not and she proceeded to put the food into
my mouth and I to masticate it, till I was full.  Then she made
me drink jujube sherbet[FN#513] and sugar and washed my hands and
dried them with a kerchief; after which she sprinkled me with
rose water, and I sat with her awhile in the best of spirits. 
When the darkness had closed in, she dressed me and said to me,
"O son of my uncle, watch through the whole night and sleep not;
for she will not come to thee this tide till the last of the dark
hours and, Allah willing, thou shalt be at one with her this
night; but forget not my charge." Then, she wept, and my heart
was pained for her by reason of her over much weeping, and I
asked, "What is the charge thou gayest me?" She answered, "When
thou takest leave of her repeat to her the verse before
mentioned." So, full of joy I left her and repairing to the
garden, went up into the pavilion where, being satiated with
food, I sat down and watched till a fourth part of the dark hours
was past.  That night seemed longsome to me as it were a year:
but I remained awake till it was three quarters spent and the
cocks crew and I was famished for long watching.  Accordingly I
went up to the table and ate my fill, whereupon my head grew
heavy and I wanted to sleep, when behold, a light appeared making
towards me from afar.  I sprang up and washed my hands and mouth
and roused myself; and before long she came with ten damsels, in
whose midst she was like the full moon among the stars.  She was
clad in a dress of green satin purfled with red gold, and she was
as saith the poet,

"She lords it o'er our hearts in grass green gown, * With
     buttons[FN#514] loose and locks long flowing down.
Quoth I, 'What is thy name?' Quoth she, 'I'm she, * Who burns the
     lover-heart live coals upon:'
I made my plaint to her of loving lowe; * Laughed she, 'To stone
     thou moanest useless moan!'
Quoth I, 'An be of hardest stone thy heart, * Allah drew sweetest
     spring from hardest stone.' "

When she saw me she laughed and said, "How is it that thou art
awake and that sleep overcame thee not?  Forasmuch as thou hast
watched through the night, I know that thou art a lover; for
night watching is the mark of lovers displaying brave endurance
of their desires." Then she turned to her women and signed to
them and they went away from her, whereupon she came up to me and
strained me to her breast and kissed me, whilst I kissed her, and
she sucked my upper lip whilst I sucked her lower lip.  I put my
hand to her waist and pressed it and we came not to the ground
save at the same moment.  Then she undid her petticoat trousers
which slipped down to her anklets, and we fell to clasping and
embracing and toying and speaking softly and biting and inter
twining of legs and going round about the Holy House and the
corners thereof,[FN#515] till her joints became relaxed for love
delight and she swooned away.  I entered the sanctuary, and
indeed that night was a joy to the sprite and a solace to the
sight even as saith the poet,

"Sweetest of nights the world can show to me, that night * When
     cups went round and round as fed by ceaseless spring:
There utter severance made I 'twixt mine eyes and sleep, * And
     joined, re joined mine ear drop with the anklet
     ring."[FN#516]

We lay together in close embrace till the morning when I would
have gone away, but she stopped me and said, "Stay till I tell
thee something"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued his recital to Taj al Muluk: "When I would
have gone away, she stopped me and said, "Stay, till I tell thee
something and charge thee with a charge." So I stayed whilst she
unfolded a kerchief and drew out this piece of linen and spread
it open before me.  I found worked on it these two figures of
gazelles and admired it with great admiration.  Then I took the
piece of linen and went away, joyful, after we had agreed that I
should visit her every night in the garden; but in my joy I
forgot to repeat to her the verse my cousin had taught me.  For
when giving me the piece of linen with the gazelles she had said
to me, "Keep this carefully, as it is my sister's handiwork." I
asked her, "What is thy sister's name?"; and she answered, "Her
name is Núr al-Hudá." When I went to my cousin, I found her lying
down; but as soon as she saw me, she rose, with the tears running
from her eyes, and came up to me, and kissed me on the breast and
said, "Didst thou do as I enjoined thee?  and repeat the verse to
her?" "I forgot it," replied I; "and nothing drove it out of my
mind but these two figured gazelles." And I threw the piece of
linen on the floor before her.  She rose and sat down again, but
was unable to contain herself for impatience, and her eyes ran
over with tears, whilst she repeated these two couplets,

"O thou who seekest parting, softly fare!  * Let not the Pair
     delude with cunning art:
Pare softly, Fortune's nature is to 'guile, * And end of every
     meeting is to part."

And when she ended her recitation she said, "O my cousin, give me
this piece of linen." So I gave it to her and she took it and
unfolding it, saw what was therein.  When the tryst time came for
my going to my lover, the daughter of my uncle said to me, "Go,
and peace attend thee; and when thou art about to leave her,
recite to her the verse I taught thee long ago and which thou
didst forget." Quoth I, "Tell it me again"; and she repeated it. 
Then I went to the garden and entered the pavilion, where I found
the young lad, awaiting me.  When she saw me, she rose and kissed
me and made me sit in her lap; and we ate and drank and did our
desire as before.  In the morning, I repeated to her my cousin's
verse which was this,

"Ho, lovers all!  by Allah say me sooth * What shall he do when
     Love sor' vexeth youth?"

When she heard this, her eyes filled with tears and she answered
and said,

"Strive he to cure his case, to hide the truth, * Patiently
     humble self and sue for rush!"

I committed it to memory and returned home rejoicing at having
done my cousin's bidding.  When I entered the house I found her
lying down and my mother at her head weeping over her case; but
as soon as I went in to her my mother said to me, "A foul plague
on such a cousin!  How couldst thou leave the daughter of thy
uncle ailing and not ask what ailed her?" But when my cousin saw
me she raised her head and sat up and asked me, "O Aziz, didst
thou repeat to her the couplet I taught thee?" I answered, "Yes,
and when she heard it she wept and recited in answer another
couplet which I committed to memory." Quoth my cousin, "Tell it
me." I did so; and when she heard it she wept with much weeping
and repeated the following verses,

'How shall youth cure the care his life undo'th, * And every day
     his heart in pieces hew'th?
In sooth he would be patient, but he findeth * Naught save a
     heart which love with pains imbu'th."

Then added my cousin, "When thou goest to her as of wont, repeat
to her also these two couplets which thou hast heard." I replied,
"Hearkening and obedience!" and I went at the wonted time, to the
garden, where there passed between my mistress and myself what
tongue faileth to describe.  When I was about to leave her, I
repeated to her those two couplets of my cousin's; whereupon the
tears streamed from her eyes and she replied,

"If he of patience fail the truth to hide * For him no cure save
     Death my vision view'th!"

I committed them to memory and returned home, and when I went in
to my cousin I found her fallen into a fit and my mother sitting
at her head.  When she heard my voice, she opened her eyes and
asked, "O Aziz! didst thou repeat the two couplets to her?"
whereto I answered, "Yes; but she wept on hearing them and she
replied with this couplet beginning, If he of patience fail, to
the end." And I repeated it; whereupon my cousin swooned again,
and when she came to herself, she recited these two couplets,

"Hearkening, obeying, with my dying mouth * I greet who joy of
     union ne'er allow'th:
Pair fall all happy loves, and fair befal * The hapless lover
     dying in his drowth!"

Again when it was night, I repaired to the garden as usual where
I found the young lady awaiting me.  We sat down and ate and
drank, after which we did all we wanted and slept till the
morning; and, as I was going away, I repeated to her the saying
of my cousin.  When she heard the couplet she cried out with a
loud cry and was greatly moved and exclaimed, "Awáh! 
Awáh![FN#517]  By Allah, she who spake these lines is dead!" Then
she wept and said to me, "Woe to thee!  How is she who spoke thus
related to thee?" Replied I, "She is the daughter of my father's
brother." "Thou liest," rejoined she; "by Allah, were she thy
cousin, thou hadst borne her the same love as she bore thee!  It
is thou who hast slain her and may the Almighty kill thee as thou
killedst her!  By Allah, hadst thou told me thou hadst a cousin,
I would not have admitted thee to my favours!" Quoth I, "Verily
it was she who interpreted to me the signs thou madest and it was
she who taught me how to come to thee and how I should deal with
thee; and, but for her, I should never have been united to thee."
She then asked me, "Did thy cousin then know of us?"; and I
answered, "Yes;" whereupon she exclaimed, "Allah give thee sorrow
of thy youth, even as thou hast sorrowed her youth!" Then she
cried to me, "Go now and see after her." So I went away troubled
at heart, and ceased not walking till I reached our street, when
I heard sounds of wailing, and asking about it, was answered,
"Azizah, we found her dead behind the door." I entered the house,
and when my mother saw me, she said, "Her death lieth heavy on
thy neck and may Allah not acquit thee of her blood!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: "So I entered the house and
when my mother saw me she said, "Her death lieth heavy on thy
neck and may Allah not acquit thee of her blood!  A plague on
such a cousin!" Then came my father, and we laid her out and get
ready her bier and buried her; and we had recitations of the
whole Koran over her tomb and we abode by her grave three days,
after which we returned to our home, and I grieving for her
grievously.  Then my mother came to me and said, "I would fain
know what thou didst to her, to break her heart[FN#518] for, O my
son, I questioned her at all times of the cause of her complaint,
but she would tell me nothing nor let me know aught of it.  So
Allah upon thee, tell me what thou hast been doing to her that
she died." Quoth I, "I did nothing." Quoth my mother, "Allah
avenge her on thee!  Verily she told me naught, but kept her
secret till she died of her love longings for thee; but when she
died I was with her and she opened her eyes and said to me; 'O
wife of my uncle may Allah hold thy son guiltless of my blood and
punish him not for what he hath done by me!  And now Allah
transporteth me from the house of the world which is perishable
to the house of the other world which is eternal.' Said I, 'O my
daughter, Allah preserve thee and preserve thy youth!' And as I
questioned her of the cause of her illness, she made me no
answer; but she smiled and said, 'O wife of my uncle, bid thy
son, whenever he would go whither he goeth every day, repeat
these two saws at his going away; 'Faith is fair!  Unfaith is
foul!' For this is of my tender affection to him, that I am
solicitous concerning him during my lifetime and after my death.'
Then she gave me somewhat for thee and sware me that I would not
give it until I see thee weeping for her and lamenting her death. 
The thing is with me; and, when I have seen thy case as I have
said, I will make it over to thee." "Show it me," cried I: but
she would not.  Then I gave myself up to love delights and
thought no more of my cousin's death: for my mind was unsettled
and fain would I have been with my lover the livelong day and
night.[FN#519]  So hardly had I perceived the darkness fall when
I betook myself to the garden, where I found the young lady
sitting on coals of fire for much impatience.  As soon as she was
sure that she saw me, she ran to me and throwing her arms about
my neck, enquired of the daughter of my uncle.  I replied, "Sooth
to say she is dead, and we have caused Zikr- litanies and
recitations of the Koran to be performed for her; and it is now
four nights and this be the fifth since she is gone." When she
heard that, she shrieked aloud and wept and said, "Did I not tell
thee that thou hast slain her?  Hadst thou let me know of her
before her death, I would have requited her the kindness she did
me, in that she served me and united thee to me; for without her,
we had never foregathered, we twain, and I fear lest some
calamity befal thee because of thy sin against her." Quoth I,
"She acquitted me of offence ere she died;" and I repeated to her
what my mother had told me.  Quoth she, "Allah upon thee!  when
thou returnest to thy mother, learn what thing she keepeth for
thee." I rejoined, "My mother also said to me; 'Before the
daughter of thy uncle died, she laid a charge upon me, saying,
Whenever thy son would go whither he is wont to go, teach him
these two saws, 'Faith is fair; Unfaith is foul!' " When my lady
heard this she exclaimed, "The mercy of Almighty Allah be upon
her!  Indeed, she hath delivered thee from me, for I minded to do
thee a mischief, but now I will not harm thee nor trouble thee."
I wondered at this and asked her, "What then west thou minded to
do with me in time past and we two being in bond of love?"
Answered she, "Thou art infatuated with me; for thou art young in
life and a raw laddie; thy heart is void of guile and thou
weetest not our malice and deceit.  Were she yet alive, she would
protect thee; for she is the cause of thy preservation and she
hath delivered thee from destruction.  And now I charge thee
speak not with any woman, neither accost one of our sex, be she
young or be she old; and again I say Beware!  for thou art simple
and raw and knowest not the wiles of women and their malice, and
she who interpreted the signs to thee is dead.  And indeed I fear
for thee, lest thou fall into some disgrace and find none to
deliver thee from it, now that the daughter of thy uncle is no
more."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: "Then the young lady said to
me, "I fear for thee lest thou fall into some disgrace and find
none to deliver thee from it.  Alas for thy cousin and ah, the
pity of her!  Would I had known her before her death, that I
might have requited by waiting upon her the fair service she did
me.  The mercy of Allah Almighty be upon her, for she kept her
secret and revealed not what she suffered, and but for her thou
hadst never foregathered with me; no, never!  But there is one
thing I desire of thee." I asked, "What is it?"; and she
answered, "It is that thou bring me to her grave, that I may
visit her in the tomb wherein she is and write some couplets
thereon." I rejoined, "To morrow, if Allah please!"[FN#520]  I
slept with her that night, and she ceased not saying after every
hour, "Would thou hadst told me of thy cousin before her death!"
And I asked her, "What is the meaning of the two saws she taught
me?  'Faith is fair!  Unfaith is foul!'" But she made no answer. 
As soon as it was day she rose and, taking a purse of gold
pieces, said to me, "Come, show me her tomb, that I may visit it
and grave some verses thereon and build a dome over it and
commend her to Allah's mercy and bestow these diners in alms for
her soul." I replied, "To hear is to obey!"; and walked on before
her, whilst she followed me, giving alms as she went and saying
to all upon whom she lavisht bounty, "This is an alms for the
soul of Azizah, who kept her counsel till she drank the cup of
death and never told the secret of her love." And she stinted not
thus to give alms and say, "for Azizah's soul," till the purse
was empty and we came to the grave.  And when she looked at the
tomb, she wept and threw herself on it; then, pulling out a
chisel of steel and a light hammer, she graved therewith upon the
head stone in fine small characters these couplets,

"I past by a broken tomb amid a garth right sheen, * Whereon
     seven blooms of Nu'uman[FN#521] glowed with cramoisie;
Quoth I, 'Who sleepeth in this tomb?' Quoth answering Earth *
     'Before a lover Hades-tombed[FN#522] bend reverently!'
Quoth I, 'May Allah help thee, O thou slain of Love, * And grant
     thee home in Heaven and Paradise height to see!'
Hapless are lovers all e'en tombed in their tombs, * Where amid
     living folk the dust weighs heavily!
Pain would I plant a garden blooming round thy grave, * And water
     every flower with tear drops flowing free!"

Then she turned away in tears and I with her and returned to the
garden where she said to me, "By Allah!  I conjure thee never
leave me!" "To hear is to obey," replied I.  Then I gave myself
wholly up to her and paid her frequent visits: she was good and
generous to me; and as often as I passed the night with her, she
would make much of me and would ask me of the two saws my cousin
Azizah told my mother and I would repeat them to her.  And
matters ceased not to be on this wise and I continued for a whole
year eating and drinking and enjoying dalliance and wearing
change of rich raiment until I waxed gross and fat, so that I
lost all thought of sorrowing and mourning, and I clean forgot my
cousin Azizah.  And on New Year's day I went to the bath, where I
refreshed myself and put on a suit of sumptuous clothes; then
coming out I drank a cup of wine and smelt the scent of my new
gear which was perfumed with various essences; and my breast was
broadened thereby, for I knew not the tricks of Pate nor the
changing ways of Time.  When the hour of night prayer came, I was
minded to repair to my lover; but, being the worse for wine, I
knew not when going to her whither I went, so my drunkenness
turned me into a by street called Syndic Street;[FN#523] and the
while I walked up that street behold, I caught sight of an old
woman faring with a lighted taper in one hand, and in the other a
folded letter.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant, whose name was Aziz, continued to Taj al-Muluk:--And
when I entered the street called Syndic Street behold, I caught
sight of an old woman walking with a lighted taper in one hand
and in the other a folded letter and I drew near her and lo!  she
was weeping and repeating these couplets,

"O glad news bearer well come!  Welcome!  Hail!  * How sweet thy
     speech to me, what treat thy tale:
O messenger from him whose weal I love, * God bless thee long as
     breathes soft morning-gale!"

Now when she saw me she asked, "O my son! canst thou read?"; and
I answered, of my officiousness, "Yes, old naunty!" Rejoined she,
"Then take this letter and read it to me." And when she handed it
to me, I took it and unfolding it read it to her and behold it
was from an absent man to his friends and lovers whom he greeted;
and, when she heard its purport, she rejoiced at the good tidings
and blessed me, saying, "Allah dispel thine anxiety, even as thou
hast dispelled mine!" Then she took the letter and walked on. 
Meanwhile, I was urged by a call of nature and sat down on my
heels to make water.[FN#524] When I had ended I stood up and
wiped the orifice with a pebble and then, letting down my
clothes, I was about to wend my way, when suddenly the old woman
came up to me again and, bending down over my hand, kissed it and
said, "O my master!  the Lord give thee joy of thy youth!  I
entreat thee to walk with me a few steps as far as yonder door,
for I told them what thou didst read to me of the letter, and
they believe me not, so come with me two steps and read them the
letter from behind the door and accept the prayers of a righteous
woman." I enquired, "What is the history of this letter?", and
she replied, "O my son, this letter is from my son, who hath been
absent for a term of ten years.  He set out with a stock of
merchandise and tarried long in foreign parts, till we lost hope
of him and supposed him to be dead.  Now after all that delay
cometh this letter from him, and he hath a sister who weepeth for
him night and day; so I said to her, 'He is well and all right.'
But she will not believe me and declares, 'There is no help but
thou bring me one who will read this letter in my presence, that
my heart may be at rest and my mind at ease.' Thou knowest, O my
son, that all who love are wont to think evil: so be good enough
to go with me and read to her this letter, standing behind the
curtain, whilst I call his sister to listen within the door, so
shalt thou dispel our heed and fulfil our need.  Verily quoth the
Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless and preserve!), 'Whoso easeth
the troubled of one of the troubles of this troublous world,
Allah will ease him of an hundred troubles'; and according to
another tradition, 'Whoso easeth his brother of one of the
troubles of this troublous world, Allah shall relieve him of
seventy and two troubles on the Day of Resurrection.' And I have
betaken myself to thee; so disappoint me not." Replied I, "To
hear is to obey: do thou go before me!" So she walked on
devancing me and I followed her a little way, till she came to
the gate of a large and handsome mansion whose door was plated
with copper.[FN#525]  I stood behind the door, whilst the old
woman cried out in Persian, and ere I knew it a damsel ran up
with light and nimble step.  She had tucked up her trousers to
her knees, so that I saw a pair of calves that confounded thinker
and lighter, and the maid herself was as saith the poet
describing her,

"O thou who barest leg calf, better to suggest * For passion
     madded amourist better things above!
Towards its lover cloth the bowl go round and run; * Cup[FN#526]
     and cup bearer only drive us daft with love."[FN#527]

Now these legs were like two pillars of alabaster adorned with
anklets of gold, wherein were set stones of price.  And the
damsel had tucked up the end of her gown under her arm pit and
had rolled up her sleeves to the elbow, so that I could see her
white wrists whereon were two pairs of bracelets with clasps of
great pearls; and round her neck was a collar of costly gems. 
Her ears were adorned with pendants of pearls and on her head she
wore a kerchief[FN#528] of brocade, brand new and broidered with
jewels of price.  And she had thrust the skirt of her shift into
her trousers string being busy with some household business.  So
when I saw her in this undress, I was confounded at her beauty,
for she was like a shining sun.  Then she said, with soft, choice
speech, never heard I sweeter, "O my mother!  is this he who
cometh to read the letter?" "It is," replied the old woman; and
she put out her hand to me with the letter.  Now between her and
the door was a distance of about half a rod[FN#529]; so I
stretched forth my hand to take the letter from her and thrust
head and shoulders within the door, thinking to draw near her and
read the letter when, before I knew what her design was, the old
woman butted her head against my back and pushed me forwards with
the letter in my hand, so that ere I could take thought I found
myself in the middle of the hall far beyond the vestibule.  Then
she entered, faster than a flash of blinding leven, and had
naught to do but to shut the door.  And Shahrazed perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
Aziz pursued to Taj al Muluk: "When the old woman pushed me
forwards I found myself, ere I could think, inside the vestibule;
and the old woman entered faster than a flash of blinding levee
and had naught to do but to shut the door.  When the girl saw me
in the vestibule, she came up to me and strained me to her bosom,
and threw me to the floor; then she sat astraddle upon my breast
and kneaded my belly with her fingers, till I well nigh lost my
senses.  Thereupon she took me by the hand and led me, unable to
resist for the violence of her pressure, through seven
vestibules, whilst the old woman forewent us with the lighted
candle, till we came to a great saloon with four estrades whereon
a horseman might play Polo.[FN#530] Here she released me, saying,
"Open thine eyes." So I opened them still giddy for the excess of
her embracing and pressing, and saw that the whole saloon was
built of the finest marbles and alabasters, and all its furniture
was of silk and brocade even to the cushions and mattresses. 
Therein also were two benches of yellow brass and a couch of red
gold, set with pearls and precious stones, befitting none save
Kings like thyself.  And off the saloon were smaller sitting
rooms; and the whole place was redolent of wealth.  Then she
asked, "O Aziz, which is liefer to thee life or death?" "Life,"
answered I; and she said, "If life be liefer to thee, marry me."
Quoth I, "Indeed I should hate to marry the like of thee." Quoth
she, "If thou marry me thou wilt at least be safe from the
daughter of Dalílah the Wily One."[FN#531]  I asked, "And who be
that daughter of the Wily One?" Whereupon she laughed and
replied, " 'Tis she who hath companied with thee this day for a
year and four months (may the Almighty destroy and afflict her
with one worse than herself!) By Allah, there liveth not a more
perfidious than she.  How many men hath she not slain before thee
and what deeds hath she not done.  Nor can I understand how thou
hast been all the time in her company, yet she hath not killed
thee nor done thee a mischief." When I heard her words, I
marvelled with exceeding marvel and said, "O my lady, who made
thee to know her?"  Said she, "I know her as the age knoweth its
calamities; but now I would fain have thee tell me all that hath
passed between you two, that I may ken the cause of thy
deliverance from her." So I told her all that had happened
between us, including the story of my cousin Azizah.  She
expressed her pity when she heard of the death, and her eyes ran
over with tears and she claps hand on hand and cried out, Her
youth was lost on Allah's way,[FN#532] and may the Lord bless
thee for her good works!  By Allah, O Aziz, she who died for thee
was the cause of thy preservation from the daughter of Dalia the
Wily; and, but for her, thou hadst been lost.  And now she is
dead I fear for thee from the Crafty One's perfidy and mischief;
but my throat is choking and I cannot speak." Quoth I Ay, by
Allah: all this happened even as thou sayest." And she shook her
head and cried, "There liveth not this day the like of Azizah.  I
continued, "And on her death bed she bade me repeat to my lover
these two saws, 'Faith is fair!  Unfaith is foul'" When she heard
me say this, she exclaimed, "O Aziz, by Allah those same words
saved thee from dying by her hand; and now my heart is at ease
for thee from her, for she will never kill thee and the daughter
of thy uncle preserved thee during her lifetime and after her
death.  By Allah, I have desired thee day after day but could not
get at thee till this time when I tricked thee and outwitted
thee; for thou art a raw youth[FN#533] and knowest not the wiles
of young women nor the de