that Jebel Musa, its Greek rival, rose after the
visions of Helena in the fourth century; whilst the building of the
Convent by Justinian belongs to A.D 527. Ras Safsáfah, its rival to
the north, is an affair of yesterday, and may be called the
invention of Robinson; and Jebel Katerina, to the south is the
property of Rüppell" (Midian Revisited i., 237). I would therefore
call the "Sinaitic" Peninsula, Peninsula of Paran in old days and
Peninsula of Tor (from its chief port) in our time. It is still my
conviction that the true Mount Sinai will be found in Jabal Aráif,
or some such unimportant height to the north of the modern Hajj-
road from Suez to Akabah. Even about the name (which the Koran
writes "Sainá" and "Sínín") there is a dispute: It is usually
derived from the root "Sanah"=sentis, a bush; but this is not
satisfactory. Our eminent Assyriologist, Professor Sayce, would
connect it with "Sin," the Assyrian Moon- god as Mount Nebo with
the Sun-god and he expects to find there the ruins of a Lunar
temple as a Solar fane stands on Ba'al Zapuna (Baal Zephon) or the
classical Mount Casius.

[FN#424] Alluding to the miracle of Aaron's rod (the gift of
Jethro) as related in the Koran (chapts. vii. 1., xx., etc.), where
the Egyptian sorcerers threw down thick ropes which by their magic
twisted and coiled like serpents.

[FN#425] Arab. "Ayát" lit. "signs," here "miracles of the truth,"
1. c. Koranic versets as opposed to chapters. The ranks of the
enemy represent the latter, sword-cuts the former--a very
persuasive mode of preaching.

[FN#426] Lane (M. E. chapt.. iii.) shows by a sketch the position
of the worshipper during this "Salám" which is addressed, some say,
to the guardian angels, others suppose to all brother-believers and
angels.

[FN#427] i.e., where the Syrians found him.

[FN#428] i.e., Dedianus Arabised; a name knightly and plebian.

[FN#429] In such tales the Wazir is usually the sharp-witted man,
contrasting with the "dummy," or master.

[FN#430] Carrier-pigeons were extensively used at this time. The
Caliph Al-Násir li-Díni ‘lláh (regn. A.H. 575=1180) was, according
to Ibn Khaldún, very fond of them. The moderns of Damascus still
affect them. My successor, Mr. Consul Kirby Green, wrote an
excellent report on pigeon-fancying at Damascus. The so-called
Maundeville or Mandeville in A. D. 1322 speaks of carrier-pigeons
in Syria as a well-known mode Of intercourse between lord and lord.

[FN#431] Mohammed who declared "There is no monkery in Al-Islam,"
and who virtually abolished the priest, had an especial aversion to
the shaveling (Ruhbán). But the "Gens æterna in quâ nemo nascitur"
(Pliny v. 17) managed to appear even in Al-lslam, as Fakirs,,
Dervishes, Súfis, etc. Of this more hereafter.

[FN#432] i.e. her holiness would act like a fascinating talisman.

[FN#433] The "smoking out" practice is common amongst the Arabs:
hence Marshal Pelissier's so- called " barbarity." The Public is
apt to forget that on a campaign the general's first duty is to
save his own men by any practice which the laws of fair warfare do
not absolutely forbid.

[FN#434] i.e. Mohammed, who promised Heaven and threatened Hell.

[FN#435] Arab. "Ahr" or "ihr," fornication or adultery, i.e.,
irreligion, infidelity as amongst the Hebrews (Isaiah xxiii.17).

[FN#436] A sign of defeat.

[FN#437] In English "last night": I have already noted that the
Moslem day, like the Jewish and the Scandinavian, begins at
sundown; and "layl " a night, is often used to denote the twenty-
four hours between sunset and sunset, whilst "yaum," a day, would
by us be translated in many cases "battle-day."

[FN#438] Iterum the "Himalayan Brothers."

[FN#439] Again, Mohammed who promised Good to the Good, and vice
versâ.

[FN#440] They are sad doggrel like most of the pièces d'occasion
inserted in The Nights.

[FN#441] Here "Kahwah" (coffee) is used in its original sense of
strong old wine. The derivation is "Akhá"=fastidire fecit, causing
disinclination for food, the Matambre (kill- hunger) of the
Iberians. In old days the scrupulous called coffee "Kihwah" in
order to distinguish it from 'Kakwah," wine.

[FN#442] i.e. Mohammed, a common title.

[FN#443] That is, fatal to the scoffer and the impious.

[FN#444] Equivalent to our "The Devil was sick," etc.

[FN#445] i.e. to the enemy: the North American Indians (so called)
use similar forms of "inverted speech"; and the Australian
aborigines are in no way behind them.

[FN#446] See Vol. i., p. 154 (Night xvi.).

[FN#447] Arab. "Sauf," a particle denoting a near future whereas
"Sa-" points to one which may be very remote.

[FN#448] From the root "Shanh"=having a fascinating eye,
terrifying. The Irish call the fascinater "eybitter" and the victim
(who is also rhymed to death) "eybitten."

[FN#449] i.e., not like the noble-born, strong in enduring the
stress of fight.

[FN#450] i.e., of Abraham. For the Well Zemzem and the Place of
Abraham see my Pilgrimage (iii. 171-175, etc.), where I described
the water as of salt-bitter taste, like that of Epsom (iii. 203).
Sir William Muir (in his excellent life of Mahomet, I. cclviii.)
remarks that "the flavour of stale water bottled up for months
would not be a criterion of the same water freshly drawn;" but
soldered tins-full of water drawn a fortnight before are to be had
in Calcutta and elsewhere after Pilgrimage time; and analysis would
at once detect the salt.

[FN#451] Racing was and is a favourite pastime with those
hippomanists, the Arabs; but it contrasts strongly with our
civilised form being a trial of endurance rather than of speed. The
Prophet is said to have limited betting in these words, "There
shall be no wagering save on the Kuff (camel's foot), the Hafir
(hoof of horse, ass, etc.) or the Nasal (arrow-pile or lance
head)."

[FN#452] In the Mac. Edit. "Arman"=Armenia, which has before
occurred. The author or scribe here understands by "Cæsarea" not
the old Turris Stratonis, Herod's city called after Augustus, but
Cæsareia the capital of Cappadocia (Pliny, vi. 3), the royal
residence before called Mazaca (Strabo).

[FN#453] An idiom meaning "a very fool."

[FN#454] i.e. Kána (was) má (that which) was (kána).

[FN#455] A son being "the lamp of a dark house."

[FN#456] When the Israelites refused to receive the Law (the souls
of all the Prophets even those unborn being present at the
Covenant), Allah tore up the mountain (Sinai which is not
mentioned) by the roots and shook it over their heads to terrify
them, saying, "Receive the Law which we have given you with a
resolution to keep it" (Koran chaps. xlx. 170). Much of this story
is from the Talmud (Abodah Sar. 2, 2, Tract Sabbath, etc.) whence
Al-Islam borrowed so much of its Judaism, as it took Christianity
from the Apocryphal New Testament. This tradition is still held by
the Israelites, says Mr. Rodwell (p. 333) who refers it to a
misunderstanding of Exod. xix. 17, rightly rendered in the E.
version "at the nether part of the mountain."

[FN#457] Arab. "Azghán" = the camel-litters in which women travel.

[FN#458] i.e. to joy foes and dismay friends.

[FN#459] Whose eyes became white (i.e. went blind) with mourning
for his son Joseph (Koran, chaps. xii. 84). He recovered his sight
when his face was covered with the shirt which Gabriel had given to
the youth after his brethren had thrown him into the well.

[FN#460] "Poison King" (Persian); or "Flower-King" (Arabic).

[FN#461] A delicate allusion to the size of her hips and back
parts, in which volume is, I have said, greatly admired for the
best of reasons.

[FN#462] All Prophets had some manual trade and that of David was
making coats of mail, which he invented, for before his day men
used plate-armour. So "Allah softened the iron for him" and in his
hands it became like wax (Koran xxi. xxxiv., etc.). Hence a good
coat of mail is called "Davidean." I have noticed (First Footsteps,
p. 33 and elsewhere) the homage paid to the blacksmith on the
principle which made Mulciber (Malik Kabir) a god. The myth of
David inventing mail possibly arose from his peculiarly fighting
career. Moslems venerate Dáúd on account of his extraordinary
devotion, nor has this view of his character ceased : a modern
divine preferred him to "all characters in history."

[FN#463] "Travel by night," said the Prophet, "when the plagues of
earth (scorpions, serpents, etc.) afflict ye not." Yet the night-
march in Arabia is detestable (Pilgrimage iii.).

[FN#464] This form of ceremony is called "Istikbál" (coming forth
to greet) and is regulated by the severest laws of etiquette. As a
rule the greater the distance (which may be a minimum of one step)
the higher the honour. Easterns infinitely despise strangers who
ignore these vitals of politeness.

[FN#465] i.e. he will be a desert Nimrod and the game will delight
to be killed by him.

[FN#466] This serves to keep the babe's eyes free from
inflammation.

[FN#467] i.e. Crown of the Kings of amorous Blandishment.

[FN#468] Lane (i. 531) translates "the grey down." The Arabs use
"Akhzar" (prop. "green") in many senses, fresh, gray-hued, etc.

[FN#469] Allusion to the well-known black banners of the house of
Abbas. The Persians describe the growth of hair on a fair young
face by, "His cheeks went into mourning for the loss of their
charms."

[FN#470] Arab. "Káfir" a Koranic word meaning Infidel, the active
participle of Kufr= Infidelity i.e. rejecting the mission of
Mohammed. It is insulting and in Turkish has been degraded to
"Giaour." Here it means black, as Hafiz of Shiraz terms a cheek
mole "Hindu" i.e. dark-skinned and idolatrous.

[FN#471] Alluding to the travel of Moses (Koran chaps. xviii.) with
Al-Khizr (the "evergreen Prophet") who had drunk of the Fountain of
Life and enjoyed flourishing and continual youth. Moses is
represented as the external and superficial religionist; the man of
outsight; Al-Khizr as the spiritual and illuminated man of insight.

[FM#472] The lynx was used like the lion in Ancient Egypt and the
Chita-leopard in India: I have never seen or heard of it in these
days.

[FN#473] Arab. "Sukúr," whence our "Saker" the falcon, not to be
confounded with the old Falco Sacer, the Gr.      . Falconry which,
like all arts, began in Egypt, is an extensive subject throughout
Moslem lands. I must refer my readers to "Falconry in the Valley of
the Indus" (Van Voorst, 1852) and a long note in Pilgrimage iii.
71.

[FN#474] It was not respectful to pitch their camp within dog-bark.

[FN#475] Easterns attach great importance to softness and
smoothness of skin and they are right: a harsh rough epidermis
spoils sport with the handsomest woman.

[FN#476] Canticles vii. 8: Hosea xiv. 6.

[FN#477] The mesmeric attraction of like to like.

[FN#478] Arab. "Taswif"=saying "Sauf," I will do it soon. It is a
beautiful word–etymologically.

[FN#479] A very far fetched allusion. The face of the beloved
springing from an unbuttoned robe is the moon rising over the camp
in the hollow (bat'há).

[FN#480] Arab. "Kasabát" = "canes," long beads, bugles.

[FN#481] Koran, xcvi. 5.

[FN#482] Both words (masc. and fem.) mean "dear, excellent, highly-
prized." The tale is the Arab form of the European "Patient
Griselda" and shows a higher conception of womanly devotion,
because Azizah, despite her wearisome weeping, is a girl of high
intelligence and Aziz is a vicious zany, weak as water and wilful
as wind. The phenomenon (not rare in life) is explained by the
couplet:--

     I love my love with an S—
     Because he is stupid and not intellectual.

This fond affection of clever women for fools can be explained only
by the law of unlikeness which mostly governs sexual unions in
physical matters; and its appearance in the story gives novelty and
point. Aziz can plead only the violence of his passion which
distinguished him as a lover among the mob of men who cannot love
anything beyond themselves. And none can pity him for losing a
member which he so much abused.

[FN#483] Arab. "Sháhid," the index, the pointer raised in
testimony: the comparison of the Eastern and the Western names is
curious.

[FN#484] Musk is one of the perfumes of the Moslem Heaven; and
"musky" is much used in verse to signify scented and dark-brown.

[FN#485] Arab. "Mandíl": these kerchiefs are mostly oblong, the
shore sides being worked with gold and coloured silk, and often
fringed, while the two others are plain.

[FN#486] Arab. "Rayhání," of the Ocymum Basilicum or sweet basil:
a delicate handwriting, so called from the pen resembling a leaf
(?) See vol. i. p. 128. [Volume 1, note 229 & 230]

[FN#487] All idiom meaning "something unusual happened."

[FN#488] An action common in grief and regret: here the lady would
show that she sighs for union with her beloved.

[FN#489] Lane (i. 608) has a valuable note on the language of
signs, from M. du Vigneau's "Secretaire Turc," etc. (Paris, 1688),
Baron von Hammer-Purgstall ("Mines de ['Orient," No. 1, Vienna,
1809) and Marcel's "Comes du Cheykh El-Mohdy" (Paris, 1833). It is
practiced in Africa as well as in Asia. At Abeokuta in Yoruba a man
will send a symbolical letter in the shape of cowries, palm-nuts
and other kernels strung on rice- straw, and sharp wits readily
interpret the meaning. A specimen is given in p. 262 of Miss
Tucker's "Abbeokuta; or Sunrise within the Tropics."

[FN#490] Mr. Payne (ii. 227) translates "Hawá al-'Urzí" by "the
love of the Beni Udhra, an Arabian tribe famous for the passion and
devotion with which love was practiced among them." See Night
dclxxxiii. I understand it as "excusable love" which, for want of
a better term, is here translated "platonic." It is, however, more
like the old "bundling" of Wales and Northern England; and allows
all the pleasures but one, the toyings which the French call les
plaisirs de la petite ode; a term my dear old friend Fred. Hankey
derived from la petite voie. The Afghans know it as "Námzad-bází"
or betrothed play (Pilgrimage, ii. 56); the Abyssinians as eye-
love; and the Kafirs as Slambuka a Shlabonka, for which see The
traveller Delegorgue.

[FN#491] "Turk" in Arabic and Persian poetry means a plunderer, a
robber. Thus Hafiz: "Agar án Turk-i-Shirázi ba-dast árad dil-i-
márá," If that Shirazi (ah, the Turk!) would deign to take my heart
in hand, etc.

[FN#492] Arab. "Názir," a steward or an eye (a "looker"). The idea
is borrowed from Al-Hariri (Assemblies, xiii.), and,--

[FN#493] Arab. "Hájib," a groom of the chambers, a chamberlain;
also an eyebrow. See Al-Hariri, ibid. xiii. and xxii.

[FN#494] This gesture speaks for itself: it is that of a dyer
staining a cloth. The "Sabbágh's" shop is the usual small recess,
open to the street and showing pans of various dyes sunk like "dog-
laps" in the floor.

[FN#495] The Arab. "Sabt" (from sabata, he kept Sabt) and the Heb.
"Sabbath" both mean Saturn's day, Saturday, transferred by some
unknown process throughout Christendom to Sunday. The change is one
of the most curious in the history of religions. If there be a
single command stronger than all others it is "Keep the Saturday
holy." It was so kept by the Founder of Christianity; the order was
never abrogated and yet most Christians are not aware that Sabbath,
or "Sawbath," means Saturn's day, the "Shiyár" of the older Arabs.
And to complete its degradation "Sabbat" in French and German means
a criaillerie, a "row," a disorder, an abominable festival of Hexen
(witches). This monstrous absurdity can be explained only by
aberrations of sectarian zeal, of party spirit in religion.

[FN#496] The men who cry to prayer. The first was Bilál, the
Abyssinian slave bought and manumitted by Abu Bakr. His simple cry
was "I testify there is no Iláh (god) but Allah (God)! Come ye to
prayers!" Caliph Omar, with the Prophet's permission, added, "I
testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of Allah." The prayer-cry
which is beautiful and human, contrasting pleasantly with the
brazen clang of the bell. now is

     Allah is Almighty (bis).
     I declare no god is there but Allah (bis).
     Hie ye to Rogation (Hayya=halumma).
     Hie ye to Salvation (Faláh=prosperity, Paradise).
     ("Hie ye to Edification," a Shi'ah adjunct).
     Prayer is better than sleep (in the morning, also bis).
     No god is there but Allah

This prayer call is similarly worded and differently pronounced and
intoned throughout Al-Islam.

[FN#497] i.e. a graceful youth of Al-Hijaz, the Moslem Holy Land,
whose "sons" claim especial privileges.

[FN#498] Arab. "harf'= a letter, as we should say a syllable.

[FN#499] She uses the masculine "fatá," in order to make the
question more mysterious.

[FN#500] The fountain-bowl is often ornamented by a rude mosaic of
black and white marble with enlivenments of red stone or tile in
complicated patterns.

[FN#501] Arab. "Kubád" = shaddock (citrus decumana): the huge
orange which Captain Shaddock brought from the West Indies; it is
the Anglo-Indian pompelmoose, vulg. pummelo. An excellent bitter is
made out of the rind steeped in spirits. Citronworts came from
India whence they spread throughout the tropics: they were first
introduced into Europe by the heroic Joam de Castro and planted in
his garden at Cintra where their descendants are still seen.

[FN#502] Arab. "Bakláwah," Turk. "Baklává," a kind of pastry with
blanched almonds bruised small between layers of dough, baked in
the oven and cut into lozenges. It is still common

[FN#503] Her just fear was that the young woman might prove "too
clever by half" for her simpleton cousin.

[FN#504] The curse is pregnant with meaning. On Judgment-day the
righteous shall arise with their faces shining gloriously: hence
the blessing, "Bayyaz' Allaho wajh-ak" (=Allah whiten thy
countenance!). But the wicked shall appear with faces scorched
black and deformed by horror (Koran xxiv.): hence "God blacken thy
brow!" I may observe that Easterns curse, the curse being
everywhere the language of excited destructiveness; but only
Westerns, and these chiefly English, swear, a practice utterly
meaningless. "Damn it" without specifying what the "it" is, sounds
like the speech of a naughty child anxious only to use a "wicked
word." "Damn you!" is intelligible all the world over. It has given
rise to "les goddams" in France, "Godámes" in the Brazil and
"Gotáma" amongst the Somal of Eastern Africa, who learn it in Aden,

[FN#505] Arab. "Zardah," usually rice dressed with saffron and
honey, from Pers. "Zard," saffron, yellow. See Night dcxii.

[FN#506] Vulgarly called "knuckle-bone," concerning which I shall
have something to say.

[FN#507] A bit of wood used in the children's game called "Táb"
which resembles our tip-cat (Lane M. E. chaps. xvii.).

[FN#508] Arab. "Balah," the unripened date, which is considered a
laxative and eaten in hot weather.

[FN#509] Lane (i. 611), quoting Al-Kazwíní, notes that the date-
stone is called "Nawá" (dim. "Nawáyah") which also means distance,
absence, severance. Thus the lady threatens to cast off her greedy
and sleepy lover.

[FN#510] The pad of the carob-bean which changes little after being
plucked is an emblem of constancy.

[FN#511] This dirham=48 grains avoir.

[FN#512] The weight would be round: also "Hadíd" (=iron) means
sharp or piercing (Koran chaps. Vi]. 21). The double "swear" is
intended to be very serious. Moreover iron conjures away fiends:
when a water-spout or a sand-devil (called Shaytán also in Arabia)
approaches, you point the index at the Jinn and say, "Iron, O thou
ill-omened one!" Amongst the Ancient Egyptians the metal was ill-
omened being the bones of Typhon, 80 here, possibly, we have an
instance of early homœopathy--similia similibus.

[FN#513] Probably fermented to a kind of wine. The insipid fruit
(Unnáb) which looks like an apple in miniature, is much used in
stews, etc. It is the fruit (Nabak classically Nabik) of Rhamnus
Nabeca (or Sidrat) also termed Zizyphus Jujuba, seu Spina Christi
because fabled to have formed the crown of thorns: in the English
market this plum is called Chinese Japonica. I have described it in
Pilgrimage ii. 205, and have noticed the infusion of the leaves for
washing the dead (ibid. ii. 105): this is especially the use of the
"Ber" in India, where the leaves are superstitiously held
peculiarly pure. Our dictionaries translate "Sidr" by "Lote-tree";
and no wonder that believers in Homeric writ feel their bile
aroused by so poor a realisation of the glorious myth. The Homerids
probably alluded to Hashish or Bhang.

[FN#514] Arab. "Azrár": the open collar of the Saub ("Tobe") or
long loose dress is symptomatic. The Eastern button is on the same
principle as ours (both having taken the place of the classical
fibula); but the Moslem affects a loop (like those to which we
attach our "frogs") and utterly ignores a button-hole.

[FN#515] Alluding to the ceremonious circumambulation of the Holy
House at Meccah: a notable irreverence worthy of Kneph-town
(Canopus).

[FN#516] The ear-drop is the penis and the anklet its crown of
glory.

[FN#517] Equivalent to our "Alas! Alas!" which, by the by, no one
ever says. "Awah," like "Yauh," is now a woman's word although used
by Al-Hariri (Assembly of Basrah) and so Al-awwáh=one who cries
from grief "Awáh." A favourite conversational form is "Yehh" with
the aspirate exasperated, but it is an expression of astonishment
rather than sorrow. It enters into Europe travel-books. 

[FN#518] In the text "burst her gall-bladder."

[FN#519] The death of Azizah is told with true Arab pathos and
simplicity: it still draws tear. *from the eyes of the Badawi, and
I never read it without a "lump in the throat."

[FN#520] Arab. "Inshallah bukra!" a universal saying which is the
horror of travellers.

[FN#521] I have explained "Nu'uman's flower" as the anemone which
in Grecised Arabic is "Anúmiyá." Here they are strewed over the
tomb; often the flowers are planted in a small bed of mould sunk in
the upper surface.

[FN#522] Arab. "Barzakh" lit. a bar, a partition: in the Koran
(chapts. xxiii. and xxxv.) the space or the place between death and
resurrection where souls are stowed away. It corresponds after a
fashion with the classical Hades and the Limbus (Limbo) of
Christendom, e.g.. Limbus patrum, infantum, fatuorum. But it must
not be confounded with Al-A'aráf, The Moslem purgatory.

[FN#523] Arab. "Zukák al-Nakíb," the latter word has been explained
as a chief, leader, head man.

[FN#524] Moslems never stand up at such times, for a spray of urine
would make their clothes ceremonially impure: hence the scrupulous
will break up with stick or knife the hard ground in front of them.
A certain pilgrim was reported to have made this blunder which is
hardly possible in Moslem dress. A high personage once asked me if
it was true that he killed a man who caught him in a standing
position; and I found to my surprise that the absurd scandal was
already twenty years old. After urinating the Moslem wipes the os
penis with one to three bits of stone, clay or handfuls of earth,
and he must perform Wuzu before he can pray. Tournefort (Voyage au
Levant iii. 335) tells a pleasant story of certain Christians at
Constantinople who powdered with "Poivre-d'Inde" the stones in a
wall where the Moslems were in the habit of rubbing the os penis by
way of wiping The same author (ii. 336) strongly recommends a
translation of Rabelais' Torcheculative chapter (Lib i., chaps. 13)
for the benefit of Mohammedans.

[FN#525] Arab. "Nuhás ahmar," lit. red brass.

[FN#526] The cup is that between the lady's legs.

[FN#527] A play upon "Sák" = calf, or leg, and "Sákí," a cup-
bearer. The going round (Tawáf) and the running (Sa'i) allude to
the circumambulation of the Ka'abah, and the running between Mount
Safá and Marwah (Pilgrimage ii. 58, and iii. 343). A religious
Moslem would hold the allusion highly irreverent.

[FN#528] Lane (i. 614) never saw a woman wearing such kerchief
which is deshabille. It is either spread over the head or twisted
turband-wise.

[FN#529] The "Kasabah" was about two fathoms of long measure, and
sometimes 12 ½ feet; but the length has been reduced.

[FN#530] "Bat and ball," or hockey on horseback (Polo) is one of
the earliest Persian games as shown by every illustrated copy of
Firdausi's "Shahnámeh." This game was played with a Kurrah or small
hand-ball and a long thin bat crooked at the end called in Persian
Chaugán and in Arabic Saulaján. Another sense of the word is given
in the Burhán-i-Káti translated by Vullers (Lex. Persico-Latinum),
a large bandy with bent head to which is hung an iron ball, also
called Kaukabah (our "morning-star") and like the umbrella it
denotes the grandees of the court. The same Kaukabah particularly
distinguished one of the Marquesses of Waterford. This Polo
corresponds with the folliculus, the pallone, the baloun-game
(moyen âge) of Europe, where the horse is not such a companion of
man; and whereof the classics sang:--

     Folle decet pueros ludere, folle senes.

In these days we should spell otherwise the "folle" of seniors
playing at the ball or lawn-tennis.

[FN#531] "Dalíl" means a guide; `'Dalílah," a woman who misguides,
a bawd. See the Tale of Dalílah the Crafty, Night dcxcviii.

[FN#532] i.e. she was a martyr.

[FN#533] Arab. "Ghashím" a popular and insulting term, our "Johnny
Raw." Its use is shown in Pilgrimage i. 110.

[FN#534] Bathers pay on leaving the Hammam; all enter without
paying.

[FN#535] i.e. she swore him upon his sword and upon the Koran: a
loaf of bread is sometimes added. See Lane (i. 615).










This etext was produced by Douglas E. Levy.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

  As a convenience to the reader I have included in this volume the
  biographical sketch of Emma Lazarus which originally appeared only
  in Vol. I. of these works.  Further, the sketch contains references
  to passages contained in this volume. --D.L.





THE POEMS of EMMA LAZARUS

in Two Volumes

VOL. II.

Jewish Poems: Translation




CONTENTS.


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF EMMA LAZARUS.


THE NEW YEAR.
THE CROWING OF THE RED COCK.
IN EXILE.
IN MEMORIAM--REV. J. J. LYONS.
THE VALLEY OF THE BACA.
THE BANNER OF THE JEW.
THE GUARDIAN OF THE RED DISK.
THE NEW EZEKIEL.
THE CHOICE.
THE WORLD'S JUSTICE.
THE SUPREME SACRIFICE.
THE FEAST OF LIGHT GIFTS.
BAR KOCHBA.
1492.
THE BIRTH OF MAN.
RASCHI IN PRAGUE.
THE DEATH OF RASCHI.
AN EPISTLE.

BY THE WATERS OF BABYLON: LITTLE POEMS IN PROSE.
     I. The Exodus.
    II. Treasures.
   III. The Sower.
    IV. The Test.
     V. Currents.
    VI. The Prophet.
   VII. Chrysalis.

TO CARMEN SYLVA.
THE DANCE TO DEATH.

TRANSLATIONS.

  FROM SOLOMON BEN JUDAH GABIROL.
     Night-Piece.
     Night-Thoughts.
     Meditations.
     Hymn.
     To a Detractor.
     Fragment.
     Stanzas.
     Wine and Grief.
     Defiance.
     A Degenerate Age.

  FROM ABUL HASSAN JUDAH BEN HA-LEVI.

     A Letter to his Friend Isaac.
     Admonition.
     Love-Song.
     Separation.
     Longing for Jerusalem.
     On the Voyage to Jerusalem.
     To the West Wind.

  FROM MOSES BEN ESRA.

     Extracts from the Book of Tarshish, or "Necklace of Pearls."
     In the Night.
     Love Song of Alcharisi.

NACHUM.

     Spring Songs.

A TRANSLATION AND TWO IMITATIONS.

     I. Donna Clara.
    II. Don Pedrillo.
   III. Fra Pedro.

TRANSLATIONS FROM PETRARCH.

     In Vita, LXVII.
     In Vita, LXXVI.
     In Vita, CV.
     In Vita, CIX.
     In Morte, II. On the Death of Cardinal Colonna and Laura.
     In Morte, XLIII.
     In Vita. Canzone XI.
     Fragment. Canzone XII.
     Fragment. Trionfo d'Amore.
     Fragment. Trionfo della Morte.

TRANSLATIONS FROM ALFRED DE MUSSET.

     The May Night.
     The October Night.

NOTES TO "EPISTLE" OF JOSHUA IBN VIVES OF ALLORQUI.


     Most of the poems in this volume were originally printed in
                     "The American Hebrew."




  Publisher's note: Thanks are due to the Editors of "The Century,"
  Lippincott's Magazine, and "The Critic," for their courtesy in
  allowing the poems published by them to be reprinted in these pages.






          EMMA LAZARUS. (Written for "The Century Magazine")


             Born July 22, 1849; Died November 19, 1887.



One hesitates to lift the veil and throw the light upon a life so
hidden and a personality so withdrawn as that of Emma Lazarus; but
while her memory is fresh, and the echo of her songs still lingers
in these pages, we feel it a duty to call up her presence once more,
and to note the traits that made it remarkable and worthy to shine
out clearly before the world.  Of dramatic episode or climax in her
life there is none; outwardly all was placid and serene, like an
untroubled stream whose depths alone hold the strong, quick tide.
The story of her life is the story of a mind, of a spirit, ever
seeking, ever striving, and pressing onward and upward to new truth
and light.  Her works are the mirror of this progress.  In reviewing
them, the first point that strikes us is the precocity, or rather
the spontaneity, of her poetic gift.  She was a born singer; poetry
was her natural language, and to write was less effort than to speak,
for she was a shy, sensitive child, with strange reserves and
reticences, not easily putting herself "en rapport" with those around
her.  Books were her world from her earliest years; in them she
literally lost and found herself.  She was eleven years old when the
War of Succession broke out, which inspired her first lyric outbursts.
Her poems and translations written between the ages of fourteen and
seventeen were collected, and constituted her first published volume.
Crude and immature as these productions naturally were, and utterly
condemned by the writer's later judgment, they are, nevertheless,
highly interesting and characteristic, giving, as they do, the
keynote of much that afterwards unfolded itself in her life.  One
cannot fail to be rather painfully impressed by the profound
melancholy pervading the book.  The opening poem is "In Memoriam,"--
on the death of a school friend and companion; and the two following
poems also have death for theme.  "On a Lock of my Mother's Hair" gives
us reflections on growing old.  These are the four poems written at
the age of fourteen.  There is not a wholly glad and joyous strain in
the volume, and we might smile at the recurrence of broken vows,
broken hearts, and broken lives in the experience of this maiden just
entered upon her teens, were it not that the innocent child herself
is in such deadly earnest.  The two long narrative poems, "Bertha" and
"Elfrida," are tragic in the extreme.  Both are dashed off apparently
at white heat: "Elfrida," over fifteen hundred lines of blank verse,
in two weeks; "Bertha," in three and a half.  We have said that Emma
Lazarus was a born singer, but she did not sing, like a bird, for
joy of being alive; and of being young, alas! there is no hint in
these youthful effusions, except inasmuch as this unrelieved gloom,
this ignorance of "values," so to speak, is a sign of youth, common
especially among gifted persons of acute and premature sensibilities,
whose imagination, not yet focused by reality, overreached the mark.
With Emma Lazarus, however, this sombre streak has a deeper root;
something of birth and temperament is in it--the stamp and heritage
of a race born to suffer.  But dominant and fundamental though it was,
Hebraism was only latent thus far.  It was classic and romantic art
that first attracted and inspired her.  She pictures Aphrodite the
beautiful, arising from the waves, and the beautiful Apollo and his
loves,--Daphne, pursued by the god, changing into the laurel, and the
enamored Clytie into the faithful sunflower.  Beauty, for its own
sake, supreme and unconditional, charmed her primarily and to the end.
Her restless spirit found repose in the pagan idea,--the absolute
unity and identity of man with nature, as symbolized in the Greek
myths, where every natural force becomes a person, and where, in turn,
persons pass with equal readiness and freedom back into nature again.

In this connection a name would suggest itself even if it did not
appear,--Heine, the Greek, Heine the Jew, Heine the Romanticist, as
Emma Lazarus herself has styled him; and already in this early volume
of hers we have trace of the kinship and affinity that afterwards so
plainly declared itself.  Foremost among the translations are a
number of his songs, rendered with a finesse and a literalness that
are rarely combined.  Four years later, at the age of twenty-one,
she published her second volume, "Admetus and Other Poems," which
at once took rank as literature both in America and England, and
challenged comparison with the work of established writers.  Of
classic themes we have "Admetus" and "Orpheus," and of romantic the
legend of Tannhauser and of the saintly Lohengrin.  All are treated
with an artistic finish that shows perfect mastery of her craft,
without detracting from the freshness and flow of her inspiration.
While sounding no absolutely new note in the world, she yet makes
us aware of a talent of unusual distinction, and a highly endowed
nature,--a sort of tact of sentiment and expression, an instinct
of the true and beautiful, and that quick intuition which is like
second-sight in its sensitiveness to apprehend and respond to external
stimulus.  But it is not the purely imaginative poems in this volume
that most deeply interest us.  We come upon experience of life in
these pages; not in the ordinary sense, however, of outward activity
and movement, but in the hidden undercurrent of being.  "The epochs
of our life are not in the visible facts, but in the silent thoughts
by the wayside as we walk."  This is the motto, drawn from Emerson,
which she chooses for her poem of "Epochs," which marks a pivotal
moment in her life.  Difficult to analyze, difficult above all to
convey, if we would not encroach upon the domain of private and
personal experience, is the drift of this poem, or rather cycle of
poems, that ring throughout with a deeper accent and a more direct
appeal than has yet made itself felt.  It is the drama of the human
soul,--"the mystic winged and flickering butterfly," "flitting
between earth and sky," in its passage from birth to death.

A golden morning of June!  "Sweet empty sky without a stain."
Sunlight and mist and "ripple of rain-fed rills."  "A murmur and a
singing manifold."


            "What simple things be these the soul to raise
             To bounding joy, and make young pulses beat
             With nameless pleasure, finding life so sweet!"


Such is youth, a June day, fair and fresh and tender with dreams and
longing and vague desire. The morn lingers and passes, but the noon
has not reached its height before the clouds begin to rise, the
sunshine dies, the air grows thick and heavy, the lightnings flash,
the thunder breaks among the hills, rolls and gathers and grows,
until


                   Behold, yon bolt struck home,
             And over ruined fields the storm hath come."


Now we have the phases of the soul,--the shock and surprise of grief
in the face of the world made desolate.  Loneliness and despair for
a space, and then, like stars in the night, the new births of the
spirit, the wonderful outcoming from sorrow: the mild light of patience
at first; hope and faith kindled afresh in the very jaws of evil;
the new meaning and worth of life beyond sorrow, beyond joy; and
finally duty, the holiest word of all, that leads at last to victory
and peace.  The poem rounds and completes itself with the close of
"the long, rich day," and the release of


           "The mystic winged and flickering butterfly,
            A human soul, that drifts at liberty,
            Ah! who can tell to what strange paradise,
            To what undreamed-of fields and lofty skies!"


We have dwelt at some length upon this poem, which seems to us, in a
certain sense, subjective and biographical; but upon closer analysis
there is still another conclusion to arrive at.  In "Epochs" we have,
doubtless, the impress of a calamity brought very near to the writer,
and profoundly working upon her sensibilities; not however by direct,
but reflex action, as it were, and through sympathetic emotion--the
emotion of the deeply-stirred spectator, of the artist, the poet who
lives in the lives of others, and makes their joys and their sorrows
his own.

Before dismissing this volume we may point out another clue as to the
shaping of mind and character.  The poem of "Admetus" is dedicated
"to my friend Ralph Waldo Emerson."  Emma Lazarus was between
seventeen and eighteen years of age when the writings of Emerson
fell into her hands, and it would be difficult to over-estimate the
impression produced upon her.  As she afterwards wrote: "To how many
thousand youthful hearts has not his word been the beacon--nay,
more, the guiding star--that led them safely through periods of
mental storm and struggle!"  Of no one is this more true than herself.
Left, to a certain extent, without compass or guide, without any
positive or effective religious training, this was the first great
moral revelation of her life.  We can easily realize the chaos and
ferment of an over-stimulated brain, steeped in romantic literature,
and given over to the wayward leadings of the imagination.  Who can
tell what is true, what is false, in a world where fantasy is as real
as fact?  Emerson's word fell like truth itself, "a shaft of light
shot from the zenith," a golden rule of thought and action.  His
books were bread and wine to her, and she absorbed them into her
very being.  She felt herself invincibly drawn to the master, "that
fount of wisdom and goodness," and it was her great privilege during
these years to be brought into personal relations with him.  From
the first he showed her a marked interest and sympathy, which became
for her one of the most valued possessions of her life.  He criticised
her work with the fine appreciation and discrimination that made
him quick to discern the quality of her talent as well as of her
personality, and he was no doubt attracted by her almost transparent
sincerity and singleness of soul, as well as by the simplicity and
modesty that would have been unusual even in a person not gifted.
He constituted himself, in a way, her literary mentor, advised her
as to the books she should read and the attitude of mind she should
cultivate.  For some years he corresponded with her very faithfully;
his letters are full of noble and characteristic utterances, and
give evidence of a warm regard that in itself was a stimulus and a
high incentive.  But encouragement even from so illustrious a source
failed to elate the young poetess, or even to give her a due sense
of the importance and value of her work, or the dignity of her
vocation.  We have already alluded to her modesty in her unwillingness
to assert herself or claim any prerogative,--something even morbid
and exaggerated, which we know not how to define, whether as over-
sensitiveness or indifference.  Once finished, the heat and glow of
composition spent, her writings apparently ceased to interest her.
She often resented any allusion to them on the part of intimate
friends, and the public verdict as to their excellence could not
reassure or satisfy her.  The explanation is not far, perhaps, to
seek.  Was it not the "Ewig-Weibliche" that allows no prestige but
its own?  Emma Lazarus was a true woman, too distinctly feminine to
wish to be exceptional, or to stand alone and apart, even by virtue
of superiority.

A word now as to her life and surroundings.  She was one of a family
of seven, and her parents were both living.  Her winters were passed
in New York, and her summers by the sea.  In both places her life was
essentially quiet and retired.  The success of her book had been
mainly in the world of letters.  In no wise tricked out to catch the
public eye, her writings had not yet made her a conspicuous figure,
but were destined slowly to take their proper place and give her the
rank that she afterwards held.

For some years now almost everything that she wrote was published
in "Lippincott's Magazine," then edited by John Foster Kirk, and we
shall still find in her poems the method and movement of her life.
Nature is still the fount and mirror, reflecting, and again reflected,
in the soul.  We have picture after picture, almost to satiety,
until we grow conscious of a lack of substance and body and of vital
play to the thought, as though the brain were spending itself in
dreamings and reverie, the heart feeding upon itself, and the life
choked by its own fullness without due outlet.  Happily, however,
the heavy cloud of sadness has lifted, and we feel the subsidence
of waves after a storm.  She sings "Matins:"--


                  "Does not the morn break thus,
                   Swift, bright, victorious,
                   With new skies cleared for us
                   Over the soul storm-tost?
                   Her night was long and deep,
                   Strange visions vexed her sleep,
                   Strange sorrows bade her weep,
                   Her faith in dawn was lost.


                  "No halt, no rest for her,
                   The immortal wanderer
                   From sphere to higher sphere
                   Toward the pure source of day.
                   The new light shames her fears,
                   Her faithlessness and tears,
                   As the new sun appears
                   To light her god-like way."


Nature is the perpetual resource and consolation. "'T is good to be
alive!" she says, and why?  Simply,


                            "To see the light
            That plays upon the grass, to feel (and sigh
            With perfect pleasure) the mild breeze stir
              Among the garden roses, red and white,
                With whiffs of fragrancy."


She gives us the breath of the pines and of the cool, salt seas,
"illimitably sparkling."  Her ears drink the ripple of the tide,
and she stops


        "To gaze as one who is not satisfied
         With gazing at the large, bright, breathing sea."


"Phantasies" (after Robert Schumann) is the most complete and perfect
poem of this period.  Like "Epochs," it is a cycle of poems, and the
verse has caught the very trick of music,--alluring, baffling, and
evasive.  This time we have the landscape of the night, the glamour
of moon and stars,--pictures half real and half unreal, mystic
imaginings, fancies, dreams, and the enchantment of "faerie," and
throughout the unanswered cry, the eternal "Wherefore" of destiny.
Dawn ends the song with a fine clear note, the return of day, night's
misty phantoms rolled away, and the world itself, again green,
sparkling and breathing freshness.

In 1874 she published "Alide," a romance in prose drawn from Goethe's
autobiography.  It may be of interest to quote the letter she
received from Tourgeneff on this occasion:--


    "Although, generally speaking, I do not think it advisable
    to take celebrated men, especially poets and artists, as a
    subject for a novel, still I am truly glad to say that I
    have read your book with the liveliest interest.  It is
    very sincere and very poetical at the same time; the life
    and spirit of Germany have no secrets for you, and your
    characters are drawn with a pencil as delicate as it is
    strong.  I feel very proud of the approbation you give to
    my works, and of the influence you kindly attribute to them
    on your own talent; an author who write as you do is not
    a pupil in art any more; he is not far from being himself
    a master."


Charming and graceful words, of which the young writer was justly
proud.

About this time occurred the death of her mother, the first break in
the home and family circle.  In August of 1876 she made a visit to
Concord, at the Emersons', memorable enough for her to keep a journal
and note down every incident and detail.  Very touching to read now,
in its almost childlike simplicity, is this record of "persons that
pass and shadows that remain."  Mr. Emerson himself meets her at the
station, and drives with her in his little one-horse wagon to his
home, the gray square house, with dark green blinds, set amidst noble
trees.  A glimpse of the family,--"the stately, white-haired Mrs.
Emerson, and the beautiful, faithful Ellen, whose figure seems always
to stand by the side of her august father."  Then the picture of
Concord itself, lovely and smiling, with its quiet meadows, quiet
slopes, and quietest of rivers.  She meets the little set of Concord
people: Mr. Alcott, for whom she does not share Mr. Emerson's
enthusiasm; and William Ellery Channing, whose figure stands out like
a gnarled and twisted scrub-oak,--a pathetic, impossible creature,
whose cranks and oddities were submitted to on account of an innate
nobility of character.  "Generally crabbed and reticent with
strangers, he took a liking to me," says Emma Lazarus.  "The bond
of our sympathy was my admiration for Thoreau, whose memory he
actually worships, having been his constant companion in his best
days, and his daily attendant in the last years of illness and heroic
suffering.  I do not know whether I was most touched by the thought
of the unique, lofty character that had inspired this depth and
fervor of friendship, or by the pathetic constancy and pure affection
of the poor, desolate old man before me, who tried to conceal his
tenderness and sense of irremediable loss by a show of gruffness and
philosophy.  He never speaks of Thoreau's death," she says, "but
always 'Thoreau's loss,' or 'when I lost Mr. Thoreau,' or 'when Mr.
Thoreau went away from Concord;' nor would he confess that he missed
him, for there was not a day, an hour, a moment, when he did not
feel that his friend was still with him and had never left him.  And
yet a day or two after," she goes on to say, "when I sat with him in
the sunlit wood, looking at the gorgeous blue and silver summer sky,
he turned to me and said: 'Just half of the world died for me when I
lost Mr. Thoreau.  None of it looks the same as when I looked at it
with him.'. . . He took me through the woods and pointed out to me
every spot visited and described by his friend.  Where the hut stood
is a little pile of stones, and a sign, 'Site of Thoreau's Hut,' and
a few steps beyond is the pond with thickly-wooded shore,--everything
exquisitely peaceful and beautiful in the afternoon light, and not
a sound to be heard except the crickets or the 'z-ing' of the locusts
which Thoreau has described.  Farther on he pointed out to me, in
the distant landscape, a low roof, the only one visible, which was
the roof of Thoreau's birthplace.  He had been over there many times,
he said, since he lost Mr. Thoreau, but had never gone in,--he was
afraid it might look lonely!  But he had often sat on a rock in
front of the house and looked at it."  On parting from his young
friend, Mr. Channing gave her a package, which proved to be a copy
of his own book on Thoreau, and the pocket compass which Thoreau
carried to the Maine woods and on all his excursions.  Before leaving
the Emersons she received the proof-sheets of her drama of "The
Spagnoletto," which was being printed for private circulation.  She
showed them to Mr. Emerson, who had expressed a wish to see them,
and, after reading them, he gave them back to her with the comment
that they were "good."  She playfully asked him if he would not give
her a bigger word to take home to the family.  He laughed, and said
he did not know of any; but he went on to tell her that he had
taken it up, not expecting to read it through, and had not been able
to put it down.  Every word and line told of richness in the poetry,
he said, and as far as he could judge the play had great dramatic
opportunities.  Early in the autumn "The Spagnoletto" appeared,--a
tragedy in five acts, the scene laid in Italy, 1655.

Without a doubt, every one in these days will take up with misgiving,
and like Mr. Emerson "not expecting to read it through," a five-act
tragedy of the seventeenth century, so far removed apparently from
the age and present actualities,--so opposed to the "Modernite,"
which has come to be the last word of art.  Moreover, great names at
once appear; great shades arise to rebuke the presumptuous new-comer
in this highest realm of expression.  "The Spagnoletto" has grave
defects that would probably preclude its ever being represented on
the stage.  The denoument especially is unfortunate, and sins against
our moral and aesthetic instinct.  The wretched, tiger-like father
stabs himself in the presence of his crushed and erring daughter, so
that she may forever be haunted by the horror and the retribution of
his death.  We are left suspended, as it were, over an abyss, our
moral judgment thwarted, our humanity outraged.  But "The Spagnoletto"
is, nevertheless, a remarkable production, and pitched in another
key from anything the writer has yet given us.  Heretofore we have
only had quiet, reflective, passive emotion: now we have a storm
and sweep of passion for which we were quite unprepared. Ribera's
character is charged like a thunder-cloud with dramatic elements.
Maria Rosa is the child of her father, fired at a flash, "deaf, dumb,
and blind" at the touch of passion.


              "Does love steal gently o'er our soul?"

she asks;


                        "What if he come,
                 A cloud, a fire, a whirlwind?"

and then the cry:


                           "O my God!
            This awful joy in mine own heart is love."

Again:


           "While you are here the one thing real to me
            In all the universe is love."


Exquisitely tender and refined are the love scenes--at the ball and
in the garden--between the dashing prince-lover in search of his
pleasure and the devoted girl with her heart in her eyes, on her
lips, in her hand.  Behind them, always like a tragic fate, the
somber figure of the Spagnoletto, and over all the glow and color
and soul of Italy.

In 1881 appeared the translation of Heine's poems and ballads, which
was generally accepted as the best version of that untranslatable
poet.  Very curious is the link between that bitter, mocking, cynic
spirit and the refined, gentle spirit of Emma Lazarus.  Charmed by
the magic of his verse, the iridescent play of his fancy, and the
sudden cry of the heart piercing through it all, she is as yet unaware
or only vaguely conscious of the of the real bond between them: the
sympathy in the blood, the deep, tragic, Judaic passion of eighteen
hundred years that was smouldering in her own heart, soon to break
out and change the whole current of thought and feeling.

Already, in 1879, the storm was gathering.  In a distant province
of Russia at first, then on the banks of the Volga, and finally in
Moscow itself, the old cry was raised, the hideous mediaeval charge
revived, and the standard of persecution unfurled against the Jews.
Province after province took it up.  In Bulgaria, Servia, and, above
all, Roumania, where, we were told, the sword of the Czar had been
drawn to protect the oppressed, Christian atrocities took the place
of Moslem atrocities, and history turned a page backward into the dark
annals of violence and crime.  And not alone in despotic Russia, but
in Germany, the seat of modern philosophic thought and culture, the
rage of Anti-Semitism broke out and spread with fatal ease and potency.
In Berlin itself tumults and riots were threatened.  We in America
could scarcely comprehend the situation or credit the reports, and
for a while we shut our eyes and ears to the facts; but we were soon
rudely awakened from our insensibility, and forced to face the truth.
It was in England that the voice was first raised in behalf of
justice and humanity.  In January, 1881, there appeared in the
"London Times" a series of articles, carefully compiled on the
testimony of eye-witnesses, and confirmed by official documents,
records, etc., giving an account of events that had been taking place
in southern and western Russia during a period of nine months,
between April and December of 1880.  We do not need to recall the
sickening details.  The headings will suffice: outrage, murder, arson,
and pillage, and the result,--100,000 Jewish families made homeless
and destitute, and nearly $100,000,000 worth of property destroyed