-
The Prince--my Prince--dear Claire, ask me no more!
My adored enemy, my angel-fiend,
Splitting my heart against my heart!  O God,
How shall I pray for strength to love him less
Than mine own soul?


CLAIRE.
          What mean these contrary words?
These passionate tears?


LIEBHAID.
          Brave girl, who art inured
To difficult privation and rude pain,
What good shall come forswearing kith and God,
To follow the allurements of the heart?


CLAIRE.
Duty wears one face, but a thousand masks.
Thy feet she leads to glittering peaks, while mine
She guides midst brambled roadways.  Not the first
Art thou of Israel's women, chosen of God,
To rule o'er rulers.  I remember me
A verse my father often would repeat
Out of our sacred Talmud: "Every time
The sun, moon, stars begin again their course,
They hesitate, trembling and filled with shame,
Blush at the blasphemous worship offered them,
And each time God's voice thunders, crying out,
On with your duty!"

  Enter REUBEN.


REUBEN.
          Sister, we are lost!
The streets are thronged with panic-stricken folk.
Wild rumors fill the air.  Two of our tribe,
Young Mordecai, as I hear, and old Baruch,
Seized by the mob, were dragged towards Eisenach,
Cruelly used, left to bleed out their lives,
In the wayside ditch at night.  This morn, betimes,
The iron-hearted Governor of Salza
Rides furious into Nordhausen; his horse,
Spurred past endurance, drops before the gate.
The Council has been called to hear him read
The Landgrave's message,--all men say, 'tis death
Unto our race.


LIEBHAID.
          Where is our father, Reuben?


REUBEN.
With Rabbi Jacob.  Through the streets they walk,
Striving to quell the terror.  Ah, too late!
Had he but heeded the prophetic voice,
This warning angel led to us in vain!


LIEBHAID.
Brother, be calm.  Man your young heart to front
Whatever ills the Lord afflicts us with.
What does Prince William?  Hastes he not to aid?


REUBEN.
None know his whereabouts.  Some say he's held
Imprisoned by the Landgrave.  Others tell
While he was posting with deliverance
To Nordhausen, in bloody Schnetzen's wake,
He was set upon by ruffians--kidnapped--killed.
What do I know--hid till our ruin's wrought.
[LIEBHAID swoons.]


CLAIRE.
Hush, foolish boy.  See how your rude words hurt.
Look up, sweet girl; take comfort.


REUBEN.
          Pluck up heart:
Dear sister, pardon me; he lives, he lives!


LIEBHAID.
God help me!  Shall my heart crack for love's loss
That meekly bears my people's martyrdom?
He lives--I feel it--to live or die with me.
I love him as my soul--no more of that.
I am all Israel's now--till this cloud pass,
I have no thought, no passion, no desire,
Save for my people.

  Enter SUSSKIND.


SUSSKIND.
          Blessed art thou, my child!
This is the darkest hour before the dawn.
Thou art the morning-star of Israel.
How dear thou art to me--heart of my heart,
Mine, mine, all mine to-day! the pious thought,
The orient spirit mine, the Jewish soul.
The glowing veins that sucked life-nourishment
From Hebrew mother's milk.  Look at me, Liebhaid,
Tell me you love me.  Pity me, my God!
No fiercer pang than this did Jephthah know.


LIEBHAID.
Father, what wild and wandering words are these?
Is all hope lost?


SUSSKIND.
          Nay, God is good to us.
I am so well assured the town is safe,
That I can weep my private loss--of thee.
An ugly dream I had, quits not my sense,
That you, made Princess of Thuringia,
Forsook your father, and forswore your race.
Forgive me, Liebhaid, I am calm again,
We must be brave--I who besought my tribe
To bide their fate in Nordhausen, and you
Whom God elects for a peculiar lot.
With many have I talked; some crouched at home,
Some wringing hands about the public ways.
I gave all comfort.  I am very weary.
My children, we had best go in and pray,
Solace and safety dwell but in the Lord.
[Exeunt.]



                            ACT IV.

SCENE I.

  The City Hall at Nordhausen.  Deputies and Burghers assembling.
  To the right, at a table near the President's chair, is seated
  the Public Scrivener.  Enter DIETRICH VON TETTENBORN, and HENRY
  SCHNETZEN with an open letter in his hand.


SCHNETZEN.
Didst hear the fellow's words who handed it?
I asked from whom it came, he spoke by rote,
"The pepper bites, the corn is ripe for harvest,
I come from Eisenach."  'T is some tedious jest.


TETTENBORN.
Doubtless your shrewd friend Prior Peppercorn
Masks here some warning.  Ask the scrivener
To help us to its contents.


SCHNETZEN (to the clerk).
          Read me these.


SCRIVENER (reads).

"Beware, Lord Henry Schnetzen, of Susskind's lying tongue!  He will
thrust a cuckoo's egg into your nest.
                             [Signed]   ONE WHO KNOWS."


SCHNETZEN.
A cuckoo's egg! that riddle puzzles me;
But this I know.  Schnetzen is no man's dupe,
Much less a Jew's.
[SCHNETZEN and VON TETTENBORN take their seats side by side.]


TETTENBORN.
Knights, counsellors and burghers!
Sir Henry Schnetzen, Governor of Salza,
Comes on grave mission from His Highness Frederick,
Margrave of Meissen, Landgrave of Thuringia,
Our town's imperial Patron and Protector.


SCHNETZEN.
Gentles, I greet you in the Landgrave's name,
The honored bearer of his princely script,
Sealed with his signet.  Read, good Master Clerk.
[He hands a parchment to the Scrivener, who reads aloud]:

  Lord President and Deputies of the town of Nordhausen!  Know that
we, Frederick Margrave of Meissen, and Landgrave of Thuringia,
command to be burned all the Jews within our territories as far
as our lands extend, on account of the great crime they have
committed against Christendom in throwing poison into the wells,
of the truth of which indictment we have absolute knowledge.
Therefore we admonish you to have the Jews killed in honor of
God, so that Christendom be not enfeebled by them.  Whatever
responsibility you incur, we will assume with our Lord the Emperor,
and with all other lords.  Know also that we send to you Henry
Schnetzen, our Governor of Salza, who shall publicly accuse your
Jews of the above-mentioned crime.  Therefore we beseech you to
help him to do justice upon them, and we will singularly reward
your good will.*

  Given at Eisenach, the Thursday after St. Walpurgis, under our
secret seal.

  *This is an authentic document.


A COUNSELLOR (DIETHER VON WERTHER).
Fit silence welcomes this unheard-of wrong!
So!  Ye are men--free, upright, honest men,
Not hired assassins?  I half doubted it,
Seeing you lend these infamous words your ears.


SCHNETZEN.
Consider, gentlemen of Nordhausen,
Ere ye give heed to the rash partisan.
Ye cross the Landgrave--well? he crosses you.
It may be I shall ride to Nordhausen,
Not with a harmless script, but with a sword,
And so denounce the town for perjured vow.
What was the Strasburg citizens' reward
Who championed these lost wretches, in the face
Of King and Kaiser--three against the world,
Conrad von Winterthur the Burgomaster,
Deputy Gosse Sturm, and Peter Schwarber,
Master Mechanic?  These leagued fools essayed
To stand between the people's sacred wrath,
And its doomed object.  Well, the Jews, no less,
Were rooted from the city neck and crop,
And their three friends degraded from their rank
I' the city council, glad to save their skins.
The Jews are foes to God.  Our Holy Father
Thunders his ban from Rome against all such
As aid the poisoners.  Your oath to God,
And to the Prince enjoins--Death to the Jews.


A BURGHER (REINHARD ROLAPP).
Why all this vain debate?  The Landgrave's brief
Affirms the Jews fling poison in the wells.
Shall we stand by and leave them unmolested,
Till they have made our town a wilderness?
I say, Death to the Jews!


A BURGHER (HUGO SCHULTZ).
          My lord and brethren,
I have scant gift of speech, ye are all my elders.
Yet hear me for truth's sake, and liberty's.
The Landgrave of Thuringia is our patron,
True--and our town's imperial Governor,
But are we not free burghers?  Shall we not
Debate and act in freedom?  If Lord Schnetzen
Will force our council with the sword--enough!
We are not frightened schoolboys crouched beneath
The master's rod, but men who bear the sword
As brave as he.  By this grim messenger,
Send back this devilish missive.  Say to Frederick
Nordhausen never was enfeoffed to him.
Prithee, Lord President, bid Henry Schnetzen
Withdraw awhile, that we may all take counsel,
According to the hour's necessity,
As free men, whom nor fear nor favor swerves.


TETTENBORN.
Bold youth, you err.  True, Nordhausen is free,
And God be witness, we for fear or favor,
Would never shed the blood of innocence.
But here the Prince condemns the Jews to death
For capital crime.  Who sees a snake must kill,
Ere it spit fatal venom.  I, too, say
Death to the Jews


ALL.
          Death to the Jews!  God wills it!


TETTENBORN.
Give me your voices in the urn.
(The votes are taken.)     One voice
For mercy, all the rest for death.  (To an Usher.)
          Go thou
To the Jews' quarter; bid Susskind von Orb,
And Rabbi Jacob hither to the Senate,
To hear the Landgrave's and the town's decree.
[Exit Usher.]
(To Schnetzen.)  What learn you of this evil through the State?


SCHNETZEN.
It swells to monstrous bulk.  In many towns,
Folk build high ramparts round the wells and springs.
In some they shun the treacherous sparkling brooks,
To drink dull rain-water, or melted snow,
In mountain districts.  Frederick has been patient,
And too long clement, duped by fleece-cloaked wolves.
But now his subjects' clamor rouses him
To front the general peril.  As I hear,
A fiendish and far-reaching plot involves
All Christian thrones and peoples.  These vile vermin,
Burrowing underneath society,
Have leagued with Moors in Spain, with heretics
Too plentiful--Christ knows! in every land,
And planned a subterraneous, sinuous scheme,
To overthrow all Christendom.  But see,
Where with audacious brows, and steadfast mien,
They enter, bold as innocence.  Now listen,
For we shall hear brave falsehoods.

  Enter SUSSKIND VON ORB and RABBI JACOB.


TETTENBORN.
          Rabbi Jacob,
And thou, Susskind von Orb, bow down, and learn
The Council's pleasure.  You the least despised
By true believers, and most reverenced
By your own tribe, we grace with our free leave
To enter, yea, to lift your voices here,
Amid these wise and honorable men,
If ye find aught to plead, that mitigates
The just severity of your doom.  Our prince,
Frederick the Grave, Patron of Nordhausen,
Ordains that all the Jews within his lands,
For the foul crime of poisoning the wells,
Bringing the Black Death upon Christendom,
Shall be consumed with flame.


RABBI JACOB (springing forward and clasping his hands).
          I' the name of God,
Your God and ours, have mercy!


SUSSKIND.
          Noble lords,
Burghers, and artisans of Nordhausen,
Wise, honorable, just, God-fearing men,
Shall ye condemn or ever ye have heard?
Sure, one at least owns here the close, kind name
Of Brother--unto him I turn.  At least
Some sit among you who have wedded wives,
Bear the dear title and the precious charge
Of Husband--unto these I speak.  Some here,
Are crowned, it may be, with the sacred name
Of Father--unto these I pray.  All, all
Are sons--all have been children, all have known
The love of parents--unto these I cry:
Have mercy on us, we are innocent,
Who are brothers, husbands, fathers, sons as ye!
Look you, we have dwelt among you many years,
Led thrifty, peaceable, well-ordered lives.
Who can attest, who prove we ever wrought
Or ever did devise the smallest harm,
Far less this fiendish crime against the State?
Rather let those arise who owe the Jews
Some debt of unpaid kindness, profuse alms,
The Hebrew leech's serviceable skill,
Who know our patience under injury,
And ye would see, if all stood bravely forth,
A motley host, led by the Landgrave's self,
Recruited from all ranks, and in the rear,
The humblest, veriest wretch in Nordhausen.
We know the Black Death is a scourge of God.
Is not our flesh as capable of pain,
Our blood as quick envenomed as your own?
Has the Destroying Angel passed the posts
Of Jewish doors--to visit Christian homes?
We all are slaves of one tremendous Hour.
We drink the waters which our enemies say
We spoil with poison,--we must breathe, as ye,
The universal air,--we droop, faint, sicken,
From the same causes to the selfsame end.
Ye are not strangers to me, though ye wear
Grim masks to-day--lords, knights and citizens,
Few do I see whose hand has pressed not mine,
In cordial greeting.  Dietrich von Tettenborn,
If at my death my wealth be confiscate
Unto the State, bethink you, lest she prove
A harsher creditor than I have been.
Stout Meister Rolapp, may you never again
Languish so nigh to death that Simon's art
Be needed to restore your lusty limbs.
Good Hugo Schultz--ah! be those blessed tears
Remembered unto you in Paradise!
Look there, my lords, one of your council weeps,
If you be men, why, then an angel sits
On yonder bench.  You have good cause to weep,
You who are Christian, and disgraced in that
Whereof you made your boast.  I have no tears.
A fiery wrath has scorched their source, a voice
Shrills through my brain--"Not upon us, on them
Fall everlasting woe, if this thing be!"


SCHNETZEN.
My lords of Nordhausen, shall ye be stunned
With sounding words?  Behold the serpent's skin,
Sleek-shining, clear as sunlight; yet his tooth
Holds deadly poison.  Even as the Jews
Did nail the Lord of heaven on the Cross,
So will they murder all his followers,
When once they have the might.  Beware, beware!


SUSSKIND.
So YOU are the accuser, my lord Schnetzen?
Now I confess, before you I am guilty.
You are in all this presence, the one man
Whom any Jew hath wronged--and I that Jew.
Oh, my offence is grievous; punish me
With the utmost rigor of the law, for theft
And violence, whom ye deemed an honest man,
But leave my tribe unharmed!  I yield my hands
Unto your chains, my body to your fires;
Let one life serve for all.


SCHNETZEN.
          You hear, my lords,
How the prevaricating villain shrinks
From the absolute truth, yet dares not front his Maker
With the full damnable lie hot on his lips.
Not thou alone, my private foe, shalt die,
But all thy race.  Thee had my vengeance reached,
Without appeal to Prince or citizen.
Silence! my heart is cuirassed as my breast.


RABBI JACOB.
Bear with us, gracious lords!  My friend is stunned.
He is an honest man.  Even I, as 't were,
Am stupefied by this surprising news.
Yet, let me think--it seems it is not new,
This is an ancient, well-remembered pain.
What, brother, came not one who prophesied
This should betide exactly as it doth?
That was a shrewd old man!  Your pardon, lords,
I think you know not just what you would do.
You say the Jews shall burn--shall burn you say;
Why, good my lords, the Jews are not a flock
Of gallows-birds, they are a colony
Of kindly, virtuous folk.  Come home with me;
I'll show you happy hearths, glad roofs, pure lives.
Why, some of them are little quick-eyed boys,
Some, pretty, ungrown maidens--children's children
Of those who called me to the pastorate.
And some are beautiful tall girls, some, youths
Of marvellous promise, some are old and sick,
Amongst them there be mothers, infants, brides,
Just like your Christian people, for all the world.
Know ye what burning is?  Hath one of you
Scorched ever his soft flesh, or singed his beard,
His hair, his eyebrows--felt the keen, fierce nip
Of the pungent flame--and raises not his voice
To stop this holocaust?  God! 't is too horrible!
Wake me, my friends, from this terrific dream.


SUSSKIND.
Courage, my brother.  On our firmness hangs
The dignity of Israel.  Sir Governor,
I have a secret word to speak with you.


SCHNETZEN.
Ye shall enjoy with me the jest.  These knaves
Are apt to quick invention as in crime.
Speak out--I have no secrets from my peers.


SUSSKIND.
My lord, what answer would you give your Christ
If peradventure, in this general doom
You sacrifice a Christian?  Some strayed dove
Lost from your cote, among our vultures caged?
Beware, for midst our virgins there is one
Owes kinship nor allegiance to our tribe.
For her dear sake be pitiful, my lords,
Have mercy on our women!  Spare at least
My daughter Liebhaid, she is none of mine!
She is a Christian!


SCHNETZEN.
          Just as I foretold!
The wretches will forswear the sacred'st ties,
Cringing for life.  Serpents, ye all shall die.
So wills the Landgrave; so the court affirms.
Your daughter shall be first, whose wanton arts
Have brought destruction on a princely house.


SUSSKIND.
My lord, be moved.  You kill your flesh and blood.
By Adonai I swear, your dying wife
Entrusted to these arms her child.  'T was I
Carried your infant from your burning home.
Lord Schnetzen, will you murder your own child?


SCHNETZEN.
Ha, excellent!  I was awaiting this.
Thou wilt inoculate our knightly veins
With thy corrupted Jewish blood.  Thou 'lt foist
This adder on my bosom.  Henry Schnetzen
Is no weak dupe, whom every lie may start.
Make ready, Jew, for death--and warn thy tribe.


SUSSKIND (kneeling).
Is there a God in heaven?  I who ne'er knelt
Until this hour to any man on earth,
Tyrant, before thee I abase myself.
If one red drop of human blood still flow
In thy congealed veins, if thou e'er have known
Touch of affection, the blind natural instinct
Of common kindred, even beasts partake,
Thou man of frozen stone, thou hollow statue,
Grant me one prayer, that thou wilt look on her.
Then shall the eyes of thy dead wife gaze back
From out the maiden's orbs, then shall a voice
Within thine entrails, cry--This is my child.


SCHNETZEN.
Enough!  I pray you, my lord President,
End this unseemly scene.  This wretched Jew
Would thrust a cuckoo's egg within my nest.
I have had timely warning.  Send the twain
Back to their people, that the court's decree
Be published unto all.


SUSSKIND.
          Lord Tettenborn!
Citizens! will you see this nameless crime
Brand the clean earth, blacken the crystal heaven?
Why, no man stirs!  God! with what thick strange fumes
Hast thou, o' the sudden, brutalized their sense?
Or am I mad?  Is this already hell?
Worshipful fiends, I have good store of gold,
Packed in my coffers, or loaned out to--Christians;
I give it you as free as night bestows
Her copious dews--my life shall seal the bond,
Have mercy on my race!


TETTENBORN.
          No more, no more!
Go, bid your tribe make ready for their death
At sunset.


RABBI JACOB.
     Oh!


SUSSKIND.
          At set of sun to-day?
Why, if you travelled to the nighest town,
Summoned to stand before a mortal Prince
You would need longer grace to put in order
Household effects, to bid farewell to friends,
And make yourself right worthy.  But our way
Is long, our journey difficult, our judge
Of awful majesty.  Must we set forth,
Haste-flushed and unprepared?  One brief day more,
And all my wealth is yours!


TETTENBORN.
          We have heard enough.
Begone, and bear our message.


SUSSKIND.
          Courage, brother,
Our fate is sealed.  These tigers are athirst.
Return we to our people to proclaim
The gracious sentence of the noble court.
Let us go thank the Lord who made us those
To suffer, not to do, this deed.  Be strong.
So! lean on me--we have little time to lose.
[Exeunt.]



                          ACT V.

SCENE I.

  A Room in Susskind's House.  LIEBHAID, CLAIRE, REUBEN.


LIEBHAID.
The air hangs sultry as in mid-July.
Look forth, Claire; moves not some big thundercloud
Athwart the sky?  My heart is sick.


CLAIRE.
          Nay, Liebhaid.
The clear May sun is shining, and the air
Blows fresh and cordial from the budding hills.


LIEBHAID.
Reuben, what is 't o'clock.  Our father stays.
The midday meal was cold an hour agone.


REUBEN.
'T is two full hours past noon; he should be here.
Ah see, he comes.  Great God! what woe has chanced?
He totters on his staff; he has grown old
Since he went forth this morn.

  Enter SUSSKIND.


LIEBHAID.
          Father, what news?


SUSSKIND.
The Lord have mercy!  Vain is the help of man.
Children, is all in order?  We must start
At set of sun on a long pilgrimage.
So wills the Landgrave, so the court decrees.


LIEBHAID.
What is it, father?  Exile?


SUSSKIND.
          Yea, just that.
We are banished from our vexed, uncertain homes,
'Midst foes and strangers, to a land of peace,
Where joy abides, where only comfort is.
Banished from care, fear, trouble, life--to death.


REUBEN.
Oh horror! horror!  Father, I will not die.
Come, let us flee--we yet have time for flight.
I'll bribe the sentinel--he will ope the gates.
Liebhaid, Claire, Father! let us flee!  Away
To some safe land where we may nurse revenge.


SUSSKIND.
Courage, my son, and peace.  We may not flee.
Didst thou not see the spies who dogged my steps?
The gates are thronged with citizens and guards.
We must not flee--God wills that we should die.


LIEBHAID.
Said you at sunset?


SUSSKIND.
          So they have decreed.


CLAIRE.
Oh why not now?  Why spare the time to warn?
Why came they not with thee to massacre,
Leaving no agony betwixt the sentence
And instant execution?  That were mercy!
Oh, my prophetic father!


SUSSKIND.
          They allow
Full five hours' grace to shrive our souls with prayer.
We shall assemble in the Synagogue,
As on Atonement Day, confess our sins,
Recite the Kaddish for the Dead, and chant
Our Shibboleth, the Unity of God,
Until the supreme hour when we shall stand
Before the mercy-seat.


LIEBHAID.
          In what dread shape
Approaches death?


SUSSKIND.
          Nerve your young hearts, my children.
We shall go down as God's three servants went
Into the fiery furnace.  Not again
Shall the flames spare the true-believers' flesh.
The anguish shall be fierce and strong, yet brief.
Our spirits shall not know the touch of pain,
Pure as refined gold they shall issue safe
From the hot crucible; a pleasing sight
Unto the Lord.  Oh, 't is a rosy bed
Where we shall couch, compared with that whereon
They lie who kindle this accursed blaze.
Ye shrink? ye would avert your martyred brows
From the immortal crowns the angels offer?
What! are we Jews and are afraid of death?
God's chosen people, shall we stand a-tremble
Before our Father, as the Gentiles use?


REUBEN.
Shall the smoke choke us, father? or the flame
Consume our flesh?


SUSSKIND.
          I know not, boy.  Be sure
The Lord will temper the shrewd pain for those
Who trust in Him.


REUBEN.
          May I stand by thy side,
And hold my hand in thine until the end?


SUSSKIND (Aside).
What solace hast thou, God, in all thy heavens
For such an hour as this?  Yea, hand in hand
We walk, my son, through fire, to meet the Lord.
Yet there is one among us shall not burn.
A secret shaft long rankling in my heart,
Now I withdraw, and die.  Our general doom,
Liebhaid, is not for thee.  Thou art no Jewess.
Thy father is the man who wills our death;
Lord Henry Schnetzen.


LIEBHAID.
          Look at me! your eyes
Are sane, correcting your distracted words.
This is Love's trick, to rescue me from death.
My love is firm as thine, and dies with thee.


CLAIRE.
Oh, Liebhaid, live.  Hast thou forgot the Prince?
Think of the happy summer blooms for thee
When we are in our graves.


LIEBHAID.
          And I shall smile,
Live and rejoice in love, when ye are dead?


SUSSKIND.
My child, my child!  By the Ineffable Name,
The Adonai, I swear, thou must believe,
Albeit thy father scoffed, gave me the lie.
Go kneel to him--for if he see thy face,
Or hear thy voice, he shall not doubt, but save.


LIEBHAID.
Never!  If I be offspring to that kite,
I here deny my race, forsake my father,--
So does thy dream fall true.  Let him save thee,
Whose hand has guided mine, whose lips have blessed,
Whose bread has nourished me.  Thy God is mine,
Thy people are my people.


VOICES (without).
          Susskind von Orb!


SUSSKIND.
I come, my friends.

  Enter boisterously certain Jews.


1ST JEW.
          Come to the house of God!


2D JEW.
Wilt thou desert us for whose sake we perish?


3D JEW.
The awful hour draws nigh.  Come forth with us
Unto the Synagogue.


SUSSKIND.
          Bear with me, neighbors.
Here we may weep, here for the last time know
The luxury of sorrow, the soft touch
Of natural tenderness; here our hearts may break;
Yonder no tears, no faltering!  Eyes serene
Lifted to heaven, and defiant brows
To those who have usurped the name of men,
Must prove our faith and valor limitless
As is their cruelty.  One more embrace,
My daughter, thrice my daughter!  Thine affection
Outshines the hellish flames of hate; farewell,
But for a while; beyond the river of fire
I'll fold thee in mine arms, immortal angel!
For thee, poor orphan, soon to greet again
The blessed brows of parents, I dreamed not
The grave was all the home I had to give.
Go thou with Liebhaid, and array yourselves
As for a bridal.  Come, little son, with me.
Friends, I am ready.  O my God, my God,
Forsake us not in our extremity!
[Exeunt SUSSKIND and JEWS.]



SCENE II.

  A Street in the Judengasse.  Several Jews pass across the stage,
  running and with gestures of distress.


JEWS.
Woe, woe! the curse has fallen!
[Exeunt.]

  Enter other Jews.


1ST JEW.
          We are doomed.
The fury of the Lord has smitten us.
Oh that mine head were waters and mine eyes
Fountains of tears!  God has forsaken us.
[They knock at the doors of the houses.]


2D JEW.
What, Benjamin!  Open the door to death!
We all shall die at sunset!  Menachem!
Come forth!  Come forth!  Manasseh!  Daniel!  Ezra!
[Jews appear at the windows.]


ONE CALLING FROM ABOVE.
Neighbors, what wild alarm is this?


1ST JEW.
          Descend!
Descend!  Come with us to the house of prayer.
Save himself whoso can! we all shall burn.
[Men and women appear at the doors of the houses.]


ONE OF THE MEN AT THE DOOR.
Beseech you brethren, calmly.  Tell us all!
Mine aged father lies at point of death
Gasping within.  Ye'll thrust him in his grave
With boisterous clamor.


1ST JEW.
          Blessed is the man
Whom the Lord calls unto Himself in peace!
Susskind von Orb and Rabbi Jacob come
From the tribunal where the vote is--Death
To all our race.


SEVERAL VOICES.
          Woe! woe!  God pity us!


1ST JEW.
Hie ye within, and take a last farewell
Of home, love, life--put on your festal robes.
So wills the Rabbi, and come forth at once
To pray till sunset in the Synagogue.


AN OLD MAN.
O God!  Is this the portion of mine age?
Were my white hairs, my old bones spared for this?
Oh cruel, cruel!


A YOUNG GIRL.
          I am too young to die.
Save me, my father!  To-morrow should have been
The feast at Rachel's house.  I longed for that,
Counted the days, dreaded some trivial chance
Might cross my pleasure--Lo, this horror comes!


A BRIDE.
Oh love! oh thou just-tasted cup of joy
Snatched from my lips!  Shall we twain lie with death,
Dark, silent, cold--whose every sense was tuned
To happiness!  Life was too beautiful--
That was the dream--how soon we are awake!
Ah, we have that within our hearts defies
Their fiercest flames.  No end, no end, no end!


JEW.
God with a mighty hand, a stretched-out arm,
And poured-out fury, ruleth over us.
The sword is furbished, sharp i' the slayer's hand.
Cry out and howl, thou son of Israel!
Thou shalt be fuel to the fire; thy blood
Shall overflow the land, and thou no more
Shalt be remembered--so the Lord hath spoken.
[Exeunt omnes.]



SCENE III.

  Within the Synagogue.  Above in the gallery, women sumptuously
  attired; some with children by the hand or infants in their arms.
  Below the men and boys with silken scarfs about their shoulders.


RABBI JACOB.
The Lord is nigh unto the broken heart.
Out of the depths we cry to thee, oh God!
Show us the path of everlasting life;
For in thy presence is the plenitude
Of joy, and in thy right hand endless bliss.

  Enter SUSSKIND, REUBEN, etc.


SEVERAL VOICES.
Woe unto us who perish!


A JEW.
          Susskind von Orb,
Thou hast brought down this doom.  Would we had heard
The prophet's voice!


SUSSKIND.
          Brethren, my cup is full!
Oh let us die as warriors of the Lord.
The Lord is great in Zion.  Let our death
Bring no reproach to Jacob, no rebuke
To Israel.  Hark ye! let us crave one boon
At our assassins' hands; beseech them build
Within God's acre where our fathers sleep,
A dancing-floor to hide the fagots stacked.
Then let the minstrels strike the harp and lute,
And we will dance and sing above the pile,
Fearless of death, until the flames engulf,
Even as David danced before the Lord,
As Miriam danced and sang beside the sea.
Great is our Lord!  His name is glorious
In Judah, and extolled in Israel!
In Salem is his tent, his dwelling place
In Zion; let us chant the praise of God!


A JEW.
Susskind, thou speakest well!  We will meet death
With dance and song.  Embrace him as a bride.
So that the Lord receive us in His tent.


SEVERAL VOICES.
Amen! amen! amen! we dance to death!


RABBI JACOB.
Susskind, go forth and beg this grace of them.
[Exit Susskind.]
Punish us not in wrath, chastise us not
In anger, oh our God!  Our sins o'erwhelm
Our smitten heads, they are a grievous load;
We look on our iniquities, we tremble,
Knowing our trespasses.  Forsake us not.
Be thou not far from us.  Haste to our aid,
Oh God, who art our Saviour and our Rock!

  Reenter SUSSKIND.


SUSSKIND.
Brethren, our prayer, being the last, is granted.
The hour approaches.  Let our thoughts ascend
From mortal anguish to the ecstasy
Of martyrdom, the blessed death of those
Who perish in the Lord.  I see, I see
How Israel's ever-crescent glory makes
These flames that would eclipse it, dark as blots
Of candle-light against the blazing sun.
We die a thousand deaths,--drown, bleed, and burn;
Our ashes are dispersed unto the winds.
Yet the wild winds cherish the sacred seed,
The waters guard it in their crystal heart,
The fire refuseth to consume.  It springs,
A tree immortal, shadowing many lands,
Unvisited, unnamed, undreamed as yet.
Rather a vine, full-flowered, golden-branched,
Ambrosial-fruited, creeping on the earth,
Trod by the passer's foot, yet chosen to deck
Tables of princes.  Israel now has fallen
Into the depths, he shall be great in time.*
Even as we die in honor, from our death
Shall bloom a myriad heroic lives,
Brave through our bright example, virtuous
Lest our great memory fall in disrepute.
Is one among us brothers, would exchange
His doom against our tyrants,--lot for lot?
Let him go forth and live--he is no Jew.
Is one who would not die in Israel
Rather than live in Christ,--their Christ who smiles
On such a deed as this?  Let him go forth--
He may die full of years upon his bed.
Ye who nurse rancor haply in your hearts,
Fear ye we perish unavenged?  Not so!
To-day, no! nor to-morrow! but in God's time,
Our witnesses arise.  Ours is the truth,
Ours is the power, the gift of Heaven.  We hold
His Law, His lamp, His covenant, His pledge.
Wherever in the ages shall arise
Jew-priest, Jew-poet, Jew-singer, or Jew-saint--
And everywhere I see them star the gloom--
In each of these the martyrs are avenged!

  *The vine creeps on the earth, trodden by the passer's foot,
  but its fruit goes upon the table of princes.  Israel now has
  fallen in the depths, but he shall be great in the fullness
  of time.--TALMUD


RABBI JACOB.
Bring from the Ark the bell-fringed, silken-bound
Scrolls of the Law.  Gather the silver vessels,
Dismantle the rich curtains of the doors,
Bring the Perpetual Lamp; all these shall burn,
For Israel's light is darkened, Israel's Law
Profaned by strangers.  Thus the Lord hath said:*
"The weapon formed against thee shall not prosper,
The tongue that shall contend with thee in judgment,
Thou shalt condemn.  This is the heritage
Of the Lord's servants and their righteousness.
For thou shalt come to peoples yet unborn,
Declaring that which He hath done.  Amen!"

  *Conclusion of service for Day of Atonement.

[The doors of the Synagogue are burst open with tumultuous noise.
Citizens and officers rush in.]


CITIZENS.
Come forth! the sun sets.   Come, the Council waits!
What! will ye teach your betters patience?  Out!
The Governor is ready.  Forth with you,
Curs! serpents! Judases!  The bonfire burns!
[Exeunt.]



SCENE IV.

  A Public Place.  Crowds of Citizens assembled.  On a platform
  are seated DIETRICH VON TETTENBORN and HENRY SCHNETZEN with
  other Members of the Council.


1ST CITIZEN.
Here's such a throng!  Neighbor, your elbow makes
An ill prod for my ribs.


2D CITIZEN.
          I am pushed and squeezed.
My limbs are not mine own.


3D CITIZEN.
          Look this way, wife.
They will come hence,--a pack of just-whipped curs.
I warrant you the stiff-necked brutes repent
To-day if ne'er before.


WIFE.
          I am all a-quiver.
I have seen monstrous sights,--an uncaged wolf,
The corpse of one sucked by a vampyre,
The widow Kupfen's malformed child--but never
Until this hour, a Jew.


3D CITIZEN.
          D' ye call me Jew?
Where do you spy one now?


WIFE.
          You'll have your jest
Now or anon, what matters it?


4TH CITIZEN.
          Well, I
Have seen a Jew, and seen one burn at that;
Hard by in Wartburg; he had killed a child.
Zounds! how the serpent wriggled!  I smell now
The roasting, stinking flesh!


BOY.
          Father, be these
The folk who murdered Jesus?


4TH CITIZEN.
          Ay, my boy.
Remember that, and when you hear them come,
I'll lift you on my shoulders.  You can fling
Your pebbles with the rest.
[Trumpets sound.]


CITIZENS.
          The Jews! the Jews!


BOY.
Quick, father! lift me!  I see nothing here
But hose and skirts.
[Music of a march approaching.]


CITIZENS.
         What mummery is this?
The sorcerers brew new mischief.


ANOTHER CITIZEN.
         Why, they come
Pranked for a holiday; not veiled for death.


ANOTHER CITIZEN.
Insolent braggarts!  They defy the Christ!

  Enter, in procession to music, the Jews.  First, RABBI JACOB--
  after him, sick people, carried on litters--then old men and
  women, followed promiscuously by men, women, and children of
  all ages.  Some of the men carry gold and silver vessels, some
  the Rolls of the Law.  One bears the Perpetual Lamp, another
  the Seven-branched silver Candlestick of the Synagogue.  The
  mothers have their children by the hand or in their arms.  All
  richly attired.


CITIZENS.
The misers! they will take their gems and gold
Down to the grave!


CITIZEN'S WIFE.
          So these be Jews!  Christ save us!
To think the devils look like human folk!


CITIZENS.
Cursed be the poison-mixers!  Let them burn!


CITIZENS.
Burn! burn!

  Enter SUSSKIND VON ORB, LIEBHAID, REUBEN, and CLAIRE.


SCHNETZEN.
          Good God! what maid is that?


TETTENBORN.
Liebhaid von Orb.


SCHNETZEN.
          The devil's trick!
He has bewitched mine eyes.


SUSSKIND (as he passes the platform).
          Woe to the father
Who murders his own child!


SCHNETZEN.
          I am avenged,
Susskind von Orb!  Blood for blood, fire for fire,
And death for death!
[Exeunt SUSSKIND, LIEBHAID, etc.]

  Enter Jewish youths and maidens.


YOUTHS (in chorus).
Let us rejoice, for it is promised us
That we shall enter in God's tabernacle!


MAIDENS.
Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Zion,
Within thy portals, O Jerusalem!
[Exeunt.]


CITIZEN'S WIFE.
I can see naught from here.  Let's follow, Hans.


CITIZEN.
Be satisfied.  There is no inch of space
For foot to rest on yonder.  Look! look there!
How the flames rise!


BOY.
          O father, I can see!
They all are dancing in the crimson blaze.
Look how their garments wave, their jewels shine,
When the smoke parts a bit.  The tall flames dart.
Is not the fire real fire?  They fear it not.


VOICES WITHOUT.
Arise, oh house of Jacob.  Let us walk
Within the light of the Almighty Lord!

  Enter in furious haste PRINCE WILLIAM and NORDMANN.


PRINCE WILLIAM.
Respite!  You kill your daughter, Henry Schnetzen!


NORDMANN.
Liebhaid von Orb is your own flesh and blood.


SCHNETZEN.
Spectre! do dead men rise?


NORDMANN.
          Yea, for revenge!
I swear, Lord Schnetzen, by my knightly honor,
She who is dancing yonder to her death,
Is thy wife's child!
[SCHNETZEN and PRINCE WILLIAM make a rush forward towards the
flames.  Music ceases; a sound of crashing boards is heard and
a great cry--HALLELUJAH!]


PRINCE WILLIAM and SCHNETZEN.
     Too late! too late!


CITIZENS.
          All's done!


PRINCE WILLIAM.
The fire! the fire!  Liebhaid, I come to thee.
[He is about to spring forward, but is held back by guards.]


SCHNETZEN.
Oh cruel Christ!  Is there no bolt in heaven
For the child murderer?  Kill me, my friends! my breast
Is bare to all your swords.
[He tears open his jerkin, and falls unconscious.]

                                        [Curtain falls.]



                            THE END.


Note:

The plot and incidents of this Tragedy are taken from a little
narrative entitled "Der Tanz zum Tode; ein Nachtstuck aus dem
vierzehnten Jahrhundert," (The Dance to Death--a Night-piece of
the fourteenth century).  By Richard Reinhard.  Compiled from
authentic documents communicated by Professor Franz Delitzsch.

The original narrative thus disposes, in conclusion, of the
principal characters:--

"The Knight Henry Schnetzen ended his curse-stricken life in a
cloister of the strictest order.

"Herr Nordmann was placed in close confinement, and during the
same year his head fell under the sword of the executioner.

"Prince William returned, broken down with sorrow, to Eisenach.
His princely father's heart found no comfort during the remainder
of his days.  He died soon after the murder of the Jews--his last
words were, 'woe! the fire!'

"William reached an advanced age, but his life was joyless.  He
never married, and at his death Meissen was inherited by his nephew.

"The Jewish cemetery in Nordhausen, the scene of this martyrdom,
lay for a long time waste.  Nobody would build upon it.  Now it
is a bleaching meadow, and where once the flames sprang up, to-day
rests peaceful sunshine."






                      TRANSLATIONS.



  TRANSLATIONS FROM THE HEBREW POETS OF MEDAEVAL SPAIN.



    SOLOMON BEN JUDAH GABIROL (Died Between 1070-80.)


    "Am I sipping the honey of the lips?
    Am I drunk with the wine of a kiss?
    Have I culled the flowers of the cheek,
    Have I sucked the fresh fragrance of the breath?
    Nay, it is the Song of Gabirol that has revived me,
    The perfume of his youthful, spring-tide breeze."
    --MOSES BEN ESRA.

    "I will engrave my songs indelibly upon the heart of
    the world, so that no one can efface them."
    --GABIROL.



                  NIGHT-PIECE.


Night, and the heavens beam serene with peace,
Like a pure heart benignly smiles the moon.
Oh, guard thy blessed beauty from mischance,
This I beseech thee in all tender love.
See where the Storm his cloudy mantle spreads,
An ashy curtain covereth the moon.
As if the tempest thirsted for the rain,
The clouds he presses, till they burst in streams.
Heaven wears a dusky raiment, and the moon
Appeareth dead--her tomb is yonder cloud,
And weeping shades come after, like the people
Who mourn with tearful grief a noble queen.
But look! the thunder pierced night's close-linked mail,
His keen-tipped lance of lightning brandishing;
He hovers like a seraph-conqueror.--
Dazed by the flaming splendor of his wings,
In rapid flight as in a whirling dance,
The black cloud-ravens hurry scared away.
So, though the powers of darkness chain my soul,
My heart, a hero, chafes and breaks its bonds.




               NIGHT-THOUGHTS.


Will night already spread her wings and weave
Her dusky robe about the day's bright form,
Boldly the sun's fair countenance displacing,
And swathe it with her shadow in broad day?
So a green wreath of mist enrings the moon,
Till envious clouds do quite encompass her.
No wind! and yet the slender stem is stirred,
With faint, slight motion as from inward tremor.
Mine eyes are full of grief--who sees me, asks,
"Oh wherefore dost thou cling unto the ground?"
My friends discourse with sweet and soothing words;
They all are vain, they glide above my head.
I fain would check my tears; would fain enlarge
Unto infinity, my heart--in vain!
Grief presses hard my breast, therefore my tears
Have scarcely dried, ere they again spring forth.
For these are streams no furnace heat may quench,
Nebuchadnezzar's flames may dry them not.
What is the pleasure of the day for me,
If, in its crucible, I must renew
Incessantly the pangs of purifying?
Up, challenge, wrestle, and o'ercome!  Be strong!
The late grapes cover all the vine with fruit.
I am not glad, though even the lion's pride
Content itself upon the field's poor grass.
My spirit sinks beneath the tide, soars not
With fluttering seamews on the moist, soft strand.
I follow Fortune not, where'er she lead.
Lord o'er myself, I banish her, compel,
And though her clouds should rain no blessed dew,
Though she withhold the crown, the heart's desire,
Though all deceive, though honey change to gall,
Still am I lord, and will in freedom strive.




       MEDITATIONS.


Forget thine anguish,
  Vexed heart, again.
Why shouldst thou languish,
  With earthly pain?
The husk shall slumber,
  Bedded in clay
Silent and sombre,
  Oblivion's prey!
But, Spirit immortal,
Thou at Death's portal,
  Tremblest with fear.
  If he caress thee,
  Curse thee or bless thee,
  Thou must draw near,
From him the worth of thy works to hear.


  Why full of terror,
  Compassed with error,
  Trouble thy heart,
  For thy mortal part?
  The soul flies home--
  The corpse is dumb.
  Of all thou didst have,
Follows naught to the grave.
  Thou fliest thy nest,
Swift as a bird to thy place of rest.


  What avail grief and fasting,
  Where nothing is lasting?
  Pomp, domination,
  Become tribulation.
  In a health-giving draught,
  A death-dealing shaft.
  Wealth--an illusion,
  Power--a lie,
  Over all, dissolution
  Creeps silent and sly.
  Unto others remain
  The goods thou didst gain
  With infinite pain.


Life is a vine-branch;
  A vintager, Death.
He threatens and lowers
  More near with each breath.
Then hasten, arise!
  Seek God, O my soul!
For time quickly flies,
  Still far is the goal.
Vain heart praying dumbly,
  Learn to prize humbly,
  The meanest of fare.
Forget all thy sorrow,
  Behold, Death is there!


  Dove-like lamenting,
  Be full of repenting,
Lift vision supernal
To raptures eternal.
  On ev'ry occasion
  Seek lasting salvation.
Pour thy heart out in weeping,
While others are sleeping.
  Pray to Him when all's still,
  Performing his will.
And so shall the angel of peace be thy warden,
And guide thee at last to the heavenly garden.




             HYMN.


Almighty! what is man?
  But flesh and blood.
Like shadows flee his days,
He marks not how they vanish from his gaze,
  Suddenly, he must die--
He droppeth, stunned, into nonentity.


  Almighty! what is man?
  A body frail and weak,
    Full of deceit and lies,
    Of vile hypocrisies.
Now like a flower blowing,
Now scorched by sunbeams glowing.
And wilt thou of his trespasses inquire?
  How may he ever bear
Thine anger just, thy vengeance dire?
  Punish him not, but spare,
For he is void of power and strength!


Almighty! what is man?
  By filthy lust possessed,
Whirled in a round of lies,
  Fond frenzy swells his breast.
The pure man sinks in mire and slime,
The noble shrinketh not from crime,
Wilt thou resent on him the charms of sin?
  Like fading grass,
  So shall he pass.
  Like chaff that blows
  Where the wind goes.
Then spare him, be thou merciful, O King,
Upon the dreaded day of reckoning!


  Almighty! what is man?
    The haughty son of time
  Drinks deep of sin,
    And feeds on crime
Seething like waves that roll,
Hot as a glowing coal.
And wilt thou punish him for sins inborn?
  Lost and forlorn,
Then like the weakling he must fall,
Who some great hero strives withal.
Oh, spare him, therefore! let him win
  Grace for his sin!


  Almighty! what is man?
    Spotted in guilty wise,
  A stranger unto faith,
    Whose tongue is stained with lies,
And shalt thou count his sins--so is he lost,
      Uprooted by thy breath.
Like to a stream by tempest tossed,
His life falls from him like a cloak,
  He passes into nothingness, like smoke.
  Then spare him, punish not, be kind, I pray,
To him who dwelleth in the dust, an image wrought in clay!


  Almighty! what is man?
     A withered bough!
When he is awe-struck by approaching doom,
Like a dried blade of grass, so weak, so low
The pleasure of his life is changed to gloom.
He crumbles like a garment spoiled with moth;
According to his sins wilt thou be wroth?
He melts like wax before the candle's breath,
Yea, like thin water, so he vanisheth,
Oh, spare him therefore, for thy gracious name,
And be not too severe upon his shame!


  Almighty! what is man?
     A faded leaf!
If thou dost weigh him in the balance--lo!
He disappears--a breath that thou dost blow.
  His heart is ever filled
  With lust of lies unstilled.
  Wilt thou bear in mind his crime
  Unto all time?
He fades away like clouds sun-kissed,
  Dissolves like mist.
Then spare him! let him love and mercy win,
According to thy grace, and not according to his sin!




           TO A DETRACTOR.


The Autumn promised, and he keeps
His word unto the meadow-rose.
The pure, bright lightnings herald Spring,
Serene and glad the fresh earth shows.
The rain has quenched her children's thirst,
Her cheeks, but now so cold and dry,
Are soft and fair, a laughing face;
With clouds of purple shines the sky,
Though filled with light, yet veiled with haze.
Hark! hark! the turtle's mocking note
Outsings the valley-pigeon's lays.
Her wings are gemmed, and from her throat,
When the clear sun gleams back again,
It seems to me as though she wore
About her neck a jewelled chain.
Say, wilt thou darken such a light,
Wilt drag the clouds from heaven's height?
Although thy heart with anger swell,
Yet firm as marble mine doth dwell.
Therein no fear thy wrath begets.
It is not shaken by thy threats.
Yea, hurl thy darts, thy weapons wield,
The strength of youth is still my shield.
My winged steed toward the heights doth bound,
The dust whiffs upward from the ground;
My song is scanty, dost thou deem
Thine eloquence a mighty stream?
Only the blameless offering.
Not the profusion man may bring,
Prevaileth with our Lord and King.
The long days out of minutes grow,
And out of months the years arise,
Wilt thou be master of the wise,
Then learn the hidden stream to know,
That from the inmost heart doth flow.




                    FRAGMENT.


My friend spoke with insinuating tongue:
  "Drink wine, and thy flesh shall be made whole.  Look how
   it hisses in the leathern bottle like a captured serpent."
Oh fool! can the sun be forged into a cask stopped with
  earthly bungs.  I know not that the power of wine has ever
  overmastered my sorrows; for these mighty giants I have found
  as yet no resting-place.




               STANZAS.


"With tears thy grief thou dost bemoan,
Tears that would melt the hardest stone,
Oh, wherefore sing'st thou not the vine?
Why chant'st thou not the praise of wine?
It chases pain with cunning art,
The craven slinks from out thy heart."


But I: Poor fools the wine may cheat,
Lull them with lying visions sweet.
Upon the wings of storms may bear
The heavy burden of their care.
The father's heart may harden so,
He feeleth not his own child's woe.


No ocean is the cup, no sea,
To drown my broad, deep misery.
It grows so rank, you cut it all,
The aftermath springs just as tall.
My heart and flesh are worn away,
Mine eyes are darkened from the day.


The lovely morning-red behold
Wave to the breeze her flag of gold.
The hosts of stars above the world,
Like banners vanishing are furled.
The dew shines bright; I bide forlorn,
And shudder with the chill of morn.




              WINE AND GRIEF.


With heavy groans did I approach my friends,
Heavy as though the mountains I would move.
The flagon they were murdering; they poured
Into the cup, wild-eyed, the grape's red blood.
No, they killed not, they breathed new life therein.
Then, too, in fiery rapture, burned my veins,
But soon the fumes had fled.  In vain, in vain!
Ye cannot fill the breach of the rent heart.
Ye crave a sensuous joy; ye strive in vain
To cheat with flames of passion, my despair.
So when the sinking sun draws near to night,
The sky's bright cheeks fade 'neath those tresses black.
Ye laugh--but silently the soul weeps on;
Ye cannot stifle her sincere lament.




                    DEFIANCE.


"Conquer the gloomy night of thy sorrow, for the morning greets
     thee with laughter.
Rise and clothe thyself with noble pride,
Break loose from the tyranny of grief.
Thou standest alone among men,
Thy song is like a pearl in beauty."


So spake my friend.  'T is well!
The billows of the stormy sea which overwhelmed my soul,--
These I subdue; I quake not
Before the bow and arrow of destiny.
I endured with patience when he deceitfully lied to me
With his treacherous smile.


Yea, boldly I defy Fate,
I cringe not to envious Fortune.
I mock the towering floods.
My brave heart does not shrink--
This heart of mine, that, albeit young in years,
Is none the less rich in deep, keen-eyed experience.




              A DEGENERATE AGE.


Where is the man who has been tried and found strong and sound?
Where is the friend of reason and of knowledge?
I see only sceptics and weaklings.
I see only prisoners in the durance of the senses,
And every fool and every spendthrift
Thinks himself as great a master as Aristotle.
Think'st thou that they have written poems?
Call'st thou that a Song?
I call it the cackling of ravens.
The zeal of the prophet must free poesy
From the embrace of wanton youths.
My song I have inscribed on the forehead of Time,
They know and hate it--for it is lofty.






   ABUL HASSAN JUDAH BEN HA-LEVI. (Born Between 1080-90.)



        A LETTER TO HIS FRIEND ISAAC.


But yesterday the earth drank like a child
  With eager thirst the autumn rain.
Or like a wistful bride who waits the hour
  Of love's mysterious bliss and pain.
And now the Spring is here with yearning eyes;
  Midst shimmering golden flower-beds,
On meadows carpeted with varied hues,
  In richest raiment clad, she treads.
She weaves a tapestry of bloom o'er all,
  And myriad eyed young plants upspring,
White, green, or red like lips that to the mouth
  Of the beloved one sweetly cling.
Whence come these radiant tints, these blended beams?
  Here's such a dazzle, such a blaze,
As though each stole the splendor of the stars,
  Fain to eclipse them with her rays.
Come! go we to the garden with our wine,
  Which scatters sparks of hot desire,
Within our hand 't is cold, but in our veins
  It flashes clear, it glows like fire.
It bubbles sunnily in earthen jugs.
We catch it in the crystal glass,
  Then wander through cool, shadowy lanes and breathe
  The spicy freshness of the grass.
Whilst we with happy hearts our circuit keep,
  The gladness of the Earth is shown.
She smileth, though the trickling raindrops weep
  Silently o'er her, one by one.
She loves to feel the tears upon her cheek,
  Like a rich veil, with pearls inwove.
Joyous she listens when the swallows chirp,
  And warbles to her mate, the dove.
Blithe as a maiden midst the young green leaves,
  A wreath she'll wind, a fragrant treasure;
All living things in graceful motion leap,
  As dancing to some merry measure.
The morning breezes rustle cordially,
  Love's thirst is sated with the balm they send.
Sweet breathes the myrtle in the frolic wind,
  As though remembering a distant friend.
The myrtle branch now proudly lifted high,
  Now whispering to itself drops low again.
The topmost palm-leaves rapturously stir,
  For all at once they hear the birds' soft strain.
So stirs, so yearns all nature, gayly decked,
  To honor ISAAC with her best array.
Hear'st thou the word?  She cries--I beam with joy,
Because with Isaac I am wed to-day.




                 ADMONITION.


Long in the lap of childhood didst thou sleep,
Think how thy youth like chaff did disappear;
Shall life's sweet Spring forever last?  Look up,
Old age approaches ominously near.
Oh shake thou off the world, even as the bird
Shakes off the midnight dew that clogged his wings.
Soar upward, seek redemption from thy guilt
And from the earthly dross that round thee c