e her--it is she!
  Whence com'st thou? speak, where hast thou been this night?
What dost thou seek? who brings thee here thus late?
  Where has this lovely form reclined till day,
While I alone must watch and weep and wait?
  Where, and on whom hast thou been smiling, say!
Out, insolent traitress! canst thou come accurst,
  And offer to my kiss thy lips' ripe charms?
What cravest thou?  By what unhallowed thirst
  Darest thou allure me to thy jaded arms?
Avaunt, begone! ghost of my mistress dead,
  Back to thy grave! avoid the morning's beam!
Be my lost youth no more remembered!
 And when I think of thee, I'll know it was a dream!


MUSE.
     Be calm!  I beg thee, I implore!
       I shudder, hearing of thy pain.
     O dearest friend, thy wound once more
       Is opening to bleed again.
     Is it so very deep, alas!
     How slowly do the traces pass
     Of this world's troubles!  Thou, my son,
     Forget her! let thy memory shun
     Even to this woman's very name,
     My pitying lips refuse to frame.


POET.
     Shame upon her, who first
       Treason and falsehood taught!
     With grief and wrath accurst,
       Who set my brain distraught.
     Shame, woman baleful-eyed,
       Whose fatal love entombed
     In shadows of thy pride
       My April ere it bloomed.
     It was thy voice, thy smile,
       Thy poisoned glances bright,
     Which taught me to revile
       The semblance of delight.
     Thy grace of girlish years
       Murdered my peace, my sleep.
     If I lose faith in tears,
       'T is that I saw thee weep.
     I yielded to thy power
       A child's simplicity.
     As to the dawn the flower,
       So oped my heart to thee.
     Doubtless this helpless heart
       Was thine without defence.
     Were 't not the better part
       To spare its innocence?
     Shame! thou who didst beget
       My earliest, youngest woe.
     The tears are streaming yet
       Which first thou madest flow.
     Quenchless this source is found
       Which thou hast first unsealed.
     It issues from a wound
       That never may be healed.
     But in the bitter wave
       I shall be clean restored,
     And from my soul shall lave
       Thy memory abhorred!


MUSE.
Poet, enough!  Though but one single day
  Lasted thy dream of her who faithless proved,
That day insult not; whatsoe'er thou say,
  Respect thy love, if thou would be beloved.
If human weakness find the task too great
  Of pardoning the wrongs by others done,
At least the torture spare thyself of hate,
  In place of pardon seek oblivion.
The dead lie peaceful in the earth asleep,
  So our extinguished passions too, should rest.
Dust are those relics also; let us keep
  Our hands from violence to their ashes blest.
Why, in this story of keen pain, my friend,
  Wilt thou refuse naught but a dream to see?
Does Nature causeless act, to no wise end?
  Think'st thou a heedless God afflicted thee?
Mayhap the blow thou weepest was to save.
  Child, it has oped thy heart to seek relief;
Sorrow is lord to man, and man a slave,
  None knows himself till he has walked with grief,--
A cruel law, but none the less supreme,
  Old as the world, yea, old as destiny.
Sorrow baptizes us, a fatal scheme;
  All things at this sad price we still must buy.
The harvest needs the dew to make it ripe,
  And man to live, to feel, has need of tears.
Joy chooses a bruised plant to be her type,
  That, drenched with rain, still many a blossom bears.
Didst thou not say this folly long had slept?
  Art thou not happy, young, a welcome guest?
And those light pleasures that give life its zest,
  How wouldst thou value if thou hadst not wept?
When, lying in the sunlight on the grass,
  Freely thou drink'st with some old friend--confess,
Wouldst thou so cordially uplift thy glass,
  Hadst thou not weighed the worth of cheerfulness?
Would flowers be so dear unto thy heart,
  The verse of Petrarch, warblings of the bird,
Shakespeare and Nature, Angelo and Art,
  But that thine ancient sobs therein thou heard?
Couldst thou conceive the ineffable peace of heaven,
  Night's silence, murmurs of the wave that flows,
If sleeplessness and fever had not driven
  Thy thought to yearn for infinite repose?
By a fair woman's love art thou not blest?
  When thou dost hold and clasp her hand in thine,
Does not the thought of woes that once possessed,
  Make all the sweeter now her smile divine?
Wander ye not together, thou and she,
  Midst blooming woods, on sands like silver bright?
Does not the white wraith of the aspen-tree
  In that green palace, mark the path at night?
And seest thou not, within the moon's pale ray,
  Her lovely form sink on thy breast again?
If thou shouldst meet with Fortune on thy way,
  Wouldst thou not follow singing, in her train?
What hast thou to regret?  Immortal Hope
  Is shaped anew in thee by Sorrow's hand.
Why hate experience that enlarged thy scope?
  Why curse the pain that made thy soul expand?
Oh pity her! so false, so fair to see,
  Who from thine eyes such bitter tears did press,
She was a woman.  God revealed to thee,
  Through her, the secret of all happiness.
Her task was hard; she loved thee, it may be,
  Yet must she break thy heart, so fate decreed.
She knew the world, she taught it unto thee,
  Another reaps the fruit of her misdeed.
Pity her! dreamlike did her love disperse,
  She saw thy wound--nor could thy pain remove.
All was not falsehood in those tears of hers--
  Pity her, though it were,--for thou canst love!


POET.
     True!  Hate is blasphemy.
       With horror's thrill, I start,
     This sleeping snake to see,
       Uncoil within my heart.
     Oh Goddess, hear my cries,
       My vow to thee is given,
     By my beloved's blue eyes,
       And by the azure heaven,
     By yonder spark of flame,
       Yon trembling pearl, the star
     That beareth Venus' name,
       And glistens from afar,
     By Nature's glorious scheme,
       The infinite grace of God,
     The planet's tranquil beam
       That cheers the traveler's road,
     The grass, the water-course,
       Woods, fields with dew impearled,
     The quenchless vital force,
       The sap of all the world,--
     I banish from my heart
       This reckless passion's ghost,
     Mysterious shade, depart!
       In the dark past be lost!
     And thou whom once I met
       As friend, while thou didst live,
     The hour when I forget,
       I likewise should forgive.
     Let me forgive!  I break
       The long-uniting spell.
     With a last tear, oh take,
       Take thou, a last farewell.
     Now, gold-haired, pensive Muse,
       On to our pleasures!  Sing--
     Some joyous carol choose,
       As in the dear old Spring.
     Mark, how the dew-drenched lawn
       Scents the auroral hour.
     Waken my love with dawn,
       And pluck her garden's flower.
     Immortal nature, see!
       Casts slumber's veil away.
     New born with her are we
       In morning's earliest ray.






        NOTES TO "EPISTLE" OF JOSHUA IBN VIVES OF ALLORQUI.


The life and character of Paulus de Santa Maria are thus described
by Dr. Graetz:--

"Among the Jews baptized in 1391, no other wrought so much harm to
his race as the Rabbi Solomon Levi of Burgos, known to Christians
as Paulus Burgensis, or de Santa Maria (born about 1351-52, died
1435) who rose to very high ecclesiastical and political rank. . . .
He had no philosophical culture; on the contrary, as a Jew, he had
been extremely devout, observing scrupulously all the rites, and
regarded as a pillar of Judaism in his own circle. . . . Possessed
by ambition and vanity, the synagogue where he had passed a short
time in giving and receiving instruction, appeared to him too narrow
and restricted a sphere.  He longed for a bustling activity, aimed
at a position at court, in whatever capacity, began to live on a
grand scale, maintained a sumptuous equipage, a spirited team, and
a numerous retinue of servants.  As his affairs brought him into
daily contact with Christians and entangled him in religious
discussions, he studied ecclesiastical literature in order to
display his erudition.  The bloody massacre of 1391 robbed him of
all hope of reaching eminence as a Jew, in his fortieth year, and
he abruptly resolved to be baptized.  The lofty degree of dignity
which he afterwards attained in Church and State, may even then have
floated alluringly before his mind.  In order to profit by his
apostasy, the convert Paulus de Santa Maria gave out that he had
voluntarily embraced Christianity, the theological writings of the
Scholiast Thomas of Aquinas having taken hold of his inmost
convictions.  The Jews, however, mistrusted his credulity, and
knowing him well, they ascribed this step to his ambition and his
thirst for fame.  His family, consisting of a wife and son, renounced
him when he changed his faith. . . . He studied theology in the
University of Paris, and then visited the papal court of Avignon,
where Cardinal Pedro de Juna had been elected papal antagonist to
Benedict XIII. of Rome.  The church feud and the schism between the
two Popes offered the most favorable opportunity for intrigues and
claims.  Paulus, by his cleverness, his zeal, and his eloquence, won
the favor of the Pope, who discerned in him a useful tool.  Thus he
became successively Archdeacon of Trevinjo, Canon of Seville, Bishop
of Cartagena, Chancellor of Castile, and Privy Councillor to King
Henry III. of Spain.  With tongue and pen he attacked Judaism, and
Jewish literature provided him with the necessary weapons.  Intelligent
Jews rightly divined in this convert to Christianity their bitterest
enemy, and entered into a contest with him. . . .

The campaign against the malignity of Paul de Santa Maria was
opened by a young man who had formerly sat at his feet, Joshua ben
Joseph Ibn Vives, from the town of Lorca or Allorqui, a physician
and Arabic scholar.  In an epistle written in a tone of humility as
from a docile pupil to a revered master, he deals his apostate
teacher heavy blows, and under the show of doubt he shatters the
foundations of Christianity.  He begins by saying that the apostasy
of his beloved teacher to whom his loyal spirit had formerly clung,
has amazed him beyond measure and aroused in him many serious
reflections.  He can only conceive four possible motives for such a
surprising step.  Either Paulus has been actuated by ambition, love

of wealth, pomp, and the satisfaction of the senses, or else by doubt
of the truth of Judaism upon philosophic grounds, and has renounced
therefore the religion which afforded him so little freedom and
security; or else he has foreseen through the latest cruel
persecutions of the Jews in Spain, the total extinction of the race;
or, finally, he may have become convinced of the truth of Christianity.
The writer enters therefore into an examination based upon his
acquaintance with the character of his former master, as to which of
these four motives is most likely to have occasioned the act.  He
cannot believe that ambition and covetousness prompted it, "For I
remember when you used to be surrounded by wealth and attendants, you
sighed regretfully for your previous humble station, for your retired
life and communion with wisdom, and regarded your actual brilliant
position as an unsatisfactory sham happiness.  Neither can Allorqui
admit that Paulus had been disturbed by philosophic scepticism, for
to the day of his baptism he had observed all the Jewish customs and
had only accepted that little kernel of philosophy which accords
with faith, always rejecting the pernicious outward shell.  He must
also discard the theory that the sanguinary persecution of the Jews
could have made Paulus despair of the possible continuation of the
Jewish race, for only a small portion of the Jews dwelt among
Christians, while the majority lived in Asia and enjoyed a certain
independence.  There remains only the conclusion that Paulus has
tested the new dogmas and found them sufficient. . . . Allorqui
therefore begs him to communicate his convictions and vanquish his
pupil's doubts concerning Christianity.  Instead of the general
spread of divine doctrine and everlasting peace which the prophets
had associated with the advent of the Messiah, only dissension and
war reigned on earth.  Indeed, after Jesus' appearance, frightful
wars had but increased. . . . And even if Allorqui conceded the
Messiahship of Jesus, the Immaculate Conception, the Resurrection,
and all incomprehensible miracles, he could not reconcile himself to
the idea of God becoming a man.  Every enlightened conception of the
Deity was at variance with it.

[Page 77 et seq. Volume 8, Second half, Graetz' History of
the Jews.]


           Marrano..--See Verse xix., Line 7th of "Epistle."

The enforced recipients of baptism who remained in Spain formed a
peculiar class, outwardly Christians, inwardly Jews.  They might
have been called Jewish-Christians.  They were looked upon with
suspicion by the Christian population, and shunned with a still
more intense hatred by the loyal Jews who gave them the name of
Marranos, the accursed.
[Page 73.]

     "Master, if thou to thy prides' goal should come,
     Where wouldst thou throne--at Avignon or Rome?"
                                              Verse xxviii. 7, 8.

This sentence occurs in another Epistle to Paulus by Profiat Duran.

Verses 29 and 30 are paraphrases from an epistle to Paulus by
Chasdai Crescas.

"These are burning questions, from which the fire of the stake may
be kindled.  Christianity gives itself out as a new revelation in a
certain sense completing and improving Judaism.  But the revelation
has so little efficacy, that in the prolonged schism in the Church,
a new divine message is already needed to scatter the dangerous errors.
Two Popes and their partisans fulminate against each other bulls of
excommunication and condemn each other to profoundest hell.  Where is
the truth and certainty of revelation?" [Graetz' History of the Jews.]










This etext was produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading team.





THE SECOND-STORY MAN

by UPTON SINCLAIR




CHARACTERS

JIM FARADAY: the second-story man. HARVEY AUSTIN: a lawyer. HELEN
AUSTIN: his wife.

SCENE: Library of the Austin home.

Time: 2 A.M.





[The scene shows a luxuriously furnished room. In the centre is a
table with a lamp. To the right is the entrance into the front hall,
the front door of the house being visible. In the corner is a cabinet
of curios. In the rear is a large window opening on the street. Open
fire-place. There are two entrances at the left. There are book-
shelves, several easy-chairs, etc., in the room.]

[At rise: The stage is empty, and the room is darkened except for the
fire in the grate. Sounds of breaking wood are heard at the window.]


JIM. [A roughly-dressed young fellow with a patch over one eye, enters
through window, stands gazing about nervously, looks into the hall,
etc., then flashes a dark lantern.] This looks pretty good.

[Goes to mantel, takes silver cup and puts it into bag which he
carries; then exit left.]

AUSTIN. [Enters at front door without much noise. Hangs up coat and
hat, and then stands in entrance. He is a smooth-faced young man in
evening dress.] All gone to bed, hey?

[Takes out cigarette case and is about to light one, when a crash is
heard off left, as of a vase falling. He starts, then runs to table,
opens drawer, takes out revolver, and examines it, and steals off
through the other entrance at left, saying, "That noise seemed to come
from downstairs."]

JIM. [Enters panic-stricken.] God! What a thing to do! [Gazes into
hall and upstairs--long pause.] Don't seem to have waked them.

[Proceeds to examine room, stopping now and then to listen. After
placing several articles in bag, he goes to cabinet and tries to open
it. This takes some time, and while he is crouching in the shadow,
with his back to the entrance right, MRS. AUSTIN appears.]

MRS. AUSTIN. [She is young and beautiful, and wears a night-robe and
dressing- gown. She stands looking about anxiously, and then goes to
centre of room, when she hears a sound from JIM, and starts wildly.]
Oh!

JIM. [Leaps to feet, lifting revolver.] Hold up your hands! [She
starts back in terror.] Hold up your hands!

MRS. AUSTIN. [Half complyingly.] I'm not armed.

JIM. Never mind. [Long pause while they stare at each other.] I don't
want to hurt you, lady.

MRS. AUSTIN. [Calmly, after first shock.] No, I suppose not. You only
want to get away.

JIM. That's right!

MRS. AUSTIN. Very well, you may go.

JIM. And you yell for the police the moment I get out of the door,
hey?

MRS. AUSTIN. No, I don't want the police. I don't believe in sending
men to jail.

JIM. Humph!

[Another pause.]

MRS. AUSTIN. Why do you do this?

JIM. It's the way I live.

MRS. AUSTIN. Isn't it a rather trying kind of work?

JIM. It ain't all play, ma'am.

MRS. AUSTIN. [Smiling.] I should think it would be hard on the nerves.
[After another pause.] Is there no honest way you can earn a living?

JIM. I don't know. Maybe so. I got tired of looking for it.

MRS. AUSTIN. I might help you if you would let me.

JIM. I ain't asking any help.

MRS. AUSTIN. No, but I'm offering it. [After a pause.] Have you been
doing this sort of thing very long?

JIM. No.

MRS. AUSTIN. How long?

JIM. [After hesitation.] This is my first job.

MRS. AUSTIN. What! You don't mean that?

JIM. It happens to be true, ma'am.

MRS. AUSTIN. What made you do it?

JIM. It's a long story.

MRS. AUSTIN. Tell it to me.

JIM. It ain't just a good time for story telling.

MRS. AUSTIN. You are afraid of me? I have no quarrel with you. I don't
care anything for the things you have in the bag; and, besides, I
suppose you won't take them now. I'm only sorry to see a man going
wrong, and I'd like to help if I could. I'll play fair, I give you my
word of honor.

JIM. There ain't much honor in this business.

MRS. AUSTIN. No, I suppose not. But you can trust me. Put up that gun
and talk to me.

JIM. [Surlily.] It can't do any good.

MRS. AUSTIN. It can't do any harm. Put up that revolver, and tell me
what's the matter.

JIM. You'll let me go when I want to? No tricks!

MRS. AUSTIN. I give you my word.

JIM. All right. I'm a fool, I guess, but I'll trust you. [Puts
revolver in pocket.] Sit down, ma'am. It must be cold for you. This is
a queer kind of layout for a burglar. [Sits opposite her.] You heard
that racket I made in the other room?

MRS. AUSTIN. Yes. What was it?

JIM. Some kind of a jar.

MRS. AUSTIN. Oh, my Greek vase. Well, never mind . . . it was an
imitation. What were you doing?

JIM. I was looking for something to eat.

MRS. AUSTIN. Oh!

JIM. It would have been the first thing I've had since the day before
yesterday.

MRS. AUSTIN. What's the matter?

JIM. No work. [A pause.] I suppose you'll give me the old gag . . .
there's plenty of work for a man that's willing.

MRS. AUSTIN. No, I happen to have studied, and I know better than
that. Else I should have fainted when I saw you . . . instead of
sitting here talking to you . . . . Do you drink?

JIM. Yes, but I didn't use to. Any man would drink . . . that went
through what I did.

MRS. AUSTIN. Are you married?

JIM. Yes . . . I was married. My wife is dead.

MRS. AUSTIN. Any children?

JIM. Two. Both dead.

MRS. AUSTIN. Oh!

JIM. It ain't a pretty story, ma'am. It's a poor man's story.

MRS. AUSTIN. Tell it to me.

JIM. All right. It'll spoil your sleep for the rest of the night, I
guess, but you can have it. [A pause.] A year ago I was what they call
an honest working man. I had a home and a happy family; and I didn't
drink any too much, and I did well . . . even if the work was hard. I
was in the steel works here in town.

MRS. AUSTIN. [Startled.] The Empire Steel Company?

JIM. Yes. Why?

MRS. AUSTIN. Nothing . . . only I happen to know some people there. Go
on.

JIM. It's no child's work there, ma'am. There's an awful lot of
accidents . . . more than the world has any idea of. I've seen a man
sent to hell in the snapping of a finger. And they don't treat them
fair . . . they hush things up. There are things you wouldn't believe
if I told them to you.

MRS. AUSTIN. Tell them.

JIM. I've seen a man there get caught in one of the cranes. They
stopped the machinery, but they couldn't get him out. They'd have had
to take the crane apart, and that would have cost several days, and it
was rush time, and the man was only a poor Hunkie, and there was no
one to know or care. So they started up the crane, and cut his leg
off.

MRS. AUSTIN. Oh, horrible!

JIM. It's the sort of thing you couldn't believe unless you saw it.
But I saw it. I didn't care, though. I was a fool. And then my time
came.

MRS. AUSTIN. How do you mean?

JIM. A blast furnace blew out, and a piece of slag hit me here, where
you see that patch. If it wasn't for the patch you'd see something
that would make you sick. It was a pain you couldn't tell about . . .
it was a couple of days before I knew where I was. And the first thing
when I came to my senses . . . in the hospital, it was . . . there was
a lawyer chap with a paper waiting for me.

MRS. AUSTIN. [In agitation.] A lawyer?

JIM. Yes, ma'am. Company representative, you know. And I was to sign
the paper . . . it was a receipt for the hospital expenses . . . the
operation and all that . . . you see they had to take out what was
left of my eye. And of course I couldn't see . . . I had to sign where
he told me to. And when I got well, I found they had trapped me into
signing a release.

MRS. AUSTIN. A release?

JIM. I had accepted the hospital expenses as a release for all the
company owed me. And I couldn't get any damages . . . and my eye was
gone, and all the weeks without any wages.

MRS. AUSTIN. My God!

JIM. And they turned me out so weak I could hardly walk; and . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. [Greatly excited.] Who was this man?

JIM. Which?

MRS. AUSTIN. This lawyer?

JIM. I never heard his name. He was a young fellow . . . handsome . .
. smooth- faced . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. [Whispering.] Oh!

JIM. Ah, they don't mind it . . . they're smooth. They do that all the
time. It's what they get their pay for.

MRS. AUSTIN. [Covering her face with her hands.] Oh, stop!

JIM. What's the matter?

MRS. AUSTIN. [Looking up with white face.] Nothing. Go on.

JIM. It was two months before I could work at all. And the rent came
due, and they turned us out . . . it was winter-time, and my wife
caught a cold, and it turned to pneumonia, and she died. That's all of
that.

MRS. AUSTIN. Go on.

JIM. And then, you see, the panic came . . . and the mills shut down .
. . sudden as that. The lawyer told me the company would see I always
had a job, but that was only to get me to sign.

MRS. AUSTIN. [Feverishly.] Did you try him?

JIM. I went to the office and tried; but they wouldn't even let me see
him.

MRS. AUSTIN. I see. And then?

JIM. Then I went out to look for work. I had the two babies, you know
. . . and God only knows how I loved those babies. I said I'd fight
and win out for their sakes. But Amy . . . she was the little one . .
. she never had been very strong. When you're a poor man, you can't
get the best food, even if you know what it is. It ain't fit milk they
sell for the children in this city; and the baby died . . . I never
knew what was the matter exactly. And there was only one left . . .
and me tramping the streets all day looking for a job. How was I to
take care of him, lady? How could I have helped it? [His voice is
breaking with emotion.] And oh, ma'am, he was the loveliest little
fellow . . . with hair like gold. And so well and strong.

MRS. AUSTIN. [Whispering.] What happened to him?

JIM. A street car killed him.

MRS. AUSTIN. Oh!

JIM. Run over his chest, ma'am. I came home at night, and they told
me, and I near went out of my mind. Can you think what it was to see
him . . . with his eyes starting out of his head like, and his
beautiful little body all mashed flat . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. [Wildly.] Oh, spare me!

JIM. I told you it wouldn't be a pretty story. Do you think maybe you
wouldn't take to drink if you saw a sight like that? [Sinking back.]
Since then I've looked for work, but I haven't cared much. Only
sometimes I've thought I'd like to meet that young lawyer . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. [Starting up.] Oh!

JIM. Yes, it all began with him. But I don't know . . . they'd only
jug me. Anyway, tonight I was sitting in a saloon with two fellows
that I had met. One of them was a second-story man . . . a fellow that
climbs up porches and fire- escapes. And I heard him telling about a
haul he'd made, and I said to myself: "There's a job for me . . . I'll
be a second-story man." And I tried it . . . but you see I didn't do
very well. I'm not good for much, I guess, any more.

AUSTIN. [Enters left, revolver in hand; stands watching, unobserved.]
Good heavens!

MRS. AUSTIN. You can't tell. You may have better success than you look
for.

JIM. No . . . there's nothing can help me. I'm for the scrap heap.

MRS. AUSTIN. [Eagerly.] Wait and see. You are a man . . . you can be
helped yet . . .

AUSTIN. [Coming forward.] What does this mean?

JIM. [Starts wildly and reaches for revolver.] Ha!

AUSTIN. [Raising weapon.] Holdup your hands!

MRS. AUSTIN. [Rushing forward.] No. Stop!

AUSTIN. What do you mean?

MRS. AUSTIN. I say stop! I promised him his freedom!

AUSTIN. My dear . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. Give me the weapon.

AUSTIN. Why . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. Give it to me. [Takes revolver.] Now sit down.

JIM. [Has been staring wildly at AUSTIN.] My God, it's the lawyer
fellow!

MRS. AUSTIN. Yes, it is he.

AUSTIN. What does all this mean?

MRS. AUSTIN. Look at this man!

AUSTIN. [Staring.] Why?

MRS. AUSTIN. Don't you know him?

AUSTIN. No.

MRS. AUSTIN. Look carefully. [Turns up light.] Have you never seen him
before?

AUSTIN. Never that I can recall. What is his name?

MRS. AUSTIN. I don't know. [To JIM.] What is it?

JIM. Humph! [Hesitating.] He could find out, anyway. Jim Faraday.

AUSTIN. Faraday . . . it sounds familiar.

JIM. [Grimly.] You've served the trick on a good many, I guess.

AUSTIN. [To Mrs. AUSTIN.] What does he mean?

JIM. Don't you remember the Sisters' Hospital? The fellow that had his
eye burned out in the big explosion?

AUSTIN. [Startled.] Oh!

JIM. [Sneeringly.] Ah, yes!

AUSTIN. You are the man?

JIM. I'm the man.

MRS. AUSTIN. Harvey, you took this man some paper to sign.

AUSTIN. Yes . . . I remember.

MRS. AUSTIN. Did you tell him what was in it?

AUSTIN. [Hesitates.] Why . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. Answer me, please.

AUSTIN. Why, my dear . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. Did you tell him what was in it?

AUSTIN. But, my dear, it wasn't my business to tell him.

MRS. AUSTIN. Oh!

AUSTIN. I was representing the company.

MRS. AUSTIN, I see.

AUSTIN. It was his place to see what was in it.

MRS. AUSTIN. Harvey! This man with one eye burned out, and not yet
over the accident?

AUSTIN. My dear, you don't understand . . .

JIM. [Wildly.] You didn't leave me to find out for myself. You lied to
me!

MRS. AUSTIN. At least you permitted him to be misled. You did not tell
him the honest truth about the paper, and what would be the effect if
he signed it.

AUSTIN. My dear, you do not understand. I could not have done that. I
was the representative of the interests of the company.

MRS. AUSTIN. And that is the sort of work you do for them?

AUSTIN. That is the sort of work that has to be done. I cannot help
it, much as I would like to . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. [Wildly.] You have done that sort of thing before. And
you will do it again!

AUSTIN. My dear . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. And you take money for it! You bring that money home to
me! And you never told me how you got it! You make me sharer in your
guilt!

AUSTIN. Helen!

MRS. AUSTIN. This was how you earned your promotion! This was what you
came to me and boasted about! This was what we married on. This money
. . . blood money . . . that you get for cheating this helpless
laborer out of his rights . . . out of everything he had in the world!

AUSTIN. My dear, you are out of your mind. You do not understand
business.

MRS. AUSTIN. I understand it all . . . a child could understand! It is
only you . . . the rising young lawyer . . . that doesn't understand!
Harvey, Harvey! Do you know what you have done to this man . . . what
you and I together have done to him? We have wrecked his life! We have
driven him to hell! We have murdered his wife and his two children. We
have turned him into a tramp and a criminal. We have climbed to
success on top of him . . . we have made our fortune out of his blood!
This house . . . this furniture . . . these pictures . . . all this
beauty and comfort . . . all this we have coined out of his tears and
agony . . . out of the lives of his sick wife and his two little
babies! And you have done this for me . . . you have made me the cause
of it . . . you have put the guilt of it upon my young life . . . a
thing that I must carry through the world with me until I die!

AUSTIN. [Starting toward her.] Helen!

MRS. AUSTIN. No! Don't touch me! Speak to HIM! It is with him you have
to do! What have you to say to him? Don't think about me!

AUSTIN. My dear, be reasonable!

MRS. AUSTIN. What have you to say to him? That is what I want to know!
Harvey! Don't you understand it is your character that is up for
judgment?

AUSTIN. It can't be as bad as you say.

MRS. AUSTIN. Why can't it? Find out.

AUSTIN. [After a long pause, turns to Jim.] Faraday.

JIM. Well?

AUSTIN. Is what my wife says true?

JIM. It's true.

AUSTIN. You got no damages from the company?

JIM. Didn't you fix it yourself? What do they pay you for?

AUSTIN. And had you no money saved?

JIM. My family had to live on it.

AUSTIN. And didn't you get your job back?

JIM. Until the shut-down, I did.

AUSTIN. Oh, that's so. I forgot that.

JIM. Humph!

AUSTIN. That's too bad. I will have to do something for you.

JIM. Will that bring my wife and babies back to life?

AUSTIN. Oh, your family died! My God . . . that's terrible! [A pause.]
Faraday, I can't help that. What can I do? Listen, man . . . you see
how unhappy my wife is . . . you don't want to make the thing
impossible for me, do you?

JIM. I ain't doing anything.

AUSTIN. Be reasonable, and let me atone for the mistake. We'll say
nothing about this . . . about tonight. We'll start over, and I'll see
that you get a good job, and a fair chance.

Jim. Humph!

AUSTIN. Will you do that? I'm honestly sorry about it. And perhaps if
I can give you some money for a start. .

[Takes out purse.]

JIM. Put up your money. It ain't likely you've got as much there as
I'd have got from the company.

AUSTIN. Oh, is that it? Well, maybe that is fair. I'll fix it up with
you on that basis.

JIM. And what about the other fellows, hey?

AUSTIN. The other fellows?

JIM. That you've done out the same way you done me. What about Dan
Kearney, that lost his life the day after . . and you and the rest of
the company sharks fixed it up so that his widow couldn't prove how it
was that he got hurt!

MRS. AUSTIN. Harvey!

JIM. Yes, ma'am, they done that. And it ain't the first time they done
it, either . . . nor the last. And they've bought juries . . . and
judges, too, I reckon . . . there ain't much work of a dirty sort that
the Empire Steel Company ain't tried in this city . . . and you can
bet their smart young lawyers know all the game! I'm sorry for you,
lady . . . you're white, and I'd be glad to help you. But I've seen
too much of the company and its ways, and I won't lie down and lick
its hand . . . not for any money! I ain't so low I've got the value of
my wife and two little babies figured out and ready to hand. I reckon
I'll stay on the outside of the fence and take my chances. I'll wind
up in jail, I suppose; but there's many a better man than me done the
same. So I guess I'll go, and we'll call it off.

[Starts away.]

MRS. AUSTIN. Harvey!

AUSTIN. My dear . . .

MRS. AUSTIN. Is that all you can say to him? You will let him go? [To
JIM.] Listen to me. You are right. We can never undo what we have
done. We cannot repay you. But at least we must do what we can. We
cannot let the evil go on. You yourself have no right to do it . . .
you have no right to give up your life.

JIM. I see what you mean, lady; and I'm sorry for you. I'd help you if
I could. But it's too late . . . I know that. There can't anybody save
me. I'm rotten . . . I'm a boozer. I couldn't stop if I wanted to. And
I ain't got any reason to want to. I ain't in the running.

MRS. AUSTIN. [Stretching out her arms.] But what can I do ?

JIM. You can look after them that ain't down. Look after them that
your husband and the rest of the company's sharks will do up tomorrow.

MRS. AUSTIN. No!

JIM. Oh, they'll do it! I know what you mean . . . you'll make him
stop . . . but they'll have another man in his place. It's a machine .
. . it goes right on. Yes, and you won't do as much as you think you
will, either . . . you'll think it over, and you won't go as far as
you mean to now.

MRS. AUSTIN. No! No!

JIM. Ah, but you can't help it . . . you're in the mill, too. It's the
class you belong to. You can talk and feel sorry . . . but you ain't
made to do things. You have to have your houses and your fine dresses
. . . and you couldn't live without them, and there'd be no use your
trying. And that means you have to live off my class . . . you have to
ride on our backs. And it don't much matter which part you ride on, as
far as I can see. You'll make your husband get a new job, maybe; but
he'll do the same thing in another way . . . only you won't find it
out. But any way he gets his money it'll come out of me and my kind.
D'ye see? I do the work . . . I'm the man underneath. I make the good
things, and you get them. [A pause.] Good luck to you.

MRS. AUSTIN. You are cruel.

JIM. Nothing of the kind. I've just told you the facts. I feel sorry
for you. I'd do anything I could for you. [Stretching out his hands.]
See what I've done! I've given you your husband's life.

MRS. AUSTIN. Oh!

JIM. Yes, just that. You've no idea how many times I swore it . . .
that I'd kill him on sight . . . that I'd strangle the life out of
him, if ever I laid eyes on him again. I used to sit when I was half
drunk, and brood over it . . . my God, I even swore it by the body of
my little boy! And I've got my gun, and you've taken his away from
him. And I don't shoot him. [A pause.] I leave him to you. [Grimly.]
You punish him.

[Exit right.]

[AUSTIN stretches out his arms to his wife. She sinks upon the table,
burying her head.]

CURTAIN





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael Hart]





This etext was produced by anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteers





THE PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF
ARTEMUS WARD (CHARLES FARRAR BROWNE) PART 2

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF ARTEMUS WARD PART 2, WAR.

(CHARLES FARRAR BROWNE)

With a biographical sketch by Melville D. Landon, "Eli Perkins"

CONTENTS.

PART II.

War.

2.1.  The Show is Confiscated.

2.2.  Thrilling Scenes in Dixie.

2.3.  Fourth of July Oration.

2.4.  The War Fever in Baldinsville.

2.5.  A War Meeting.

2.6.  The Draft in Baldinsville.

2.7.  Surrender of Cornwallis.

2.8.  Things in New York.

2.9.  Touching Letter from a Gory Member Of The Home Guard

2.10.  In Canada.

2.11.  The Noble Red Man.

2.12.  Artemus Ward in Richmond.

2.13.  Artemus Ward to the Prince of Wales.


PART II.  WAR.


2.1.  THE SHOW IS CONFISCATED.

You hav perhaps wondered wharebouts I was for these many dase
gone and past.  Perchans you sposed I'd gone to the Tomb of
the Cappylets, tho I don't know what those is.  It's a popler
noospaper frase.

Listen to my tail, and be silent that ye may here I've been
among the Seseshers, a earnin my daily peck by my legitimit
perfeshun, and havn't had no time to weeld my facile quill for
"the Grate Komick paper," if you'll allow me to kote from your
troothful advertisement.

My success was skaly, and I likewise had a narrer scape of my
life.  If what I've bin threw is "Suthren hosspitality," 'bout
which we've hearn so much, then I feel bound to obsarve that
they made two much of me.  They was altogether two lavish with
their attenshuns.

I went amung the Seseshers with no feelins of annermosity.  I
went in my perfeshernal capacity.  I was actooated by one of
the most Loftiest desires which can swell the human Buzzum,
viz.:--to giv the peeple their money's worth, by showin them
Sagashus Beests, and Wax Statoots, which I venter to say air
onsurpast by any other statoots anywheres.  I will not call
that man who sez my statoots is humbugs a lier and a hoss
thief, but bring him be4 me and I'll wither him with one of my
scornful frowns.

But to proseed with my tail.  In my travels threw the Sonny
South I heared a heap of talk about Seceshon and bustin up the
Union, but I didn't think it mounted to nothin.  The
politicians in all the villages was swearin that Old Abe
(sometimes called the Prahayrie flower) shouldn't never be
noggerated.  They also made fools of theirselves in varis
ways, but as they was used to that I didn't let it worry me
much, and the Stars and Stripes continued for to wave over my
little tent.  Moor over, I was a Son of Malty and a member of
several other Temperance Societies, and my wife she was a
Dawter of Malty, an I sposed these fax would secoor me the
infloonz and pertectiun of all the fust families.  Alas!  I
was dispinted.  State arter State seseshed and it growed
hotter and hotter for the undersined.  Things came to a
climbmacks in a small town in Alabamy, where I was premtorally
ordered to haul down the Stars & Stripes.  A deppytashun of
red-faced men cum up to the door of my tent ware I was standin
takin money (the arternoon exhibishun had commenst, an' my
Italyun organist was jerkin his sole-stirrin chimes.)  "We air
cum, Sir," said a millingtary man in a cockt hat, "upon a hi
and holy mishun.  The Southern Eagle is screamin threwout this
sunny land--proudly and defiantly screamin, Sir!"

"What's the matter with him?" sez I; "don't his vittles sit
well on his stummick?"

"That Eagle, Sir, will continner to scream all over this Brite
and tremenjus land!"

"Wall, let him SCREAM.  If your Eagle can amuse hisself by
screamin, let him went!"  The men anoyed me, for I was Bizzy
makin change.

"We are cum, Sir, upon a matter of dooty--"

"You're right, Capting.  It's every man's dooty to visit my
show," said I.

"We air cum--"

"And that's the reason you are here!" sez I, larfin one of my
silvery larfs.  I thawt if he wanted to goak I'd giv him sum
of my sparklin eppygrams.

"Sir, you're inserlent.  The plain question is, will you haul
down the Star-Spangled Banner, and hist the Southern flag!"

"Nary hist!"  Those was my reply.

"Your wax works and beests is then confisticated, & you air
arrested as a Spy!"

Sez I, "My fragrant roses of the Southern clime and Bloomin
daffodils, what's the price of whisky in this town, and how
many cubic feet of that seductive flooid can you individooally
hold?"

They made no reply to that, but said my wax figgers was
confisticated.  I axed them if that was ginerally the stile
among thieves in that country, to which they also made no
reply, but said I was arrested as a Spy, and must go to
Montgomry in iuns.  They was by this time jined by a large
crowd of other Southern patrits, who commenst hollerin "Hang
the baldheaded aberlitionist, and bust up his immoral
exhibition!"  I was ceased and tied to a stump, and the crowd
went for my tent--that water-proof pavilion, wherein
instruction and amoosment had been so muchly combined, at 15
cents per head--and tore it all to pieces.  Meanwhile dirty-
faced boys was throwin stuns and empty beer bottles at my
massiv brow, and takin other improper liberties with my
person.  Resistance was useless, for a varity of reasons, as I
readily obsarved.

The Seseshers confisticated my statoots by smashin them to
attums.  They then went to my money box and confisticated all
the loose change therein contaned.  They then went and bust in
my cages, lettin all the animils loose, a small but helthy
tiger among the rest.  This tiger has a excentric way of
tearin dogs to peaces, and I allers sposed from his gineral
conduck that he'd hav no hesitashun in servin human beins in
the same way if he could get at them.  Excuse me if I was
crooil, but I larfed boysterrusly when I see that tiger spring
in among the people.  "Go it, my sweet cuss!" I inardly
exclaimed.  "I forgive you for bitin off my left thum with all
my heart!  Rip 'em up like a bully tiger whose Lare has bin
inwaded by Seseshers!"

I can't say for certain that the tiger serisly injured any of
them, but as he was seen a few days after, sum miles distant,
with a large and well selected assortment of seats of trowsis
in his mouth, and as he lookt as tho he'd been havin sum
vilent exercise, I rayther guess he did.  You will therefore
perceive that they didn't confisticate him much.

I was carried to Montgomry in iuns and placed in durans vial.
The jail was a ornery edifiss, but the table was librally
surplied with Bakin an Cabbidge.  This was a good variety, for
when I didn't hanker after Bakin I could help myself to the
cabbige.

I had nobody to talk to nor nothin to talk about, howsever,
and I was very lonely, specially on the first day; so when the
jailer parst my lonely sell I put the few stray hairs on the
back part of my hed (I'm bald now, but thare was a time when I
wore sweet auburn ringlets) into as dish-hevild a state as
possible, & rollin my eyes like a manyyuck, I cride:  "Stay,
jaler, stay!  I am not mad, but soon shall be if you don't
bring me suthin to Talk!"  He brung me sum noospapers, for
which I thanked him kindly.

At larst I got a interview with Jefferson Davis, the President
of the Southern Conthieveracy.  He was quite perlite, and axed
me to sit down and state my case.  I did it, when he larfed
and said his gallunt men had been a little 2 enthoosiastic in
confisticatin my show.

"Yes," sez I, "they confisticated me too muchly.  I had sum
hosses confisticated in the same way onct, but the
confisticaters air now poundin stun in the States Prison in
Injinnapylus."

"Wall, wall Mister Ward, you air at liberty to depart; you air
friendly to the South, I know.  Even now we hav many frens in
the North, who sympathize with us, and won't mingle with this
fight."

"J. Davis, there's your grate mistaik.  Many of us was your
sincere frends, and thought certin parties amung us was fussin
about you and meddlin with your consarns intirely too much.
But J. Davis, the minit you fire a gun at the piece of dry-
goods called the Star-Spangled Banner, the North gits up and
rises en massy, in defence of that banner.  Not agin you as
individooals,--not agin the South even--but to save the flag.
We should indeed be weak in the knees, unsound in the heart,
milk-white in the liver, and soft in the hed, if we stood
quietly by, and saw this glorus Govyment smashed to pieces,
either by a furrin or a intestine foe.  The gentle-harted
mother hates to take her naughty child across her knee, but
she knows it is her dooty to do it.  So we shall hate to whip
the naughty South, but we must do it if you don't make back
tracks at onct, and we shall wallup you out of your boots!  J.
Davis, it is my decided opinion that the Sonny South is makin
a egrejus mutton-hed of herself!"

"Go on, sir, you're safe enuff.  You're two small powder for
me!" sed the President of the Southern Conthieveracy.

"Wait till I go home and start out the Baldinsville Mounted
Hoss Cavalry!  I'm Capting of that Corpse, I am, and J. Davis,
beware!  Jefferson D., I now leave you!  Farewell my gay Saler
Boy!  Good-bye, my bold buccaneer!  Pirut of the deep blue
sea, adoo! adoo!"

My tower threw the Southern Conthieveracy on my way home was
thrillin enuff for yeller covers.  It will form the subjeck of
my next.  Betsy Jane and the projeny air well.

Yours respectively,

A. Ward.


2.2.  THRILLING SCENES IN DIXIE.

I had a narrer scape from the sonny South.  "The swings and
arrers of outrajus fortin," alluded to by Hamlick, warn't
nothin in comparison to my trubles.  I come pesky near swearin
sum profane oaths more'n onct, but I hope I didn't do it, for
I've promist she whose name shall be nameless (except that her
initials is Betsy J.) that I'll jine the Meetin House at
Baldinsville, jest as soon as I can scrape money enuff
together so I can 'ford to be piuss in good stile, like my
welthy nabers.  But if I'm confisticated agin I'm fraid I
shall continner on in my present benited state for sum time.

I figgered conspicyusly in many thrillin scenes in my tower
from Montgomry to my humsted, and on sevril occasions I
thought "the grate komick paper" wouldn't be inriched no more
with my lubrications.  Arter biddin adoo to Jefferson D. I
started for the depot.  I saw a nigger sittin on a fence a
playin on a banjo, "My Afrikan Brother," sed I, coting from a
Track I onct red, "you belong to a very interestin race.  Your
masters is goin to war excloosively on your account."

"Yes, boss," he replied, "an' I wish 'em honorable graves!"
and he went on playin the banjo, larfin all over and openin
his mouth wide enuff to drive in an old-fashioned 2 wheeled
chaise.

The train of cars in which I was to trust my wallerable life,
was the scaliest, rickytiest lookin lot of consarns that I
ever saw on wheels afore.  "What time does this string of
second-hand coffins leave?" I inquired of the depot master.
He sed direckly, and I went in & sot down.  I hadn't more'n
fairly squatted afore a dark lookin man with a swinister
expression onto his countenance entered the cars, and lookin
very sharp at me, he axed what was my principles?

"Secesh!" I ansered.  "I'm a Dissoluter.  I'm in favor of Jeff
Davis, Bowregard, Pickens, Capt. Kidd, Bloobeard, Munro
Edards, the devil, Mrs. Cunningham and all the rest of 'em."

"You're in favor of the war?"

"Certingly.  By all means.  I'm in favor of this war and also
of the next war.  I've been in favor of the next war for over
sixteen years!"

"War to the knife!" sed the man.

"Blud, Eargo, Blud!" sed I, tho them words isn't orrigernal
with me, them words was rit by Shakspeare, who is ded.  His
mantle fell onto the author of "The Seven Sisters," who's goin
to hav a Spring overcoat made out of it.

We got under way at larst, an' proceeded on our jerney at
about the rate of speed which is ginrally obsarved by
properly-conducted funeral processions.  A hansum yung gal,
with a red musketer bar on the back side of her hed, and a
sassy little black hat tipt over her forrerd, sot in the seat
with me.  She wore a little Sesesh flag pin'd onto her hat,
and she was a goin for to see her troo love, who had jined the
Southern army, all so bold and gay.  So she told me.  She was
chilly and I offered her my blanket.

"Father livin?" I axed.

"Yes, sir."

"Got any Uncles?"

"A heap.  Uncle Thomas is ded, tho."

"Peace to Uncle Thomas's ashes, and success to him!  I will be
your Uncle Thomas!  Lean on me, my pretty Secesher, and linger
in Blissful repose!"  She slept as secoorly as in her own
housen, and didn't disturb the sollum stillness of the night
with 'ary snore!

At the first station a troop of Sojers entered the cars and
inquired if "Old Wax Works" was on bored.  That was the
disrespectiv stile in which they referred to me.  "Becawz if
Old Wax Works is on bored," sez a man with a face like a
double-breasted lobster, "we're going to hang Old Wax Works!"

"My illustrious and patriotic Bummers!" sez I, a gittin up and
takin orf my Shappo, "if you allude to A. Ward, it's my
pleasin dooty to inform you that he's ded.  He saw the error
of his ways at 15 minutes parst 2 yesterday, and stabbed
hisself with a stuffed sled-stake, dyin in five beautiful
tabloos to slow moosic!  His last words was:  'My perfeshernal
career is over!  I jerk no more!'"

"And who be you?"

"I'm a stoodent in Senator Benjamin's law offiss.  I'm going
up North to steal some spoons and things for the Southern
Army."

This was satisfactory and the intossicated troopers went orf.
At the next station the pretty little Secessher awoke and sed
she must git out there.  I bid her a kind adoo and giv her sum
pervisions.  "Accept my blessin and this hunk of ginger bred!"
I sed.  She thankt me muchly and tript galy away.  There's
considerable human nater in a man, and I'm afraid I shall
allers giv aid and comfort to the enemy if he cums to me in
the shape of a nice young gal.

At the next station I didn't get orf so easy.  I was dragged
out of the cars and rolled in the mud for several minits, for
the purpose of "takin the conseet out of me," as a Secesher
kindly stated.

I was let up finally, when a powerful large Secesher came up
and embraced me, and to show that he had no hard feelins agin
me, put his nose into my mouth.  I returned the compliment by
placin my stummick suddenly agin his right foot, when he
kindly made a spittoon of his able-bodied face.  Actooated by
a desire to see whether the Secesher had bin vaxinated I then
fastened my teeth onto his left coat-sleeve and tore it to the
shoulder.  We then vilently bunted out heads together for a
few minutes, danced around a little, and sot down in a
mudpuddle.  We riz to our feet agin and by a sudden and adroit
movement I placed my left eye agin the Secesher's fist.  We
then rushed into each other's arms and fell under a two-hoss
wagon.  I was very much exhaustid and didn't care about gettin
up agin, but the man sed he reckoned I'd better, and I
conclooded I would.  He pulled me up, but I hadn't bin on my
feet more'n two seconds afore the ground flew up and hit me in
the hed.  The crowd sed it was high old sport, but I couldn't
zackly see where the lafture come in.  I riz and we embraced
agin.  We careered madly to a steep bank, when I got the upper
hands of my antaggernist and threw him into the raveen.  He
fell about forty feet, striking a grindstone pretty hard.  I
understood he was injured.  I haven't heard from the
grindstone.

A man in a cockt hat cum up and sed he felt as though a
apology was doo me.  There was a mistake.  The crowd had taken
me for another man!  I told him not to mention it, and axed
him if his wife and little ones was so as to be about, and got
on bored the train, which had stopped at that station "20
minits for refreshments."  I got all I wantid.  It was the
hartiest meal I ever et.

I was rid on a rale the next day, a bunch of blazin fire
crackers bein tied to my coat tales.  It was a fine spectycal
in a dramatic pint of view, but I didn't enjoy it.  I had
other adventers of a startlin kind, but why continner?  Why
lasserate the Public Boozum with these here things?  Suffysit
to say I got across Mason & Dixie's line safe at last.  I made
tracks for my humsted, but she to whom I'm harnist for life
failed to recognize, in the emashiated bein who stood before
her, the gushin youth of forty-six summers who had left her
only a few months afore.  But I went into the pantry, and
brought out a certin black bottle.  Raisin it to my lips, I
sed "Here's to you, old gal!"  I did it so natral that she
knowed me at once.  "Those form!  Them voice!  That natral
stile of doin things!  'Tis he!" she cried, and rushed into my
arms.  It was too much for her & she fell into a swoon.  I cum
very near swoundin myself.

No more to-day from yours for the Pepetration of the Union,
and the bringin of the Goddess of Liberty out of her present
bad fix.


2.3.  FOURTH OF JULY ORATION.

Delivered July 4th, at Weathersfield, Connecticut, 1859.

[I delivered the follerin, about two years ago, to a large and
discriminating awjince.  I was 96 minits passin a givin pint.
I have revised the orashun, and added sum things which makes
it approposser to the times than it otherwise would be.  I
have also corrected the grammers and punktooated it.  I do my
own punktooatin now days.  The Printers in "Vanity Fair"
offiss can't punktooate worth a cent.]

FELLER CITIZENS:  I've bin honored with a invite to norate
before you to-day; and when I say that I skurcely feel ekal to
the task, I'm sure you will believe me.

Weathersfield is justly celebrated for her onyins and
patritism the world over, and to be axed to paws and address
you on this my fust perfeshern