ur wax figger represented HENRY WILKINS as a boy.  Now,
HENRY was hung, and yet you show him to us now as a full-grown
man!  How's that?"

"The figger has growd, sir--it has growd," I said.

I was angry.  If it had been in these times I think I should
have informed agin him as a traitor to his flag, and had him
put in Fort Lafayette.

I say adoo to Quebeck with regret.  It is old-fogyish, but
chock-full of interest.  Young gentlemen of a romantic turn of
mind, who air botherin' their heads as to how they can spend
their father's money, had better see Quebeck.

Altogether I like Canady.  Good people and lots of pretty
girls.  I wouldn't mind comin' over here to live in the
capacity of a Duke, provided a vacancy occurs, and provided
further I could be allowed a few star-spangled banners, a
eagle, a boon of liberty, etc.

Don't think I've skedaddled.  Not at all.  I'm coming home in
a week.

Let's have the Union restored as it was, if we can; but if we
can't, I'M IN FAVOR OF THE UNION AS IT WASN'T.  But the Union,
anyhow.

Gentlemen of the editorial corpse, if you would be happy be
virtoous!  I who am the emblem of virtoo, tell you so.

                                 (Signed,)        "A Ward."


2.11.  THE NOBLE RED MAN.

The red man of the forest was form'ly a very respectful
person.  Justice to the noble aboorygine warrants me in sayin'
that orrigernerly he was a majestic cuss.

At the time CHRIS. arrove on these shores (I allood to CHRIS.
COLUMBUS), the savajis was virtoous and happy.  They were
innocent of secession, rum, draw-poker, and sinfulness
gin'rally.  They didn't discuss the slavery question as a
custom.  They had no Congress, faro banks, delirium tremens,
or Associated Press.  Their habits was consequently good.
Late suppers, dyspepsy, gas companies, thieves, ward
politicians, pretty waiter-girls, and other metropolitan
refinements, were unknown among them.  No savage in good
standing would take postage-stamps.  You couldn't have bo't a
coonskin with a barrel of 'em.  The female Aboorygine never
died of consumption, because she didn't tie her waist up in
whale-bone things; but in loose and flowin' garments she
bounded, with naked feet, over hills and plains, like the wild
and frisky antelope.  It was a onlucky moment for us when
CHRIS. sot his foot onto these 'ere shores.  It would have
been better for us of the present day if the injins had given
him a warm meal and sent him home ore the ragin' billers.  For
the savages owned the country, and COLUMBUS was a fillibuster.
CORTEZ, PIZARRO, and WALKER were one-horse fillibusters--
COLUMBUS was a four-horse team fillibuster, and a large yaller
dog under the waggin.  I say, in view of the mess we are
makin' of things, it would have been better for us if cOLUMBUS
had staid to home.  It would have been better for the show
bisniss.  The circulation of "Vanity Fair" would be larger,
and the proprietors would all have boozum pins!  Yes, sir, and
perhaps a ten-pin alley.

By which I don't wish to be understood as intimatin' that the
scalpin' wretches who are in the injin bisness at the present
day are of any account, or calculated to make home happy,
specially the Sioxes of Minnesoty, who desarve to be murdered
in the first degree, and if POPE will only stay in St. Paul
and not go near 'em HIMSELF, I reckon they will be.


2.12.  ARTEMUS WARD IN RICHMOND.

                             Richmond, Va.--May, 18 & 65.

                      OLONZO WARD.

Afore I comments this letter from the late rebil capitol I
desire to cimply say that I hav seen a low and skurrilus noat
in the paper from a certin purson who singes hisself Olonzo
Ward, & sez he is my berruther.  I did ONCE hav a berruther of
that name, but I do not recugnize him now.  To me he is wuss
than ded!  I took him from collige sum 16 years ago and gave
him a good situation as the Bearded Woman in my Show.  How did
he repay me for this kindness?  He basely undertook (one day
while in a Backynalian mood on rum & right in sight of the
aujience in the tent) to stand upon his hed, whareby he
betray'd his sex on account of his boots & his Beard fallin'
off his face, thus rooinin' my prospecks in that town, &
likewise incurrin' the seris displeasure of the Press, which
sed boldly I was triflin with the feelin's of a intelligent
public.  I know no such man as Olonzo Ward.  I do not even
wish his name breathed in my presents.  I do not recognize
him.  I perfectly disgust him.

                          RICHMOND.

The old man finds hisself once more in a Sunny climb.  I cum
here a few days arter the city catterpillertulated.

My naburs seemed surprised & astonisht at this darin' bravery
onto the part of a man at my time of life, but our family was
never know'd to quale in danger's stormy hour.

My father was a sutler in the Revolootion War.  My father once
had a intervoo with Gin'ral La Fayette.

He asked La Fayette to lend him five dollars, promisin' to pay
him in the Fall; but Lafy said "he couldn't see it in those
lamps."  Lafy was French, and his knowledge of our langwidge
was a little shaky.

Immejutly on my 'rival here I perceeded to the Spotswood
House, and callin' to my assistans a young man from our town
who writes a good runnin' hand, I put my ortograph on the
Register, and handin' my umbrella to a baldheded man behind
the counter, who I s'posed was Mr. Spotswood, I said, "Spotsy,
how does she run?"

He called a cullud purson, and said,

"Show the gen'lman to the cowyard, and giv' him cart number
1."

"Isn't Grant here?" I said.  "Perhaps Ulyssis wouldn't mind my
turnin' in with him."

"Do you know the Gin'ral?" inquired Mr. Spotswood.

"Wall, no, not 'zacky; but he'll remember me.  His
brother-in-law's Aunt bought her rye meal of my uncle Levi
all one winter.  My uncle Levi's rye meal was--"

"Pooh! pooh!" said Spotsy, "don't bother me," and he shuv'd
my umbrella onto the floor.  Obsravin' to him not to be so
keerless with that wepin, I accompanid the African to my
lodgins.

"My brother," I sed, "air you aware that you've bin
mancipated?  Do you realize how glorus it is to be free?  Tell
me, my dear brother, does it not seem like some dreams, or do
you realize the great fact in all its livin' and holy
magnitood?"

He sed he would take some gin.

I was show'd to the cowyard and laid down under a one-mule
cart.  The hotel was orful crowded, and I was sorry I hadn't
gone to the Libby Prison.  Tho' I should hav' slept comf'ble
enuff if the bed-clothes hadn't bin pulled off me durin' the
night, by a scoundrul who cum and hitched a mule to the cart
and druv it off.  I thus lost my cuverin', and my throat feels
a little husky this mornin'.

Gin'ral Hulleck offers me the hospitality of the city, givin
me my choice of hospitals.

He has also very kindly placed at my disposal a smallpox
amboolance.

                      UNION SENTIMENT.

There is raly a great deal of Union sentiment in this city.  I
see it on ev'ry hand.

I met a man to-day--I am not at liberty to tell his name, but
he is a old and inflooentooial citizen of Richmond, and sez
he, "Why!  We've bin fightin' agin the Old Flag!  Lor' bless
me, how sing'lar!"  He then borrer'd five dollars of me and
bust into a flood of teers.

Sed another (a man of standin' and formerly a bitter rebuel),
"Let us at once stop this effooshun of Blud!  The Old Flag is
good enuff for me.  Sir," he added, "you air from the North!
Have you a doughnut or a piece of custard pie about you?"

I told him no, but I knew a man from Vermont who had just
organized a sort of restaurant, where he could go and make a
very comfortable breakfast on New England rum and cheese.  He
borrowed fifty cents of me, and askin' me to send him Wm.
Lloyd Garrison's ambrotype as soon as I got home, he walked
off.

Said another, "There's bin a tremendous Union feelin here from
the fust.  But we was kept down by a rain of terror.  Have you
a dagerretype of Wendell Phillips about your person? and will
you lend me four dollars for a few days till we air once more
a happy and united people."

                         JEFF. DAVIS.

Jeff. Davis is not pop'lar here.  She is regarded as a
Southern sympathizer. & yit I'm told he was kind to his
Parents.  She ran away from 'em many years ago, and has never
bin back.  This was showin' 'em a good deal of consideration
when we refleck what his conduck has been.  Her captur in
female apparel confooses me in regard to his sex, & you see I
speak of him as a her as frekent as otherwise, & I guess he
feels so hisself.

                             R. LEE.

Robert Lee is regarded as a noble feller.

He was opposed to the war at the fust, and draw'd his sword
very reluctant.  In fact, he wouldn't hav' drawd his sword at
all, only he had a large stock of military clothes on hand,
which he didn't want to waste.  He sez the colored man is
right, and he will at once go to New York and open a Sabbath
School for negro minstrels.

                   THE CONFEDERATE ARMY.

The surrender of R. Lee, J. Johnston and others leaves the
Confedrit Army in a ruther shattered state.  That army now
consists of Kirby Smith, four mules and a Bass drum, and is
movin' rapidly to'rds Texis.

                A PROUD AND HAWTY SUTHENER.

Feelin' a little peckish, I went into a eatin' house to-day
and encountered a young man with long black hair and slender
frame.  He didn't wear much clothes, and them as he did wear
looked onhealthy.  He frowned on me, and sed, kinder scornful,
"So, Sir--you come here to taunt us in our hour of trouble, do
you?"

"No," said I, "I cum here for hash!"

"Pish-haw!" he sed sneerinly, "I mean you air in this city for
the purposes of gloating over a fallen people.  Others may
basely succumb, but as for me, I will never yield--NEVER,
NEVER!"

"Hav' suthin' to eat!" I pleasantly suggested.

"Tripe and onions!" he sed furcely; then he added, "I eat with
you, but I hate you.  You're a low-lived Yankee!"

To which I pleasantly replied, "How'l you have your tripe?"

"Fried, mudsill! with plenty of ham-fat!"

He et very ravenus.  Poor feller!  He had lived on odds and
ends for several days, eatin' crackers that had bin turned
over by revelers in the bread tray at the bar.

He got full at last, and his hart softened a little to'ards
me.  "After all," he sed, "you have sum people at the North
who air not wholly loathsum beasts?"

"Well, yes," I sed, "we hav' now and then a man among us who
isn't a cold-bluded scoundril.  Young man," I mildly but
gravely sed, "this crooil war is over, and you're lickt!  It's
rather necessary for sumbody to lick in a good square, lively
fite, and in this 'ere case it happens to be the United States
of America.  You fit splendid, but we was too many for you.
Then make the best of it, & let us all give in and put the
Republic on a firmer basis nor ever.

"I don't gloat over your misfortuns, my young fren'.  Fur from
it.  I'm a old man now, & my hart is softer nor it once was.
You see my spectacles is misten'd with suthin' very like
tears.  I'm thinkin' of the sea of good rich Blud that has
been spilt on both sides in this dredful war!  I'm thinkin' of
our widders and orfuns North, and of your'n in the South.  I
kin cry for both.  B'leeve me, my young fren', I kin place my
old hands tenderly on the fair yung hed of the Virginny maid
whose lover was laid low in the battle dust by a fed'ral
bullet, and say, as fervently and piously as a vener'ble
sinner like me kin say anythin', God be good to you, my poor
dear, my poor dear."

I riz up to go, & takin' my young Southern fren' kindly by the
hand, I sed, "Yung man, adoo!  You Southern fellers is probly
my brothers, tho' you've occasionally had a cussed queer way
of showin' it!  It's over now.  Let us all line in and make a
country on this continent that shall giv' all Europe the cramp
in the stummuck ev'ry time they look at us!  Adoo, adoo!"

And as I am through, I likewise say adoo to you, jentle
reader, merely remarkin' that the Star-Spangled Banner is
wavin' round loose agin, and that there don't seem to be
anything the matter with the Goddess of Liberty beyond a slite
cold.

                                              Artemus Ward.


2.13.  ARTEMUS WARD TO THE PRINCE OF WALES.

FRIEND WALES,--You remember me.  I saw you in Canady a few
years ago.  I remember you too.  I seldim forget a person.

I hearn of your marriage to the Printcis Alexandry, & ment ter
writ you a congratoolatory letter at the time, but I've bin
bildin a barn this summer, & hain't had no time to write
letters to folks.  Excoose me.

Numeris changes has tooken place since we met in the body
politic.  The body politic, in fack, is sick.  I sometimes
think it has got biles, friend Wales.

In my country we've got war, while your country, in
conjunktion with Cap'n Sems of the "Alobarmy," manetanes a
nootral position!

I'm afraid I can't write goaks when I sit about it.  Oh no, I
guess not!

Yes, Sir, we've got a war, and the troo Patrit has to make
sacrifisses, you bet.

I have alreddy given two cousins to the war, & I stand reddy
to sacrifiss my wife's brother ruther'n not see the rebelyin
krusht.  And if wuss cums to wuss I'll shed ev'ry drop of blud
my able-bodied relations has got to prosekoot the war.  I
think sumbody oughter be prosekooted, & it may as well be the
war as any body else.  When I git a goakin fit onto me it's no
use to try ter stop me.

You hearn about the draft, friend Wales, no doubt.  It caused
sum squirmin', but it was fairly conducted, I think, for it
hit all classes.  It is troo that Wendill Phillips, who is a
American citizen of African scent, 'scaped, but so did
Vallandiggum, who is Conservativ, and who wus resuntly sent
South, tho' he would have bin sent to the Dry Tortoogus if Abe
had 'sposed for a minit that the Tortoogusses would keep him.

We hain't got any daily paper in our town, but we've got a
female sewin' circle, which ansers the same purpuss, and we
wasn't long in suspents as to who was drafted.

One young man who was drawd claimed to be exemp because he was
the only son of a widow'd mother who supported him.  A few
able-bodid dead men was drafted, but whether their heirs will
have to pay 3 hundrid dollars a peace for 'em is a question
for Whitin', who 'pears to be tinkerin' up this draft bizniss
right smart.  I hope he makes good wages.

I think most of the conscrips in this place will go.  A few
will go to Canady, stopping on their way at Concord, N.H.,
where I understan there is a Muslum of Harts.

You see I'm sassy, friend Wales, hittin' all sides; but no
offense is ment.  You know I ain't a politician, and never
was.  I vote for Mr. Union--that's the only candidate I've
got.  I claim, howsever, to have a well-balanced mind; tho' my
idees of a well-balanced mind differs from the idees of a
partner I once had, whose name it was Billson.  Billson and me
orjanized a strollin' dramatic company, & we played The
Drunkard, or the Falling Saved, with a real drunkard.  The
play didn't take particlarly, and says Billson to me, Let's
giv 'em some immoral dramy.  We had a large troop onto our
hands, consisting of eight tragedians and a bass drum, but I
says, No, Billson; and then says I, Billson, you hain't got a
well-balanced mind.  Says he, Yes, I have, old hoss-fly (he
was a low cuss)--yes, I have.  I have a mind, says he, that
balances in any direction that the public rekires.  That's wot
I call a well-balanced mind.  I sold out and bid adoo to
Billson.  He is now an outcast in the State of Vermont.  The
miser'ble man once played Hamlet.  There wasn't any orchestry,
and wishin' to expire to slow moosic, he died playin' on a
claironett himself, interspersed with hart-rendin' groans, &
such is the world!  Alars! alars! how onthankful we air to
that Providence which kindly allows us to live and borrow
money, and fail und do bizniss!

But to return to our subjeck.  With our resunt grate triumps
on the Mississippi, the Father of Waters (and them is waters
no Father need feel 'shamed of--twig the wittikism?) and the
cheerin' look of things in other places, I reckon we shan't
want any Muslum of Harts.  And what upon airth do the people
of Concord, N.H., want a Muslum of Harts for?  Hain't you got
the State House now?  & what more do you want?

But all this is furrin to the purpuss of this note, arter all.
My objeck in now addressin' you is to giv you sum advice,
friend Wales, about managin' your wife, a bizniss I've had
over thirty years experience in.

You had a good weddin.  The papers have a good deal to say
about "vikins" in connexion thare with.  Not knowings what
that air, and so I frankly tells you, my noble lord dook of
the throne, I can't zackly say whether we hab 'em or not.  We
was both very much flustrated.  But I never injoyed myself
better in my life.

Dowtless, your supper was ahead of our'n.  As regards eatin'
uses, Baldinsville was allers shaky.  But you can git a good
meal in New York, & cheap to.  You can git half a mackril at
Delmonico's or Mr. Mason Dory's for six dollars, and biled
pertaters throw'd in.

As I sed, I manige my wife without any particler trouble.
When I fust commenst trainin' her I institooted a series of
experiments, and them as didn't work I abanding'd.  You'd
better do similer.  Your wife may objeck to gittin' up and
bildin' the fire in the mornin', but if you commence with her
at once you may be able to overkum this prejoodiss.  I regret
to obsarve that I didn't commence arly enuff.  I wouldn't have
you s'pose I was ever kicked out of bed.  Not at all.  I
simply say, in regard to bildin' fires, that, I didn't
commence arly enuff.  It was a ruther cold mornin' when I fust
proposed the idee to Betsy.  It wasn't well received, and I
found myself layin' on the floor putty suddent.  I thought I'd
git up and bild the fire myself.

Of course now you're marrid you can eat onions.  _I_ allus
did, and if I know my own hart, I allus will.  My daughter,
who is goin' on 17 and is frisky, says they's disgustin.  And
speaking of my daughter reminds me that quite a number of
young men have suddenly discovered that I'm a very
entertainin' old feller, and they visit us frekently,
specially on Sunday evenins.  One young chap--a lawyer by
habit--don't cum as much as he did.  My wife's father lives
with us.  His intelleck totters a little, and he saves the
papers containin' the proceedins of our State Legislater.  The
old gen'l'man likes to read out loud, and he reads tol'ble
well.  He eats hash freely, which makes his voice clear; but
as he onfortnitly has to spell the most of his words, I may
say he reads slow.  Wall, whenever this lawyer made his
appearance I would set the old man a-reading the Legislativ'
reports.  I kept the young lawyer up one night till 12 o'clock
listenin to a lot of acts in regard to a drawbridge away orf
in the east part of the State, havin' sent my daughter to bed
at half-past 8.  He hasn't bin there since, and I understan'
he says I go round swindlin' the Public.

I never attempted to reorganize my wife but onct.  I shall
never attempt agin.  I'd bin to a public dinner, and had
allowed myself to be betrayed into drinkin' several people's
healths; and wishin' to make 'em as robust as possible, I
continnerd drinkin' their healths until my own became
affected.  Consekens was, I presented myself at Betsy's
bedside late at night with consid'ble licker concealed about
my person.  I had sumhow got perseshun of a hosswhip on my way
home, and rememberin' sum cranky observations of Mrs. Ward's
in the mornin', I snapt the whip putty lively, and in a very
loud woice, I sed, "Betsy, you need reorganizin'!  I have cum,
Betsy," I continued--crackin the whip over the bed--"I have
cum to reorganize you!  Haave you per-ayed tonight?"

      *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *

I dream'd that sumbody had laid a hosswhip over me sev'ril
conseckootiv times; and when I woke up I found she had.  I
hain't drank much of anythin' since, and if I ever have
another reorganizin' job on hand I shall let it out.

My wife is 52 years old, and has allus sustained a good
character.  She's a good cook.  Her mother lived to a
vener'ble age, and died while in the act of frying slapjacks
for the County Commissioners.  And may no rood hand pluk a
flour from her toomstun!  We hain't got any picter of the old
lady, because she'd never stand for her ambrotipe, and
therefore I can't giv her likeness to the world through the
meejum of the illusterated papers; but as she wasn't a
brigadier-gin'ral, particlerly, I don't s'pose they'd publish
it, any how.

It's best to give a woman considerable lee-way.  But not too
much.  A naber of mine, Mr. Roofus Minkins, was once very sick
with the fever, but his wife moved his bed into the door-yard
while she was cleanin' house.  I toald Roofus this wasn't the
thing, 'specially as it was rainin' vi'lently; but he said he
wanted to giv his wife "a little lee-way."  That was 2 mutch.
I told Mrs. Minkins that her Roofus would die if he staid out
there into the rain much longer; when she said, "It shan't be
my fault if he dies unprepared," at the same time tossin' him
his mother's Bible.  It was orful!  I stood by, however, and
nussed him as well's I could, but I was a putty wet-nuss, I
tell you.

There's varis ways of managin' a wife, friend Wales, but the
best and only safe way is to let her do jist about as she
wants to.  I 'dopted that there plan sum time ago, and it
works like a charm.

Remember me kindly to Mrs. Wales, and good luck to you both!
And as years roll by, and accidents begin to happen to you--
among which I hope there'll be Twins--you will agree with me
that family joys air the only ones a man can bet on with any
certinty of winnin'.

It may interest you to know that I'm prosperin' in a pecoonery
pint of view.  I make 'bout as much in the course of a year as
a cab'net offisser does, & I understand my business a good
deal better than some of them do.

      Respecks to St. George & the Dragon.
                                   Ever be 'appy.
                                             A. Ward.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was scanned by JC Byers
(http://www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and
proofread by Doris Ringbloom, Sara Vazirian, Diane Doerfler,
Nancy Bloomquist, and JC Byers.





                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                          VOLUME THREE
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                    Inscribed to the Memory
                               of
                            A Friend
                              Who
            During A Friendship of Twenty-Six Years
                    Ever Showed Me The Most
                      Unwearied Kindness,
                    Richard Monckton Milnes
                        Baron Houghton.


                  Contents of the Third Volume


The Tale of King Omar Bin Al-Nu'uman and His Sons Sharrkan and
Zau Al-Makan (cont)
          aa.  Continuation of the Tale of Aziz and Azizah
     b.   Tale of the Hashish Eater
     c.   Tale of Hammad the Badawi
10.  The Birds and Beasts and the Carpenter
11.  The Hermits
12.  The Water-Fowl and the Tortoise
13.  The Wolf and the Fox
     a.   Tale of the Falcon and the Partridge
14.  The Mouse and the Ichneumon
15.  The Cat and the Crow
16.  The Fox and the Crow
     a.   The Flea and the Mouse
     b.   The Saker and the Birds
     c.   The Sparrow and the Eagle
17.  The Hedgehog and the Wood Pigeons
     a.   The Merchant and the Two Sharpers
18.  The Thief and His Monkey
     a.   The Foolish Weaver
19.  The Sparrow and the Peacock
20.  Ali Bin Bakkar and Shams Al-Nahar
21.  Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman






                        The Book Of The
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                                
                                
                                

       When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Night

Shahrazad continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Aziz pursued to Taj al-Muluk: Then I entered the flower garden
and made for the pavilion, where I found the daughter of Dalilah
the Wily One, sitting with head on knee and hand to cheek.  Her
colour was changed and her eyes were sunken; but, when she saw
me, she exclaimed, "Praised be Allah for thy safety!" And she was
minded to rise but fell down for joy.  I was abashed before her
and hung my head; presently, however, I went up to her and kissed
her and asked, "How knewest thou that I should come to thee this
very night?" She answered, "I knew it not!  By Allah, this whole
year past I have not tasted the taste of sleep, but have watched
through every night, expecting thee; and such hath been my case
since the day thou wentest out from me and I gave thee the new
suit of clothes, and thou promisedst me to go to the Hammam and
to come back!  So I sat awaiting thee that night and a second
night and a third night; but thou camest not till after so great
delay, and I ever expecting thy coming; for this is lovers' way. 
And now I would have thee tell me what hath been the cause of
thine absence from me the past year long?" So I told her.  And
when she knew that I was married, her colour waxed yellow, and I
added, "I have come to thee this night but I must leave thee
before day." Quoth she, "Doth it not suffice her that she tricked
thee into marrying her and kept thee prisoner with her a whole
year, but she must also make thee swear by the oath of divorce,
that thou wilt return to her on the same night before morning,
and not allow thee to divert thyself with thy mother or me, nor
suffer thee to pass one night with either of us, away from her? 
How then must it be with one from whom thou hast been absent a
full year, and I knew thee before she did?  But Allah have mercy
on thy cousin Azizah, for there befel her what never befel any
and she bore what none other ever bore and she died by thy ill
usage; yet 'twas she who protected thee against me.  Indeed, I
thought thou didst love me, so I let thee take thine own way;
else had I not suffered thee to go safe in a sound skin, when I
had it in my power to clap thee in jail and even to slay thee."
Then she wept with sore weeping and waxed wroth and shuddered in
my face with skin bristling[FN#1] and looked at me with furious
eyes.  When I saw her in this case I was terrified at her and my
side muscles trembled and quivered, for she was like a dreadful
she Ghul, an ogress in ire, and I like a bean over the fire. 
Then said she, "Thou art of no use to me, now thou art married
and hast a child; nor art thou any longer fit for my company; I
care only for bachelors and not for married men:[FN#2] these
profit us nothing Thou hast sold me for yonder stinking armful;
but, by Allah, I will make the whore's heart ache for thee, and
thou shalt not live either for me or for her!" Then she cried a
loud cry and, ere I could think, up came the slave girls and
threw me on the ground; and when I was helpless under their hands
she rose and, taking a knife, said, "I will cut thy throat as
they slaughter he goats; and that will be less than thy desert,
for thy doings to me and the daughter of thy uncle before me."
When I looked to my life and found myself at the mercy of her
slave women, with my cheeks dust soiled, and saw her sharpen the
knife, I made sure of death.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan thus continued his tale to Zau al-Makan: Then quoth the
youth Aziz to Taj al-Muluk, Now when I found my life at the mercy
of her slave women with my cheeks dust soiled, and I saw her
sharpen the knife, I made sure of death and cried out to her for
mercy.  But she only redoubled in ferocity and ordered the slave
girls to pinion my hands behind me, which they did; and, throwing
me on my back, she seated herself on my middle and held down my
head.  Then two of them came up and squatted on my shin bones,
whilst other two grasped my hands and arms; and she summoned a
third pair and bade them beat me.  So they beat me till I fainted
and my voice failed.  When I revived, I said to myself, " 'Twere
easier and better for me to have my gullet slit than to be beaten
on this wise!" And I remembered the words of my cousin, and how
she used to say to me, "Allah, keep thee from her mischief!"; and
I shrieked and wept till my voice failed and I remained without
power to breathe or to move.  Then she again whetted the knife
and said to the slave girls, "Uncover him." Upon this the Lord
inspired me to repeat to her the two phrases my cousin had taught
me, and had bequeathed to me, and I said, "O my lady, dost thou
not know that Faith is fair, Unfaith is foul?" When she heard
this, she cried out and said, "Allah pity thee, Azizah, and give
thee Paradise in exchange for thy wasted youth!  By Allah, of a
truth she served thee in her life time and after her death, and
now she hath saved thee alive out of my hands with these two
saws.  Nevertheless, I cannot by any means leave thee thus, but
needs must I set my mark on thee, to spite yonder brazen faced
piece, who hath kept thee from me." There upon she called out to
the slave women and bade them bind my feet with cords and then
said to them, "Take seat on him!" They did her bidding, upon
which she arose and fetched a pan of copper and hung it over the
brazier and poured into it oil of sesame, in which she fried
cheese.[FN#3] Then she came up to me (and I still insensible)
and, unfastening my bag trousers, tied a cord round my testicles
and, giving it to two of her women, bade them trawl at it.  They
did so, and I swooned away and was for excess of pain in a world
other than this.  Then she came with a razor of steel and cut off
my member masculine,[FN#4] so that I remained like a woman: after
which she seared the wound with the boiling and rubbed it with a
powder, and I the while unconscious.  Now when I came to myself,
the blood had stopped; so she bade the slave girls unbind me and
made me drink a cup of wine.  Then said she to me, "Go now to her
whom thou hast married and who grudged me a single night, and the
mercy of Allah be on thy cousin Azizah, who saved thy life and
never told her secret love!  Indeed, haddest thou not repeated
those words to me, I had surely slit thy weasand.  Go forth this
instant to whom thou wilt, for I needed naught of thee save what
I have just cut off; and now I have no part in thee, nor have I
any further want of thee or care for thee.  So begone about thy
business and rub thy head[FN#5] and implore mercy for the
daughter of thine uncle!" Thereupon she kicked me with her foot
and I rose, hardly able to walk; and I went, little by little,
till I came to the door of our house.  I saw it was open, so I
threw myself within it and fell down in a fainting fit; whereupon
my wife came out and lifting me up, carried me into the saloon
and assured herself that I had become like a woman.  Then I fell
into a sleep and a deep sleep; and when I awoke, I found myself
thrown down at the garden gate,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan pursued to King Zau al-Makan, The youth Aziz thus
continued his story to Taj al-Muluk: When I awoke and found
myself thrown down at the garden gate, I rose, groaning for pain
and misery, and made my way to our home and entering, I came upon
my mother weeping for me, and saying, "Would I knew, O my son, in
what land art thou?" So I drew near and threw myself upon her,
and when she looked at me and felt me, she knew that I was ill;
for my face was coloured black and tan.  Then I thought of my
cousin and all the kind offices she had been wont to do me, and I
learned when too late that she had truly loved me; so I wept for
her and my mother wept also Presently she said to me, "O my son,
thy sire is dead." At this my fury against Fate redoubled, and I
cried till I fell into a fit.  When I came to myself, I looked at
the place where my cousin Azizah had been used to sit and shed
tears anew, till I all but fainted once more for excess of
weeping; and I ceased not to cry and sob and wail till midnight,
when my mother said to me, "Thy father hath been dead these ten
days." "I shall never think of any one but my cousin Azizah,"
replied I; "and indeed I deserve all that hath befallen me, for
that I neglected her who loved me with love so dear." Asked she,
"What hath befallen thee?" So I told her all that had happened
and she wept awhile, then she rose and set some matter of meat
and drink before me.  I ate a little and drank, after which I
repeated my story to her, and told her the whole occurrence;
whereupon she exclaimed, "Praised be Allah, that she did but this
to thee and forbore to slaughter thee!" Then she nursed me and
medicined me till I regained my health; and, when my recovery was
complete, she said to me, "O my son, I will now bring out to thee
that which thy cousin committed to me in trust for thee; for it
is thine.  She swore me not to give it thee, till I should see
thee recalling her to mind and weeping over her and thy
connection severed from other than herself; and now I know that
these conditions are fulfilled in thee." So she arose, and
opening a chest, took out this piece of linen, with the figures
of gazelles worked thereon, which I had given to Azizah in time
past; and taking it I found written therein these couplets,

"Lady of beauty, say, who taught thee hard and harsh design, * 
     To slay with longing Love's excess this hapless lover thine?
An thou fain disremember me beyond our parting day, * Allah will
     know, that thee and thee my memory never shall tyne.
Thou blamest me with bitter speech yet sweetest 'tis to me; *
     Wilt generous be and deign one day to show of love a sign?
I had not reckoned Love contained so much of pine and pain; * 
     And soul distress until I came for thee to pain and pine
Never my heart knew weariness, until that eve I fell * In love
     wi' thee, and prostrate fell before those glancing eyne!
My very foes have mercy on my case and moan therefor; * But thou,
     O heart of Indian steel, all mercy dost decline.
No, never will I be consoled, by Allah, an I die, * Nor yet
     forget the love of thee though life in ruins lie!"

When I read these couplets, I wept with sore weeping and buffeted
my face; then I unfolded the scroll, and there fell from it an
other paper.  I opened it and behold, I found written therein,
'Know, O son of my uncle, that I acquit thee of my blood and I
beseech Allah to make accord between thee and her whom thou
lovest; but if aught befal thee through the daughter of Dalilah
the Wily, return thou not to her neither resort to any other
woman and patiently bear thine affliction, for were not thy fated
life tide a long life, thou hadst perished long ago; but praised
be Allah who hath appointed my death day before thine!  My peace
be upon thee; preserve this cloth with the gazelles herein
figured and let it not leave thee, for it was my companion when
thou was absent from me;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan pursued to King Zau al-Makan, And the youth Aziz continued
to Taj al-Muluk: So I read what my cousin had written and the
charge to me which was, "Preserve this cloth with the gazelles
and let it not leave thee, for it was my companion when thou west
absent from me and, Allah upon thee!  if thou chance to fall in
with her who worked these gazelles, hold aloof from her and do
not let her approach thee nor marry her; and if thou happen not
on her and find no way to her, look thou consort not with any of
her sex.  Know that she who wrought these gazelles worketh every
year a gazelle cloth and despatcheth it to far countries, that
her report and the beauty of her broidery, which none in the
world can match, may be bruited abroad.  As for thy beloved, the
daughter of Dalilah the Wily, this cloth came to her hand, and
she used to ensnare folk with it, showing it to them and saying,
'I have a sister who wrought this.' But she lied in so saying,
Allah rend her veil!  This is my parting counsel; and I have not
charged thee with this charge, but because I know[FN#6] that
after my death the world will be straitened on thee and, haply,
by reason of this, thou wilt leave thy native land and wander in
foreign parts, and hearing of her who wrought these figures, thou
mayest be minded to fore gather with her.  Then wilt thou
remember me, when the memory shall not avail thee; nor wilt thou
know my worth till after my death.  And, lastly, learn that she
who wrought the gazelles is the daughter of the King of the
Camphor Islands and a lady of the noblest." Now when I had read
that scroll and understood what was written therein, I fell again
to weeping, and my mother wept because I wept, and I ceased not
to gaze upon it and to shed tears till night fall.  I abode in
this condition a whole year, at the end of which the merchants,
with whom I am in this cafilah, prepared to set out from my
native town; and my mother counseled me to equip myself and
journey with them, so haply I might be consoled and my sorrow be
dispelled, saying, "Take comfort and put away from thee this
mourning and travel for a year or two or three, till the caravan
return, when perhaps thy breast may be broadened and thy heart
heartened." And she ceased not to persuade me with endearing
words, till I provided myself with merchandise and set out with
the caravan.  But all the time of my wayfaring, my tears have
never dried; no, never!  and at every halting place where we
halt, I open this piece of linen and look on these gazelles and
call to mind my cousin Azizah and weep for her as thou hast seen;
for indeed she loved me with dearest love and died, oppressed by
my unlove.  I did her nought but ill and she did me nought but
good.  When these merchants return from their journey, I shall
return with them, by which time I shall have been absent a whole
year: yet hath my sorrow waxed greater and my grief and
affliction were but increased by my visit to the Islands of
Camphor and the Castle of Crystal.  Now these islands are seven
in number and are ruled by a King, by name Shahriman,[FN#7] who
hath a daughter called Dunya;[FN#8] and I was told that it was
she who wrought these gazelles and that this piece in my
possession was of her embroidery.  When I knew this, my yearning
redoubled and I burnt with the slow fire of pining and was
drowned in the sea of sad thought; and I wept over myself for
that I was become even as a woman, without manly tool like other
men, and there was no help for it.  From the day of my quitting
the Camphor Islands, I have been tearful eyed and heavy hearted,
and such hath been my case for a long while and I know not
whether it will be given me to return to my native land and die
beside my mother or not; for I am sick from eating too much of
the world.  Thereupon the young merchant wept and groaned and
complained and gazed upon the gazelles; whilst the tears rolled
down his cheeks in streams and he repeated these two couplets,

"Joy needs shall come," a prattler 'gan to prattle: * 
     "Needs cease thy blame!" I was commoved to rattle:
'In time,' quoth he: quoth I ' 'Tis marvellous!  * 
     Who shall ensure my life, O cold of tattle!'"[FN#9]

And he repeated also these,

"Well Allah weets that since our severance day * 
     I've wept till forced to ask of tears a loan:
'Patience!  (the blamer cries): thou'lt have her yet!' *
     Quoth I, 'O blamer where may patience wone?'"

Then said he, "This, O King!  is my tale: hast thou ever heard
one stranger?" So Taj al-Muluk marvelled with great marvel at the
young merchant's story, and fire darted into his entrails on
hearing the name of the Lady Dunya and her loveliness.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan: Now when Taj al-Muluk heard the
story of the young merchant, he marvelled with great marvel and
fire darted into his entrails on hearing the name of the Lady
Dunya who, as he knew, had embroidered the gazelles; and his love
and longing hourly grew, so he said to the youth, "By Allah, that
hath befallen thee whose like never befel any save thyself, but
thou hast a life term appointed, which thou must fulfil; and now
I would fain ask of thee a question." Quoth Aziz, "And what is
it?" Quoth he, "Wilt thou tell me how thou sawest the young lady
who wrought these gazelles?" Then he, "O my lord, I got me access
to her by a sleight and it was this.  When I entered her city
with the caravan, I went forth and wandered about the garths till
I came to a flower garden abounding in trees, whose keeper was a
venerable old man, a Shaykh stricken in years.  I addressed him,
saying, 'O ancient sir, whose may be this garden?' and he
replied, 'It belongs to the King's daughter, the Lady Dunya.  We
are now beneath her palace and, when she is minded to amuse
herself, she openeth the private wicket and walketh in the garden
and smelleth the fragrance of the flowers.' So I said to him,
'Favour me by allowing me to sit in this garden till she come;
haply I may enjoy a sight of her as she passeth.' The Shaykh
answered, 'There can be no harm in that.' Thereupon I gave him a
dirham or so and said to him, Buy us something to eat.' He took
the money gladly and opened door and, entering himself, admitted
me into the garden, where we strolled and ceased not strolling
till we reached a pleasant spot in which he bade me sit down and
await his going and his returning.  Then he brought me somewhat
of fruit and, leaving me, disappeared for an hour; but after a
while he returned to me bringing a roasted lamb, of which we ate
till we had eaten enough, my heart yearning the while for a sight
of the lady.  Presently, as we sat, the postern opened and the
keeper said to me, 'Rise and hide thee.' I did so; and behold, a
black eunuch put his head out through the garden wicket and
asked, 'O Shaykh, there any one with thee?' 'No,' answered he;
and the eunuch said, 'Shut the garden gate.' So the keeper shut
the gate, and lo!  the Lady Dunya came in by the private door. 
When I saw her, methought the moon had risen above the horizon
and was shining; I looked at her a full hour and longed for her
as one athirst longeth for water.  After a while she withdrew and
shut the door; whereupon I left the garden and sought my lodging,
knowing that I could not get at her and that I was no man for
her, more especially as I was become like a woman, having no
manly tool: moreover she was a King's daughter and I but a
merchant man; so; how could I have access to the like of her or--
to any other woman?  Accordingly, when these my companions made
ready for the road, I also made preparation and set out with
them, and we journeyed towards this city till we arrived at the
place ere we met with thee.  Thou askedst me and I have answered;
and these are my adventures and peace be with thee!" Now when Taj
al-Muluk heard that account, fires raged in his bosom and his
heart and thought were occupied love for the Lady Dunya; and
passion and longing were sore upon him.  Then he arose and
mounted horse and, taking Aziz with him, returned to his father's
capital, where he settled him in a separate house and supplied
him with all he needed in the way of meat and drink and dress. 
Then he left him and returned to his palace, with the tears
trickling down his cheeks, for hearing oftentimes standeth
instead of seeing and knowing.[FN#10]  And he ceased not to be in
this state till his father came in to him and finding him wan
faced, lean of limb and tearful eyed, knew that something had
occurred to chagrin him and said, "O my son, acquaint me with thy
case and tell me what hath befallen thee, that thy colour is
changed and thy body is wasted.  So he told him all that had
passed and what tale he had heard of Aziz and the account of the
Princess Dunya; and how he had fallen in love of her on hearsay,
without having set eyes on her.  Quoth his sire, "O my son, she
is the daughter of a King whose land is far from ours: so put
away this thought and go in to thy mother's palace."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan: And the father of Taj al-Muluk
spake to him on this wise, "O my son, her father is a King whose
land is far from ours: so put away this thought and go into thy
mother's palace where are five hundred maidens like moons, and
whichsoever of them pleaseth thee, take her; or else we will seek
for thee in marriage some one of the King's daughters, fairer
than the Lady Dunya." Answered Taj al-Muluk, "O my father, I
desire none other, for she it is who wrought the gazelles which I
saw, and there is no help but that I have her; else I will flee
into the world and the waste and I will slay myself for her
sake." Then said his father, "Have patience with me, till I send
to her sire and demand her in marriage, and win thee thy wish as
I did for myself with thy mother.  Haply Allah will bring thee to
thy desire; and, if her parent will not consent, I will make his
kingdom quake under him with an army, whose rear shall be with me
whilst its van shall be upon him." Then he sent for the youth
Aziz and asked him, "O my son, tell me dost thou know the way to
the Camphor Islands?" He answered "Yes"; and the King said, "I
desire of thee that thou fare with my Wazir thither." Replied
Aziz, "I hear and I obey, O King of the Age!"; where upon the
King summoned his Minister and said to him, "Devise me some
device, whereby my son's affair may be rightly managed and fare
thou forth to the Camphor Islands and demand of their King his
daughter in marriage for my son, Taj al-Muluk." The Wazir
replied, "Hearkening and obedience." Then Taj al-Muluk returned
to his dwelling place and his love and longing redoubled and the
delay seemed endless to him; and when the night darkened around
him, he wept and sighed and complained and repeated this poetry,

"Dark falls the night: my tears unaided rail * And fiercest
     flames of love my heart assail:
Ask thou the nights of me, and they shall tell * An I find aught
     to do but weep and wail:
Night long awake, I watch the stars what while * Pour down my
     cheeks the tears like dropping hail:
And lone and lorn I'm grown with none to aid; * For kith and kin
     the love lost lover fail."

And when he had ended his reciting he swooned away and did not
recover his senses till the morning, at which time there came to
him one of his father's eunuchs and, standing at his head,
summoned him to the King's presence.  So he went with him and his
father, seeing that his pallor had increased, exhorted him to
patience and promised him union with her he loved.  Then he
equipped Aziz and the Wazir and supplied them with presents; and
they set out and fared on day and night till they drew near the
Isles of Camphor, where they halted on the banks of a stream, and
the Minister despatched a messenger to acquaint the King of his
arrival.  The messenger hurried forwards and had not been gone
more than an hour, before they saw the King's Chamberlains and
Emirs advancing towards them, to meet them at a parasang's
distance from the city and escort them into the royal presence. 
They laid their gifts before the King and became his guests for
three days.  And on the fourth day the Wazir rose and going in to
the King, stood between his hands and acquainted him with the
object which induced his visit; whereat he was perplexed for an
answer inasmuch as his daughter misliked men and disliked
marriage.  So he bowed his head groundwards awhile, then raised
it and calling one of his eunuchs, said to him, "Go to thy
mistress, the Lady Dunya, and repeat to her what thou hast heard
and the purport of this Wazir's coming." So the eunuch went forth
and returning after a time, said to the King, "O King of the Age,
when I went in to the Lady Dunya and told her what I had heard,
she was wroth with exceeding wrath and rose at me with a staff
designing to break my head; so I fled from her, and she said to
me 'If my Father force me to wed him, whomsoever I wed I will
slay.' Then said her sire to the Wazir and Aziz, "Ye have heard,
and now ye know all!  So let your King wot of it and give him my
salutations and say that my daughter misliketh men and disliketh
marriage."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Shahriman thus addressed the Wazir and Aziz, "Salute your King
from me and inform him of what ye have heard, namely that my
daughter misliketh marriage." So they turned away unsuccessful
and ceased not faring on till they rejoined the King and told him
what had passed; whereupon he commanded the chief officers to
summon the troops and get them ready for marching and
campaigning.  But the Wazir said to him, "O my liege Lord, do not
thus: the King is not at fault because, when his daughter learnt
our business, she sent a message saying, 'If my father force me
to wed, whomsoever I wed I will slay and myself after him.' So
the refusal cometh from her." When the King heard his Minister's
words he feared for Taj al-Muluk and said, "Verily if I make war
on the King of the Camphor Islands and carry off his daughter,
she will kill herself and it will avail me naught." Then he told
his son how the case stood, who hearing it said, "O my father, I
cannot live without her; so I will go to her and contrive to get
at her, even though I die in the attempt, and this only will I do
and nothing else." Asked his father, "How wilt thou go to her?"
and he answered, "I will go in the guise of a merchant."[FN#11]
Then said the King, "If thou need must go and there is no help
for it, take with thee the Wazir and Aziz." Then he brought out
money from his treasuries and made ready for his son merchandise
to the value of an hundred thousand dinars.  The two had settled
upon this action; and when the dark hours came Taj al-Muluk and
Aziz went to Aziz's lodgings and there passed that night, and the
Prince was heart smitten, taking no pleasure in food or in sleep;
for melancholy was heavy upon him and he was agitated with
longing for his beloved.  So he besought the Creator that he
would vouch safe to unite him with her and he wept and groaned
and wailed and began versifying,

"Union, this severance ended, shall I see some day?  * Then shall
     my tears this love lorn lot of me portray.
While night all care forgets I only minded thee, * And thou didst
     gar me wake while all forgetful lay."

And when his improvising came to an end, he wept with sore
weeping and Aziz wept with him, for that he remembered his
cousin; and they both ceased not to shed tears till morning
dawned, whereupon Taj al-Muluk rose and went to farewell his
mother, in travelling dress.  She asked him of his case and he
repeated the story to her; so she gave him fifty thousand gold
pieces a