nd bade him adieu; and, as he fared forth, she put up
prayers for his safety and for his union with his lover and his
friends.  Then he betook himself to his father and asked his
leave to depart.  The King granted him permission and, presenting
him with other fifty thousand dinars, bade set up a tent for him
without the city and they pitched a pavilion wherein the
travellers abode two days.  Then all set out on their journey. 
Now Taj al-Muluk delighted in the company of Aziz and said to
him, "O my brother, henceforth I can never part from thee."
Replied Aziz, "And I am of like mind and fain would I die under
thy feet: but, O my brother, my heart is concerned for my
mother." "When we shall have won our wish," said the Prince,
"there will be naught save what is well!" Now the Wazir continued
charging Taj al-Muluk to be patient, whilst Aziz entertained him
every evening with talk and recited poetry to him and diverted
him with histories and anecdotes.  And so they fared on
diligently night and day for two whole months, till the way
became tedious to Taj al-Muluk and the fire of desire redoubled
on him; and he broke out,

"The road is lonesome; grow my grief and need, * While on my
     breast love fires for ever feed:
Goal of my hopes, sole object of my wish!  * By him who moulded
     man from drop o' seed,
I bear such loads of longing for thy love, * Dearest, as weight
     of al Shumm Mounts exceed:
O 'Lady of my World'[FN#12] Love does me die; * No breath of life
     is left for life to plead;
But for the union hope that lends me strength, * My weary limbs
     were weak this way to speed."

When he had finished his verses, he wept (and Aziz wept with him)
from a wounded heart, till the Minister was moved to pity by
their tears and said, "O my lord, be of good cheer and keep thine
eyes clear of tears; there will be naught save what is well!"
Quoth Taj al-Muluk, "O Wazir, indeed I am weary of the length of
the way.  Tell me how far we are yet distant from the city."
Quoth Aziz, "But a little way remaineth to us." Then they
continued their journey, cutting across river vales and plains,
words and stony wastes, till one night, as Taj al-Muluk was
sleeping, he dreamt that his beloved was with him and that he
embraced her and pressed her to his bosom; and he awoke
quivering, shivering with pain, delirious with emotion, and
improvised these verses,

"Dear friend, my tears aye flow these cheeks adown, *
     With longsome pain and pine, my sorrow's crown:
I plain like keening woman child bereft, *
     And as night falls like widow dove I groan:
An blow the breeze from land where thou cost wone, *
     I find o'er sunburnt earth sweet coolness blown.
Peace be wi' thee, my love, while zephyr breathes, *
     And cushat flies and turtle makes her moan."

And when he had ended his versifying, the Wazir came to him and
said, "Rejoice; this is a good sign: so be of good cheer and keep
thine eyes cool and clear, for thou shalt surely compass thy
desire." And Aziz also came to him and exhorted him to patience
and applied himself to divert him, talking with him and telling
him tales.  So they pressed on, marching day and night, other two
months, till there appeared to them one day at sunrise some white
thing in the distance and Taj al-Muluk said to Aziz, "What is
yonder whiteness?" He replied, "O my lord!  yonder is the Castle
of Crystal and that is the city thou seekest." At this the Prince
rejoiced, and they ceased not faring forwards till they drew near
the city and, as they approached it, Taj al-Muluk joyed with
exceeding joy, and his care ceased from him.  They entered in
trader guise, the King's son being habited as a merchant of
importance; and repaired to a great Khan, known as the Merchants'
Lodging.  Quoth Taj al-Muluk to Aziz, "Is this the resort of the
merchants?"; and quoth he, "Yes; 'tis the Khan wherein I lodged
before." So they alighted there and making their baggage camels
kneel, unloaded them and stored their goods in the
warehouses.[FN#13] They abode four days for rest; when the Wazir
advised that they should hire a large house.  To this they
assented and they found them a spacious house, fitted up for
festivities, where they took up their abode, and the Wazir and
Aziz studied to devise some device for Taj al-Muluk, who remained
in a state of perplexity, knowing not what to do.  Now the
Minister could think of nothing but that he should set up as a
merchant on 'Change and in the market of fine stuffs; so he
turned to the Prince and his companion and said to them, "Know ye
that if we tarry here on this wise, assuredly we shall not win
our wish nor attain our aim; but a something occurred to me
whereby (if Allah please!) we shall find our advantage." Replied
Taj al-Muluk and Aziz, "Do what seemeth good to thee, indeed
there is a blessing on the grey beard; more specially on those
who, like thyself, are conversant with the conduct of affairs: so
tell us what occurreth to thy mind." Rejoined the Wazir "It is my
counsel that we hire thee a shop in the stuff bazar, where thou
mayst sit to sell and buy.  Every one, great and small, hath need
of silken stuffs and other cloths; so if thou patiently abide in
thy shop, thine affairs will prosper, Inshallah!  more by token
as thou art comely of aspect.  Make, however, Aziz thy factor and
set him within the shop, to hand thee the pieces of cloth and
stuffs." When Taj al-Muluk heard these words, he said, 'This rede
is right and a right pleasant recking." So he took out a handsome
suit of merchant's weed, and, putting it on, set out for the
bazar, followed by his servants, to one of whom he had given a
thousand dinars, wherewith to fit up the shop.  They ceased not
walking till they came to the stuff market, and when the
merchants saw Taj al-Muluk's beauty and grace, they were
confounded and went about saying, "Of a truth Rizwan[FN#14] hath
opened the gates of Paradise and left them unguarded, so that
this youth of passing comeliness hath come forth." And others,
"Peradventure this is one of the angels." Now when they went in
among the traders they asked for the shop of the Overseer of the
market and the merchants directed them thereto.  So they delayed
not to repair thither and to salute him, and he and those who
were with him rose to them and seated them and made much of them,
because of the Wazir, whom they saw to be a man in years and of
reverend aspect; and viewing the youths Aziz and Taj al-Muluk in
his company, they said to one another, "Doubtless our Shaykh is
the father of these two youths." Then quoth the Wazir, "Who among
you is the Overseer of the market?" "This is he," replied they;
and behold, he came forward and the Wazir observed him narrowly
and saw him to be an old man of grave and dignified carriage,
with eunuchs and servants and black slaves.  The Syndic greeted
them with the greeting of friends and was lavish in his
attentions to them: then he seated them by his side and asked
them, "Have ye any business which we[FN#15] may have the
happiness of transacting?" The Minister answered, "Yes; I am an
old man, stricken in years, and have with me these two youths,
with whom I have travelled through every town and country,
entering no great city without tarrying there a full year, that
they might take their pleasure in viewing it and come to know its
citizens.  Now I have visited your town intending to sojourn here
for a while; so I want of thee a handsome shop in the best
situation, wherein I may establish them, that they may traffic
and learn to buy and sell and give and take, whilst they divert
themselves with the sight of the place, and be come familiar with
the usages of its people." Quoth the Overseer, "There is no harm
in that;" and, looking at the two youths, he was delighted with
them and affected them with a warm affection.  Now he was a great
connoisseur of bewitching glances, preferring the love of boys to
that of girls and inclining to the sour rather than the sweet of
love.  So he said to himself, "This, indeed, is fine game.  Glory
be to Him who created and fashioned them out of vile
water!"[FN#16] and rising stood before them like a servant to do
them honour.  Then he went out and made ready for them a shop
which was in the very midst of the Exchange; nor was there any
larger or better in the bazar, for it was spacious and handsomely
decorated and fitted with shelves of ivory and ebony wood.  After
this he delivered the keys to the Wazir, who was dressed as an
old merchant, saying, "Take them, O my lord, and Allah make it a
blessed abiding place to thy two sons!" The Minister took the
keys and the three returning to the Khan where they had alighted,
bade the servants transport to the shop all their goods and
stuffs.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Wazir took the shop keys, he went accompanied by Taj al-Muluk and
Aziz to the Khan, and they bade the servants transport to the
shop all their goods and stuffs and valuables of which they had
great store worth treasures of money.  And when all this was duly
done, they went to the shop and ordered their stock in trade and
slept there that night.  As soon as morning morrowed the Wazir
took the two young men to the Hammam bath where they washed them
clean; and they donned rich dresses and scented themselves with
essences and enjoyed themselves to the utmost.  Now each of the
youths was passing fair to look upon, and in the bath they were
even as saith the poet,

"Luck to the Rubber, whose deft hand o'erdies *
     A frame begotten twixt the lymph and light:[FN#17]
He shows the thaumaturgy of his craft, *
     And gathers musk in form of camphor dight."[FN#18]

After bathing they left; and, when the Overseer heard that they
had gone to the Hammam, he sat down to await the twain, and
presently they came up to him like two gazelles; their cheeks
were reddened by the bath and their eyes were darker than ever;
their faces shone and they were as two lustrous moons or two
branches fruit laden.  Now when he saw them he rose forthright
and said to them, "O my sons, may your bath profit you
always!"[FN#19] Where upon Taj al-Muluk replied, with the
sweetest of speech, "Allah be bountiful to thee, O my father; why
didst thou not come with us and bathe in our company?" Then they
both bent over his right hand and kissed it and walked before him
to the shop, to entreat him honourably and show their respect for
him, for that he was Chief of the Merchants and the market, and
he had done them kindness in giving them the shop.  When he saw
their hips quivering as they moved, desire and longing redoubled
on him; and he puffed and snorted and he devoured them with his
eyes, for he could not contain himself, repeating the while these
two couplets,

"Here the heart reads a chapter of devotion pure; *
     Nor reads dispute if Heaven in worship partner take:
No wonder 'tis he trembles walking 'neath such weight!  *
     How much of movement that revolving sphere must
     make.[FN#20]"

Furthermore he said,

"I saw two charmers treading humble earth.  *
     Two I must love an tread they on mine eyes."

When they heard this, they conjured him to enter the bath with
them a second time.  He could hardly believe his ears and
hastening thither, went in with them.  The Wazir had not yet left
the bath; so when he heard of the Overseer's coming, he came out
and meeting him in the middle of the bath hall invited him to
enter.  He refused, whereupon Taj al-Muluk taking him by the hand
walked on one side and Aziz by the other, and carried him into a
cabinet; and that impure old man submitted to them, whilst his
emotion increased on him.  He would have refused, albeit this was
what he desired; but the Minister said to him, "They are thy
sons; let them wash thee and cleanse thee." "Allah preserve them
to thee!" exclaimed the Overseer, "By Allah your coming and the
coming of those with you bring down blessing and good luck upon
our city!" And he repeated these two couplets,

"Thou camest and green grew the hills anew; *
     And sweetest bloom to the bridegroom threw,
While aloud cried Earth and her earth-borns too *
     'Hail and welcome who comest with grace to endue.'"

They thanked him for this, and Taj al-Muluk ceased not to wash
him and to pour water over him and he thought his soul in
Paradise.  When they had made an end of his service, he blessed
them and sat by the side of the Wazir, talking but gazing the
while on the youths.  Presently, the servants brought them
towels, and they dried themselves and donned their dress.  Then
they went out, and the Minister turned to the Syndic and said to
him, "O my lord!  verily the bath is the Paradise[FN#21] of this
world." Replied the Overseer, "Allah vouchsafe to thee such
Paradise, and health to thy sons and guard them from the evil
eye!  Do ye remember aught that the eloquent have said in praise
of the bath.?" Quoth Taj al-Muluk, "I will repeat for thee a pair
of couplets;" and he recited,

The life of the bath is the joy of man's life,[FN#22] *
     Save that time is short for us there to bide:
A Heaven where irksome it were to stay; *
     A Hell, delightful at entering-tide."

When he ended his recital, quoth Aziz, "And I also remember two
couplets in praise of the bath." The Overseer said, "Let me hear
them," so he repeated the following,

"A house where flowers from stones of granite grow, *
     Seen at its best when hot with living lows:
Thou deem'st it Hell but here, forsooth, is Heaven, *
     And some like suns and moons within it show."

And when he had ended his recital, his verses pleased the
Overseer and he wondered at his words and savoured their grace
and fecundity and said to them, "By Allah, ye possess both beauty
and eloquence.  But now listen to me, you twain!" And he began
chanting, and recited in song the following verses,

"O joy of Hell and Heaven!  whose tormentry *
     Enquickens frame and soul with lively gree:
I marvel so delightsome house to view, *
     And most when 'neath it kindled fires I see:
Sojourn of bliss to visitors, withal *
     Pools on them pour down tears unceasingly."

Then his eye-sight roamed and browsed on the gardens of their
beauty and he repeated these two couplets,

"I went to the house of the keeper-man; *
     He was out, but others to smile began:
I entered his Heaven[FN#23] and then his Hell;[FN#24] *
     And I said 'Bless Malik[FN#25] and bless Rizwan.' "[FN#26]

When they heard these verses they were charmed, and the Over seer
invited them to his house; but they declined and returned to
their own place, to rest from the great heat of the bath.  So
they took their ease there and ate and drank and passed that
night in perfect solace and satisfaction, till morning dawned,
when they arose from sleep and making their lesser ablution,
prayed the dawn- prayer and drank the morning draught.[FN#27] As
soon as the sun had risen and the shops and markets opened, they
arose and going forth from their place to the bazar opened their
shop, which their servants had already furnished, after the
handsomest fashion, and had spread with prayer rugs and silken
carpets and had placed on the divans a pair of mattresses, each
worth an hundred dinars.  On every mattress they had disposed a
rug of skin fit for a King and edged with a fringe of gold; and
a-middlemost the shop stood a third seat still richer, even as
the place required.  Then Taj al-Muluk sat down on one divan, and
Aziz on another, whilst the Wazir seated himself on that in the
centre, and the servants stood before them.  The city people soon
heard of them and crowded about them, so that they sold some of
their goods and not a few of their stuffs; for Taj al-Muluk's
beauty and loveliness had become the talk of the town.  Thus they
passed a trifle of time, and every day the people flocked to them
and pressed upon them more and more, till the Wazir, after
exhorting Taj al-Muluk to keep his secret, commended him to the
care of Aziz and went home, that he might commune with himself
alone and cast about for some contrivance which might profit
them.  Meanwhile, the two young men sat talking and Taj al-Muluk
said to Aziz, "Haply some one will come from the Lady Dunya." So
he ceased not expecting this chance days and nights, but his
heart was troubled and he knew neither sleep nor rest; for desire
had got the mastery of him, and love and longing were sore upon
him, so that he renounced the solace of sleep and abstained from
meat and drink; yet ceased he not to be like the moon on the
night of fullness.  Now one day as he sat in the shop, behold,
there came up an ancient woman.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan: Now one day as Taj al-Muluk sat
in his shop, behold, there appeared an ancient woman, who came up
to him followed by two slave girls.  She ceased not advancing
till she stood before the shop of Taj al-Muluk and, observing his
symmetry and beauty and loveliness, marvelled at his charms and
sweated in her petticoat trousers, exclaiming, "Glory to Him who
created thee out of vile water, and made thee a temptation to all
beholders!" And she fixed her eyes on him and said, "This is not
a mortal, he is none other than an angel deserving the highest
respect."[FN#28] Then she drew near and saluted him, whereupon he
returned her salute and rose to his feet to receive her and
smiled in her face (all this by a hint from Aziz); after which he
made her sit down by his side and fanned her with a fan, till she
was rested and refreshed.  Then she turned to Taj al-Muluk and
said, "O my son!  O thou who art perfect in bodily gifts and
spiritual graces; say me, art thou of this country?" He replied,
in voice the sweetest and in tone the pleasantest, "By Allah, O
my mistress, I was never in this land during my life till this
time, nor do I abide here save by way of diversion." Rejoined
she, "May the Granter grant thee all honour and prosperity!  And
what stuffs hast thou brought with thee?  Show me something
passing fine; for the beauteous should bring nothing but what is
beautiful." When he heard her words, his heart fluttered and he
knew not their inner meaning; but Aziz made a sign to him and he
replied, "I have everything thou canst desire and especially I
have goods that besit none but Kings and King's daughters; so
tell me what stuff thou wantest and for whom, that I may show
thee what will be fitting for him." This he said, that he might
learn the meaning of her words; and she rejoined, "I want a stuff
fit for the Princess Dunya, daughter of King Shahriman." Now when
the Prince heard the name of his beloved, he joyed with great joy
and said to Aziz, "Give me such a parcel." So Aziz brought it and
opened it before Taj al-Muluk who said to the old woman, "Select
what will suit her; for these goods are to be found only with
me." She chose stuffs worth a thousand dinars and asked, "How
much is this?"; and she ceased not the while to talk with him and
rub what was inside her thighs with the palm of her hand. 
Answered Taj al-Muluk, "Shall I haggle with the like of thee
about this paltry price?  Praised be Allah who hath acquainted me
with thee!" The old woman rejoined, "Allah's name be upon thee! 
I commend thy beautiful face to the protection of the Lord of the
Daybreak.[FN#29] Beautiful face and eloquent speech!  Happy she
who lieth in thy bosom and claspeth thy waist in her arms and
enjoyeth thy youth, especially if she be beautiful and lovely
like thyself!" At this, Taj al-Muluk laughed till he fell on his
back and said to himself, "O Thou who fulfillest desires human by
means of pimping old women!  They are the true fulfillers of
desires!" Then she asked, "O my son, what is thy name?" and he
answered, "My name is Taj al-Muluk, the Crown of Kings." Quoth
she, "This is indeed a name of Kings and King's sons and thou art
clad in merchant's clothes." Quoth Aziz, "for the love his
parents and family bore him and for the value they set on him,
they named him thus." Replied the old woman, "Thou sayest sooth,
Allah guard you both from the evil eye and the envious, though
hearts be broken by your charms!" Then she took the stuffs and
went her way; but she was amazed at his beauty and stature and
symmetry, and she ceased not going till she found the Lady Dunya
and said to her, "O my mistress!  I have brought thee some
handsome stuffs." Quoth the Princess, "Show me that same"; and
the old woman, "O apple of my eye, here it is, turn it over and
examine it." Now when the Princess looked at it she was amazed
and said, "O my nurse, this is indeed handsome stuff: I have
never seen its like in our city." "O my lady," replied the old
nurse, "he who sold it me is handsomer still.  It would seem as
if Rizwan had left the gates of Paradise open in his
carelessness, and as if the youth who sold me this stuff had come
bodily out of Heaven.  I would he might sleep this night with
thee and might lie between thy breasts.[FN#30] He hath come to
thy city with these precious stuffs for amusement's sake, and he
is a temptation to all who set eyes on him." The Princess laughed
at her words and said, "Allah afflict thee, O pernicious old hag! 
Thou dotest and there is no sense left in thee." Presently, she
resumed, "Give me the stuff that I may look at it anew." So she
gave it her and she took it again and saw that its size was small
and its value great.  It pleased her, for she had never in her
life seen its like, and she exclaimed, "By Allah, this is a
handsome stuff!" Answered the old woman, "O my lady, by Allah! 
if thou sawest its owner thou wouldst know him for the handsomest
man on the face of the earth." Quoth the Lady Dunya, "Didst thou
ask him if he had any need, that he might tell us and we might
satisfy it?" But the nurse shook her head and said, "The Lord
keep thy sagacity!  By Allah, he hath a want, may thy skill not
fail thee.  What!  is any man free from wants?" Rejoined the
Princess, "Go back to him and salute him and say to him, 'Our
land and town are honoured by thy visit and, if thou have any
need, we will fulfil it to thee, on our head and eyes.' "  So the
old woman at once returned to Taj al-Muluk, and when he saw her
his heart jumped for joy and gladness and he rose to his feet
before her and, taking her hand, seated her by his side.  As soon
as she was rested, she told him what Princess Dunya had said; and
he on hearing it joyed with exceeding joy; his breast dilated to
the full; gladness entered his heart and he said to himself,
"Verily, I have my need." Then he asked the old woman, "Haply
thou wilt take her a message from me and bring me her answer?";
and she answered, "I hear and I obey." So he said to Aziz, "Bring
me ink-case and paper and a brazen pen." And when Aziz brought
him what he sought, he hent the pen in hand and wrote these lines
of poetry,

"I write to thee, O fondest hope!  a writ *
     Of grief that severance on my soul cloth lay:
Saith its first line, 'Within my heart is [owe!' *
     Its second, 'Love and Longing on me prey!'
Its third, 'My patience waste is, fades my life!' *
     Its fourth, 'Naught shall my pain and pine allay!'
Its fifth, 'When shall mine eyes enjoy thy sight?' *
     Its sixth, 'Say, when shall dawn our meeting-day?' "

And, lastly, by way of subscription he wrote these words. "This
letter is from the captive of captivation * prisoned in the hold
of longing expectation * wherefrom is no emancipation * but in
anticipation and intercourse and in unification * after absence
and separation. * For from the severance of friends he loveth so
fain * he suffereth love pangs and pining pain. *" Then his tears
rushed out, and he indited these two couplets,

"I write thee, love, the while my tears pour down; *
     Nor cease they ever pouring thick and fleet:
Yet I despair not of my God, whose grace *
     Haply some day will grant us twain to meet."

Then he folded the letter[FN#31] and sealed it with his signet
ring and gave it to the old woman, saying, "Carry it to the Lady
Dunya." Quoth she, "To hear is to obey;" whereupon he gave her a
thousand dinars and said to her, "O my mother!  accept this gift
from me as a token of my affection." She took both from him and
blessed him and went her way and never stinted walking till she
went in to the Lady Dunya.  Now when the Princess saw her she
said to her, "O my nurse, what is it he asketh of need that we
may fulfil his wish to him?" Replied the old woman, "O my lady,
he sendeth thee this letter by me, and I know not what is in it;"
and handed it to her.  Then the Princess took the letter and read
it; and when she understood it, she exclaimed, "Whence cometh and
whither goeth this merchant man that he durst address such a
letter to me?" And she slapt her face saying, "'Whence are we
that we should come to shopkeeping?  Awah!  Awah!  By the lord,
but that I fear Almighty Allah I had slain him;" and she added,
"Yea, I had crucified[FN#32] him over his shop door!" Asked the
old woman, "What is in this letter to vex thy heart and move thy
wrath on this wise?  Doth it contain a complaint of oppression or
demand for the price of the stuff?" Answered the Princess, "Woe
to thee!  There is none of this in it, naught but words of love
and endearment.  This is all through thee: otherwise whence
should this Satan[FN#33] know me?" Rejoined the old woman, "o my
lady, thou sittest in thy high palace and none may have access to
thee; no, not even the birds of the air.  Allah keep thee, and
keep thy youth from blame and reproach!  Thou needest not care
for the barking of dogs, for thou art a Princess, the daughter of
a King.  Be not wroth with me that I brought thee this letter,
knowing not what was in it; but I opine that thou send him an
answer and threaten him with death and forbid him this foolish
talk; surely he will abstain and not do the like again." Quoth
the Lady Dunya, "I fear that, if I write to him, he will desire
me the more." The old woman returned "When he heareth thy threats
and promise of punishment, he will desist from his persistence."
She cried, "Here with the ink case and paper and brazen pen;" and
when they brought them she wrote these couplets,

"O thou who for thy wakeful nights wouldst claim my love
     to boon, * For what of pining thou must feel and
     tribulation!
Dost thou, fond fool and proud of sprite, seek meeting with the
     Moon? * Say, did man ever win his wish to take in arms the
     Moon?
I counsel thee, from soul cast out the wish that dwells
     therein, * And cut that short which threatens thee with 
     sore risk oversoon:
An to such talk thou dare return, I bid thee to expect *
     Fro' me such awful penalty as suiteth froward loon:
I swear by Him who moulded man from gout of clotted 
     blood,[FN#34] * Who lit the Sun to shine by day and lit 
     for night the moon,
An thou return to mention that thou spakest in thy pride, *
     Upon a cross of tree for boon I'll have thee crucified!"

Then she folded the letter and handing it to the old woman said,
"Give him this and say him, 'Cease from this talk!' " "Hearkening
and obedience," replied she, and taking the letter with joy,
returned to her own house, where she passed the night; and when
morning dawned she betook herself to the shop of Taj al-Muluk
whom she found expecting her.  When he saw her, he was ready to
fly[FN#35] for delight, and when she came up to him, he stood to
her on his feet and seated her by his side.  Then she brought out
the letter and gave it to him, saying, "Read what is in this;"
adding "When Princess Dunya read thy letter she was angry; but I
coaxed her and jested with her till I made her laugh, and she had
pity on thee and she hath returned thee an answer." He thanked
her for her kindness and bade Aziz give her a thousand gold
pieces: then he perused the letter and understanding it fell to
weeping a weeping so sore that the old woman's heart was moved to
ruth for him, and his tears and complaints were grievous to her. 
Presently she asked him, "O my son, what is there in this letter
to make thee weep?" Answered he, "She hath threatened me with
death and crucifixion and she forbiddeth me to write to her, but
if I write not my death were better than my life.  So take thou
my answer to the letter and let her work her will." Rejoined the
old woman, "By the life of thy youth, needs must I risk my
existence for thee, that I may bring thee to thy desire and help
thee to win what thou hast at heart!" And Taj al-Muluk said,
"Whatever thou dost, I will requite thee for it and do thou weigh
it in the scales of thy judgement, for thou art experienced in
managing matters, and skilled in reading the chapters of the book
of intrigue: all hard matters to thee are easy doings; and Allah
can bring about everything." Then he took a sheet of paper and
wrote thereon these improvised couplets,

"Yestre'en my love with slaughter menaced me, *
     But sweet were slaughter and Death's foreordained:
Yes, Death is sweet for lover doomed to bear *
     Long life, rejected, injured and constrained:
By Allah!  deign to visit friendless friend!  *
     Thy thrall am I and like a thrall I'm chained:
Mercy, O lady mine, for loving thee!  *
     Who loveth noble soul should be assained."

 Then he sighed heavy sighs and wept till the old woman wept also
and presently taking the letter she said to him, "Be of good
cheer and cool eyes and clear; for needs must I bring thee to thy
wish."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Taj
al-Muluk wept the old woman said to him, "Be of good cheer and
cool eyes and clear; for needs must I bring thee to thy wish."
Then she rose and left him on coals of fire; and returned to
Princess Dunya, whom she found still showing on her changed face
rage at Taj al-Muluk's letter.  So she gave her his second
letter, whereat her wrath redoubled and she said, "Did I not say
he would desire us the more?" Replied the old woman, "What thing
is this dog that he should aspire to thee?" Quoth the Princess,
"Go back to him and tell him that, if he write me after this, I
will cut off his head." Quoth the nurse, "Write these words in a
letter and I will take it to him that his fear may be the
greater." So she took a sheet of paper and wrote thereon these
couplets,

"Ho thou, who past and bygone risks regardest with uncare! *
     Thou who to win thy meeting prize dost overslowly fare!
In pride of spirit thinkest thou to win the star Soha[FN#36]? *
     Albe thou may not reach the Moon which shines through
     upper air?
How darest thou expect to win my favours, hope to clip *
     Upon a lover's burning breast my lance like shape and rare?
Leave this thy purpose lest my wrath come down on thee some
     day, * A day of wrath shall hoary turn the partings of
     thy hair!"

Then she folded the letter and gave it to the old woman, who took
it and repaired to Taj al-Muluk.  And when he saw her, he rose to
his feet and exclaimed, "May Allah never bereave me of the
blessing of thy coming!" Quoth she, "Take the answer to thy
letter." He took it and reading it, wept with sore weeping and
said, "I long for some one to slay me at this moment and send me
to my rest, for indeed death were easier to me than this my
state!" Then he took ink case and pen and paper and wrote a
letter containing these two couplets,

"O hope of me!  pursue me not with rigour and disdain: *
     Deign thou to visit lover wight in love of thee is drowned;
Deem not a life so deeply wronged I longer will endure; * My soul
     for severance from my friend divorced this frame unsound."

Lastly he folded the letter and handed it to the old woman,
saying, "Be not angry with me, though I have wearied thee to no
purpose." And he bade Aziz give her other thousand ducats,
saying, "O my mother, needs must this letter result in perfect
union or utter severance." Replied she, "O my son, by Allah, I
desire nought but thy weal; and it is my object that she be
thine, for indeed thou art the shining moon, and she the rising
sun.[FN#37] If I do not bring you together, there is no profit in
my existence; and I have lived my life till I have reached the
age of ninety years in the practice of wile and intrigue; so how
should I fail to unite two lovers, though in defiance of right
and law?" Then she took leave of him having comforted his heart,
and ceased not walking till she went in to the Lady Dunya.  Now
she had hidden the letter in her hair: so when she sat down by
the Princess she rubbed her head and said, "O my lady, maybe thou
wilt untwist my hair knot, for it is a time since I went to the
Hammam." The King's daughter bared her arms to the elbows and,
letting down the old woman's locks, began to loose the knot of
back hair; when out dropped the letter and the Lady Dunya seeing
it, asked, "What is this paper?" Quoth the nurse, "As I sat in
the merchant's shop, this paper must have stuck to me: give it to
me that I may return it to him; possibly it containeth some
account whereof he hath need." But the Princess opened it and
read it and, when she understood it, she cried out, "This is one
of thy manifold tricks, and hadst thou not reared me, I would lay
violent hands on thee this moment!  Verily Allah hath afflicted
me with this merchant: but all that hath befallen me with him is
on thy head.  I know not from what country this one can have
come: no man but he would venture to affront me thus, and I fear
lest this my case get abroad, more by token as it concerneth one
who is neither of my kin nor of my peers." Rejoined the old woman
"None would dare speak of this for fear of thy wrath and for awe
of thy sire; so there can be no harm in sending him an answer."
Quoth the Princess, "O my nurse, verily this one is a perfect
Satan!  How durst he use such language to me and not dread the
Sultan's rage.  Indeed, I am perplexed about his case: if I order
him to be put to death, it were unjust; and if I leave him alive
his boldness will increase." Quoth the old woman, "Come, write
him a letter; it may be he will desist in dread." So she called
for paper and ink case and pen and wrote these couplets,

"Thy folly drives thee on though long I chid, *
     Writing in verse: how long shall I forbid?
For all forbiddal thou persistest more, *
     And my sole grace it is to keep it hid;
Then hide thy love nor ever dare reveal, *
     For an thou speak, of thee I'll soon be rid
If to thy silly speech thou turn anew, *
     Ravens shall croak for thee the wold amid:
And Death shall come and beat thee down ere long, *
     Put out of sight and bury 'neath an earthen lid:
Thy folk, fond fool!  thou'lt leave for thee to mourn, *
     And through their lives to sorrow all forlorn."

Then she folded the letter and committed it to the old woman, who
took it and returning to Taj al-Muluk, gave it to him.  When he
read it, he knew that the Princess was hard hearted and that he
should not win access to her; so he complained of his case to the
Wazir and besought his counsel.  Quoth the Minister, "Know thou
that naught will profit thee save that thou write to her and
invoke the retribution of Heaven upon her." And quoth the Prince,
"O my brother, O Aziz, do thou write to her as if my tongue
spake, according to thy knowledge." So Aziz took a paper and
wrote these couplets,

"By the Five Shaykhs,[FN#38] O Lord, I pray deliver me; *
     Let her for whom I suffer bear like misery:
Thou knowest how I fry in flaming lowe of love, *
     While she I love hath naught of ruth or clemency:
How long shall I, despite my pain, her feelings spare? *
     How long shall she wreak tyranny o'er weakling me?
In pains of never ceasing death I ever grieve: *
     O Lord, deign aid; none other helping hand I see.
How fain would I forget her and forget her love! *
     But how forget when Love garred Patience death to dree?
O thou who hinderest Love to 'joy fair meeting tide *
     Say!  art thou safe from Time and Fortune's jealousy?
Art thou not glad and blest with happy life, while I *
     From folk and country for thy love am doomed flee?"

Then Aziz folded the letter and gave it to Taj al-Muluk, who read
it and was pleased with it.  So he handed it to the old woman,
who took it and went in with it to Princess Dunya.  But when she
read it and mastered the meaning thereof, she was enraged with
great rage and said, "All that hath befallen me cometh by means
of this ill omened old woman!" Then she cried out to the damsels
and eunuchs, saying, "Seize this old hag, this accursed
trickstress and beat her with your slippers!" So they came down
upon her till she swooned away; and, when she came to herself,
the Princess said to her, "By the Lord!  O wicked old woman, did
I not fear Almighty Allah, I would slay thee." Then quoth she to
them, "Beat her again" and they did so till she fainted a second
time, whereupon she bade them drag her forth and throw her
outside the palace door.  So they dragged her along on her face
and threw her down before the gate; but as soon as she revived
she got up from the ground and, walking and sitting by turns,
made her way home.  There she passed the night till morning, when
she arose and went to Taj al-Muluk and told them all that had
occurred.  He was distressed at this grievous news and said, "O
my mother, hard indeed to us is that which hath befallen thee,
but all things are according to fate and man's lot." Replied she,
"Be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for I will
not give over striving till I have brought thee and her together,
and made thee enjoy this wanton who hath burnt my skin with
beating." Asked the Prince "Tell me what caused her to hate men;"
and the old woman answered, "It arose from what she saw in a
dream." "And what was this dream?" "'Twas this: one night, as she
lay asleep, she saw a fowler spread his net upon the ground and
scatter wheat grain round it.  Then he sat down hard by, and not
a bird in the neighbourhood but flocked to his toils.  Amongst
the rest she beheld a pair of pigeons, male and female; and,
whilst she was watching the net, behold, the male bird's foot
caught in the meshes and he began to struggle; whereupon all the
other birds took fright and flew away.  But presently his mate
came back and hovered over him, then alighted on the toils
unobserved by the fowler, and fell to pecking with her beak and
pulling at the mesh in which the male bird's foot was tangled,
till she released the toes and they flew away together.  Then the
fowler came up, mended his net and seated himself afar off. 
After an hour or so the birds flew back and the female pigeon was
caught in the net; whereupon all the other birds took fright and
scurried away; and the male pigeon fled with the rest and did not
return to his mate, but the fowler came up and took the female
pigeon and cut her throat.  The Princess awoke, troubled by her
dream, and said, 'All males are like this pigeon, worthless
creatures: and men in general lack grace and goodness to women.'"
When the old woman had ended her story, the Prince said to her,
"O my mother, I desire to have one look at her, though it be my
death; so do thou contrive me some contrivance for seeing her."
She replied, "Know then that she hath under her palace windows a
garden wherein she taketh her pleasure; and thither she resorteth
once in every month by the private door.  After ten days, the
time of her thus going forth to divert herself will arrive; so
when she is about to visit the garden, I will come and tell thee,
that thou mayst go thither and meet her.  And look thou leave not
the garden, for haply, an she see thy beauty and Loveliness, her
heart will be taken with love of thee, and love is the most
potent means of union." He said, "I hear and obey;" whereupon he
and Aziz arose and left the shop and, taking the old woman with
them, showed her the place where they lodged.  Then said Taj al-
Muluk to Aziz, "O my brother, I have no need of the shop now,
having fulfilled my purpose of it; so I give it to thee with all
that is in it; for that thou hast come abroad with me and hast
left thy native land for my sake." Aziz accepted his gift and
then they sat conversing, while the Prince questioned him of the
strange adventures which had befallen him, and his companion
acquainted him with the particulars thereof.  Presently, they
went to the Wazir and, reporting to him Taj al-Muluk's purpose,
asked him, "What is to be done?" "Let us go to the garden,"
answered he.  So each and every donned richest clothes and went
forth, followed by three white slaves to the garden, which they
found thick with thickets and railing its rills.  When they saw
the keeper sitting at the gate, they saluted him with the Salam
and he returned their salute.  Then the Wazir gave him an hundred
gold pieces, saying, "Prithee, take this small sum and fetch us
somewhat to eat; for we are strangers and I have with me these
two lads whom I wish to divert."[FN#39] The Gardener took the
sequins and said to them, "Enter and amuse yourselves in the
garden, for it is all yours; and sit down till I bring you what
food you require." So he went to the market while the Wazir and
Taj al-Muluk and Aziz entered the garden.  And shortly after
leaving for the bazar the Gardener returned with a roasted lamb
and cotton white bread, which he placed before them, and they ate
and drank; thereupon he served up sweetmeats, and they ate of
them, and washed their hands and sat talking.  Presently the
Wazir said to the garth keeper, "Tell me about this garden: is it
thine or dost thou rent it?" The Shaykh replied, "It doth not
belong to me, but to our King's daughter, the Princess Dunya."
"What be thy monthly wages?" asked the Wazir and he answered,
"One diner and no more." Then the Minister looked round about the
garden and, seeing in its midst a pavilion tall and grand but old
and disused, said to the keeper, "O elder, I am minded to do here
a good work, by which thou shalt remember me.  Replied the other,
"O my lord, what is the good work thou wouldest do?" "Take these
three hundred diners," rejoined the Wazir When the Keeper heard
speak of the gold, he said, "O my lord, whatso thou wilt, do!" So
the Wazir gave him the monies, saying, "Inshallah, we will make a
good work in this place!" Then they left him and returned to
their lodging, where they passed the night; and when it was the
next day, the Minister sent for a plasterer and a painter and a
skilful goldsmith and, furnishing them with all the tools they
wanted, carried them to the garden, where he bade them whitewash
the walls of the pavilion and decorate it with various kinds of
paintings.  Moreover he sent for gold and lapis lazuli[FN#40] and
said to the painter, "Figure me on the wall, at the upper end of
this hall, a man fowler with his nets spread and birds falling
into them and a female pigeon entangled in the meshes by her
bill." And when the painter had finished his picture on one side,
the Wazir said, "Figure me on the other side a similar figure and
represent the she pigeon alone in the snare and the fowler
seizing her and setting the knife to her neck; and draw on the
third side wall, a great raptor clutching the male pigeon, her
mate, and digging talons into him." The artist did his bidding,
and when he and the others had finished the designs, they
received their hire and went away.  Then the Wazir and his
companions took leave of the Gardener and returned to their
place, where they sat down to converse.  And Taj al-Muluk said to
Aziz, "O my brother, recite me some verses: perchance it may
broaden my breast and dispel my dolours and quench the fire
flaming in my heart." So Aziz chanted with sweet modulation these
couplets,

"Whate'er they say of grief to lovers came, *
     I, weakling I, can single handed claim:
An seek thou watering spot,[FN#41] my streaming eyes *
     Pour floods that thirst would quench howe'er it flame
Or wouldest view what ruin Love has wrought *
     With ruthless hands, then see this wasted frame."

And his eyes ran over with tears and he repeated these couplets
also,

"Who loves not swan-neck and gazelle-like eyes, *
     Yet claims to know Life's joys, I say he lies:
In Love is mystery, none avail to learn *
     Save he who loveth in pure loving wise.
Allah my heart ne'er lighten of this love, *
     Nor rob the wakefulness these eyelids prize."

Then he changed the mode of song and sang these couplets:

"Ibn Sina[FN#42] in his Canon cloth opine *
     Lovers' best cure is found in merry song:
In meeting lover of a like degree, *
     Dessert in garden, wine draughts long and strong:
I chose another who of thee might cure *
     While Force and Fortune aided well and long
But ah! I learnt Love's mortal ill, wherein *
     Ibn Sina's recipe is fond and wrong."

After hearing them to the end, Taj al-Muluk was pleased with his
verses and wondered at his eloquence and the excellence of his
recitation, saying, "Indeed, thou hast done away with somewhat of
my sorrow." Then quoth the Wazir "Of a truth, there occurred to
those of old what astoundeth those who hear it told." Quoth the
Prince, "If thou canst recall aught of this kind, prithee let us
hear thy subtle lines and keep up the talk." So the Minister
chanted in modulated song these couplets,

"Indeed I deemed thy favours might be bought *
     By gifts of gold and things that joy the sprite
And ignorantly thought thee light-o'-love, *
     When can thy love lay low the highmost might;
Until I saw thee choosing one, that one *
     Loved with all favour, crowned with all delight:
Then wot I thou by sleight canst ne'er be won *
     And under wing my head I hid from sight
And in this nest of passion made my wone, *
     Wherein I nestle morning, noon and night."

So far concerning them; but as regards the old woman she remained
shut up from the world in her house, till it befel that the
King's daughter was taken with a desire to divert herself in the
garden.  Now she had never been wont so to do save in company
with her nurse; accordingly she sent for her and made friends
with her and soothed her sorrow, saying, "I wish to go forth to
the garden, that I may divert myself with the sight of its trees
and Fruits, and broaden my breast with the scent of its flowers."
Replied the old woman, "I hear and obey; but first I would go to
my house, and soon I will be with thee." The Princess rejoined,
"Go home, but be not long absent from me." So the old woman left
her and, repairing to Taj al-Muluk, said to him, "Get thee ready
and don thy richest dress and go to the garden and find out the
Gardener and salute him and then hide thyself therein." "To hear
is to obey" answered he; and she agreed with him upon a signal,
after which she returned to the Lady Dunya.  As soon as she was
gone, the Wazir and Aziz rose and robed Taj al-Muluk in a
splendid suit of royal raiment worth five thousand diners, and
girt his middle with a girdle of gold set with gems and precious
metals.  Then they repaired to the garden and found seated at the
gate the Keeper who, as soon as he saw the Prince, sprang to his
feet and received him with all respect and reverence, and opening
the gate, said, "Enter and take thy pleasure in looking at the
garden." Now the Gardener knew not that the King's daughter was
to visit the place that day; but when Taj al-Muluk had been a
little while there, he heard a hubbub and ere he could think, out
issued the eunuchs and damsels by the private wicket.  The
Gardener seeing this came up to the Prince, informed him of her
approach and said to him, "O my lord, what is to be done?  The
Princess Dunya, the King's daughter, is here." Replied the
Prince, "Fear not, no harm shall befal thee; for I will hide me
somewhere about the garden." So the Keeper exhorted him to the
utmost prudence and went away.  Presently the Princess entered
the garden with her damsels and with the old woman, who said to
herself, "If these eunuchs stay with us, we shall not attain our
end." So quoth she to the King's daughter, "O my lady, I have
somewhat to tell thee which shall ease thy heart." Quoth the
Princess, "Say what thou hast to say." "O my lady, rejoined the
old woman, "thou hast no need of these eunuchs at a time like the
present; nor wilt thou be able to divert thyself at thine ease,
whilst they are with us; so send them away;" and the Lady Dunya
replied, "Thou speakest sooth" Accordingly she dismissed them and
presently began to walk about, whilst Taj al-Muluk looked upon
her and fed his eyes on her beauty and loveliness (but she knew
it not); and every time he gazed at her he fainted by reason of
her passing charms.[FN#43] The old woman drew her on by converse
till they reached the pavilion which the Wazir had bidden be
decorated, when the Princess entered and cast a glance round and
perceived the picture of the birds the fowler and the pigeon;
whereupon she cried, "Exalted be Allah!  This is the very
counterfeit presentment of what I saw in my dream." She continued
to gaze at the figures of the birds and the fowler with his net,
admiring the work, and presently she said, "O my nurse, I have
been wont to blame and hate men, but look now at the fowler how
he hath slaughtered the she bird who set free her mate; who was
minded to return to her and aid her to escape when the bird of
prey met him and tore him to pieces." Now the old woman feigned
ignorance to her and ceased not to occupy her in converse, till
they drew near the place where Taj al-Muluk lay hidden. 
Thereupon she signed to him to come out and walk under the
windows of the pavilion, and, as the Lady Dunya stood looking
from the casement, behold, her glance fell that way and she saw
him and noting his beauty of face and form, said to the old
woman, "O my nurse, whence cometh yonder handsome youth?" Replied
the old woman, "I know nothing of him save that I think he must
be some great King's son, for he attaineth comeliness in excess
and extreme loveliness." And the Lady Dunya fell in love with him
to distraction; the spells which bound her were loosed and her
reason was overcome by his beauty and grace; and his fine stature
and proportions strongly excited her desires sexual.  So she
said, "O my nurse!  this is indeed a handsome youth;" and the old
woman replied, "Thou sayest sooth, O my lady," and signed to Taj
al-Muluk to go home.  And though desire and longing flamed in him
and he was distraught for love, yet he went away and took leave
of the Gardener and returned to his place, obeying the old woman
and not daring to cross her.  When he told the Wazir and Aziz
that she had signed him to depart, they exhorted him to patience,
saying, "Did not the ancient dame know that there was an object
to be gained by thy departure, she had not signalled thee to
return home." Such was the case with Taj al-Muluk, the Wazir and
Aziz but as regards the King's daughter, the Lady Dunya, desire
and passion redoubled upon her; she was overcome with love and
longing and she said to her nurse, "I know not how I shall manage
a meeting with this youth, but through thee." Exclaimed the old
woman, "I take refuge with Allah from Satan the stoned!  Thou who
art averse from men!  How cometh it then that thou art thus
afflicted with hope and fear of this young man?  Yet, by Allah,
none is worthy of thy youth but he." Quoth the Lady Dunya, "O my
nurse, further my cause and help me to foregather with him, and
thou shalt have of me a thousand diners and a dress of honour
worth as much more: but if thou aid me not to come at him, I am a
dead woman in very sooth." Replied the ancient dame, "Go to thy
palace and leave me to devise means for bringing you twain
together.  I will throw away my life to content you both!" So the
Lady Dunya returned to her palace, and the old woman betook
herself to Taj al-Muluk who, when he saw her, rose to receive her
and entreated her with respect and reverence making her sit by
his side.  Then s