he said, "The trick hath succeeded," and told
him all that had passed between herself and the Princess.  He
asked her, "When is our meeting to be?"; and she answered,
"Tomorrow." So he gave her a thousand diners and a dress of like
value, and she took them and stinted not walking till she
returned to her mistress, who said to her, "O my nurse!  what
news of the be loved?" Replied she, "I have learnt where he
liveth and will bring him to thee tomorrow." At this the Princess
was glad and gave her a thousand diners and a dress worth as much
more, and she took them and returned to her own place, where she
passed the night till morning.  Then she went to Taj al-Muluk and
dressing him in woman's clothes, said to him, "Follow me and sway
from side to side[FN#44] as thou steppest, and hasten not thy
pace nor take heed of any who speaketh to thee." And after thus
charging him she went out, and the Prince followed her in woman's
attire and she continued to charge and encourage him by the way,
that he might not be afraid; nor ceased they walking till they
came to the Palace-gate.  She entered and the Prince after her,
and she led him on, passing through doors and vestibules, till
they had passed seven doors.[FN#45] As they approached the
seventh, she said to him, "Hearten thy heart and when I call out
to thee and say, 'O damsel pass on!' do not slacken thy pace, but
advance as if about to run.  When thou art in the vestibule, look
to thy left and thou wilt see a saloon with doors: count five
doors and enter the sixth, for therein is thy desire." Asked Taj
al-Muluk, "And whither wilt thou go?"; and she answered, "Nowhere
shall I go except that perhaps I may drop behind thee, and the
Chief Eunuch may detain me to chat with him." She walked on (and
he behind her) till she reached the door where the Chief Eunuch
was stationed and he, seeing Taj al-Muluk with her dressed as a
slave girl, said to the old woman, "What business hath this girl
with thee?" Replied she, "This is a slave girl of whom the Lady
Dunya hath heard that she is skilled in different kinds of work
and she hath a mind to buy her." Rejoined the Eunuch, "I know
neither slave girls nor anyone else; and none shall enter here
without my searching according to the King's commands."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Chamberlain Eunuch cried to the old woman, "I know neither slave
girl nor anyone else; and none shall enter here without my
searching him according to the King's commands." Then quoth she,
feigning to be angry, "I thought thee a man of sense and good
breeding; but, if thou be changed, I will let the Princess know
of it and tell her how thou hinderest her slave girl;" and she
cried out to Taj al-Muluk, saying, "Pass on, O damsel!" So he
passed on into the vestibule as she bade him, whilst the Eunuch
was silent and said no more.  The Prince counted five doors and
entered the sixth where he found the Princess Dunya standing and
awaiting him.  As soon as she saw him, she knew him and clasped
him to her breast, and he clasped her to his bosom.  Presently
the old woman came in to them, having made a pretext to dismiss
the Princess's slave girls for fear of disgrace; and the Lady
Dunya said to her, "Be thou our door keeper!" So she and Taj al-
Muluk abode alone together and ceased not kissing and embracing
and twining leg with leg till dawn.[FN#46] When day drew near,
she left him and, shutting the door upon him, passed into another
chamber, where she sat down as was her wont, whilst her slave
women came in to her, and she attended to their affairs and
conversed with them.  Then she said to them, "Go forth from me
now, for I wish to amuse myself in privacy." So they withdrew and
she betook herself to Taj al-Muluk, and the old woman brought
them food, of which they ate and returned to amorous dalliance
till dawn.  Then the door was locked upon him as on the day
before; and they ceased not to do thus for a whole month.  This
is how it fared with Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya; but as
regards the Wazir and Aziz when they found that the Prince had
gone to the Palace of the King's daughter and there delayed all
the while, they concluded that he would never return from it and
that he was lost for ever; and Aziz said to the Wazir, "O my
father, what shall we do?" He replied, "O my son, this is a
difficult matter, and except we return to his sire and tell him,
he will blame us therefor." So they made ready at once and
forthright set out for the Green Land and the Country of the Two
Columns, and sought Sulayman Shah's capital.  And they traversed
the valleys night and day till they went in to the King, and
acquainted him with what had befallen his son and how from the
time he entered the Princess's Palace they had heard no news of
him.  At this the King was as though the Day of Doom had dawned
for him and regret was sore upon him, and he proclaimed a Holy
War[FN#47] throughout his realm.  After which he sent forth his
host without the town and pitched tents for them and took up his
abode in his pavilion, whilst the levies came from all parts of
the kingdom; for his subjects loved him by reason of his great
justice and beneficence.  Then he marched with an army walling
the horizon, and departed in quest of his son.  Thus far
concerning them; but as regards Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya
the two remained as they were half a year's time, whilst every
day they redoubled in mutual affection; and love and longing and
passion and desire so pressed upon Taj al Muluk, that at last he
opened his mind and said to her, "Know, O beloved of my heart and
vitals, that the longer I abide with thee, the more love and
longing and passion and desire increase on me, for that I have
not yet fulfilled the whole of my wish." Asked she, "What then
wouldst thou have, O light of my eyes and fruit of my vitals?  If
thou desire aught beside kissing and embracing and entwining of
legs with legs, do what pleaseth thee; for, by Allah, no partner
hath any part in us."[FN#48] But he answered "It is not that I
wish: I would fain acquaint thee with my true story.  Know, then,
that I am no merchant, nay, I am a King the son of a King, and my
father's name is the supreme King Sulayman Shah, who sent his
Wazir ambassador to thy father, to demand thee in marriage for
me, but when the news came to thee thou wouldst not consent."
Then he told her his past from first to last, nor is there any
avail in a twice told tale, and he added, "And now I wish to
return to my father, that he may send an ambassador to thy sire,
to demand thee in wedlock for me, so we may be at ease." When she
heard these words, she joyed with great joy because it suited
with her own wishes, and they passed the night on this
understanding.  But it so befel by the decree of Destiny that
sleep overcame them that night above all nights and they remained
till the sun had risen.  Now at this hour, King Shahriman was
sitting on his cushion of estate, with his Emirs and Grandees
before him, when the Syndic of the goldsmiths presented himself
between his hands, carrying a large box.  And he advanced and
opening it in presence of the King, brought out therefrom a
casket of fine work worth an hundred thousand diners, for that
which was therein of precious stones, rubies and emeralds beyond
the competence of any sovereign on earth to procure.  When the
King saw this, he marvelled at its beauty; and, turning to the
Chief Eunuch (him with whom the old woman had had to do), said to
him, "O Kafur,[FN#49] take this casket and wend with it to the
Princess Dunya." The Castrato took the casket and repairing to
the apartment of the King's daughter found the door shut and the
old woman lying asleep on the threshold; whereupon said he,
"What!  sleeping at this hour?" When the old woman heard the
Eunuch's voice she started from sleep and was terrified and said
to him, "Wait till I fetch the key." Then she went forth and fled
for her life.  Such was her case; but as regards the Epicene he,
seeing her alarm, lifted the door off its hinge pins,[FN#50] and
entering found the Lady Dunya with her arms round the neck of Taj
al-Muluk and both fast asleep.  At this sight he was confounded
and was preparing to return to the King, when the Princess awoke,
and seeing him, was terrified and changed colour and waxed pale,
and said to him, "O Kafur, veil thou what Allah hath
veiled!"[FN#51] But he replied, "I cannot conceal aught from the
King"; and, locking the door on them, returned to Shahriman, who
asked him, "Hast thou given the casket to the Princess?" Answered
the Eunuch, "Take the casket, here it is for I cannot conceal
aught from thee.  Know that I found a handsome young man by the
side of the Princess and they two asleep in one bed and in mutual
embrace." The King commanded them to be brought into the presence
and said to them, "What manner of thing is this?" and, being
violently enraged, seized a dagger and was about to strike Taj
al-Muluk with it, when the Lady Dunya threw herself upon him and
said to her father, "Slay me before thou slayest him." The King
reviled her and commended her to be taken back to her chamber:
then he turned to Taj al-Muluk and said to him, "Woe to thee! 
whence art thou?  Who is thy father and what hath emboldened thee
to debauch my daughter?" Replied the Prince, "Know, O King, that
if thou put me to death, thou art a lost man, and thou and all in
thy dominions will repent the deed." Quoth the King, "How so?";
and quoth Taj al-Muluk "Know that I am the son of King Sulayman
Shah, and ere thou knowest it, he will be upon thee with his
horse and foot." When King Shahriman heard these words he would
have deferred killing Taj al-Muluk and would rather have put him
in prison, till he should look into the truth of his words; but
his Wazir said to him, "O King of the Age, it is my opinion that
thou make haste to slay this gallows bird who dares debauch the
daughters of Kings." So the King cried to the headsman, "Strike
off his head; for he is a traitor." Accordingly, the herdsman
took him and bound him fast and raised his hand to the Emirs,
signing to consult them, a first and a second signal, thinking
thereby to gain time in this matter;[FN#52] but the King cried in
anger to him, "How long wilt thou consult others?  If thou
consult them again I will strike off thine own head.;' So the
headsman raised his hand till the hair of his armpit showed' and
was about to smite his neck,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
headsman raised his hand to smite off his head when behold, loud
cries arose and the folk closed their shops; whereupon the King
said to the headsman, "Wait awhile," and despatched one to learn
the news.  The messenger fared forth and presently returned and
reported, "I saw an army like the dashing sea with its clashing
surge: and their horses curvetting till earth trembleth with the
tramp; and I know no more of them." When the King heard this, he
was confounded and feared for his realm lest it should be torn
from him; so he turned to his Minister and said, "Have not any of
our army gone forth to meet this army?" But ere he had done
speaking, his Chamberlains entered with messengers from the King
who was approaching, and amongst them the Wazir who had
accompanied Taj al-Muluk.  They began by saluting the King, who
rose to receive them and bade them draw near, and asked the cause
of their coming; whereupon the Minister came forward from amongst
them and stood before him and said "Know that he who hath come
down upon thy realm is no King like unto the Kings of yore and
the Sultans that went before." "And who is he?" asked Shahriman,
and the Wazir answered, "He is the Lord of justice and loyalty,
the bruit of whose magnanimity the caravans have blazed abroad,
the Sultan Sulayman Shah, Lord of the Green Land and the Two
Columns and the Mountains of Ispahan; he who loveth justice and
equity, and hateth oppression and iniquity.  And he saith to thee
that his son is with thee and in thy city; his son, his heart's
very core and the fruit of his loins, and if he find him in
safety, his aim is won and thou shalt have thanks and praise; but
if he have been lost from thy realm or if aught of evil have
befallen him, look thou for ruin and the wasting of thy reign! 
for this thy city shall become a wold wherein the raven shall
croak.  Thus have I done my errand to thee and peace be with
thee!" Now when King Shahriman heard from the messenger these
words, his heart was troubled and he feared for his kingdom: so
he cried out for his Grandees and Ministers, Chamberlains and
Lieutenants; and, when they appeared, he said to them, "Woe to
you!  Go down and search for the youth." Now the Prince was still
under the headsman's hands, but he was changed by the fright he
had undergone.  Presently, the Wazir, chancing to glance around,
saw the Prince on the rug of blood and recognised him; so he
arose and threw himself upon him, and so did the other envoys. 
Then they proceeded to loose his bonds and they kissed his hands
and feet, whereupon Taj al-Muluk opened his eyes and, recognising
his father's Wazir and his friend Aziz, fell down a fainting for
excess of delight in them.  When King Shahriman made sure that
the coming of this army was indeed because of this youth, he was
confounded and feared with great fear; so he went up to Taj al-
Muluk and, kissing his head, said to him, "O my son, be not wroth
with me, neither blame the sinner for his sin; but have
compassion on my grey hairs, and waste not my realm." Whereupon
Taj al-Muluk drew near unto him and kissing his hand, replied,
"No harm shall come to thee, for indeed thou art to me as my
father; but look that nought befal my beloved, the Lady Dunya!"
Rejoined the King, "O my lord!  fear not for her; naught but joy
shall betide her;" and he went on to excuse himself and made his
peace with Sulayman Shah's Wazir to whom he promised much money,
if he would conceal from the King what he had seen.  Then he bade
his Chief Officers take the Prince with them and repair to the
Hammam and clothe him in one of the best of his own suits and
bring him back speedily.  So they obeyed his bidding and bore him
to the bath and clad him in the clothes which King Shahriman had
set apart for him; and brought him back to the presence chamber. 
When he entered the King rose to receive him and made all his
Grandees stand in attendance on him.  Then Taj al-Muluk sat down
to converse with his father's Wazir and with Aziz, and he
acquainted them with what had befallen him; after which they said
to him, "During that delay we returned to thy father and gave him
to know that thou didst enter the palace of the Princess and
didst not return therefrom, and thy case seemed doubtful to us. 
But when thy sire heard of this he mustered his forces; then we
came to this land and indeed our coming hath brought to thee
relief in extreme case and to us great joy." Quoth he, "Good
fortune hath attended your every action, first and last." While
this was doing King Shahriman went in to his daughter Princess
Dunya, and found her wailing and weeping for Taj al-Muluk. 
Moreover, she had taken a sword and fixed the hilt in the ground
and had set the point to the middle of her heart between her
breasts; and she bent over the blade saying, "Needs must I slay
myself and not survive my beloved." When her father entered and
saw her in this case, he cried out to her, saying, "O Princess of
kings' daughters, hold thy hand and have ruth on thy sire and the
folk of thy realm!" Then he came up to her and continued, "Let it
not be that an ill thing befal thy father for thy sake!" And he
told her the whole tale that her lover was the son of King
Sulayman Shah and sought her to wife and he added, "The marriage
waiteth only for thy consent." Thereat she smiled and said, "Did
I not tell thee that he was the son of a Sultan?  By Allah, there
is no help for it but that I let him crucify thee on a bit of
wood worth two pieces of silver!" Replied the King, "O my
daughter, have mercy on me, so Allah have mercy on thee!"
Rejoined she, "Up with you and make haste and go bring him to me
without delay." Quoth the King, "On my head and eyes be it!"; and
he left her and, going in hastily to Taj al-Muluk, repeated her
words in his ear.[FN#53] So he arose and accompanied the King to
the Princess, and when she caught sight of her lover, she took
hold of him and embraced him in her father's presence and hung
upon him and kissed him, saying, "Thou hast desolated me by thine
absence!" Then she turned to her father and said, "Sawest thou
ever any that could do hurt to the like of this beautiful being,
who is moreover a King, the son of a King and of the free
born,[FN#54] guarded against ignoble deeds?" There upon King
Shahriman went out shutting the door on them with his own hand;
and he returned to the Wazir and to the other envoys of Sulayman
Shah and bade them inform their King that his son was in health
and gladness and enjoying all delight of life with his beloved. 
So they returned to King Sulayman and acquainted him with this;
whereupon King Shahriman ordered largesse of money and vivers to
the troops of King Sulayman Shah; and, when they had conveyed all
he had commanded, he bade be brought out an hundred coursers and
an hundred dromedaries and an hundred white slaves and an hundred
concubines and an hundred black slaves and an hundred female
slaves; all of which he forwarded to the King as a present.  Then
he took horse, with his Grandees and Chief Officers, and rode out
of the city in the direction of the King's camp.  As soon as
Sultan Sulayman Shah knew of his approach, he rose and advanced
many paces to meet him.  Now the Wazir and Aziz had told him all
the tidings, whereat he rejoiced and cried, "Praise be to Allah
who hath granted the dearest wish of my son!" Then King Sulayman
took King Shahriman in his arms and seated him beside himself on
the royal couch, where they conversed awhile and had pleasure in
each other's conversation.  Presently food was set before them,
and they ate till they were satisfied; and sweetmeats and dried
fruits were brought, and they enjoyed their dessert.  And after a
while came to them Taj al-Muluk, richly dressed and adorned, and
when his father saw him, he stood up and embraced him and kissed
him.  Then all who were sitting rose to do him honour; and the
two Kings seated him between them and they sat conversing a
while, after which quoth King Sulayman Shah to King Shahriman, "I
desire to have the marriage contract between my son and thy
daughter drawn up in the presence of witnesses, that the wedding
may be made public, even as is the custom of Kings." "I hear and
I obey," quoth King Shahriman and thereon summoned the Kazi and
the witnesses, who came and wrote out the marriage contract
between Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya.  Then they gave
bakhshish[FN#55] of money and sweetmeats; and lavished incense
and essences; and indeed it was a day of joy and gladness and all
the grandees and soldiers rejoiced therein.  Then King Shahriman
proceeded to dower and equip his daughter; and Taj al-Muluk said
to his sire, "Of a truth, this young man Aziz is of the generous
and hath done me a notable service, having borne weariness with
me; and he hath travelled with me and hath brought me to my
desire.  He ceased never to show sufferance with me and exhort me
to patience till I accomplished my intent; and now he hath abided
with us two whole years, and he cut off from his native land.  So
now I purpose to equip him with merchandise, that he may depart
hence with a light heart; for his country is nearhand." Replied
his father, "Right is thy rede;" so they made ready an hundred
loads of the richest stuffs and the most costly, and Taj al-Muluk
presented them with great store of money to Aziz, and farewelled
him, saying, "O my brother and my true friend!  take these loads
and accept them from me by way of gift and token of affection,
and go in peace to thine own country." Aziz accepted the presents
and kissing the ground between the hands of the Prince and his
father bade them adieu.  Moreover, Taj al-Muluk mounted and
accompanied him three miles on his homeward way as a proof of
amity, after which Aziz conjured him to turn back, saying, "By
Allah, O my master, were it not for my mother, I never would part
from thee!  But, good my lord!  leave me not without news of
thee." Replied Taj al-Muluk, "So be it!" Then the Prince returned
to the city and Aziz journeyed on till he came to his native
town; and he entered it and ceased not faring till he went in to
his mother and found that she had built him a monument in the
midst of the house and used to visit it continually.  When he
entered, he saw her with hair dishevelled and dispread over the
tomb, weeping and repeating these lines,

"Indeed I'm strong to bear whate'er befal; *
     But weak to bear such parting's dire mischance:
What heart estrangement of the friend can bear? *
     What strength withstand assault of severance?"

Then sobs burst from her breast, and she recited also these
couplets,

"What's this?  I pass by tombs, and fondly greet *
     My friends' last homes, but send they no reply:
For saith each friend, 'Reply how can I make *
     When pledged to clay and pawned to stones I lie?
Earth has consumed my charms and I forget *
     Thy love, from kith and kin poor banisht I.' "

While she was thus, behold, Aziz came in to her and when she saw
him, she fell down, fainting for very joy.  He sprinkled water on
her face till she revived and rising, took him in her arms and
strained him to her breast, whilst he in like manner embraced
her.  Then he greeted her and she greeted him, and she asked the
reason of his long absence, whereupon he told her all that had
befallen him from first to last and informed her how Taj al-Muluk
had given him an hundred loads of monies and stuffs.  At this she
rejoiced, and Aziz abode with his mother in his native town,
weeping for what mishaps had happened to him with the daughter of
Dalilah the Wily One, even her who had castrated[FN#56] him. 
Such was the case with Aziz; but as regards Taj al-Muluk he went
in unto his beloved, the Princess Dunya, and abated her
maidenhead.  Then King Shahriman proceeded to equip his daughter
for her journey with her husband and father in law, and bade
bring them provaunt and presents and rarities.  So they loaded
their beasts and set forth, whilst King Shahriman escorted them,
by way of farewell, three days' journey on their way, till King
Shah Sulayman conjured him to return.  So he took leave of them
and turned back, and Taj al-Muluk and his wife and father fared
for wards night and day, with their troops, till they drew near
their capital.  As soon as the news of their coming spread
abroad, the folk decorated for them the city,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Shah
Sulayman drew near his capital, the folk decorated the city for
him and for his son.  So they entered in state and the King,
sitting on his throne with his son by his side, gave alms and
largesse and loosed all who were in his jails.  Then he held a
second bridal for his son, and the sound of the singing women and
players upon instruments was never silent for a whole month, and
the tire women stinted not to adorn the Lady Dunya and display
her in various dresses; and she tired not of the displaying nor
did the women weary of gazing on her.  Then Taj al-Muluk, after
having foregathered awhile with his father and mother, took up
his sojourn with his wife, and they abode in all joyance of life
and in fairest fortune, till there came to them the Destroyer of
all delights.[FN#57] Now when the Wazir Dandan had ended the tale
of Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya, Zau al-Makan said to him, "Of
a truth, it is the like of thee who lighten the mourner's heart
and who deserve to be the boon companions of Kings and to guide
their policy in the right way." All this befel and they were
still besieging Constantinople, where they lay four whole years,
till they yearned after their native land; and the troops
murmured, being weary of vigil and besieging and the endurance of
fray and foray by night and by day.  Then King Zau al-Makan
summoned Rustam and Bahram and Tarkash, and when they were in
presence bespoke them thus, "Know that we have lain here all
these years and we have not won to our wish; nay, we have but
gained increase of care and concern; for indeed we came, thinking
to take our man bote for King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and in so doing
my brother Sharrkan was slain; so is our sorrow grown to sorrows
twain and our affliction to afflictions twain.  All this came of
the old woman Zat al-Dawahi, for it was she who slew the Sultan
in his kingdom and carried off his wife, the Queen Sophia; nor
did this suffice her, but she must put another cheat on us and
cut the throat of my brother Sharrkan and indeed I have bound
myself and sworn by the solemnest oaths that there is no help but
I take blood wit from her.  What say ye?  Ponder my address and
answer me." Then they bowed their heads and answered, "It is for
the Wazir Dandan to opine." So the Minister came forward and
said, "Know O King of the Age!  it booteth us nought to tarry
here; and 'tis my counsel that we strike camp and return to our
own country, there to abide for a certain time and after that we
should return for a razzia upon the worshippers of idols."
Replied the King, "This rede is right, for indeed the folk weary
for a sight of their families, and I am an other who is also
troubled with yearning after my son Kanmakan and my brother 's
daughter Kuzia Fakan, for she is in Damascus and I know not how
is her case." When the troops heard this report, they rejoiced
and blessed the Wazir Dandan.  Then the King bade the crier call
the retreat after three days.  They fell to preparing for the
march, and, on the fourth day, they beat the big drums and
unfurled the banners and the army set forth, the Wazir Danden in
the van and the King riding in the mid battle, with the Grand
Chamberlain by his side; and all journeyed without ceasing, night
and day, till they reached Baghdad city.  The folk rejoiced in
their return, and care and fear ceased from them whilst the stay
at homes met the absentees and each Emir betook him to his own
house.  As for Zau al-Makan he marched up to the Palace and went
in to his son Kanmakan, who had now reached the age of seven; and
who used to go down to the weapon plain and ride.  As soon as the
King was rested of his journey, he entered the Hammam with his
son, and returning, seated himself on his sofa of state, whilst
the Wazir Dandan took up his station before him and the Emirs and
Lords of the realm presented themselves and stood in attendance
upon him.  Then Zau al-Makan called for his comrade, the Fireman,
who had befriended him in his wanderings; and, when he came into
presence, the King rose to do him honour and seated him by his
side.  Now he had acquainted the Wazir with all the kindness and
good turns which the Stoker had done him; and he found that the
wight had waxed fat and burly with rest and good fare, so that
his neck was like an elephant's throat and his face like a
dolphin's belly.  Moreover, he was grown dull of wit, for that he
had never stirred from his place; so at first he knew not the
King by his aspect.  But Zau al-Makan came up to him smiling in
his face, and greeted him after the friendliest fashion, saying,
"How soon hast thou forgotten me?" With this the Fireman roused
himself and, looking steadfastly at Zau al-Makan, made sure that
he knew him; whereupon he sprang hastily to his feet and
exclaimed, "O my friend, who hath made thee Sultan?" Then Zau al-
Makan laughed at him and the Wazir, coming up to him expounded
the whole story to him and said, "In good sooth he was thy
brother and thy friend; and now he is King of the land and needs
must thou get great good of him.  So I charge thee, if he say,
'Ask a boon of me,' ask not but for some great thing; for thou
art very dear to him." Quoth the Fireman, "I fear lest, if I ask
of him aught, he may not choose to give it or may not be able to
grant it." Quoth the Wazir, "Have no care; whatsoever thou askest
he will give thee." Rejoined the Stoker, "By Allah, I must at
once ask of him a thing that is in my thought: every night I
dream of it and implore Almighty Allah to vouchsafe it to me."
Said the Wazir, "Take heart; by Allah, if thou ask of him the
government of Damascus, in place of his brother, he would surely
give it thee and make thee Governor." With this the Stoker rose
to is feet and Zau al-Makan signed to him to sit; but he refused,
saying, "Allah forfend!  The days are gone by of my sitting in
thy presence.' Answered the Sultan, "Not so, they endure even
now.  Thou west in very deed the cause that I am at present alive
and, by Allah, whatever thing most desired thou requirest of me,
I will give that same to thee.  But ask thou first of Allah, and
then of me!" He said, "O my lord, I fear" "Fear not," quoth the
Sultan He continued, "I fear to ask aught and that thou shouldst
refuse it to me and it is only" At this the King laughed and
replied, "If thou require of me the half of my kingdom I would
share it with thee: so ask what thou wilt and leave talking."
Repeated the Fireman "I fear" "Don't fear," quoth the King.  He
went on, "I fear lest I ask a thing and thou be not able to grant
it." Upon this the Sultan waxed wroth and cried, "Ask what thou
wilt." Then said he, "I ask, first of Allah and then of thee,
that thou write me a patent of Syndicate over all the Firemen of
the baths in the Holy City, Jerusalem." The Sultan and all
present laughed and Zau al-Makan said, "Ask something more than
this." He replied, "O my lord, said I not I feared that thou
wouldst not choose to give me what I should ask or that thou be
not able to grant it?" Therewith the Wazir signed him with his
foot once and twice and thrice, and every time he began, "I ask
of thee" Quoth the Sultan, "Ask and be speedy." So he said, "I
ask thee to make me Chief of the Scavengers in the Holy City of
Jerusalem, or in.  Damascus town." Then all those who were
present fell on their backs with laughter and the Wazir beat him;
whereupon he turned to the Minister and said to him, "What art
thou that thou shouldest beat me?  'Tis no fault of mine: didst
thou not thyself bid me ask some important thing?" And he added,
"Let me go to my own land." With this, the Sultan knew that he
was jesting and took patience with him awhile; then turned to him
and said, "O my brother, ask of me some important thing,
befitting our dignity." So the Stoker said, "O King of the Age, I
ask first of Allah and then of thee, that thou make me Viceroy of
Damascus in the place of thy brother;" and the King replied,
"Allah granteth thee this." Thereupon the Fireman kissed ground
before him and he bade set him a chair in his rank and vested him
with a viceroy's habit.  Then he wrote him a patent and sealed it
with his own seal, and said to the Wazir Dandan, "None shall go
with him but thou; and when thou makest the return journey, do
thou bring with thee my brother's daughter, Kuzia Fakan."
"Hearken ing and obedience," answered the Minister; and, taking
the Fire man, went down with him and made ready for the march. 
Then the King appointed for the Stoker servants and suite, and
gave him a new litter and a princely equipage and said to the
Emirs, "Whoso loveth me, let him honour this man and offer him a
handsome present." So each and every of the Emirs brought him his
gift according to his competence; and the King named him Zibl
Khan,[FN#58] and conferred on him the honourable surname of al-
Mujahid.[FN#59] As soon as the gear was ready, he went up with
the Wazir Dandan to the King, that he might take leave of him and
ask his permission to depart.  The King rose to him and embraced
him, and charged him to do justice between his subjects and bade
him make ready for fight against the Infidels after two years. 
Then they took leave of each other and the King,[FN#60] the
Fighter for the Faith highs Zibl Khan, having been again exhorted
by Zau al-Makan to deal fairly with his subjects, set out on his
journey, after the Emirs had brought him Mamelukes and eunuchs,
even to five thousand in number, who rode after him.  The Grand
Chamberlain also took horse, as did Bahram, captain of the
Daylamites, and Rustam, captain of the Persians, and Tarkash,
captain of the Arabs, who attended to do him service; and they
ceased not riding with him three days' journey by way of honour. 
Then, taking their leave of him, they returned to Baghdad and the
Sultan Zibl Khan and the Wazir Dandan fared on, with their suite
and troops, till they drew near Damascus.  Now news was come,
upon the wings of birds, to the notables of Damascus, that King
Zau al-Makan had made Sultan over Damascus a King named Zibl Khan
and surnamed Al-Mujahid; so when he reached the city he found it
dressed in his honour and everyone in the place came out to gaze
on him.  The new Sultan entered Damascus in a splendid progress
and went up to the citadel, where he sat down upon his chair of
state, whilst the Wazir Dandan stood in attendance on him, to
acquaint him with the ranks of the Emirs and their stations. 
Then the Grandees came in to him and kissed hands and called down
blessings on him.  The new King, Zibl Khan, received them
graciously and bestowed on them dresses of honour and various
presents and bounties; after which he opened the treasuries and
gave largesse to the troops, great and small.  Then he governed
and did justice and proceeded to equip the Lady Kuzia Fakan,
daughter of King Sharrkan, appointing her a litter of silken
stuff.  Moreover he furnished the Wazir Dandan equally well for
the return journey and offered him a gift of coin but he refused,
saying, "Thou art near the time appointed by the King, and haply
thou wilt have need of money, or after this we may send to seek
of thee funds for the Holy War or what not." Now when the Wazir
was ready to march, Sultan al-Mujahid mounted to bid the Minister
farewell and brought Kuzia Fakan to him, and made her enter the
litter and sent with her ten damsels to do her service. 
Thereupon they set forward, whilst King "Fighter for the Faith"
returned to his government that he might order affairs and get
ready his munitions of war, awaiting such time as King Zau al-
Makan should send a requisition to him.  Such was the case with
Sultan Zibl Khan, but as regards the Wazir Dandan, he ceased not
faring forward and finishing off the stages, in company with
Kuzia Fakan till they came to Ruhbah[FN#61] after a month's
travel and thence pushed on, till he drew near Baghdad.  Then he
sent to announce his arrival to King Zau al-Makan who, when he
heard this, took horse and rode out to meet him.  The Wazir
Dandan would have dismounted, but the King conjured him not to do
so and urged his steed till he came up to his side.  Then he
questioned him of Zibl Khan highs Al-Mujahid, whereto the Wazir
replied that he was well and that he had brought with him Kuzia
Fakan the daughter of his brother.  At this the King rejoiced and
said to Dandan, "Down with thee and rest thee from the fatigue of
the journey for three days, after which come to me again."
Replied the Wazir "With joy and gratitude," and betook himself to
his own house, whilst the King rode up to his Palace and went in
to his brother's daughter, Kuzia Fakan, a girl of eight years
old.  When he saw her, he rejoiced in her and sorrowed for her
sire; then he bade make for her clothes and gave her splendid
jewelry and ornaments, and ordered she be lodged with his son
Kanmakan in one place.  So they both grew up the brightest of the
people of their time and the bravest; but Kuzia Fakan became a
maiden of good sense and understanding and knowledge of the
issues of events, whilst Kanmakan approved him a generous youth
and freehanded, taking no care in the issue of aught.  And so
they continued till each of them attained the age of twelve.  Now
Kuzia Fakan used to ride a horseback and fare forth with her
cousin into the open plain and push forward and range at large
with him in the word; and they both learnt to smite with swords
and spike with spears.  But when they had reached the age of
twelve, King Zau al-Makan, having completed his preparations and
provisions and munitions for Holy War, summoned the Wazir Dandan
and said to him, "Know that I have set mind on a thing, which I
will discover to thee, and I want shine opinion thereon; so do
thou with speed return me a reply." Asked the Wazir, "What is
that, O King of the Age?"; and the other answered, "I am resolved
to make my son Kanmakan Sultan and rejoice in him in my lifetime
and do battle before him till death overtake me.  What reckest
thou of this?" The Wazir kissed the ground before the King and
replied, "Know, O King and Sultan mine, Lord of the Age and the
time!  that which is in thy mind is indeed good, save that it is
now no tide to carry it out, for two reasons; the first, that thy
son Kanmakan is yet of tender years; and the second, that it
often befalleth him who maketh his son King in his life time, to
live but a little while thereafterward.[FN#62]  And this is my
reply." Rejoined the King, "Know, O Wazir that we will make the
Grand Chamberlain guardian over him, for he is now one of the
family and he married my sister, so that he is to me as a
brother." Quoth the Wazir, "Do what seemeth good to thee: we have
only to obey thine orders." Then the King sent for the Grand
Chamberlain whom they brought into the presence together with the
Lords of the realm and he said to them, "Ye know that this my son
Kanmakan is the first cavalier of the age, and that he hath no
peer in striking with the sword and lunging with the lance; and
now I appoint him to be Sultan over you and I make the Grand
Chamberlain, his uncle, guardian over him." Replied the
Chamberlain, "I am but a tree which thy bounty hath planted"; and
Zau al-Makan said, "O Chamberlain, verily this my son Kanmakan
and my niece Kuzia Fakan are brothers' children; so I hereby
marry her to him and I call those present to witness thereof."
Then he made over to his son such treasures as no tongue can
describe, and going in to his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman, told her
what he had done, whereat she was a glad woman and said, "Verily
the twain are my children: Allah preserve thee to them and keep
thy life for them many a year!" Replied he, "O my sister, I have
accomplished in this world all my heart desired and I have no
fear for my son!  yet it were well thou have an eye on him, and
an eye on his mother." And he charged the Chamberlain and Nuzhat
al-Zaman with the care of his son and niece and wife, and this he
continued to do nights and days till he fell sick and deemed
surely that he was about to drink the cup of death; so he took to
his bed, whilst the Chamberlain busied himself with ordering the
folk and realm.  At the end of the year, the King summoned his
son Kanmakan and the Wazir Dandan and said, "O my son, after my
death this Wazir is thy sire; for know that I am about to leave
this house of life transitory for the house of eternity.  And
indeed I have fulfilled my will of this world; yet there
remaineth in my heart one regret which may Allah dispel through
and by thy hands." Asked his son, "What regret is that, O my
father?" Answered Zau al-Makan, "O my son, the sole regret of me
is that I die without having avenged thy grandfather, Omar bin
al-Nu'uman, and thine uncle, Sharrkan, on an old woman whom they
call Zat al-Dawahi; but, if Allah grant thee aid, sleep not till
thou take thy wreak on her, and so wipe out the shame we have
suffered at the Infidel's hands; and beware of the old hag's wile
and do what the Wazir Dandan shall advise thee; because he from
old time hath been the pillar of our realm." And his son assented
to what he said.  Then the King's eyes ran over with tears and
his sickness redoubled on him; whereupon his brother in law, the
Chamberlain took charge over the country and, being a capable
man, he judged and bade and forbade for the whole of that year,
while Zau al-Makan was occupied with his malady.  And his
sickness was sore upon him for four years, during which the Chief
Chamberlain sat in his stead and gave full satisfaction to the
commons and the nobles; and all the country blessed his rule. 
Such was the case with Zau al-Makan and the Chamberlain, but as
regards the King's son, he busied himself only with riding and
lunging with lance and shooting with shaft, and thus also did the
daughter of his uncle, Kuzia Fakan; for he and she were wont to
fare forth at the first of the day and return at nightfall, when
she would go in to her mother, and he would go in to his mother
whom he ever found sitting in tears by the head of his father's
couch.  Then he would tend his father all night long till
daybreak, when he would go forth again with his cousin according
to their wont.  Now Zau al-Makan's pains and sufferings were
lonesome upon him and he wept and began versifying with these
couplets,

"Gone is my strength, told is my tale of days *
     And, lookye!  I am left as thou dost see:
In honour's day most honoured wont to be, *
     And win the race from all my company
Would Heaven before my death I might behold *
     My son in seat of empire sit for me
And rush upon his foes, to take his wreak *
     With sway of sword and lance lunged gallantly:
In this world and the next I am undone, *
     Except the Lord vouchsafe me clemency."

When he had ended repeating these verses, he laid his head on his
pillow and closed his eyes and slept.  Then saw he in his sleep
one who said to him, "Rejoice, for thy son shall fill the lands
with justest sway; and he shall rule them and him shall the
lieges obey."; Then he awoke from his dream gladdened by the good
tidings he had seen, and after a few days, Death smote him, and
because of his dying great grief fell on the people of Baghdad,
and simple and gentle mourned for him.  But Time passed over him,
as though he had never been[FN#63] and Kanmakan's estate was
changed; for the people of Baghdad set him aside and put him and
his family in a place apart.  Now when his mother saw this, she
fell into the sorriest of plights and said, "There is no help but
that I go to the Grand Chamberlain, and I must hope for the
aidance of the Subtle, the All-Wise!" Then she rose from her
place and betook herself to the house of the Chamberlain who was
now become Sultan, and she found him sitting upon his carpet.  So
she went in to his wife, Nuzhat al-Zaman, and wept with sore
weeping and said unto her, "Verily the dead hath no friend!  May
Allah never bring you to want as long as your age and the years
endure, and may you cease not to rule justly over rich and poor. 
Thine ears have heard and thine eyes have seen all that was ours
of kingship and honour and dignity and wealth and fair fortune of
life and condition; and now Time hath turned upon us, and fate
and the world have betrayed us and wrought in hostile way with
us, wherefore I come to thee craving thy favours, I from whom
favours were craved: for when a man dieth, women and maidens are
brought to despisal." And she repeated these couplets,

"Suffice thee Death such marvels can enhance, *
     And severed lives make lasting severance:
Man's days are marvels, and their stations are *
     But water-pits[FN#64] of misery and mischance.
Naught wrings my heart save loss of noble friends, *
     Girt round by rings of hard, harsh circumstance."

When Nuzhat al-Zaman heard these words, she remembered her
brother, Zau al-Makan, and his son Kanmakan, and, making her draw
near to her and showing her honour, she said, "Verily at this
moment, by Allah, I am grown rich and thou art poor; now by the
Lord!  we did not cease to seek thee out, but we feared to wound
thy heart lest thou shouldest fancy our gifts to thee an alms
gift.  Withal, whatso weal we now enjoy is from thee and thy
husband; so our house is thy house and our place thy place, and
thine is all our wealth and what goods we have belong to thee."
Then she robed her in sumptuous robes and set apart for her a
place in the Palace adjoining her own; and they abode therein,
she and her son, in all delight of life.  And Nuzhat al-Zaman
clothed him also in Kings' raiment and gave to them both especial
handmaids for their service.  After a little, she related to her
husband the sad case of the widow of her brother, Zau al-Makan,
whereat his eyes filled with tears and he said, "Wouldest thou
see the world after thee, look thou upon the world after other
than thyself.  Then entreat her honourably and enrich her
poverty."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When It was the One Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
Al-Zaman related to her husband the sad case of the widow of her
brother, Zau al-Makan, the Chamberlain said, "Entreat her
honourably and enrich her poverty." Thus far concerning Nuzhat
al-Zaman and her consort and the relict of Zau al-Makan; but as
regards Kanmakan and his cousin Kuzia Fakan, they grew up and
flourished till they waxed like unto two fruit-laden boughs or
two shining moons; and they reached the age of fifteen.  And she
was indeed the fairest of maids who are modestly veiled, lovely
faced with smooth cheeks graced, and slender waist on heavy hips
based; and her shape was the shaft's thin line and her lips were
sweeter than old wine and the nectar of her mouth as it were the
fountain Salsabil[FN#65]; even as saith the poet in these two
couplets describing one like her,

"As though ptisane of wine on her lips honey dew *
     Dropt from the ripened grapes her mouth in clusters grew
And, when her frame thou doublest, and low bends her vine, *
     Praise her Creator's might no creature ever knew."

Of a truth Allah had united in her every charm: her shape would
shame the branch of waving tree and the rose before her cheeks
craved lenity; and the honey dew of her lips of wine made jeer,
however old and clear, and she gladdened heart and beholder with
joyous cheer, even as saith of her the poet,

"Goodly of gifts is she, and charm those perfect eyes, *
     With lashes shaming Kohl and all the fair ones Kohl'd[FN#66]
And from those eyne the glances pierce the lover's heart, *
     Like sword in Mir al-Muminina Ali's hold."

And (the relator continueth) as for Kanmakan, he became unique in
loveliness and excelling in perfection no less; none could even
him in qualities as in seemliness and the sheen of velour between
his eyes was espied, testifying for him while against him it
never testified.  The hardest hearts inclined to his side; his
eyelids bore lashes black as by Kohl; and he was of surpassing
worth in body and soul.  And when the down of lips and cheeks
began to sprout bards and poets sang for him far and near,

"Appeared not my excuse till hair had clothed his cheek, *
     And gloom o'ercrept that side-face (sight to stagger!)
A fawn, when eyes would batten on his charms, *
     Each glance deals thrust like point of Khanjar-dagger."

And saith another,

"His lovers' souls have drawn upon his cheek *
     An ant that perfected its rosy light:
I marvel at such martyrs Laza-pent *
     Who yet with greeny robes of Heaven are dight.''[FN#67]

Now it chanced one holiday, that Kuzia Fakan fared forth to make
festival with certain kindred of the court, and she went
surrounded by her handmaids.  And indeed beauty encompassed her,
the roses of her cheeks dealt envy to their mole; from out her
smiling lips levee flashed white, gleaming like the
chamomile[FN#68]; and Kanmakan began to turn about her and devour
her with his sight, for she was the moon of resplendent light. 
Then he took heart and giving his tongue a start began to
improvise,

"When shall the disappointed heart be healed of severance, *
     And lips of Union smile at ceasing of our hard mischance?
Would Heaven I knew shall come some night, and with it surely
     bring * Meeting with friend who like myself endureth
     sufferance."[FN#69]

When Kuzia Fakan heard these couplets, she showed vexation and
disapproval and, putting on a haughty and angry air, said to him,
"Dost thou name me in thy verse, to shame me amongst folk?  By
Allah, if thou turn not from this talk, I will assuredly complain
of thee to the Grand Chamberlain, Sultan of Khorasan and Baghdad
and lord of justice and equity; that disgrace and punishment may
befal thee!" Kanmakan made no reply for anger but he returned to
Baghdad; and Kuzia Fakan also returned to her palace and
complained of her cousin to her mother, who said to her, "O my
daughter, haply he meant thee no harm, and is he aught but an
orphan?  Withal, he said nought of reproach to thee; so beware
thou tell none of this, lest perchance it come to e Sultan's ears
and he cut short his life and blot out his name and make it even
as yesterday, whose memory hath passed away." However, Kanmakan's
love for Kuzia Fakan spread abroad in Baghdad, so that the women
talked of it.  Moreover, his breast became straitened and his
patience waned and he knew not what to do, yet he could not hide
his condition from the world.  Then longed he to give vent to the
pangs he endured, by reason of the lowe of separation; but he
feared her rebuke and her wrath; so he began improvising,

"Now is my dread to incur reproaches, which *
     Disturb her temper and her mind obscure,
Patient I'll bear them; e'en as generous youth his case to
     cure.'' * Beareth the burn of brand his case to
     cure."[FN#70]

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Grand Chamberlain became Sultan they named him King Sasan; and
after he had assumed the throne he governed the people in
righteous way.  Now as he was giving audience one day, Kanmakan's
verses came to his knowledge.  Thereupon he repented him of the
past and going in to his wife Nuzhat al-Zaman, said to her,
"Verily, to join Halfah grass and fire,[FN#71] is the greatest of
risks, and man may not be trusted with woman, so long as eye
glanceth and eyelid quivereth.  Now thy brother's son, Kanmakan,
is come to man's estate and it behoveth us to forbid him access
to the rooms where anklets trinkle, and it is yet more needful to
forbid thy daughter the company of men, for the like of her
should be kept in the Harim." Replied she, "Thou sayest sooth, O
wise King!" Next day came Kanmakan according to his wont; and,
going in to his aunt saluted her.  She returned his salutation
and said to him, "O my son!  I have some what to say to thee
which I would fain leave unsaid; yet I must tell it thee despite
my inclination." Quoth he, "Speak;" and quoth she, Know then that
thy sire the Chamberlain, the father of Kuzia Fakan, hath heard
of the verses thou madest anent her, and hath ordered that she be
kept in the Harim and out of thy reach; if therefore, O my son,
thou want anything from us, I will send it to thee from behind
the door; and thou shalt not look upon Kuzia Fakan nor shalt thou
return hither from this day forth." When he heard this he arose
and withdrew with out speaking a single word; and, betaking
himself to his mother related what his aunt had said.  She
observed, "This all cometh of thine overtalking.  Thou knowest
that the news of thy passion for Kuzia Fakan is noised abroad and
the tattle hath spread everywhere how thou eatest their food and
thereafter thou courtest their daughter." Rejoined he, "And who
should have her but I?  She is the daughter of my father's
brother and I have the best of rights to her." Retorted his
mother, "Th