ese are idle words.  Be silent, lest haply thy talk
come to King Sasan's ears and it prove the cause of thy losing
her and the reason of thy ruin and increase of thine affliction. 
They have not sent us any supper to-night and we shall die an
hungered; and were we in any land but this, we were already dead
of famine or of shame for begging our bread." When Kanmakan heard
these words from his mother, his regrets redoubled; his eyes ran
over with tears and he complained and began improvising,

"Minish this blame I ever bear from you: *
     My heart loves her to whom all love is due:
Ask not from me of patience jot or little, *
     Divorce of Patience by God's House!  I rue:
What blamers preach of patience I unheed; *
     Here am I, love path firmly to pursue!
Indeed they bar me access to my love, *
     Here am I by God's ruth no ill I sue!  
Good sooth my bones, whenas they hear thy name, *
     Quail as birds quailed when Nisus o'er them flew:[FN#72]
Ah! say to them who blame my love that I *
     Will love that face fair cousin till I die." 

And when he had ended his verses he said to his mother, "I have
no longer a place in my aunt's house nor among these people, but
I will go forth from the palace and abide in the corners of the
city." So he and his mother left the court; and, having sought an
abode in the neighbourhood of the poorer sort, there settled; but
she used to go from time to time to King Sasan's palace and
thence take daily bread for herself and her son.  As this went on
Kuzia Fakan took her aside one day and said to her, "Alas, O my
naunty, how is it with thy son?" Replied she, "O my daughter,
sooth to say, he is tearful-eyed and heavy hearted, being fallen
into the net of thy love." And she repeated to her the couplets
he had made; whereupon Kuzia Fakan wept and said, "By Allah!  I
rebuked him not for his words, nor for ill-will to him, but
because I feared for him the malice of foes.  Indeed my passion
for him is double that he feeleth for me; my tongue may not
describe my yearning for him; and were it not for the extravagant
wilfulness of his words and the wanderings of his wit, my father
had not cut off from him favours that besit, nor had decreed unto
him exclusion and prohibition as fit.  However, man's days bring
nought but change, and patience in all case is most becoming:
peradventure He who ordained our severance will vouchsafe us
reunion!" And she began versifying in these two couplets,

"O son of mine uncle!  same sorrow I bear, *
     And suffer the like of thy cark and thy care
Yet hide I from man what I suffer for pine; *
     Hide it too, and such secret to man never bare!"

When his mother heard this from her, she thanked her and blessed
her: then she left her and acquainted her son with what she had
said; whereupon his desire for her increased and he took heart,
being eased of his despair and the turmoil of his love and care. 
And he said, "By Allah, I desire none but her!"; and he began
improvising,

"Leave this blame, I will list to no flout of my foe! *
     I divulged a secret was told me to keep:
He is lost to my sight for whose union I yearn, *
     And I watch all the while he can slumber and sleep."

So the days and nights went by whilst Kanmakan lay tossing upon
coals of fire,[FN#73] till he reached the age of seventeen; and
his beauty had waxt perfect and his wits were at their brightest. 
One night, as he lay awake, he communed with himself and said,
"Why should I keep silence till I waste away and see not my
lover?  Fault have I none save poverty; so, by Allah, I am
resolved to remove me from this region and wander over the wild
and the word; for my position in this city is a torture and I
have no friend nor lover therein to comfort me; wherefore I am
determined to distract myself by absence from my native land till
I die and take my rest after this shame and tribulation." And he
began to improvise and recited these couplets,

"Albeit my vitals quiver 'neath this ban; *
     Before the foe myself I'll ne'er unman!
So pardon me, my vitals are a writ *
     Whose superscription are my tears that ran:
Heigh ho!  my cousin seemeth Houri may *
     Come down to earth by reason of Rizwan:
'Scapes not the dreadful sword lunge of her look *
     Who dares the glancing of those eyne to scan:
O'er Allah's wide spread world I'll roam and roam, *
     And from such exile win what bread I can
Yes, o'er broad earth I'll roam and save my soul, *
     All but her absence bear ing like a man
With gladsome heart I'll haunt the field of fight, *
     And meet the bravest Brave in battle van!"

So Kanmakan fared forth from the palace barefoot and he walked in
a short sleeved gown, wearing on his head a skull cap of
felt[FN#74] seven years old and carrying a scone three days
stale, and in the deep glooms of night betook himself to the
portal of al-Arij of Baghdad.  Here he waited for the gate being
opened and when it was opened, he was the first to pass through
it; and he went out at random and wandered about the wastes night
and day.  When the dark hours came, his mother sought him but
found him not; whereupon the world waxt strait upon her for all
that it was great and wide, and she took no delight in aught of
weal it supplied.  She looked for him a first day and a second
day and a third day till ten days were past, but no news of him
reached her.  Then her breast became contracted and she shrieked
and shrilled, saying, "O my son!  O my darling!  thou hast
revived my regrets.  Sufficed not what I endured, but thou must
depart from my home?  After thee I care not for food nor joy in
sleep, and naught but tears and mourning are left me.  O my son,
from what land shall I call thee?  And what town hath given thee
refuge?" Then her sobs burst out, and she began repeating these
couplets,

"Well learnt we, since you left, our grief and sorrow to
     sustain, * While bows of severance shot their shafts in
     many a railing rain:
They left me, after girthing on their selles of corduwayne *
     To fight the very pangs of death while spanned they sandy
     plain:
Mysterious through the nightly gloom there came the moan of
     dove; * A ring dove, and replied I, 'Cease thy plaint, how
     durst complain?'
If, by my life, her heart, like mine, were full of pain and 
    pine * She had not decks her neck with ring nor sole with
     ruddy stain.[FN#75]
Fled is mine own familiar friend, bequeathing me a store *
     Of parting pang and absence ache to suffer evermore."

Then she abstained from food and drink and gave herself up to
excessive tear shedding and lamentation.  Her grief became public
property far and wide and all the people of the town and country
side wept with her and cried, "Where is thine eye, O Zau al-
Makan?" And they bewailed the rigours of Time, saying, "Would
Heaven we knew what hath befallen Kanmakan that he fled his
native town, and chased himself from the place where his father
used to fill all in hungry case and do justice and grace?" And
his mother redoubled her weeping and wailing till the news of
Kanmakan's departure came to King Sasan.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that came to
King Sasan the tidings of the departure of Kanmakan, through the
Chief Emirs who said to him, "Verily he is the son of our Sovran
and the seed of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and it hath reached us
that he hath exiled himself from the land." When King Sasan heard
these words, he was wroth with them and ordered one of them to be
hanged by way of silencing him, whereat the fear of him fell upon
the hearts of all the other Grandees and they dared not speak one
word.  Then he called to mind all the kindness that Zau al-Makan
had done him, and how he had charged him with the care of his
son; wherefore he grieved for Kanmakan and said, "Needs must I
have search made for him in all countries." So he summoned
Tarkash and bade him choose an hundred horse and wend with them
in quest of the Prince.  Accordingly he went out and was absent
ten days, after which he returned and said, "I can learn no
tidings of him and have hit on no trace of him, nor can any tell
me aught of him." Upon this King Sasan repented him of that which
he had done by the Prince; whilst his mother abode in unrest
continual nor would patience come at her call: and thus passed
over her twenty days in heaviness all.  This is how it fared with
these; but as regards Kanmakan, when he left Baghdad, he went
forth perplexed about his case and knowing not whither he should
go: so he fared on alone through the desert for three days and
saw neither footman nor horseman; withal, his sleep fled and his
wakefulness redoubled, for he pined after his people and his
homestead.  He ate of the herbs of the earth and drank of its
flowing waters and siesta'd under its trees at hours of noontide
heats, till he turned from that road to another way and,
following it other three days, came on the fourth to a land of
green leas, dyed with the hues of plants and trees and with
sloping valley sides made to please, abounding with the fruits of
the earth.  It had drunken of the cups of the cloud, to the sound
of thunders rolling loud and the song of the turtle-dove gently
sough'd, till its hill slopes were brightly verdant and its
fields were sweetly fragrant.  Then Kanmakan recalled his
father's city Baghdad, and for excess of emotion he broke out
into verse,

"I roam, and roaming hope I to return; *
     Yet of returning see not how or when:
I went for love of one I could not win, *
     Nor way of 'scaping ills that pressed could ken."

When he ended his recital he wept, but presently he wiped away
his tears and ate of the fruits of the earth enough for his
present need.  Then he made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed the
ordained prayers which he had neglected all this time; and he sat
resting in that place through the livelong day.  When night came
he slept and ceased not sleeping till midnight, when he awoke and
heard a human voice declaiming these couplets,

"What's life to me, unless I see the pearly sheen *
     Of teeth I love, and sight that glorious mien?
Pray for her Bishops who in convents reign, *
     Vying to bow before that heavenly queen.
And Death is lighter than the loved one's wrath, *
     Whose phantom haunts me seen in every scene:
O joy of cup companions, when they meet, *
     And loved and lover o'er each other lean!
E'en more in time of spring, the lord of flowers, *
     When fragrant is the world with bloom and green:
Drainer of vine-juice!  up wi' thee, for now *
     Earth is a Heaven where sweet waters flow.[FN#76]"

When Kanmakan heard these distichs his sorrows surged up; his
tears ran down his cheeks like freshets and flames of fire darted
into his heart.  So he rose to see who it was that spake these
words, but saw none for the thickness of the gloom; whereupon
passion increased on him and he was frightened and restlessness
possessed him.  He descended from his place to the sole of the
valley and walked along the banks of the stream, till he heard
the same voice sighing heavy sighs and reciting these couplets,

"Tho' 'tis thy wont to hide thy love perforce, *
     Yet weep on day of parting and divorce!
Twixt me and my dear love were plighted vows; *
     Pledge of reunion, fonder intercourse:
With joy inspires my heart and deals it rest *
     Zephyr, whose coolness doth desire enforce.
O Sa'ada,[FN#77] thinks of me that anklet wearer? *
     Or parting broke she troth without remorse?
And say!  shall nights foregather us, and we *
     Of suffered hardships tell in soft discourse?
Quoth she, 'Thou'rt daft for us and fey'; quoth I, *
     ' 'Sain thee!  how many a friend hast turned to corse!'
If taste mine eyes sweet sleep while she's away, *
     Allah with loss of her these eyne accurse.
O wounds in vitals mine!  for cure they lack *
     Union and dewy lips' sweet theriack."[FN#78]

When Kanmakan heard this verse again spoken by the same voice yet
saw no one, he knew that the speaker was a lover like unto
himself, debarred from union with her who loved him; and he said
to himself, "'Twere fitting that this man should lay his head to
my head and become my comrade in this my strangerhood."[FN#79] 
Then he hailed the speaker and cried out to him, saying, "O thou
who farest in sombrest night, draw near to me and tell me thy
tale haply thou shalt find me one who will succour thee in thy
sufferings." And when the owner of the voice heard these words,
he cried out, "O thou that respondest to my complaint and
wouldest hear my history, who art thou amongst the knights?  Art
thou human or Jinni?  Answer me speedily ere thy death draw near
for I have wandered in this desert some twenty days and have seen
no one nor heard any voice but thy voice." At these words
Kanmakan said to himself, "This one's case is like my case, for
I, even I, have wandered twenty days, nor during my wayfare have
I seen man or heard voice:" and he added, "I will make him no
answer till day arise." So he was silent, and the voice again
called out to him, saying, "O thou that callest, if thou be of
the Jinn fare in peace and, if thou be man, stay awhile till the
day break stark and the night flee with the dark." The speaker
abode in his place and Kanmakan did likewise and the twain in
reciting verses never failed, and wept tears that railed till the
light of day began loom and the night departed with its gloom. 
Then Kanmakan looked at the other and found him to be of the
Badawi Arabs, a youth in the flower of his age; clad in worn
clothes and bearing in baldrick a rusty sword which he kept
sheathed, and the signs of love longing were apparent on him.  He
went up to him and accosted him and saluted him, and the Badawi
returned the salute and greeted him with courteous wishes for his
long life, but somewhat despised him, seeing his tender years and
his condition, which was that of a pauper.  So he said to him, "O
youth, of what tribe art thou and to whom art thou kin among the
Arabs; and what is thy history that thou goest by night, after
the fashion of knights?  Indeed thou spakest to me in the dark
words such as are spoken of none but doughty cavaliers and lion-
like warriors; and now I hold thy life in hand.  But I have
compassion on thee by reason of thy green years; so I will make
thee my companion and thou shalt go with me, to do me service."
When Kanmakan heard him speak these unseemly words, after showing
him such skill in verse, he knew that he despised him and would
presume with him; therefore he answered him with soft and well-
chosen speech, saying, "O Chief of the Arabs, leave my tenderness
of age and tell me why thou wanderest by night in the desert
reciting verses.  Thou talkest, I see, of my serving thee; who
then art thou and what moved thee to talk this wise?" Answered
he, "Hark ye, boy!  I am Sabbah, son of Rammah bin Humam.[FN#80] 
My people are of the Arabs of Syria and I have a cousin, Najmah
highs, who to all that look on her brings delight.  And when my
father died I was brought up in the house of his brother, the
father of Najmah; but as soon I grew up and my uncle's daughter
became a woman, they secluded her from me and me from her, seeing
that I was poor and without money in pouch.  Then the Chiefs of
the Arabs and the heads of the tribes rebuked her sire, and he
was abashed before them and consented to give me my cousin, but
upon condition that I should bring him as her dower fifty head of
horses and fifty dromedaries which travel ten days[FN#81] without
a halt and fifty camels laden with wheat and a like number laden
with barley, together with ten black slaves and ten handmaids. 
Thus the weight he set upon me was beyond my power to bear; for
he exacted more than the marriage settlement as by law
established.  So here am I, travelling from Syria to Irak, and I
have passed twenty days with out seeing other than thyself; yet I
mean to go to Baghdad that I may ascertain what merchant men of
wealth and importance start thence.  Then will I fare forth in
their track and loot their goods, and I will slay their escort
and drive off their camels with their loads.  But what manner of
man art thou?" Replied Kanmakan, "Thy case is like unto my case,
save that my evil is more grievous than thine ill; for my cousin
is a King's daughter and the dowry of which thou hast spoken
would not content her people, nor would they be satisfied with
the like of that from me." Quoth Sabbah, "Surely thou art a fool
or thy wits for excess of passion are gathering wool!  How can
thy cousin be a King's daughter?  Thou hast no sign of royal rank
on thee, for thou art but a mendicant." Re joined Kanmakan, "O
Chief of the Arabs, let not this my case seem strange to thee;
for what happened, happened;[FN#82] and if thou desire proof of
me, I am Kanmakan, son of King Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman Lord of Baghdad and the realm Khorasan; and Fortune
banned me with her tyrant ban, for my father died and my
Sultanate was taken by King Sasan.  So I fled forth from Baghdad
secretly, lest I be seen of any man, and have wandered twenty
days without any but thyself to scan.  So now I have discovered
to thee my case, and my story is as thy story and my need as thy
need." When Sabbab heard this, he cried out, "O my joy, I have
attained my desire!  I will have no loot this day but thy self;
for since thou art of the seed of Kings and hast come out in
beggar's garb, there is no help but thy people will seek thee;
and, if they find thee in any one's power, they will ransom thee
with monies galore.  So show me thy back, O my lad, and walk
before me." Answered Kanmakan, "O brother of the Arabs, act not
on this wise, for my people will not buy me with silver nor with
gold, not even with a copper dirham; and I am a poor man, having
with me neither much nor little, so cease then to be upon this
track and take me to thy comrade.  Fare we forth for the land of
Irak and wander over the world, so haply we may win dower and
marriage portion, and we may seek and enjoy our cousins' kisses
and embraces when we come back." Hearing this, Sabbah waxed
angry; his arrogance and fury redoubled and he said, "Woe to
thee!  Dost thou bandy words with me, O vilest of dogs that be? 
Turn thee thy back, or I will come down on thee with clack!"
Kanmakan smiled and answered, "Why should I turn my back for
thee?  Is there no justice in thee?  Dost thou not fear to bring
blame upon the Arab men by driving a man like myself captive, in
shame and disdain, before thou hast proved him on the plain, to
know if he be a warrior or of cowardly strain?" Upon this Sabbah
laughed and replied, "By Allah, a wonder!  Thou art a boy in
years told, but in talk thou art old.  These words should come
from none but a champion doughty and bold: what wantest thou of
justice?" Quoth Kanmakan, "If thou wilt have me thy captive, to
wend with thee and serve thee, throw down thine arms and put off
thine outer gear and come on and wrestle with me; and whichever
of us throw his opponent shall have his will of him and make him
his boy." Then Sabbah laughed and said, "I think this waste of
breath de noteth the nearness of thy death." Then he arose and
threw down his weapon and, tucking up his skirt, drew near unto
Kanmakan who also drew near and they gripped each other.  But the
Badawi found that the other had the better of him and weighed him
down as the quintal downweighs the diner; and he looked at his
legs firmly planted on the ground, and saw that they were as two
minarets[FN#83] strongly based, or two tent-poles in earth
encased, or two mountains which may not he displaced.  So he
acknowledged himself to be a failure and repented of having come
to wrestle with him, saying in himself, "Would I had slain him
with my weapon!" Then Kanmakan took hold of him and mastering
him, shook him till the Badawi thought his bowels would burst in
his belly, and he broke out, "Hold thy hand, O boy!" He heeded
not his words, but shook him again and, lifting him from the
ground, made with him towards the stream, that he might throw him
therein: where upon the Badawi roared out, saying, "O thou
valiant man, what wilt thou do with me?"[FN#84] Quoth he, "I mean
to throw thee into this stream: it will bear thee to the Tigris. 
The Tigris will bring thee to the river Isa and the Isa will
carry thee to the Euphrates, and the Euphrates will land thee in
shine own country; so thy tribe shall see thee and know thy manly
cheer and how thy passion be sincere." Then Sabbah cried aloud
and said, "O Champion of the desert lair, do not with me what
deed the wicked dare but let me go, by the life of thy cousin,
the jewel of the fair!" Hearing this, Kanmakan set him on the
ground, but when he found him self at liberty, he ran to his
sword and targe and taking them up stood plotting in himself
treachery and sudden assault on his adversary.[FN#85]  The Prince
kenned his intent in his eye and said to him, "I con what is in
thy heart, now thou hast hold of thy sword and thy targe.  Thou
hast neither length of hand nor trick of wrestling, but thou
thinkest that, wert thou on thy mare and couldst wheel about the
plain, and ply me with thy skene, I had long ago been slain.  But
I will give thee thy requite, so there may be left in thy heart
no despite; now give me the targe and fall on me with thy
whinger; either thou shalt kill me or I shall kill thee." "Here
it is," answered Sabbah and, throwing him the targe, bared his
brand and rushed at him sword in hand; Kanmakan hent the buckler
in his right and began to fend himself with it, whilst Sabbah
struck at him, saying at each stroke, "This is the finishing
blow!" But it fell harmless enow, for Kanmakan took all on his
buckler and it was waste work, though he did not reply lacking
the wherewithal to strike and Sabbah ceased not to smite at him
with his sabre, till his arm was weary.  When his opponent saw
this, he rushed upon him and, hugging him in his arms, shook him
and threw him to the ground.  Then he turned him over on his face
and pinioned his elbows behind him with the baldrick of his
sword, and began to drag him by the feet and to make for the
river.  Thereupon cried Sabbah, "What wilt thou do with me, O
youth, and cavalier of the age and brave of the plain where
battles rage?" Answered he, "Did I not tell thee that it was my
intent to send thee by the river to thy kin and to thy tribe,
that thy heart be not troubled for them nor their hearts be
troubled for thee, and lest thou miss thy cousin's bride-feast!"
At this Sabbah shrieked aloud and wept and screaming said, "Do
not thus, O champion of the time's braves!  Let me go and make me
one of thy slaves!" And he wept and wailed and began reciting
these verses,

"I'm estranged fro' my folk and estrangement's long: *
     Shall I die amid strangers?  Ah, would that I kenned!
I die, nor my kinsman shall know where I'm slain, *
     Die in exile nor see the dear face of my friend!"

Thereupon Kanmakan had compassion on him and said, "Make with me
a covenant true and swear me an oath to be a comrade as due and
to bear me company wheresoever I may go." "'Tis well," replied
Sabbah and swore accordingly.  Then Kanmakan loosed him and he
rose and would have kissed the Prince's hand; but he forbade him
that.  Then the Badawi opened his scrip and, taking out three
barley scones, laid them before Kanmakan and they both sat down
on the bank of the stream to eat.[FN#86]  When they had done
eating together, they made the lesser ablution and prayed; after
which they sat talking of what had befallen each of them from his
people and from the shifts of Time.  Presently said Kanmakan,
"Whither dost thou now intend?" Replied Sabbah, "I purpose to
repair to Baghdad, thy native town, and abide there, until Allah
vouchsafe me the marriage portion." Rejoined the other, "Up then
and to the road!  I tarry here." So the Badawi farewelled him and
took the way for Baghdad, whilst Kanmakan remained behind, saying
to himself, "O my soul, with what face shall I return pauper-
poor?  Now by Allah, I will not go back empty handed and, if the
Almighty please, I will assuredly work my deliverance." Then he
went to the stream and made the Wuzu-washing and when prostrating
he laid his brow in the dust and prayed to the Lord, saying, "O
Allah!  Thou who sendest down the dew, and feedest the worm that
homes in the stone, I beseech Thee vouchsafe me my livelihood of
Thine Omnipotence and the Grace of Thy benevolence!" Then he
pronounced the salutation which closes prayer; yet every road
appeared closed to him.  And while he sat turning right and left,
behold, he espied a horseman making towards him with bent back
and reins slack.  He sat up right and after a time reached the
Prince; and the stranger was at the last gasp and made sure of
death, for he was grievously wounded when he came up; the tears
streamed down his cheeks like water from the mouths of skins, and
he said to Kanmakan, "O Chief of the Arabs, take me to thy
friendship as long as I live, for thou wilt not find my like; and
give me a little water though the drinking of water be harmful to
one wounded, especially whilst the blood is flowing and the life
with it.  And if I live, I will give thee what shall heal thy
penury and thy poverty: and if I die, mayst thou be blessed for
thy good intent." Now under that horseman was a stallion, so
noble a Rabite[FN#87] the tongue fails to describe him; and as
Kanmakan looked at his legs like marble shafts, he was seized
with a longing and said to himself, "Verily the like of this
stallion[FN#88] is not to be found in our time." Then he helped
the rider to alight and entreated him in friendly guise and gave
him a little water to swallow; after which he waited till he had
taken rest and addressed him, saying, "Who hath dealt thus with
thee?" Quoth the rider, "I will tell thee the truth of the case. 
I am a horse thief and I have busied myself with lifting and
snatching horses all my life, night and day, and my name is
Ghassan, the plague of every stable and stallion.  I heard tell
of this horse, that he was in the land of Roum, with King
Afridun, where they had named him Al-Katul and surnamed him Al
Majnun.[FN#89] So I journeyed to Constantinople for his sake and
watched my opportunity and whilst I was thus waiting, there came
out an old woman, one highly honoured among the Greeks, and whose
word with them is law, by name Zat al-Dawahi, a past mistress in
all manner of trickery.  She had with her this steed and ten
slaves, no more, to attend on her and the horse; and she was
bound for Baghdad and Khorasan, there to seek King Sasan and to
sue for peace and pardon from ban.  So I went out in their track,
longing to get at the horse,[FN#90] and ceased not to follow
them, but was unable to come by the stallion, because of the
strict guard kept by the slaves, till they reached this country
and I feared lest they enter the city of Baghdad.  As I was
casting about to steal the stallion lo! a great cloud of dust
arose on them and walled the horizon.  Presently it opened and
disclosed fifty horsemen, gathered together to waylay merchants
on the highway, and their captain, by name Kahrdash, was a lion
in daring and dash; a furious lion who layeth knights flat as
carpets in battle-crash."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the wounded
rider spake thus to Kanmakan, "Then came out the same Kahrdash,
and fell on the old woman and her men and bore down upon them
bashing them, nor was it long before they bound her and the ten
slaves and bore off their captives and the horse, rejoicing. 
When I saw this, I said to myself, 'My pains were in vain nor did
I attain my gain.' However, I waited to see how the affair would
fare, and when the old woman found herself in bonds, she wept and
said to the captain, Kahrdash, 'O thou doughty Champion and
furious Knight, what wilt thou do with an old woman and slaves,
now that thou hast thy will of the horse?' And she beguiled him
with soft words and she sware that she would send him horses and
cattle, till he released her and her slaves.  Then he went his
way, he and his comrades, and I followed them till they reached
this country; and I watched them, till at last I found an
opportunity of stealing the horse, whereupon I mounted him and,
drawing a whip from my wallet, struck him with it.  When the
robbers heard this, they came out on me and surrounded me on all
sides and shot arrows and cast spears at me, whilst I stuck fast
on his back and he fended me with hoofs and forehand,[FN#91] till
at last he bolted out with me from amongst them like unerring
shaft or shooting star.  But in the stress and stowre I got
sundry grievous wounds and sore; and, since that time, I have
passed on his back three days without tasting food or sleeping
aught, so that my strength is down brought and the world is
become to me as naught.  But thou hast dealt kindly with me and
hast shown ruth on me; and I see thee naked stark and sorrow hath
set on thee its mark, yet are signs of wealth and gentle breeding
manifest on thee.  So tell me, what and whence art thou and
whither art thou bound?" Answered the Prince, "My name is
Kanmakan, son of Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman. 
When my father died and an orphan lot was my fate, a base man
seized the throne and became King over small and great." Then he
told him all his past from first to last; and the horse thief
said to him for he pitied him, "By Allah, thou art one of high
degree and exceeding nobility, and thou shalt surely attain
estate sublime and become the first cavalier of thy time.  If
thou can lift me on horseback and mount thee behind me and bring
me to my own land, thou shalt have honour in this world and a
reward on the day of band calling to band,[FN#92] for I have no
strength left to steady myself; and if this be my last day, the
steed is thine alway, for thou art worthier of him than any
other." Quoth Kanmakan, By Allah, if I could carry thee on my
shoulders or share my days with thee, I would do this deed
without the steed!  For I am of a breed that loveth to do good
and to succour those in need; and one kindly action in Almighty
Allah's honour averteth seventy calamities from its doer.  So
make ready to set out and put thy trust in the Subtle, the All-
Wise." And he would have lifted him on to the horse and fared
forward trusting in Allah Aider of those who seek aid, but the
horse thief said, "Wait for me awhile.  Then he closed his eyes
and opening his hands, said I testify that there is no god but
the God, and I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of God!" And
he added, "O glorious One, pardon me my mortal sin, for none can
pardon mortal sins save the Immortal!" And he made ready for
death and recited these couplets,

"I have wronged mankind, and have ranged like wind *
     O'er the world, and in wine-cups my life has past:
I've swum torrent course to bear off the horse; *
     And my guiles high places on plain have cast.
Much I've tried to win and o'er much my sin, *
     And Katul of my winnings  is most and last:
I had hoped of this steed to gain wish and need, *
     But vain was the end of this journey vast.
I have stolen through life, and my death in strife *
     Was doomed by the Lord who doth all forecast
And I've toiled these toils to their fatal end *
     For an orphan, a pauper sans kith or friend!"

And when he had finished his verses he closed his eyes and opened
his mouth; then with a single death-rattling he left this world. 
Thereupon Kanmakan rose and dug a grave and laid him in the dust;
after which he went up to the steed and kissed him and wiped his
face and joyed with exceeding joy, saying, "None hath the fellow
of this stallion; no, not even King Sasan." Such was the case
with Kanmakan; but as regards King Sasan, presently news came to
him that the Wazir Dandan had thrown off his allegiance, and with
him half the army who swore that they would have no King but
Kanmakan: and the Minister had bound the troops by a solemn
covenant and had gone with them to the Islands of India and to
Berber-land and to Black-land;[FN#93] where he had levied armies
from far and near, like unto the swollen sea for fear and none
could tell the host's van from its rear.  And the Minister was
resolved to make for Baghdad and take the kingdom in ward and
slay every soul who dare retard, having sworn not to return the
sword of war to its sheath, till he had made Kanmakan King.  When
this news came to Sasan, he was drowned in the sea of appal,
knowing that the whole state had turned against him, great and
small; and his trouble redoubled and his care became despair.  So
he opened his treasuries and distributed his monies among his
officers; and he prayed for Kanmakan's return, that he might draw
his heart to him with fair usage and bounty; and make him
commander of those troops which ceased not being faithful to him,
so might he quench the sparks ere they became a flame.  Now when
the news of this reached Kanmakan by the merchants, he returned
in haste to Baghdad on the back of the aforesaid stallion, and as
King Sasan sat perplexed upon his throne he heard of the coming
of Kanmakan; whereupon he despatched all the troops and head-men
of the city to meet him.  So all who were in Baghdad fared forth
and met the Prince and escorted him to the palace and kissed the
thresholds, whilst the damsels and the eunuchs went in to his
mother and gave her the fair tidings of his return.  She came to
him and kissed him between the eyes, but he said to her, "O
mother mine, let me go to my uncle King Sasan who hath
overwhelmed me with weal and boon." And while he so did, all the
palace-people and head-men marvelled at the beauty of the
stallion and said, "No King is like unto this man." So Kanmakan
went in to King Sasan and saluted him as he rose to receive him;
and, kissing his hands and feet, offered him the horse as a
present.  The King greeted him, saying, "Well come and welcome to
my son Kanmakan!  By Allah, the world hath been straitened on me
by reason of thine absence, but praised be Allah for thy safety!"
And Kanmakan called down blessings on him.  Then the King looked
at the stallion, Al-Katul highs, and knew him for the very horse
he had seen in such and such a year whilst beleaguering the
Cross-worshippers of Constantinople with Kanmakan's sire, Zau al-
Makan, that time they slew his uncle Sharrkan.  So he said to the
Prince, "If thy father could have come by this courser, he would
have bought it with a thousand blood horses: but now let the
honour return to the honourable.  We accept the steed and we give
him back to thee as a gift, for to him thou hast more right than
any wight, being knightliest of knights." Then King Sasan bade
bring forth for him dresses of honour and led horses and
appointed to him the chief lodging in the palace, and showed him
the utmost affection and honour, because he feared the issue of
the Wazir Dandan's doings.  At this Kanmakan rejoiced and shame
and humiliation ceased from him.  Then he went to his house and,
going to his mother, asked, "O my mother, how is it with the
daughter of my uncle?" Answered she, "By Allah, O my son, my
concern for thine absence hath distracted me from any other, even
from thy beloved; especially as she was the cause of thy
strangerhood and thy separation from me." Then he complained to
her of his case, saying, "O my mother, go to her and speak with
her; haply she will vouchsafe me her sight to see and dispel from
me this despondency." Replied his mother, "Idle desires abase
men's necks; so put away from thee this thought that can only
vex; for I will not wend to her nor go in to her with such
message.' Now when he heard his mother's words he told her what
said the horse-thief concerning Zat al-Dawahi, how the old woman
was then in their land purposing to make Baghdad, and added, "It
was she who slew my uncle and my grandfather, and needs must I
avenge them with man-bote, that our reproach be wiped out." Then
he left her and repaired to an old woman, a wicked, whorish,
pernicious beldam by name Sa'adanah and complained to her of his
case and of what he suffered for love of his cousin Kuzia Fakan
and begged her to go to her and win her favour for him.  "I hear
and I obey," answered the old hag and leaving him betook herself
to Kuzia Fakan's palace, that she might intercede with her in his
behalf.  Then she returned to him and said, "Of a truth Kuzia
Fakan saluteth thee and promiseth to visit thee this night about
midnight."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
old woman came to Kanmakan and said, "Of a truth the daughter of
thine uncle saluteth thee and she will visit thee this night
about midnight;" he rejoiced and sat down to await the fulfilment
of his cousin's promise.  But before the hour of night she came
to him, wrapped in a veil of black silk, and she went in to him
and aroused him from sleep, saying, "How canst thou pretend to
love me, when thou art sleeping heart-free and in complete
content?" So he awoke and said, "By Allah, O desire of my heart,
I slept not but in the hope that thine image might visit my
dreams!" Then she chid him with soft words and began versifying
in these couplets,

"Hadst thou been leaf in love's loyalty, *
     Ne'er haddest suffered sleep to seal those eyne:
O thou who claimest lover-loyalty, *
     Treading the lover's path of pain and pine!
By Allah, O my cousin, never yet *
     Did eyes of lover sleep such sleep indign."

Now when he heard his cousin's words, he was abashed before her
and rose and excused himself.  Then they embraced and complained
to each other of the anguish of separation; and they ceased not
thus till dawn broke and day dispersed itself over the horizon;
when she rose preparing to depart.  Upon this Kanmakan wept and
sighed and began improvising these couplets,

"O thou who deignest come at sorest sync, *
     Whose lips those teeth like necklaced pearls enshrine'
I kissed him[FN#94] thousand times and clips his waist, *
     And spent the night with cheek to cheek close li'en
Till to depart us twain came dawning day, *
     Like sword edge drawn from sheath in radiant line."

And when he ended his poetry, Kuzia Fakan took leave of him and
returned to her palace.  Now certain of her damsels became aware
of her secret, and one of these slave girls disclosed it to King
Sasan, who went into Kuzia Fakan and, drawing his sabre upon her,
would have slain her: but her mother Nuzhat al-Zaman entered and
said to him, "By Allah, do her no harm, for if thou hurt her, the
report will be noised among the folk and thou shalt become a
reproach amongst the Kings of the age!  Know thou that Kanmakan
is no son of adultery, but a man of honour and nobility, who
would not do aught that could shame him, and she was reared with
him.  So be not hasty; for verily the report is spread abroad,
among all the palace-people and all the folk of Baghdad, how the
Wazir Dandan hath levied armies from all countries and is on his
way hither to make Kanmakan King." Quoth Sasan, "By Allah, needs
must I cast him into such calamity that neither earth shall
support him nor sky shall shadow him!  I did but speak him fair
and show him favour because of my lieges and my lords, lest they
incline to him; but right soon shalt thou see what shall betide."
Then he left her and went out to order the affairs of the realm. 
Such, then, was the case with King Sasan; but as regards
Kanmakan, on the next day he came in to his mother and said, "O
my mother!  I am resolved to ride forth a raiding and a looting:
and I will cut the road of caravans and lift horses and flocks,
negroes and white slaves and, as soon as I have collected great
store and my case is bettered galore, I will demand my cousin
Kuzia Fakan in marriage of my uncle Sasan." Replied she, "O my
son, of a truth the goods of men are not ready to hand like a
scape-camel;[FN#95] for on this side of them are sword-strokes
and lance-lungings and men that eat the wild beast and lay
countries waste and chase lynxes and hunt lions." Quoth he,
Heaven forefend that I turn back from my resolve, till I have won
to my will!  Then he despatched the old woman to Kuzia Fakan, to
tell her that he was about to set out in quest of a marriage
settle ment befitting her, saying to the beldam, "Thou needs must
pray her to send me an answer." "I hear and I obey," replied the
old woman and going forth, presently returned with Kuzia Fakan's
reply, which was, "She will come to thee at midnight." So he
abode awake till one half of the night was passed, when
restlessness get hold on him, and before he was aware she came in
to him, saying, "My life be thy ransom from wakefulness!" and he
sprang up to receive her, exclaiming, "O desire of my heart, my
life be thy redemption from all ills and evils!" Then he
acquainted her, with his intent, and she wept: but he said, "Weep
not, O daughter of my uncle; for I beseech Him who decreed our
separation to vouchsafe us reunion and fair understanding." Then
Kanmakan, having fixed a day for departure, went in to his mother
and took leave of her, after which came he down from his palace
and threw the baldrick of his sword over his shoulder and donned
turband and face-veil; and mounting his horse, Al-Katul, and
looking like the moon at its full, he threaded the streets of
Baghdad, till he reached the city gate.  And behold, here he
found Sabbah bin Rammah coming out of town; and his comrade
seeing him, ran to his stirrup and saluted him.  He returned his
salutation, and Sabbah asked him, "O my brother, how camest thou
by this good steed and this sword and clothes, whilst I up to
present time have gotten nothing but my sword and target?"
Answered Kanmakan, "The hunter returneth not but with quarry
after the measure of his intention.  A little after thy
departure, fortune came to me: so now say, wilt thou go with me
and work thine intent in my company and journey with me in this
desert?" Replied Sabbah, "By the Lord of the Ka'abah, from this
time forth I will call thee naught but 'my lord'!" Then he ran on
before the horse, with his sword hanging from his neck and his
budget between his shoulder blades, and Kanmakan rode a little
behind him; and they plunged into the desert, for a space of four
days, eating of the gazelles and drinking water of the springs. 
On the fifth day they drew near a high hill, at whose foot was a
spring-encampment[FN#96] and a deep running stream; and the
knolls and hollows were filled with camels and cattle and sheep
and horses, and little children played about the pens and folds. 
When Kanmakan saw this, he rejoiced at the sight and his breast
was filled with delight; so he addressed himself to fight, that
he might take the camels and the cattle, and said to Sabbah,
"Come, fall with us upon this loot, whose owners have left it
unguarded here, and do we battle for it with near and far, so
haply may fall to our lot of goods some share." Replied Sabbah,
"O my lord, verily they to whom these herds belong be many in
number; and among them are doughty horsemen and fighting footmen;
and if we venture lives in this derring do we shall fall into
danger great and neither of us will return safe from this bate;
but we shall both be cut off by fate and leave our cousins
desolate." Then Kanmakan laughed and knew that he was a coward;
so he left him and rode down the rise, intent on rapine, with
loud cries and chanting these couplets,

"Oh a valiant race are the sons of Nu'uman, *
     Braves whose blades shred heads of the foeman-clan![FN#97]
A tribe who, when tried in the tussle of war, *
     Taketh prowess stand in the battle-van:
In their tents safe close gaberlunzie's eyne, *
     Nor his poverty's ugly features scan:
And I for their aidance sue of Him *
     Who is King of Kings and made soul of man."

Then he rushed upon the she-camels like a he-camel in rut and
drove all before him, sheep and cattle, horses and dromedaries. 
Therewith the slaves ran at him with their blades so bright and
their lances so long; and at their head rode a Turkish horseman
who was indeed a stout champion, doughty in fray and in battle
chance and skilled to wield the nut-brown lance and the blade
with bright glance.  He drove at Kanmakan, saying, "Woe to thee! 
Knewest thou to whom these herds belong thou hadst not done this
deed.  Know that they are the goods of the band Grecian, the
champions of the ocean and the troop Circassian; and this troop
containeth none but valiant wights numbering an hundred knights,
who have cast off the allegiance of every Sultan.  But there hath
been stolen from them a noble stallion, and they have vowed not
to return hence without him." Now when Kanmakan heard these
words, he cried out, saying, "O villain, this I bestride is the
steed whereof ye speak and after which ye seek, and ye would do
battle with me for his sake' So come out against me, all of you
at once, and do you dourest for the nonce!" Then he shouted
between the ears of Al-Katul who ran at them like a Ghul;
whereupon Kanmakan let drive at the Turk[FN#98] and ran him
through the body and threw him from his horse and let out his
life; after which he turned upon a second and a third and a
fourth, and also of life bereft them.  When the slaves saw this,
they were afraid of him, and he cried out and said to them, "Ho,
sons of whores, drive out the cattle and the stud or I will dye
my spear in your blood." So they untethered the beasts and began
to drive them out; and Sabbah came down to Kanmakan with loud
voicing and hugely rejoicing; when lo! there arose a cloud of
dust and grew till it walled the view, and there appeared under
of it riders an hundred, like lions an-hungered.  Upon this
Sabbah took flight, and fled to the hill's topmost height,
leaving the assailable site, and enjoyed sight of the fight,
saying, "I am no warrior; but in sport and jest I
delight."[FN#99] Then the hundred cavaliers made towards Kanmakan
and surrounded him on all sides, and one of them accosted him,
saying, "Whither goest thou with this loot?" Quoth he, "I have
made it my prize and am carrying it away; and I forbid you from
it, or come on to the combat, for know ye that he who is before
you is a terrible lion and an honourable champion, and a sword
that cutteth wherever it turneth!" When the horseman heard these
words, he looked at Kanmakan and saw that he was a knight like a
mane-clad lion in might, whilst his face was as the full moon
rising on its fourteenth night, and velour shone from between his
eyes.  Now that horseman was the captain of the hundred horse,
and his name was Kahrdash; and when he saw in Kanmakan the
perfection of cavalarice with surpassing gifts of comeliness, his
beauty reminded him of a beautiful mistress of his whose name was
Fatin.[FN#100]  Now she was one of the fairest of women in face,
for Allah had given her charms and grace and noble qualities of
all kinds, such as tongue faileth to explain and which ravish the
hearts of men.  Moreover, the cavaliers of the tribe feared her
prowess and all the champions of that land stood in awe of her
high spirit; and she had sworn that she would not marry nor let
any possess her, except he should conquer her in combat (Kahrdash
being one of her suitors); and she said to her father, "None
shall approach me, save he be able to deal me over throw in the
field and stead of war thrust and blow.  Now when this news
reached Kahrdash, he scorned to fight with a girl, fearing
reproach; and one of his intimates said to him, "Thou art
complete in all conditions of beauty and goodliness; so if thou
contend with her, even though she be stronger than thou, thou
must needs overcome her; for when she seeth thy beauty and grace,
she will be discomfited before thee and yield thee the victory;
for verily women have a need of men e'en as thou heedest full
plain." Nevertheless Kahrdash refused and would not contend with
her, and he ceased not to abstain from her thus, till he met from
Kanmakan that which hath been set down.  Now he took the Prince
for his beloved Fatin and was afraid; albeit indeed she loved him
for what she had heard of his beauty and velour; so he went up to
him and said, "Woe to thee,[FN#101]  O Fatin!  Thou comest here
to show me thy prowess; but now alight from thy steed, that I may
talk with thee, for I have lifted these cattle and have foiled my
friends and waylaid many a brave and man of knightly race, all
for the sake of thy beauty of form and face, which are without
peer.  So marry me now, that Kings' daughters may serve thee and
thou shalt become Queen of these countries." When Kanmakan heard
these words, the fires of wrath flamed up in him and he cried
out, "Woe to thee, O Persian dog!  Leave Fatin and thy trust and
mistrust, and come to cut and thrust, for eftsoon thou shalt lie
in the dust;" and so saying, he began to wheel about him and
assail him and feel the way to prevail.  But when Kahrdash
observed him closely he knew him for a doughty knight and a
stalwart in fight; and the error of his thought became manifest
to him, whenas he saw the green down on his cheeks dispread like
myrtles springing from the heart of a rose bright-red.  And he
feared his onslaught and quoth he to those with him, "Woe to you! 
Let one of you charge down upon him and show him the keen sword
and the quivering spear; for know that when many do battle with
one man it is foul shame, even though he be a kemperly wight and
an invincible knight." Upon this, there ran at Kanmakan a
horseman like a lion in fight, mounted on a black horse with
hoofs snow-white and a star on his forehead, the bigness of a
dirham, astounding wit and sight, as he were Abjar, which was
Antar's destrier, even as saith of him the poet,

"The courser chargeth on battling foe, *
     Mixing heaven on high with the earth down low:[FN#102]
As though the Morning had blazed his brow, *
     And he rends her vitals as quid pro quo."

He rushed upon Kanmakan, and they wheeled about awhile, giving
blows and taking blows such as confound the sprite and dim the
sight; but Kanmakan was the first to smite the foe a swashing
blow, that rove through turband and iron skull cap and reached
his head, and he fell from his steed with the fall of a camel
when he rolleth over.  Then a second came out to him and offered
battle, and in like guise a third, a fourth and a fifth, and he
did with them all as he had done with the first.  Thereupon the
rest at once rushed upon him, for indeed they were roused by rage
and wild with wrath; but it was not long before he had pierced
them all with the point of his spear.  When Kahrdash saw these
feats of arms, he feared death; for he knew that the youth was
stoutest of heart and concluded that he was unique among knights
and braves; and he said to Kanmakan, "I waive my claim to thy
blood and I pardon thee the blood of my comrades: so take what
thou wilt of the cattle and wend thy ways, for thy firmness in
fight moveth my ruth and life is better for thee than death."
Replied Kanmakan, "Thou lackest not of the generosity of the
noble!  but leave this talk and run for thy life and reck not of
blame nor think to get back the booty; but take the straight path
for thine own safety." Thereupon Kahrdash waxed exceeding wroth,
and rage moved him to the cause of his death; so he said to
Kanmakan, "Woe to thee, an thou knew who I be, thou wouldst not
wield these words in the open field.  I am the lion to bash known
as Kahrdash, he who spoileth great Kings and waylayeth all
travellings and seizeth the merchants' preciousest things.  And
the steed under thee is that I am seeking; and I call upon thee
to tell me how thou camest by him and hast him in thy keeping."
Replied Kan makan, "Know thou that this steed was being carried
to my uncle King Sasan, under the escort of an ancient dame high
in rank attended by ten slaves, when thou f