ellest upon her and
tookest the horse from her; and I have a debt of blood against
this old woman for the sake of my grandfather King Omar bin al
Nu'uman and my uncle King Sharrkan.' "Woe to thee!" quoth
Kahrdash, "who is thy father, O thou that hast no lawful mother?"
Quoth he, "Know that I am Kanmakan, bin Zau al-Makan, son of Omar
bin al-Nu'uman." But when Kahrdash heard this address he said,
"Thy perfection cannot be denied, nor yet the union in thee of
knightly virtue and seemlihead," and he added, "Fare in peace,
for thy father showed us favour." Rejoined Kanmakan, "By Allah, I
will not deign to honour thee, O wretch I disdain, so far as to
overcome thee in battle plain!" Upon this the Badawi waxed wroth
and they drove at each other, shouting aloud, whilst their horses
pricked their ears and raised their tails.[FN#103]  And they
ceased not clashing together with such a crash that it seemed to
each as if the firmament were split in sunder, and they continued
to strive like two rams which butt, smiting and exchanging with
their spears thrust and cut.  Presently Kahrdash foined at
Kanmakan; but he evaded it and rejoined upon him and so pierced
him through the breast that the spearhead issued from his back. 
Then he collected the horses and the plunder, and he cried out to
the slaves, saying, "Up and be driving as hard as ye may!"
Hearing this, down came Sabbah and, accosting Kanmakan, said to
him, "Right well hast thou dight, O Knight of the age!  Verily I
prayed Allah for thee and the Lord heard my prayer." Then he cut
off Kahrdash's head and Kanmakan laughed and said, "Woe to thee,
O Sabbah!  I thought thee a rider fain of fight." Quoth the
Badawi, "Forget not thy slave in the division of the spoil, so
haply therewith I may marry my cousin Najmah." Answered Kanmakan,
"Thou shalt assuredly share in it, but now keep watch over the
booty and the slaves." Then he set out for his home and he ceased
not journeying night and day till he drew near Baghdad city, and
all the troops heard of Kanmakan, and saw what was his of loot
and cattle and the horse-thief's head on the point of Sabbah's
spear.  Also (for he was a noted highwayman) the merchants knew
Kahrdash's head and rejoiced, saying, "Allah hath rid mankind of
him!"; and they marvelled at his being slain and blessed his
slayer.  Thereupon all the people of Baghdad came to Kanmakan,
seeking to know what adventures had befallen him, and he told
them what had passed, whereupon all men were taken with awe of
him and the Knights and champions feared him.  Then he drove his
spoil under the palace walls; and, planting the spear heel, on
whose point was Kahrdash's head, over against the royal gate,
gave largesse to the people of Baghdad, distributing horses and
camels, so that all loved him and their hearts inclined to him. 
Presently he took Sabbah and lodged him in a spacious dwelling
and gave him a share of the loot; after which he went in to his
mother and told her all that had befallen him in his last
journey.  Meanwhile the news of him reached the King, who rose
from his levee and, shutting himself up with his chief officers,
said to them, "Know ye that I desire to reveal to you my secret
and acquaint you with the hidden facts of my case.  And further
know that Kanmakan will be the cause of our being uprooted from
this kingdom, our birth place; for he hath slain Kahrdash, albeit
he had with him the tribes of the Kurds and the Turks, and our
affair with him will end in our destruction, seeing that the most
part of our troops are his kinsmen and ye weet what the Wazir
Dandan hath done; how he disowneth me, after all I have shown him
of favours; and after being faithful he hath turned traitor. 
Indeed it hath reached me that he hath levied an army in the
provinces and hath planned to make Kanmakan Sultan, for that the
Sultanate was his father's and his grandfather's; and assuredly
he will slay me without mercy." Now when the Lords of the Realm
heard from him these words, they replied, "O King, verily this
man.[FN#104] is unequal to this, and did we not know him to have
been reared by thee, not one of us would approve of him.  And
know thou that we are at thy commandment; if thou desire his
death, we will do him die; and if thou wilt remove him, we will
remove him." Now when King Sasan heard this, he said, "Verily, to
slay him were wise; but needs must ye swear an oath to it." So
all sware to slay Kanmakan without giving him a chance; to the
end that, when the Wazir Dandan should come and hear of his
death, his force might be weakened and he fail of his design. 
When they had made this compact and covenant with trim, the king
honoured them with the highest honours and presently retired to
his own apartments.  But the officers deserted him and the troops
refused their service and would neither mount nor dismount until
they should espy what might befal, for they saw that most of the
army was with the Wazir Dandan.  Presently, the news of these
things came to Kuzia Fakan and caused her much concern; so that
she sent for the old woman who was wont to carry messages between
her and her cousin, and when she came, bade her go to him and
warn him of the plot.  Whereto he replied, "Bear my salutation to
the daughter of my uncle and say to her, 'Verily the earth is of
Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!), and He giveth it as
heritage to whomsoever of His servants He willeth.' How excellent
is the saying of the sayer,

'Allah holds Kingship!  Whoso seeks without Him victory *
     Shall be cast out, with soul condemned to Hell of low
     degree:
Had I or any other man a finger breadth of land, *
     The rule were changed and men a twain of partner gods would
     see.' "

Then the old woman returned to Kuzia Fakan and told her his reply
and acquainted her that he abode in the city.  Meanwhile, King
Sasan awaited his faring forth from Baghdad, that he might send
after him some who would slay him; till it befel one morning that
Kanmakan went out to course and chase, accompanied by Sabbah, who
would not leave him night or day.  He caught ten gazelles and
among them one that had tender black eyes and turned right and
left: so he let her go and Sabbah said to him, "Why didst thou
free this gazelle?" Kanmakan laughed and set the others free
also, saying, "It is only humane to release gazelles that have
young, and this one turned not from side to side, save to look
for her fawns: so I let her go and released the others in her
honour." Quoth Sabbah, "Do thou release me, that I may go to my
people." At this Kanmakan laughed and smote him with the spear
butt on the breast, and he fell to the ground squirming like a
snake.  Whilst they were thus doing, behold, they saw a dust
cloud spireing high and heard the tramp of horses; and presently
there appeared under it a plump of knights and braves.  Now the
cause of their coming was this.  Some of his followers had
acquainted King Sasan with Kanmakan's going out to the chase; so
he sent for an Emir of the Daylamites, called Jami' and twenty of
his horsemen; and gave them money and bade them slay Kanmaken. 
So when they drew near the Prince, they charged down upon him and
he met them in mid-charge and killed them all, to the last man. 
And behold, King Sasan took horse and riding out to meet his
people, found them all slain, whereat he wondered and turned
back; when lo!  the people of the city laid hands on him and
bound him straitly.  As for Kanmakan after that adventure, he
left the place behind him and rode onward with Sabbah the Badawi. 
And the while he went, lo!  he saw a youth sitting at the door of
a house on his road and saluted him.  The youth returned his
greeting and, going into the house, brought out two platters, one
full of soured milk and the other of brewis swimming in clarified
butter; and he set the platter before Kanmakan, saying "Favour us
by eating of our victual." But he refused and quoth the young man
to him, "What aileth thee, O man, that thou wilt not eat?" Quoth
Kanmakan, "I have a vow upon me." The youth asked, "What is the
cause of thy vow?", and Kanmakan answered, "Know that King Sasan
seized upon my kingdom like a tyrant and an enemy, although it
was my father's and my grand father's before me; yet he became
master of it by force after my father's death and took no count
of me, by reason of my tender years.  So I have bound myself by a
vow to eat no man's victual till I have eased my heart of my
foe." Rejoined the youth, "Rejoice, for Allah hath fulfilled thy
vow.  Know that he hath been prisoned in a certain place and
methinks he will soon die." Asked Kanmakan, "In what house is he
confined?" "Under yon high dome," answered the other.  The Prince
looked and saw the folk entering and buffeting Sasan, who was
suffering the agonies of the dying.  So he arose and went up to
the pavilion and noted what was therein; after which he returned
to his place and, sitting down to the proferred victual, ate what
sufficed him and put the rest in his wallet.  Then he took seat
in his own place and ceased not sitting till it was dark night
and the youth, whose guest he was slept; when he rose and
repaired to the pavilion wherein Sasan was confined.  Now about
it were dogs guarding it, and one of them sprang at him; so he
took out of his budget a bit of meat and threw it to him.  He
ceased not casting flesh to the dogs till he came to the pavilion
and, making his way to where King Sasan was, laid his hand upon
his head; whereupon he said in a loud voice, "Who art thou?" He
replied, "I am Kanmakan whom thou stravest to kill; but Allah
made thee fall into thine evil device.  Did it not suffice thee
to take my kingdom and the kingdom of my father, but thou must
purpose to slay me?"[FN#105]  And Sasan swore a false oath that
he had not plotted his death and that the bruit was untrue.  So
Kanmakan forgave him and said to him, "Follow me." Quoth he, "I
cannot walk a single step for weakness." Quoth Kanmakan, "If the
case be thus we will get us two horses and ride forth, I and
thou, and seek the open." So he did as he said, and he took horse
with Sasan and rode till day break, when they prayed the dawn
prayer and fared on, and ceased not faring till they came to a
garden, where they sat down and talked.  Then Kanmakan rose to
Sasan and said, "Is aught left to set thy heart against me?" "No,
by Allah!" replied Sasan.  So they agreed to return to Baghdad
and Sabbah the Badawi said, "I will go before you, to give folk
the fair tidings of your coming." Then he rode on in advance,
acquainting women and men with the good news; so all the people
came out to meet Kanmakan with tabrets and pipes; and Kuzia Fakan
also came out, like the full moon shining in all her splendour of
light through the thick darkness of the night.  So Kanmakan met
her, and soul yearned to soul and body longed for body.  There
was no talk among the people of the time but of Kanmakan; for the
Knights bore witness of him that he was the most valiant of the
folk of the age and said, "It is not right that other than
Kanmakan should be our Sultan, but the throne of his grandfather
shall revert to him as it began." Meanwhile Sasan went in to his
wife, Nuzhat al-Zaman, who said to him, "I hear that the folk
talk of nothing but Kanmakan and attribute to him such qualities
as tongue never can." He replied, "Hearing of a man is not like
seeing a man.  I have seen him, but have noted in him none of the
attributes of perfection.  Not all that is heard is said; but
folk ape one another in extolling and cherishing him, and Allah
maketh his praises to run on the lips of men, so that there
incline to him the hearts of the people of Baghdad and of the
Wazir Dandan, that perfidious and treacherous man; who hath
levied troops from all lands and taketh to himself the right of
naming a King of the country; and who chooseth that it shall be
under the hand of an orphan ruler whose worth is naught." Asked
Nuzhat al-Zaman, "What then is it that thou purposest to do?";
and the King answered, "I mean to kill him, that the Wazir may be
baulked of his intent and return to his allegiance, seeing
nothing for it but my service." Quoth she, "In good sooth perfidy
with strangers is a foul thing and how much more with kith and
kin!  The righteous deed to do would be to marry him to thy
daughter Kuzia Fakan and give heed to what was said of old time,

'An Fate some person 'stablish o'er thy head, *
     And thou being worthier her choice upbraid,
Yet do him honour due to his estate; *
     He'll bring thee weal though far or near thou vade:
Nor speak thy thought of him, else shalt thou be *
     Of those who self degrade from honour's grade:
Many Harims are lovelier than the Bride, *
     But Time and Fortune lent the Bride their aid.'"

When Sasan heard these her words and comprehended what her verse
intended, he rose from her in anger and said, "Were it not that
thy death would bring on me dishonour and disgrace, I would take
off thy head with my blade and make an end of thy breath." Quoth
she, "Why art thou wroth with me?  I did but jest with thee."
Then she rose to him and bussed his head and hands, saying,
"Right is thy foresight, and I and thou will cast about for some
means to kill him forthright." When he heard this, he was glad
and said, "Make haste and contrive some deceit to relieve me of
my grieving: for in my sooth the door of device is straitened
upon me!" Replied she, "At once I will devise for thee to do away
his life." "How so?" asked he; and she answered, "By means of our
female slave the so-called Bakun." Now this Bakun was past
mistress in all kinds of knavery and was one of the most
pestilent of old women, in whose religion to abstain from
wickedness was not lawful; she had brought up Kuzia Fakan and
Kanmakan who had her in so great affection that he used to sleep
at her feet.  So when King Sasan heard his wife name her, he
said, "Right is this recking"; and, sending for the old woman,
told her what had passed and bade her cast about to kill
Kanmaken, promising her all good.  Replied she, "Thy bidding
shall be obeyed; but I would have thee, O my lord, give me a
dagger[FN#106] which hath been tempered in water of death, that I
may despatch him the speedilier for thee." Quoth Sasan, "And
welcome to thee!"; and gave her a hanger that would devance man's
destiny.  Now this slave women had heard stories and verses and
had learned by rote great store of strange sayings and anecdotes:
so she took the dagger and went out of the room, considering how
she could compass his doom.  Then she repaired to Kanmakan, who
was sitting and awaiting news of tryst with the daughter of his
uncle, Kuzia Fakan; so that night his thought was taken up with
her and the fires of love for her raged in his heart.  And while
he was thus, behold, the slave woman, Bakun, went in to him and
said, "Union time is at hand and the days of disunion are over
and gone." Now when he heard this he asked, "How is it with Kuzia
Fakan?"; and Bakun answered, "Know that her time is wholly taken
up with love of thee." At this he rose and doffing his outer
clothes put them on her and promised her all good.  Then said
she, "Know that I mean to pass this night with thee, that I may
tell thee what talk I have heard and console thee with stories of
many passion distraughts whom love hath made sick." "Nay," quoth
he, "rather tell me a tale that will gladden my heart and gar my
cares depart." "With joy and good will," answered she; then she
took seat by his side (and that poniard under her dress) and
began to say: "Know thou that the pleasantest thing my ears ever
heard was





The Tale of the Hashish Eater.



A certain man loved fair women, and spent his substance on them,
till he became so poor that nothing remained to him; the world
was straitened upon him and he used to go about the market-
streets begging his daily bread.  Once upon a time as he went
along, behold, a bit of iron nail pierced his finger and drew
blood; so he sat down and wiping away the blood, bound up his
finger.  Then he arose crying out, and fared forwards till he
came to a Hammam and entering took off his clothes, and when he
looked about him he found it clean and empty.  So he sat him down
by the fountain-basin, and ceased not pouring water on his head,
till he was tired.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man sat
down by the fountain basin and ceased not pouring water on his
head till he was tired.  Then he went out to the room in which
was the cistern of cold water; and seeing no one there, he found
a quiet corner and taking out a piece of Hashish,[FN#107]
swallowed it.  Presently the fumes mounted to his brain and he
rolled over on to the marble floor.  Then the Hashish made him
fancy that a great lord was shampooing him and that two slaves
stood at his head, one bearing a bowl and the other washing gear
and all the requisites of the Hammam.  When he saw this, he said
in himself, "Meseemeth these here be mistaken in me; or else they
are of the company of us Hashish-eaters."[FN#108]  Then he
stretched out his legs and he imagined that the bathman said to
him, "O my master, the time of thy going up to the Palace draweth
near and it is to-day thy turn of service." At this he laughed
and said to himself, "As Allah willeth,[FN#109] O Hashish!" Then
he sat and said nothing, whilst the bathman arose and took him by
the hand and girt his middle with a waist-cloth of black silk,
after which the two slaves followed him with the bowls and gear,
and they ceased not escorting him till they brought him into a
cabinet, wherein they set incense and perfumes a-burning.  He
found the place full of various kinds of fruits and sweet-scented
flowers, and they sliced him a watermelon and seated him on a
stool of ebony, whilst the bathman stood to wash him and the
slaves poured water on him; after which they rubbed him down well
and said, "O our lord, Sir Wazir, health to thee forever!" Then
they went out and shut the door on him; and in the vanity of
phantasy he arose and removed the waist-cloth from his middle,
and laughed till he well nigh fainted.  He gave not over laughing
for some time and at last quoth he to himself, "What aileth them
to address me as if I were a Minister and style me Master, and
Sir?  Haply they are now blundering; but after an hour they will
know me and say, This fellow is a beggar; and take their fill of
cuffing me on the neck." Presently, feeling hot he opened the
door, whereupon it seemed to him that a little white slave and an
eunuch came in to him carrying a parcel.  Then the slave opened
it and brought out three kerchiefs of silk, one of which he threw
over his head, a second over his shoulders and a third he tied
round his waist.  Moreover, the eunuch gave him a pair of bath-
clogs,[FN#110] and he put them on; after which in came white
slaves and eunuchs and sup ported him (and he laughing the while)
to the outer hall, which he found hung and spread with
magnificent furniture, such as be seemeth none but kings; and the
pages hastened up to him and seated him on the divan.  Then they
fell to kneading him till sleep overcame him; and he dreamt that
he had a girl in his arms.  So he kissed her and set her between
his thighs; then, sitting to her as a man sitteth to a
woman,[FN#111] he took yard in hand and drew her towards him and
weighed down upon her, when lo!  he heard one saying to him,
"Awake, thou ne'er-do-well!  The noon hour is come and thou art
still asleep." He opened his eyes and found him self lying on the
merge of the cold-water tank, amongst a crowd of people all
laughing at him; for his prickle was at point and the napkin had
slipped from his middle.  So he knew that all this was but a
confusion of dreams and an illusion of Hashish and he was vexed
and said to him who had aroused him, "Would thou hadst waited
till I had put it in!" Then said the folk, "Art thou not ashamed,
O Hashish-eater, to be sleeping stark naked with stiff standing
tool?" And they cuffed him till his neck was red.  Now he was
starving, yet forsooth had he savoured the flavour of pleasure in
his dream.  When Kanmakan heard the bondwoman's tale, he laughed
till he fell backward and said to Bakun, "O my nurse, this is
indeed a rare story and a delectable; I never heard the like of
this anecdote.  Say me!  hast more?" "Yes," replied she, and she
ceased not to tell him merry adventures and laughable
absurdities, till sleep overcame him.  Then she sat by his head
till the most part of the night was past, when she said to
herself, "It is time to profit by the occasion." So she sprang to
her feet and unsheathed the hanger and rushing up to Kanmakan,
was about to cut his throat when behold, his mother came in upon
the twain.  As soon as Bakun saw her, she rose in respect and
advanced to meet her, and fear get hold of her and she fell a-
trembling, as if he had the ague.  When his mother looked at her
she marvelled to see her thus and aroused her son, who awoke and
found her sitting at his head.  Now the cause of her coming was
that Kuzia Fakan overheard the conversation and the concert to
kill Kanmakan, and she said to his mother, "O wife of my uncle,
go to thy son, ere that wicked whore Bakun murther him;" and she
told her what had passed from first to last.  So she fared forth
at once, and she thought of naught and stayed not for aught till
she went in to her son at the very moment when Bakun was about to
slay him in his sleep.  When he awoke, he said to his mother, "O
my mother, indeed thou comest at a good time, for nurse Bakun
hath been with me this night." Then he turned to Bakun and asked
her, "By my life!  knowest thou any story better than those thou
hast told me?" She answered, "And where is what I have told thee
compared with what I will tell thee?; but however better it be,
it must be told at another time." Then she rose to depart, hardly
believing, in her escape albeit he said, "Go in peace!" for she
perceived by her cunning that his mother knew what had occurred. 
So she went her way; whereupon his mother said to him, "O my son,
blessed be this night, for that Almighty Allah hath delivered
thee from this accursed woman." "And how so?" enquired he, and
she told him the story from beginning to end.  Quoth he, "O my
mother, of a truth the live man findeth no slayer, and though
slain he shall not die; but now it were wiser that we depart from
amongst these enemies and let Allah work what He will." So, when
day dawned he left the city and joined the Wazir Dandan, and
after his departure, certain things befel between King Sasan and
Nuzhat al-Zaman, which compelled her also to quit the city and
join herself to them; and presently they were met by all the high
officers of King Sasan who inclined to their party.  Then they
sat in counsel together devising what they should do, and at last
all agreed upon a razzia into the land of Roum there to take
their revenge for the death of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and his
son Sharrkan.  So they set out with this in tent and, after
sundry adventures (which it were tedious to tell as will appear
from what follows), they fell into the hands of Rumzan, King of
the Greeks.  Next morning, King Rumzan caused Kanmakan and the
Wazir Dandan and their company to be brought before him and, when
they came, he seated them at his side, and bade spread the tables
of food.  So they ate and drank and took heart of grace, after
having made sure of death, when they were summoned to the King's
presence; and they had said to one another, "He hath not sent for
us but to slay us." And when they were comforted the King said,
"In truth I have had a dream, which I related to the monks, and
they said, "None can expound it to thee save the Wazir Dandan."
Quoth the Minister, "Weal it was thou didst see in thy dream, O
King of the age!" Quoth the King, "O Wazir, I dreamt that I was
in a pit which seemed a black well where multitudes were
tormenting me; and I would have risen, but when springing up I
fell on my feet and could not get out of that same pit.  Then I
turned and saw therein a girdle of gold and I stretched out my
hand to take it; but when I raised it from the ground, I saw it
was two girdles.  So I girt my middle with them both and behold,
the girdles became one girdle; and this, O Wazir, is my dream and
what I saw when my sleep was deepest." Said Dandan, "O our Lord
the Sultan!  know that this thy dream denoteth thou hast a
brother or a brother's son or an uncle's son or other near
kinsman of thy flesh and blood whom thou knowest not; withal he
is of the noblest of you all." Now when the King heard these
words he looked at Kanmakan and Nuzhat al-Zaman and Kuzia Fakan
and the Wazir Dandan and the rest of the captives and said to
himself, "If I smite these people's necks, their troops will lose
heart for the destruction of their chiefs and I shall be able to
return speedily to my realm, lest the Kingship pass out of my
hands." So having determined upon this he called the Sworder and
bade him strike off Kanmakan's head upon the spot and forthright,
when lo!  up came Rumzan's nurse and said to him, "O auspicious
King, what purposest thou?" Quoth he, "I purpose slaughtering
these prisoners who are in my power; and after that I will throw
their heads among their men: then will I fall upon them, I and
all my army in one body, and kill all we can kill and rout the
rest: so will this be the decisive action of the war and I shall
return speedily to my kingdom ere aught of accident befal among
my subjects." When the nurse heard these words, she came up to
him and said in the Frankish tongue, "How canst thou prevail upon
thyself to slay thine own brother's son, and thy sister, and thy
sister's daughter?" When he heard this language, he was wroth
with exceeding wrath and said to her, "O accursed woman, didst
thou not tell me that my mother was murthered and that my father
died by poison?  Didst thou not give me a jewel and say to me,
'Of a truth this jewel was thy father's?' Why didst thou not tell
me the truth?" Replied she, "All that I told thee is true, but my
case and thy case are wonderful and my history and thy his tory
are marvellous.  My name is Marjanah and thy mother's name was
Abrizah: and she was gifted with such beauty and loveliness and
velour that proverbs were made of her, and her prowess was
renowned among men of war.  And thy father was King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad and Khorasan, without doubt or double
dealing or denial.  He sent his son Sharrkan on a razzia in
company with this very Wazir Dandan; and they did all that men
can.  But Sharrkan, thy brother, who had preceded the force,
separated himself from the troops and fell in with thy mother
Queen Abrizah in her palace; and we happened to have sought a
place apart in order to wrestle, she and I and her other damsels. 
He came upon us by chance while we were in such case, and
wrestled with thy mother, who overcame him by the power of her
splendid beauty and by her prowess.  Then she entertained him
five days in her palace, till the news of this came to her
father, by the old woman Shawahi, surnamed Zat al-Dawahi,
whereupon she embraced Al-Islam at the hands of Sharrkan, and he
took her and carried her by stealth to Baghdad, and with her
myself and Rayhanab and twenty other damsels, all of us having,
like her, followed the True Faith.  When we came into the
presence of thy Father, the King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, and he saw
thy mother, Queen Abrizah, he fell in love with her and going in
unto her one night, had connection with her, and she conceived by
him and became with child of thee.  Now thy mother had three
jewels which she presented to thy father; and he gave one of them
to his daughter, Nuzhat al-Zaman, another to thy brother, Zau al-
Makan, and the third to thy brother Sharrkan.  This last thy
mother took from Sharrkan and kept it for thee.  But as the time
of her delivery drew near she yearned after her own people and
disclosed to me her secret; so I went to a black slave called Al-
Ghazban; and, privily telling him our case, bribed him to go with
us.  Accordingly the negro took us and fled the city with us, thy
mother being near her time.  But as we approached a desert place
on the borders of our own country, the pangs of labour came upon
thy mother.  Then the slave proved himself a lustful villain and
approaching her sought of her a shameful thing; whereupon she
cried out at him with a loud cry, and was sore affrighted at him. 
In the excess of her fright she gave birth to thee at once, and
at that moment there arose, in the direction of our country, a
dust-cloud which towered and flew till it walled the view. 
Thereupon the slave feared for his life; so he smote Queen
Abrizah with his sword and slew her in his fury; then mounting
his horse he went his way.  Soon after his going, the dust lifted
and discovered thy grandfather, King Hardub, Lord of Graecia-
land, who, seeing thy mother (and his daughter) lying slain on
the plain, was sorely troubled with a distress that redoubled,
and questioned me of the manner of her death and the cause of her
secretly quitting her father's realm.  So I told him all that had
passed, first and last; and this is the cause of the feud between
the people of the land of the Greeks and the people of the city
of Baghdad.  Then we bore off thy murthered mother and buried
her; and I took thee and reared thee, and hung about thy neck the
jewel which was with Queen Abrizah.  But, when being grown up
thou camest to man's estate, I dared not acquaint thee with the
truth of the matter, lest such information stir up a war of blood
revenge between you.  More over, thy grandfather had enjoined me
to secrecy, and I could not gainsay the commandment of thy
mother's father, Hardub, King of the Greeks.  This, then, is the
cause of my concealment and the reason why I forbore to inform
thee that thy father was King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; but when thou
camest to the throne, I told thee what thou knowest; and I durst
not reveal to thee the rest till this moment, O King of the Age! 
So now I have discovered to thee my secret and my proof, and I
have acquainted thee with all I know; and thou reckest best what
is in thy mind." Now all the captives had heard the slave woman
Marjanah, nurse to King Rumzan, speaking as she spake; when
Nuzhat al-Zaman, without stay or delay, cried out, saying, "This
King Rumzan is my brother by my father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,
and his mother was Queen Abrizah, daughter of King Hardub, Lord
of the Greeks; and I know this slave-woman Marjanah right well."
With this, trouble and perplexity got hold upon Rumzan and he
caused Nuzhat al-Zaman to be brought up to him forthright.  When
he looked upon her, blood yearned to blood and he questioned her
of his history.  She told him the tale and her story tallied with
that of Marjanah, his nurse; whereupon the King was assured that
he was, indeed and without a doubt, of the people of Irak; and
that King Omar bin al-Nu'uman was his father.  So without losing
time he caused his sister to be unpinioned, and Nuzhat al-Zaman
came up to him and kissed his hands, whilst her eves ran over
with tears.  The King west also to see her weeping, and brotherly
love possessed him and his heart yearned to his brother's son
Sultan Kanmakan.  So he sprang to his feet and, taking the sword
from the Sworder's hands (whereat the captives made sure of
death), he caused them to be set close to him and he cut their
bonds with the blade and said to his nurse Marjanah, "Explain the
matter to this company, even as thou hast explained it to me."
Replied she, "O King, know that this Shayth is the Wazir Dandan
and he is the best of witnesses to my story, seeing that he
knoweth the facts of the case." Then she turned to the captives
and repeated the whole story to them on the spot and forthright,
and in presence of the Kings of the Greeks and the Kings of the
Franks; whereupon Queen Nuzhat al-Zaman and the Wazir Dandan and
all who were prisoners with them confirmed her words.  When
Marjanah, the bond-woman, had finished, chancing to look at
Sultan Kanmakan she saw on his neck the third jewel, fellow to
the two which were with Queen Abrizah; and, recognising it, she
cried so loud a cry, that the palace re-echoed it and said to the
King, "O my son, know that now my certainty is still more
assured, for this jewel that is about the neck of yonder captive
is the fellow to that I hung to thy neck; and, these being the
two, this captive is indeed thy brother's son, Kanmakan." Then
the slave women Marjanah turned to Kanmakan and said to him, "Let
me see that jewel, O King of the Age!"; so he took it from his
neck and handed it to her.  Then she asked Nuzhat al-Zaman of the
third jewel and she gave it to her; and when the two were in her
hand she delivered them to King Rumzan, and the truth and proof
were made manifest to him; and he was assured that he was indeed
Sultan Kanmakan's uncle and that his father was King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman.  So he rose at once and on the spot and, going up to the
Wazir Dandan, threw his arms round his neck; then he embraced
King Kanmakan and the twain cried a loud cry for excess of joy. 
The glad news was blazed abroad without delay; and they beat the
tabrets and cymbals, whilst the shawms sounded and the people
held high festival.  The armies of Irak and Syria heard the
clamour of rejoicing among the Greeks; so they mounted to the
last man, and King Zibl Khan also took horse saying to himself,
"Would I knew what can be the cause of this clamour and rejoicing
in the army of the Franks and the Greeks!" Then the army of Irak
dight itself for fight and advanced into the plain and place of
cut and foin.  Presently, King Rumzan turned him round and saw
the army deployed and in preparing for battle employed, so he
asked the cause thereof and was told the state of the case. 
Thereupon he bade his niece and brother's daughter, Kuzia Fakan,
return at once and forthright to the troops of Syria and Irak and
acquaint them with the plight that had betided and how it was
come to light that King Rumzan was uncle to Sultan Kanmakan.  She
set out, putting away from her sorrows and troubles and, coming
to King Zibl Khan,[FN#112] saluted him and told him all that had
passed of the good accord, and how King Rumzan had proved to be
her uncle and uncle of Kanmakan.  And when she went in to him she
found him tearful eyed, in fear for the captive Emirs and
Princes; but when he heard what had passed, from first to last,
the Moslem's sadness was abated and they joyed with the more
gladness.  Then King Zibl Khan and all his officers and his
retinue took horse and followed Princess Kuzia Fakan till they
reached the pavilion of King Rumzan; and when entering they found
him sitting with his nephew, Sultan Kanmakan.  Now he had taken
counsel with the Wazir Dandan concerning King Zibl Khan and had
agreed to commit to his charge the city of Damascus of Sham and
leave him King over it as he before had been while they
themselves entered Irak.  Accordingly, they confirmed him in the
vice royalty of Damascus of Syria, and bade him set out at once
for his government; so he fared forth with his troops and they
rode with him a part of the way to bid him farewell.  Then they
returned to their own places whereupon, the two armies
foregathered and gave orders for the march upon Irak; but the
Kings said one to other, "Our hearts will never be at rest nor
our wrath cease to rage till we have taken our wreak of the old
woman Shawahi, surnamed Zat al-Dawahi, and wiped away our shame
and blot upon our honour." Thereupon King Rumzan and his nephew
set out, surrounded by their Nobles and Grandees; and indeed
Kanmakan rejoiced in his uncle, King Rumzan, and called down
blessings on nurse Marjanah who had made them known to each
other.  They fared on and ceased not faring till they drew near
their home Baghdad, and when the Chief Chamberlain, Sasan, heard
of their approach, he came out to meet them and kissed the hand
of King Rumzan who bestowed on him a dress of honour.  Then the
King of Roum sat down on the throne and seated by his side his
nephew Sultan Kanmakan, who said to him, "O my uncle, this
Kingdom befitteth none but thee." Replied Rumzan, "Allah be my
refuge and the Lord forbid that I should supplant thee in thy
Kingdom!" Upon this the Wazir Dandan counselled them to share the
throne between the two, ruling each one day in turn; and with
this they were well satisfied.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two
Kings agreed each to rule one day in turn: then made they feasts
and offered sacrifices of clean beasts and held high festival;
and they abode thus awhile, whilst Sultan Kanmakan spent his
nights with his cousin Kuzia Fakan.  And after that period, as
the two Kings sat rejoicing in their condition and in the happy
ending of their troubles, behold, they saw a cloud of dust arise
and tower till it walled the world from their eyes.  And out of
it came a merchant shrieking and crying aloud for succour and
saying, "O Kings of the Age!  how cometh it that I woned safely
in the land of the Infidels and I am plundered in your realm,
though it be the biding place of justice[FN#113] and peace?" Then
King Rumzan went up to him and questioned him of his case and he
replied, "I am a merchant and, like other merchants, I have been
long absent from my native land, travelling in far countries for
some twenty years; and I have a patent of exemption from the city
of Damascus which the Viceroy, King Sharrkan (who hath found
mercy) wrote me, for the cause that I had made him gift of a
slave-girl.  Now as I was drawing near my home, having with me an
hundred loads of rarities of Hind, when I brought them near
Baghdad, which be the seat of your sovereignty and the place of
your peace and your justice, out there came upon me wild Arabs
and Kurds[FN#114] in band gathered together from every land; and
they slew my many and they robbed my money and this is what they
have done me." Then the trader wept in presence of King Rumzan,
saying that he was an old man and infirm; and he bemoaned himself
till the King felt for him and had compassion on him; and
likewise did King Kanmakan and they swore that they would sally
forth upon the thieves.  So they set out amid an hundred horse,
each reckoned worth thou sands of men, and the merchant went
before them to guide them in the right way; and they ceased not
faring on all that day and the livelong night till dawnbreak,
when they came to a valley abounding in rills and shady with
trees.  Here they found the foray dispersed about the valley,
having divided that merchant's bales among them; but there was
yet some of the goods left.  So the hundred horsemen fell upon
them and surrounded them on all sides, and King Rumzan shouted
his war cry, and thus also did his nephew Kanmakan, and ere long
they made prize of them all, to the number of near three hundred
horsemen, banded together of the refuse of rascality.[FN#115] 
They took what they could find of the merchant's goods and,
binding them tightly, brought them to Baghdad, where King Rumzan
and his nephew, King Kanmakan, sat down together on one throne
and, passing the prisoners in review before them, questioned them
of their case and their chiefs.  They said, "We have no chiefs
but these three men and it was they who gathered us together from
all corners and countries." The Kings said to them, "Point out to
us your headmen!"; and, when this was done, they bade lay hands
on the leaders and set their comrades free, after taking from
them all the goods in their possession and restoring them to the
merchant, who examined his stuffs and monies and found that a
fourth of his stock was missing.  The Kings engaged to make good
the whole of his loss, where upon the trader pulled out two
letters, one in the handwriting of Sharrkan, and the other in
that of Nuzhat al-Zaman; for this was the very merchant who had
bought Nuzhat al-Zaman of the Badawi, when she was a virgin, and
had forwarded her to her brother Sharrkan; and that happened
between them which happened.[FN#116]  Hereupon King Kanmakan
examined the letters and recognised the handwriting of his uncle
Sharrkan, and, having heard the history of his aunt, Nuzhat al-
Zaman, he went in to her with the second letter written by her to
the merchant who had lost through her his monies; Kanmakan also
told her what had befallen the trader from first to last.  She
knew her own handwriting and, recognising the merchant,
despatched to him guest gifts and commended him to her brother
and nephew, who ordered him largesse of money and black slaves
and pages to wait on him; besides which Nuzhat al-Zaman sent him
an hundred thousand dirhams in cash and fifty loads of
merchandise and presented to him other rich presents.  Then she
sent for him and when he came, she went up to him and saluted him
and told him that she was the daughter of King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman and that her brother was King Rumzan and that King
Kanmakan was her nephew.  Thereupon the merchant rejoiced with
great joy, and congratulated her on her safety and on her re-
union with her brother, and kissed her hands thanking her for her
bounty, and said to her, "By Allah!  a good deed is not lost upon
thee!" Then she withdrew to her own apartment and the trader
sojourned with them three days, after which he took leave of them
and set out on his return march to the land of Syria.  Thereupon
the two Kings sent for the three robber chiefs who were of the
highway men, and questioned them of their case, when one of them
came forward and said, "Know ye that I am a Badawi who am wont to
lie in wait, by the way, to snatch small children[FN#117] and
virgin girls and sell them to merchants; and this I did for many
a year until these latter days, when Satan incited me to join yon
two gallows birds in gathering together all the riff-raff of the
Arabs and other peoples, that we might plunder merchandise and
waylay merchants." Said the Kings, "Tell us the rarest of the
adventures that have befallen thee in kidnapping children and
maidens." Replied he, "O Kings of the Age, the strangest thing
that happened to me was that one day, two-and-twenty years ago, I
snatched a girl who belonged to the Holy City; she was gifted
with beauty and comeliness, despite that she was but a servant
and was clad in threadbare clothes, with a piece of camlet-cloth
on her head.  So I entrapped her by guile as she came out of the
caravanserai; and at that very hour mounting her on a camel, made
off with her, thinking to carry her to my own people in the
Desert and there set her to pasture the camels and gather their
droppings in the valley.  But she wept with so sore a weeping
that after coming down upon her with blows, I took her and
carried her to Damascus city where a merchant saw her with me
and, being astounded at her beauty and marvelling at her
accomplishments, wished to buy her of me and kept on bidding me
more and more for her, till at last I sold her to him for an
hundred thousand dirhams.  After selling her I heard her display
prodigious eloquence; and it reached me that the merchant clothed
her in handsome gear and presented her to the Viceroy of
Damascus, who gave him three times the price which he had paid to
me, and this price, by my life!  was but little for such a
damsel.  This, O Kings of the Age, is the strangest thing that
ever befel me." When the two Kings heard her story they wondered
thereat, but when Nuzhat al-Zaman heard what the Badawi related,
the light became darkness before her face and she cried out and
said to her brother Rumzan, "Sure and sans doubt this is the very
Badawi who kidnapped me in the Holy City Jerusalem!" Then she
told them all that she had endured from him in her stranger hood
of hardship, blows, hunger, humiliation, contempt, adding, "And
now it is lawful for me to slay him." So saying she seized a
sword and made at him to smite him; and behold, he cried out and
said, "O Kings of the Age, suffer her not to slay me, till I
shall have told you the rare adventures that have betided me."
And her nephew Kanmakan said to her, "O my aunt, let him tell us
his tale, and after that do with him as thou wilt." So she held
her hand and the Kings said to him, "Now let us hear thy
history." Quoth he, "O Kings of the Age, if I tell you a rare
tale will ye pardon me?" "Yes," answered they.  Then the Badawi
robber-chief began,




The Tale of Hammad the Badawi.



And he said:--Know ye that a short while ago, I was sore wakeful
one night and thought the morn would never dawn; so, as soon as
it was break of day I rose, without stay or delay; and, slinging
over my shoulder my sword, mounted horse and set my lance in
rest.  Then I rode out to sport and hunt and, as I went along, a
company of men accosted me and asked me whither I was bound I
told them and they said, "We will keep thee company." So we all
fared on together, and, whilst we were faring, lo and behold!  up
started an ostrich and we gave her chase, but she escaped our
pursuit and spreading wings ceased not to fly before us (and we
following by sight) till she lost us in a desert wherein there
was neither grass nor water, nor heard we aught therein save hiss
of snake and wail of Jinn and howl of Ghul; and when we reached
that place the ostrich disappeared nor could we tell whether she
had flown up into the sky or into the ground had gone down.  Then
we turned our horses' heads and thought to return; but found that
to retrace our steps at that time of burning heat would be
toilsome and dangerous; for the sultry air was grievous to us, so
that we thirsted with sore thirst and our steeds stood still.  We
made sure of death; but while we were in this case we suddenly
espied from afar a spacious mead where gazelles were frisking
Therein was a tent pitched and by the tent side a horse tethered
and a spear was planted with head glittering in the sun.[FN#118] 
Upon this our hearts revived after we had despaired, and we
turned our horses' heads towards that tent making for the meadow
and the water which irrigated it; and all my comrades fared for
it and I at their head, and we ceased not faring till we reached
the mead.  Then we alighted at the spring and watered our beasts. 
But I was seized with a fever of foolish curiosity and went up to
the door of that tent, wherein I saw a young man, without hair on
his cheeks, who fellowed the new moon; and on his right hand was
a slender-waisted maid, as she were a willow-wand.  No sooner did
I set eyes on her than love get hold upon my heart and I saluted
the youth, who returned my greeting.  Then said I, "O my brother,
tell me who thou art and what to thee is this damsel sitting by
thy side?"[FN#119]  Thereupon the youth bent his head groundwards
awhile, then raised it and replied, "Tell me first who thou art
and what are these horsemen with thee?" Answered I, "I am Hammad
son of al-Fazari, the renowned knight, who is reckoned among the
Arabs as five hundred horse.  We went forth from our place this
morning to sport and chase and were overcome by thirst; so I came
to the door of this tent, thinking haply to get of thee a draught
of water." When he heard these my words, he turned to the fair
maiden and said, "Bring this man water and what food there is
ready." So she arose trailing her skirts, whilst the golden
bangles tinkled on her ankles and her feet stumbled in her long
locks, and she disappeared for a little while.  Presently she
returned bearing in her right hand a silver vessel full of cold
water and in her left hand a bowl brimming with milk and dates,
together with some flesh of wild cattle.  But I could take of her
nor meat nor drink for the excess of my passion, and I applied to
her these two couplets, saying,

"It was as though the sable dye[FN#120] upon her palms, *
     Were raven perching on a swathe of freshest snow;
Thou seest Sun and Moon conjoined in her face, *
     While Sun fear-dimmed and Moon fright-pallid show."

After I had eaten and drunk I said to the youth, "Know thou, O
Chief of the Arabs, that I have told thee in all truth who and
what I am, and now I would fain have thee do the like by me and
tell me the truth of thy case." Replied the young man, "As for
this damsel she is my sister." Quoth I, "It is my desire that
thou give me her to wife of thy free will: else will I slay thee
and take her by force." Upon this, he bowed his head groundwards
awhile, then he raised his eyes to me and answered, "Thou sayest
sooth in avouching thyself a renowned knight and famed in fight
and verily thou art the lion of the desert; but if ye all attack
me treacherously and slay me in your wrath and take my sister by
force, it will be a stain upon your honour.  An you be, as ye
aver, cavaliers who are counted among the Champions and reck not
the shock of foray and fray, give me a little time to don my
armour and sling on my sword and set lance in rest and mount war
steed.  Then will we go forth into the field of fight, I and you;
and, if I conquer you, I will kill you to the last man; but if
you overcome me and slay me, this damsel, my sister, is yours."
Hearing such words I replied, "This is only just, and we oppose
it not." Then I turned back my horse's head (for my love for the
damsel waxed hotter and hotter) and returned to my companions, to
whom I set forth her beauty and loveliness as also the comeliness
of the young man who was with her, together with his velour and
strength of soul and how he had avouched himself a match for a
thousand horse.  Moreover, I described to my company the tent and
all the riches and rarities therein and said to them, "Know ye
that this youth would not have cut himself off from society and
have taken up his abode alone in this place, were he not a man of
great prowess: so I propose that whoso slayeth the younker shall
take his sister." And they said, "This contenteth us." Then my
company armed themselves and mounting, rode to the tent, where we
found that the young man had donned his gear and backed his
steed; but his sister ran up to him (her veil being drenched with
tears), and took hold of his stirrup and cried out, saying,
"Alas!" and, "Woe worth the day!" in her fear for her brother,
and recited these couplets,

"To Allah will I make my moan of travail and of woe, *
     Maybe Ilah of Arsh[FN#121] will smite their faces with
     affright:
Fain would they slay thee, brother mine, with purpose
     felon-fell; * Albe no cause of vengeance was, nor fault
     forewent the fight.
Yet for a rider art thou known to those who back the steed, *
     And twixt the East and West of knights thou art the prowess
     knight:
Thy sister's honour thou shalt guard though little might be
     hers, * For thou'rt her brother and for thee she sueth
     Allah's might:
Then let not enemy possess my soul nor 'thrall my frame, *
     And work on me their will and treat thy sister with
     despight.
I'll ne'er abide, by Allah's truth, in any land or home *
     Where thou art not, though dight it be with joyance and
     delight
For love and yearning after thee myself I fain will slay, *
     And in the gloomy darksome tomb spread bed upon the clay."

But when her brother heard her verse he wept with sore weeping
and turned his horse's head towards his sister and made this
answer to her poetry,

"Stand by and see the derring-do which I to-day will show, *
     When meet we and I deal them blows that rend and cleave and
     split;
E'en though rush out to seek a bout the lion of the war, *
     The stoutest hearted brave of all and eke the best in wit;
To him I'll deal without delay a Sa'alabiyan blow,[FN#122] *
     And dye my cane-spear's joint in blood by wound of foe
     bespit:
If all I beat not off from thee, O sister, may this frame *
     Be slain, and cast my corpse to birds, for so it would
     befit:
Yes, for thy dearest sake I'll strike my blows with might and
     main, * And when we're gone shall this event in many a book
     be writ."
