 unable
to go beyond the date-tree whereon is my daily bread?  And even
could I do so, I know of no other place wherein I may wone." 
Quoth the hedgehog, "Thou canst shake down of the fruit of the
date-tree what shall suffice thee and thy wife for a year's
provaunt; then do ye take up your abode in a nest under the
trunk, that ye may prayerfully seek to be guided in the right
way, and then turn thou to what thou hast shaken down and
transport it all to thy home and store it up against what time
the dates fail; and when the fruits are spent and the delay is
longsome upon you, address thyself to total abstinence." 
Exclaimed the pigeon, "Allah requite thee with good for the
righteous intention wherewith thou hast reminded me of the world
to come and hast directed me into the right way!"  Then he and
his wife worked hard at knocking down the dates, till nothing was
left on the palm-tree, whilst the hedgehog, finding whereof to
eat, rejoiced and filled his den with the fruit, storing it up
for his subsistence and saying in his mind, "When the pigeon and
his wife have need of their provision, they will seek it of me
and covet what I have, relying upon thy devoutness and
abstinence; and, from what they have heard of my counsels and
admonitions, they will draw near unto me.  Then will I make them
my prey and eat them, after which I shall have the place and all
that drops from the date-tree to suffice me." presently, having
shaken down the fruits, the pigeon and his wife descended from
the tree-top and finding that the hedgehog had removed all the
dates to his own place, said to him, "O hedgehog! thou pious
preacher and of good counsel, we can find no sign of the dates
and know not on what else we shall feed."  Replied the hedgehog,
"Probably the winds have carried them away; but the turning from
the provisions to the Provider is of the essence of salvation,
and He who the mouth-corners cleft, the mouth without victual
hath never left."  And he gave not over improving the occasion to
them on this wise, and making a show of piety and cozening them
with fine words and false until they put faith in him and
accepted him and entered his den and had no suspicion of his
deceit.  Thereupon he sprang to the door and gnashed his teeth,
and the wood-pigeon, seeing his perfidy manifested, said to him,
"What hath to-night to do with yester-night?  Knowest thou not
that there is a Helper for the oppressed?  Beware of craft and
treachery, lest that mishap befal thee which befel the sharpers
who plotted against the merchant."  "What was that?" asked the
hedgehog.  Answered the pigeon:--I have heard tell this tale of 




The Merchant and the Two Shapers



In a city called Sindah there was once a very wealthy merchant,
who made ready his camel-loads and equipped himself with goods
and set out with his outfit for such a city, purposing to sell it
there.  Now he was followed by two sharpers, who had made up into
bales what merchandise they could get; and, giving out to the
merchant that they also were merchants, wended with him by the
way.  So halting at the first halting-place they agreed to play
him false and take all he had; but at the same time, each
inwardly plotted foul play to the other, saying in his mind, "If
I can cheat my comrade, times will go well with me and I shall
have all these goods for myself."  So after planning this
perfidy, one of them took food and putting therein poison,
brought it to his fellow; the other did the same and they both
ate of the poisoned mess and they both died.  Now they had been
sitting with the merchant; so when they left him and were long
absent from him, he sought for tidings of them and found the
twain lying dead; whereby he knew that they were sharpers who had
plotted to play him foul, but their foul play had recoiled upon
themselves.  So the merchant was preserved and took what they
had.  Then quoth the Sultan, "O Shahrazad, verily thou hast
aroused me to all whereof I was negligent!  So continue to edify
me with these fables."  Quoth she:--It hath reached me, O King,
that men tell this tale of




                THE THIEF AND HIS MONKEY[FN#171]



A certain man had a monkey and that man was a thief, who never
entered any of the street-markets of the city wherein he dwelt,
but he made off with great profit.  Now it came to pass one day
that he saw a man offering for sale worn clothes, and he went
calling them in the market, but none bid for them and all to whom
he showed them refused to buy of him.  Presently the thief who
had the monkey saw the man with the ragged clothes set them in a
wrapper and sit down to rest for weariness; so he made the ape
sport before him to catch his eye and, whilst he was busy gazing
at it, stole the parcel from him.  Then he took the ape and made
off to a lonely place, where he opened the wrapper and, taking
out the old clothes, folded them in a piece of costly stuff. 
This he carried to another bazar and exposed for sale together
with what was therein, making it a condition that it should not
be opened, and tempting the folk with the lowness of the price he
set on it.  A certain man saw the wrapper and its beauty pleased
him; so he bought the parcel on these terms and carried it home,
doubting not that he had done well.  When his wife saw it she
asked, "What is this?" and he answered, "It is costly stuff,
which I have bought at lowest price, meaning to sell it again and
take the profit."  Rejoined she, "O dupe, would this stuff be
sold under its value, unless it had been stolen?  Dost thou not
know that whoso buyeth aught without examining it, falleth into
error and becometh like unto the weaver?"  Quoth he, "And what is
the story of the weaver?"; and quoth she:--I have heard this take
of 




The Foolish Weaver



There was once in a certain village a weaver who worked hard but
could not earn his living save by overwork.  Now it chanced that
one of the richards of the neighbourhood made a marriage feast
and invited the folk thereto: the weaver also was present and
found the guests, who wore rich gear, served with delicate viands
and made much of by the house-master for what he saw of their
fine clothes.  So he said in his mind, "If I change this my craft
for another craft easier to compass and better considered and
more highly paid, I shall amass great store of money and I shall
buy splendid attire, so I may rise in rank and be exalted in
men's eyes and become even with these."  Presently, he beheld one
of the mountebanks, who was present at the feast, climbing up to
the top of a high and towering wall and throwing himself down to
the ground and alighting on his feet.  Whereupon the waver said
to himself, "Needs must I do as this one hath done, for surely I
shall not fail of it."  So he arose and swarmed upon the wall and
casting himself down, broke his neck against the ground and died
forthright.  "Now I tell thee this that thou sayst get thy living
by what way thou knowest and thoroughly understandest, lest
peradventure greed enter into thee and thou lust after what is
not of thy condition."  Quoth the woman's husband, "Not every
wise man is saved by his wisdom, nor is every fool lost by his
folly.  I have seen it happen to a skilful charmer, well versed
in the ways of serpents, to be struck by the fangs of a
snake[FN#172] and killed, and others prevail over serpents who
had no skill in them and no knowledge of their ways."  And he
went contrary to his wife and persisted in buying stolen goods
below their value till he fell under suspicion and perished
therefor: even as perished the sparrow in the tale of




                  THE SPARROW AND THE PEACOCK



There was once upon a time a sparrow, that used every day to
visit a certain king of the birds and ceased not to wait upon him
in the mornings and not to leave him till the evenings, being the
first to go in and the last to go out.  One day, a company of
birds chanced to assemble on a high mountain and one of them said
to another, "Verily, we are waxed many, and many are the
differences between us, and there is no help for it but we have a
king to look into our affairs; so shall we all be at one and our
differences will disappear."  Thereupon up came that sparrow and
counselled them to choose for King the peacock (that is, the
prince he used to visit).  So they chose the peacock to their
King and he, become their sovereign, bestowed largesse upon them
and made the sparrow his secretary and Prime Minister.  Now the
sparrow was wont by times to quit his assiduous serve in the
presence and look into matters in general.  So one day he
absented himself at the usual time, whereat the peacock was sore
troubled; and, while things stood thus, he returned and the
peacock said to him, "What hath delayed thee, and thou the
nearest to me of all my servants and the dearest of all my
dependents?" replied the sparrow, "I have seen a thing which is
doubtful to me and whereat I am affrighted."  Asked the peacock,
"What was it thou sawest?"; and the sparrow answered, "I saw a
man set up a net, hard by my nest, peg down its pegs, strew grain
in its midst and withdraw afar off.  And I sat watching what he
would do when behold, fate and fortune drave thither a crane and
his wife, which fell into the midst of the net and began to cry
out; whereupon the fowler rose up and took them.  This troubled
me, and such is the reason for my absence from thee, O King of
the Age, but never again will I abide in that nest for fear of
the net."  Rejoined the peacock, "Depart not thy dwelling, for
against fate and lot forethought will avail the naught."  And the
sparrow obeyed his bidding and said, "I will forthwith arm myself
with patience and forbear to depart in obedience to the King." 
So he ceased not taking care of himself, and carrying food to his
sovereign, who would eat what sufficed him and after feeding
drink his water and dismiss the sparrow.  Now one day as he was
looking into matters, lo and behold! he saw two sparrows fighting
on the ground and said in his mind, "How can I, who am the King's
Wazir, look on and see sparrows fighting in my neighbourhood?  By
Allah, I must make peace between them!"  So he flew down to
reconcile them; but the fowler cast the net over the whole number
and the sparrow happened to be in their very midst.  Then the
fowler arose and took him and gave him to his comrade, saying,
"Take care of him, " I never saw fatter or finer."  But the
sparrow said to himself, "I have fallen into that which I feared
and none but the peacock inspired me with false confidence.  It
availed me naught to beware of the stroke of fate and fortune,
since even he who taketh precaution may never flee from destiny. 
And how well said the poet in this poetry,

     "Whatso is not to be shall ne'er become; *
     No wise! and that to be must come to pass;
     Yea it shall come to pass at time ordained, *
     And th' Ignoramus[FN#173] aye shall cry 'Alas!'"

Whereupon quoth the King, "O Shahrazad, recount me other of these
tales!"; and quoth she, "I will do so during the coming night, if
life be granted to by the King whom Allah bring to honour!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said:--I will relate the




              TALE OF ALI BIN BAKKAR AND OF SHAMS
                           AL-NAHAR.



It hath reached me, O august King, that in days of yore and in
times and ages long gone before, during the Caliphate of Harun
al-Rashid, there was a merchant who named his son Abu
al-Hasan[FN#174] Ali bin Tahir; and the same was great of goods
and grace, while his son was fair of form and face and held in
favour by all folk. He used to enter the royal palace without
asking leave, for all the Caliph's concubines and slave-girls
loved him, and he was wont to be companion with Al-Rashid in his
cups and recite verses to him and tell him curious tales and
witty. Withal he sold and bought in the merchants' bazar, and
there used to sit in his shop a youth named Ali bin Bakkar, of
the sons of the Persian Kings[FN#175] who was formous of form and
symmetrical of shape and perfect of figure, with cheeks red as
roses and joined eyebrows; sweet of speech, laughing-lipped and
delighting in mirth and gaiety. Now it chanced one day, as the
two sat talking and laughing behold, there came up ten damsels
like moons, every one of them complete in beauty and loveliness,
and elegance and grace; and amongst them was a young lady riding
on a she-mule with a saddle of brocade and stirrups of gold. She
wore an outer veil of fine stuff, and her waist was girt with a
girdle of gold-embroidered silk; and she was even as saith the
poet,

     "Silky her skin and silk that zoned waist; *
          Sweet voice; words not o'er many nor too few: 
     Two eyes quoth Allah 'Be,' and they became; *
          And work like wine on hearts they make to rue: 
     O love I feel! grow greater every night: *
          O solace! Doom-day bring our interview."

And when the cortege reached Abu al-Hasan's shop, she alighted
from her mule, and sitting down on the front board,[FN#176]
saluted him, and he returned her salam. When Ali bin Bakkar saw
her, she ravished his understanding and he rose to go away; but
she said to him, "Sit in thy place. We came to thee and thou
goest away: this is not fair!" Replied he, "O my lady, by Allah,
I flee from what I see; for the tongue of the case saith,

     'She is a sun which towereth high a-sky; *
          So ease thy heart with cure by Patience lent:
     Thou to her skyey height shalt fail to fly; *
          Nor she from skyey height can make descent.'"

When she heard this, she smiled and asked Abu al-Hasan, "What is
the name of this young man?"; who answered, "He is a stranger;"
and she enquired, "What countryman is he?"; whereto the merchant
replied, "He is a descendant of the Persian Kings; his name is
Ali son of Bakkar and the stranger deserveth honour." Rejoined
she, "When my damsel comes to thee, come thou at once to us and
bring him with thee, that we may entertain him in our abode, lest
he blame us and say, 'There is no hospitality in the people of
Baghdad'; for niggardliness is the worst fault a man can have.
Thou hearest what I say to thee and, if thou disobey me, thou
wilt incur my displeasure and I will never again visit thee or
salute thee." Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "On my head and my eyes: Allah
preserve me from thy displeasure, fair lady!" Then she rose and
went her way. Such was her case; but as regards Ali bin Bakkar he
remained in a state of bewilderment. Now after an hour the damsel
came to Abu al-Hasan and said to him, "Of a truth my lady Shams
al-Nahar, the favourite of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun
al-Rashid, biddeth thee to her, thee and thy friend, my lord Ali
bin Bakkar." So he rose and, taking Ali with him, followed the
girl to the Caliph's palace, where she carried them into a
chamber and made them sit down. They talked together awhile, when
behold, trays of food were set before them, and they ate and
washed their hands. Then she brought them wine, and they drank
deep and made merry; after which she bade them rise and carried
them into another chamber, vaulted upon four columns, furnished
after the goodliest fashion with various kinds of furniture, and
adorned with decorations as it were one of the pavilions of
Paradise. They were amazed at the rarities they saw; and, as they
were enjoying a review of these marvels, suddenly up came ten
slave-girls, like moons, swaying and swimming in beauty's pride,
dazzling the sight and confounding the sprite; and they ranged
themselves in two ranks as if they were of the black-eyed Brides
of Paradise. And after a while in came other ten damsels, bearing
in their hands lutes and divers instruments of mirth and music;
and these, having saluted the two guests, sat down and fell to
tuning their lute-strings. Then they rose and standing before
them, played and sang and recited verses: and indeed each one of
them was a seduction to the servants of the Lord. Whilst they
were thus busied there entered other ten damsels like unto them,
high-bosomed maids and of an equal age, with black-eyes and
cheeks like the rose, joined eyebrows and looks languorous; a
very fascination to every faithful wight and to all who looked
upon them a delight; clad in various kinds of coloured silks,
with ornaments that amazed man's intelligence. They took up their
station at the door, and there succeeded them yet other ten
damsels even fairer than they, clad in gorgeous array, such as no
tongue can say; and they also stationed themselves by the
doorway. Then in came a band of twenty damsels and amongst them
the lady, Shams al-Nahar hight, as she were the moon among the
stars swaying from side to side, with luring gait and in beauty's
pride. And she was veiled to the middle with the luxuriance of
her locks, and clad in a robe of azure blue and a mantilla of
silk embroidered with gold and gems of price; and her waist was
girt with a zone set with various kinds of precious stones. She
ceased not to advance with her graceful and coquettish swaying,
till she came to the couch that stood at the upper end of the
chamber and seated herself thereon. But when Ali bin Bakkar saw
her, he versified with these verses,

     "Source of mine evils, truly, she alone 's, *
          Of long love-longing and my groans and moans;
     Near her I find my soul in melting mood, *
          For love of her and wasting of my bones."

And finishing his poetry he said to Abu al-Hasan, "Hadst thou
Dealt more kindly with me thou haddest forewarned me of these
things ere I came hither, that I might have made up my mind and
taken patience to support what hath befallen me." And he wept and
groaned and complained. Replied Abu al-Hasan, "O my brother, I
meant thee naught but good; but I feared to tell thee this, lest
such transport should betide thee as might hinder thee from
foregathering with her, and be a stumbling-block between thee and
her. But be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear;[FN#177] for she to thee inclineth and to favour thee
designeth." Asked Ali bin Bakkar, "What is this young lady's
name?" Answered Abu al-Hasan, "She is hight Shams al-Nahar, one
of the favourites of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun
al-Rashid, and this is the palace of the Caliphate." Then Shams
al-Nahar sat gazing upon the charms of Ali bin Bakkar and he upon
hers, till both were engrossed with love for each other.
Presently she commanded the damsels, one and all, to be seated,
each in her rank and place, and all sat on a couch before one of
the windows, and she bade them sing; whereupon one of them took
up the lute and began caroling,

"Give thou my message twice * Bring clear reply in trice!
To thee, O Prince of Beau * -ty[FN#178] with complaint I rise:
My lord, as heart-blood dear * And Life's most precious prize!
Give me one kiss in gift * Or loan, if thou devise:
And if thou crave for more * Take all that satisfies.[FN#179]
Thou donn'st me sickness-dress * Thee with health's weed I
     bless."

Her singing charmed Ali bin Bakkar, and he said to her, "Sing me
more of the like of these verses." So she struck the strings and
began to chaunt these lines,

     "By stress of parting, O beloved one, *
          Thou mad'st these eyelids torment- race to run: 
     Oh gladness of my sight and dear desire, *
          Goal of my wishes, my religion! 
     Pity the youth whose eyne are drowned in tears *
          Of lover gone distraught and clean undone."

When she had finished her verses, Shams al-Nahar said to another
damsel, "Let us hear something from thee!" So she played a lively
measure and began these couplets,

     "His[FN#180] looks have made me drunken, not his wine; *
          His grace of gait disgraced sleep to these eyne:
     Dazed me no cup, but cop with curly crop; *
          His gifts overcame me not the gifts of vine:
     His winding locks my patience-clue unwound: *
          His robed beauties robbed all wits of mine."

When Shams Al-Nahar heard this recital from the damsel, she
sighed heavily and the song pleased her. Then she bade another
damsel sing; so she took the lute and began chanting,

     "Face that with Sol in Heaven lamping vies; *
          Youth-tide's fair fountain which begins to rise;
     Whose curly side-beard writeth writ of love, *
          And in each curl concealeth mysteries:
     Cried Beauty, 'When I met this youth I knew *
          'Tis Allah's loom such gorgeous robe supplies.'"

When she had finished her song, Ali bin Bakkar said to the
slave-maiden nearest him, "Sing us somewhat, thou O damsel." So
she took the lute and began singing,

     "Our trysting-time is all too short *
          For this long coyish coquetry:
     How long this 'Nay, Nay!' and 'Wait, wait?' *
          This is not old nobility!
     And now that Time deigns lend delight *
          Profit of th' opportunity."

When she ended, Ali bin Bakkar followed up her song with flowing
tears; and, as Shams al-Nahar saw him weeping and groaning and
complaining, she burned with love-longing and desire; and passion
and transport consumed her. So she rose from the sofa and came to
the door of the alcove, where Ali met her and they embraced with
arms round the neck, and fell down fainting in the doorway;
whereupon the damsels came to them and carrying them into the
alcove, sprinkled rose-water upon them both. When they recovered,
they found not Abu al-Hasan who had hidden himself by the side of
a couch, and the young lady said, "Where is Abu al-Hasan?" So he
showed himself to her from beside the couch and she saluted him,
saying, "I pray Allah to give me the means of requiting thee, O
kindest of men!" Then she turned to Ali bin Bakkar and said to
him, "O my lord, passion hath not reached this extreme pass with
thee without my feeling the like; but we have nothing to do save
to bear patiently what calamity hath befallen us." Replied he,
"By Allah, O my lady, union with thee may not content me nor
gazing upon thee assuage the fire thou hast lighted, nor shall
leave me the love of thee which hath mastered my heart but with
the leaving of my life." So saying, he wept and the tears ran
down upon his cheeks like thridded pearls; and when Shams
al-Nahar saw him weep, she wept for his weeping. But Abu al-Hasan
exclaimed, "By Allah, I wonder at your case and am confounded at
your condition; of a truth, your affair is amazing and your
chance dazing. What! this weeping while ye are yet together: then
how will it be what time ye are parted and far separated?" And he
continued, "Indeed, this is no tide for weeping and wailing, but
a season for meeting and merry-making; rejoice, therefore, and
take your pleasure and shed no more tears!" Then Shams al-Nahar
signed to a slave-girl, who arose and presently returned with
handmaids bearing a table, whose dishes of silver were full of
various rich viands. They set the table before the pair and Shams
al-Nahar began to eat[FN#181] and to place tid-bits in the mouth
of Ali bin Bakkar; and they ceased not so doing till they were
satisfied, when the table was removed and they washed their
hands. Then the waiting-women fetched censers with all manner of
incense, aloe-wood and ambergris and mixed scents; and
sprinkling-flasks full of rose-water were also brought and they
were fumigated and perfumed. After this the slaves set on vessels
of graven gold, containing all kinds of sherbets, besides fruits
fresh and dried, that heart can desire and eye delight in; and
lastly one brought a flagon of carnelion full of old wine. Then
Shams al-Nahar chose out ten handmaids to attend on them and ten
singing women; and, dismissing the rest to their apartments, bade
some of those who remained strike the lute. They did as she bade
them and one of them began to sing,

     "My soul to him who smiled back my salute, *
          In breast reviving hopes that were no mo'e: 
     The hand o' Love my secret brought to light, *
          And censor's tongues what lies my ribs below:[FN#182] 
     My tear-drops ever press twixt me and him, *
          As though my tear-drops showing love would flow."

When she had finished her singing, Shams al-Nahar rose and,
filling a goblet, drank it off, then crowned it again and handed
it to Ali bin Bakkar;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams
al-Nahar filled a goblet and handed it to Ali bin Bakkar; after
which she bade another damsel sing; and she began singing these
couplets,

     "My tears thus flowing rival with my wine, *
          Pouring the like of what fills cup to brink:[FN#183] 
     By Allah wot I not an run these eyne *
          Wi' wine, or else it is of tears I drink."

And when she ended her recitation, Ali bin Bakkar drained his cup
and returned it to Shams al-Nahar. She filled it again and gave
it to Abu al-Hasan who tossed it off. Then she took the lute,
saying, "None shall sing over my cup save myself;" so she screwed
up the strings and intoned these verses,

"The tears run down his cheeks in double row, *
     And in his breast high flameth lover-lowe: 
He weeps when near, a-fearing to be far; *
     And, whether far or near, his tear-drops flow."

And the words of another,

"Our life to thee, O cup-boy Beauty-dight! *
     From parted hair to calves; from black to white: 
Sol beameth from thy hands, and from thy lips *
     Pleiads, and full Moon through thy collar's night,[FN#184] 
Good sooth the cups, which made our heads fly round, *
     Are those thine eyes pass round to daze the sight: 
No wonder lovers hail thee as full moon *
     Waning to them, for self e'er waxing bright: 
Art thou a deity to kill and quicken, *
     Bidding this fere, forbidding other wight? 
Allah from model of thy form made Beau *
     -ty and the Zephyr scented with thy sprite. 
Thou art not of this order of human *
     -ity but angel lent by Heaven to man."

When Ali bin Bakkar and Abu al-Hasan and those present heard
Shams al-Nahar's song, they were like to fly for joy, and sported
and laughed; but while they were thus enjoying themselves lo! up
came a damsel, trembling for fear and said, "O my lady, the
Commander of the Faithful's eunuchs are at the door, Afif and
Masrur and Marjan[FN#185] and others whom wot I not." When they
heard this they were like to die with fright, but Shams al-Nahar
laughed and said, "Have no fear!" Then quoth she to the damsel,
"Keep answering them whilst we remove hence." And she caused the
doors of the alcove to be closed upon Ali and Abu al-Hasan, and
let down the curtains over the entrance (they being still
within); after which she shut the door of the saloon and went out
by the privy wicket into the flower-garden, where she seated
herself on a couch she had there and made one of the damsels
knead her feet.[FN#186] Then she dismissed the rest of her women
to their rooms and bade the portress admit those who were at the
door; whereupon Masrur entered, he and his company of twenty with
drawn swords. And when they saluted her, she asked, "Wherefore
come ye?"; whereto they answered, "The Commander of the Faithful
saluteth thee. Indeed he is desolated for want of thy sight; he
letteth thee know that this be to him a day of joy and great
gladness and he wisheth to seal his day and complete his pleasure
with thy company at this very hour. So say, wilt go to him or
shall he come to thee?" Upon this she rose and, kissing the
earth, replied, "I hear and I obey the commandment of the Prince
of True Believers!" Then she summoned the women guards of her
household and other slave-damsels, who lost no time in attending
upon her and made a show of obeying the Caliph's orders. And
albeit everything about the place was in readiness, she said to
the eunuchs, "Go to the Commander of the Faithful and tell him
that I await him after a little space, that I may make ready for
him a place with carpets and other matters." So they returned in
haste to the Caliph, whilst Shams al-Nahar, doffing her outer
gear, repaired to her lover, Ali bin Bakkar, and drew him to her
bosom and bade him farewell, whereat he wept sore and said, "O my
lady, this leave-taking will cause the ruin of my very self and
the loss of my very soul; but I pray Allah grant me patience to
support the passion wherewith he hath afflicted me!" Replied she,
"By Allah, none shall suffer perdition save I; for thou wilt fare
forth to the bazar and consort with those that shall divert thee,
and thy life will be sound and thy love hidden forsure; but I
shall fall into trouble and tristesse nor find any to console me,
more by token that I have given the Caliph a tryst, wherein haply
great peril shall betide me by reason of my love for thee and my
longing for thee and my grief at being parted from thee. For with
what tongue shall I sing and with what heart shall I present
myself before the Caliph? and with what speech shall I company
the Commander of the Faithful in his cups? and with what eyes
shall I look upon a place where thou art absent? and with what
taste shall I drink wine of which thou drinkest not?" Quoth Abu
al-Hasan, "Be not troubled but take patience and be not remiss in
entertaining the Commander of the Faithful this night, neither
show him any neglect, but be of good heart." Now at this
juncture, behold, up came a damsel, who said to Shams al-Nahar,
"O my lady, the Caliph's pages are come." So she hastily rose to
her feet and said to the maid, "Take Abu al-Hasan and his friend
and carry them to the upper balcony[FN#187] giving upon the
garden and there leave them till darkness come on; when do thou
contrive to carry them forth." Accordingly the girl led them up
to the balcony and, locking the door upon them both, went her
way. As they sat looking on the garden lo! the Caliph appeared
escorted by near an hundred eunuchs, with drawn swords in hand
and girt about with a score of damsels, as they were moons, all
clad in the richest of raiment and on each one's head was a crown
set with jewels and rubies; while each carried a lighted
flambeau. The Caliph walked in their midst, they encompassing him
about on all sides, and Masrur and Afif and Wasif[FN#188] went
before him and he bore himself with a graceful gait. So Shams
al-Nahar and her maidens rose to receive him and, meeting him at
the garden-door, kissed ground between his hands; nor did they
cease to go before him till they brought him to the couch whereon
he sat down, whilst all the waiting-women who were in the garden
and the eunuchs stood before him and there came fair handmaids
and concubines holding in hand lighted candles and perfumes and
incense and instruments of mirth and music. Then the Sovereign
bade the singers sit down, each in her place, and Shams al-Nahar
came up and, seating herself on a stool by the side of the
Caliph's couch, began to converse with him; all this happening
whilst Abu al-Hasan and Ali bin Bakkar looked on and listened,
unseen of the King. Presently the Caliph fell to jesting and
toying with Shams al-Nahar and both were in the highest spirits,
glad and gay, when he bade them throw open the garden pavilion.
So they opened the doors and windows and lighted the tapers till
the place shone in the season of darkness even as the day. Then
the eunuchs removed thither the wine-service and (quoth Abu
al-Hasan) "I saw drinking-vessels and rarities whose like mine
eyes never beheld, vases of gold and silver and all manner of
noble metals and precious stones, such as no power of description
can describe, till indeed it seemed to me I was dreaming, for
excess of amazement at what I saw!" But as for Ali bin Bakkar,
from the moment Shams al-Nahar left him, he lay strown on the
ground for stress of love and desire; and, when he revived, he
fell to gazing upon these things that had not their like and
saying to Abu al-Hasan, "O my brother, I fear lest the Caliph see
us or come to know of our case; but the most of my fear is for
thee. For myself, of a truth I know that I am about to be lost
past recourse, and the cause of my destruction is naught but love
and longing and excess of desire and distraction, and disunion
from my beloved after union with her; but I beseech Allah to
deliver us from this perilous predicament." And they ceased not
to look out of the balcony on the Caliph who was taking his
pleasure, till the banquet was spread before him, when he turned
to one of the damsels and said to her, "O Gharam,[FN#189] let us
hear some of thine enchanting songs." So she took the lute and
tuning it, began singing,

"The longing of a Bedouin maid, whose folks are far away, *
     Who yearns after the willow of the Hejaz and the
     bay,[FN#190]--
Whose tears, when she on travellers lights, might for their water
     serve * And eke her her passion, with its heat, their
     bivouac-fire purvey,--
Is not more fierce nor ardent than my longing for my love, *
     Who deems that I commit a crime in loving him
     alway."[FN#191]

Now when Shams al-Nahar heard these verses she slipped off the
stool whereon she sat and fell to the earth fainting and became
insensible to the world around her; upon which the damsels came
and lifted her up. And when Ali bin Bakkar saw this from the
balcony he also slipped down senseless, and Abu al-Hasan said,
"Verily Fate hath divided love-desire equally upon you
twain!"[FN#192] As he spoke lo! in came the damsel who had led
them up to the balcony and said to him, "O Abu al-Hasan, arise
thou and thy friend and come down, for of a truth the world hath
waxed strait upon us and I fear lest our case be discovered or
the Caliph become aware of you; unless you descend at once we are
dead ones." Quoth he, "And how shall this youth descend with me
seeing that he hath no strength to rise?" Thereupon the damsel
began sprinkling rose-water on Ali bin Bakkar till he came to his
senses, when Abu al-Hasan lifted him up and the damsel made him
lean upon her. So they went down from the balcony and walked on
awhile till the damsel opened a little iron door, and made the
two friends pass through it, and they came upon a bench by the
Tigris' bank. Thereupon the slave-girl clapped her hands[FN#193]
and there came up a man with a little boat to whom said she,
"Take up these two young men and land them on the opposite side."
So both entered the boat and, as the man rowed off with them and
they left the garden behind them, Ali bin Bakkar looked back
towards the Caliph's palace and the pavilion and the grounds; and
bade them farewell with these two couplets,

     "I offered this weak hand as last farewell, *
          While to heart-burning fire that hand is guided:
     O let not this end union! Let not this *
          Be last provision for long road provided!"

Thereupon the damsel said to the boatman, "Make haste with them
both." So he plied his oars deftly (the slave-girl being still
with them);--And Shahrazad perceived the dawning day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the boatman
rowed them towards the other bank till they reached it and
landed, whereupon she took leave of them, saying, "It were my
wish not to abandon you, but I can go no farther than this." Then
she turned back, whilst Ali bin Bakkar lay prostrate on the
ground before Abu al-Hasan and by no manner of means could he
rise, till his friend said to him, "Indeed this place is not sure
and I fear lest we lose our lives in this very spot, by reason of
the lewd fellows who infest it and highwaymen and men of
lawlessness." Upon this Ali bin Bakkar arose and walked a little
but could not continue walking. Now Abu al-Hasan had friends in
that quarter; so he made search for one of them, in whom he
trusted, and who was of his intimates, and knocked at the door.
The man came out quickly and seeing them, bade them welcome and
brought them into his house, where he seated them and talked with
them and asked them whence they came. Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "We
came out but now, being obliged thereto by a person with whom I
had dealings and who hath in his hands dirhams of mine. And it
reached me that he designed to flee into foreign parts with my
monies; so I fared forth to-night in quest of him, taking with me
for company this youth, Ali bin Bakkar; but, when we came hoping
to see the debtor, he hid from us and we could get no sight of
him. Accordingly we turned back, empty-handed without a doit, but
it was irksome to us to return home at this hour of the night; so
weeting not whither to go, we came to thee, well knowing thy
kindness and wonted courtesy." "Ye are welcome and well come!"
answered the host, and studied to do them honour; so the twain
abode with him the rest of their night and as soon as the
daylight dawned, they left him and made their way back without
aught of delay to the city. When they came to the house of Abu
al-Hasan, he conjured his comrade to enter; so they went in and
lying down on the bed, slept awhile. As soon as they awoke, Abu
al-Hasan bade his servants spread the house with rich carpets,
saying in his mind, "Needs must I divert this youth and distract
him from thinking of his affliction, for I know his case better
than another." Then he called for water for Ali bin Bakkar who,
when it was brought, rose up from his bed and making his
ablutions, prayed the obligatory prayers which he had omitted for
the past day and night[FN#194]; after which he sat down and began
to solace himself by talking with his friend. When Abu al-Hasan
saw this, he turned to him and said, "O my lord, it were fitter
for thy case that thou abide with me this night, so thy breast
may be broadened and the distress of love-longing that is upon
thee be dispelled and thou make merry with us, so haply the fire
of thy heart may thus be quenched." Ali replied, "O my brother,
do what seemeth good to thee; for I may not on any wise escape
from what calamity hath befallen me; so act as thou wilt."
Accordingly, Abu al-Hasan arose and bade his servants summon some
of the choicest of his friends and sent for singers and musicians
who came; and meanwhile he made ready meat and drink for them; so
they sat eating and drinking and making merry through the rest of
the day till nightfall. Then they lit the candles, and the cups
of friendship and good fellowship went round amongst them and the
time passed pleasantly with them. Presently, a singing-woman took
the lute and began singing, 

"I've been shot by Fortune, and shaft of eye *
     Down struck me and parted from fondest friend:
Time has proved him foe and my patience failed, *
     Yet I ever expected it thus would end."

When Ali bin Bakkar heard her words, he fell to the earth in a
swoon and ceased not lying in his fainting fit till day-break;
and Abu al-Hasan despaired of him. But, with the dawning, he came
to himself and sought to go home; nor could his friend hinder
him, for fear of the issue of his affair. So he made his servants
bring a she-mule and, mounting Ali thereon, carried him to his
lodgings, he and one of his men. When he was safe at home, Abu
al-Hasan thanked Allah for his deliverance from that sore peril
and sat awhile with him, comforting him; but Ali could not
contain himself, for the violence of his love and longing. So Abu
al-Hasan rose to take leave of him and return to his own
place.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
al-Hasan rose to take leave of him, Ali son of Bakkar exclaimed,
"O my brother, leave me not without news." "I hear and obey,"
replied the other; and forthwith went away and, repairing to his
shop, opened it and sat there all day, expecting news of Shams
al-Nahar. But none came. He passed the night in his own house
and, when dawned the day, he walked to Ali bin Bakkar's lodging
and went in and found him thrown on his bed, with his friends
about him and physicians around him prescribing something or
other, and the doctors feeling his pulse. When he saw Abu
al-Hasan enter he smiled, and the visitor, after saluting him,
enquired how he did and sat with him till the folk withdrew, when
he said to him, "What plight is this?" Quoth Ali bin Bakkar, "It
was bruited abroad that I was ill and my comrades heard the
report; and I have no strength to rise and walk so as to give him
the lie who noised abroad my sickness, but continue lying strown
here as thou seest. So my friends came to visit me; say, however,
O my brother, hast thou seen the slave-girl or heard any news of
her?" He replied, "I have not seen her, since the day we parted
from her on Tigris' bank;" and he presently added, "O my brother,
beware thou of scandal and leave this weeping." Rejoined Ali, "O
my brother, indeed, I have no control over myself;" and he sighed
and began reciting,

"She gives her woman's hand a force that fails the hand of me, *
     And with red dye on wrist she gars my patience fail and
     flee:
And for her hand she fears so sore what shafts her eyes
     discharge, * She's fain to clothe and guard her hand with
     mail-ring panoply:[FN#195]
The leach in ignorance felt my pulse the while to him I cried, *
     'Sick is my heart, so quit my hand which hath no malady:'
Quoth she to that fair nightly vision favoured me and fled, *
     'By Allah picture him nor add nor 'bate in least degree!'
Replied the Dream, 'I leave him though he die of thirst,'
     I cry, * 'Stand off from water-pit and say why this
     persistency.'
Rained tear-pearls her Narcissus-eyes, and rose on cheek belit *
     She made my sherbet, and the lote with bits of hail she
     bit."[FN#196]

And when his recital was ended he said, "O Abu al-Hasan, I am
smitten with an affliction from which I deemed myself in perfect
surety, and there is no greater ease for me than death." Replied
he, "Be patient, haply Allah will heal thee!" Then he went out
from him and repairing to his shop opened it, nor had he sat
long, when suddenly up came the handmaid who saluted him. He
returned her salam and looking at her, saw that her heart was
palpitating and that she was in sore trouble and showed signs of
great affliction: so he said to her, "Thou art welcome and well
come! How is it with Shams al-Nahar?" She answered, "I will
presently tell thee, but first let me know how doth Ali bin
Bakkar." So he told her all that had passed and how his case
stood, whereat she grieved and sighed and lamented and marvelled
at his condition. Then said she, "My lady's case is still
stranger than this; for when you went away and fared homewards, I
turned back, my heart beating hard on your account and hardly
crediting your escape. On entering I found her lying prostrate in
the pavilion, speaking not nor answering any, whilst the
Commander of the Faithful sat by her head not knowing what ailed
her and finding none who could make known to him aught of her
ailment. She ceased not from her swoon till midnight, when she
recovered and the Prince of the Faithful said to her, 'What harm
hath happened to thee, O Shams al-Nahar, and what hath befallen
thee this night?' Now when she heard the Caliph's words she
kissed his feet and said, 'Allah make me thy ransom, O Prince of
True Believers! Verily a sourness of stomach lighted a fire in my
body, so that I lost my senses for excess of pain, and I know no
more of my condition.' Asked the Caliph, 'What hast thou eaten
to-day?'; and she answered, 'I broke my fast on something I had
never tasted before.' Then she feigned to be recovered and
calling for a something of wine, drank it, and begged the
Sovereign to resume his diversion. So he sat down again on his
couch in the pavilion and the sitting was resumed, but when she
saw me, she asked me how you fared. I told her what I had done
with you both and repeated to her the verses which Ali bin Bakkar
had composed at parting-tide, whereat she wept secretly, but
presently held her peace. After awhile, the Commander of the
Faithful ordered a damsel to sing, and she began reciting,

     'Life has no sweet for me since forth ye fared; *
          Would Heaven I wot how fare ye who forsake:
     'Twere only fit my tears were tears of blood, *
          Since you are weeping for mine absence sake.'

But when my lady heard this verse she fell back on the sofa in a
swoon,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
slave-girl continued to Abu al-Hasan, "But when my lady heard
this verse, she fell back on the sofa in a swoon, and I seized
her hand and sprinkled rose-water on her face, till she revived,
when I said to her, 'O my lady, expose not thyself and all thy
palace containeth. By the life of thy beloved, be thou patient!'
She replied, 'Can aught befal me worse than death which indeed I
seek, for by Allah, my ease is therein?' Whilst we were thus
talking, another damsel sang these words of the poet,

     'Quoth they, 'Maybe that Patience lend thee ease!' *
          Quoth I, 'Since fared he where is Patience' place?
     Covenant he made 'twixt me and him, to cut *
          The cords of Patience at our last embrace!'[FN#197]

And as soon as she had finished her verse Shams al-Nahar swooned
away once more, which when the Caliph saw, he came to her in
haste and commanded the wine to be removed and each damsel to
return to her chamber. He abode with her the rest of the night,
and when dawned the day, he sent for chirurgeons and leaches and
bade them medicine her, knowing not that her sickness arose from
love and longing. I tarried with her till I deemed her in a way
of recovery, and this is what kept me from thee. I have now left
her with a number of her body-women, who were greatly concerned
for her, when she bade me go to you two and bring her news of Ali
bin Bakkar and return to her with the tidings." When Abu al-Hasan
heard her story, he marvelled and said, "By Allah, I have
acquainted thee with his whole case; so now return to thy
mistress; and salute her for me and diligently exhort her to have
patience and say to her, 'Keep thy secret!'; and tell her that I
know all her case which is indeed hard and one which calleth for
nice conduct." She thanked him and taking leave of him, returned
to her mistress. So far concerning her; but as regards Abu
al-Hasan, he ceased not to abide in his shop till the end of the
day, when he arose and shut it and locked it and betaking himself
to Ali bin Bakkar's house knocked at the door. One of the
servants came out and admitted him; and when Ali saw him, he
smiled and congratulated himself on his coming, saying, "O Abu
al-Hasan, thou hast desolated me by thine absence this day; for
indeed my soul is pledged to thee during the rest of my time."
Answered the other, "Leave this talk! Were thy healing at the
price of my hand, I would cut it off ere thou couldst ask me;
and, could I ransom thee with my life, I had already laid it down
for thee. Now this very day, Shams al-Nahar's handmaid hath been
with me and told me that what hindered her coming ere this was
the Caliph's sojourn with her mistress; and she acquainted me
with everything which had betided her." And he went on to repeat
to him all that the girl had told him of Shams al-Nahar; at which
Ali bin Bakkar lamented sore and wept and said to him, "Allah
upon thee, O my brother, help me in this affliction and teach me
what course I shall take. Moreover, I beg thee of thy grace to
abide with me this night, that I may have the solace of thy
society." Abu al-Hasan agreed to this request, replying that he
would readily night there; so they talked together till even-tide
darkened, when Ali bin Bakkar groaned aloud and lamented and wept
copious tears, reciting these couplets,

     "Thine image in these eyne, a-lip thy name, *
          My heart thy home; how couldst thou disappear?
     How sore I grieve for life which comes to end, *
          Nor see I boon of union far or near."

And these the words of another,

"She split my casque of courage with eye-swords that sorely
     smite; * She pierced my patience' ring-mail with her shape
     like cane-spear light:
Patched by the musky mole on cheek was to our sight displayed *
     Camphor set round with ambergris, light dawning through the
     night.[FN#198]
Her soul was sorrowed and she bit carnelion stone with pearls *
     Whose unions in a sugared tank ever to lurk unite:[FN#199]
Restless she sighed and smote with palm the snows that clothe her
     breast, * And left a mark whereon I looked and ne'er beheld
     such sight, 
Pens, fashioned of her coral nails with ambergris for ink, * 
     Five lines on crystal page of breast did cruelly indite:
O swordsmen armed with trusty steel! I bid you all beware *
     When she on you bends deadly glance which fascinates the
     sprite: 
And guard thyself, O thou of spear! whenas she draweth near *
     To tilt with slender quivering shape, likest the nut-brown
     spear."

And when Ali bin Bakkar ended his verse, he cried out with a
great cry and fell down in a fit. Abu al-Hasan thought that his
soul had fled his body and he ceased not from his swoon till day-
break, when he came to himself and talked with his friend, who
continued to sit with him till the forenoon. Then he left him and
repaired to his shop; and hardly had he opened it, when lo! the
damsel came and stood by his side. As soon as he saw her, she
made him a sign of salutation which he returned; and she
delivered to him the greeting message of her mistress and asked,
"How doth Ali bin Bakkar?" Answered he, "O handmaid of good, ask
me not of his case nor what he suffereth for excess of
love-longing; he sleepeth not by night neither resteth he by day;
wakefulness wasteth him and care hath conquered him and his
condition is a consternation to his friend." Quoth she, "My lady
saluteth thee and him, and she hath written him a letter, for
indeed she is in worse case than he; and she entrusted the same
to me, saying, 'Do not return save with the answer; and do thou
obey my bidding.' Here now is the letter, so say, wilt thou wend
with me to him that we may get his reply?" "I hear and obey,"
answered Abu al-Hasan, and locking his shop and taking with him
the girl he went, by a way different from that whereby he came,
to Ali bin Bakkar's house, where he left her standing at the door
and walked in.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
al-Hasan went with the girl to the house of Ali son of Bakkar,
where he left her standing at the door and walked in to his great
joy. And Abu al-Hasan said to him, "The reason of my coming is
that such an one hath sent his handmaid to thee with a letter,
containing his greeting to thee and mentioning therein that the
cause of his not coming to thee was a matter that hath betided
him. The girl standeth even now at the door: shall she have leave
to enter?"; and he signed to him that it was Shams al-Nahar's
slave-girl. Ali understood his signal and answered, "Bring her
in," and when he saw her, he shook for joy and signed to her,
"How doth thy lord?; Allah grant him health and healing!" "He is
well," answered she and pulling out the letter gave it to him. He
took it and kissing it, opened and read it; after which he handed
it to Abu al-Hasan, who found these verses written therein,

     "This messenger shall give my news to thee; *
          Patience what while my sight thou canst not see:
     A lover leav'st in love's insanity, *
          Whose eyne abide on wake incessantly:
     I suffer patience-pangs in woes that none *
          Of men can medicine;--such my destiny!
     Keep cool thine eyes; ne'er shall my heart forget, *
          Nor without dream of thee one day shall be.
     Look what befel thy wasted frame, and thence *
          Argue what I am doomed for love to dree!

"And af