grain gone, stood awhile wondering; after which she sat down to
watch and find out who might be the intruder and make him account
for her loss.  After a while, out crept the ichneumon to carry
off the grain as was her wont, but spying the woman seated there,
knew that she was on the watch for her and said in her mind,
"Verily, this affair is like to end blameably; and sore I fear me
this woman is on the look-out for me, and Fortune is no friend to
who attend not to issue and end: so there is no help for it but
that I do a fair deed, whereby I may manifest my innocence and
wash out all the ill-doings I have done."  So saying, she began
to take the sesame out of her hole and carry it forth and lay it
back upon the rest.  The woman stood by and, seeing the ichneumon
do thus, said to herself, "Verily this is not the cause of our
loss, for she bringeth it back from the hole of him who stole it
and returneth it to its place; and of a truth she hath done us a
kindness in restoring us the sesame, and the reward of those who
do us good is that we do them the like good.  It is clear that it
is not she who stole the grain; but I will not cease my watching
till he fall into my hands and I find out who is the thief."  The
ichneumon guess what was in her mind, so she went to the mouse
and said to her, "O my sister, there is no good in one who
observeth not the claims of neighborship and who showeth no
constancy in friendship."  The mouse replied, "Even so, O my
friend, and I delight in thee and in they neighborhood; but what
be the motive of this speech?"  Quoth the ichneumon, "The house-
master hath brought home sesame and hath eaten his fill of it, he
and his family, and hath left much; every living being hath eaten
of it and, if thou take of it in they turn, thou art worthier
thereof than any other."  This pleased the mouse and she squeaked
for joy and danced and frisked her ears and tail, and greed for
the grain deluded her; so she rose at once and issuing forth of
her home, saw the sesame husked and dry, shining with whiteness,
and the woman sitting at watch and ward.  The mouse, taking no
thought to the issue of the affair (for the woman had armed
herself with a cudgel), and unable to contain herself, ran up to
the sesame and began turning it over and eating of it; whereupon
the woman smote her with that club and cleft her head: so the
cause of her destruction were her greed and heedlessness of
consequences.  Then said the Sultan, "O Shahrazad, by Allah! this
be a goodly parable!  Say me, hast thou any story bearing on the
beauty of true friendship and the observance of its duty in time
of distress and rescuing from destruction?"  Answered she:--Yes,
it hath reached me that they tell a tale of




                  THE CAT[FN#166] AND THE CROW



Once upon a time, a crow and a cat lived in brotherhood; and one
day as they were together under a tree, behold, they spied a
leopard making towards them, and they were not aware of his
approach till he was close upon them.  The crow at once flew up
to the tree-top; but the cat abode confounded and said to the
crow, "O my friend, hast thou no device to save me, even as all
my hope is in thee?"  Replied the crow, "Of very truth it
behoveth brethren, in case of need, to cast about for a device
when peril overtaketh them, and how well saith the poet,

     ‘A friend in need is he who, ever true, *
     For they well-doing would himself undo:
     One who when Fortune gars us parting rue *
     Victimeth self reunion to renew.'"

Now hard by that tree were shepherds with their dogs; so the crow
flew towards them and smote the face of the earth with his wings,
cawing and crying out.  Furthermore he went up to one of the dogs
and flapped his wings in his face and flew up a little way,
whilst the dog ran after him thinking to catch him.  Presently,
one of the shepherds raised his head and saw the bird flying near
the ground and lighting alternately; so he followed him, and the
crow ceased not flying just high enough to save himself and to
throw out the dogs; and yet tempting them to follow for the
purpose of tearing him to pieces.  But as soon as they came near
him, he would fly up a little; and so at last he brought them to
the tree, under which was the leopard.  And when the dogs saw him
they rushed upon him and he turned and fled.  Now the leopard
thought to eat the cat who was saved by the craft of his friend
the crow.  This story, O King, showeth that the friendship of the
Brothers of Purity[FN#167] delivereth and saveth from
difficulties and from falling into mortal dangers.  And they also
tell a tale of




                      THE FOX AND THE CROW



A Fox once dwelt in a cave of a certain mountain and, as often as
a cub was born to him and grew stout, he would eat the young one,
for he had died of hunger, had he instead of so doing left the
cub alive and bred it by his side and preserved and cherished his
issue.  Yet was this very grievous to him.  Now on the crest of
the same mountain a crow had made his nest, and the fox said to
himself, "I have a mind to set up a friendship with this crow and
make a comrade of him, that he may help me to my daily bread; for
he can do in such matters what I cannot."  So he drew near the
crow's home and, when he came within sound of speech, he saluted
him and said, "O my neighbour, verily a true-believer hath two
claims upon his true-believing neighbour, the right of
neighbourliness and the right of Al-Islam, our common faith; and
know, O my friend, that thou art my neighbour and thou hast a
claim upon me which it behoveth me to observe, the more that I
have long been thy neighbour.  Also, there be implanted in my
breast a store of love to thee, which biddeth me speak thee fair
and obligeth me to solicit thy brothership.  What sayest thou in
reply?"  Answered the crow, "Verily, the truest speech is the
best speech; and haply thou speakest with thy tongue that which
is not in thy heart; so I fear lest thy brotherhood be only of
the tongue, outward, and thy enmity be in the heart, inward; for
that thou art the Eater and I the Eaten, and faring apart were
apter to us than friendship and fellowship.  What, then, maketh
thee seek that which thou mayst not gain and desire what may not
be done, seeing that I be of the bird-kind and thou be of the
beast-kind?  Verily, this thy proffered brotherhood[FN#168] may
not be made, neither were it seemly to make it."  Rejoined the
fox, "Of a truth whoso knoweth the abiding-place of excellent
things, maketh better choice in what he chooseth therefrom, so
perchance he may advantage his brethren; and indeed I should love
to wone near thee and I have sued for thine intimacy, to the end
that we may help each other to our several objects; and success
shall surely wait upon our amity.  I have a many tales of the
goodliness of true friendship, which I will relate to thee if
thou wish the relating."  Answered the crow, "Thou hast my leave
to let me hear thy communication; so tell thy tale, and relate it
to me that I may hearken to it and weigh it and judge of thine
intent thereby."  Rejoined the fox, "Hear then, O my friend, that
which is told of a flea and a mouse and which beareth out what I
have said to thee."  Asked the crow, "How so?" and the fox
answered:--They tell this tale of




The Flea and the Mouse



Once upon a time a mouse dwelt in the house of a merchant who
owned much merchandise and great stories of monies.  One night, a
flea took shelter in the merchant's carpet-bed and, finding his
body soft, and being thirsty drank of his blood.  The merchant
was awakened by the smart of the bite and sitting up called to
his slave-girls and serving men.  So they hastened to him and,
tucking up their sleeves, fell to searching for the flea; but as
soon as the bloodsucker was aware of the search, he turned to
flee and coming on the mouse's home, entered it.  When the mouse
saw him, she said to him, "What bringeth thee in to me, thou who
art not of my nature nor of my kind, and who canst not be assured
of safety from violence or of not being expelled with roughness
and ill usage?"  Answered the flea, "Of a truth, I took refuge in
thy dwelling to save me from slaughter; and I have come to thee
seeking thy protection and on nowise coveting thy house; nor
shall any mischief betide thee from me to make thee leave thy
home.  Nay I hope right soon to repay thy favours to me with all
good and then shalt thou see and praise the issue of my words." 
And when the mouse heard the speech of the flea, - And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-first Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
mouse heard the words of the flea, she said, "If the case be as
thou dost relate and describe, then be at thine ease here; for
naught shall befal thee save the rain of peace and safety; nor
shall aught betide thee but what shall joy thee and shall not
annoy thee, nor shall it annoy me.  I will lavish on thee my
affections without stint; and do not thou regret having lost the
merchant's blood nor lament for thy subsistence from him, but be
content with what sustenance thou canst obtain; for indeed that
is the safer for thee.  And I have heard, O flea, that one of the
gnomic poets saith as follows in these couplets,

‘I have fared content in my solitude *
     With wate'er befel, and led life of ease,
On a water-draught and a bite of bread, *
     Coarse salt and a gown of tattered frieze:
Allah might, an He pleased, give me easiest life, *
     But with whatso pleaseth Him self I please.'"

Now when the flea heard these words of the mouse, he rejoined, "I
hearken to thy charge and I submit myself to obey thee, nor have
I power to gainsay thee, till life be fulfilled in this righteous
intention."  Replied the mouse, "Pure intention sufficeth to
sincere affection."  So the tie of love arose and was knitted
between them twain, and after this, the flea used to visit the
merchant's bed by night and not exceed in his diet, and house him
by day in the hole of the mouse.  Now it came to pass one night,
the merchant brought home great store of dinars and began to turn
them over.  When the mouse heard the chink of the coin, she put
her head out of her hole and fell to gazing at it, till the
merchant laid it under his pillow and went to sleep, when she
said to the flea, "Seest thou not the proffered occasion and the
great good fortune?  Hast thou any device to bring us to our
desire of yonder dinars?  Quoth the flea, "Verily, it is not good
that one strives for aught, unless he be able to win his will;
because, if he lack ability thereto, he falleth into that which
he should avoid and he attaineth not his wish by reason of his
weakness, albeit he use all power of cunning, like the sparrow
which picketh up grain and falleth into the net and is caught by
the fowler.  Thou hast no strength to take the dinars and to
transport them out of this house, nor have I force sufficient to
do this; I the contrary, I could not carry a single ducat of
them; so what hast thou to do with them?"  Quoth the mouse, "I
have made me for my house these seventy openings, whence I may go
out at my desire, and I have set apart a place strong and safe,
for things of price; and if thou can contrive to get the merchant
out of the house, I doubt not of success, an so be that 
Fate aid me."  Answered the flea, "I will engage to get him out
of the house for thee;" and, going to the merchant's bed, bit him
a fearful bite, such as he had never before felt, then fled to a
place of safety, where he had no fear of the man.  So the
merchant awoke and sought for the flea, but finding him not, lay
down again on his other side.  Then the flea bit him a second
time more painfully than before.  So he lost patience and,
leaving his bed, went out and lay down on the bench before his
door and slept there and woke not till the morning.  Meanwhile
the mouse came out and fell to carrying the dinars into her hole,
till she left not a single one; and when day dawned the merchant
began to suspect the folk and fancy all manner of fancies.  And
(continued the fox) know thou, O wise and experienced crow with
the clear-seeing eyes, that I tell thee this only to the intent
that thou mayst reap the recompense of thy kindness to me, even
as the mouse reaped the reward of her kindness to the flea; for
see how he repaid her and requited her with the goodliest of
requitals.  Said the crow, "It lies with the benefactor to show
benevolence or not to show it; nor is it incumbent on us to
entreat kindly one who seeketh a connection that entaileth
separation from kith and kin.  If I show thee favour who art my
foe by kind, I am the cause of cutting myself off from the world;
and thou, O fox, art full of wiles and guiles.  Now those whose
characteristics are craft and cunning, must not be trusted upon
oath; and whoso is not to be trusted upon oath, in him there is
no good faith.  The tidings lately reached me of thy treacherous
dealing with one of thy comrades, which was a wolf; and how thou
didst deceive him until thou leddest him into destruction by thy
perfidy and stratagems; and this thou diddest after he was of
thine own kind and thou hadst long consorted with him: yet didst
thou not spare him; and if thou couldst deal thus with thy fellow
which was of thine own kind, how can I have trust in they truth
and what would be thy dealing with thy foe of other kind than thy
kind?  Nor can I compare thee and me but with the saker and the
birds."  "How so?" asked the fox.  Answered the crow, they relate
this tale of 




The Saker[FN#169] and the Birds.



There was once a saker who was a cruel tyrant"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-second Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the crow
pursued, "They relate that there was once a saker who was a cruel
tyrant in the days of his youth, so that the raveners of the air
and the scavengers of the earth feared him, none being safe from
his mischief; and many were the haps and mishaps of his tyranny
and his violence, for this saker was ever in the habit of
oppressing and injuring all the other birds.  As the years passed
over him, he grew feeble and his force failed him, so that he was
often famished; but his cunning waxed stronger with the waning of
his strength and redoubled in his endeavour and determined to be
present at the general assembly of the birds, that he might eat
of their orts and leavings; so in this manner he fed by fraud
instead of feeding by fierceness and force.  And out, O fox, art
like this:  if thy might fail thee, thy sleight faileth thee not;
and I doubt not that thy seeking my society is a fraud to get thy
food; but I am none of those who fall to thee and put fist into
thy fist;[FN#170] for that Allah hath vouchsafed force to my
wings and caution to my mind and sharp sight to my eyes; and I
know that whoso apeth a stronger than he, wearieth himself and
haply cometh to ruin.  Wherefore I fear for thee lest, if thou
ape a stronger than thyself, there befal thee what befel the
sparrow."  Asked the fox, "What befel the sparrow?"  Allah upon
thee, tell me his tale."  And the crow began to relate the story
of




The Sparrow and the Eagle



I have heard that a sparrow was once flitting over a sheep-fold,
when he looked at it carefully and behold, he saw a great eagle
swoop down upon a newly weaned lamb and carry it off in his claws
and fly away.  Thereupon the sparrow clapped his wings and said,
"I will do even as this one did;" and he waxed proud in his own
conceit and mimicked a greater than he.  So he flew down
forthright and lighted on the back of a fat ram with a thick
fleece that was become matted by his lying in his dung and stale
till it was like woollen felt.  As soon as the sparrow pounced
upon the sheep's back he flapped his wings to fly away, but his
feet became tangled in the wool and, however hard he tried, he
could not set himself free.  While all this was doing the
shepherd was looking on, having seen what happened first with the
eagle and afterwards with the sparrow; so he came up to the wee
birdie in a rage and seized him.  Then he plucked out his wing-
feathers and, tying his feet with a twine, carried him to his
children and threw him to them.  "What is this?" asked one of
them; and he answered, "This is he that aped a greater than
himself and came to grief."  "Now thou, O fox, art like this and
I would have thee beware of aping a greater than thou, lest thou
perish.  This is all I have to say to thee; so fare from me in
peace!"  When the fox despaired of the crow's friendship, he
turned away, groaning for sorrow and gnashing teeth upon teeth in
his disappointment; and the crow, hearing the sound of weeping
and seeing his grief and profound melancholy, said to him, "O
fox, what dole and dolour make thee gnash thy canines?"  Answered
the fox, "I gnash my canines because I find thee a greater rascal
than myself;" and so saying he made off to his house and ceased
not to fare until he reached his home.  Quoth the Sultan, "O
Shahrazad, how excellent are these thy stories, and how
delightsome!  Hast thou more of such edifying tales?"  Answered
she:--They tell this legend concerning




               THE HEDGEHOG AND THE WOOD-PIGEONS



A hedgehog once too up his abode by the side of a date-palm,
whereon roosted a wood-pigeon and his wife that had built their
next there and lived a life of ease and enjoyment.  So he said to
himself, "This pigeon-pair eateth of the fruit of the date tree
and I have no means of getting at it; but needs must I find some
fashion of tricking them.  Upon this he dug a hole at the foot of
the palm tree and took up his lodgings there, he and his wife;
moreover, he built an oratory beside the hole and went into
retreat there and made a show of devotion and edification and
renunciation of the world.  The male pigeon saw him praying and
worshipping, and his heart was softened towards him for his
excess of devoutness; so he said to him, "How many years hast
thou been thus?"  Replied the hedgehog, "During the last thirty
years."  "What is thy food?"  "That which falleth from the palm-
tree."  "And what is thy clothing?"  "Prickles! and I profit by
their roughness."  "And why hast thou chosen this for place
rather than another?"  "I chose it and preferred it to all others
that I might guide the erring into the right way and teach the
ignorant!"  "I had fancied thy case," quoth the wood-pigeon,
"other than this, but now I yearn for that which is with thee." 
Quoth the hedgehog, "I fear lest thy deed contradict thy word and
thou be even as the husbandman who, when the seed-season came,
neglected to sow, saying, ‘Verily I dread lest the days bring me
not to my desire and by making hast to sow I shall only waste my
substance!'  When harvest-time came and he saw the folk earing
their crops, he repented him of what he had lost by his tardiness
and he died of chagrin and vexation."  Asked the wood-pigeon,
"What then shall I do that I may be freed from the bonds of the
world and cut myself loose from all things save the service of my
Lord?"  Answered the hedgehog, "Betake thee to preparing for the
next world and content thyself with a pittance of provision." 
Quoth the pigeon, "How can I do this, I that am a bird and unable
to go beyond the date-tree whereon is my daily bread?  And even
could I do so, I know of no other place wherein I may wone." 
Quoth the hedgehog, "Thou canst shake down of the fruit of the
date-tree what shall suffice thee and thy wife for a year's
provaunt; then do ye take up your abode in a nest under the
trunk, that ye may prayerfully seek to be guided in the right
way, and then turn thou to what thou hast shaken down and
transport it all to thy home and store it up against what time
the dates fail; and when the fruits are spent and the delay is
longsome upon you, address thyself to total abstinence." 
Exclaimed the pigeon, "Allah requite thee with good for the
righteous intention wherewith thou hast reminded me of the world
to come and hast directed me into the right way!"  Then he and
his wife worked hard at knocking down the dates, till nothing was
left on the palm-tree, whilst the hedgehog, finding whereof to
eat, rejoiced and filled his den with the fruit, storing it up
for his subsistence and saying in his mind, "When the pigeon and
his wife have need of their provision, they will seek it of me
and covet what I have, relying upon thy devoutness and
abstinence; and, from what they have heard of my counsels and
admonitions, they will draw near unto me.  Then will I make them
my prey and eat them, after which I shall have the place and all
that drops from the date-tree to suffice me." presently, having
shaken down the fruits, the pigeon and his wife descended from
the tree-top and finding that the hedgehog had removed all the
dates to his own place, said to him, "O hedgehog! thou pious
preacher and of good counsel, we can find no sign of the dates
and know not on what else we shall feed."  Replied the hedgehog,
"Probably the winds have carried them away; but the turning from
the provisions to the Provider is of the essence of salvation,
and He who the mouth-corners cleft, the mouth without victual
hath never left."  And he gave not over improving the occasion to
them on this wise, and making a show of piety and cozening them
with fine words and false until they put faith in him and
accepted him and entered his den and had no suspicion of his
deceit.  Thereupon he sprang to the door and gnashed his teeth,
and the wood-pigeon, seeing his perfidy manifested, said to him,
"What hath to-night to do with yester-night?  Knowest thou not
that there is a Helper for the oppressed?  Beware of craft and
treachery, lest that mishap befal thee which befel the sharpers
who plotted against the merchant."  "What was that?" asked the
hedgehog.  Answered the pigeon:--I have heard tell this tale of 




The Merchant and the Two Shapers



In a city called Sindah there was once a very wealthy merchant,
who made ready his camel-loads and equipped himself with goods
and set out with his outfit for such a city, purposing to sell it
there.  Now he was followed by two sharpers, who had made up into
bales what merchandise they could get; and, giving out to the
merchant that they also were merchants, wended with him by the
way.  So halting at the first halting-place they agreed to play
him false and take all he had; but at the same time, each
inwardly plotted foul play to the other, saying in his mind, "If
I can cheat my comrade, times will go well with me and I shall
have all these goods for myself."  So after planning this
perfidy, one of them took food and putting therein poison,
brought it to his fellow; the other did the same and they both
ate of the poisoned mess and they both died.  Now they had been
sitting with the merchant; so when they left him and were long
absent from him, he sought for tidings of them and found the
twain lying dead; whereby he knew that they were sharpers who had
plotted to play him foul, but their foul play had recoiled upon
themselves.  So the merchant was preserved and took what they
had.  Then quoth the Sultan, "O Shahrazad, verily thou hast
aroused me to all whereof I was negligent!  So continue to edify
me with these fables."  Quoth she:--It hath reached me, O King,
that men tell this tale of




                THE THIEF AND HIS MONKEY[FN#171]



A certain man had a monkey and that man was a thief, who never
entered any of the street-markets of the city wherein he dwelt,
but he made off with great profit.  Now it came to pass one day
that he saw a man offering for sale worn clothes, and he went
calling them in the market, but none bid for them and all to whom
he showed them refused to buy of him.  Presently the thief who
had the monkey saw the man with the ragged clothes set them in a
wrapper and sit down to rest for weariness; so he made the ape
sport before him to catch his eye and, whilst he was busy gazing
at it, stole the parcel from him.  Then he took the ape and made
off to a lonely place, where he opened the wrapper and, taking
out the old clothes, folded them in a piece of costly stuff. 
This he carried to another bazar and exposed for sale together
with what was therein, making it a condition that it should not
be opened, and tempting the folk with the lowness of the price he
set on it.  A certain man saw the wrapper and its beauty pleased
him; so he bought the parcel on these terms and carried it home,
doubting not that he had done well.  When his wife saw it she
asked, "What is this?" and he answered, "It is costly stuff,
which I have bought at lowest price, meaning to sell it again and
take the profit."  Rejoined she, "O dupe, would this stuff be
sold under its value, unless it had been stolen?  Dost thou not
know that whoso buyeth aught without examining it, falleth into
error and becometh like unto the weaver?"  Quoth he, "And what is
the story of the weaver?"; and quoth she:--I have heard this take
of 




The Foolish Weaver



There was once in a certain village a weaver who worked hard but
could not earn his living save by overwork.  Now it chanced that
one of the richards of the neighbourhood made a marriage feast
and invited the folk thereto: the weaver also was present and
found the guests, who wore rich gear, served with delicate viands
and made much of by the house-master for what he saw of their
fine clothes.  So he said in his mind, "If I change this my craft
for another craft easier to compass and better considered and
more highly paid, I shall amass great store of money and I shall
buy splendid attire, so I may rise in rank and be exalted in
men's eyes and become even with these."  Presently, he beheld one
of the mountebanks, who was present at the feast, climbing up to
the top of a high and towering wall and throwing himself down to
the ground and alighting on his feet.  Whereupon the waver said
to himself, "Needs must I do as this one hath done, for surely I
shall not fail of it."  So he arose and swarmed upon the wall and
casting himself down, broke his neck against the ground and died
forthright.  "Now I tell thee this that thou sayst get thy living
by what way thou knowest and thoroughly understandest, lest
peradventure greed enter into thee and thou lust after what is
not of thy condition."  Quoth the woman's husband, "Not every
wise man is saved by his wisdom, nor is every fool lost by his
folly.  I have seen it happen to a skilful charmer, well versed
in the ways of serpents, to be struck by the fangs of a
snake[FN#172] and killed, and others prevail over serpents who
had no skill in them and no knowledge of their ways."  And he
went contrary to his wife and persisted in buying stolen goods
below their value till he fell under suspicion and perished
therefor: even as perished the sparrow in the tale of




                  THE SPARROW AND THE PEACOCK



There was once upon a time a sparrow, that used every day to
visit a certain king of the birds and ceased not to wait upon him
in the mornings and not to leave him till the evenings, being the
first to go in and the last to go out.  One day, a company of
birds chanced to assemble on a high mountain and one of them said
to another, "Verily, we are waxed many, and many are the
differences between us, and there is no help for it but we have a
king to look into our affairs; so shall we all be at one and our
differences will disappear."  Thereupon up came that sparrow and
counselled them to choose for King the peacock (that is, the
prince he used to visit).  So they chose the peacock to their
King and he, become their sovereign, bestowed largesse upon them
and made the sparrow his secretary and Prime Minister.  Now the
sparrow was wont by times to quit his assiduous serve in the
presence and look into matters in general.  So one day he
absented himself at the usual time, whereat the peacock was sore
troubled; and, while things stood thus, he returned and the
peacock said to him, "What hath delayed thee, and thou the
nearest to me of all my servants and the dearest of all my
dependents?" replied the sparrow, "I have seen a thing which is
doubtful to me and whereat I am affrighted."  Asked the peacock,
"What was it thou sawest?"; and the sparrow answered, "I saw a
man set up a net, hard by my nest, peg down its pegs, strew grain
in its midst and withdraw afar off.  And I sat watching what he
would do when behold, fate and fortune drave thither a crane and
his wife, which fell into the midst of the net and began to cry
out; whereupon the fowler rose up and took them.  This troubled
me, and such is the reason for my absence from thee, O King of
the Age, but never again will I abide in that nest for fear of
the net."  Rejoined the peacock, "Depart not thy dwelling, for
against fate and lot forethought will avail the naught."  And the
sparrow obeyed his bidding and said, "I will forthwith arm myself
with patience and forbear to depart in obedience to the King." 
So he ceased not taking care of himself, and carrying food to his
sovereign, who would eat what sufficed him and after feeding
drink his water and dismiss the sparrow.  Now one day as he was
looking into matters, lo and behold! he saw two sparrows fighting
on the ground and said in his mind, "How can I, who am the King's
Wazir, look on and see sparrows fighting in my neighbourhood?  By
Allah, I must make peace between them!"  So he flew down to
reconcile them; but the fowler cast the net over the whole number
and the sparrow happened to be in their very midst.  Then the
fowler arose and took him and gave him to his comrade, saying,
"Take care of him, " I never saw fatter or finer."  But the
sparrow said to himself, "I have fallen into that which I feared
and none but the peacock inspired me with false confidence.  It
availed me naught to beware of the stroke of fate and fortune,
since even he who taketh precaution may never flee from destiny. 
And how well said the poet in this poetry,

     "Whatso is not to be shall ne'er become; *
     No wise! and that to be must come to pass;
     Yea it shall come to pass at time ordained, *
     And th' Ignoramus[FN#173] aye shall cry ‘Alas!'"

Whereupon quoth the King, "O Shahrazad, recount me other of these
tales!"; and quoth she, "I will do so during the coming night, if
life be granted to by the King whom Allah bring to honour!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said:--I will relate the




              TALE OF ALI BIN BAKKAR AND OF SHAMS
                           AL-NAHAR.



It hath reached me, O august King, that in days of yore and in
times and ages long gone before, during the Caliphate of Harun
al-Rashid, there was a merchant who named his son Abú
al-Hasan[FN#174] Ali bin Táhir; and the same was great of goods
and grace, while his son was fair of form and face and held in
favour by all folk. He used to enter the royal palace without
asking leave, for all the Caliph's concubines and slave-girls
loved him, and he was wont to be companion with Al-Rashid in his
cups and recite verses to him and tell him curious tales and
witty. Withal he sold and bought in the merchants' bazar, and
there used to sit in his shop a youth named Ali bin Bakkár, of
the sons of the Persian Kings[FN#175] who was formous of form and
symmetrical of shape and perfect of figure, with cheeks red as
roses and joined eyebrows; sweet of speech, laughing-lipped and
delighting in mirth and gaiety. Now it chanced one day, as the
two sat talking and laughing behold, there came up ten damsels
like moons, every one of them complete in beauty and loveliness,
and elegance and grace; and amongst them was a young lady riding
on a she-mule with a saddle of brocade and stirrups of gold. She
wore an outer veil of fine stuff, and her waist was girt with a
girdle of gold-embroidered silk; and she was even as saith the
poet,

     "Silky her skin and silk that zoned waist; *
          Sweet voice; words not o'er many nor too few: 
     Two eyes quoth Allah 'Be,' and they became; *
          And work like wine on hearts they make to rue: 
     O love I feel! grow greater every night: *
          O solace! Doom-day bring our interview."

And when the cortège reached Abu al-Hasan's shop, she alighted
from her mule, and sitting down on the front board,[FN#176]
saluted him, and he returned her salam. When Ali bin Bakkar saw
her, she ravished his understanding and he rose to go away; but
she said to him, "Sit in thy place. We came to thee and thou
goest away: this is not fair!" Replied he, "O my lady, by Allah,
I flee from what I see; for the tongue of the case saith,

     'She is a sun which towereth high a-sky; *
          So ease thy heart with cure by Patience lent:
     Thou to her skyey height shalt fail to fly; *
          Nor she from skyey height can make descent.'"

When she heard this, she smiled and asked Abu al-Hasan, "What is
the name of this young man?"; who answered, "He is a stranger;"
and she enquired, "What countryman is he?"; whereto the merchant
replied, "He is a descendant of the Persian Kings; his name is
Ali son of Bakkar and the stranger deserveth honour." Rejoined
she, "When my damsel comes to thee, come thou at once to us and
bring him with thee, that we may entertain him in our abode, lest
he blame us and say, 'There is no hospitality in the people of
Baghdad'; for niggardliness is the worst fault a man can have.
Thou hearest what I say to thee and, if thou disobey me, thou
wilt incur my displeasure and I will never again visit thee or
salute thee." Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "On my head and my eyes: Allah
preserve me from thy displeasure, fair lady!" Then she rose and
went her way. Such was her case; but as regards Ali bin Bakkar he
remained in a state of bewilderment. Now after an hour the damsel
came to Abu al-Hasan and said to him, "Of a truth my lady Shams
al-Nahár, the favourite of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun
al-Rashid, biddeth thee to her, thee and thy friend, my lord Ali
bin Bakkar." So he rose and, taking Ali with him, followed the
girl to the Caliph's palace, where she carried them into a
chamber and made them sit down. They talked together awhile, when
behold, trays of food were set before them, and they ate and
washed their hands. Then she brought them wine, and they drank
deep and made merry; after which she bade them rise and carried
them into another chamber, vaulted upon four columns, furnished
after the goodliest fashion with various kinds of furniture, and
adorned with decorations as it were one of the pavilions of
Paradise. They were amazed at the rarities they saw; and, as they
were enjoying a review of these marvels, suddenly up came ten
slave-girls, like moons, swaying and swimming in beauty's pride,
dazzling the sight and confounding the sprite; and they ranged
themselves in two ranks as if they were of the black-eyed Brides
of Paradise. And after a while in came other ten damsels, bearing
in their hands lutes and divers instruments of mirth and music;
and these, having saluted the two guests, sat down and fell to
tuning their lute-strings. Then they rose and standing before
them, played and sang and recited verses: and indeed each one of
them was a seduction to the servants of the Lord. Whilst they
were thus busied there entered other ten damsels like unto them,
high-bosomed maids and of an equal age, with black-eyes and
cheeks like the rose, joined eyebrows and looks languorous; a
very fascination to every faithful wight and to all who looked
upon them a delight; clad in various kinds of coloured silks,
with ornaments that amazed man's intelligence. They took up their
station at the door, and there succeeded them yet other ten
damsels even fairer than they, clad in gorgeous array, such as no
tongue can say; and they also stationed themselves by the
doorway. Then in came a band of twenty damsels and amongst them
the lady, Shams al-Nahar hight, as she were the moon among the
stars swaying from side to side, with luring gait and in beauty's
pride. And she was veiled to the middle with the luxuriance of
her locks, and clad in a robe of azure blue and a mantilla of
silk embroidered with gold and gems of price; and her waist was
girt with a zone set with various kinds of precious stones. She
ceased not to advance with her graceful and coquettish swaying,
till she came to the couch that stood at the upper end of the
chamber and seated herself thereon. But when Ali bin Bakkar saw
her, he versified with these verses,

     "Source of mine evils, truly, she alone 's, *
          Of long love-longing and my groans and moans;
     Near her I find my soul in melting mood, *
          For love of her and wasting of my bones."

And finishing his poetry he said to Abu al-Hasan, "Hadst thou
Dealt more kindly with me thou haddest forewarned me of these
things ere I came hither, that I might have made up my mind and
taken patience to support what hath befallen me." And he wept and
groaned and complained. Replied Abu al-Hasan, "O my brother, I
meant thee naught but good; but I feared to tell thee this, lest
such transport should betide thee as might hinder thee from
foregathering with her, and be a stumbling-block between thee and
her. But be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear;[FN#177] for she to thee inclineth and to favour thee
designeth." Asked Ali bin Bakkar, "What is this young lady's
name?" Answered Abu al-Hasan, "She is hight Shams al-Nahar, one
of the favourites of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun
al-Rashid, and this is the palace of the Caliphate." Then Shams
al-Nahar sat gazing upon the charms of Ali bin Bakkar and he upon
hers, till both were engrossed with love for each other.
Presently she commanded the damsels, one and all, to be seated,
each in her rank and place, and all sat on a couch before one of
the windows, and she bade them sing; whereupon one of them took
up the lute and began caroling,

"Give thou my message twice * Bring clear reply in trice!
To thee, O Prince of Beau * -ty[FN#178] with complaint I rise:
My lord, as heart-blood dear * And Life's most precious prize!
Give me one kiss in gift * Or loan, if thou devise:
And if thou crave for more * Take all that satisfies.[FN#179]
Thou donn'st me sickness-dress * Thee with health's weed I
     bless."

Her singing charmed Ali bin Bakkar, and he said to her, "Sing me
more of the like of these verses." So she struck the strings and
began to chaunt these lines,

     "By stress of parting, O beloved one, *
          Thou mad'st these eyelids torment- race to run: 
     Oh gladness of my sight and dear desire, *
          Goal of my wishes, my religion! 
     Pity the youth whose eyne are drowned in tears *
          Of lover gone distraught and clean undone."

When she had finished her verses, Shams al-Nahar said to another
damsel, "Let us hear something from thee!" So she played a lively
measure and began these couplets,

     "His[FN#180] looks have made me drunken, not his wine; *
          His grace of gait disgraced sleep to these eyne:
     Dazed me no cup, but cop with curly crop; *
          His gifts overcame me not the gifts of vine:
     His winding locks my patience-clue unwound: *
          His robed beauties robbed all wits of mine."

When Shams Al-Nahar heard this recital from the damsel, she
sighed heavily and the song pleased her. Then she bade another
damsel sing; so she took the lute and began chanting,

     "Face that with Sol in Heaven lamping vies; *
          Youth-tide's fair fountain which begins to rise;
     Whose curly side-beard writeth writ of love, *
          And in each curl concealeth mysteries:
     Cried Beauty, 'When I met this youth I knew *
          'Tis Allah's loom such gorgeous robe supplies.'"

When she had finished her song, Ali bin Bakkar said to the
slave-maiden nearest him, "Sing us somewhat, thou O damsel." So
she took the lute and began singing,

     "Our trysting-time is all too short *
          For this long coyish coquetry:
     How long this 'Nay, Nay!' and 'Wait, wait?' *
          This is not old nobility!
     And now that Time deigns lend delight *
          Profit of th' opportunity."

When she ended, Ali bin Bakkar followed up her song with flowing
tears; and, as Shams al-Nahar saw him weeping and groaning and
complaining, she burned with love-longing and desire; and passion
and transport consumed her. So she rose from the sofa and came to
the door of the alcove, where Ali met her and they embraced with
arms round the neck, and fell down fainting in the doorway;
whereupon the damsels came to them and carrying them into the
alcove, sprinkled rose-water upon them both. When they recovered,
they found not Abu al-Hasan who had hidden himself by the side of
a couch, and the young lady said, "Where is Abu al-Hasan?" So he
showed himself to her from beside the couch and she saluted him,
saying, "I pray Allah to give me the means of requiting thee, O
kindest of men!" Then she turned to Ali bin Bakkar and said to
him, "O my lord, passion hath not reached this extreme pass with
thee without my feeling the like; but we have nothing to do save
to bear patiently what calamity hath befallen us." Replied he,
"By Allah, O my lady, union with thee may not content me nor
gazing upon thee assuage the fire thou hast lighted, nor shall
leave me the love of thee which hath mastered my heart but with
the leaving of my life." So saying, he wept and the tears ran
down upon his cheeks like thridded pearls; and when Shams
al-Nahar saw him weep, she wept for his weeping. But Abu al-Hasan
exclaimed, "By Allah, I wonder at your case and am confounded at
your condition; of a truth, your affair is amazing and your
chance dazing. What! this weeping while ye are yet together: then
how will it be what time ye are parted and far separated?" And he
continued, "Indeed, this is no tide for weeping and wailing, but
a season for meeting and merry-making; rejoice, therefore, and
take your pleasure and shed no more tears!" Then Shams al-Nahar
signed to a slave-girl, who arose and presently returned with
handmaids bearing a table, whose dishes of silver were full of
various rich viands. They set the table before the pair and Shams
al-Nahar began to eat[FN#181] and to place tid-bits in the mouth
of Ali bin Bakkar; and they ceased not so doing till they were
satisfied, when the table was removed and they washed their
hands. Then the waiting-women fetched censers with all manner of
incense, aloe-wood and ambergris and mixed scents; and
sprinkling-flasks full of rose-water were also brought and they
were fumigated and perfumed. After this the slaves set on vessels
of graven gold, containing all kinds of sherbets, besides fruits
fresh and dried, that heart can desire and eye delight in; and
lastly one brought a flagon of carnelion full of old wine. Then
Shams al-Nahar chose out ten handmaids to attend on them and ten
singing women; and, dismissing the rest to their apartments, bade
some of those who remained strike the lute. They did as she bade
them and one of them began to sing,

     "My soul to him who smiled back my salute, *
          In breast reviving hopes that were no mo'e: 
     The hand o' Love my secret brought to light, *
          And censor's tongues what lies my ribs below:[FN#182] 
     My tear-drops ever press twixt me and him, *
          As though my tear-drops showing love would flow."

When she had finished her singing, Shams al-Nahar rose and,
filling a goblet, drank it off, then crowned it again and handed
it to Ali bin Bakkar;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams
al-Nahar filled a goblet and handed it to Ali bin Bakkar; after
which she bade another damsel sing; and she began singing these
couplets,

     "My tears thus flowing rival with my wine, *
          Pouring the like of what fills cup to brink:[FN#183] 
     By Allah wot I not an run these eyne *
          Wi' wine, or else it is of tears I drink."

And when she ended her recitation, Ali bin Bakkar drained his cup
and returned it to Shams al-Nahar. She filled it again and gave
it to Abu al-Hasan who tossed it off. Then she took the lute,
saying, "None shall sing over my cup save myself;" so she screwed
up the strings and intoned these verses,

"The tears run down his cheeks in double row, *
     And in his breast high flameth lover-lowe: 
He weeps when near, a-fearing to be far; *
     And, whether far or near, his tear-drops flow."

And the words of another,

"Our life to thee, O cup-boy Beauty-dight! *
     From parted hair to calves; from black to white: 
Sol beameth from thy hands, and from thy lips *
     Pleiads, and full Moon through thy collar's night,[FN#184] 
Good sooth the cups, which made our heads fly round, *
     Are those thine eyes pass round to daze the sight: 
No wonder lovers hail thee as full moon *
     Waning to them, for self e'er waxing bright: 
Art thou a deity to kill and quicken, *
     Bidding this fere, forbidding other wight? 
Allah from model of thy form made Beau *
     -ty and the Zephyr scented with thy sprite. 
Thou art not of this order of human *
     -ity but angel lent by Heaven to man."

When Ali bin Bakkar and Abu al-Hasan and those present heard
Shams al-Nahar's song, they were like to fly for joy, and sported
and laughed; but while they were thus enjoying themselves lo! up
came a damsel, trembling for fear and said, "O my lady, the
Commander of the Faithful's eunuchs are at the door, Afíf and
Masrúr and Marján[FN#185] and others whom wot I not." When they
heard this they were like to die with fright, but Shams al-Nahar
laughed and said, "Have no fear!" Then quoth she to the damsel,
"Keep answering them whilst we remove hence." And she caused the
doors of the alcove to be closed upon Ali and Abu al-Hasan, and
let down the curtains over the entrance (they being still
within); after which she shut the door of the saloon and went out
by the privy wicket into the flower-garden, where she seated
herself on a couch she had there and made one of the damsels
knead her feet.[FN#186] Then she dismissed the rest of her women
to their rooms and bade the portress admit those who were at the
door; whereupon Masrur entered, he and his company of twenty with
drawn swords. And when they saluted her, she asked, "Wherefore
come ye?"; whereto they answered, "The Commander of the Faithful
saluteth thee. Indeed he is desolated for want of thy sight; he
letteth thee know that this be to him a day of joy and great
gladness and he wisheth to seal his day and complete his pleasure
with thy company at this very hour. So say, wilt go to him or
shall he come to thee?" Upon this she rose and, kissing the
earth, replied, "I hear and I obey the commandment of the Prince
of True Believers!" Then she summoned the women guards of her
household and other slave-damsels, who lost no time in attending
upon her and made a show of obeying the Caliph's orders. And
albeit everything about the place was in readiness, she said to
the eunuchs, "Go to the Commander of the Faithful and tell him
that I await him after a little space, that I may make ready for
him a place with carpets and other matters." So they returned in
haste to the Caliph, whilst Shams al-Nahar, doffing her outer
gear, repaired to her lover, Ali bin Bakkar, and drew him to her
bosom and bade him farewell, whereat he wept sore and said, "O my
lady, this leave-taking will cause the ruin of my very self and
the loss of my very soul; but I pray Allah grant me patience to
support the passion wherewith he hath afflicted me!" Replied she,
"By Allah, none shall suffer perdition save I; for thou wilt fare
forth to the bazar and consort with those that shall divert thee,
and thy life will be sound and thy love hidden forsure; but I
shall fall into trouble and tristesse nor find any to console me,
more by token that I have given the Caliph a tryst, wherein haply
great peril shall betide me by reason of my love for thee and my
longing for thee and my grief at being parted from thee. For with
what tongue shall I sing and with what heart shall I present
myself before the Caliph? and with what speech shall I company
the Commander of the Faithful in his cups? and with what eyes
shall I look upon a place where thou art absent? and with what
taste shall I drink wine of which thou drinkest not?" Quoth Abu
al-Hasan, "Be not troubled but take patience and be not remiss in
entertaining the Commander of the Faithful this night, neither
show him any neglect, but be of good heart." Now at this
juncture, behold, up came a damsel, who said to Shams al-Nahar,
"O my lady, the Caliph's pages are come." So she hastily rose to
her feet and said to the maid, "Take Abu al-Hasan and his friend
and carry them to the upper balcony[FN#187] giving upon the
garden and there leave them till darkness come on; when do thou
contrive to carry them forth." Accordingly the girl led them up
to the balcony and, locking the door upon them both, went her
way. As they sat looking on the garden lo! the Caliph appeared
escorted by near an hundred eunuchs, with drawn swords in hand
and girt about with a score of damsels, as they were moons, all
clad in the richest of raiment and on each one's head was a crown
set with jewels and rubies; while each carried a lighted
flambeau. The Caliph walked in their midst, they encompassing him
about on all sides, and Masrur and Afíf and Wasíf[FN#188] went
before him and he bore himself with a graceful gait. So Shams
al-Nahar and her maidens rose to receive him and, meeting him at
the garden-door, kissed ground between his hands; nor did they
cease to go before him till they brought him to the couch whereon
he sat down, whilst all the waiting-women who were in the garden
and the eunuchs stood before him and there came fair handmaids
and concubines holding in hand lighted candles and perfumes and
incense and instruments of mirth and music. Then the Sovereign
bade the singers sit down, each in her place, and Shams al-Nahar
came up and, seating herself on a stool by the side of the
Caliph's couch, began to converse with him; all this happening
whilst Abu al-Hasan and Ali bin Bakkar looked on and listened,
unseen of the King. Presently the Caliph fell to jesting and
toying with Shams al-Nahar and both were in the highest spirits,
glad and gay, when he bade them throw open the garden pavilion.
So they opened the doors and windows and lighted the tapers till
the place shone in the season of darkness even as the day. Then
the eunuchs removed thither the wine-service and (quoth Abu
al-Hasan) "I saw drinking-vessels and rarities whose like mine
eyes never beheld, vases of gold and silver and all manner of
noble metals and precious stones, such as no power of description
can describe, till indeed it seemed to me I was dreaming, for
excess of amazement at what I saw!" But as for Ali bin Bakkar,
from the moment Shams al-Nahar left him, he lay strown on the
ground for stress of love and desire; and, when he revived, he
fell to gazing upon these things that had not their like and
saying to Abu al-Hasan, "O my brother, I fear lest the Caliph see
us or come to know of our case; but the most of my fear is for
thee. For myself, of a truth I know that I am about to be lost
past recourse, and the cause of my destruction is naught but love
and longing and excess of desire and distraction, and disunion
from my beloved after union with her; but I beseech Allah to
deliver us from this perilous predicament." And they ceased not
to look out of the balcony on the Caliph who was taking his
pleasure, till the banquet was spread before him, when he turned
to one of the damsels and said to her, "O Gharám,[FN#189] let us
hear some of thine enchanting songs." So she took the lute and
tuning it, began singing,

"The longing of a Bedouin maid, whose folks are far away, *
     Who yearns after the willow of the Hejaz and the
     bay,[FN#190]--
Whose t