ears, when she on travellers lights, might for their water
     serve * And eke her her passion, with its heat, their
     bivouac-fire purvey,--
Is not more fierce nor ardent than my longing for my love, *
     Who deems that I commit a crime in loving him
     alway."[FN#191]

Now when Shams al-Nahar heard these verses she slipped off the
stool whereon she sat and fell to the earth fainting and became
insensible to the world around her; upon which the damsels came
and lifted her up. And when Ali bin Bakkar saw this from the
balcony he also slipped down senseless, and Abu al-Hasan said,
"Verily Fate hath divided love-desire equally upon you
twain!"[FN#192] As he spoke lo! in came the damsel who had led
them up to the balcony and said to him, "O Abu al-Hasan, arise
thou and thy friend and come down, for of a truth the world hath
waxed strait upon us and I fear lest our case be discovered or
the Caliph become aware of you; unless you descend at once we are
dead ones." Quoth he, "And how shall this youth descend with me
seeing that he hath no strength to rise?" Thereupon the damsel
began sprinkling rose-water on Ali bin Bakkar till he came to his
senses, when Abu al-Hasan lifted him up and the damsel made him
lean upon her. So they went down from the balcony and walked on
awhile till the damsel opened a little iron door, and made the
two friends pass through it, and they came upon a bench by the
Tigris' bank. Thereupon the slave-girl clapped her hands[FN#193]
and there came up a man with a little boat to whom said she,
"Take up these two young men and land them on the opposite side."
So both entered the boat and, as the man rowed off with them and
they left the garden behind them, Ali bin Bakkar looked back
towards the Caliph's palace and the pavilion and the grounds; and
bade them farewell with these two couplets,

     "I offered this weak hand as last farewell, *
          While to heart-burning fire that hand is guided:
     O let not this end union! Let not this *
          Be last provision for long road provided!"

Thereupon the damsel said to the boatman, "Make haste with them
both." So he plied his oars deftly (the slave-girl being still
with them);--And Shahrazad perceived the dawning day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the boatman
rowed them towards the other bank till they reached it and
landed, whereupon she took leave of them, saying, "It were my
wish not to abandon you, but I can go no farther than this." Then
she turned back, whilst Ali bin Bakkar lay prostrate on the
ground before Abu al-Hasan and by no manner of means could he
rise, till his friend said to him, "Indeed this place is not sure
and I fear lest we lose our lives in this very spot, by reason of
the lewd fellows who infest it and highwaymen and men of
lawlessness." Upon this Ali bin Bakkar arose and walked a little
but could not continue walking. Now Abu al-Hasan had friends in
that quarter; so he made search for one of them, in whom he
trusted, and who was of his intimates, and knocked at the door.
The man came out quickly and seeing them, bade them welcome and
brought them into his house, where he seated them and talked with
them and asked them whence they came. Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "We
came out but now, being obliged thereto by a person with whom I
had dealings and who hath in his hands dirhams of mine. And it
reached me that he designed to flee into foreign parts with my
monies; so I fared forth to-night in quest of him, taking with me
for company this youth, Ali bin Bakkar; but, when we came hoping
to see the debtor, he hid from us and we could get no sight of
him. Accordingly we turned back, empty-handed without a doit, but
it was irksome to us to return home at this hour of the night; so
weeting not whither to go, we came to thee, well knowing thy
kindness and wonted courtesy." "Ye are welcome and well come!"
answered the host, and studied to do them honour; so the twain
abode with him the rest of their night and as soon as the
daylight dawned, they left him and made their way back without
aught of delay to the city. When they came to the house of Abu
al-Hasan, he conjured his comrade to enter; so they went in and
lying down on the bed, slept awhile. As soon as they awoke, Abu
al-Hasan bade his servants spread the house with rich carpets,
saying in his mind, "Needs must I divert this youth and distract
him from thinking of his affliction, for I know his case better
than another." Then he called for water for Ali bin Bakkar who,
when it was brought, rose up from his bed and making his
ablutions, prayed the obligatory prayers which he had omitted for
the past day and night[FN#194]; after which he sat down and began
to solace himself by talking with his friend. When Abu al-Hasan
saw this, he turned to him and said, "O my lord, it were fitter
for thy case that thou abide with me this night, so thy breast
may be broadened and the distress of love-longing that is upon
thee be dispelled and thou make merry with us, so haply the fire
of thy heart may thus be quenched." Ali replied, "O my brother,
do what seemeth good to thee; for I may not on any wise escape
from what calamity hath befallen me; so act as thou wilt."
Accordingly, Abu al-Hasan arose and bade his servants summon some
of the choicest of his friends and sent for singers and musicians
who came; and meanwhile he made ready meat and drink for them; so
they sat eating and drinking and making merry through the rest of
the day till nightfall. Then they lit the candles, and the cups
of friendship and good fellowship went round amongst them and the
time passed pleasantly with them. Presently, a singing-woman took
the lute and began singing, 

"I've been shot by Fortune, and shaft of eye *
     Down struck me and parted from fondest friend:
Time has proved him foe and my patience failed, *
     Yet I ever expected it thus would end."

When Ali bin Bakkar heard her words, he fell to the earth in a
swoon and ceased not lying in his fainting fit till day-break;
and Abu al-Hasan despaired of him. But, with the dawning, he came
to himself and sought to go home; nor could his friend hinder
him, for fear of the issue of his affair. So he made his servants
bring a she-mule and, mounting Ali thereon, carried him to his
lodgings, he and one of his men. When he was safe at home, Abu
al-Hasan thanked Allah for his deliverance from that sore peril
and sat awhile with him, comforting him; but Ali could not
contain himself, for the violence of his love and longing. So Abu
al-Hasan rose to take leave of him and return to his own
place.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
al-Hasan rose to take leave of him, Ali son of Bakkar exclaimed,
"O my brother, leave me not without news." "I hear and obey,"
replied the other; and forthwith went away and, repairing to his
shop, opened it and sat there all day, expecting news of Shams
al-Nahar. But none came. He passed the night in his own house
and, when dawned the day, he walked to Ali bin Bakkar's lodging
and went in and found him thrown on his bed, with his friends
about him and physicians around him prescribing something or
other, and the doctors feeling his pulse. When he saw Abu
al-Hasan enter he smiled, and the visitor, after saluting him,
enquired how he did and sat with him till the folk withdrew, when
he said to him, "What plight is this?" Quoth Ali bin Bakkar, "It
was bruited abroad that I was ill and my comrades heard the
report; and I have no strength to rise and walk so as to give him
the lie who noised abroad my sickness, but continue lying strown
here as thou seest. So my friends came to visit me; say, however,
O my brother, hast thou seen the slave-girl or heard any news of
her?" He replied, "I have not seen her, since the day we parted
from her on Tigris' bank;" and he presently added, "O my brother,
beware thou of scandal and leave this weeping." Rejoined Ali, "O
my brother, indeed, I have no control over myself;" and he sighed
and began reciting,

"She gives her woman's hand a force that fails the hand of me, *
     And with red dye on wrist she gars my patience fail and
     flee:
And for her hand she fears so sore what shafts her eyes
     discharge, * She's fain to clothe and guard her hand with
     mail-ring panoply:[FN#195]
The leach in ignorance felt my pulse the while to him I cried, *
     'Sick is my heart, so quit my hand which hath no malady:'
Quoth she to that fair nightly vision favoured me and fled, *
     'By Allah picture him nor add nor 'bate in least degree!'
Replied the Dream, 'I leave him though he die of thirst,'
     I cry, * 'Stand off from water-pit and say why this
     persistency.'
Rained tear-pearls her Narcissus-eyes, and rose on cheek belit *
     She made my sherbet, and the lote with bits of hail she
     bit."[FN#196]

And when his recital was ended he said, "O Abu al-Hasan, I am
smitten with an affliction from which I deemed myself in perfect
surety, and there is no greater ease for me than death." Replied
he, "Be patient, haply Allah will heal thee!" Then he went out
from him and repairing to his shop opened it, nor had he sat
long, when suddenly up came the handmaid who saluted him. He
returned her salam and looking at her, saw that her heart was
palpitating and that she was in sore trouble and showed signs of
great affliction: so he said to her, "Thou art welcome and well
come! How is it with Shams al-Nahar?" She answered, "I will
presently tell thee, but first let me know how doth Ali bin
Bakkar." So he told her all that had passed and how his case
stood, whereat she grieved and sighed and lamented and marvelled
at his condition. Then said she, "My lady's case is still
stranger than this; for when you went away and fared homewards, I
turned back, my heart beating hard on your account and hardly
crediting your escape. On entering I found her lying prostrate in
the pavilion, speaking not nor answering any, whilst the
Commander of the Faithful sat by her head not knowing what ailed
her and finding none who could make known to him aught of her
ailment. She ceased not from her swoon till midnight, when she
recovered and the Prince of the Faithful said to her, 'What harm
hath happened to thee, O Shams al-Nahar, and what hath befallen
thee this night?' Now when she heard the Caliph's words she
kissed his feet and said, 'Allah make me thy ransom, O Prince of
True Believers! Verily a sourness of stomach lighted a fire in my
body, so that I lost my senses for excess of pain, and I know no
more of my condition.' Asked the Caliph, 'What hast thou eaten
to-day?'; and she answered, 'I broke my fast on something I had
never tasted before.' Then she feigned to be recovered and
calling for a something of wine, drank it, and begged the
Sovereign to resume his diversion. So he sat down again on his
couch in the pavilion and the sitting was resumed, but when she
saw me, she asked me how you fared. I told her what I had done
with you both and repeated to her the verses which Ali bin Bakkar
had composed at parting-tide, whereat she wept secretly, but
presently held her peace. After awhile, the Commander of the
Faithful ordered a damsel to sing, and she began reciting,

     'Life has no sweet for me since forth ye fared; *
          Would Heaven I wot how fare ye who forsake:
     'Twere only fit my tears were tears of blood, *
          Since you are weeping for mine absence sake.'

But when my lady heard this verse she fell back on the sofa in a
swoon,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
slave-girl continued to Abu al-Hasan, "But when my lady heard
this verse, she fell back on the sofa in a swoon, and I seized
her hand and sprinkled rose-water on her face, till she revived,
when I said to her, 'O my lady, expose not thyself and all thy
palace containeth. By the life of thy beloved, be thou patient!'
She replied, 'Can aught befal me worse than death which indeed I
seek, for by Allah, my ease is therein?' Whilst we were thus
talking, another damsel sang these words of the poet,

     'Quoth they, 'Maybe that Patience lend thee ease!' *
          Quoth I, 'Since fared he where is Patience' place?
     Covenant he made 'twixt me and him, to cut *
          The cords of Patience at our last embrace!'[FN#197]

And as soon as she had finished her verse Shams al-Nahar swooned
away once more, which when the Caliph saw, he came to her in
haste and commanded the wine to be removed and each damsel to
return to her chamber. He abode with her the rest of the night,
and when dawned the day, he sent for chirurgeons and leaches and
bade them medicine her, knowing not that her sickness arose from
love and longing. I tarried with her till I deemed her in a way
of recovery, and this is what kept me from thee. I have now left
her with a number of her body-women, who were greatly concerned
for her, when she bade me go to you two and bring her news of Ali
bin Bakkar and return to her with the tidings." When Abu al-Hasan
heard her story, he marvelled and said, "By Allah, I have
acquainted thee with his whole case; so now return to thy
mistress; and salute her for me and diligently exhort her to have
patience and say to her, 'Keep thy secret!'; and tell her that I
know all her case which is indeed hard and one which calleth for
nice conduct." She thanked him and taking leave of him, returned
to her mistress. So far concerning her; but as regards Abu
al-Hasan, he ceased not to abide in his shop till the end of the
day, when he arose and shut it and locked it and betaking himself
to Ali bin Bakkar's house knocked at the door. One of the
servants came out and admitted him; and when Ali saw him, he
smiled and congratulated himself on his coming, saying, "O Abu
al-Hasan, thou hast desolated me by thine absence this day; for
indeed my soul is pledged to thee during the rest of my time."
Answered the other, "Leave this talk! Were thy healing at the
price of my hand, I would cut it off ere thou couldst ask me;
and, could I ransom thee with my life, I had already laid it down
for thee. Now this very day, Shams al-Nahar's handmaid hath been
with me and told me that what hindered her coming ere this was
the Caliph's sojourn with her mistress; and she acquainted me
with everything which had betided her." And he went on to repeat
to him all that the girl had told him of Shams al-Nahar; at which
Ali bin Bakkar lamented sore and wept and said to him, "Allah
upon thee, O my brother, help me in this affliction and teach me
what course I shall take. Moreover, I beg thee of thy grace to
abide with me this night, that I may have the solace of thy
society." Abu al-Hasan agreed to this request, replying that he
would readily night there; so they talked together till even-tide
darkened, when Ali bin Bakkar groaned aloud and lamented and wept
copious tears, reciting these couplets,

     "Thine image in these eyne, a-lip thy name, *
          My heart thy home; how couldst thou disappear?
     How sore I grieve for life which comes to end, *
          Nor see I boon of union far or near."

And these the words of another,

"She split my casque of courage with eye-swords that sorely
     smite; * She pierced my patience' ring-mail with her shape
     like cane-spear light:
Patched by the musky mole on cheek was to our sight displayed *
     Camphor set round with ambergris, light dawning through the
     night.[FN#198]
Her soul was sorrowed and she bit carnelion stone with pearls *
     Whose unions in a sugared tank ever to lurk unite:[FN#199]
Restless she sighed and smote with palm the snows that clothe her
     breast, * And left a mark whereon I looked and ne'er beheld
     such sight, 
Pens, fashioned of her coral nails with ambergris for ink, * 
     Five lines on crystal page of breast did cruelly indite:
O swordsmen armed with trusty steel! I bid you all beware *
     When she on you bends deadly glance which fascinates the
     sprite: 
And guard thyself, O thou of spear! whenas she draweth near *
     To tilt with slender quivering shape, likest the nut-brown
     spear."

And when Ali bin Bakkar ended his verse, he cried out with a
great cry and fell down in a fit. Abu al-Hasan thought that his
soul had fled his body and he ceased not from his swoon till day-
break, when he came to himself and talked with his friend, who
continued to sit with him till the forenoon. Then he left him and
repaired to his shop; and hardly had he opened it, when lo! the
damsel came and stood by his side. As soon as he saw her, she
made him a sign of salutation which he returned; and she
delivered to him the greeting message of her mistress and asked,
"How doth Ali bin Bakkar?" Answered he, "O handmaid of good, ask
me not of his case nor what he suffereth for excess of
love-longing; he sleepeth not by night neither resteth he by day;
wakefulness wasteth him and care hath conquered him and his
condition is a consternation to his friend." Quoth she, "My lady
saluteth thee and him, and she hath written him a letter, for
indeed she is in worse case than he; and she entrusted the same
to me, saying, 'Do not return save with the answer; and do thou
obey my bidding.' Here now is the letter, so say, wilt thou wend
with me to him that we may get his reply?" "I hear and obey,"
answered Abu al-Hasan, and locking his shop and taking with him
the girl he went, by a way different from that whereby he came,
to Ali bin Bakkar's house, where he left her standing at the door
and walked in.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
al-Hasan went with the girl to the house of Ali son of Bakkar,
where he left her standing at the door and walked in to his great
joy. And Abu al-Hasan said to him, "The reason of my coming is
that such an one hath sent his handmaid to thee with a letter,
containing his greeting to thee and mentioning therein that the
cause of his not coming to thee was a matter that hath betided
him. The girl standeth even now at the door: shall she have leave
to enter?"; and he signed to him that it was Shams al-Nahar's
slave-girl. Ali understood his signal and answered, "Bring her
in," and when he saw her, he shook for joy and signed to her,
"How doth thy lord?; Allah grant him health and healing!" "He is
well," answered she and pulling out the letter gave it to him. He
took it and kissing it, opened and read it; after which he handed
it to Abu al-Hasan, who found these verses written therein,

     "This messenger shall give my news to thee; *
          Patience what while my sight thou canst not see:
     A lover leav'st in love's insanity, *
          Whose eyne abide on wake incessantly:
     I suffer patience-pangs in woes that none *
          Of men can medicine;--such my destiny!
     Keep cool thine eyes; ne'er shall my heart forget, *
          Nor without dream of thee one day shall be.
     Look what befel thy wasted frame, and thence *
          Argue what I am doomed for love to dree!

"And afterwards[FN#200]: Without fingers[FN#201] I have written
to thee, and without tongue I have spoken to thee * to resume my
case, I have an eye wherefrom sleeplessness departeth not * and a
heart whence sorrowful thought stirreth not * It is with me as
though health I had never known * nor in sadness ever ceased to
wone * nor spent an hour in pleasant place * but it is as if I
were made up of pine and of the pain of passion and chagrin *
Sickness unceasingly troubleth * and my yearning ever redoubleth
* desire still groweth * and longing in my heart still gloweth *
I pray Allah to hasten our union * and dispel of my mind the
confusion * And I would fain thou favour me * with some words of
thine * that I may cheer my heart in pain and repine * Moreover,
I would have thee put on a patience lief, until Allah vouchsafe
relief * And His peace be with thee."[FN#202] When Ali bin Bakkar
had read this letter he said in weak accents and feeble voice,
"With what hand shall I write and with what tongue shall I make
moan and lament? Indeed she addeth sickness to my sickness and
draweth death upon my death!" Then he sat up and taking in hand
ink-case and paper, wrote the following reply, "In the name of
Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate![FN#203] Thy letter
hath reached me, O my lady, and hath given ease to a sprite worn
out with passion and love-longing, and hath brought healing to a
wounded heart cankered with languishment and sickness; for indeed
I am become even as saith the poet,

     'Straitened bosom; reveries dispread; *
          Slumberless eyelids; body wearied; 
     Patience cut short; disunion longsomest; *
          Reason deranged and heart whose life is fled!'

And know that complaining is unavailing; but it easeth him whom
love-longing disordereth and separation destroyeth and, with
repeating, 'Union,' I keep myself comforted and how fine is the
saying of the poet who said, 

     'Did not in love-plight joys and sorrows meet, *
          How would the message or the writ be sweet?'"

When he had made an end of this letter, he handed it to Abu
al-Hasan, saying, "Read it and give it to the damsel." So he took
it and read it and its words stirred his soul and its meaning
wounded his vitals. Then he committed it to the girl, and when
she took it Ali bin Bakkar said to her, "Salute thy lady for me
and acquaint her with my love and longing and how passion is
blended with my flesh and my bones; and say to her that in very
deed I need a woman who shall snatch me from the sea of
destruction and save me from this dilemma; for of a truth Fortune
oppresseth me with her vicissitudes; and is there any helper to
free me from her turpitudes?" And he wept and the damsel wept for
his weeping. Then she took leave of him and went forth and Abu
al-Hasan went out with her and farewelled her. So she ganged her
gait and he returned to his shop, which he opened and sat down
there, as was his wont;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
al-Hasan farewelled the slave-girl and returned to his shop which
he opened and sat down there according to his custom; but as he
tarried, he found his heart oppressed and his breast straitened,
and he was perplexed about his case. So he ceased not from
melancholy the rest of that day and night, and on the morrow he
betook himself to Ali bin Bakkar, with whom he sat till the folk
withdrew, when he asked him how he did. Ali began to complain of
desire and to descant upon the longing and distraction which
possessed him, and repeated these words of the poet.

     "Men have 'plained of pining before my time, *
          Live and dead by parting been terrified: 
     But such feelings as those which my ribs immure *
          I have never heard of, nor ever espied."

And these of another poet,

     "I have borne for thy love what never bore *
          For his fair, Kays the 'Daft one'[FN#204] hight of old: 
     Yet I chase not the wildlings of wold and wild *
          Like Kays, for madness is manifold."

Thereupon quoth Abu al-Hasan, "Never did I see or hear of one
like unto thee in thy love! When thou sufferest all this
transport and sickness and trouble being enamoured of one who
returneth thy passion, how would it be with thee if she whom thou
lovest were contrary and contumelious, and thy case were
discovered through her perfidy?" "And Ali the son of Bakkar"
(says Abu al-Hasan) "was pleased with my words and he relied upon
them and he thanked me for what I had said and done. I had a
friend" (continued Abu al-Hasan), "to whom I discovered my affair
and that of Ali and who knew that we were intimates; but none
other than he was acquainted with what was betwixt us. He was
wont to come to me and enquire how Ali did and after a little, he
began to ask me about the damsel; but I fenced him off, saying,
'She invited him to her and there was between him and her as much
as can possibly take place, and this is the end of their affair;
but I have devised me a plan and an idea which I would submit to
thee.'" Asked his friend, "And what is that?" Answered Abu
al-Hasan, "I am a person well known to have much dealing among
men and women, and I fear, O my brother, lest the affair of these
twain come to light and this lead to my death and the seizure of
my goods and the rending of my repute and that of my family.
Wherefore I have resolved to get together my monies and make
ready forthright and repair to the city of Bassorah and there
abide, till I see what cometh of their case, that none may know
of me; for love hath lorded over both and correspondence passeth
between them. At this present their go-between and confidante is
a slave-girl who hath till now kept their counsel, but I fear
lest haply anxiety get the better of her and she discover their
secret to some one and the matter, being bruited abroad, might
bring me to great grief and prove the cause of my ruin; for I
have no excuse to offer my accusers." Rejoined his friend, "Thou
hast acquainted me with a parlous affair, from the like of which
the wise and understanding will shrink with fear. Allah avert
from thee the evil thou dreadest with such dread and save thee
from the consequences thou apprehendest! Assuredly thy recking is
aright." So Abu al-Hasan returned to his place and began ordering
his affairs and preparing for his travel; nor had three days
passed ere he made an end of his business and fared forth
Bassorah-wards. His friend came to visit him three days after but
finding him not, asked of him from the neighbours who answered,
"He set out for Bassorah three days ago, for he had dealings with
its merchants and he is gone thither to collect monies from his
debtors; but he will soon return." The young man was confounded
at the news and knew not whither to wend; and he said in his
mind, "Would I had not parted from Abu al-Hasan!" Then he
bethought him of some plan whereby he should gain access to Ali
bin Bakkar; so he went to his lodging, and said to one of his
servants, "Ask leave for me of thy lord that I may go in and
salute him." The servant entered and told his master and
presently returning, invited the man to walk in. So he entered
and found Ali bin Bakkar thrown back on the pillow and saluted
him. Ali returned his greeting and bade him welcome; whereupon
the young man began to excuse himself for having held aloof from
him all that while and added, "O my lord, between Abu al-Hasan
and myself there was close friendship, so that I used to trust
him with my secrets and could not sever myself from him an hour.
Now it so chanced that I was absent three days' space on certain
business with a company of my friends; and, when I came back and
went to him, I found his shop locked up; so I asked the
neighbours about him and they replied, 'He is gone to Bassorah.'
Now I know he had no surer friend than thou; so, by Allah, tell
me what thou knowest of him." When Ali bin Bakkar heard this, his
colour changed and he was troubled and answered, "I never heard
till this day of his departure and, if the case be as thou
sayest, weariness is come upon me." And he began repeating,

     "For joys that are no more I wont to weep, *
          While friends and lovers stood by me unscattered; 
     This day when disunited me and them *
          Fortune, I weep lost loves and friendship shattered."

Then he hung his head ground-wards in thought awhile and
presently raising it and looking to one of his servants, said,
"Go to Abu al-Hasan's house and enquire anent him whether he be
at home or journeying abroad. If they say, 'He is abroad'; ask
whither he be gone." The servant went out and returning after a
while said to his master, "When I asked for Abu al-Hasan, his
people told me that he was gone on a journey to Bassorah; but I
saw a damsel standing at the door who, knowing me by sight,
though I knew her not, said to me, 'Art thou not servant to Ali
bin Bakkar?' 'Even so,' answered I; and she rejoined, 'I bear a
message for him from one who is the dearest of all folk to him.'
So she came with me and she is now standing at the door." Quoth
Ali bin Bakkar, "Bring her in." The servant went out to her and
brought her in, and the man who was with Ali looked at her and
found her pretty. Then she advanced to the son of Bakkar and
saluted him.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say,

        When it was the One Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
slave-girl came in to Ali bin Bakkar, she advanced to him and
saluted him and spake with him secretly; and from time to time
during the dialogue he exclaimed with an oath and swore that he
had not talked and tattled of it. Then she took leave of him and
went away. Now Abu al-Hasan's friend was a jeweller,[FN#205] and
when she was gone, he found a place for speech and said to Ali
bin Bakkar, "Doubtless and assuredly the Caliph's household have
some demand upon thee or thou hast dealings therewith?" "Who told
thee of this?" asked Ali; and the jeweller answered, "I know it
by yonder damsel who is Shams al-Nahar's slave-girl; for she came
to me a while since with a note wherein was written that she
wanted a necklace of jewels; and I sent her a costly collar." But
when Ali bin Bakkar heard this, he was greatly troubled, so that
the jeweller feared to see him give up the ghost, yet after a
while he recovered himself and said, "O my brother, I conjure
thee by Allah to tell me truly how thou knowest her." Replied he,
"Do not press this question upon me;" and Ali rejoined, "Indeed,
I will not turn from thee till thou tell me the whole truth."
Quoth the jeweller, "I will tell thee all, on condition that thou
distrust me not, and that my words cause thee no restraint; nor
will I conceal aught from thee by way of secret but will discover
to thee the truth of the affair, provided that thou acquaint me
with the true state of thy case and the cause of thy sickness."
Then he told him all that had passed from first to last between
Abu al-Hasan and himself, adding, "I acted thus only out of
friendship for thee and of my desire to serve thee;" and assured
him that he would keep his secret and venture life and good in
his service. So Ali in turn told him his story and added, "By
Allah, O my brother, naught moved me to keep my case secret from
thee and from others but my fear lest folk should lift the veils
of protection from certain persons." Rejoined the jeweller, "And
I desired not to foregather with thee but of the great affection
I bear thee and my zeal for thee in every case, and my compassion
for the anguish thy heart endureth from severance. Haply I may be
a comforter to thee in the room of my friend, Abu al-Hasan,
during the length of his absence: so be thou of good cheer and
keep thine eyes cool and clear." Thereupon Ali thanked him and
repeated these couplets,

     "An say I, 'Patient I can bear his faring,' *
          My tears and sighings give my say the lie; 
     How can I hide these tears that course adown *
          This plain, my cheek, for friend too fain to fly?"

Then he was silent awhile, and presently said to the jeweller
"Knowest thou what secret the girl whispered to me?" Answered he,
"Not I, by Allah, O my lord!" Quoth Ali, "She fancied that I
directed Abu al-Hasan to go to Bassorah and that I had devised
this device to put a stop to our correspondence and consorting. I
swore to her that this was on nowise so; but she would not credit
me and went away to her mistress, persisting in her injurious
suspicions; for she inclined to Abu al-Hasan and gave ear to his
word." Answered the young jeweller, "O my brother, I understood
as much from the girl's manner; but I will win for thee thy wish,
Inshallah!" Rejoined Ali bin Bakkar, "Who can be with me in this
and how wilt thou do with her, when she shies and flies like a
wildling of the wold?" Cried the jeweller "By Allah, needs must I
do my utmost to help thee and contrive to scrape acquaintance
with her without exposure or mischief!" Then he asked leave to
depart and Ali bin Bakkar said, "O my brother, mind thou keep my
counsel;" and he looked at him and wept. The jeweller bade him
good-bye and fared forth.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
jeweller bade him good-bye and fared forth not knowing what he
should do to win for him his wishes; and he ceased not walking,
while over-musing the matter, till he spied a letter lying in the
road. He took it up and looked at its direction and
superscription, then read it and behold, it ran:--"From the least
worthy of lovers to the most worthy of beloveds." So he opened it
and found these words written therein,

"A messenger from thee came bringing union-hope, *
     But that he erred somehow with me the thought prevailed; 
So I rejoiced not; rather grew my grief still more; *
     Weeting my messenger of wits and wit had failed.

"But afterwards: Know, O my lord! that I ken not the reason why
our correspondence between thee and me hath been broken off: but,
if the cruelty arise from thy part, I will requite it with
fidelity, and if thy love have departed, I will remain constant
to my love of the parted, for I am with thee even as says the
poet,

'Be proud; I'll crouch! Bully; I'll bear! Despise; I'll pray! *
     Go; I will come! Speak; I will hear! Bid; I'll obey!'"

As he was reading lo! up came the slave-girl, looking right and
left, and seeing the paper in the jeweller's hand, said to him,
"O my master, this letter is one I let fall." He made her no
answer, but walked on, and she walked behind him, till he came to
his house, when he entered and she after him, saying, "O my
master, give me back this letter, for it fell from me." Thereon
he turned to her and said, "O handmaid of good, fear not neither
grieve, for verily Allah the Protector loveth those who protect;
but tell me in truthful way thy case, as I am one who keepeth
counsel. I conjure thee by an oath not to hide from me aught of
thy lady's affairs; for haply Allah shall help me to further her
wishes and make easy by my hand that which is hard." When the
slave-girl heard these words she said, "O my lord, indeed a
secret is not lost whereof thou art the secretist; nor shall any
affair come to naught for which thou strivest. Know that my heart
inclineth to thee and would interest thee with my tidings, but do
thou give me the letter." Then she told him the whole story,
adding, "Allah is witness to whatso I say." Quoth he, "Thou hast
spoken truly, for I am acquainted with the root of the matter."
Then he told her his tale of Ali bin Bakkar and how he had
learned his state of mind; and related to her all that had passed
from first to last, whereat she rejoiced; and they two agreed
that she should take the letter and carry it to Ali and return
and acquaint the jeweller with all that happened. So he gave her
the letter and she took it and sealed it up as it was before,
saying, "My mistress Shams al-Nahar gave it to me sealed; and
when he hath read it and given me its reply, I will bring it to
thee." Then she took leave and repaired to Ali bin Bakkar, whom
she found waiting, and gave him the letter. He read it and
writing a paper by way of reply, gave it to her; and she carried
it to the jeweller, who tore asunder the seal[FN#206] and read it
and found written therein these two couplets,

"The messenger, who kept our commerce hid, *
     Hath failed, and showeth wrath without disguise;[FN#207] 
Choose one more leal from your many friends *
     Who, truth approving, disapproves of lies.

"To proceed: Verily, I have not entered upon perfidy * nor have I
abandoned fidelity * I have not used cruelty * neither have I out
off lealty * no covenant hath been broken by me * nor hath
love-tie been severed by me * I have not parted from penitence *
nor have I found aught but misery and ruin after severance * I
know nothing of that thou avouchest * nor do I love aught but
that which thou lovest * By Him who knoweth the secret of hidden
things none discover *I have no desire save union with my lover *
and my one business is my passion to conceal * albeit with sore
sickness I ail. * This is the exposition of my case and now all
hail!" When the jeweller read this letter and learnt its contents
he wept with sore weeping, and the slave-girl said to him, "Leave
not this place till I return to thee; for he suspecteth me of
such and such things, in which he is excusable; so it is my
desire to bring about a meeting between thee and my mistress,
Shams al-Nahar, howsoever I may trick you to it. For the present
I left her prostrate, awaiting my return with the reply." Then
she went away and the jeweller passed the night with a troubled
mind. And when day dawned he prayed his dawn-prayer and sat
expecting the girl's coming; and behold, she came in to him
rejoicing with much joy and he asked her, "What news, O damsel?"
She answered, "After leaving thee I went to my mistress and gave
her the letter written by Ali bin Bakkar; and, when she read it
and understood it, she was troubled and confounded; but I said to
her, 'O my lady, have no fear of your affair being frustrated by
Abu al-Hasan's disappearance, for I have found one to take his
place, better than he and more of worth and a good man to keep
secrets.' Then I told her what was between thyself and Abu
al-Hasan and how thou camest by his confidence and that of Ali
bin Bakkar and how that note was dropped and thou camest by it;
and I also showed her how we arranged matters betwixt me and
thee." The jeweller marvelled with much wonder, when she resumed,
"And now my mistress would hear whatso thou sayest, that she may
be assured by thy speech of the covenants between thee and him;
so get thee ready to go with me to her forthwith." When the
jeweller heard the slave-girl's words, he saw that the proposed
affair was grave and a great peril to brave, not lightly to be
undertaken or suddenly entered upon, and he said to her, "O my
sister, verily, I am of the ordinary and not like unto Abu
al-Hasan; for he being of high rank and of well-known repute, was
wont to frequent the Caliph's household, because of their need of
his merchandise. As for me, he used to talk with me and I
trembled before him the while. So, if thy mistress would speak
with me, our meeting must be in some place other than the
Caliph's palace and far from the abode of the Commander of the
Faithful; for my common sense will not let me consent to what
thou proposest." On this wise he refused to go with her and she
went on to say that she would be surety for his safety, adding,
"Take heart and fear no harm!" and pressed him to courage till he
consented to accompany her; withal, his legs bent and shivered
and his hands quivered and he exclaimed, "Allah forbid that I
should go with thee! Indeed, I have not strength to do this
thing!" Replied she, "Hearten thy heart, if it be hard for thee
to go to the Caliph's palace and thou canst not muster up courage
to accompany me, I will make her come to thee; so budge not from
thy place till I return to thee with her." Then the slave-girl
went away and was absent for a while, but a short while, after
which she returned to the jeweller and said to him, "Take thou
care that there be with thee none save thyself, neither man-slave
nor girl-slave." Quoth he, "I have but a negress, who is in years
and who waiteth on me."[FN#208] So she arose and locked the door
between his negress and the jeweller and sent his man-servants
out of the place; after which she fared forth and presently
returned, followed by a lady who, entering the house, filled it
with the sweet scent of her perfumes. When the jeweller saw her,
he sprang up and set her a couch and a cushion; and she sat down
while he seated himself before her. She abode awhile without
speaking till she had rested herself, when she unveiled her face
and it seemed to the jeweller's fancy as if the sun had risen in
his home. Then she asked her slave-girl, "Is this the man of whom
thou spakest to me?" "Yes," answered she; whereupon the lady
turned to the jeweller and said to him, "How is it with thee?"
Replied he, "Right well! I pray Allah for thy preservation and
that of the Commander of the Faithful." Quoth she, "Thou hast
moved us to come to thee and possess thee with what we hold
secret." Then she questioned him of his household and family; and
he disclosed to her all his circumstance and his condition and
said to her, "I have a house other than this; and I have set it
apart for gathering together my friends and brethren; and there
is none there save the old negress, of whom I spoke to thy
handmaid." She asked him on what wise he came first to know how
the affair began and the matter of Abu al-Hasan and the cause of
his way-faring: accordingly he told her all he knew and how he
had advised the journey. Thereupon she bewailed the loss of Abu
al-Hasan and said to the jeweller, "Know, O such an one,[FN#209]
that men's souls are active in their lusts and that men are still
men; and that deeds are not done without words nor is end ever
reached without endeavour. Rest is won only by work."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams
al-Nahar thus addressed the jeweller, "Rest is gained only by
work and success is gendered only by help of the generous. Now I
have acquainted thee with our affair and it is in thy hand to
expose us or to shield us; I say no more, because thy generosity
requireth naught. Thou knowest that this my handmaiden keepeth my
counsel and therefore occupieth high place in my favour; and I
have selected her to transact my affairs of importance. So let
none be worthier in thy sight than she and acquaint her with
thine affair; and be of good cheer, for on her account thou art
safe from all fear, and there is no place shut upon thee but she
shall open it to thee. She shall bring thee my messages to Ali
bin Bakkar and thou shalt be our intermediary." So saying, she
rose, scarcely able to rise, and fared forth, the jeweller faring
before her to the door of her house, after which he returned and
sat down again in his place, having seen of her beauty and heard
of her speech what dazzled him and dazed his wit, and having
witnessed of her grace and courtesy what bewitched his sprite. He
sat musing on her perfections till his mind waxed tranquil, when
he called for food and ate enough to keep soul and body together.
Then he changed his clothes and went out; and, repairing to the
house of the youth Ali bin Bakkar, knocked at the door. The
servants hastened to admit him and walked before him till they
had brought him to their master, whom he found strown upon his
bed. Now when he saw the jeweller, he said to him, "Thou hast
tarried long from me, and that hath heaped care upon my care."
Then he dismissed his servants and bade the doors be shut; after
which he said to the jeweller, "By Allah, O my brother, I have
not closed my eyes since the day I saw thee last; for the
slave-girl came to me yesterday with a sealed letter from her
mistress Shams al-Nahar;" and went on to tell him all that had
passed with her, adding, "By the Lord, I am indeed perplexed
concerning mine affair and my patience faileth me: for Abu
al-Hasan was a comforter who cheered me because he knew the
slave-girl." When the jeweller heard his words, he laughed; and
Ali said, "Why dost thou laugh at my words, thou on whose coming
I congratulated myself and to whom I looked for provision against
the shifts of fortune?" Then he sighed and wept and repeated
these couplets,[FN#210]

     "Full many laugh at tears they see me shed *
          Who had shed tears an bore they what I bore; 
     None feeleth pity for th' afflicted's woe, *
          Save one as anxious and in woe galore: 
     My passion, yearning, sighing, thought, repine *
          Are for me cornered in my heart's deep core: 
     He made a home there which he never quits, *
          Yet rare our meetings, not as heretofore: 
     No friend to stablish in his place I see; *
          No intimate but only he and --he."

Now when the jeweller heard these lines and understood their
significance, he wept also and told him all that had passed
betwixt himself and the slave-girl and her mistress since he left
him. And Ali bin Bakkar gave ear to his speech, and at every word
he heard his colour shifted from white to red and his body grew
now stronger and then weaker till the tale came to an end, when
he wept and said, "O my brother, I am a lost man in any case:
would mine end were nigh, that I might be at rest from all this!
But I beg thee, of thy favour, to be my helper and comforter in
all my affairs till Allah fulfil whatso be His will; and I will
not gainsay thee with a single word." Quoth the jeweller,
"Nothing will quench thy fire save union with her whom thou
lovest; and the meeting must be in other than this perilous
place. Better it were in a house of mine where the girl and her
mistress met me; which place she chose for herself, to the intent
that ye twain may there meet and complain each to other of what
you have suffered from the pangs of love." Quoth Ali bin Bakkar,
"O good Sir, do as thou wilt and with Allah be thy reward!; and
what thou deemest is right do it forthright: but be not long in
doing it, lest I perish of this anguish." "So I abode with him
(said the jeweller) that night conversing with him till the
morning morrowed,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
jeweller continued:--"So I abode with him that night conversing
with him till the morning morrowed, when I prayed the
dawn-prayers and, going out from him, returned to my house.
Hardly had I settled down when the damsel came up and saluted me;
and I returned her salutation and told her what had passed
between myself and Ali bin Bakkar, and she said, 'Know that the
Caliph hath left us and there is no one in our place and it is
safer for us and better.' Replied I, 'Sooth thou sayest; yet is
it not like my other house which is both fitter and surer for
us;' and the slave-girl rejoined 'Be it as thou seest fit. I am
now going to my lady and will tell her what thou sayest and
acquaint her with all thou hast mentioned.' So she went away and
sought her mistress and laid the project before her, and
presently returned and said to me, 'It is to be as thou sayest:
so make us ready the place and expect us.' Then she took out of
her breast-pocket a purse of dinars and gave this message, 'My
lady saluteth thee and saith to thee, 'Take this and provide
therewith what the case requireth.' But I swore that I would
accept naught of it; so she took the purse and returning to her
mistress, told her, 'He would not receive the money, but gave it
back to me.' 'No matter,' answered Shams al-Nahar. As soon as the
slave-girl was gone" (continued the jeweller), "I arose and
betook myself to my other house and transported thither all that
was needful, by way of vessels and furniture and rich carpets;
and I did not forget china vases and cups of glass and gold and
silver; and I made ready meat and drink required for the
occasion. When the damsel came and saw what I had done, it
pleased her and she bade me fetch Ali bin Bakkar; but I said,
'None shall bring him save thou.' Accordingly she went to him and
brought him back perfectly dressed and looking his best. I met
him and greeted him and then seated him upon a divan befitting
his condition, and set before him sweet-scented flowers in vases
of china and vari-coloured glass.[FN#211] Then I set on a tray of
many-tinted meats such as broaden the breast with their sight,
and sat talking with him and diverting him, whilst the slave-girl
went away and was absent till after sundown-prayers, when she
returned with Shams al-Nahar, attended by two maids and none
else. Now as soon as she saw Ali bin Bakkar and he saw her, he
rose and embraced her, and she on her side embraced him and both
fell in a fit to the ground. They lay for a whole hour
insensible; then, coming to themselves, they began mutually to
complain of the pains of separation. Thereupon they drew near to
each other and sat talking charmingly, softly, tenderly; after
which they somewhat perfumed themselves and fell to thanking me
for what I had done for them. Quoth I, 'Have ye a mind for food?'
'Yes,' quoth they. So I set before them a small matter of food
and they ate till they were satisfied and then washed their
hands; after which I led them to another sitting-room and brought
them wine. So they drank and drank deep and inclined to each
other; and presently Shams al-Nahar said to me, 'O my master,
complete thy kindness by bringing us a lute or other instrument
of mirth and music that the measure of our joy may be fully
filled.' I replied, 'On my head and eyes!' and rising brought her
a lute, which she took and tuned; then laying it in her lap she
touched it with a masterly touch, at once exciting to sadness and
changing sorrow to gladness; after which she sang these two
couplets,

     'My sleeplessness would show I love to bide on wake; *
          And would my leanness prove that sickness is my make: 
     And tear-floods course adown the cheeks they only scald; *
          Would I knew union shall disunion overtake!'

Then she went on to sing the choicest and most affecting poesy to
many and various modes, till our senses were bewitched and the
very room danced with excess of delight and surprise at her sweet
singing; and neither thought nor reason was left in us. When we
had sat awhile and the cup had gone round amongst us, the damsel
took the lute and sang to a lively measure these couplets, 

My love a meeting promised me and kept it faithfully, *
     One night as many I shall count in number and degree: 
O Night of joyance Fate vouchsafed to faithful lovers tway, *
     Uncaring for the railer loon and all his company! 
My lover lay the Night with me and clipt me with his right, *
     While I with left embraced him, a-faint for ecstasy; 
And hugged him to my breast and sucked the sweet wine of his
     lips, * Full savouring the honey-draught the honey-man sold
     to me.'

Whilst we were thus drowned in the sea of gladness" (continued
the jeweller) "behold, there came in to us a little maid
trembling and said, 'O my lady, look how you may go away for the
folk have found you out and have surrounded the house; and we
know not the cause of this!' When I heard her words, I arose
startled and lo! in rushed a slave-girl who cried, 'Calamity hath
come upon you.' At the same moment the door was burst open and
there rushed in upon us ten men masked in kerchiefs with hangers
in their hands and swords by their sides, and as many more behind
them. When I saw this, the world was straitened on me for all its
wideness, and I looked to the door but saw no issue; so I sprang
from the terrace into the house of one of my neighbours and there
hid myself. Thence I found that folk had entered my lodgings and
were making a mighty hubbub; and I concluded that the Caliph had
got wind of us and had sent his Chief of the Watch to seize us
and bring us before him. So I abode confounded and ceased not
remaining in my place, without any possibility of quitting it
till midnight. And presently the house-master arose, for he had
heard me moving, and he feared with exceeding great fear of me;
so he came forth from his room with drawn br