and in hand and made
at me, saying, 'Who is this in my house?' Quoth I, 'I am thy
neighbour the jeweller;' and he knew me and retired. Then he
fetched a light and coming up to me, said, 'O my brother, indeed
that which hath befallen thee this night is no light matter to
me.' I replied, 'O my brother, tell me who was in my house and
entered it breaking in my door; for I fled to thee not knowing
what was to do.' He answered, 'Of a truth the robbers who
attacked our neighbours yesterday and slew such an one and took
his goods, saw thee on the same day bringing furniture into this
house; so they broke in upon thee and stole thy goods and slew
thy guests.' Then we arose" (pursued the jeweller), "I and he,
and repaired to my house, which we found empty without a stick
remaining in it; so I was confounded at the case and said to
myself, 'As for the gear I care naught about its loss, albeit I
borrowed part of the stuff from my friends and it hath come to
grief; yet is there no harm in that, for they know my excuse in
the plunder of my property and the pillage of my place. But as
for Ali bin Bakkar and the Caliph's favourite concubine, I fear
lest their case get bruited abroad and this cause the loss of my
life.' So I turned to my neighbour and said to him, 'Thou art my
brother and my neighbour and wilt cover my nakedness; what then
dost thou advise me to do?' The man answered, 'What I counsel
thee to do is to keep quiet and wait; for they who entered thy
house and took thy goods have murdered the best men of a party
from the palace of the Caliphate and have killed not a few of the
watchmen: the government officers and guards are now in quest of
them on every road and haply they will hit upon them, whereby thy
wish will come about without effort of thine.'" The jeweller
hearing these words returned to his other house, that wherein he
dwelt,--and Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
jeweller heard these words he returned to his other house wherein
he dwelt, and said to himself, "Indeed this that hath befallen me
is what Abu al-Hasan feared and from which he fled to Bassorah.
And now I have fallen into it." Presently the pillage of his
pleasure-house was noised abroad among the folk, and they came to
him from all sides and places, some exulting in his misfortune
and others excusing him and condoling with his sorrow; whilst he
bewailed himself to them and for grief neither ate meat nor drank
drink. And as he sat, repenting him of what he had done, behold
one of his servants came in to him and said, "There is a person
at the door who asketh for thee; and I know him not." The
jeweller went forth to him and saluted him who was a stranger;
and the man whispered to him, "I have somewhat to say between our
two selves." Thereupon he brought him in and asked him, "What
hast thou to tell me?" Quoth the man, "Come with me to thine
other house;" and the jeweller enquired, "Dost thou then know my
other house?" Replied the other, "I know all about thee and I
know that also whereby Allah will dispel thy dolours." "So I said
to myself" (continued the jeweller) "'I will go with him whither
he will;' and went out and walked on till we came to my second
house; and when the man saw it he said to me, 'It is without door
or doorkeeper, and we cannot possibly sit in it; so come thou
with me to another place.' Then the man continued passing from
stead to stead (and I with him) till night overtook us. Yet I put
no question to him of the matter in hand and we ceased not to
walk on, till we reached the open country. He kept saying,
'Follow me,' and quickened his pace to a trot, whilst I trotted
after him heartening my heart to go on, until we reached the
river, where he took boat with me, and the boatman rowed us over
to the other bank. Then he landed from the boat and I landed
after him: and he took my hand and led me to a street which I had
never entered in all my days, nor do I know in what quarter it
was. Presently the man stopped at the door of a house, and
opening it entered and made me enter with him; after which he
locked the door with an iron padlock,[FN#212] and led me along
the vestibule, till he brought me in the presence of ten men who
were as though they were one and the same man; they being
brothers. We saluted them" (continued the jeweller) "and they
returned our greeting and bade us be seated; so we sat down. Now
I was like to die for excess of weariness; but they brought me
rose-water and sprinkled it on my face; after which they gave me
a sherbet to drink and set before me food whereof some of them
ate with me. Quoth I to myself, 'Were there aught harmful in the
food, they would not eat with me.' So I ate, and when we had
washed our hands, each of us returned to his place. Then they
asked me, 'Dost thou know us?' and I answered, 'No! nor in my
life have I ever seen you; nay, I know not even him who brought
me hither.' Said they, 'Tell us thy tidings and lie not at all.'
Replied I, 'Know then that my case is wondrous and my affair
marvellous; but wot ye anything about me?' They rejoined, 'Yes!
it was we took thy goods yesternight and carried off thy friend
and her who was singing to him.' Quoth I, 'Allah let down His
veil over you! Where be my friend and she who was singing to
him?' They pointed with their hands to one side and replied,
'Yonder, but, by Allah, O our brother, the secret of their case
is known to none save to thee, for from the time we brought the
twain hither up to this day, we have not looked upon them nor
questioned them of their condition, seeing them to be persons of
rank and dignity. Now this and this only it was that hindered our
killing them: so tell us the truth of their case and thou shalt
be assured of thy safety and of theirs.' When I heard this"
(continued the jeweller) "I almost died of fright and horror, and
I said to them, 'Know ye, O my brethren, that if generosity were
lost, it would not be found save with you; and had I a secret
which I feared to reveal, none but your breasts would conceal
it.' And I went on exaggerating their praises in this fashion,
till I saw that frankness and readiness to speak out would profit
me more than concealing facts; so I told them all that had
betided me to the very end of the tale. When they heard it, they
said, 'And is this young man Ali Bakkar-son and this lady Shams
al-Nahar?' I replied, 'Yes.' Now this was grievous to them and
they rose and made their excuses to the two and then they said to
me, 'Of what we took from thy house part is spent, but here is
what is left of it.' So speaking, they gave me back most of my
goods and they engaged to return them to their places in my
house, and to restore me the rest as soon as they could. My heart
was set at ease till they split into two parties, one with me and
the other against me; and we fared forth from that house and such
was my case. But as regards Ali bin Bakkar and Shams al-Nahar;
they were well-nigh dying for excess of fear, when I went up to
them and saluting them, asked, 'What happened to the damsel and
the two maids, and where be they gone?', and they answered only,
'We know nothing of them.' Then we walked on and stinted not till
we came to the river-bank where the barque lay; and we all
boarded it, for it was the same which had brought me over on the
day before. The boatman rowed us to the other side; but hardly
had we landed and taken seat on the bank to rest, when a troop of
horse swooped down on us like eagles and surrounded us on all
sides and places, whereupon the robbers with us sprang up in
haste like vultures, and the boat put back for them and took them
in and the boatman pushed off into mid-stream, leaving us on the
river bank, unable to move or to stand still. Then the chief
horseman said to us, 'Whence be ye!'; and we were perplexed for
an answer, but I said" (continued the jeweller), "'Those ye saw
with us are rogues; we know them not. As for us, we are singers,
and they intended taking us to sing for them, nor could we get
free of them, save by subtlety and soft words; so on this
occasion they let us go, their works being such as you have
seen.' But they looked at Shams al-Nahar and Ali bin Bakkar and
said to me, 'Thou hast not spoken sooth but, if thy tale be true,
tell us who ye are and whence ye are; and what be your place and
in what quarter you dwell.' I knew not what to answer them, but
Shams al-Nahar sprang up and approaching the Captain of the
horsemen spoke with him privily, whereupon he dismounted from his
steed and, setting her on horse-back, took the bridle and began
to lead his beast. And two of his men did the like with the
youth, Ali bin Bakkar, and it was the same with myself. The
Commandant of the troop ceased not faring on with us, till they
reached a certain part of the river bank, when he sang out in
some barbarous jargon[FN#213] and there came to us a number of
men with two boats. Then the Captain embarked us in one of them
(and he with us) whilst the rest of his men put off in the other,
and rowed on with us till we arrived at the palace of the
Caliphate where Shams al-Nahar landed. And all the while we
endured the agonies of death for excess of fear, and they ceased
not faring till they came to a place whence there was a way to
our quarter. Here we landed and walked on, escorted by some of
the horsemen, till we came to Ali bin Bakkar's house; and when we
entered it, our escort took leave of us and went their way. We
abode there, unable to stir from the place and not knowing the
difference between morning and evening; and in such case we
continued till the dawn of the next day. And when it was again
nightfall, I came to myself and saw Ali bin Bakkar and the women
and men of his household weeping over him, for he was stretched
out without sense or motion. Some of them came to me and
thoroughly arousing me said, 'Tell us what hath befallen our son
and say how came he in this plight?' Replied I, 'O folk, hearken
to me!'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
jeweller answered them, "'O folk, hearken to my words and give me
no trouble and annoyance! but be patient and he will come to and
tell you his tale for himself.' And I was hard upon them and made
them afraid of a scandal between me and them, but as we were
thus, behold, Ali bin Bakkar moved on his carpet-bed, whereat his
friends rejoiced and the stranger folk withdrew from him; but his
people forbade me to go away. Then they sprinkled rose-water on
his face and he presently revived and sensed the air; whereupon
they questioned him of his case, and he essayed to answer them
but his tongue could not speak forthright and he signed to them
to let me go home. So they let me go, and I went forth hardly
crediting my escape and returned to my own house, supported by
two men. When my people saw me thus, they rose up and set to
shrieking and slapping their faces; but I signed to them with my
hand to be silent and they were silent. Then the two men went
their way and I threw myself down on my bed, where I lay the rest
of the night and awoke not till the forenoon, when I found my
people gathered round me and saying, 'What calamity befel thee,
and what evil with its mischief did fell thee?' Quoth I 'Bring me
somewhat to drink.' So they brought me drink, and I drank of it
what I would and said to them, 'What happened, happened.'
Thereupon they went away and I made my excuses to my friends, and
asked if any of the goods that had been stolen from my other
house had been returned. They answered, 'Yes! some of them have
come back; by token that a man entered and threw them down within
the doorway and we saw him not.' So I comforted myself and abode
in my place two days, unable to rise and leave it; and presently
I took courage and went to the bath, for I was worn out with
fatigue and troubled in mind for Ali bin Bakkar and Shams
al-Nahar, because I had no news of them all this time and could
neither get to Ali's house nor, out of fear for my life, take my
rest in mine own. And I repented to Almighty Allah of what I had
done and praised Him for my safety. Presently my fancy suggested
to me to go to such and such a place and see the folk and solace
myself; so I went on foot to the cloth-market and sat awhile with
a friend of mine there. When I rose to go, I saw a woman standing
over against me; so I looked at her, and lo! it was Shams
al-Nahar's slave-girl. When I saw her, the world grew dark in my
eyes and I hurried on. She followed me, but I was seized with
affright and fled from her, and whenever I looked at her, a
trembling came upon me whilst she pursued me, saying. 'Stop, that
I may tell thee somewhat!' But I heeded her not and never ceased
walking till I reached a mosque, and she entered after me. I
prayed a two-bow prayer, after which I turned to her and,
sighing, said, 'What cost thou want?' She asked me how I did, and
I told her all that had befallen myself and Ali bin Bakkar and
besought her for news of herself. She answered, 'Know that when I
saw the robbers break open thy door and rush in, I was in sore
terror, for I doubted not but that they were the Caliph's
officers and would seize me and my mistress and we should perish
forthwith: so we fled over the roofs, I and the maids; and,
casting ourselves down from a high place, came upon some people
with whom we took refuge; and they received us and brought us to
the palace of the Caliphate, where we arrived in the sorriest of
plights. We concealed our case and abode on coals of fire till
nightfall, when I opened the river-gate and, calling the boatman
who had carried us the night before, said to him, 'I know not
what is become of my mistress; so take me in the boat, that we
may go seek her on the river: haply I shall chance on some news
of her. Accordingly he took me into the boat and went about with
me and ceased not wending till midnight, when I spied a barque
making towards the water gate, with one man rowing and another
standing up and a woman lying prostrate between them twain. And
they rowed on till they reached the shore when the woman landed,
and I looked at her, and behold, it was Shams al-Nahar. Thereupon
I got out and joined her, dazed for joy to see her after having
lost all hopes of finding her alive.'" --And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
slave-girl went on telling the jeweller, "'I was dazed for joy to
see her, after having lost all hopes of finding her alive. When I
came up to her, she bade me give the man who had brought her
thither a thousand gold pieces; and we carried her in, I and the
two maids, and laid her on her bed; where she passed that night
in a sorely troubled state; and, when morning dawned, I forbade
the women and eunuchs to go in to her, or even to draw near her
for the whole of that day; but on the next she revived and
somewhat recovered and I found her as if she had come out of her
grave. I sprinkled rose-water upon her face and changed her
clothes and washed her hands and feet; nor did I cease to coax
her, till I brought her to eat a little and drink some wine,
though she had no mind to any such matter. As soon as she had
breathed the fresh air and strength began to return to her, I
took to upbraiding her, saying, 'O my lady, consider and have
pity on thyself; thou seest what hath betided us: surely, enough
and more than enough of evil hath befallen thee; for indeed thou
hast been nigh upon death. She said, 'By Allah, O good damsel, in
sooth death were easier to me than what hath betided me; for it
seemed as though I should be slain and no power could save me.
When the robbers took us from the jeweller's house they asked me,
Who mayest thou be? and hearing my answer, 'I am a singing girl,
they believed me. Then they turned to Ali bin Bakkar and made
enquiries about him, 'And who art thou and what is thy
condition?; whereto he replied, 'I am of the common kind. So they
took us and carried us along, without our resisting, to their
abode; and we hurried on with them for excess of fear; but when
they had us set down with them in the house, they looked hard at
me and seeing the clothes I wore and my necklaces and jewellery,
believed not my account of myself and said to me, 'Of a truth
these necklaces belong to no singing-girl; so be soothfast and
tell us the truth of thy case. I returned them no answer
whatever, saying in my mind, 'Now will they slay me for the sake
of my apparel and ornaments; and I spoke not a word. Then the
villains turned to Ali bin Bakkar, asking, 'And thou, who art
thou and whence art thou? for thy semblance seemeth not as that
of the common kind. But he was silent and we ceased not to keep
our counsel and to weep, till Allah softened the rogues' hearts
to pity and they said to us, 'Who is the owner of the house
wherein we were?' We answered, 'Such an one, the jeweller;
whereupon quoth one of them, 'I know him right well and I wot the
other house where he liveth and I will engage to bring him to you
this very hour. Then they agreed to set me in a place by myself
and Ali bin Bakkar in a place by himself, and said to us, 'Be at
rest ye twain and fear not lest your secret be divulged; ye are
safe from us. Meanwhile their comrade went away and returned with
the jeweller, who made known to them our case, and we joined
company with him; after which a man of the band fetched a barque,
wherein they embarked us all three and, rowing us over the river,
landed us with scant ceremony on the opposite bank and went their
ways. Thereupon up came a horse-patrol and asked us who we were;
so I spoke with the Captain of the watch and said to him, 'I am
Shams al-Nahar, the Caliph's favourite; I had drunken strong wine
and went out to visit certain of my acquaintance of the wives of
the Wazirs, when yonder rogues came upon me and laid hold of me
and brought me to this place; but when they saw you, they fled as
fast as they could. I met these men with them: so do thou escort
me and them to a place of safety and I will requite thee as I am
well able to do. When the Captain of the watch heard my speech,
he knew me and alighting, mounted me on his horse; and in like
manner did two of his men with Ali bin Bakkar. So I spoke to her'
(continued the handmaid) 'and blamed her doings, and bade her
beware, and said to her, 'O my lady, have some care for thy
life!' But she was angered at my words and cried out at me;
accordingly I left her and came forth in quest of thee, but found
thee not and dared not go to the house of Ali bin Bakkar; so
stood watching for thee, that I might ask thee of him and wot how
it goes with him. And I pray thee, of thy favour, to take of me
some money, for thou hast doubtless borrowed from thy friends
part of the gear and as it is lost, it behoveth thee to make it
good with folk.' I replied, 'To hear is to obey! go on;' and I
walked with her till we drew near my house, when she said to me,
'Wait here till I come back to thee.'"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
slave-girl had addressed the jeweller, "'Wait here till I come
back to thee!' she went away and presently returned with the
money, which she put" (continued the jeweller) "into my hand,
saying, 'O my master, in what place shall we meet?' Quoth I, 'I
will start and go to my house at once and suffer hard things for
thy sake and contrive how thou mayst win access to him, for such
access is difficult at this present.' Said she, 'Let me know some
spot, where I shall come to thee,' and I answered, 'In my other
house, I will go thither forthright and have the doors mended and
the place made safe again, and henceforth we will meet there.'
Then she took leave of me and went her way, whilst I carried the
money home, and counting it, found it five thousand dinars. So I
gave my people some of it and to all who had lent me aught I made
good their loss, after which I arose and took my servants and
repaired to my other house whence the things had been stolen; and
I brought builders and carpenters and masons who restored it to
its former state. Moreover, I placed my negress-slave there and
forgot the mishaps which had befallen me. Then I fared forth and
repaired to Ali bin Bakkar's house and, when I reached it, his
slave-servants accosted me, saying, 'Our lord calleth for thee
night and day, and hath promised to free whichever of us bringeth
thee to him; so they have been wandering about in quest of thee
everywhere but knew not in what part to find thee. Our master is
by way of recovering strength, but at times he reviveth and at
times he relapseth; and whenever he reviveth he nameth thee, and
saith, 'Needs must ye bring him to me, though but for the
twinkling of an eye;' and then he sinketh back into his torpor.'
Accordingly" (continued the jeweller) "I accompanied the slave
and went in to Ali bin Bakkar; and, finding him unable to speak,
sat down at his head, whereupon he opened his eyes and seeing me,
wept and said, 'Welcome and well come!' I raised him and making
him sit up, strained him to my bosom, and he said, 'Know, O my
brother, that, from the hour I took to my bed, I have not sat up
till now: praise to Allah that I see thee again!' And I ceased
not to prop him and support him until I made him stand on his
feet and walk a few steps, after which I changed his clothes and
he drank some wine: but all this he did for my satisfaction.
Then, seeing him somewhat restored, I told him what had befallen
me with the slave-girl (none else hearing me), and said to him,
'Take heart and be of good courage, I know what thou sufferest.'
He smiled and I added, 'Verily nothing shall betide thee save
what shall rejoice thee and medicine thee.' Thereupon he called
for food, which being brought, he signed to his pages, and they
withdrew. Then quoth he to me, 'O my brother, hast thou seen what
hath befallen me?'; and he made excuses to me and asked how I had
fared all that while. I told him everything that had befallen me,
from beginning to end, whereat he wondered and calling his
servants, said, 'Bring me such and such things.' They brought in
fine carpets and hangings and, besides that, vessels of gold and
silver, more than I had lost, and he gave them all to me; so I
sent them to my house and abode with him that night. When the day
began to yellow, he said to me, 'Know thou that as to all things
there is an end, so the end of love is either death or
accomplishment of desire. I am nearer unto death, would I had
died ere this befel!; and had not Allah favoured us, we had been
found out and put to shame. And now I know not what shall deliver
me from this my strait, and were it not that I fear Allah, I
would hasten my own death; for know, O my brother, that I am like
bird in cage and that my life is of a surety perished, choked by
the distresses which have befallen me; yet hath it a period
stablished firm and an appointed term.' And he wept and groaned
and began repeating,

     'Enough of tears hath shed the lover-wight, *
          When grief outcast all patience from his sprite: 
     He hid the secrets which united us, *
          But now His eye parts what He did unite!'"

When he had finished his verses, the jeweller said to him, "O my
lord, I now intend returning to my house." He answered, "There be
no harm in that; go and come back to me with news as fast as
possible, for thou seest my case." "So I took leave of him"
(continued the jeweller) "and went home, and hardly had I sat
down, when up came the damsel, choked with long weeping. I asked,
'What is the matter'?; and she answered, 'O my lord, know then
that what we feared hath befallen us; for, when I left thee
yesterday and returned to my lady, I found her in a fury with one
of the two maids who were with us the other night, and she
ordered her to be beaten. The girl was frightened and ran away;
but, as she was leaving the house, one of the door-porters and
guards of the gate met her and took her up and would have sent
her back to her mistress. However, she let fall some hints, which
were a disclosure to him; so he cajoled her and led her on to
talk, and she tattled about our case and let him know of all our
doings. This affair came to the ears of the Caliph, who bade
remove my mistress, Shams al-Nahar, and all her gear to the
palace of the Caliphate; and set over her a guard of twenty
eunuchs. Since then to the present hour he hath not visited her
nor hath given her to know the reason of his action, but I
suspect this to be the cause; wherefore I am in fear for my life
and am sore troubled, O my lord, knowing not what I shall do, nor
with what contrivance I shall order my affair and hers; for she
hath none by her more trusted or more trustworthy than
myself.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
slave-girl thus addressed the jeweller, "'And in very sooth my
lady hath none by her more trusted or more trustworthy in matter
of secrecy than myself. So go thou, O my master, and speed thee
without delay to Ali bin Bakkar; and acquaint him with this, that
he may be on his guard and ward; and, if the affair be
discovered, we will cast about for some means whereby to save our
lives.' On this" (continued the jeweller), "I was seized with
sore trouble and the world grew dark in my sight for the
slave-girl's words; and when she was about to wend, I said to
her, 'What reckest thou and what is to be done?' Quoth she, 'My
counsel is that thou hasten to Ali bin Bakkar, if thou be indeed
his friend and desire to save him; thine be it to carry him this
news at once without aught of stay and delay, or regard for far
and near; and mine be it to sniff about for further news.' Then
she took her leave of me and went away: so I rose and followed
her track and, betaking myself to Ali bin Bakkar, found him
flattering himself with impossible expectations. When he saw me
returning to him so soon, he said, 'I see thou hast come back to
me forthwith and only too soon.' I answered, 'Patience, and cut
short this foolish connection and shake off the pre-occupation
wherein thou art, for there hath befallen that which may bring
about the loss of thy life and good.' Now when he heard this, he
was troubled and strongly moved; and he said to me, 'O my
brother, tell me what hath happened.' Replied I, 'O my lord, know
that such and such things have happened and thou art lost without
recourse, if thou abide in this thy house till the end of the
day.' At this, he was confounded and his soul well-nigh departed
his body, but he recovered himself and said to me, 'What shall I
do, O my brother, and what counsel hast thou to offer.' Answered
I, 'My advice is that thou take what thou canst of thy property
and whom of thy slaves thou trustest, and flee with us to a land
other than this, ere this very day come to an end.' And he said,
'I hear and I obey.' So he rose, confused and dazed like one in
epilepsy, now walking and now falling, and took what came under
his hand. Then he made an excuse to his household and gave them
his last injunctions, after which he loaded three camels and
mounted his beast; and I did likewise. We went forth privily in
disguise and fared on and ceased not our wayfare the rest of that
day and all its night, till nigh upon morning, when we unloaded
and, hobbling our camels, lay down to sleep. But we were worn
with fatigue and we neglected to keep watch, so that there fell
upon us robbers, who stripped us of all we had and slew our
slaves, when these would have beaten them off, leaving us naked
and in the sorriest of plights, after they had taken our money
and lifted our beasts and disappeared. As soon as they were gone,
we arose and walked on till morning dawned, when we came to a
village which we entered, and finding a mosque took refuge
therein for we were naked. So we sat in a corner all that day and
we passed the next night without meat or drink; and at day-break
we prayed our dawn-prayer and sat down again. Presently behold, a
man entered and saluting us prayed a two-bow prayer, after which
he turned to us and said, 'O folk, are ye strangers?' We replied,
'Yes: the bandits waylaid us and stripped us naked, and we came
to this town but know none here with whom we may shelter.' Quoth
he, 'What say ye? will you come home with me?' And" (pursued the
jeweller) "I said to Ali bin Bakkar, 'Up and let us go with him,
and we shall escape two evils; the first, our fear lest some one
who knoweth us enter this mosque and recognise us, so that we
come to disgrace; and the second, that we are strangers and have
no place wherein to lodge.' And he answered helplessly, 'As thou
wilt.' Then the man said to us again, 'O ye poor folk, give ear
unto me and come with me to my place,' and I replied, 'Hearkening
and obedience;' whereupon he pulled off a part of his own clothes
and covered us therewith and made his excuses to us and spoke
kindly to us. Then we arose and accompanied him to his house and
he knocked at the door, whereupon a little slave-boy came out and
opened to us. The host entered and we followed him;[FN#214] when
he called for a bundle of clothes and muslins for turbands, and
gave us each a suit and a piece; so we dressed and turbanded
ourselves and sat us down. Presently, in came a damsel with a
tray of food and set it before us, saying, 'Eat.' We ate some
small matter and she took away the tray: after which we abode
with our host till nightfall, when Ali bin Bakkar sighed and said
to me, 'Know, O my brother, that I am a dying man past hope of
life and I would charge thee with a charge: it is that, when thou
seest me dead, thou go to my parent[FN#215] and tell her of my
decease and bid her come hither that she may be here to receive
the visits of condolence and be present at the washing of my
corpse, and do thou exhort her to bear my loss with patience.'
Then he fell down in a fainting fit and, when he recovered he
heard a damsel singing afar off and making verses as she sang.
Thereupon he addressed himself to give ear to her and hearken to
her voice; and now he was insensible, absent from the world, and
now he came to himself; and anon he wept for grief and mourning
at the love which had befallen him. Presently, he heard the
damsel who was singing repeat these couplets,

     'Parting ran up to part from lover-twain *
          Free converse, perfect concord, friendship fain: 
     The Nights with shifting drifted us apart, *
          Would heaven I wot if we shall meet again: 
     How bitter after meeting 'tis to part, *
          May lovers ne'er endure so bitter pain!
     Death-grip, death-choke, lasts for an hour and ends, *
          But parting-tortures aye in heart remain: 
     Could we but trace where Parting's house is placed, *
          We would make Parting eke of parting taste!'

When Ali son of Bakkar heard the damsel's song, he sobbed one sob
and his soul quitted his body. As soon as I saw that he was dead"
(continued the jeweller), "I committed his corpse to the care of
the house-master and said to him 'Know thou, that I am going to
Baghdad, to tell his mother and kinsfolk, that they may come
hither and conduct his burial.' So I betook myself to Baghdad
and, going to my house, changed my clothes; after which I
repaired to Ali bin Bakkar's lodging. Now when his servants saw
me, they came to me and questioned me of him, and I bade them ask
permission for me to go in to his mother. She gave me leave; so I
entered and saluting her, said, 'Verily Allah ordereth the lives
of all creatures by His commandment and when He decreeth aught,
there is no escaping its fulfilment; nor can any soul depart but
by leave of Allah, according to the Writ which affirmeth the
appointed term.'[FN#216] She guessed by these words that her son
was dead and wept with sore weeping, then she said to me, 'Allah
upon thee! tell me, is my son dead?' I could not answer her for
tears and excess of grief, and when she saw me thus, she was
choked with weeping and fell to the ground in a fit. As soon as
she came to herself she said to me, 'Tell me how it was with my
son.' I replied, 'May Allah abundantly compensate thee for his
loss!' and I told her all that had befallen him from beginning to
end. She then asked, 'Did he give thee any charge?'; and I
answered, 'Yes,' and told her what he had said, adding, 'Hasten
to perform his funeral.' When she heard these words, she swooned
away again; and, when she recovered, she addressed herself to do
as I charged her. Then I returned to my house; and as I went
along musing sadly upon the fair gifts of his youth, behold, a
woman caught hold of my hand;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
jeweller thus continued:--"A woman caught hold of my hand; and I
looked at her and lo! it was the slave-girl who used to come from
Shams al-Nahar, and she seemed broken by grief. When we knew each
other we both wept and ceased not weeping till we reached my
house, and I said to her, 'Knowest thou the news of the youth,
Ali bin Bakkar?' She replied, 'No, by Allah!'; so I told her the
manner of his death and all that had passed, whilst we both wept;
after which quoth I to her, 'How is it with thy mistress?' Quoth
she, 'The Commander of the Faithful would not hear a single word
against her; but, for the great love he bore her, saw all her
actions in a favourable light, and said to her, 'O Shams
al-Nahar, thou art dear to me and I will bear with thee and bring
the noses of thy foes to the grindstone. Then he bade them
furnish her an apartment decorated with gold and a handsome
sleeping-chamber, and she abode with him in all ease of life and
high favour. Now it came to pass that one day, as he sat at wine
according to his custom, with his favourite concubines in
presence, he bade them be seated in their several ranks and made
Shams al-Nahar sit by his side. But her patience had failed and
her disorder had redoubled upon her. Then he bade one of the
damsels sing: so she took a lute and tuning it struck the chords,
and began to sing these verses,

'One craved my love and I gave all he craved of me, *
     And tears on cheek betray how 'twas I came to yield: 
Tear-drops, meseemeth, are familiar with our case, *
     Revealing what I hide, hiding what I revealed: 
How can I hope in secret to conceal my love, *
     Which stress of passion ever showeth unconcealed: 
Death, since I lost my lover, is grown sweet to me; *
     Would I knew what their joys when I shall quit the field!

Now when Shams al-Nahar heard these verses sung by the
slave-girl, she could not keep her seat; but fell down in a
fainting-fit whereupon the Caliph cast the cup from his hand and
drew her to him crying out; and the damsels also cried out, and
the Prince of True Believers turned her over and shook her, and
lo and behold! she was dead. The Caliph grieved over her death
with sore grief and bade break all the vessels and
dulcimers[FN#217] and other instruments of mirth and music which
were in the room; then carrying her body to his closet, he abode
with her the rest of the night. When the day broke, he laid her
out and commanded to wash her and shroud her and bury her. And he
mourned for her with sore mourning, and questioned not of her
case nor of what caused her condition. And I beg thee in Allah's
name' (continued the damsel) 'to let me know the day of the
coming of Ali bin Bakkar's funeral procession that I may be
present at his burial.' Quoth I, 'For myself, where thou wilt
thou canst find me; but thou, where art thou to be found, and who
can come at thee where thou art?' She replied, 'On the day of
Shams al-Nahar's death, the Commander of the Faithful freed all
her women, myself among the rest;[FN#218] and I am one of those
now abiding at the tomb in such a place.' So I rose and
accompanied her to the burial-ground and piously visited Shams
al-Nahar's tomb; after which I went my way and ceased not to
await the coming of Ali bin Bakkar's funeral. When it arrived,
the people of Baghdad went forth to meet it and I went forth with
them: and I saw the damsel among the women and she the loudest of
them in lamentation, crying out and wailing with a voice that
rent the vitals and made the heart ache. Never was seen in
Baghdad a finer funeral than his; and we ceased not to follow in
crowds till we reached the cemetery and buried him to the mercy
of Almighty Allah; nor from that time to this have I ceased to
visit the tombs of Ali son of Bakkar and of Shams al-Nahar. This,
then, is their story, and Allah Almighty have mercy upon
them!"[FN#219] And yet is not their tale (continued Shahrazad)
more wonderful than that of King Shahriman. The King asked her
"And what was his tale?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, as regards the






                    TALE OF KAMAR AL ZAMAN, 
                                
                                
                                
That there was in times of yore and in ages long gone before a
King called Shahrimán,[FN#220] who was lord of many troops and
guards, and officers, and who reigned over certain islands, known
as the Khálidán Islands,[FN#221] on the borders of the land of
the Persians. But he was stricken in years and his bones were
wasted, without having been blessed with a son, albeit he had
four wives, daughters of Kings, and threescore concubines, with
each of whom he was wont to lie one night in turn.[FN#222]  This
preyed upon his mind and disquieted him, so that he complained
thereof to one of his Wazirs, saying, "Verily I fear lest my
kingdom be lost when I die, for that I have no son to succeed
me." The Minister answered, "O King, peradventure Allah shall yet
bring something to pass; so rely upon the Almighty and be instant
in prayer. It is also my counsel that thou spread a banquet and
invite to it the poor and needy, and let them eat of thy food;
and supplicate the Lord to vouchsafe thee a son; for perchance
there may be among thy guests a righteous soul whose prayers find
acceptance; and thereby thou shalt win thy wish." So the King
rose, made the lesser ablution, and prayed a two-bow
prayer,[FN#223] then he cried upon Allah with pure intention;
after which he called his chief wife to bed and lay with her
forthright. By grace of God she conceived and, when her months
were accomplished, she bore a male child, like the moon on the
night of fulness. The King named him Kamar al-Zamán,[FN#224] and
rejoiced in him with extreme joy and bade the city be dressed out
in his honour; so they decorated the streets seven days, whilst
the drums beat and the messengers bore the glad tidings abroad.
Then wet and dry nurses were provided for the boy and he was
reared in splendour and delight, until he reached the age of
fifteen. He grew up of surpassing beauty and seemlihead and
symmetry, and his father loved him so dear that he could not
brook to be parted from him day or night. One day he complained
to a certain of his Ministers anent the excess of his love for
his only child, saying, "O thou the Wazir, of a truth I fear for
my son, Kamar al-Zaman, the shifts and accidents which befal man
and fain would I marry him in my life-time." Answered the Wazir,
"O King, know thou that marriage is one of the most honourable of
moral actions, and thou wouldst indeed do well and right to marry
thy son in thy lifetime, ere thou make him Sultan." On this quoth
the King, "Hither with my son Kamar al-Zaman;" so he came and
bowed his head to the ground in modesty before his sire. "O Kamar
al Zaman," said King Shahriman, "of a truth I desire to marry
thee and rejoice in thee during my lifetime." Replied he, "O my
father, know that I have no lust to marry nor cloth my soul
incline to women; for that concerning their craft and perfidy I
have read many books and heard much talk, even as saith the poet,

'Now, an of women ask ye, I reply:--*
     In their affairs I'm versed a doctor rare!
When man's head grizzles and his money dwindles, *
     In their affections he hath naught for share.'

And another said:--

'Rebel against women and so shalt thou serve Allah the more; *
     The youth who gives women the rein must forfeit all hope to
     soar.
They'll baulk him when seeking the strange device, Excelsior, *
     Tho' waste he a thousand of years in the study of science
     and lore.' "

And when he had ended his verses he continued, "O my father,
wedlock is a thing whereto I will never consent; no, not though I
drink the cup of death." When Sultan Shahriman heard these words
from his son, light became darkness in his sight and he grieved
thereat with great grief.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Shahriman heard these words from his son, the light became
darkness in his sight and he grieved over his son's lack of
obedience to his directions in the matter of marriage; yet, for
the great love he bore him, he was unwilling to repeat his wishes
and was not wroth with him, but caressed him and spake him fair
and showed him all manner of kindness such as tendeth to induce
affection. All this, and Kamar al-Zaman increased daily in beauty
and loveliness and amorous grace; and the King bore with him for
a whole year till he became perfect in eloquence and elegant wit.
All men were ravished with his charms; and every breeze that blew
bore the tidings of his gracious favour; his fair sight was a
seduction to the loving and a garden of delight to the longing,
for he was honey-sweet of speech and the sheen of his face shamed
the full moon; he was a model of symmetry and blandishment and
engaging ways; his shape was as the willow-wand or the rattan-
cane and his cheeks might take the place of rose or red anemone.
He was, in fine the pink of perfection, even as the poet hath
said of him,

"He came and cried they, 'Now be Allah blest! *
     Praise Him that clad that soul in so fair vest!'
He's King of Beauty where the beauteous be; *
     All are his Ryots,[FN#225] all obey his hest:
His lip-dew's sweeter than the virgin honey; *
     His teeth are pearls in double row close press:
All charms are congregate in him alone, *
     And deals his loveliness to man unrest.
Beauty wrote on those cheeks for worlds to see *
     'I testify there is none good but He.'"[FN#226]

When the year came to an end, the King called his son to him and
said, "O my son, wilt thou not hearken to me?" Whereupon Kamar
al-Zaman fell down for respect and shame before his sire and
replied, "O my father, how should I not hearken to thee, seeing
that Allah commandeth me to obey thee and not gain-say thee?"
Rejoined King Shahriman, "O my son, know that I desire to marry
thee and rejoice in thee whilst yet I live, and make thee King
over my realm, before my death." When the Prince heard his sire
pronounce these words he bowed his head awhile, then raised it
and said, "O my father, this is a thing which I will never do;
no, not though I drink the cup of death! I know of a surety that
the Almighty hath made obedience to thee a duty in religion; but,
Allah upon thee! press me not in this matter of marriage, nor
fancy that I will ever marry my life long; for that I have read
the books both of the ancients and the moderns, and have come to
know all the mischiefs and miseries which have befallen them
through women and their endless artifices. And how excellent is
the saying of the poet,
  
'He whom the randy motts entrap *
     Shall never see deliverance!
Though build he forts a thousand-fold, *
     Whose mighty strength lead-plates enhance,[FN#227]
Their force shall be of no avail; *
     These fortresses have not a chance!
Women aye deal in treachery *
     To far and near o'er earth's expanse
With fingers dipt in Henna-blood *
     And locks in braids that mad the glance;
And eyelids painted o'er with Kohl *
     They gar us drink of dire mischance.'

And how excellently saith another,

'Women, for all the chastity they claim, *
     Are offal cast by kites where'er they list:
This night their talk and secret charms are shine, *
     That night another joyeth calf and wrist:
Like inn, whence after night thou far'st at dawn, *
     And lodges other wight thou hast not wist.'"[FN#228]

Now when King Shahriman heard these his son's words and learnt
the import of his verses and poetical quotations, he made no
answer, of his excessive love for him, but redoubled in
graciousness and kindness to him. He at once broke up the
audience and, as soon as the seance was over, he summoned his
Minister and taking him apart, said to him, "O thou the Wazir!
tell me how I shall deal with my son in the matter of marriage."-
-And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted stay.

     When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
summoned his Minister; and, taking him apart, said to him, "O
thou the Wazir, tell me what I shall do with my son in the matter
of marriage. Of a truth I took counsel with thee thereon and thou
didst counsel me to marry him, before making him King. I have
spoken with him of wedlock time after time and he still gainsaid
me; so do thou, O Wazir, forthright advise me what to do."
Answered the Minister, "O King, wait another year and, if after
that thou be minded to speak to him on the matter of marriage,
speak not to him privily, but address him on a day of state, when
all the Emirs and Wazirs are present with the whole of the army
standing before thee. And when all are in crowd then send for thy
son, Kamar al-Zaman, and summon him; and, when he cometh, broach
to him the matter of marriage before the Wazirs and Grandees and
Officers of state and Captains; for he will surely be bashful and
daunted by their presence and will not dare to oppose thy will."
Now when King Shahriman heard his Wazir's words, he rejoiced with
exceeding joy, seeing success in the project, and bestowed on him
a splendid robe of honour. Then he took patience with his son
another year, whilst, with every day that passed over him, Kamar
al-Zaman increased in beauty and loveliness, and elegance and
perfect grace, till he was nigh twenty years old. Indeed Allah
had clad him in the cloak of comeliness and had crowned him with
the crown of completion: his eye-glance was more bewitching than
Hárút and Marút[FN#229] and the play of his luring looks more
misleading than Tághút;[FN#230] and his cheeks shone like the
dawn rosy-red and his eyelashes stormed the keen-edged blade: the
whiteness of his brow resembled the moon shining bright, and the
blackness of his locks was as the murky night; and his waist was
more slender than the gossamer[FN#231]  and his back parts than
two sand heaps bulkier, making a Babel of the heart with their
softness; but his waist complained of the weight of his hips and
loins; and his charms ravished all mankind, even as one of the
poets saith in these couplets,

"By his eyelash tendril curled, by his slender waist I swear,
By the dart his witchery feathers, fatal hurtling through the
     air;
By the just roundness of his shape, by his glances bright and
     keen
By the swart limping of his locks, and his fair forehead shining
     sheen;
By his eyebrows which deny that she who looks on them should
     sleep,
Which now commanding, now forbidding, o'er me high dominion keep;
By the roses of his cheek, his face as fresh as myrtle wreath
His tulip lips, and those pure pearls that hold the places of his
     teeth;
By his noble form, which rises featly turned in even swell
To where upon his jutting chest two young pomegranates seem to
     dwell
By his supple moving hips, his taper waist, the silky skin,
By all he robbed Perfection of, and holds enchained his form
     within;
By his tongue of steadfastness, his nature true, and excellent,
By the greatness of his rank, his noble birth, and high descent,
Musk from my love her savour steals, who musk exhales from every
     limb
And all the airs ambergris breathes are but the Zephyr's blow
     o'er him.
The sun, methinks, the broad bright sun, as low before my love
     should quail
As would my love himself transcend the paltry paring of his
     nail!"[FN#232]

So King Shahriman, having accepted the counsel of his Wazir,
waited for another year and a great festival,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shahriman
having accepted the counsel of his Wazir, waited for another year
and a great festival, a day of state when the audience hall was
filled with his Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees of his reign and
Officers of State and Captains of might and main. Thereupon he
sent for his son Kamar al-Zaman who came, and kissing the ground
before him three times, stood in presence of his sire with his
hands behind his back the right grasping the left.[FN#233]  Then
said the King to him, "Know O my son, that I have not sent for
thee on this occasion and summoned thee to appear before this
assembly and all these officers of estate here awaiting our
orders save and except that I may lay a commandment on thee,
wherein do thou not disobey me; and my commandment is that thou
marry, for I am minded to wed thee to a King's daughter and
rejoice in thee ere I die." When the Prince heard this much from
his royal sire, he bowed his head groundwards awhile, then
raising it towards his father and being moved thereto at that
time by youthful folly and boyish ignorance, replied, "But for
myself I will never marry; no, not though I drink the cup of
death! As for thee, thou art great in age and small of wit: hast
thou not, twice ere this day and before this occasion, questioned
me of the matter of marriage and I refused my consent? Indeed
thou dotest and are not fit to govern a flock of sheep!" So
saying Kamar al-Zaman unclasped his hands from behind his back
and tucked up his sleeves above his elbows before his father,
being in a fit of fury; moreover, he added many words to his
sire, knowing not what he said in the trouble of his spirits. The
King was confounded and ashamed, for that this befel in the
presence of his grandees and soldier-officers assembled on a high
festival and a state occasion; but presently the majesty of
Kingship took him, and he cried out at his son and made him
tremble. Then he called to the guards standing  before him and
said, "Seize him!' So they came forward and laid hands on him
and, binding him, brought him before his sire, who bade them
pinion his elbows behind his back and in this guise make him
stand before the presence. And the Prince bowed down  his head
for fear and apprehension, and his brow and face were beaded and
spangled with sweat; and shame and confusion troubled him sorely.
Thereupon his father abused him and reviled him and cried, "Woe
to thee, thou son of adultery and nursling of
abomination![FN#234]  How durst thou answer me on this wise
before my captains and soldiers? But hitherto none hath chastised
thee,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Shahriman cried out to his son Kamar al-Zaman, "How durst thou
answer me on this wise before my captains and soldiers? But
hitherto none hath chastise