, when that eunuch
confessed to the young lady, saying, 'At once I will return to
thee and tell thee all about her?'" With these words, he sprang
up and rushed at the Wazir and gripped hold of his beard (which
was long[FN#273]) and, after gripping it, he twisted his hand in
it and haling him off the couch, threw him on the floor. It
seemed to the Minister as though his soul departed his body for
the violent plucking at his beard; and Kamar al-Zaman ceased not
kicking the Wazir and basting his breast and ribs and cuffing him
with open hand on the nape of his neck till he had well-nigh
beaten him to death. Then said the old man in his mind, "Just as
the eunuch-slave saved his life from this lunatic youth by
telling him a lie, thus it is even fitter that I do likewise;
else he will destroy me. So now for my lie to save myself, he
being mad beyond a doubt." Then he turned to Kamar al-Zaman and
said, "O my lord, pardon me; for indeed thy father charged me to
conceal from thee this affair of the young lady; but now I am
weak and weary and wounded with funding; for I am an old man and
lack strength and bottom to endure blows. Have, therefore, a
little patience with me and I will tell thee all and acquaint
thee with the story of the young woman." When the Prince heard
this, he left off drubbing him and said, "Wherefore couldst thou
not tell me the tale until after shame and blows? Rise now,
unlucky old man that thou art, and tell me her story." Quoth the
Wazir, "Say, dost thou ask of the young lady with the fair face
and perfect form?" Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "Even so! Tell me, O
Wazir, who it was that led her to me and laid her by my side, and
who was it that took her away from me by night; and let me know
forthright whither she is gone, that I myself may go to her at
once. If my father did this deed to me that he might try me by
means of that beautiful girl, with a view to our marriage, I
consent to wed her and free myself of this trouble; for he did
all these dealings with me only because I refused wedlock. But
now I consent and I say again, I consent to matrimony: so tell
this to my father, O Wazir, and advise him to marry me to that
young lady; for I will have none other and my heart loveth none
save her alone. Now rise up at once and haste thee to my father
and counsel him to hurry on our wedding and bring me his answer
within this very hour." Rejoined the Wazir, "'Tis well!" and went
forth from him, hardly believing himself out of his hands. Then
he set off from the tower, walking and tripping up as he went,
for excess of fright and agitation, and he ceased not hurrying
till he came in to King Shahriman.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Eighty-nineth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir,
fared forth from the tower, and ceased not running till he came
in to King Shahriman, who said to him as he sighted him, "O thou
Wazir, what man hath brought thee to grief and whose mischief
hath treated thee in way unlief; how happeneth it that I see thee
dumb foundered and coming to me thus astounded?" Replied the
Wazir, "O King! I bring thee good news." "And what is it?" quoth
Shahriman, and quoth the Wazir, "Know that thy son Kamar al-
Zaman's wits are clean gone and that he hath become stark mad."
Now when the King heard these words of the Minister, light became
darkness in his sight and he said, "O Wazir, make clear to me the
nature of his madness." Answered the Wazir, "O my lord, I hear
and I obey." Then he told him that such and such had passed and
acquainted him with all that his son had done; whereupon the King
said to him, "Hear, O Wazir, the good tidings which I give thee
in return for this thy fair news of my son's insanity; and it
shall be the cutting off of thy head and the forfeiture of my
favour, O most ill-omened of Wazirs and foulest of Emirs! for I
feel that thou hast caused my son's disorder by the wicked advice
and the sinister counsel thou hast given me first and last. By
Allah, if aught of mischief or madness have befallen my son I
will most assuredly nail thee upon the palace dome and make thee
drain the bitterest draught of death!'' Then he sprang up and,
taking the Wazir, with him, fared straight for the tower and
entered it. And when Kamar al-Zaman saw the two, he rose to his
father in haste from the couch whereon he sat and kissing his
hands drew back and hung down his head and stood before him with
his arms behind him, and thus remained for a full hour. Then he
raised his head towards his sire; the tears gushed from his eyes
and streamed down his cheeks and he began repeating,

"Forgive the sin 'neath which my limbs are trembling,
For the slave seeks for mercy from his master;
I've done a fault, which calls for free confession,
Where shall it call for mercy, and forgiveness?''[FN#274]

When the King heard this, he arose and embraced his son, and
kissing him between the eyes, made him sit by his side on the
couch; then he turned to the Wazir, and, looking on him with eyes
of wrath, said, "O dog of Wazirs, how didst thou say of my son
such and such things and make my heart quake for him?" Then he
turned to the Prince and said, "O my son, what is to-day called?"
He answered, "O my father, this day is the Sabbath, and to morrow
is First day: then come Second day, Third, Fourth, Fifth day and
lastly Friday."[FN#275] Exclaimed the King, "O my son, O Kamar
al-Zaman, praised be Allah for the preservation of thy reason!
What is the present month called in our Arabic?" "Zú'l Ka'adah,"
answered Kamar al-Zaman, "and it is followed by Zú'l hijjah; then
cometh Muharram, then Safar, then Rabí'a the First and Rabí'a the
Second, the two Jamádás, Rajab, Sha'aban, Ramazán and Shawwál."
At this the King rejoiced exceedingly and spat in the Wazir's
face, saying, "O wicked old man, how canst thou say that my son
is mad? And now none is mad but thou." Hereupon the Minister
shook his head and would have spoken, but bethought himself to
wait awhile and see what might next befal. Then the King said to
his child, "O my son, what words be these thou saddest to the
eunuch and the Wazir, declaring, 'I was sleeping with a fair
damsel this night?'[FN#276] What damsel is this of whom thou
speakest?" Then Kamar al-Zaman laughed at his father's words and
replied, "O my father, know that I can bear no more jesting; so
add me not another mock or even a single word on the matter, for
my temper hath waxed short by that you have done with me. And
know, O my father, with assured knowledge, that I consent to
marry, but on condition that thou give me to wife her who lay by
my side this night; for I am certain it was thou sentest her to
me and madest me in love with her and then despatchedst a message
to her before the dawn and tookest her away from beside me."
Rejoined the King, "The name of Allah encompass thee about, O my
son, and be thy wit preserved from witlessness!"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth King
Shahriman to his son Kamar al-Zaman, "The name of Allah encompass
thee about, O my son, and be thy wit preserved from witlessness!
What thing be this young lady whom thou fanciest I sent to thee
last night and then again that I sent to withdraw her from thee
before dawn? By the Lord, O my son, I know nothing of this
affair, and Allah upon thee, tell me if it be a delusion of
dreaming or a deception caused by indisposition. For verily thou
layest down to sleep last night with thy mind occupied anent
marriage and troubled with the talk of it (Allah damn marriage
and the hour when I spake of it and curse him who counselled
it!); and without doubt or diffidence I can say that being moved
in mind by the mention of wedlock thou dreamedst that a handsome
young lady embraced thee and didst fancy thou sawest her when
awake. But all this, O my son, is but an imbroglio of dreams."
Replied Kamar al-Zaman, "Leave this talk and swear to me by
Allah, the All creator, the Omniscient; the Humbler of the tyrant
Caesars and the Destroyer of the Chosroes, that thou knowest
naught of the young lady nor of her woning-place." Quoth the
King, "By the Might of Allah Almighty, the God of Moses and
Abraham, I know naught of all this and never even heard of it; it
is assuredly a delusion of dreams thou hast seen in sleep.' Then
the Prince replied to his sire, "I will give thee a self evident
proof that it happened to me when on wake."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al
Zamar said to his sire, "I will give thee a self-evident proof
that this happened to me when on wake. Now let me ask thee, did
it ever befal any man to dream that he was battling a sore battle
and after to awake from sleep and find in his hand a sword-blade
besmeared with blood? Answered the King, "No, by Allah, O my son,
this hath never been." Rejoined Kamar al-Zaman, "I will tell thee
what happened to me and it was this. Meseemed I awoke from sleep
in the middle of the past night and found a girl lying by my
side, whose form was like mine and whose favour was as mine. I
embraced her and turned her about with my hand and took her seal-
ring, which I put on my finger, and she pulled off my ring and
put it on hers. Then I went to sleep by her side, but refrained
from her for shame of thee, deeming that thou hadst sent her to
me, intending to tempt me with her and incline me to marriage,
and suspecting thee to be hidden somewhere whence thou couldst
see what I did with her. And I was ashamed even to kiss her on
the mouth for thy account, thinking over this temptation to
wedlock; and, when I awoke at point of day, I found no trace of
her, nor could I come at any news of her, and there befel me what
thou knowest of with the eunuch and with the Wazir. How then can
this case have been a dream and a delusion, when the ring is a
reality? Save for her ring on my finger I should indeed have
deemed it a dream; but here is the ring on my little finger: look
at it, O King, and see what is its worth." So saying he handed
the ring to his father, who examined it and turned it over, then
looked to his son and said, "Verily, there is in this ring some
mighty mystery and some strange secret. What befel thee last
night with the girl is indeed a hard nut to crack, and I know not
how intruded upon us this intruder. None is the cause of all this
posher save the Wazir; but, Allah upon thee, O my son, take
patience, so haply the Lord may turn to gladness this thy grief
and to thy sadness bring complete relief: as quoth one of the
poets,

'Haply shall Fortune draw her rein, and bring *
     Fair chance, for she is changeful, jealous, vain:
Still I may woo my want and wishes win, *
     And see on heels of care unfair, the fain.'

And now, O my son, I am certified at this hour that thou art not
mad; but thy case is a strange one which none can clear up for
thee save the Almighty." Cried the Prince, "By Allah, O my
father, deal kindly with me and seek out this young lady and
hasten her coming to me; else I shall die of woe and of my death
shall no one know." Then he betrayed the ardour of his passion;
and turned towards his father and repeated these two couplets,

"If your promise of personal call prove untrue, *
     Deign in vision to grant me an interview:
Quoth they, 'How can phantom[FN#277] appear to the sight *
     Of a youth, whose sight is fordone, perdue?'"

Then, after ending his poetry, Kamar al-Zaman again turned to his
father, with submission and despondency, and shedding tears in
flood, began repeating these lines.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman had repeated to his father these verses, he wept and
complained and groaned from a wounded heart; and added these
lines,

"Beware that eye glance which hath magic might; *
     Wherever turn those orbs it bars our flight:
Nor be deceived by low sweet voice, that breeds *
     A fever festering in the heart and sprite:
So soft that silky skin, were rose to touch it *
     She'd cry and tear-drops rain for pain and fright:
Did Zephyr e'en in sleep pass o'er her land, *
     Scented he'd choose to dwell in scented site:
Her necklets vie with tinkling of her belt; *
     Her wrists strike either wristlet dumb with spite:
When would her bangles buss those rings in ear, *
     Upon the lover's eyne high mysteries 'light:
I'm blamed for love of her, nor pardon claim; *
     Eyes are not profiting which lack foresight:
Heaven strip thee, blamer mine! unjust art thou; *
     Before this fawn must every eye low bow."[FN#278]

After which he said, "By Allah, O my father, I cannot endure to
be parted from her even for an hour." The King smote hand upon
hand and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! No cunning contrivance
can profit us in this affair." Then he took his son by the hand
and carried him to the palace, where Kamar al-Zaman lay down on
the bed of languor and the King sat at his head, weeping and
mourning over him and leaving him not, night or day, till at last
the Wazir came in to him and said, "O King of the age and the
time, how long wilt thou remain shut up with thy son and hide
thyself from thy troops. Haply, the order of thy realm may be
deranged, by reason of shine absence from thy Grandees and
Officers of State. It behoveth the man of understanding, if he
have various wounds in his body, to apply him first to medicine
the most dangerous; so it is my counsel to thee that thou remove
thy son from this place to the pavilion which is in the palace
overlooking the sea; and shut thyself up with him there, setting
apart in every week two days, Thursday and Monday, for state
receptions and progresses and reviews. On these days let shine
Emirs and Wazirs and Chamberlains and Viceroys and high Officials
and Grandees of the realm and the rest of the levies and the
lieges have access to thee and submit their affairs to thee; and
do thou their needs and judge among them and give and take with
them and bid and forbid. And the rest of the week thou shalt pass
with thy son, Kamar al-Zaman, and cease not thus doing till Allah
shall vouchsafe relief to you twain. Think not, O King, that thou
art safe from the shifts of Time and the strokes of Change which
come like a traveller in the night; for the wise man is ever on
his guard and how well saith the poet,

'Thou deemedst well of Time when days went well, *
     And fearedst not what ills might bring thee Fate:
The Nights so fair and restful cozened thee, *
     For peaceful Nights bring woes of heavy weight.
Oh children of mankind whom Time befriends, *
     Beware of Time's deceits or soon or late!'''[FN#279]

When the Sultan heard his Wazir's words he saw that they were
right and deemed his counsel wise, and it had effect upon him for
he feared lest the order of the state be deranged; so he rose at
once and bade transport his son from his sick room to the
pavilion in the palace overlooking the sea. Now this palace was
girt round by the waters and was approached by a causeway twenty
cubits wide. It had windows on all sides commanding an ocean-
view; its floor was paved with parti-coloured marbles and its
ceiling was painted in the richest pigments and figured with gold
and lapis-lazuli. They furnished it for Kamar al-Zaman with
splendid upholstery, embroidered rugs and carpets of the richest
silk; and they clothed the walls with choice brocades and hung
curtains bespangled with gems of price. In the midst they set him
a couch of juniper[FN#280]-wood inlaid with pearls and jewels,
and Kamar al-Zaman sat down thereon, but the excess of his
concern and passion for the young lady had wasted his charms and
emaciated his body; he could neither eat nor drink nor sleep; and
he was like a man who had been sick twenty years of sore
sickness. His father seated himself at his head, grieving for him
with the deepest grief, and every Monday and Thursday he gave his
Wazirs and Emirs and Chamberlains and Viceroys and Lords of the
realm and levies and the rest of his lieges leave to come up to
him in that pavilion. So they entered and did their several
service and duties and abode with him till the end of the day,
when they went their ways and the King returned to his son in the
pavilion whom he left not night nor day; and he ceased not doing
on this wise for many days and nights. Such was the case with
Kamar al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman; but as regards Princess
Budur, daughter of King Ghayur, Lord of the Isles and the Seven
Palaces, when the two Jinns bore her up and laid her on her bed,
she slept till daybreak, when she awoke and sitting upright
looked right and left, but saw not the youth who had lain in her
bosom. At this her vitals fluttered, her reason fled and she
shrieked a loud shriek which awoke all her slave girls and nurses
and duennas. They flocked in to her; and the chief of them came
forward and asked, "What aileth thee, O my lady?" Answered the
Princess, "O wretched old woman, where is my beloved, the
handsome youth who lay last night in my bosom? Tell me whither he
is gone." Now when the duenna heard this, the light starkened in
her sight and she feared from her mischief with sore affright,
and said to her, "O my Lady Budur, what unseemly words are
these?" Cried the Princess, "Woe to thee pestilent crone that
thou art! I ask thee again where is my beloved, the goodly youth
with the shining face and the slender form, the jetty eyes and
the joined eyebrows, who lay with me last night from supper-tide
until near daybreak?" She rejoined "By Allah, O my lady, I have
seen no young man nor any other. I conjure thee, carry not this
unseemly jest too far lest we all lose our lives; for perhaps the
joke may come to thy father's ears and who shall then deliver us
from his hand?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the duenna
bespake the Lady Budur in these words, "Allah upon thee, O my
lady! carry not this unseemly jest too far; for perhaps it may
come to thy father's ears, and who shall then deliver us from his
hand?" The Princess rejoined, "In very sooth a youth lay with me
last night, one of the fairest-faced of men." Exclaimed the
duenna, "Heaven preserve thy reason! indeed no one lay with thee
last night." Thereupon the Princess looked at her hand and,
finding Kamar al-Zaman's seal-ring on her finger in stead of her
own, said to her, "Woe to thee, thou accursed! thou traitress!
wilt thou lie to me and tell me that none lay with me last night
and swear to me a falsehood in the name of the Lord?" Replied the
duenna, "By Allah, I do not lie to thee nor have I sworn
falsely." Then the Princess was incensed by her words and,
drawing a sword she had by her, she smote the old woman with it
and slew her;[FN#281] whereupon the eunuch and the waiting-women
and the concubines cried out at her, and ran to her father and,
without stay or delay, acquainted him with her case. So the King
went to her, and asked her, "O my daughter, what aileth thee?";
and she answered, "O my father, where is the youth who lay with
me last night?" Then her reason fled from her head and she cast
her eyes right and left and rent her raiment even to the skirt.
When her sire saw this, he bade the women lay hands on her; so
they seized her and manacled her, then putting a chain of iron
about her neck, made her fast to one of the palace-windows and
there left her.[FN#282] Thus far concerning Princess Budur; but
as regards her father, King Ghayur, the world was straitened upon
him when he saw what had befallen his daughter, for that he loved
her and her case was not a little grievous to him. So he summoned
on it the doctors and astrologers and men skilled in talisman-
writing and said to them, "Whoso healeth my daughter of what ill
she hath, I will marry him to her and give him half of my
kingdom; but whoso cometh to her and cureth her not, I will
strike off his head and hang it over her palace-gate."
Accordingly, all who went in to her, but failed to heal her, he
beheaded and hung their heads over the palace-gates, till he had
beheaded on her account forty doctors and crucified forty
astrologers; wherefor the general held aloof from her, all the
physicians having failed to medicine her malady; and her case was
a puzzle to the men of science and the adepts in cabalistic
characters. And as her longing and passion redoubled and love and
distraction were sore upon her, she poured forth tears and
repeated these couplets,

"My fondness, O my moon, for thee my foeman is, *
     And to thy comradeship the nights my thought compel:
In gloom I bide with fire that flames below my ribs, *
     Whose lowe I make comparison with heat of Hell:
I'm plagued with sorest stress of pine and ecstasy; *
     Nor clearest noon tide can that horrid pain dispel."

Then she sighed and repeated these also,

"Salams fro' me to friends in every stead; *
     Indeed to all dear friends do I incline:
Salams, but not salams that bid adieu; *
     Salams that growth of good for you design:
I love you dear, indeed, nor less your land, *
     But bide I far from every need of mine!"

And when the Lady Budur ceased repeating her poetry, she wept
till her eyes waxed sore and her cheeks changed form and hue, and
in this condition she continued three years. Now she had a
foster-brother, by name Marzawán,[FN#283] who was travelling in
far lands and absent from her the whole of this time. He loved
her with an exceeding love, passing the love of brothers; so when
he came back he went in to his mother and asked for his sister,
the Princess Budur. She answered him, "O my son, thy sister hath
been smitten with madness and hath passed these three years with
a chain of iron about her neck; and all the physicians and men of
science have failed of healing her." When Marzawan heard these
words he said, "I must needs go in to her; peradventure I may
discover what she hath, and be able to medicine her;" and his
mother replied, "Needs must thou visit her, but wait till to
morrow, that I may contrive some thing to suit thy case." Then
she went a-foot to the palace of the Lady Budur and, accosting
the eunuch in charge of the gates, made him a present and said to
him, "I have a daughter, who was brought up with thy mistress and
since then I married her; and, when that befel the Princess which
befel her, she became troubled and sore concerned, and I desire
of thy favour that my daughter may go in to her for an hour and
look on her; and then return whence she came, so shall none know
of it." Quoth the eunuch, "This may not be except by night, after
the King hath visited his child and gone away; then come thou and
thy daughter." So she kissed the eunuch's hand and, returning
home, waited till the morrow at nightfall; and when it was time
she arose and sought her son Marzawan and attired him in woman's
apparel; then, taking his hand in hers, led him towards the
palace, and ceased not walking with him till she came upon the
eunuch after the Sultan had ended his visit to the Princess. Now
when the eunuch saw her, he rose to her, and said, "Enter, but do
not prolong thy stay!" So they went in and when Marzawan beheld
the Lady Budur in the aforesaid plight, he saluted her, after his
mother had doffed his woman's garb: then he took out of their
satchel books he had brought with him; and, lighting a wax-
candle, he began to recite certain conjurations Thereupon the
Princess looked at him and recognising him, said, "O my brother,
thou hast been absent on thy travels' and thy news have been cut
off from us." He replied, "True! but Allah hath brought me back
safe and sound, I am now minded to set out again nor hath aught
delayed me but the news I hear of thee; wherefore my heart burned
for thee and I came to thee, so haply I may free thee of thy
malady." She rejoined, O my brother, thinkest thou it is madness
aileth me?" "Yes." answered he, and she said, "Not so, by Allah!
'tis even as saith the poet,

'Quoth they 'Thou rav'st on him thou lov'st': quoth I, *
     'The sweets of love are only for th' insane!'
Love never maketh Time his friend befriend; *
     Only the Jinn-struck wight such boon can gain:
Well! yes, I'm mad: bring him who madded me *
     And, if he cure m: madness, blame restrain!'"

Then she let Marzawan know that she was love-daft and he said
"Tell me concerning thy tale and what befel thee: haply there may
be in my hand something which shall be a means of deliverance for
thee."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of da, and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Marzawar
thus addressed Princess Budur, "Tell me concerning thy tale and
what befel thee: haply Allah may inspire me with a means of
deliverance for thee." Quoth she, "O my brother, hear my story
which is this. One night I awoke from sleep, in the last third of
the night[FN#284] and, sitting up, saw by my side the handsomest
of youths that be, and tongue faileth to describe him, for he was
as a willow-wand or an Indian rattan-cane. So methought it was my
father who had done on this wise in order thereby to try me, for
that he had consulted me concerning wedlock, when the Kings
sought me of him to wife, and I had refused. It was this though
withheld me from arousing him, for I feared that, if I did aught
of embraced him, he would peradventure inform my father of m,
doings. But in the morning, I found on my finger his seal-ring,
in place of my own which he had taken. And, O my brother, m,
heart was seized with love of him at first sight; and, for the
violence of my passion and longing, I have never savoured the
taste of sleep and have no occupation save weeping alway and
repeating verses night and day. And this, O my brother, is my
story and the cause of my madness." Then she poured forth tears
and repeated these couplets,

"Now Love hast banished all that bred delight; *
     With that heart-nibbling fawn my joys took flight:
Lightest of trifles lover's blood to him *
     Who wastes the vitals of the hapless wight!
For him I'm jealous of my sight and thought; *
     My heart acts spy upon my thought and sight:
Those long-lashed eyelids rain on me their shafts *
     Guileful, destroying hearts where'er they light:
Now, while my portion in the world endures, *
     Shall I behold him ere I quit world-site?
What bear I for his sake I'd hide, but tears *
     Betray my feelings to the spy's despight.
When near, our union seemeth ever far; *
     When far, my thoughts to him aye nearest are."

And presently she continued, "See then, O my brother, how thou
mayest aid me in mine affliction." So Marzawan bowed his head
ground-wards awhile, wondering and not knowing what to do, then
he raised it and said to her, "All thou hast spoken to me I hold
to be true, though the case of the young man pass my
understanding: but I will go round about all lands and will seek
for what may heal thee; haply Allah shall appoint thy healing to
be at my hand. Meanwhile, take patience and be not disquieted."
Thereupon Marzawan farewelled her, praying that she might be
constant and left her repeating these couplets,

"Thine image ever companies my sprite, *
     For all thou'rt distant from the pilgrim's sight:
But my heart-wishes e'er attract thee near: *
     What is the lightning's speed to Thought's swift flight?
Then go not thou, my very light of eyes *
     Which, when thou'rt gone, lack all the Kohl of light."

Then Marzawan returned to his mother's house, where he passed the
night. And when the morrow dawned, having equipped himself for
his journey, he fared forth and ceased not faring from city to
city and from island to island for a whole month, till he came to
a town named Al-Tayrab.[FN#285] Here he went about scenting news
of the townsfolk, so haply he might light on a cure for the
Princess's malady, for in every capital he entered or passed by,
it was reported that Queen Budur, daughter of King Ghayur, had
lost her wits. But arriving at Al-Tayrab city, he heard that
Kamar al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman, was fallen sick and
afflicted with melancholy madness. So Marzawan asked the name of
the Prince's capital and they said to him, "It is on the Islands
of Khalidan and it lieth distant from our city a whole month's
journey by sea, but by land it is six months' march." So he went
down to the sea in a ship which was bound for the Khalidan Isles,
and she sailed with a favouring breeze for a whole month, till
they came in sight of the capital; and there remained for them
but to make the land when, behold, there came out on them a
tempestuous wind which carried away the masts and rent the
canvas, so that the sails fell into the sea and the ship
capsized, with all on board,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
ship capsized with all on board, each sought his own safety; and
as for Marzawan the set of the sea carried him under the King's
palace, wherein was Kamar al-Zaman. And by the decree of destiny
it so happened that this was the day on which King Shahriman gave
audience to his Grandees and high officers, and he was sitting,
with his son's head on his lap, whilst an eunuch fanned away the
flies; and the Prince had not spoken neither had he eaten nor
drunk for two days, and he was grown thinner than a
spindle.[FN#286] Now the Wazir was standing respectfully a-foot
near the latticed window giving on the sea and, raising his eyes,
saw Marzawan being beaten by the billows and at his last gasp;
whereupon his heart was moved to pity for him, so he drew near to
the King and moving his head towards him said, "I crave thy
leave, O King, to go down to the court of the pavilion and open
the water-gate that I may rescue a man who is at the point of
drowning in the sea and bring him forth of danger into
deliverance; peradventure, on this account Allah may free thy son
from what he hath!" The King replied, "O thou Wazir, enough is
that which hath befallen my son through thee and on shine
account. Haply, if thou rescue this drowning man, he will come to
know our affairs, and look on my son who is in this state and
exult over me; but I swear by Allah, that if this half-drowned
wretch come hither and learn our condition and look upon my son
and then fare forth and speak of our secrets to any, I will
assuredly strike off thy head before his; for thou, O my Minister
art the cause of all that hath betided us, first and last. Now do
as thou wilt." Thereupon the Wazir sprang up and, opening the
private pastern which gave upon the sea, descended to the
causeway; then walked on twenty steps and came to the water where
he saw Marzawan nigh unto death. So he put out his hand to him
and, catching him by his hair, drew him ashore in a state of
insensibility, with belly full of water and eyes half out of his
head. The Wazir waited till he came to himself, when he pulled
off his wet clothes and clad him in a fresh suit, covering his
head with one of his servants' turbands; after which he said to
him, Know that I have been the means of saving thee from
drowning: do not thou requite me by causing my death and shine
own."ÄAnd Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Wazir did to Marzawan what he did, he thus addressed him Know
that I have been the cause of saving thee from drowning so
requite me not by causing my death and shine own." Asked
Marzawan, And how so?"; and the Wazir answered, "Thou art at this
hour about to go up and pass among Emirs and Wazirs all of them
silent and none speaking, because of Kamar al-Zaman the son of
the Sultan." Now when Marzawan heard the name of Kamar al-Zaman,
he knew that this was he whom he had heard spoken of in sundry
cities and of whom he came in search, but he feigned ignorance
and asked the Wazir, "And who is Kamar al-Zaman? Answered the
Minister, "He is the son of Sultan Shahriman and he is sore sick
and lieth strown on his couch restless alway, eating not nor
drinking neither sleeping night or day; indeed he is nigh upon
death and we have lost hope of his living and are certain that he
is dying. Beware lest thou look too long on him, or thou look on
any other than that where thou settest thy feet: else thou art a
lost man, and I also." He replied, "Allah upon thee, O Wazir, I
implore thee, of thy favour, acquaint me touching this youth thou
describest, what is the cause of the condition in which he is."
The Wazir replied, "I know none, save that, three years ago, his
father required him to wed, but he refused; whereat the King was
wroth and imprisoned him. And when he awoke on the morrow, he
fancied that during the night he had been roused from sleep and
had seen by his side a young lady of passing loveliness, whose
charms tongue can never express; and he assured us that he had
plucked off her seal-ring from her finger and had put it on his
own and that she had done likewise; but we know not the secret of
all this business. So by Allah, O my son, when thou comest up
with me into the palace, look not on the Prince, but go thy way;
for the Sultan's heart is full of wrath against me." So said
Marzawan to himself, "By Allah; this is the one I sought!" Then
he followed the Wazir up to the palace, where the Minister seated
himself at the Prince's feet; but Marzawan found forsooth nothing
to do but go up to Kamar al-Zaman and stand before him at gaze.
Upon this the Wazir, died of affright in his skin, and kept
looking at Marzawan and signalling him to wend his way; but he
feigned not to see him and gave not over gazing upon Kamar al-
Zaman, till he was well assured that it was indeed he whom he was
seeking,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Marzawan looked upon Kamar al-Zaman and knew that it was indeed
he whom he was seeking, he cried, "Exalted be Allah, Who hath
made his shape even as her shape and his complexion as her
complexion and his cheek as her cheek!'' Upon this Kamar al-Zaman
opened his eyes and gave earnest ear to his speech; and, when
Marzawan saw him inclining to hear, he repeated these
couplets[FN#287],

"I see thee full of song and plaint and love's own ecstasy;
Delighting in describing all the charms of loveliness:

Art smit by stroke of Love or hath shaft-shot wounded thee?
None save the wounded ever show such signals of distress!

Ho thou! crown the wine cup and sing me singular
Praises to Sulaymá, Al-Rabáb, Tan'oum addrest;[FN#288]

Go round the grape-vine sun[FN#289] which for mansion hath a jar;
Whose East the cup boy is, and here my mouth that opes for West.

I'm jealous of the very clothes that dare her sides enroll
When she veils her dainty body of the delicatest grace:

I envy every goblet of her lips that taketh toll
When she sets the kissing cup on that sweetest kissing-place.

But deem not by the keen-edged scymitar I'm slain--
The hurts and harms I dree are from arrows of her eyes.

I found her finger tips, as I met her once again,
Deep-reddened with the juice of the wood that ruddy dyes;[FN#290]

And cried, 'Thy palms thou stainedst when far away was I
And this is how thou payest one distracted by his pine!'

Quoth she (enkindling in my heart a flame that burned high
Speaking as one who cannot hide of longing love the sign),

'By thy life, this is no dye used for dyeing; so forbear
Thy blame, nor in charging me with falsing Love persist!

But when upon our parting-day I saw thee haste to fare,
The while were bared my hand and my elbow and my wrist;

'I shed a flood of blood-red tears and with fingers brushed away;
Hence blood-reddened were the tips and still blood-red they
     remain.'

Had I wept before she wept, to my longing-love a prey,
Before repentance came, I had quit my soul of pain;

But she wept before I wept and I wept to see her care
And I said, 'All the merit to precedent;'[FN#291]

Blame me not for loving her, now on self of Love I swear
For her sake, for her only, these pains my soul torment.

She hath all the lere of Lukmán[FN#292] and Yúsuf's beauty lief;
Sweet singer David's voice and Maryam's chastity:

While I've all Jacob's mourning and Jonah's prison-grief,
And the sufferings of Job and old Adam's history:

Yet kill her not, albeit of my love for her I die;
But ask her why my blood to her was lawful. ask her why?"

When Marzawan recited this ode, the words fell upon Kamar al-
Zaman's heart as freshness after fever and returning health; and
he sighed and, turning his tongue in his mouth, said to his sire,
"O my father, let this youth come and sit by my side."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman said to his sire, "O my father, allow this youth to come
and sit by my side." Now when the King heard these words from his
son, he rejoiced with exceeding joy, though at the first his
heart had been set against Marzawan and he had determined that
the stranger's head needs must be stricken off: but when he heard
Kamar al-Zaman speak, his anger left him and he arose and drawing
Marzawan to him, seated him by his son and turning to him said,
"Praised be Allah for thy safety!" He replied, "Allah preserve
thee! and preserve thy son to thee!" and called down blessings on
the King. Then the King asked, "From what country art thou?"; and
he answered, "From the Islands of the Inland Sea, the kingdom of
King Ghayur, Lord of the Isles and the Seas and the Seven
Palaces." Quoth King Shahriman, "Maybe thy coming shall be
blessed to my son and Allah vouchsafe to heal what is in him."
Quoth Marzawan, "Inshallah, naught shall be save what shall be
well!" Then turning to Kamar al-Zaman, he said to him in his ear
unheard of the King and his court, 'O my lord! be of good cheer,
and hearten thy heart and let shine eyes be cool and clear and,
with respect to her for whose sake thou art thus, ask not of her
case on shine account. But thou keptest thy secret and fellest
sick, while she told her secret and they said she had gone mad;
so she is now in prison, with an iron chain about her neck, in
most piteous plight; but, Allah willing, the healing of both of
you shall come from my hand." Now when Kamar al-Zaman heard these
words, his life returned to him and he took heart and felt a
thrill of joy and signed to his father to help him sit up; and
the King was like to fly for gladness and rose hastily and lifted
him up. Presently, of his fear for his son, he shook the kerchief
of dismissal[FN#293]; and all the Emirs and Wazirs withdrew; then
he set two pillows for his son to lean upon, after which he bade
them perfume the palace with saffron and decorate the city,
saying to Marzawan, "By Allah, O my son, of a truth shine aspect
be a lucky and a blessed!" And he made as much of him as he might
and called for food, and when they brought it, Marzawan came up
to the Prince and said, "Rise, eat with me." So he obeyed him and
ate with him, and all the while the King invoked blessings on
Marzawan and said, "How auspicious is thy coming, O my son!" And
when the father saw his boy eat, his joy and gladness redoubled,
and he went out and told the Prince's mother and all the
household. Then he spread throughout the palace the good news of
the Prince's recovery and the King commanded the decoration of
the city and it was a day of high festival. Marzawan passed that
night with Kamar al-Zaman, and the King also slept with them in
joy and delight for his son's recovery.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Shahriman also passed that night with them in the excess of his
joy for his son's recovery. And when the next morning dawned, and
the King had gone away and the two young men were left alone,
Kamar al-Zaman told his story from beginning to end to Marzawan
who said, "In very sooth I know her with whom thou didst
foregather; her name is the Princess Budur and she is daughter to
King Ghayur." Then he related to him all that had passed with the
Princess from first to last and acquainted him with the excessive
love she bore him, saying, "All that befel thee with thy father
hath befallen her with hers, and thou art without doubt her
beloved, even as she is shine; so brace up thy resolution and
take heart, for I will bring thee to her and unite you both anon
and deal with you even as saith the poet,

"Albe to lover adverse be his love, *
     And show aversion howso may he care;
Yet will I manage that their persons[FN#294] meet, *
     E'en as the pivot of a scissor pair."

And he ceased not to comfort and solace and encourage Kamar al-
Zaman and urged him to eat and drink till he ate food and drank
wine, and life returned to him and he was saved from his ill
case; and Marzawan cheered him and diverted him with talk and
songs and stories, and in good time he became free of his
disorder and stood up and sought to go to the Hammam.[FN#295] So
Marzawan took him by the hand and both went to the bath, where
they washed their bodies and made them clean.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Two Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman, went to the Hammam, his father
in his joy at this event freed the prisoners, and presented
splendid dresses to his grandees and bestowed large alm-gifts
upon the poor and bade decorate the city seven days. Then quoth
Marzawan to Kamar al-Zaman, "Know, O my lord, that I came not
from the Lady Budur save for this purpose, and the object of my
journey was to deliver her from her present case; and it
remaineth for us only to devise how we may get to her, since thy
father cannot brook the thought of parting from thee. So it is my
counsel that to-morrow thou ask his leave to go abroad hunting.
Then do thou take with thee a pair of saddle-bags full of money
and mount a swift steed, and lead a spare horse, and I will do
the like, and say to thy sire, 'I have a mind to divert myself
with hunting the desert and to see the open country and there to
pass one night.' Suffer not any servant to follow us, for as soon
as we reach the open country, we will go our ways." Kamar al-
Zaman rejoiced in this plan with great joy and cried, "It is
good." Then he stiffened his back and, going in to his father,
sought his leave and spoke as he had been taught, and the King
consented to his going forth a-hunting and said, "O my son,
blessed be the day that restoreth thee to health! I will not
gainsay thee in this; but pass not more than one night in the
desert and return to me on the morrow; for thou knowest that life
is not good to me without thee, and indeed I can hardly believe
thee to be wholly recovered from what thou hadst,[FN#296] because
thou art to me as he of whom quoth the poet,

'Albe by me I had through day and night *
     Solomon's carpet and the Chosroes' might,
Both were in value less than wing of gnat, *
     Unless these eyne could hold thee aye in sight.'"[FN#297]

Then the King equipped his son Kamar al-Zaman and Marzawan for
the excursion, bidding make ready for them four horses, together
with a dromedary to carry the money and a camel to bear the water
and belly timber; and Kamar al-Zaman forbade any of his
attendants to follow him. His father farewelled him and pressed
him to his breast and kissed him, saying, "I ask thee in the name
of Allah, be not absent from me more than one night, wherein
sleep will be unlawful to me, for I am even as saith the poet,

'Thou present, in the Heaven of heavens I dwell; *
     Bearing shine absence is of hells my Hell:
Pledged be for thee my soul! If love for thee *
     Be crime, my crime is of the fellest fell.
Does love-lowe burn thy heart as burns it mine, *
     Doomed night and day Gehenna-fire to smell?'"

Answered Kamar al-Zaman, "O my father, Inshallah, I will lie
abroad but one night!" Then he took leave of him, and he and
Marzawan mounted and leading the spare horses, the dromedary with
the money and the camel with the water and victual, turned their
faces towards the open country;--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawning day and ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the Two Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman and Marzawan fared forth and turned their faces towards the
open country; and they travelled from the first of the day till
nightfall, when they halted and ate and drank and fed their
beasts and rested awhile; after which they again took horse and
ceased not journeying for three days, and on the fourth they came
to a spacious tract wherein was a thicket. They alighted in it
and Marzawan, taking the camel and one of the horses, slaughtered
them and cut off their flesh and stripped their bones. Then he
doffed from Kamar al-Zaman his shirt and trousers which he
smeared with the horse's blood and he took the Prince's coat
which he tore to shreds and befouled with gore; and he cast them
down in the fork of the road. Then they ate and drank and
mounting set forward again; and, when Kamar al- Zaman asked why
this was done, and said, "What is this O my brother, and how
shall it profit us?"; Marzawan replied, "Know that thy father,
when we have outstayed the second night after the night for which
we had his leave, and yet we return not, will mount and follow in
our track till he come hither; and, when he happeneth upon this
blood which I have spilt and he seeth thy shirt and trousers rent
and gore-fouled, he will fancy that some accident befel thee from
bandits or wild-beasts, so he will give up hope of thee and
return to his city, and by this device we shall win our wishes."
Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "By Allah, this be indeed a rare device!
Thou hast done right well.''[FN#298] Then the two fared on days
and nights and all that while Kamar al-Zaman did naught but
complain when he found himself alone, and he ceased not weeping
till they drew near their journeys end, when he rejoiced and
repeated these verses,

"Wilt tyrant play with truest friend who thinks of thee each
     hour, * And after showing love-desire betray indifference?
May I forfeit every favour if in love I falsed thee, *
     If thee I left, abandon me by way of recompense:
But I've been guilty of no crime such harshness to deserve, *
     And if I aught offended thee I bring my penitence;
Of Fortune's wonders one it is thou hast abandoned me, *
     But Fortune never wearieth of showing wonderments."

When he had made an end of his verses, Marzawan said to him,
"Look! these be King Ghayur's Islands;" whereat Kamar al-Zaman
joyed with exceeding joy and thanked him for what he had done,
and kissed him between the eyes and strained him--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Two Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Marzawan said "Look! these be the Islands of King Ghayur;" Kamar
al-Zaman joyed with exceeding joy and thanked him for what he had
done and kissed him between the eyes and strained him to his
bosom. And after reaching the Islands and entering the city they
took up their lodging in a khan, where they rested three days
from the fatigues of their wayfare; after which Marzawan carried
Kamar al-Zaman to the bath and, clothing him in merchant's gear,
provided him with a geomantic tablet of gold,[FN#299] with a set
of astrological instruments and with an astrolabe of silver,
plated with gold. Then he said to him, "Arise, O my lord, and
take thy stand under the walls of the King's palace and cry out,
'I am the ready Reckoner; I am the Scrivener; I am he who weeteth
the Sought and the Seeker; I am the finished man of Science; I am
the Astrologer accomplished in experience! Where then is he that
seeketh?' As soon as the King heareth this, he will send after
thee and carry thee in to his daughter the Princess Budur, thy
lover; but when about going in to her do thou say to him, 'Grant
me three days' delay, and if she recover, give her to me to wife;
and if not, deal with me as thou dealest with those who forewent
me.' He will assuredly agree to this, so as soon as thou art
alone with her, discover thyself to her; and when she seeth thee,
she will recover strength and her madness will cease from her and
she will be made whole in one night. Then do thou give her to eat
and drink. and her father, rejoicing in her recovery, will marry
thee to her and share his kingdom with thee; for he hath imposed
on himself this condition and so peace be upon thee." Now when
Kamar al-Zaman heard these words he exclaimed, "May I never lack
thy benefits!", and, taking the set of instruments aforesaid,
sallied forth from the caravanserai in the dress of his order. He
walked on till he stood under the walls of King Ghayur's palace,
where he began to cry out, saying, "I am the Scribe, I am the
ready Reckoner, I am he who knoweth the Sought and the Seeker; I
am he who openeth the Volume and summeth up the Sums;[FN#300] who
Dreams can expound whereby the sought is found! Where then is the
seeker?" Now when the city people heard this, they flocked to
him, for it was long since they had seen Scribe or Astrologer,
and they stood round him and, looking upon him, they saw one in
the prime of beauty and grace and perfect elegance, and they
marvelled at his loveliness, and his fine stature and symmetry.
Presently one of them accosted him and said, "Allah upon thee, O
thou fair and young, with the eloquent tongue! incur not this
affray; nor throw thy life away in thine ambition to marry the
Princess Budur. Only cast shine eyes upon yonder heads hung up;
all their owners have lost their lives in this same venture." Yet
Kamar al-Zaman paid no heed to them, but cried out at the top of
his voice, saying, "I am the Doctor, the Scrivener! I am the
Astrologer, the Calculator!" And all the townsfolk forbade him
from this, but he regarded them not at all, saying in his mind,
"None knoweth desire save whoso suffereth it." Then he began
again to cry his loudest, shouting, "I am the Scrivener, I am the
Astrologer!"--And Shahrazad per ceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

          When it was the Two Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman in no wise heeded the words of the citizens, but continued
to cry out, "I am the Calculator! I am the Astrologer!" Thereupon
all the townsfolk were wroth with him and said to him, "Thou art
nothing but an imbecile, silly, self-willed lad! Have pity on
shine own youth and tender years and beauty and loveliness." But
he cried all the more, "I am the Astrologer, I am the Calculator!
Is there any one that seeketh?" As he was thus crying and the
people forbidding him, behold, King Ghayur heard his voice and
the clamour of the lieges and said to his Wazir, "Go down and
bring me yon Astrologer." So the Wazir, went down in haste, and
taking Kamar al-Zaman from the midst of the crowd led him up to
the King; and when in the presence he kissed the ground and began
versifying,

"Eight glories meet, all, all conjoined in thee, *
     Whereby may F