 morning he uncorked
it and threatened the gentleman (whom for convenience sake we
will call Smith) with all sorts of vengeance.  He obtained a
small horsewhip and tore furiously through the town, on the
lookout for Smith.

He sent Smith a challenge, couched in language so scathingly hot
that it burnt holes through the paper, and when it reached Smith
it was riddled like an old-fashioned milk-strainer.  No notice
was taken of the challenge, and Culkins' wrath became absolutely
terrific.  He wrote handbills, which he endeavoured to have
printed, posting Smith as a coward.  He wrote a communication for
the "New Herald," explaining the whole matter.  (This wasn't very
rich, we expect.)  He urged us to publish his challenge to Smith.
Somebody told him that Smith was intending to flee the city in
fear on an afternoon train, and Culkins proceeded to the depot,
horsewhip in hand, to lie in wait for him.  This was Saturday
last.  During the afternoon Smith concluded to accept the
challenge.  Seconds and a surgeon were selected, and we are
mortified to state that at 10 o'clock in the evening Scanton's
Bottom was desecrated with a regular duel.  The frantic glee of
Culkins when he learned his challenge had been accepted can't be
described.  Our pen can't do it--a pig-pen couldn't.  He wrote a
long letter to his uncle in New York, and to his father in
Connaught.  At about ten o'clock the party proceeded to the
field.  The moon was not up, the darkness was dense, the ground
was unpleasantly moist, and the lights of the town, which gleamed
in the distance, only made the scene more desolate and dreary.
The ground was paced off and the men arranged.  While this was
being done, the surgeon, by the light of a dark lantern, arranged
his instruments, which consisted of 1 common hand-saw, 1 hatchet,
1 butcher knife, a large variety of smaller knives, and a small
mountain of old rag.  Neither of the principals exhibited any
fear.  Culkins insisted that, as the challenging party, he had
the right to the word fire.  This, after a bitter discussion, was
granted.  He urged his seconds to place him facing towards the
town, so that the lights would be in his favour.  This was done
without any trouble, the immense benefits of that position not
being discovered by Smith's second.

"If I fall," said Culkins to his second, "see me respectably
buried and forward bill to Connaught.  Believe me, it will be
cashed."  The arms (horse-pistols) were given to the men, and one
of Culkins's seconds said:

"Gentlemen, are you ready?"

SMITH:--Ready.

CULKINS:--Ready.  The blood of the Culkinses is aroused!

SECOND:--One, Two, Three--fire!

Culkins's pistol didn't go off.  Smith didn't fire.

"That was generous in Smith not to fire," said a second.

"It was inDADE," said Culkins; "I did not think it of the
low-lived scoundrel!"

The word was again given.  Crack went both pistols
simultaneously.  The smoke slowly cleared away, and the
principals were discovered standing stock-still.  The silence and
stillness for a moment were awful.  No one moved.  Soon Smith was
seen to reel and then to slowly fall.  His second and the surgeon
rushed to him.  Culkins made a tremendous effort to fly from the
field, but was restrained by his seconds.

"The honor of the Culkinses," he roared, "is untarnished--why the
divil won't yez let me go?  H--ll's blazes, men, will yez be
after giving me over to the bailiffs?  Docther, Docther!" he
shouted, "is he mortally wounded?"

The Doctor said he could not tell--that he was wounded in the
shoulder--that a carriage would be sent for and the wounded man
taken to his house.  Here a heart-rending groan came from Smith,
and Culkins, with a Donnybrook shriek, burst from his seconds,
knocked over the doctor's lantern, and fled towards the town like
greased lightning amidst a chorus of excited voices.

"Hold him!"

"Stop him!"

"Grab him by the coat-tails!"

"Shoot him!"

"Head him off!"

And half of the party started after him at an express-train rate.
There was some very fine running indeed.  Culkins was brought to
a sudden stop against a tall board fence, but he sprang back and
cleared it like an English hunter, and tore like a lunatic for
the city.  Half an hour later the party might have been seen, if
it hadn't been so pesky dark, groping blindly around the office
in which Culkins had been a student at law.

"Are you here, Culkins?" said one.

"Before Culkins answers that," said a smothered voice in the
little room, "tell me who yez are."

"Friends--your seconds!"

"Gintlemin, Culkins is here.  The last of the Culkinses is under
the bed."

He was dragged out.

"I hope," he said, "the ignoble wretch is not dead, but I call
you to witness, gintlemen, that he grossly insulted me."

(We don't care what folks say, but choking a man is a gross
insult.--Ed. P.D.)

He was persuaded to retire.  There was no danger of his being
disturbed that night, as the watch were sleeping sweetly as usual
in the big arm-chairs of the various hotels, and he would be able
to fly the city in the morning.  He had a haggard and worn-out
look yesterday morning.  Two large bailiffs, he said, had
surrounded the building in the night, and he had not slept a
wink.  And to add to his discomfiture his coat was covered with a
variegated and moist mixture, which he thought must be some of
the brains of his opponent, they having spattered against him as
he passed the dying man in his flight from the field.  As Smith
was not dead (though the surgeon said he would be confined to his
house for several weeks, and there was some danger of
mortification setting in), Culkins wisely concluded that the
mixture might be something else.  A liberal purse was made up for
him, and at an early hour yesterday morning the last of the
Culkinses went down St. Clair Street on a smart trot.  He took
this morning's Lakeshore express train at some way-station, and
is now on his way to New York.  The most astonishing thing about
the whole affair is the appearance on the street to-day,
apparently well and unhurt, of the gentleman who was so badly
"wounded in the shoulder."  But a duel was actually "fit."

3.10.  A MORMON ROMANCE--REGINALD GLOVERSON.

               CHAPTER I.--THE MORMON'S DEPARTURE.

The morning on which Reginald Gloverson was to leave Great Salt
Lake City with a mule-train, dawned beautifully.

Reginald Gloverson was a young and thrifty Mormon, with an
interesting family of twenty young and handsome wives.  His
unions had never been blessed with children.  As often as once a
year he used to go to Omaha, in Nebraska, with a mule-train for
goods; but although he had performed the rather perilous journey
many times with entire safety, his heart was strangely sad on
this particular morning, and filled with gloomy forebodings.

The time for his departure had arrived.  The high-spirited mules
were at the door, impatiently champing their bits.  The Mormon
stood sadly among his weeping wives.

"Dearest ones," he said, "I am singularly sad at heart, this
morning; but do not let this depress you.  The journey is a
perilous one, but--pshaw!  I have always come back safely
heretofore, and why should I fear?  Besides, I know that every
night, as I lay down on the broad starlit prairie, your bright
faces will come to me in my dreams, and make my slumbers sweet
and gentle.  You, Emily, with your mild blue eyes; and you,
Henrietta, with your splendid black hair; and you, Nelly, with
your hair so brightly, beautifully golden; and you, Mollie, with
your cheeks so downy; and you, Betsy, with your wine-red lips--
far more delicious, though, than any wine I ever tasted--and you,
Maria, with your winsome voice; and you, Susan, with your--with
your--that is to say, Susan, with your--and the other thirteen of
you, each so good and beautiful, will come to me in sweet dreams,
will you not, Dearestists?"

"Our own," they lovingly chimed, "we will!"

"And so farewell!" said Reginald.  "Come to my arms, my own!" he
cried, "that is, as many of you as can do it conveniently at
once, for I must away."

He folded several of them to his throbbing breast, and drove
sadly away.

                          .     .      .      .

But he had not gone far when the trace of the off-hind mule
became unhitched.  Dismounting, he essayed to adjust the trace;
but ere he had fairly commenced the task, the mule, a singularly
refractory animal--snorted wildly, and kicked Reginald
frightfully in the stomach.  He arose with difficulty, and
tottered feebly towards his mother's house, which was near by,
falling dead in her yard, with the remark, "Dear Mother, I've
come home to die!"

"So I see," she said; "where's the mules?"

Alas!  Reginald Gloverson could give no answer.  In vain the
heart-stricken mother threw herself upon his inanimate form,
crying, "Oh, my son--my son! Only tell me where the mules are,
and then you may die if you want to."

In vain--in vain!  Reginald had passed on.

                CHAPTER II.--FUNERAL TRAPPINGS.

The mules were never found.

Reginald's heart-broken mother took the body home to her
unfortunate son's widows.  But before her arrival she
indiscreetly sent a boy to Bust the news gently to the afflicted
wives, which he did by informing them in a hoarse whisper that
their "old man had gone in."

The wives felt very badly indeed.

"He was devoted to me," sobbed Emily.

"And to me," said Maria.

"Yes," said Emily, "he thought considerably of you, but not so
much as he did of me."

"I say he did!"

"And I say he didn't!"

"He did!"

"He didn't!"

"Don't look at ME, with your squint eyes!"

"Don't shake your red head at ME!"

"Sisters!" said the black-haired Henrietta, "cease this unseemly
wrangling.  I, as his first wife, shall strew flowers on his
grave."

"No you WON'T," said Susan.  "I, as his last wife, shall strew
flowers on his grave.  It's MY business to strew!"

"You shan't, so there!" said Henrietta.

"You bet I will!" said Susan, with a tear-suffused cheek.

"Well, as for me," said the practical Betsy, "I ain't on the
Strew, much, but I shall ride at the head of the funeral
procession!"

"Not if I've been introduced to myself, you won't," said the
golden-haired Nelly; "that's my position.  You bet your bonnet-
strings it is."

"Children," said Reginald's mother, "you must do some crying, you
know, on the day of the funeral; and how many pocket-handkerchers
will it take to go round?  Betsy, you and Nelly ought to make one
do between you."

"I'll tear her eyes out if she perpetrates a sob on my
handkercher!" said Nelly.

"Dear daughters in-law," said Reginald's mother, "how unseemly is
this anger!  Mules is five hundred dollars a span, and every
identical mule my poor boy had has been gobbled up by the red
man.  I knew when my Reginald staggered into the door-yard that
he was on the Die, but if I'd only thunk to ask him about them
mules ere his gentle spirit took flight, it would have been four
thousand dollars in OUR pockets, and NO mistake!  Excuse those
real tears, but you've never felt a parent's feelin's."

"It's an oversight," sobbed Maria.  "Don't blame us!"

                  CHAPTER III.--DUST TO DUST.

The funeral passed off in a very pleasant manner, nothing
occuring to mar the harmony of the occasion.  By a happy thought
of Reginald's mother, the wives walked to the grave twenty
abreast, which rendered that part of the ceremony thoroughly
impartial.

                       .     .      .      .

That night the twenty wives, with heavy hearts, sought their
twenty respective couches.  But no Reginald occupied those twenty
respective couches--Reginald would never more linger all night in
blissful repose in those twenty respective couches--Reginald's
head would never more press the twenty respective pillows of
those twenty respective couches--never, nevermore!

                       .     .      .      .

In another house, not many leagues from the House of Mourning, a
gray-haired woman was weeping passionately.  "He died," she
cried, "he died without sigerfyin', in any respect, where them
mules went to!"

                  CHAPTER IV.--MARRIED AGAIN.

Two years are supposed to elapse between the third and fourth
chapters of this original American romance.

A manly Mormon, one evening, as the sun was preparing to set
among a select apartment of gold and crimson clouds in the
western horizon--although for that matter the sun has a right to
"set" where it wants to, and so, I may add has a hen--a manly
Mormon, I say, tapped gently at the door of the mansion of the
late Reginald Gloverson.

The door was opened by Mrs. Sarah Gloverson.

"Is this the house of the widow Gloverson!" the Mormon asked.

"It is," said Susan.

"And how many is there of she?" inquired the Mormon.

"There is about twenty of her, including me," courteously
returned the fair Susan.

"Can I see her?"

"You can."

"Madam," he softly said, addressing the twenty disconsolate
widows.  "I have seen part of you before!  And although I have
already twenty-five wives, whom I respect and tenderly care for,
I can truly say that I never felt love's holy thrill till I saw
thee!  Be mine--be mine!" he enthusiastically cried, "and we will
show the world a striking illustration of the beauty and truth of
the noble lines, only a good deal more so--

               "Twenty-one souls with a single thought,
                Twenty-one hearts that beat as one!"

They were united, they were!

Gentle reader, does not the moral of this romance show that--does
it not, in fact, show that however many there may be of a young
widow woman, or rather does it not show that whatever number of
persons one woman may consist of--well, never mind what it SHOWS.
Only this writing Mormon romances is confusing to the intellect.
You try it and see.










This etext was produced by J.C. Byers at jcbyers@capitalnet.com.
Proofreaders were: J.C. Byers, Norm Wolcott, Dianne Doefler and
Charles Wilson.




This etext was scanned by J.C. Byers
(www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm)
and proofread by Doris Ringbloom




                        THE BOOK OF THE 
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT 
                A Plain and Literal Translation 
             of the Arabian Nights Entertainments 
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by 
                       Richard F. Burton 
                                
                          VOLUME FOUR 
                                
                To Foster Fitzgerald Arbuthnot. 

My Dear Arbuthnot,

     I have no fear that a friend, whose friendship has lasted
nearly a third of a century, will misunderstand my reasons for
inscribing his name upon these pages. You have lived long enough
in the East and, as your writings show, observantly enough, to
detect the pearl which lurks in the kitchen-midden, and to note
that its lustre is not dimmed nor its value diminished by its
unclean surroundings. 

                    Ever yours sincerely,    
                    Richard F. Burton. 

AthenAEum Club, October 1, 1885 

Contents of the Fourth Volume

Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman (continued)
     a.   Ni'amar Bin Al-Rabi'a and Naomi His Slave-girl
     b.   Conclusion of the Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman 
22.  Ala Al-Din Abu Al-Shamat 
23.  Hatim of the Trive of Tayy 
24.  Ma'an the Son of Zaidah 
25.  Ma'an the Son of Zaidah and the Badawi 
26.  The City of Labtayt 
27.  The Caliph Hisham and the Arab Youth 
28.  Ibrahim Bin Al-Mahdi and the Barber-Surgeon 
29.  The City of Many-Columned Iram and Abdullah Son of Abi
     Kilabah 
30.  Isaac of Mosul 
31.  The Sweep and the Noble Lady
32.  The Mock Caliph 
33.  Ali the Persian 
34.  Haru Al-Rashid and the Slave-Girl and the Iman Abu Yusuf 
35.  The Lover Who Feigned Himself A Thief 
36.  Ja'afar the Barmecide and the Bean-Seller 
37.  Abu Mohammed Hight Lazybones 
38.  Generous Dealing of Yahya Bin Khalid The Barmecide with
     Mansur 
39.  Generous Dealing of Yahya Son of Khalid with a Man Who
     Forged a Letter in his Name 
40.  Caliph Al-Maamum and the Strange Scholar 
41.  Ali Shar and Zumurrud 
42.  The Loves of Jubayr Bin Umayr and the Lady Budur 
43.  The Man of Al-Yaman and His Six Slave-Girls 
44.  Harun Al-Rashid and the Damsel and Abu Nowas 
45.  The Man Who Stole the Dish of Gold Wherein The Dog Ate 
46.  The Sharper of Alexandria and the Chief of Police 
47.  Al-Malik Al-Nasir and the Three Chiefs of Police
     a.   Story of the Chief of Police of Cairo
     b.   Story of the Chief of the Bulak Police
     c.   Story of the Chief of the Old Cairo Police 
48.  The Thief and the Shroff 
49.  The Chief of the Kus Police and the Sharper 
50.  Ibrahim Bin Al-Mahdi and the Merchant's Sister 
51.  The Woman Whose Hands were Cut Off For Giving Alms to the
     Poor 
52.  The Devout Israelite 
53.  Abu Hassan Al-Ziyadi and the Khorasan 
54.  The Poor Man and His Friend in Need 
55.  The Ruined Man Who became Rich Again Through A Dream 
56.  Caliph Al-Mutawakkil and His Concubine Mahbubah 
57.  Wardan the Butcher; His Adventure With the Lady and the Bear 
58.  The King's Daughter and the Ape





          The Book of the Thousand Nights and A Night




        Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a and Naomi his Slave-girl.



There lived once in the city of Cufa[FN#1] a man called Al-Rabi'a
bin Hatim, who was one of the chief men of the town, a wealthy
and a healthy, and Heaven had vouchsafed him a son, whom he named
Ni'amah Allah.[FN#2] One day, being in the slave-brokers' mart,
he saw a woman exposed for sale with a little maid of wonderful
beauty and grace on her arm. So he beckoned to the broker and
asked him, "How much for this woman and her daughter?" He
answered "Fifty dinars." Quoth Al-Rabi'a "Write the contract of
sale and take the money and give it to her owner." Then he gave
the broker the price and his brokerage and taking the woman and
her child, carried them to his house. Now when the daughter of
his uncle who was his wife saw the slave, she said to her
husband, "O my cousin, what is this damsel?" He replied, "Of a
truth, I bought her for the sake of the little one on her arm;
for know that, when she groweth up, there will not be her like
for beauty, either in the land of the Arabs or the Ajams." His
wife remarked, "Right was thy rede", and said to the woman "What
is thy name?" She replied, "O my lady, my name is Tauflik.[FN#3]"
"And what is thy daughter's name?" asked she? Answered the slave,
"Sa'ad, the happy." Rejoined her mistress; "Thou sayst sooth,
thou art indeed happy, and happy is he who hath bought thee."
Then quoth she to her husband, "O my cousin, what wilt thou call
her?"; and quoth he, "Whatso thou chooses"; so she said, "Then
let us call her Naomi," and he rejoined "Good is thy device." The
little Naomi was reared with Al-Rabi'a's son Ni'amah in one
cradle, so to speak, till the twain reached the age of ten and
each grew handsomer than the other; and the boy used to address
her, "O my sister!" and she, "O my brother!", till they came to
that age when Al-Rabi'a said to Ni'amah, "O my son, Naomi is not
thy sister but thy slave. I bought her in thy name whilst thou
wast yet in the cradle; so call her no more sister from this day
forth." Quoth Ni'amah, "If that be so, I will take her to wife."
Then he went to his mother and told her of this, and she said to
him, "O my son, she is thy handmaid." So he wedded and went in
unto Naomi and loved her; and two[FN#4] years passed over them
whilst in this condition, nor was there in all Cufa a fairer girl
than Naomi, or a sweeter or a more graceful. As she grew up she
learnt the Koran and read works of science and excelled in music
and playing upon all kinds of instruments; and in the beauty of
her singing she surpassed all the folk of her time. Now one day
as she sat with her husband in the wine chamber, she took the
lute, tightened the strings, and sang these two couplets,

"While thou'rt my lord whose bounty's my estate, * A sword
     whereby my woes to annihilate,
Recourse I never need to Amru or Zayd,[FN#5] * Nor aught save
     thee if way to me grow strait!"

Ni'amah was charmed with these verses and said to her, "By my
life, O Naomi, sing to us with the tambourine and other
instruments!" So she sang these couplets to a lively measure,

"By His life who holds my guiding rein, I swear * I'll meet on
     love ground parlous foe nor care:
Good sooth I'll vex revilers, thee obey * And quit my slumbers
     and all joy forswear:
And for thy love I'll dig in vitals mine * A grave, nor shall my
     vitals weet 'tis there!"

And Ni'amah exclaimed, "Heaven favoured art thou, O Naomi!" But
whilst they led thus the most joyous life, behold!
Al-Hajjaj,[FN#6] the Viceroy of Cufa said to himself, "Needs must
I contrive to take this girl named Naomi and send her to the
Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, for he hath
not in his palace her like for beauty and sweet singing." So he
summoned an old woman of the duennas of his wives and said to
her, "Go to the house of Al-Rabi'a and foregather with the girl
Naomi and combine means to carry her off; for her like is not to
be found on the face of the earth." She promised to do his
bidding; the next morning she donned the woollen clothes of a
devotee and hung around her neck a rosary of beads by the
thousand; and, henting in hand a staff and a leather water bottle
of Yamani manufacture.-- And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old
woman promised to do the bidding of Al-Hajjaj, and whenas it was
morning she donned the woollen clothes of a devotee[FN#7] and
hung around her neck a rosary of beads by the thousand and hent
in hand a staff and a leather water bottle of Yamani manufacture
and fared forth crying, "Glory be to Allah! Praised be Allah!
There is no god but the God! Allah is Most Great! There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!" Nor did she leave off her lauds and her groaning in
prayer whilst her heart was full of guile and wiles, till she
came to the house of Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a at the hour of noon
prayer, and knocked at the door. The doorkeeper opened and said
to her, "What dost thou want?" Quoth she, "I am a poor pious
woman, whom the time of noon prayer hath overtaken, and fief
would I pray in this blessed place." Answered the porter, "O old
woman, this is no mosque nor oratory, but the house of Ni'amah
son of al Rabi'a." She replied, "I know there is neither
cathedral-mosque nor oratory like the house of Ni'amah bin
al-Rabi'a. I am a chamberwoman of the palace of the Prince of
True Believers and am come out for worship and the visitation of
Holy Places." But the porter rejoined, "Thou canst not enter;"
and many words passed between them, till at last she caught hold
and hung to him saying, "Shall the like of me be denied admission
to the house of Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a, I who have free access to
the houses of Emirs and Grandees?" Anon, out came Ni'amah and,
hearing their loud language, laughed and bade the old woman enter
after him. So she followed him into the presence of Naomi, whom
she saluted after the godliest and goodliest fashion, and, when
she looked on her, she was confounded at her exceeding seemliness
and said to her, "O my lady, I commend thee to the safeguard of
Allah, who made thee and thy lord fellows in beauty and
loveliness!" Then she stood up in the prayer niche and betook
herself to inclination and prostration and prayer, till day
departed and night darkened and starkened, when Naomi said to
her, "O my mother, rest thy legs and feet awhile." Replied the
old woman "O my lady, whoso seeketh the world to come let him
weary him in this world, and whoso wearieth not himself in this
world shall not attain the dwellings of the just in the world to
come." Then Naomi brought her food and said to her, "Eat of my
bread and pray Heaven to accept my penitence and to have mercy on
me." But she cried, "O my lady, I am fasting. As for thee, thou
art but a girl and it befitteth thee to eat and drink and make
merry; Allah be indulgent to thee!; for the Almighty saith: All
shall be punished except him who shall repent and believe and
shall work a righteous work."[FN#8] So Naomi continued sitting
with the old woman in talk and presently said to Ni'amah, "O my
lord, conjure this ancient dame to sojourn with us awhile, for
piety and devotion are imprinted on her countenance." Quoth he,
"Set apart for her a chamber where she may say her prayers; and
suffer no one to go in to her: peradventure, Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) shall prosper us by the blessing of her presence
and never separate us." So the old woman passed her night in
praying and reciting the Koran; and when Allah caused the morn to
dawn, she went in to Ni'amah and Naomi and, giving them good
morning, said to them, "I pray Allah have you in His holy
keeping!" Quoth Naomi, "Whither away, O my mother? My lord hath
bidden me set apart for thee a chamber, where thou mayst seclude
thee for thy devotions." Replied the old woman, "Allah give him
long life, and continue His favour to you both! But I would have
you charge the doorkeeper not to stay my coming in to you; and,
Inshallah! I will go the round of the Holy Places and pray for
you two at the end of my devotions every day and night." Then she
went out (whilst Naomi wept for parting with her knowing not the
cause of her coming), and returned to Al-Hajjaj who said to her,
"As thou do my bidding soon, thou shalt have of me abundant
good." Quoth she, "I ask of thee a full month;" and quoth he
"Take the month." Thereupon the old hag fell to daily visiting
Ni'amah's house and frequented his slave-wife, Naomi.-- And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old hag
fell to visiting daily Ni'amah's house and frequenting his slave
wife, Naomi; and both ceased not to honour her, and she used to
go in to them morning and evening and all in the house respected
her till, one day, being alone with Naomi, she said to her, "O my
lady! by Allah, when I go to the Holy Places, I will pray for
thee; and I only wish thou wert with me, that thou mightest look
on the Elders of the Faith who resort thither, and they should
pray for thee, according to thy desire." Naomi cried, "I conjure
thee by Allah take me with thee!"; and she replied, "Ask leave of
thy mother in law, and I will take thee." So Naomi said to her
husband's mother, "O my lady, ask my master to let us go forth,
me and thee, one day with this my old mother, to prayer and
worship with the Fakirs in the Holy Places." Now when Ni'amah
came in and sat down, the old woman went up to him and would have
kissed his hand, but he forbade her; so she invoked
blessings[FN#9] on him and left the house. Next day she came
again, in the absence of Ni'amah, and she addressed Naomi,
saying, "We prayed for thee yesterday; but arise now and divert
thyself and return ere thy lord come home." So Naomi said to her
mother-in-law, "I beseech thee, for Allah's sake, give me leave
to go with this pious woman, that I may sight the saints of Allah
in the Holy Places, and return speedily ere my lord come back."
Quoth Ni'amah's mother, "I fear lest thy lord know;" but said the
old woman, "By Allah, I will not let her take seat on the floor;
no, she shall look, standing on her feet, and not tarry." So she
took the damsel by guile and, carrying her to Al-Hajjaj's palace,
told him of her coming, after placing her in a lonely chamber;
whereupon he went in to her and, looking upon her, saw her to be
the loveliest of the people of the day, never had he beheld her
like. Now when Naomi caught sight of him she veiled her face from
him; but he left her not till he had called his Chamberlain, whom
he commanded to take fifty horsemen; and he bade him mount the
damsel on a swift dromedary, and bear her to Damascus and there
deliver her to the Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin
Marwan. Moreover, he gave him a letter for the Caliph, saying,
"Bear him this letter and bring me his answer and hasten thy
return to me." So the Chamberlain, without losing time, took the
damsel (and she tearful for separation from her lord) and,
setting out with her on a dromedary, gave not over journeying
till he reached Damascus. There he sought audience of the
Commander of the Faithful and, when it was granted, the
Chamberlain delivered the damsel and reported the circumstance.
The Caliph appointed her a separate apartment and going into his
Harim, said to his wife, "Al Hajjaj hath bought me a slave-girl
of the daughters of the Kings of Cufa[FN#10] for ten thousand
dinars, and hath sent me this letter."-- And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Two Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph acquainted his wife with the story of the slave-girl, she
said to him, "Allah increase to thee His favour!" Then the
Caliph's sister went in to the supposed slave-girl and, when she
saw her, she said, "By Allah, not unlucky is the man who hath
thee in his house, were thy cost an hundred thousand dinars!" And
Naomi replied, "O fair of face, what King's palace is this, and
what is the city?" She answered, "This is the city of Damascus,
and this is the palace of my brother, the Commander of the
Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan.[FN#11]" Then she resumed,
"Didst thou not know all this?" Naomi said, "By Allah, O my lady,
I had no knowledge of it!"; when the other asked, "And he who
sold thee and took thy price did he not tell thee that the Caliph
had bought thee?" Now when Naomi heard these words, she shed
tears and said to herself, "Verily, I have been tricked and the
trick hath succeeded," adding to herself, "If I speak, none will
credit me; so I will hold my peace and take patience, for I know
that the relief of Allah is near." Then she bent her head for
shame, and indeed her cheeks were tanned by the journey and the
sun. So the Caliph's sister left her that day and returned to her
on the morrow with clothes and necklaces of jewels, and dressed
her; after which the Caliph came in to her and sat down by her
side, and his sister said to him, "Look on this handmaid in whom
Allah hath conjoined every perfection of beauty and loveliness."
So he said to Naomi, "Draw back the veil from thy face;" but she
would not unveil, and he beheld not her face. However, he saw her
wrists and love of her entered his heart; and he said to his
sister, "I will not go in unto her for three days, till she be
cheered by thy converse." Then he arose and left her, but Naomi
ceased not to brood over her case and sigh for her separation
from her master, Ni'amah, till she fell sick of a fever during
the night and ate not nor drank; and her favour faded and her
charms were changed. They told the Caliph of this and her
condition grieved him; so he visited her with physicians and men
of skill, but none could come at a cure for her. This is how it
fared with her; but as regards Ni'amah, when he returned home he
sat down on his bed and cried, "Ho, Naomi!" But she answered not;
so he rose in haste and called out, yet none came to him, as all
the women in the house had hidden themselves for fear of him.
Then he went out to his mother, whom he found sitting with her
cheek on her hand, and said to her, "O my mother, where is
Naomi?" She answered, "O my son, she is with one who is worthier
than I to be trusted with her, namely, the devout old woman; she
went forth with her to visit devotionally the Fakirs and return."
Quoth Ni'amah, "Since when hath this been her habit and at what
hour went she forth?" Quoth his mother, "She went out early in
the morning." He asked, "And how camest thou to give her leave
for this?"; and she answered, "O my son, 'twas she persuaded me."
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!" exclaimed Ni'amah and, going forth from his
home in a state of distraction, he repaired to the Captain of the
Watch to whom said he, "Doss thou play tricks upon me and
steal-my slave-girl away from my house? I will assuredly complain
of thee to the Commander of the Faithful." Said the Chief of
Police, "Who hath taken her?" and Ni'amah replied, "An old woman
of such and such a mien, clad in woollen raiment and carrying a
rosary of beads numbered by thousands." Rejoined the other, "Find
me the old woman and I will get thee back thy slave-girl." "And
who knows the old woman?" retorted Ni'amah. "And who knows the
hidden things save Allah (may He be extolled and exalted!)?"
cried the Chief, who knew her for Al-Hajjaj's procuress. Cried
Ni'amah, "I look to thee for my slave-girl, and Al-Hajjaj shall
judge between thee and me;" and the Master of Police answered,
"Go to whom thou wilt." So Ni'amah went to the palace of
Al-Hajjaj, for his father was one of the chief men of Cufa; and,
when he arrived there, the Chamberlain went in to the Governor
and told him the case; whereupon Al-Hajjaj said, "Hither with
him!" and when he stood before him enquired, "What be thy
business?" Said Ni'amah, "Such and such things have befallen me;"
and the Governor said, "Bring me the Chief of Police, and we will
commend him to seek for the old woman." Now he knew that the
Chief of Police was acquainted with her; so, when he came, he
said to him, "I wish thee to make search for the slave-girl of
Ni'amah son of Al-Rabi'a." And he answered, "None knoweth the
hidden things save Almighty Allah." Rejoined Al-Hajjaj, "There
is no help for it but thou send out horsemen and look for the
damsel in all the roads, and seek for her in the towns."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Hajjaj
said to the Captain of the Watch, "There is no help for it but
thou send out horsemen, and look for the damsel on all the roads
and seek for her in the towns." Then he turned to Ni'amah and
said to him, "And thy slave-girl return not, I will give thee ten
slave-girls from my house and ten from that of the Chief of
Police." And he again bade the Captain of the Watch, "Go and seek
for the girl." So he went out, and Ni'amah returned home full of
trouble and despairing of life; for he had now reached the age of
fourteen and there was yet no hair on his side cheeks. So he wept
and lamented and shut himself up from his household; and ceased
not to weep and lament, he and his mother, till the morning, when
his father came in to him and said, "O my son, of a truth,
Al-Hajjaj hath put a cheat upon the damsel and hath taken her;
but from hour to hour Allah giveth relief." However grief
redoubled on Ni'amah, so that he knew not what he said nor knew
he who came in to him, and he fell sick for three months his
charms were changed, his father despaired of him and the
physicians visited him and said, "There is no remedy for him save
the damsel." Now as his father was sitting one day, behold he
heard tell of a skillful Persian physician, whom the folk gave
out for perfect in medicine and astrology and geomancy. So
Al-Rabi'a sent for him and, seating him by his side, entreated
him with honour and said to him, "Look into my son's case."
Thereupon quoth he to Ni'amah, "Give me thy hand." The young man
gave him his hand and he felt his pulse and his joints and looked
in his face; then he laughed and, turning to his father, said,
"Thy son's sole ailment is one of the heart."[FN#12] He replied,
Thou sayest sooth, O sage, but apply thy skill to his state and
case, and acquaint me with the whole thereof and hide naught from
me of his condition." Quoth the Persian, "Of a truth he is
enamoured of a slave-girl and this slave-girl is either in
Bassorah or Damascus; and there is no remedy for him but reunion
with her." Said Al-Rabi'a, "An thou bring them together, thou
shalt live all thy life in wealth and delight." Answered the
Persian, "In good sooth this be an easy matter and soon brought
about," and he turned to Ni'amah and said to him, "No hurt shall
befall thee; so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear." Then quoth he to Al-Rabi'a, "Bring me out four thousand
dinars of your money;" so he gave them to him, and he added, "I
wish to carry thy son with me to Damascus; and Almighty Allah
willing, I will not return thence but with the damsel." Then he
turned to the youth and asked, "What is thy name?"; and he
answered "Ni'amah." Quoth the Persian, "O Ni'amah, sit up and be
of good heart, for Allah will reunite thee with the damsel." And
when he sat up the leach continued, "Be of good cheer for we set
out for Damascus this very day: put thy trust in the Lord and eat
and drink and be cheerful so as to fortify thyself for travel."
Upon this the Persian began making preparation of all things
needed, such as presents and rarities; and he took of Al-Rabi'a
in all the sum of ten thousand dinars, together with horses and
camels and beasts of burden and other requisites. Then Ni'amah
farewelled his father and mother and journeyed with the physician
to Aleppo. They could find no news of Naomi there so they fared
on to Damascus, where they abode three days, after which the
Persian took a shop and he adorned even the shelves with vessels
of costly porcelain, with covers of silver, and with gildings and
stuffs of price. Moreover, he set before himself vases and
flagons of glass full of all manner of ointments and ups, and he
surrounded them with cups of crystal--and, placing astrolabe and
geomantic tablet facing him, he donned a physician's habit and
took his seat in the shop. Then he set Ni'amah standing before
him clad in a shirt and gown of silk and, girding his middle with
a silken kerchief gold-embroidered, said to him, "O Ni'amah,
henceforth thou art my son; so call me naught but sire, and I
will call thee naught but son." And he replied, "I hear and I
obey." Thereupon the people of Damascus flocked to the Persian's
shop that they might gaze on the youth's goodliness and the
beauty of the shop and its contents, whilst the physician spoke
to Ni'amah in Persian and he answered him in the same tongue, for
he knew the language, after the wont of the sons of the notables.
So that Persian doctor soon became known among the townsfolk and
they began to acquaint him with their ailments, and he to
prescribe for them remedies. Moreover, they brought him the water
of the sick in phials,[FN#13] and he would test it and say, "He,
whose water this is, is suffering from such and such a disease,"
and the patient would declare, "Verily this physician sayeth
sooth." So he continued to do the occasions of the folk and they
to flock to him, till his fame spread throughout the city and
into the houses of the great. Now, one day as he sat in his-shop,
behold, there came up an old woman riding on an ass with a
stuffed saddle of brocade embroidered with jewels; and, stopping
before the Persian's shop, drew rein and beckoned him, saying,
"Take my hand." He took her hand, and she alighted and asked him
"Art thou the Persian physician from Irak?" "Yes," answered he,
and she said, "Know that I have a sick daughter." Then she
brought out to him a phial--and the Persian looked at it and said
to her, "O my mistress, tell me thy daughter's name, that I may
calculate her horoscope and learn the hour in which it will befit
her to drink medicine." She replied, "O my brother the
Persian,[FN#14] her name is Naomi."-- And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Persian heard the name of Naomi, he fell to calculating and
writing on his hand and presently said, "O my lady, I cannot
prescribe a medicine for her till I know what country woman she
is, because of the difference of climate: so tell me in what land
she was brought up and what is her age." The old woman replied
"She is fourteen years old and she was brought up in Cufa of
Irak." He asked, "And how long hath she sojourned in this
country?" "But a few months," answered she. Now when Ni'amah
heard the old woman's words and recognised the name of his slave-
girl, his heart fluttered and he was like to faint. Then said the
Persian, "Such and such medicines will suit her case;" and the
old woman rejoined, "Then make them up and give me what thou hast
mentioned, with the blessing of Almighty Allah." So saying, she
threw upon the shop board ten gold pieces, and he looked at
Ni'amah and bade him prepare the necessary drugs; whereupon she
also looked at the youth and exclaimed, "Allah have thee in his
keeping, O my son! Verily, she favoureth thee in age and mien."
Then said she to the physician, "O my brother the Persian, is
this thy slave or thy son?" "He is my son," answered he. So
Ni'amah put up the medicine and, placing it in a little box, took
a piece of paper and wrote thereon these two couplets,[FN#15]

"If Naomi bless me with a single glance, * Let Su'ada sue and
     Juml joy to
They said, "Forget her: twenty such thou'lt find." * But none is
     like her--I will not forget!"

He pressed the paper into the box and, sealing it up, wrote upon
the cover the following words in Cufic characters, "I am Ni'amah
of al-Rabi'a of Cufa." Then he set it before the old woman who
took it and bade them farewell and returned to the Caliph's
palace, and when she went up with the drugs to the damsel she
placed the little box of medicine at her feet, saying, "O my
lady, know that there is lately come to our town a Persian
physician, than whom I never saw a more skilful nor a better
versed in matters of malady. I told him thy name, after showing
him the water-bottle, and forthwith he knew thine ailment and
prescribed a remedy. Then he bade his son make thee up this
medicine; and there is not in Damascus a comelier or a seemlier
youth than this lad of his, nor hath anyone a shop the like of
his shop." So Naomi took the box and, seeing the names of her
lord and his father written on the cover, changed colour and said
to herself, "Doubtless, the owner of this shop is come in search
of me." So she said to the old woman, "Describe to me this
youth." Answered the old woman, "His name is Ni'amah, he hath a
mole on his right eyebrow, is richly clad and is perfectly
handsome." Cried Naomi, "Give me the medicine, whereon be the
blessing and help of Almighty Allah!" So she drank off the potion
(and she laughing) and said, "Indeed, it is a blessed medicine!"
Then she sought in the box and, finding the paper, opened it,
read it, understood it and knew that this was indeed her lord,
whereas her heart was solaced and she rejoiced. Now when the old
woman saw her laughing, she exclaimed, "This is indeed a blessed
day!"; and Naomi said, "O nurse, I have a mind for something to
eat and drink." The old woman said to the serving women, "Bring a
tray of dainty viands for your mistress;" whereupon they set food
before her and she sat down to eat. And behold in came the Caliph
who, seeing her sitting at meat, rejoiced; and the old woman said
to him, "O Commander of the Faithful, I give thee joy of thy hand
maid Naomi's recovery! And the cause is that there is lately come
to this our city a physician than whom I never saw a better
versed in diseases and their remedies. I fetched her medicine
from him and she hath drunken of it but once and is restored to
health." Quoth he, "Take a thousand dinars and apply thyself to
her treatment, till she be completely recovered." And he went
away, rejoicing in the damsel's recovery, whilst the old woman
betook herself to the Persian's house and delivered the thousand
dinars, giving him to know that she was become the Caliph's slave
and also handing him a letter which Naomi had written. He took it
and gave the letter to Ni'amah, who at first sight knew her hand
and fell down in a swoon. When he revived he opened the letter
and found these words written therein: "From the slave despoiled
of her Ni'amah, her delight; her whose reason hath been beguiled
and who is parted from the core of her heart. But afterwards of a
truth thy letter hath reached me and hath broadened my breast,
and solaced my soul, even as saith the poet,

"Thy note came: long lost hungers wrote that note, * Till drop
     they sweetest scents for what they wrote:
Twas Moses to his mother's arms restored; * 'Twas Jacob's eye-
     sight cured by Joseph's coat!"[FN#16]

When Ni'amah read these verses, his eyes ran over with tears and
the old woman said to him, "What maketh thee to weep, O my son?
Allah never cause thine eye to shed tears!" Cried the Persian, "O
my lady, how should my son not weep, seeing that this is his
slave-girl and he her lord, Ni'amah son of al-Rabi'a of Cufa; and
her health dependeth on her seeing him, for naught aileth her but
loving him.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian
cried out to the old woman, "How shall my son not weep, seeing
that this is his slave-girl and he her lord, Ni'amah son of
al-Rabi'a of Cufa; and the health of this damsel dependeth on her
seeing him and naught aileth her but loving him. So, do thou, O
my lady, take these thousand dinars to thyself and thou shalt
have of me yet more than this; only look on us with eyes of rush;
for we know not how to bring this affair to a happy end save
through thee." Then she said to Ni'amah, "Say, art thou indeed
her lord?" He replied, "Yes," and she rejoined, "Thou sayest
sooth; for she ceaseth not continually to name thee." Then he
told her all that had passed from first to last, and she said, "O
youth, thou shalt owe thy reunion with her to none but myself."
So she mounted and, at once returning to Naomi, looked in her
face and laughed saying, "It is just, O my daughter, that thou
weep and fall sick for thy separation from thy master, Ni'amah,
son of Al-Rabi'a of Cufa." Quoth Naomi, "Verily, the veil hath
been withdrawn for thee and the truth revealed to thee." Rejoined
the old woman, "Be of good cheer and take heart, for I will
assuredly bring you together, though it cost me my life." Then
she returned to Ni'amah and said to him, "I went to thy slave-
girl and conversed with her, and I find that she longeth for thee
yet more than thou for her; for although the Commander of the
Faithful is minded to become intimate with her, she refuseth
herself to him. But if thou be stout of purpose and firm of
heart, I will bring you together and venture my life for you, and
play some trick and make shift to carry thee into the Caliph's
palace, where thou shalt meet her, for she cannot come forth."
And Ni'amah answered, "Allah requite thee with good!" Then she
took leave of him and went back to Naomi and said, "Thy lord is
indeed dying of love for thee and would fain see thee and
foregather with thee. What sayest thou?" Naomi replied, "And I
too am longing for his sight and dying for his love." Whereupon
the old woman took a parcel of women's clothes and ornaments and,
repairing to Ni'amah, said to him, "Come with me into some place
apart." So he brought her into the room behind the shop where she
stained his hands and decked his wrists and plaited his hair,
after which she clad him in a slave-girl's habit and adorned him
after the fairest fashion of woman's adornment, till he was as
one of the Houris of the Garden of Heaven, and when she saw him
thus she exclaimed, "Blessed be Allah, best of Creators! By
Allah, thou art handsomer than the damsel.[FN#17] Now, walk with
thy left shoulder forwards and thy right well behind, and sway
thy hips from side to side."[FN#18] So he walked before her, as
she bade him; and, when she saw he had caught the trick of
woman's gait, she said to him, "Expect me tomorrow night, and
Allah willing, I will take and carry thee to the palace. But when
thou seest the Chamberlains and the Eunuchs be bold, and bow thy
head and speak not with any, for I will prevent their speech; and
with Allah is success!" Accordingly, when the morning dawned, she
returned and, carrying him to the palace, entered before him and
he after her step by step. The Chamberlain would have stopped his
entering, but the old woman said to him, "O most ill omened of
slaves, this is the handmaid of Naomi, the Caliph's favourite.
How durst thou stay her when she would enter?" Then said she,
"Come in, O damsel!"; and the old woman went in and they ceased
not faring on, till they drew near the door leading to the inner
piazza of the palace, when she said to him, "O Ni'amah, hearten
thyself and take courage and enter and turn to the left: then
count five doors and pass through the sixth, for it is that of
the place prepared for thee. Fear nothing, and if any speak to
thee, answer not, neither stop." Then she went up with him to the
door, and the Chamberlain there on guard accosted her, saying
"What damsel is this?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Chamberlain accosted the old woman, saying, "What damsel is
this?"; quoth the ancient dame, "Our lady hath a mind to buy
her;" and he rejoined, "None may enter save by leave of the
Commander of the Faithful; so do thou go back with her. I can not
let her pass for thus am I commanded." Replied the old woman, "O
Chief Chamberlain, use thy reason. Thou knowest that Naomi, the
Caliph's slave-girl, of whom he is enamoured, is but now restored
to health and the Commander of the Faithful hardly yet crediteth
her recovery. She is minded to buy this hand maid; so oppose thou
not her entrance, lest haply it come to Naomi's knowledge and she
be wroth with thee and suffer a relapse and this cause thy head
to be cut off." Then said she to Ni'amah, "Enter, O damsel; pay
no heed to what he saith and tell not the Queen-consort that her
Chamberlain opposed thine entrance." So Ni'amah bowed his head
and entered the palace, and would have turned to the left, but
mistook the direction and walked to his right; and, meaning to
count five doors and enter the sixth, he counted six and entering
the seventh, found himself in a place whose floor was carpeted
with brocade and whose walls were hung with curtains of gold-
embroidered silk. And therein stood censers of aloes-wood and
ambergris and strong-scented musk, and at the upper end was a
couch bespread with cloth of gold on which he seated himself,
marvelling at the magnificence he saw and knowing not what was
written for him in the Secret Purpose. As he sat musing on his
case, the Caliph's sister, followed by her handmaid, came in upon
him; and, seeing the youth seated there took him for a slave-girl
and accosted him and said, "Who art thou O damsel? and what is
thy case and who brought thee hither?" He made no reply, and was
silent, when she continued, "O damsel! if thou be one of my
brother's concubines and he be wroth with thee, I will intercede
with him for thee and get thee grace." But he answered her not a
word; so she said to her slave-girl, "Stand at the door and let
none enter." Then she went up to Ni'amah and looking at him was
amazed at his beauty and said to him, "O lady, tell me who thou
art and what is thy name and how thou camest here; for I have
never seen thee in our palace." Still he answered not, whereat
she was angered and, putting her hand to his bosom, found no
breasts and would have unveiled him, that she might know who he
was; but he said to her, "O my lady, I am thy slave and I cast
myself on thy protection: do thou protect me." She said, "No harm
shall come to thee, but tell me who thou art and who brought thee
into this my apartment." Answered he, "O Princess, I am known as
Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a of Cufa and I have ventured my life for the
sake of my slave-girl, Naomi, whom Al-Hajjaj took by sleight and
sent hither." Said she, "Fear not: no harm shall befall thee;"
the