his world and in the next world.
Wherefore, if thou wilt become a Moslem, well and good; if not,
thy death were better than thy life." Ala al-Din also exhorted
him to embrace the True Faith; but he refused and was
contumacious; so Ala al-Din drew a dagger and cut his throat from
ear to ear.[FN#126] Then he wrote a scroll, setting forth what
had happened and laid it on the brow of the dead, after which
they took what was light of load and weighty of worth and turned
from the palace and returned to the church. Here the Princess
drew forth the jewel and, placing her hand upon the facet where
was figured a couch, rubbed it; and behold, a couch appeared
before her and she mounted upon it with Ala al-Din and his wife
Zubaydah, the lutist, saying, "I conjure thee by the virtue of
the names and talismans and characts engraver on this jewel, rise
up with us, O Couch!" And it rose with them into the air and
flew, till it came to a Wady wholly bare of growth, when the
Princess turned earthwards the facet on which the couch was
figured, and it sank with them to the ground. Then she turned up
the face where on was fashioned a pavilion and tapping it said,
"Let a pavilion be pitched in this valley;" and there appeared a
pavilion, wherein they seated themselves. Now this Wady was a
desert waste, without grass or water; so she turned a third face
of the jewel towards the sky, and said, "By the virtue of the
names of Allah, let trees upgrow here and a river flow beside
them!" And forthwith trees sprang up and by their side ran a
river plashing and dashing. They made the ablution and prayed and
drank of the stream; after which the Princess turned up the three
other facets till she came to the fourth, whereon was portrayed a
table of good, and said, "By the virtue of the names of Allah,
let the table be spread!" And behold, there appeared before them
a table, spread with all manner of rich meats, and they ate and
drank and made merry and were full of joy. Such was their case;
but as regards Husn Maryam's father, his son went in to waken him
and found him slain; and, seeing Ala al-Din's scroll, took it and
read it, and readily understood it. Then he sought his sister and
finding her not, betook himself to the old woman in the church,
of whom he enquired for her, but she said, "Since yesterday I
have not seen her." So he returned to the troops and cried out,
saying, "To horse, ye horsemen!" Then he told them what had
happened, so they mounted and rode after the fugitives, till they
drew near the pavilion. Presently Husn Maryam arose and looked up
and saw a cloud of dust which spread till it walled the view,
then it lifted and flew, and lo! stood disclosed her brother and
his troops, crying aloud, "Whither will ye fly, and we on your
track!" Then said she to Ala al-Din, "Are thy feet firm in
fight?" He replied, "Even as the stake in bran, I know not war
nor battle, nor swords nor spears." So she pulled out the jewel
and rubbed the fifth face, that on which were graven a horse and
his rider, and behold, straightway a cavalier appeared out of the
desert and ceased not to do battle with the pursuing host and
smite them with the sword, till he routed them and put them to
flight. Then the Princess asked Ala al-Din, "Wilt thou go to
Cairo or to Alexandria?"; and he answered, "To Alexandria." So
they mounted the couch and she pronounced over it the
conjuration, whereupon it set off with them and, in the twinkling
of an eye, brought them to Alexandria. They alighted without the
city and Ala al-Din hid the women in a cavern, whilst he went
into Alexandria and fetched them outer clothing, wherewith he
covered them. Then he carried them to his shop and, leaving them
in the "ben"[FN#127] walked forth to fetch them the morning-meal,
and behold he met Calamity Ahmad who chanced to be coming from
Baghdad. He saw him in the street and received him with open
arms, saluting him and welcoming him. Whereupon Ahmad al-Danaf
gave him the good news of his son Aslan and how he was now come
to the age of twenty: and Ala al-Din, in his turn, told the
Captain of the Guard all that had befallen him from first to
last, whereat he marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then he brought
him to his shop and sitting room where they passed the night; and
next day he sold his place of business and laid its price with
other monies. Now Ahmad al-Danaf had told him that the Caliph
sought him; but he said, "I am bound first for Cairo, to salute
my father and mother and the people of my house." So they all
mounted the couch and it carried them to Cairo the God-guarded;
and here they alighted in the street called Yellow,[FN#128] where
stood the house of Shams al-Din. Then Ala al-Din knocked at the
door, and his mother said, "Who is at the door, now that we have
lost our beloved for evermore?" He replied, " 'Tis I! Ala
al-Din!" whereupon they came down and embraced him. Then he sent
his wives and baggage into the house and entering himself with
Ahmad al-Danaf, rested there three days, after which he was
minded to set out for Baghdad. His father said, "Abide with me, O
my son;" but he answered; "I cannot bear to be parted from my
child Aslan." So he took his father and mother and fared forth
for Baghdad. Now when they came thither, Ahmad al-Danaf went in
to the Caliph and gave him the glad tidings of Ala al-Din's
arrival--and told him his story whereupon the King went forth to
greet him taking the youth Aslan, and they met and embraced each
other. Then the Commander of the Faithful summoned the arch-thief
Ahmad Kamakim and said to Ala al-Din, "Up and at thy foe!" So he
drew his sword and smote off Ahmad Kamakim's head. Then the
Caliph held festival for Ala al-Din and, summoning the Kazis and
witnesses, wrote the contract and married him to the Princess
Husn Maryam; and he went in unto her and found her an unpierced
pearl. Moreover, the Caliph made Aslan Chief of the Sixty and
bestowed upon him and his father sumptuous dresses of honour; and
they abode in the enjoyment of all joys and joyance of life, till
there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of
societies. But the tales of generous men are manifold and amongst
them is the story of




                  HATIM OF THE TRIBE OF TAYY.



It is told of Hatim of the tribe of Tayy,[FN#129] that when he
died, they buried him on the top of a mountain and set over his
grave two troughs hewn out of two rocks and stone girls with
dishevelled hair. At the foot of the hill was a stream of running
water, and when wayfarers camped there, they heard loud crying
and keening in the night, from dark till daybreak; but when they
arose in the morning, they found nothing but the girls carved in
stone. Now when Zu 'l-Kura'a,[FN#130] King of Himyar, going forth
of his tribe, came to that valley, he halted to pass the night
there,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zu 'l-
Kura'a passed by the valley he righted there, and, when he drew
near the mountain, he heard the keening and said, "What lamenting
is that on yonder hill?" They answered him, saying, "Verily this
be the tomb of Hatim al-Tayy, over which are two troughs of stone
and stone figures of girls with dishevelled hair; and all who
camp in this place by night hear this crying and keening." So he
said jestingly, "O Hatim of Tayy! we are thy guests this night,
and we are lank with hunger." Then sleep overcame him, but
presently he awoke in affright and cried out, saying, "Help, O
Arabs! Look to my beast!" So they came to him, and finding his
she-camel struggling and struck down, they stabbed her in the
throat and roasted her flesh and ate. Then they asked him what
had happened and he said, "When I closed my eyes, I saw in my
sleep Hatim of Tayy who came to me sword in hand and cried, 'Thou
comest to us and we have nothing by us.' Then he smote my she-
camel with his sword, and she had surely died even though ye had
not come to her and slaughtered her."[FN#131] Now when morning
dawned the King mounted the beast of one of his companions and,
taking the owner up behind him, set out and fared on till midday,
when they saw a man coming towards them, mounted on a camel and
leading another, and said to him, "Who art thou?" He answered, "I
am Adi,[FN#132] son of Hatim of Tayy; where is Zu 'l-Kura'a, Emir
of Himyar?" Replied they, "This is he;" and he said to the
prince, "Take this she-camel in place of thy beast which my
father slaughtered for thee." Asked Zu 'l Kura'a, "Who told thee
of this?" and Adi answered, "My father appeared to me in a dream
last night and said to me, 'Harkye, Adi; Zu 'l Kura'a King of
Himyar, sought the guest-rite of me and I, having naught to give
him, slaughtered his she-camel, that he might eat: so do thou
carry him a she-camel to ride, for I have nothing.'" And Zu
'l-Kura'a took her, marvelling at the generosity of Hatim of Tayy
alive and dead. And amongst instances of generosity is the




            TALE OF MA'AN THE SON OF ZAIDAH.[FN#133]



It is told of Ma'an bin Zaidah that, being out one day a-chasing
and a-hunting, he became athirst but his men had no water with
them; and while thus suffering behold, three damsels met him
bearing three skins of water;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

  When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-first Night,[FN#134]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that three girls
met him bearing three skins of water; so he begged drink of them,
and they gave him to drink. Then he sought of his men somewhat to
give the damsels but they had no money; so he presented to each
girl ten golden piled arrows from his quiver. Whereupon quoth one
of them to her friend, "Well-a-day! These fashions pertain to
none but Ma'an bin Zaidah! so let each one of us say somewhat of
verse in his praise." Then quoth the first,

"He heads his arrows with piles of gold, * And while shooting his
     foes is his bounty doled:
Affording the wounded a means of cure, * And a sheet for the
     bider beneath the mould!"

And quoth the second,

"A warrior showing such open hand, * His boons all friends and
     all foes enfold:
The piles of his arrows of or are made, * So that battle his
     bounty may not withhold!"

And quoth the third,

"From that liberal-hand on his foes he rains * Shafts aureate-
    headed and manifold:
Wherewith the hurt shall chirurgeon pay, * And for slain the
     shrouds round their corpses roll'd."[FN#135]

And there is also told a tale of




              MA'AN SON OF ZAIDAH AND THE BADAWI.



Now Ma'an bin Zaidah went forth one day to the chase with his
company, and they came upon a herd of gazelles; so they separated
in pursuit and Ma'an was left alone to chase one of them. When he
had made prize of it he alighted and slaughtered it; and as he
was thus engaged, he espied a person[FN#136] coming forth out of
the desert on an ass. So he remounted and riding up to the new-
comer, saluted him and asked him, "Whence  comest thou?" Quoth
he, "I come from the land of Kuza'ah, where we have had a two
years' dearth; but this year it was a season of plenty and I
sowed early cucumbers.[FN#137] They came up before their time, so
I gathered what seemed the best of them and set out to carry them
to the Emir Ma'an bin Zaidah, because of his well-known
beneficence and notorious munificence." Asked Ma'an, "How much
dost thou hope to get of him?"; and the Badawi answered, "A
thousand dinars." Quoth the Emir, "What if he say this is too
much?" Said the Badawi, "Then I will ask five hundred dinars."
"And if he say, too much?" "Then three hundred!" "And if he say
yet, too much?" "Then two hundred!" "And if he say yet, too
much?" "Then one hundred!" "And if he say yet, too much?" "Then,
fifty!" "And if he say yet, too much?" "Then thirty!" "And if he
say still, too much?" asked Ma'an bin Zaidah. Answered the
Badawi, "I will make my ass set his four feet in his Honour's
home[FN#138] and return to my people, disappointed and empty-
handed." So Ma'an laughed at him and urged his steed till he came
up with his suite and returned to his place, when he said to his
chamberlain, "An there come to thee a man with cucumbers and
riding on an ass admit him to me." Presently up came the Badawi
and was admitted to Ma'an's presence; but knew not the Emir for
the man he had met in the desert, by reason of the gravity and
majesty of his semblance and the multitude of his eunuchs and
attendants, for he was seated on his chair of state with his
officers ranged in lines before him and on either side. So he
saluted him and Ma'an said to him "What bringeth thee, O brother
of the Arabs?" Answered the Badawi, "I hoped in the Emir, and
have brought him curly cucumbers out of season." Asked Ma'an,
"And how much dost thou expect of us?" "A thousand dinars,"
answered the Badawi. "This is far too much," quoth Ma'an. Quoth
he, "Five hundred." "Too much!" "Then three hundred." "Too much!"
"Two hundred." "Too much!" "One hundred." "Too much!" "Fifty."
"Too much!" At last the Badawi came down to thirty dinars; but
Ma'an still replied, "Too much!" So the Badawi cried, "By Allah,
the man who met me in the desert brought me bad luck! But I will
not go lower than thirty dinars." The Emir laughed and said
nothing; whereupon the wild Arab knew that it was he whom he had
met and said, "O my lord, except thou bring the thirty dinars,
see ye, there is the ass tied ready at the door and here sits
Ma'an, his honour, at home." So Ma'an laughed, till he fell on
his back; and, calling his steward, said to him, "Give him a
thousand dinars and five hundred and three hundred and two
hundred and one hundred and fifty and thirty; and leave the ass
tied up where he is." So the Arab to his amazement, received two
thousand one hundred and eighty dinars, and Allah have mercy on
them both and on all generous men! And I have also heard, O
auspicious King, a tale of




                  THE CITY OF LABTAYT.[FN#139]



There was once a royal-city in the land of Roum, called the City
of Labtayt wherein stood a tower which was always shut. And
whenever a King died and another King of the Greeks took the
Kingship after him, he set on the tower a new and strong lock,
till there were four-and-twenty locks upon the gate, according to
the number of the Kings. After this time, there came to the
throne a man who was not of the old royal-house, and he had a
mind to open these locks, that he might see what was within the
tower. The grandees of his kingdom forbade him this and pressed
him to desist and reproved him and blamed him; but he persisted
saying, "Needs must this place be opened." Then they offered him
all that their hands possessed of monies and treasures and things
of price, if he would but refrain; still he would not be
baulked,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
grandees offered that King all their hands possessed of monies
and treasures if he would but refrain; still he would not be
baulked and said "There is no help for it but I open this tower."
So he pulled off the locks and entering, found within the tower
figures of Arabs on their horses and camels, habited in
turbands[FN#140] hanging down at the ends, with swords in
baldrick-belts thrown over their shoulders and bearing long
lances in their hands. He found there also a scroll which he
greedily took and read, and these words were written therein,
"Whenas this door is opened will conquer this country a raid of
the Arabs, after the likeness of the figures here depicted;
wherefore beware, and again beware of opening it." Now this city
was in Andalusia; and that very year Tarik ibn Ziyad conquered
it, during the Caliphate of Al-Walid son of Abd al-Malik[FN#141]
of the sons of Umayyah; and slew this King after the sorriest
fashion and sacked the city and made prisoners of the women and
boys therein and got great loot. Moreover, he found there immense
treasures; amongst the rest more than an hundred and seventy
crowns of pearls and jacinths and other gems of price; and he
found a saloon, wherein horsemen might throw the spears, full of
vessels of gold and silver, such as no description can comprise.
Moreover, he found there the table of food for the Prophet of
Allah, Solomon, son of David (peace with both of them!), which is
extant even now in a city of the Greeks, it is told that it was
of grass-green emerald with vessels of gold and platters of
jasper. Likewise he found the Psalms written in the old
Ionian[FN#142] characters on leaves of gold bezel'd with jewels;
together with a book setting forth the properties of stones and
herbs and minerals, as well as the use of characts and talismans
and the canons of the art of alchymy; and he found a third volume
which treated of the art of cutting and setting rubies and other
precious stones and of the preparation of poisons and theriacks.
There found he also a mappa mundi figuring the earth and the seas
and the different cities and countries and villages of the world;
and he found a vast saloon full of hermetic powder, one drachm of
which elixir would turn a thousand drachms of silver into fine
gold; likewise a marvellous mirror, great and round, of mixed
metals, which had been made for Solomon, son of David (on the
twain be peace!) wherein whoso looked might see the counterfeit
presentment of the seven climates of the world; and he beheld a
chamber full of Brahmini[FN#143] jacinths for which no words can
suffice. So he despatched all these things to Walid bin Abd
al-Malik, and the Arabs spread all over the cities of Andalusia
which is one of the finest of lands. This is the end of the story
of the City of Labtayt. And a tale is also told of




             THE CALIPH HISHAM AND THE ARAB YOUTH.



The Caliph Hisham bin Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, was hunting one
day, when he sighted an antelope and pursued it with his dogs. As
he was following the quarry, he saw an Arab youth pasturing sheep
and said to him, "Ho boy, up and after yonder antelope, for it
escapeth me!" The youth raised his head to him and replied, "O
ignorant of what to the deserving is due, thou lookest on me with
disdain and speakest to me with contempt; thy speaking is that of
a tyrant true and thy doing what an ass would do." Quoth Hisham,
"Woe to thee, dost thou not know me?" Rejoined the youth, "Verily
thine unmannerliness hath made thee known to me, in that thou
spakest to me, without beginning by the salutation."[FN#144]
Repeated the Caliph, "Fie upon thee! I am Hisham bin Abd
al-Malik." "May Allah not favour thy dwelling-place," replied the
Arab, "nor guard thine abiding place! How many are thy words and
how few thy generous deeds!" Hardly had he ended speaking, when
up came the troop from all sides and surrounded him as the white
encircleth the black of the eye, all and each saying, "Peace be
with thee, O Commander of the Faithful!" Quoth Hisham, "Cut short
this talk and seize me yonder boy." So they laid hands on him;
and when he saw the multitude of Chamberlains and Wazirs and
Lords of State, he was in nowise concerned and questioned not of
them, but let his chin drop on his breast and looked where his
feet fell, till they brought him to the Caliph[FN#145] when he
stood before him, with head bowed groundwards and saluted him not
and spoke him not. So one of the eunuchs said to him, "O dog of
the Arabs, what hindereth thy saluting the Commander of the
Faithful?" The youth turned to him angrily and replied, "O
packsaddle of an ass, it was the length of the way that hindered
me from this and the steepness of the steps and the profuseness
of my sweat." Then said Hisham (and indeed he was exceeding
wroth), "O boy, verily thy days are come to their latest hour;
thy hope is gone from thee and thy life is past out of thee." He
answered, "By Allah, O Hisham, verily an my life-term be
prolonged and Fate ordain not its cutting short, thy words irk me
not, be they long or short." Then said the Chief Chamberlain to
him, "Doth it befit thy degree, O vilest of the Arabs, to bandy
words with the Commander of the Faithful?" He answered promptly,
"Mayest thou meet with adversity and may woe and wailing never
leave thee! Hast thou not heard the saying of Almighty Allah?,
'One day, every soul shall come to defend itself.'"[FN#146]
Hereupon Hisham rose, in great wrath, and said, "O headsman,
bring me the head of this lad; for indeed he exceedeth in talk,
such as passeth conception." So the sworder took him and, making
him kneel on the carpet of blood, drew his sword above him and
said to the Caliph, "O Commander of the Faithful, this thy slave
is misguided and is on the way to his grave; shall I smite off
his head and be quit of his blood?" "Yes," replied Hisham. He
repeated his question and the Caliph again answered in the
affirmative. Then he asked leave a third time; and the youth,
knowing that, if the Caliph assented yet once more, it would be
the signal of his death, laughed till his wisdom-teeth showed;
whereupon Hisham's wrath redoubled and he said to him, "O boy,
meseems thou art mad; seest thou not that thou art about to
depart the world? Why then dost thou laugh in mockery of
thyself?" He replied, "O Commander of the Faithful, if a larger
life-term befell me, none can hurt me, great or small; but I have
bethought me of some couplets, which do thou hear, for my death
cannot escape thee." Quoth Hisham, "Say on and be brief;" so the
Arab repeated these couplets,

"It happed one day a hawk pounced on a bird, * A wildling sparrow
     driven by destiny;
And held in pounces spake the sparrow thus, * E'en as the hawk
     rose ready home to hie:--
'Scant flesh have I to fill the maw of thee * And for thy lordly
     food poor morsel I.
Then smiled the hawk in flattered vanity * And pride, so set the
     sparrow free to fly.

At this Hisham smiled and said, "By the truth of my kinship to
the Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless and keep!), had he spoken
this speech at first and asked for aught except the Caliphase,
verily I would have given it to him. Stuff his mouth with
jewels,[FN#147] O eunuch and entreat him courteously;" so they
did as he bade them and the Arab went his way. And amongst
pleasant tales is that of




              IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI AND THE BARBER-
                            SURGEON.



They relate that Ibrahim, son of al-Mahdi,[FN#148] brother of
Harun al-Rashid, when the Caliphate devolved to Al-Maamun, the
son of his brother Harun, refused to acknowledge his nephew and
betook himself to Rayy[FN#149]; where he claimed the throne and
abode thus a year and eleven months and twelve days. Meanwhile
his nephew, Al-Maamun, awaited his return to allegiance and his
accepting a dependent position till, at last, despairing of this,
he mounted with his horsemen and footmen and repaired to Rayy in
quest of him. Now when the news came to Ibrahim, he found nothing
for it but to flee to Baghdad and hide there, fearing for his
life; and Maamun set a price of a hundred thousand gold pieces
upon his head, to be paid to whoso might betray him. (Quoth
Ibrahim) "When I heard of this price I feared for my head"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim
continued, "Now when I heard of this price I feared for my head
and knew not what to do: so I went forth of my house in disguise
at mid-day, knowing not whither I should go. Presently I entered
a broad street which was no thoroughfare and said in my mind,
'Verily, we are Allah's and unto Him we are returning! I have
exposed my life to destruction. If I retrace my steps, I shall
arouse suspicion.' Then, being still in disguise I espied, at the
upper end of the street, a negro-slave standing at his door; so I
went up to him and said to him, 'Hast thou a place where I may
abide for an hour of the day?' 'Yes,' answered he, and opening
the door admitted me into a decent house, furnished with carpets
and mats and cushions of leather. Then he shut the door on me and
went away; and I misdoubted me he had heard of the reward offered
for me, and said to myself, 'He hath gone to inform against me.'
But, as I sat pondering my case and boiling like cauldron over
fire, behold, my host came back, accompanied by a porter loaded
with bread and meat and new cooking-pots and gear and a new jar
and new gugglets and other needfuls. He made the porter set them
down and, dismissing him, said to me, 'I offer my life for thy
ransom! I am a barber-surgeon, and I know it would disgust thee
to eat with me' because of the way in which I get my
livelihood;[FN#150] so do thou shift for thyself and do what thou
please with these things whereon no hand hath fallen.' (Quoth
Ibrahim), Now I was in sore need of food so I cooked me a pot of
meat whose like I remember not ever to have eaten; and, when I
had satisfied my want, he said to me, 'O my lord, Allah make me
thy ransom! Art thou for wine?; for indeed it gladdeneth the soul
and doeth away care.' 'I have no dislike to it,' replied I, being
desirous of the barber's company; so he brought me new flagons of
glass which no hand had touched and a jar of excellent wine, and
said to me, 'Strain for thyself, to thy liking;' whereupon I
cleared the wine and mixed me a most delectable draught. Then he
brought me a new cup and fruits and flowers in new vessels of
earthenware; after which he said to me, 'Wilt thou give me leave
to sit apart and drink of my own wine by myself, of my joy in
thee and for thee?' 'Do so,' answered I. So I drank and he drank
till the wine began to take effect upon us, when the barber rose
and, going to a closet, took out a lute of polished wood and said
to me, 'O my lord, it is not for the like of me to ask the like
of thee to sing, but it behoveth thine exceeding generosity to
render my respect its due; so, if thou see fit to honour thy
slave, thine is the high decision.' Quoth I (and indeed I thought
not that he knew me), 'How knowest thou that I excel in song?' He
replied, 'Glory be to Allah, our lord is too well renowned for
that! Thou art my lord Ibrahim, son of Al-Mahdi, our Caliph of
yesterday, he on whose head Al-Maamun hath set a price of an
hundred thousand dinars to be paid to thy betrayer: but thou art
in safety with me.' (Quoth Ibrahim), When I heard him say this,
he was magnified in my eyes and his loyalty and noble nature were
certified to me; so I complied with his wish and took the lute
and tuned it, and sang. Then I bethought me of my severance from
my children and my family and I began to say,

'Belike Who Yusuf to his kin restored * And honoured him in goal,
     a captive wight,
May grant our prayer to reunite our lots, * For Allah, Lord of
     Worlds, hath all of might.'

When the barber heard this, exceeding joy took possession of him.
and he was of great good cheer; for it is said that when
Ibrahim's neighbours heard him only sing out, 'Ho, boy, saddle
the mule!' they were filled with delight. Then, being overborne
by mirth, he said to me, 'O my lord, wilt thou give me leave to
say what is come to my mind, albeit I am not of the folk of this
craft?' I answered, 'Do so; this is of thy great courtesy and
kindness.' So he took the lute and sang these verses,

'To our beloveds we moaned our length of night; * Quoth they,
     'How short the nights that us benight!'
'Tis for that sleep like hood enveils their eyes * Right soon,
     but from our eyes is fair of flight:
When night-falls, dread and drear to those who love, * We mourn;
     they joy to see departing light:
Had they but dree'd the weird, the bitter dole * We dree, their
     beds like ours had bred them blight.'

(Quoth Ibrahim), So I said to him, 'By Allah, thou hast shown me
a kindness, O my friend, and hast done away from me the pangs of
sorrow. Let me hear more trifles of thy fashion.' So he sang
these couplets,

'When man keeps honour bright without a stain, * Pair sits
     whatever robe to robe he's fain!
She jeered at me because so few we are; * Quoth I:--'There's ever
     dearth of noble men!'
Naught irks us we are few, while neighbour tribes * Count many;
     neighbours oft are base-born strain:
We are a clan which holds not Death reproach, * Which A'mir and
     Samul[FN#151] hold illest bane:
Leads us our love of death to fated end; * They hate that ending
     and delay would gain:
We to our neighbours' speech aye give the lie, * But when we
     speak none dare give lie again.'

(Quoth Ibrahim), When I heard these lines, I was filled with huge
delight and marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then I slept and
awoke not till past night-fall, when I washed my face, with a
mind full of the high worth of this barber-surgeon and his
passing courtesy; after which I wakened him and, taking out a
purse I had by me containing a number of gold pieces, threw it to
him, saying, 'I commend thee to Allah, for I am about to go forth
from thee, and pray thee to expend what is in this purse on thine
requirements; and thou shalt have an abounding reward of me, when
I am quit of my fear.' (Quoth Ibrahim), But he resumed the bag to
me, saying, 'O my lord, paupers like myself are of no value in
thine eyes; but how, with due respect to my own generosity, can I
take a price for the boon which fortune hath vouchsafed me of thy
favour and thy visit to my poor abode? Nay, if thou repeat thy
words and throw the purse to me again I will slay myself.' So I
put in my sleeve[FN#152] the purse whose weight was irksome to
me."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

     When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim son
of Al-Mahdi continued, "So I put in my sleeve the purse whose
weight was irksome to me; and turned to depart, but when I came
to the house door he said, 'O my lord, of a truth this is a safer
hiding-place for thee than any other, and thy keep is no burden
to me; so do thou abide with me, till Allah be pleased grant thee
relief.' Accordingly, I turned back, saying, 'On condition that
thou spend of the money in this purse.' He made me think that he
consented to this arrangement, and I abode with him some days in
the utmost comfort; but, perceiving that he spent none of the
contents of the purse, I revolted at the idea of abiding at his
charge and thought it shame to be a burthen on him; so I left the
house disguised in women's apparel, donning short yellow walking-
boots[FN#153] and veil. Now as soon as I found myself in the
street, I was seized with excessive fear, and going to pass the
bridge behold, I came to a place sprinkled with water,[FN#154]
where a trooper, who been in my service, looked at me and knowing
me, cried out, saying, 'This is he whom Al-Maamun wanteth.' Then
he laid hold of me but the love of sweet life lent me strength
and I gave him and his horse a push which threw them down in that
slippery place, so that he became an example to those who will
take example; and the folk hastened to him. Meanwhile, I hurried
my pace over the bridge and entered a main street, where I saw
the door of a house open and a woman standing upon the threshold.
So I said to her, 'O my lady, have pity on me and save my life;
for I am a man in fear.' Quoth she, 'Enter and welcome;' and
carried me into an upper dining-room, where she spread me a bed
and brought me food, saying 'Calm thy fear, for not a soul shall
know of thee.' As she spoke lo! there came a loud knocking at the
door; so she went and opened, and suddenly, my friend, whom I had
thrown down on the bridge, appeared with his head bound up, the
blood running down upon his clothes and without his horse. She
asked, 'O so and so, what accident hath befallen thee?'; and he
answered, 'I made prize of the young man whom the Caliph seeketh
and he escaped from me;' whereupon he told her the whole story.
So she brought out tinder[FN#155] and, putting it into a piece of
rag bandaged his head; after which she spread him a bed and he
lay sick. Then she came up to me and said, 'Methinks thou art the
man in question?' 'Even so,' answered I, and she said, 'Fear not:
no harm shall befall thee,' and redoubled in kindness to me. So I
tarried with her three days, at the end of which time she said to
me, 'I am in fear for thee, lest yonder man happen upon thee and
betray thee to what thou dreadest; so save thyself by flight.' I
besought her to let me stay till nightfall, and she said, 'There
is no harm in that.' So, when the night came, I put on my woman's
gear and betook me to the house of a freed-woman who had once
been our slave. When she saw me she wept and made a show of
affliction and praised Almighty Allah for my safety. Then she
went forth, as if she would go to market intent on hospitable
thoughts, and I fancied all was right; but, ere long, suddenly I
espied Ibrahim al-Mosili[FN#156] for the house amongst his
troopers and servants, and led by a woman on foot; and looking
narrowly at her behold, she was the freed-woman, the mistress of
the house, wherein I had taken refuge. So she delivered me into
their hands, and I saw death face to face. They carried me, in my
woman's attire, to Al-Maamun who called a general-council and had
me brought before him. When I entered I saluted him by the title
of Caliph, saying, 'Peace be on thee, O Commander of the
Faithful!' and he replied, 'Allah give thee neither peace nor
long life.' I rejoined, 'According to thy good pleasure, O
Commander of the Faithful!; it is for the claimant of blood-
revenge[FN#157] to decree punishment or pardon; but mercy is
nigher to piety; and Allah hath set thy pardon above all other
pardon, even as He made my sin to excel all other sin. So, if
thou punish, it is of thine equity, and if thou pardon, it is of
thy bounty.' And I repeated these couplets,

'My sin to thee is great,   *  But greater thy degree:
So take revenge, or else *  Remit in clemency:
An I in deeds have not*  Been generous, generous be!

(Quoth Ibrahim), At this Al-Maamun raised his head to me and I
hastened to add these two couplets,

'I've sinned enormous sin, *  But pardon in thee lies:
If pardon thou, 'tis grace;  * Justice an thou chastise!'

Then Al-Maamun bowed his head and repeated,

'I am (when friend would raise a rage that mote * Make spittle
     choke me, sticking in my throat)
His pardoner, and pardon his offense, * Fearing lest I should
     live a friend without.'

(Quoth Ibrahim), Now when I heard these words I scented mercy,
knowing his disposition to clemency.[FN#158] Then he turned to
his son Al Abbas and his brother Abu Ishak and all his chief
officers there present and said to them, 'What deem ye of his
case?' They all counselled him to do me dead, but they differed
as to the manner of my death. Then said he to his Wazir Ahmad bin
al-Khalid, 'And what sayest thou, O Ahmad?' He answered, 'O
Commander of the Faithful, an thou slay him, we find the like of
thee who hath slain the like of him; but an thou pardon him, we
find not the like of thee that hath pardoned the like of him.'"--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Al
Maamun, Prince of the Faithful, heard the words of Ahmad bin
al-Khalid, he bowed his head and began repeating,

"My tribe have slain that brother mine, Umaym, * Yet would shoot
     back what shafts at them I aim:
If I deal-pardon, noble pardon 'tis; * And if I shoot, my bones
     'twill only maim."[FN#159]

And he also recited,

"Be mild to brother mingling * What is wrong with what is right:

Kindness to him continue * Whether good or graceless wight:
Abstain from all reproaching,   * An he joy or vex thy sprite:
Seest not that what thou lovest * And what hatest go unite?
That joys of longer life-tide  * Ever fade with hair turned
     white?
That thorns on branches growing * For the plucks fruit catch thy
     sight?
Who never hath done evil,* Doing good for sole delight?
When tried the sons of worldli-* ness they mostly work upright."

Quoth Ibrahim, "Now when I heard these couplets, I withdrew my
woman's veil from my head and cried out, with my loudest voice,
'Allah is Most Great! By Allah, the Commander of the Faithful
pardoneth me!' Quoth he, 'No harm shall come to thee, O uncle;'
and I rejoined, 'O Commander of the Faithful, my sin is too sore
for me to excuse it and thy mercy is too much for me to speak
thanks for it.' And I chanted these couplets to a lively motive,

'Who made all graces all collected He * In Adam's loins, our
     Seventh Imam, for thee,[FN#160]
Thou hast the hearts of men with reverence filled, * Enguarding
     all with heart-humility
Rebelled I never by delusion whelmed * For object other than thy
     clemency ;[FN#161]
And thou hast pardoned me whose like was ne'er * Pardoned before,
     though no man pled my plea:
Hast pitied little ones like Kata's[FN#162] young, * And mother's
     yearning heart a son to see.'

Quoth Maamun, 'I say, following our lord Joseph (on whom and on
our Prophet be blessing and peace!) let there be no reproach cast
on you this day. Allah forgiveth you; for He is the most merciful
of those who show mercy.[FN#163] Indeed I pardon thee, and
restore to thee thy goods and lands, O uncle, and no harm shall
befall thee.' So I offered up devout prayers for him and repeated
these couplets,

'Thou hast restored my wealth sans greed, and ere * So didst,
     thou deignedest my blood to spare:
Then if I shed my blood and wealth, to gain * Thy grace, till
     even shoon from foot I tear,
Twere but repaying what thou lentest me, * And what unloaned no
     man to blame would care:
Were I ungrateful for thy lavish boons, * Baser than thou'rt
     beneficent I were!'

Then Al-Maamun showed me honour and favour and said to me, 'O
uncle, Abu Ishak and Al-Abbas counselled me to put thee to
death.' So I answered, 'And they both counselled thee right, O
Commander of the Faithful, but thou hast done after thine own
nature and hast put away what I feared with what I hoped.'
Rejoined Al Maamun, 'O uncle, thou didst extinguish my rancour
with the modesty of thine excuse, and I have pardoned thee
without making thee drink the bitterness of obligation to
intercessors.' Then he prostrated himself in prayer a long while,
after which he raised his head and said to me, 'O uncle, knowest
thou why I prostrated myself?' Answered I, 'Haply thou didst this
in thanksgiving to Allah, for that He hath given thee the mastery
over thine enemy.' He replied, 'Such was not my design, but
rather to thank Allah for having inspired me to pardon thee and
for having cleared my mind towards thee. Now tell me thy tale.'
So I told him all that had befallen me with the barber, the
trooper and his wife and with my freed-woman who had betrayed me.
So he summoned the freed-woman, who was in her house, expecting
the reward to be sent to her, and when she came before him he
said to her, 'What moved thee to deal thus with thy lord?' Quoth
she, 'Lust of money.' Asked the Caliph 'Hast thou a child or a
husband?'; and she answered 'No;' whereupon he bade them give her
an hundred stripes with a whip and imprisoned her for life. Then
he sent for the trooper and his wife and the barber-surgeon and
asked the soldier what had moved him to do thus. 'Lust of money,'
quoth he; whereupon quoth the Caliph, 'It befitteth thee to be a
barber-cupper,'[FN#164] and committed him to one whom he charged
to place him in a barber-cupper's shop, where he might learn the
craft. But he showed honour to the trooper's wife and lodged her
in his palace, saying, 'This is a woman of sound sense and fit
for matters of moment.' Then said he to the barber-cupper,
'Verily, thou hast shown worth and generosity which call for
extraordinary honour.' So he commanded the trooper's house and
all that was therein to be given him and bestowed on him a dress
of honour and in addition fifteen thousand dinars to be paid
annually. And men tell the following tale concerning




               THE CITY OF MANY COLUMNED IRAM AND
              ABDULLAH SON OF ABI KILABAH.[FN#165]



It is related that Abdullah bin Abi Kilabah went forth in quest
of a she-camel which had strayed from him; and, as he was
wandering in the deserts of Al-Yaman and the district of
Saba,[FN#166] behold, he came upon a great city girt by a vast
castle around which were palaces and pavilions that rose high
into middle air. He made for the place thinking to find there
folk of whom he might ask concerning his she-camel; but, when he
reached it, he found it desolate, without a living soul in it. So
(quoth he) "I alighted and, hobbling my dromedary,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah
bin Abi Kilabah continued, "I dismounted and hobbling my
dromedary, and composing my mind, entered into the city. Now when
I came to the castle, I found it had two vast gates (never in the
world was seen their like for size height) inlaid with all manner
of jewels and jacinths, white and red, yellow and green.
Beholding this I marvelled with great marvel and thought the case
mighty wondrous; then entering the citadel in a flutter of fear
and dazed with surprise and affright, I found it long and wide,
about equalling Al-Medinah[FN#167] in point of size; and therein
were lofty palaces laid out in pavilions all built of gold and
silver and inlaid with many-coloured jewels and jacinths and
chrysolites and pearls. And the door-leaves in the pavilions were
like those of the castle for beauty; and their floors were strewn
with great pearls and balls, no smaller than hazel nuts, of musk
and ambergris and saffron. Now when I came within the heart of
the city and saw therein no created beings of the Sons of Adam I
was near swooning and dying for fear. Moreover, I looked down
from the great roofs of the pavilion-chambers and their balconies
and saw rivers running under them; and in the main streets were
fruit-laden trees and tall palms; and the manner of their
building was one brick of gold and one of silver. So I said in
myself, 'Doubtless this is the Paradise promised for the world to
come.' Then I loaded me with the jewels of its gravel and the
musk of its dust as much as I could carry and returned to my own
country, where I told the folk what I had seen. After a time the
news reached Mu'awiyah, son of Abu Sufyan, who was then Caliph in
Al-Hijaz; so he wrote to his lieutenant in San'a of Al-Yaman to
send for the teller of the story and question him of the truth of
the case. Accordingly the lieutenant summoned me and questioned
me of my adventure and of all appertaining to it; and I told him
what I had seen, whereupon he despatched me to Mu'awiyah, before
whom I repeated the story of the strange sights; but he would not
credit it. So I brought out to him some of the pearls and balls
of musk and ambergris and saffron, in which latter there was
still some sweet savour; but the pearls were grown yellow and had
lost pearly colour."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah
son of Abu Kilabah continued, "But the pearls were grown yellow
and had lost pearly colour. Now Mu'awiyah wondered at this and,
sending for Ka'ab al-Ahbar[FN#168] said to him, 'O Ka'ab, I have
sent for thee to ascertain the truth of a certain matter and hope
that thou wilt be able to certify me thereof.' Asked Ka'ab, 'What
is it, O Commander of the Faithful?'; and Mu'awiyah answered,
'Wottest thou of any city founded by man which is builded of gold
and silver, the pillars whereof are of chrysolite and rubies and
its gravel pearls and balls of musk and ambergris and saffron?'
He replied, 'Yes, O Commander of the Faithful, this is 'Iram with
pillars decked and dight, the like of which was never made in the
lands,'[FN#169] and the builder was Shaddad son of Ad the
Greater.' Quoth the Caliph, 'Tell us something of its history,'
and Ka'ab said, 'Ad the Greater[FN#170] had two sons, Shadid and
Shaddad who, when their father died, ruled conjointly in his
stead, and there was no King of the Kings of the earth but was
subject to them. After awhile Shadid died and his brother Shaddad
reigned over the earth alone. Now he was fond of reading in
antique books; and, happening upon the description of the world
to come and of Paradise, with its pavilions and galleries and
trees and fruits and so forth, his soul moved him to build the
like thereof in this world, after the fashion aforesaid. Now
under his hand were an hundred thousand Kings, each ruling over
an hundred thousand chiefs, commanding each an hundred thousand
warriors; so he called these all before him and said to them, 'I
find in ancient books and annals a description of Paradise, as it
is to be in the next world, and I desire to build me its like in
this world. Go ye forth therefore to the goodliest tract on earth
and the most spacious and build me there a city of gold and
silver, whose gravel shall be chrysolite and rubies and pearls;
and for support of its vaults make pillars of jasper. Fill it
with palaces, whereon ye shall set galleries and balconies and
plant its lanes and thoroughfares with all manner trees bearing
yellow-ripe fruits and make rivers to run through it in channels
of gold and silver.' Whereat said one and all, 'How are we able
to do this thing thou hast commanded, and whence shall we get the
chrysolites and rubies and pearls whereof thou speakest?' Quoth
he, 'What! weet ye not that the Kings of the world are subject to
me and under my hand and that none therein dare gainsay my word?'
Answered they, 'Yes, we know that.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lieges
answered, "Yes, we know that;" whereupon the King rejoined, "Fare
ye then to the mines of chrysolites and rubies and pearls and
gold and silver and collect their produce and gather together all
of value that is in the world and spare no pains and leave
naught; and take also for me such of these things as be in men's
hands and let nothing escape you: be diligent and beware of
disobedience." And thereupon he wrote letters to all the Kings of
the world and bade them gather together whatso of these things
was in their subjects' hands, and get them to the mines of
precious stones and metals, and bring forth all that was therein,
even from the abysses of the seas. This they accomplished in the
space of 20 years, for the number of rulers then reigning over
the earth was three hundred and sixty Kings, and Shaddad
presently assembled from all lands and countries architects and
engineers and men of art and labourers and handicraftsmen, who
dispersed over the world and explored all the wastes and words
and tracts and holds. At last they came to an uninhabited spot, a
vast and fair open plain clear of sand-hills and mountains, with
founts flushing and rivers rushing, and they said, "This is the
manner of place the King commanded us to seek and ordered us to
find." So they busied themselves in building the city even as
bade them Shaddad, King of the whole earth in its length and
breadth; leading the fountains in channels and laying the
foundations after the prescribed fashion. Moreover, all the Kings
of earth's several-reigns sent thither jewels and precious stones
and pearls large and small and carnelian and refined gold and
virgin silver upon camels by land, and in great ships over the
waters, and there came to the builders' hands of all these
materials so great a quantity as may neither be told nor counted
nor conceived. So they laboured at the work three hundred years;
and, when they had brought it to end, they went to King Shaddad
and acquainted him therewith. Then said he, "Depart and make
thereon an impregnable castle, rising and towering high in air,
and build around it a thousand pavilions, each upon a thousand
columns of chrysolite and ruby and vaulted with gold, that in
each pavilion a Wazir may dwell." So they returned forthwith and
did this in other twenty years; after which they again presented
themselves before King Shaddad and informed him of the
accomplishment of his will. Then he commanded his Wazirs, who
were a thousand in number, and his Chief Officers and such of his
troops and others as he put trust in, to prepare for departure
and removal to Many-columned Iram, in the suite and at the
stirrup of Shaddad, son of Ad, King of the World; and he bade
also such as he would of his women and his Harim and of his
handmaids and eunuchs make them ready for the journey. They spent
twenty years in preparing for departure, at the end of which time
Shaddad set out with his host.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shaddad bin
Ad fared forth, he and his host, rejoicing in the attainment of
his desire till there remained but one day's journey between him
and Iram of the Pillars. Then Allah sent down on him and on the
stubborn unbelievers with him a mighty rushing sound from the
Heavens of His power, which destroyed them all with its vehement
clamour, and neither Shaddad nor any of his company set eyes on
the city.[FN#171] Moreover, Allah blotted out the road which led
to the city, and it stands in its stead unchanged until the
Resurrection Day and the Hour of Judgement." So Mu'awiyah
wondered greatly at Ka'ab al-Ahbar's story and said to him, "Hath
any mortal ever made his way to that city?" He replied, "Yes; one
of the companions of Mohammed (on whom be blessing and peace!)
reached it, doubtless and forsure after the same fashion as this
man here seated." "And (quoth Al-Sha'abi[FN#172]) it is related,
on the authority of learned men of Himyar in Al-Yaman that
Shaddad, when destroyed with all his host by the sound, was
succeeded in his Kingship by his son Shaddad the Less, whom he
left vice-regent in Hazramaut[FN#173] and Saba, when he and his
marched upon Many-columned Iram. Now as soon as he heard of his
father's death on the road, he caused his body to be brought back
from the desert to Hazramaut and bade them hew him out a tomb in
a cave, where he laid the body on a throne of gold and threw over
the corpse threescore and ten robes of cloth of gold, purfled
with precious stones. Lastly at his sire's head he set up a
tablet of gold whereon were graven these verses,

     'Take warning O proud,    * And in length o' life vain!
     I'm Shaddad son of Ad,    * Of the forts castellain;
     Lord of pillars and power,* Lord of tried might and main,
     Whom all earth-sons obeyed* For my mischief and bane
     And who held East and West* In mine awfullest reign.
     He preached me salvation  * Whom God did assain,[FN#174]
     But we crossed him and asked * 'Can no refuge be ta'en?'
     When a Cry on us cried    * From th' horizon plain,
     And we fell on the field  * Like the harvested grain,
     And the Fixt Day await    * We, in earth's bosom lain!'"

Al-Sa'alibi also relateth, "It chanced that two men once entered
this cave and found steps at its upper end; so they descended and
came to an underground chamber, an hundred cubits long by forty
wide and an hundred high. In the midst stood a throne of gold,
whereon lay a man of huge bulk, filling the whole length and
breadth of the throne. He was covered with jewels and raiment
gold-and-silver wrought, and at his head was a tablet of gold
bearing an inscription. So they took the tablet and carried it
off, together with as many bars of gold and silver and so forth
as they could bear away." And men also relate the tale 