ined to go to the Hammam to day; so sit
thou on this couch and rise not from thy place, till I return to
thee.' 'I hear and I obey,' answered I, and she made me swear to
this; after which she took her women and went off to the bath.
But by Allah, O my brothers, she had not reached the head of the
street ere the door opened and in came an old woman, who said to
me, 'O my lord Mohammed, the Lady Zubaydah biddeth thee to her,
for she hath heard of thy fine manners and accomplishments and
skill in singing.' I answered, 'By Allah, I will not rise from my
place till the Lady Dunya come back.' Rejoined the old woman, 'O
my lord, do not anger the Lady Zubaydah with thee and vex her so
as to make her thy foe: nay, rise up and speak with her and
return to thy place.' So I rose at once and followed her into the
presence of the Lady Zubaydah and, when I entered her presence
she said to me, 'O light of the eye, art thou the Lady Dunya's
beloved?' 'I am thy Mameluke, thy chattel,' replied I. Quoth she,
'Sooth spake he who reported thee possessed of beauty and grace
and good breeding and every fine quality; indeed, thou surpassest
all praise and all report. But now sing to me, that I may hear
thee.' Quoth I, 'Hearkening and obedience;' so she brought me a
lute, and I sang to it these couplets,

'The hapless lover's heart is of his wooing weary grown, * And
     hand of sickness wasted him till naught but skin and bone
Who should be amid the riders which the haltered camels urge, *
     But that same lover whose beloved cloth in the litters wone:
To Allah's charge I leave that moon-like Beauty in your tents *
     Whom my heart loves, albe my glance on her may ne'er be
     thrown.
Now she is fain; then she is fierce: how sweet her coyness shows;
     * Yea sweet whatever cloth or saith to lover loved one!'

When I had finished my song she said to me, 'Allah assain thy
body and thy voice! Verily, thou art perfect in beauty and good
breeding and singing. But now rise and return to thy place, ere
the Lady Dunya come back, lest she find thee not and be wroth
with thee.' Then I kissed the ground before her and the old woman
forewent me till I reached the door whence I came. So I entered
and, going up to the couch, found that my wife had come back from
the bath and was lying asleep there. Seeing this I sat down at
her feet and rubbed them; whereupon she opened her eyes and
seeing me, drew up both her feet and gave me a kick that threw me
off the couch,[FN#206] saying, 'O traitor, thou hast been false
to thine oath and hast perjured thyself. Thou swarest to me that
thou wouldst not rise from thy place; yet didst thou break thy
promise and go to the Lady Zubaydah. By Allah, but that I fear
public scandal, I would pull down her palace over her head!' Then
said she to her black slave, 'O Sawab, arise and strike off this
lying traitor's head, for we have no further need of him.' So the
slave came up to me and, tearing a strip from his skirt, bandaged
with it my eyes[FN#207] and would have struck off my head;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Mohammed
the Jeweller continued: "So the slave came up to me and, tearing
a strip from his skirt, bandaged with it my eyes and would have
struck off my head, but all her women, great and small, rose and
came up to her and said to her, 'O our lady, this is not the
first who hath erred: indeed, he knew not thy humour and hath
done thee no offence deserving death.' Replied she, 'By Allah, I
must needs set my mark on him.' And she bade them bash me; so
they beat me on my ribs and the marks ye saw are the scars of
that fustigation. Then she ordered them to cast me out, and they
carried me to a distance from the house and threw me down like a
log. After a time I rose and dragged myself little by little to
my own place, where I sent for a surgeon and showed him my hurts;
and he comforted me and did his best to cure me. As soon as I was
recovered I went to the Hammam and, as my pains and sickness had
left me, I repaired to my shop and took and sold all that was
therein. With the proceeds, I bought me four hundred white
slaves, such as no King ever got together, and caused two hundred
of them to ride out with me every day. Then I made me yonder
barge whereon I spent five thousand gold pieces; and styled
myself Caliph and appointed each of my servants to the charge of
some one of the Caliph's officers and clad him in official habit.
Moreover, I made proclamation, 'Whoso goeth a-pleasuring on the
Tigris by night, I will strike off his head, without ruth or
delay;' and on such wise have I done this whole year past, during
which time I have heard no news of the lady neither happened upon
any trace of her." Then wept he copiously and repeated these
couplets,

"By Allah! while the days endure ne'er shall forget her I, * Nor
     draw to any nigh save those who draw her to me nigh
Like to the fullest moon her form and favour show to me, * Laud
     to her All-creating Lord, laud to the Lord on high,
She left me full of mourning, sleepless, sick with pine and pain
     * And ceaseth not my heart to yearn her mystery[FN#208] to
     espy."

Now when Harun al-Rashid heard the young man's story and knew the
passion and transport and love lowe that afflicted him, he was
moved to compassion and wonder and said, "Glory be to Allah, who
hath appointed to every effect a cause!" Then they craved the
young man's permission to depart; which being granted, they took
leave of him, the Caliph purposing to do him justice meet, and
him with the utmost munificence entreat; and they returned to the
palace of the Caliphate, where they changed clothes for others
befitting their state and sat down, whilst Masrur the Sworder of
High Justice stood before them. After awhile, quoth the Caliph to
Ja'afar, "O Wazir, bring me the young man'--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
Caliph to his Minister, "Bring me the young man with whom we were
last night." "I hear and obey," answered Ja'afar and, going to
the youth, saluted him, saying, "Obey the summons of the
Commander of the Faithful, the Caliph Harun al-Rashid." So he
returned with him to the palace, in great anxiety by reason of
the summons; and, going in to the King, kissed ground before him;
and offered up a prayer for the endurance of his glory and
prosperity, for the accomplishment of his desires, for the
continuance of his beneficence and for the cessation of evil and
punishment; ordering his speech as best he might and ending by
saying, "Peace be on thee, O Prince of True Believers and
Protector of the folk of the Faith!" Then he repeated these two
couplets,

"Kiss thou his fingers which no fingers are; * Keys of our daily
     bread those fingers ken:
And praise his actions which no actions are, * But precious
     necklaces round necks of men."

So the Caliph smiled in his face and returned his salute, looking
on him with the eye of favour; then he bade him draw near and sit
down before him and said to him, "O Mohammed Ali, I wish thee to
tell me what befel thee last night, for it was strange and
passing strange." Quoth the youth, "Pardon, O Commander of the
Faithful, give me the kerchief of immunity, that my dread may be
appeased and my heart eased." Replied the Caliph, "I promise thee
safety from fear and woes." So the young man told him his story
from first to last, whereby the Caliph knew him to be a lover and
severed from his beloved and said to him, "Desirest thou that I
restore her to thee?" "This were of the bounty of the Commander
of the Faithful," answered the youth and repeated these two
couplets.

"Ne'er cease thy gate be Ka'abah to mankind; * Long may its
     threshold dust man's brow beseem!
That o'er all countries it may be proclaimed, * This is the Place
     and thou art Ibrahim."[FN#209]

Thereupon the Caliph turned to his Minister and said to him, "O
Ja'afar, bring me thy sister, the Lady Dunya, daughter of the
Wazir Yahya bin Khalid!" "I hear and I obey," answered he and
fetched her without let or delay. Now when she stood before the
Caliph he said to her, "Doss thou know who this is?"; and she
replied, "O Commander of the Faithful, how should women have
knowledge of men?"[FN#210] So the Caliph smiled and said, "O
Dunya this is thy beloved, Mohammed bin Ali the Jeweller. We are
acquainted with his case, for we have heard the whole story from
beginning to end, and have apprehended its inward and its
outward; and it is no more hidden from me, for all it was kept in
secrecy." Replied she, "O Commander of the Faithful, this was
written in the Book of Destiny; I crave the forgiveness of
Almighty Allah for the wrong I have wrought, and pray thee to
pardon me of thy favour." At this the Caliph laughed and,
summoning the Kazi and witnesses, renewed the marriage-contract
between the Lady Dunya and her husband, Mohammed Ali son of the
Jeweller, whereby there betided them, both her and him the utmost
felicity, and to their enviers mortification and misery.
Moreover, he made Mohammed Ali one of his boon-companions, and
they abode in joy and cheer and gladness, till there came to them
the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies. And men
also relate the pleasant tale of




                        ALI THE PERSIAN.



It is said that the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, being restless one
night, sent for his Wazir and said to him, "O Ja'afar, I am sore
wakeful and heavy-hearted this night, and I desire of thee what
may solace my spirit and cause my breast to broaden with amuse
meet." Quoth Ja'afar, "O Commander of the Faithful, I have a
friend, by name Ali the Persian, who hath store of tales and plea
sent stories, such as lighten the heart and make care depart."
Quoth the Caliph, "Fetch him to me," and quoth Ja'afar,
"Hearkening and obedience;" and, going out from before him, sent
to seek Ali the Persian and when he came said to him, "Answer the
summons of the Commander of the Faithful." "To hear is to obey,"
answered Ali;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian
replied, "To hear is to obey;" and at once followed the Wazir
into the presence of the Caliph who bade him be seated and said
to him, "O Ali, my heart is heavy within me this night and it
hath come to my ear that thou hast great store of tales and
anecdotes; so I desire of thee that thou let me hear what will
relieve my despondency and brighten my melancholy." Said he, "O
Commander of the Faithful, shall I tell thee what I have seen
with my eyes or what I have heard with my ears?" He replied, "An
thou have seen aught worth the telling, let me hear that."
Replied Ali: "Hearkening and obedience. Know thou, O Commander of
the Faithful, that some years ago I left this my native city of
Baghdad on a journey, having with me a lad who carried a light
leathern bag. Presently we came to a certain city, where, as I
was buying and selling, behold, a rascally Kurd fell on me and
seized my wallet perforce, saying, 'This is my bag, and all which
is in it is my property.' Thereupon, I cried aloud 'Ho
Moslems,[FN#211] one and all, deliver me from the hand of the
vilest of oppressors!' But the folk said, 'Come, both of you, to
the Kazi and abide ye by his judgment with joint consent.' So I
agreed to submit myself to such decision and we both presented
ourselves before the Kazi, who said, 'What bringeth you hither
and what is your case and your quarrel?' Quoth I, 'We are men at
difference, who appeal to thee and make complaint and submit
ourselves to thy judgment.' Asked the Kazi, 'Which of you is the
complainant?'; so the Kurd came forward[FN#212] and said, 'Allah
preserve our lord the Kazi! Verily, this bag is my bag and all
that is in it is my swag. It was lost from me and I found it with
this man mine enemy.' The Kazi asked, 'When didst thou lose it?';
and the Kurd answered, 'But yesterday, and I passed a sleepless
night by reason of its loss.' 'An it be thy bag,' quoth the Kazi,
'tell me what is in it.' Quoth the Kurd, 'There were in my bag
two silver styles for eye-powder and antimony for the eyes and a
kerchief for the hands, wherein I had laid two gilt cups and two
candlesticks. Moreover it contained two tents and two platters
and two spoons and a cushion and two leather rugs and two ewers
and a brass tray and two basins and a cooking-pot and two water-
jars and a ladle and a sacking-needle and a she-cat and two
bitches and a wooden trencher and two sacks and two saddles and a
gown and two fur pelisses and a cow and two calves and a she-goat
and two sheep and an ewe and two lambs and two green pavilions
and a camel and two she-camels and a lioness and two lions and a
she-bear and two jackals and a mattress and two sofas and an
upper chamber and two saloons and a portico and two sitting-rooms
and a kitchen with two doors and a company of Kurds who will bear
witness that the bag is my bag.' Then said the Kazi to me, 'And
thou, sirrah, what sayest thou?' So I came forward, O Commander
of the Faithful (and indeed the Kurd's speech had bewildered me)
and said, 'Allah advance our lord the Kazi! Verily, there was
naught in this my wallet, save a little ruined tenement and
another without a door and a dog house and a boys' school and
youths playing dice and tents and tent-ropes and the cities of
Bassorah and Baghdad and the palace of Shaddad bin Ad and an
ironsmith's forge and a fishing-net and cudgels and pickets and
girls and boys and a thousand pimps who will testify that the bag
is my bag.' Now when the Kurd heard my words, he wept and wailed
and said, 'O my lord the Kazi, this my bag is known and what is
in it is a matter of renown; for in this bag there be castles and
citadels and cranes and beasts of prey and men playing chess and
draughts. Furthermore, in this my bag is a brood-mare and two
colts and a stallion and two blood-steeds and two long lances;
and it containeth eke a lion and two hares and a city and two
villages and a whore and two sharking panders and an
hermaphrodite and two gallows birds and a blind man and two
wights with good sight and a limping cripple and two lameters and
a Christian ecclesiastic and two deacons and a patriarch and two
monks and a Kazi and two assessors, who will be evidence that the
bag is my bag.' Quoth the Kazi to me, 'And what sayst thou, O
Ali?' So, O Commander of the Faithful, being filled with rage, I
came forward and said, 'Allah keep our lord the Kazi!'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian
continued: "So being filled with rage, O Commander of the
Faithful, I came forward and said, 'Allah keep our lord the Kazi
I had in this my wallet a coat of mail and a broadsword and
armouries and a thousand fighting rams and a sheep-fold with its
pasturage and a thousand barking dogs and gardens and vines and
flowers and sweet smelling herbs and figs and apples and statues
and pictures and flagons and goblets and fair-faced slave-girls
and singing-women and marriage-feasts and tumult and clamour and
great tracts of land and brothers of success, which were robbers,
and a company of daybreak-raiders with swords and spears and bows
and arrows and true friends and dear ones and Intimates and
comrades and men imprisoned for punishment and cup-companions and
a drum and flutes and flags and banners and boys and girls and
brides (in all their wedding bravery), and singing-girls and five
Abyssinian women and three Hindi maidens and four damsels of
Al-Medinah and a score of Greek girls and eighty Kurdish dames
and seventy Georgian ladies and Tigris and Euphrates and a
fowling net and a flint and steel and Many-columned Iram and a
thousand rogues and pimps and horse-courses and stables and
mosques and baths and a builder and a carpenter and a plank and a
nail and a black slave with his flageolet and a captain and a
caravan leader and towns and cities and an hundred thousand
dinars and Cufa and Anbar[FN#213] and twenty chests full of
stuffs and twenty storehouses for victuals and Gaza and Askalon
and from Damietta to Al-Sawan[FN#214]; and the palace of Kisra
Anushirwan and the kingdom of Solomon and from Wadi Nu'uman to
the land of Khorasan and Balkh and Ispahan and from India to the
Sudan. Therein also (may Allah prolong the life of our lord the
Kazi!) are doublets and cloths and a thousand sharp razors to
shave off the Kazi's beard, except he fear my resentment and
adjudge the bag to be my bag.' Now when the Kazi heard what I and
the Kurd avouched, he was confounded and said, 'I see ye twain be
none other than two pestilent fellows, atheistical-villains who
make sport of Kazis and magistrates and stand not in fear of
reproach. Never did tongue tell nor ear hear aught more
extraordinary than that which ye pretend. By Allah, from China to
Shajarat Umm Ghaylan, nor from Fars to Sudan nor from Wadi
Nu'uman to Khorasan, was ever heard the like of what ye avouch or
credited the like of what ye affirm. Say, fellows, be this bag a
bottomless sea or the Day of Resurrection that shall gather
together the just and unjust?' Then the Kazi bade them open the
bag; so I opened it and behold, there was in it bread and a lemon
and cheese and olives. So I threw the bag down before the Kurd
and ganged my gait." Now when the Caliph heard this tale from Ali
the Persian, he laughed till he fell on his back and made him a
handsome present.[FN#215] And men also relate a




           TALE OF HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE SLAVE-GIRL
                    AND THE IMAM ABU YUSUF.



It is said that Ja'afar the Barmecide was one night carousing
with Al Rashid, who said, "O Ja'afar, it hath reached me that
thou hast bought such and such a slave-girl. Now I have long
sought her for she is passing fair; and my heart is taken up with
love of her, so do thou sell her to me." He replied, "I will not
sell her, O Commander of the Faithful." Quoth he, "Then give her
to me." Quoth the other, "Nor will I give her." Then Al-Rashid
exclaimed, "Be Zubaydah triply divorced an thou shall not either
sell or give her to me!" Then Ja'afar exclaimed, "Be my wife
triply divorced an I either sell or give her to thee!" After
awhile they recovered from their tipsiness and were aware of
having fallen into a grave dilemma, but knew not by what device
to extricate themselves. Then said Al-Rashid, "None can help us
in this strait but Abu Yusuf."[FN#216] So they sent for him, and
this was in the middle of the night; and when the messenger
reached him, he arose in alarm, saying to himself, "I should not
be sent for at this tide and time, save by reason of some
question of moment to Al-Islam." So he went out in haste and
mounted his she-mule, saying to his servant, "Take the mule's
nose-bag with thee; it may be she hath not finished her feed; and
when we come to the Caliph's palace, put the bag on her, that she
may eat what is left of her fodder, during the last of the
night." And the man replied, "I hear and obey." Now when the Imam
was admitted to the presence, Al-Rashid rose to receive him and
seated him on the couch beside himself (where he was wont to seat
none save the Kazi), and said to him, "We have not sent for thee
at this untimely time and tide save to advise us upon a grave
matter, which is such and such and wherewith we know not how to
deal." And he expounded to him the case. Abu Yusuf answered, "O
Commander of the Faithful, this is the easiest of things." Then
he turned to Ja'afar and said, "O Ja'afar, sell half of her to
the Commander of the Faithful and give him the other half; so
shall ye both be quit of your oaths." The Caliph was delighted
with this and both did as he prescribed. Then said Al-Rashid,
"Bring me the girl at once,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
Harun al-Rashid commanded, "Bring me the girl at once, for I long
for her exceedingly." So they brought her and the Caliph said to
Abu Yusuf, I have a mind to have her forthright, for I cannot
bear to abstain from her during the prescribed period of
purification; now how is this to be done?" Abu Yusuf replied,
"Bring me one of thine own male slaves who hath never been
manumitted." So they brought one and Abu Yusuf said, "Give me
leave to marry her to him; then let him divorce her before
consummation; and thus shall it be lawful for thee to lie with
her before purification." This second expedient pleased the
Caliph yet more than the first; he sent for the Mameluke and,
whenas he came, said to the Kazi "I authorise thee to marry her
to him." So the Imam proposed the marriage to the slave, who
accepted it, and performed the ceremony; after which he said to
the slave, "Divorce her, and thou shalt have an hundred dinars."
But he replied, "I won't do this;" and the Imam went on to
increase his offer, and the slave to refuse till he bid him a
thousand dinars. Then the man asked him, "Doth it rest with me to
divorce her, or with thee or with the Commander of the Faithful?"
He answered, "It is in thy hand." "Then by Allah," quoth the
slave, "I will never do it; no, never!" Hearing these words the
Caliph was exceeding wroth and said to the Imam, "What is to be
done, O Abu Yusuf?" Replied he, "Be not concerned, O Commander of
the Faithful; the thing is easy. Make this slave the damsel's
chattel." Quoth Al-Rashid, "I give him to her;" and the Imam said
to the girl, "Say: I accept." So she said, I accept;" whereon
quoth Abu Yusuf, "I pronounce separation from bed and board and
divorce between them, for that he hath become her property, and
so the marriage is annulled." With this, Al-Rashid rose to his
feet and exclaimed, "It is the like of thee that shall be Kazi in
my time." Then he called for sundry trays of gold and emptied
them before Abu Yusuf, to whom he said, "Hast thou wherein to put
this?" The Imam bethought him of the mule's nose-bag; so he sent
for it and, filling it with gold, took it and went home. And on
the morrow, he said to his friends, "There is no easier nor
shorter road to the goods of this world and the next, than that
of religious learning; for, see, I have gotten all this money by
answering two or three questions." So consider thou, O polite
reader,[FN#217] the pleasantness of this anecdote, for it
compriseth divers goodly features, amongst which are the
complaisance of Ja'afar to Al Rashid, and the wisdom of the
Caliph who chose such a Kazi and the excellent learning of Abu
Yusuf, may Almighty Allah have mercy on their souls one and all!
And they also tell the




            TALE OF THE LOVER WHO FEIGNED HIMSELF A
                             THIEF.



When Khalid bin Abdallah al-Kasri[FN#218] was Emir of Bassorah,
there came to him one day a company of men dragging a youth of
exceeding beauty and lofty bearing and perfumed attire; whose
aspect expressed good breeding, abundant wit and dignity of the
gravest. They brought him before the Governor, who asked what it
was and they replied, "This fellow is a thief, whom we caught
last night in our dwelling-house." Whereupon Khalid looked at him
and was pleased with his well-favouredness and elegant aspect; so
he said to the others, "Loose him," and going up to the young
man, asked what he had to say for himself. He replied, "Verily
the folk have spoken truly and the case is as they have said."
Quoth Khalid, "And what moved thee to this and thou so noble of
port and comely of mien?" Quoth the other "The lust after worldly
goods, and the ordinance of Allah (extolled exalted be He!)."
Rejoined Khalid, "Be thy mother bereaved of thee![FN#219] Hadst
thou not, in thy fair face and sound sense and good breeding,
what should restrain thee from thieving?" Answered the young man,
"O Emir, leave this talk and proceed to what Almighty Allah hath
ordained; this is what my hands have earned, and, 'God is not
unjust towards mankind.'"[FN#220] So Khalid was silent awhile
considering the matter then he bade the young man draw near him
and said, "Verily, thy confession before witnesses perplexeth me,
for I cannot believe thee to be a thief: haply thou hast some
story that is other than one of theft; and if so tell it me."
Replied the youth "O Emir, imagine naught other than what I have
confessed to in thy presence; for I have no tale to tell save
that verily I entered these folks' house and stole what I could
lay hands on and they caught me and took the stuff from me and
carried me before thee." Then Khalid bade clap him in gaol and
commended a crier to cry throughout Bassorah, "O yes! O yes!
Whoso be minded to look upon the punishment of such an one, the
thief, and the cutting-off of his hand, let him be present to-
morrow morning at such a place!" Now when the young man found
himself in prison, with irons on his feet, he sighed heavily and
with tears streaming from his eyes extemporized these couplets,

"When Khalid menaced off to strike my hand * If I refuse to tell
     him of her case;
Quoth I, 'Far, far fro' me that I should tell * A love, which
     ever shall my heart engrace;
Loss of my hand for sin I have confessed * To me were easier than
     to shame her face.'"

The warders heard him and went and told Khalid who, when it was
dark night, sent for the youth and conversed with him. He found
him clever and well-bred, intelligent, lively and a pleasant
companion; so he ordered him food and he ate. Then after an
hour's talk said Khalid, "I know indeed thou hast a story to tell
that is no thief's; so when the Kazi shall come to-morrow morning
and shall question thee about this robbery, do thou deny the
charge of theft and avouch what may avert the pain and penalty of
cutting off thy hand; for the Apostle (whom Allah bless and
keep!) saith, 'In cases of doubt, eschew punishment.'" Then he
sent him back to prison,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khalid,
after conversing with the youth, sent him back to prison, where
he passed the night. And when morning dawned the folk assembled
to see his hand cut off, nor was there a soul in Bassorah, man or
woman, but was present to look upon the punishment of that
handsome youth. Then Khalid mounted in company of the notables of
the city and others; and, summoning all four Kazis, sent for the
young man, who came hobbling and stumbling in his fetters. There
was none saw him but wept over him and the women all lifted up
their voices in lamentation as for the dead. Then the Kazi bade
silence the women and said to the prisoner, "These folk avouch
that thou didst enter their dwelling-house and steal their goods:
belike thou stolest less than a quarter dinar[FN#221]?" Replied
he, "Nay, I stole that and more." "Peradventure," rejoined the
Kazi "thou art partner with the folk in some of the goods?" Quoth
the young man; "Not so: it was all theirs, and I had no right in
it." At this the Khalid was wroth and rose and smote him on the
face with his whip, applying to his own case this couplet,

"Man wills his wish to him accorded be; * But Allah naught
     accords save what He wills."

Then he called for the butcher to do the work, who came and drew
forth his knife and taking the prisoner's hand set the blade to
it, when, behold, a damsel pressed through the crowd of women,
clad in tattered clothes,[FN#222] and cried out and threw herself
on the young man. Then she unveiled and showed a face like the
moon whereupon the people raised a mighty clamour and there was
like to have been a riot amongst them and a violent scene. But
she cried out her loudest, saying, "I conjure thee, by Allah, O
Emir, hasten not to cut off this man's hand, till thou have read
what is in this scroll!" So saying, she gave him a scroll, and
Khalid took it and opened it and read therein these couplets,

"Ah Khalid! this one is a slave of love distraught, * And these
     bowed eye-lashes sent shaft that caused his grief:
Shot him an arrow sped by eyes of mine, for he, * Wedded to
     burning love of ills hath no relief:
He hath avowed a deed he never did, the while * Deeming this
     better than disgrace of lover fief:
Bear then, I pray, with this distracted lover mine * Whose noble
     nature falsely calls himself a thief!"

When Khalid had read these lines he withdrew himself from the
people and summoned the girl and questioned her; and she told him
that the young man was her lover and she his mistress; and that
thinking to visit her he came to the dwelling of her people and
threw a stone into the house, to warn her of his coming. Her
father and brothers heard the noise of the stone and sallied out
on him; but he, hearing them coming, caught up all the household
stuff and made himself appear a robber to cover his mistress's
honour. "Now when they saw him they seized him (continued she),
crying:--A thief! and brought him before thee, whereupon he
confessed to the robbery and persisted in his confession, that he
might spare me disgrace; and this he did, making himself a thief,
of the exceeding nobility and generosity of his nature." Khalid
answered, "He is indeed worthy to have his desire;" and, calling
the young man to him, kissed him between the eyes. Then he sent
for the girl's father and bespoke him, saying, "O Shaykh, we
thought to carry out the law of mutilation in the case of this
young man; but Allah (to whom be Honour and Glory!) hath
preserved us from this, and I now adjudge him the sum of ten
thousand dirhams, for that he would have given his hand for the
preservation of thine honour and that of thy daughter and for the
sparing of shame to you both. Moreover, I adjudge other ten
thousand dirhams to thy daughter, for that she made known to me
the truth of the case; and I ask thy leave to marry her to him."
Rejoined the old man, "O Emir, thou hast my consent." So Khalid
praised Allah and thanked Him and improved the occasion by
preaching a goodly sermon and a prayerful;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khalid
praised Allah and thanked Him and improved the occasion by
preaching a goodly sermon and a prayerful; after which he said to
the young man, "I give thee to wife the damsel, such an one here
present, with her own permission and her father's consent; and
her wedding settlement shall be this money, to wit, ten thousand
dirhams." "I accept this marriage at thy hands," replied the
youth; and Khalid bade them carry the money on brass trays in
procession to the young man's house, whilst the people dispersed,
fully satisfied. "And surely (quoth he who tells the
tale[FN#223]) never saw I a rarer day than this, for that it
began with tears and annoy; and it ended with smiles and joy."
And in contrast of this story is this piteous tale of




           JA'AFAR THE BARMECIDE AND THE BEAN SELLER.



When Harun al-Rashid crucified Ja'afar the Barmecide[FN#224] he
commended that all who wept or made moan for him should also be
crucified; so the folk abstained from that. Now it chanced that a
wild Arab, who dwelt in a distant word, used every year to bring
to the aforesaid Ja'afar an ode[FN#225] in his honour, for which
he rewarded him with a thousand dinars; and the Badawi took them
and, returning to his own country, lived upon them, he and his
family, for the rest of the year. Accordingly, he came with his
ode at the wonted time and, finding that Ja'afar had been
crucified, betook himself to the place where his body was
hanging, and there made his camel kneel down and wept with sore
weeping and mourned with grievous mourning; and he recited his
ode and fell asleep. Presently Ja'afar the Barmecide appeared to
him in a vision and said, "Verily thou hast wearied thyself to
come to us and findest us as thou seest; but go to Bassorah and
ask for a man there whose name is such and such, one of the
merchants of the town, and say to him, 'Ja'afar, the Barmecide,
saluteth thee and biddeth thee give me a thousand dinars, by the
token of the bean.'" Now when the wild Arab awoke, he repaired to
Bassorah, where he sought out the merchant and found him and
repeated to him what Ja'afar had said in the dream; whereupon he
wept with weeping so sore that he was like to depart the world.
Then he welcomed the Badawi and seated him by his side and made
his stay pleasant and entertained him three days as an honoured
guest; and when he was minded to depart he gave him a thousand
and five hundred dinars, saying, "The thousand are what is
commanded to thee, and the five hundred are a gift from me to
thee; and every year thou shalt have of me a thousand gold
pieces." Now when the Arab was about to take leave, he said to
the merchant, "Allah upon thee, tell me the story of the bean,
that I may know the origin of all this." He answered: "In the
early part of my life I was poor and hawked hot beans[FN#226]
about the streets of Baghdad to keep me alive. So I went out one
raw and rainy day, without clothes enough on my body to protect
me from the weather; now shivering for excess of cold and now
stumbling into the pools of rain-water, and altogether in so
piteous a plight as would make one shudder with goose-skin to
look upon. But it chanced that Ja'afar that day was seated with
his officers and his concubines, in an upper chamber overlooking
the street when his eyes fell on me; so he took pity on my case
and, sending one of his dependents to fetch me to him, said as
soon as he saw me, 'Sell thy beans to my people.' So I began to
mete out the beans with a measure I had by me; and each who took
a measure of beans filled the measure with gold pieces till all
my store was gone and my basket was clean empty. Then I gathered
together the gold I had gotten, and Ja'afar said to me, 'Hast
thou any beans left?' 'I know not,' answered I, and then sought
in the basket, but found only one bean. So Ja'afar took from me
the single bean and, splitting it in twain, kept one half himself
and gave the other to one of his concubines, saying, 'For how
much wilt thou buy this half bean?' She replied, 'For the tale of
all this gold twice-told;' whereat I was confounded and said to
myself, 'This is impossible.' But, as I stood wondering, behold,
she gave an order to one of her hand-maids and the girl brought
me the sum of the collected monies twice-told. Then said Ja'afar,
'And I will buy the half I have by me for double the sum of the
whole,' presently adding, 'Now take the price of thy bean.' And
he gave an order to one of his servants, who gathered together
the whole of the money and laid it in my basket; and I took it
and went my ways. Then I betook myself to Bassorah, where I
traded with the monies and Allah prospered me amply, to Him be
the praise and the thanks! So, if I give thee every year a
thousand dinars of the bounty of Ja'afar, it will in no wise
injure me. Consider then the munificence of Ja'afar's nature and
how he was praised both alive and dead, the mercy of Allah
Almighty be upon him! And men also recount the tale of




                 ABU MOHAMMED HIGHT LAZYBONES.



It is told that Harun al-Rashid was sitting one day on the throne
of the Caliphate, when there came in to him a youth of his
eunuchry, bearing a crown of red gold, set with pearls and rubies
and all manner of other gems and jewels, such as money might not
buy; and, bussing the ground between his hands, said, "O
Commander of the Faithful, the Lady Zubaydah kisseth the earth
before thee"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say. Whereupon quoth her sister Dunyazad,
"How pleasant is thy tale and profitable; and how sweet is thy
speech and how delectable!" "And where is this," replied
Shahrazad, "compared with what I shall tell you next night an I
live and the King grant me leave!" Thereupon quoth the King to
himself, "By Allah, I will not slay her until I hear the end of
her tale."

             When it was the Three Hundredth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "favour us, O my sister, with thy tale," and she
replied, 'With joy and good will, if the King accord me leave;"
whereupon the King said, "Tell thy tale, O Shahrazad." So she
pursued: It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
said to the Caliph, "The Lady Zubaydah kisseth the earth before
thee and saith to thee, Thou knowest she hath bidden make this
crown, which lacketh a great jewel for its dome-top; and she hath
made search among her treasures, but cannot find a jewel of size
to suit her mind." Quoth the Caliph to his Chamberlains and
Viceregents, Make search for a great jewel, such as Zubaydah
desireth." So they sought, but found nothing befitting her and
told the Caliph who, vexed and annoyed thereat, exclaimed, "How
am I Caliph and King of the Kings of the earth and cannot find so
small a matter as a jewel? Woe to you! Ask of the merchants." So
they enquired of the traders, who replied, "Our lord the Caliph
will not find a jewel such as he requireth save with a man of
Bassorah, by name Abu Mohammed highs Lazybones." Thereupon they
acquainted the Caliph with this and he bade his Wazir Ja'afar
send a note to the Emir Mohammed al-Zubaydi, Governor of
Bassorah, commanding him to equip Abu Mohammed Lazybones and
bring him into the presence of the Commander of the Faithful. The
Minister accordingly wrote a note to that effect and despatched
it by Masrur, who set out forthright for the city of Bassorah,
and went in to the Emir Mohammed al-Zubaydi, who rejoiced in him
and treated him with the high-most honour. Then Masrur read him
the mandate of the Prince of True Believers, Harun al-Rashid, to
which he replied, "I hear and I obey," and forthwith despatched
him, with a company of his followers, to Abu Mohammed's house.
When they reached it, they knocked at the door, whereupon a page
came out and Masrur said to him, "Tell thy lord, The Commander of
the Faithful summoneth thee." The servant went in and told his
master, who came out and found Masrur, the Caliph's Chamberlain,
and a company of the Governor's men at the door. So he kissed
ground before Masrur and said, "I hear and obey the summons of
the Commander of the Faithful; but first enter ye my house." They
replied, "We cannot do that, save in haste; even as the Prince of
True Believers commanded us, for he awaiteth thy coming." But he
said, "Have patience with me a little, till I set my affairs in
order." So after much pressure and abundant persuasion, they
entered the house with him and found the vestibule hung with
curtains of azure brocade, purfled with red gold, and Abu
Mohammed Lazybones bade one of his servants carry Masrur to the
private Hammam. Now this bath was in the house and Masrur found
its walls and floors of rare and precious marbles, wrought with
gold and silver, and its waters mingled with rose-water. Then the
servants served Masrur and his company with the perfection of
service; and, on their going forth of the Hammam, clad them in
robes of honour, brocade-work interwoven with gold. And after
leaving the bath Masrur and his men went in to Abu Mohammed
Lazybones and found him seated in his upper chamber; and over his
head hung curtains of gold-brocade, wrought with pearls and
jewels, and the pavilion was spread with cushions, embroidered in
red gold. Now the owner was sitting softly upon a quilted cloth
covering a settee inlaid with stones of price; and, when he saw
Masrur, he went forward to meet him and bidding him welcome,
seated him by his side. Then he called for the food-trays; so
they brought them, and when Masrur saw the tables, he exclaimed,
"By Allah, never did I behold the like of these appointments in
the palace of the Commander of the Faithful!" For indeed the
trays contained every manner of meat all served in dishes of
gilded porcelain.[FN#227] "So we ate and drank and made merry
till the end of the day (quoth Masrur) when the host gave to each
and every of us five thousand dinars, and on the morrow he clad
us in dresses of honour of green and gold and entreated us with
the utmost worship." Then said Masrur to him, "We can tarry no
longer for fear of the Caliph's displeasure." Answered Abu
Mohammed Lazybones, "O my lord, have patience with us till the
morrow, that we may equip ourselves, and we will then depart with
you." So they tarried with him that day and slept the night; and
next morning Abu Mohammed's servants saddled him a she mule with
selle and trappings of gold, set with all manner of pearls and
stones of price; whereupon quoth Masrur to himself, "I wonder,
when Abu Mohammed shall present himself in such equipage, if the
Caliph will ask him how he came by all this wealth." Thereupon
they took leave of Al-Zubaydi and, setting out from Bassorah,
fared on, without ceasing to fare till they reached Baghdad-city
and presented themselves before the Caliph, who bade Abu Mohammed
be seated. He sat down and addressed the Caliph in courtly
phrase, saying, "O Commander of the Faithful, I have brought with
me an humble offering by way of homage: have I thy gracious
permission to produce it?" Al-Rashid replied, "There is no harm
in that,"[FN#228] whereupon Abu Mohammed bade his men bring in a
chest, from which he took a number of rarities, and amongst the
rest, trees of gold with leaves of white emeraid,[FN#229] and
fruits of pigeon blood rubies and topazes and new pearls and
bright. And as the Caliph was struck with admiration he fetched a
second chest and brought out of it a tent of brocade, crowned
with pearls and jacinths and emeralds and jaspers and other
precious stones; its poles were of freshly cut Hindi aloes-wood,
and its skirts were set with the greenest smaragds. Thereon were
depicted all manner of animals such as beasts and birds, spangled
with precious stones, rubies, emeralds, chrysolites and balasses
and every kind of precious metal. Now when Al-Rashid saw these
things, he rejoiced with exceeding joy and Abu Mohammed Lazybones
said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful, deem not that I have
brought these to thee, fearing aught or coveting anything; but I
knew myself to be but a man of the people and that such things
befitted none save the Commander of the Faithful. And now, with
thy leave, I will show thee, for thy diversion, something of what
I can do." Al-Rashid replied, "Do what thou wilt, that we may
see." "To hear is to obey," said Abu Mohammed and, moving his
lips, beckoned the palace battlements,[FN#230] whereupon they
inclined to him; then he made another sign to them, and they
returned to their place. Presently he made a sign with his eye,
and there appeared before him closets with closed doors, to which
he spoke, and lo! the voices of birds answered him from within.
The Caliph marvelled with passing marvel at this and said to him,
"How camest thou by all this, seeing that thou art known only as
Abu Mohammed Lazybones, and they tell me that thy father was a
cupper serving in a public Hammam, who left thee nothing?"
Whereupon he answered, "Listen to my story" And Shahrazed
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Three Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
Mohammed Lazybones thus spake to the Caliph: "O Prince of True
Believers, listen to my story, for it is a marvellous and its
particulars are wondrous; were it graven with graver-needles upon
the eye-corners it were a warner to whose would be warned." Quoth
Al-Rashid, "Let us hear all thou hast to say, O Abu Mohammed!"
So he began "Know then, O Commander of the Faithful (Allah
prolong to thee glory and dominion!), the report of the folk;
that I am known as the Lazybones and that my father left me
nothing, is true; for he was, as thou hast said, nothing but a
barber-cupper in a Hammam. And I throughout my youth was the
idlest wight on the face of the earth; indeed, so great was my
sluggishness that, if I lay at full length in the sultry season
and the sun came round upon me, I was too lazy to rise and remove
from the sun to the shade. And thus I abode till I reached my
fifteenth year, when my father deceased in the mercy of Allah
Almighty and left me nothing. However, my mother used to go out
a-charing and feed me and give me to drink, whilst I lay on my
side. Now it came to pass that one day she came in to me with
five silver dirhams, and said to me, 'O my son, I hear that
Shaykh Abu al-Muzaffar[FN#231] is about to go a voyage to China.'
(Now this Shaykh was a good and charitable man who loved the
poor.) 'So come, my son, take these five silver bits; and let us
both carry them to him and beg him to buy thee therewith somewhat
from the land of China; so haply thou mayst make a profit of it
by the bounty of Allah, whose name be exalted!' I was too idle to
move for her; but she swore by the Almighty that, except I rose
and went with her, she would bring me neither meat nor drink nor
come in to me, but would leave me to die of hunger and thirst.
Now when I heard her words, O Commander of the Faithful, I knew
she would do as she threatened for her knowledge of my
sluggishness; so I said to her, 'Help me to sit up.' She did so,
and I wept the while and said to her, 'Bring me my shoes.'
Accordingly, she brought them and I said, 'Put them on my feet.'
She put them on my feet and I said, 'Lift me up off the ground.'
So she lifted me up and I said, 'Support me, that I may walk.' So
she supported me and I continued to fare a foot, at times
stumbling over my skirts, till we came to the river bank, where
we saluted the Shaykh and I said to him, 'O my uncle, art thou
Abu al-Muzaffar?' 'At thy service,' answered he, and I, 'Take
these dirhams and with them buy me somewhat from the land of
China: haply Allah may vouchsafe me a profit of it.' Quoth the
Shaykh to his companions, 'Do ye know this youth?' They answered,
'Yes, he is known as Abu Mohammed Lazybones, and we never saw him
stir from his house till this moment.' Then said he to me, 'O my
son, give me the silver with the blessing of Almighty Allah!' So
he took the money, saying, 'Bismillah in the name of Allah!' and
I returned home with my mother. Presently Shaykh Abu al-Muzaffar
set sail, with a company of merchants, and stayed not till they
reached the land of China, where he and his bought and sold; and,
having won what they wished, set out on their homeward voyage.
When they had been three days at sea, the Shaykh said to his
company, 'Stay the vessel!' They asked, 'What dost thou want?'
and he answered, 'Know that I have forgotten the commission
wherewith Abu Mohammed Lazybones charged me; so let us turn back
that we may lay out his money on somewhat whereby he may profit.'
They cried, 'We conjure thee, by Allah Almighty turn not back
with us; for we have traversed a long distance and a sore, and
while so doing we have endured sad hardship and many terrors.'
Quoth he, 'There is no help for it but we return;' and they said,
'Take from us double the profit of the five dirhams, and turn us
not back.' He agreed to this and they collected for him an ample
sum of money. Thereupon they sailed on, till they came to an
island wherein was much people; when they moored thereto and the
merchants went ashore, to buy thence a stock of precious metals
and pearls and jewels and so forth. Presently Abu al-Muzaffar saw
a man seated, with many apes before him, and amongst them one
whose hair had been plucked off; and as often as their owner's
attention was diverted from them, the other apes fell upon the
plucked one and beat him and threw him on their master; whereupon
the man rose and bashed them and bound them and punished them for
this; and all the apes were wroth with the plucked ape on this
account and funded him the more. When Shaykh Abu al-Muzaffar saw
this, he felt for and took compassion upon the plucked ape and
said to his master, 'Wilt thou sell me yonder monkey?' Replied
the man, 'Buy,' and Abu al-Muzaffar rejoined, 'I have with me
five dirhams, belonging to an orphan lad. Wilt thou sell it me
for that sum?' Answered the monkey-merchant, 'It is a bargain;
and Allah give thee a blessing of him!' So he made over the beast
and received his money; and the Shaykh's slaves took the ape and
tied him up in the ship. Then they loosed sail and made for
another island, where they cast anchor; and there came down
divers, who plunged for precious stones, pearls and other gems;
so the merchants hired them to dive for money and they dived. Now
when the ape saw them doing this, he loosed himself from his
bonds and, jumping off the ship's side, plunged with them,
whereupon quoth Abu al-Muzaffar, 'There is no Majesty and there
is no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! The monkey
is lost to us with the luck of the poor fellow for whom we bought
him.' And they despaired of him; but, after a while, the company
of divers rose to the surface, and behold, among them was the
ape, with his hands full of jewels of price, which he threw down
before Abu al-Muzaffar. The Shaykh marvelled at this and said,
'There is much mystery in this monkey!' Then they cast off and
sailed till they came to a third island, called the Isle of the
Zunuj,[FN#232] who are a people of the blacks, which eat the
flesh of the sons of Adam. When the blacks saw them, they boarded
them in dug-outs[FN#233] and, taking all in the vessel, pinioned
them and carried them to their King, who bade slaughter certain
of the merchants. So they slaughtered them by cutting their
throats and ate their flesh; and the rest of the traders passed
the night in bonds and were in sore concern. But when it was
midnight, the ape arose and going up to Abu al-Muzaffar, loosed
his bonds; and, as the others saw him free, they said, 'Allah
grant our deliverance may be at thy hands, O Abu al-Muzaffar!'
But he replied, 'Know that he who delivered me, by leave of Allah
Almighty, was none other than this monkey'"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Three Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
al-Muzaffar declared, "None loosed me, by leave of Allah
Al-mighty, save this monkey and I buy my release of him at a
thousand dinars!" whereupon the merchants rejoined, 'And we
likewise, each and every, will pay him a thousand dinars if he
release us.' With this the ape arose and went up to them and
loosed their bonds one by one, till he had freed them all, when
they made for the vessel and boarding her, found all safe and
nothing missing from her. So they cast off and set sail; and
presently Abu al-Muzaffar said to them, 'O merchants, fulfil your
promise to the monkey.' 'We hear and we obey,' answered they; and
each one paid him one thousand dinars, whilst Abu al-Muzaffar
brought out to him the like sum of his own monies, so that a
great heap of coin was collected for the ape. Then they fared on
till they reached Bassorah-city where their friends came out to
meet them; and when they had landed, the Shaykh said, 'Where is
Abu Mohammed Lazybones?' The news reached my mother, who came to
me as I lay asleep and said to me, 'O my son, verily the Shaykh
Abu al-Muzaffar hath come back and is now in the city; so rise
and go thou to him and salute him and enquire what he hath
brought thee; it may be Allah Almighty have opened to thee the
door of fortune with somewhat.' Quoth I, 'Lift me from the ground
and prop me up, whilst I go forth and walk to the river bank.'
After which I went out and walked on, stumbling over my skirts,
till I met the Shaykh, who exclaimed at sight of me, 'Welcome to
him whose money hath been the means of my release and that of
these merchants, by the will of Almighty Allah.' 