Then he
continued, 'Take this monkey I bought for thee and carry him home
and wait till I come to thee.' So I took the ape and went off,
saying in my mind, 'By Allah, this is naught but rare
merchandise!' and led it home, where I said to my mother,
'Whenever I lie down to sleep, thou biddest me rise and trade;
see now this merchandise with thine own eyes.' Then I sat me down
and as I sat, up came the slaves of Abu al-Muzaffar and said to
me, 'Art thou Abu Mohammed Lazybones?' 'Yes' answered I; and
behold, Abu al-Muzaffar appeared behind them. So I rose up to him
and kissed his hands: and he said, 'Come with me to my home.'
'Hearkening and obedience,' answered I and accompanied him to his
house, where he bade his servants bring me what money the monkey
had earned for me. So they brought it and he said to me, 'O my
son, Allah hath blessed thee with this wealth, by way of profit
on thy five dirhams.' Then the slaves set down the treasure in
chests, which they had carried on their heads, and Abu
al-Muzaffar gave me the keys saying, 'Go before the slaves to thy
house; for in sooth all this wealth is thine.' So I returned to
my mother, who rejoiced in this and said to me, 'O my son, Allah
hath blessed thee with all these riches; so put off thy laziness
and go down to the bazar and sell and buy.' At once I shook off
my dull sloth, and opened a shop in the bazar, where the ape used
to sit on the same divan with me eating with me when I ate and
drinking when I drank. But, every day, he was absent from dawn
till noon, when he came back bringing with him a purse of a
thousand dinars, which he laid by my side, and sat down; and he
ceased not so doing for a great while, till I amassed much
wealth, wherewith, O Commander of the Faithful, I purchased
houses and lands, and I planted gardens and I bought me white
slaves and negroes and concubines. Now it came to pass one day,
as I sat in my shop, with the ape sitting at my side on the same
carpet, behold, he began to turn right and left, and I said to
myself, 'What aileth the beast?' Then Allah made the ape speak
with a ready tongue, and he said to me, 'O Abu Mohammed!' Now
when I heard him speak, I was sore afraid; but he said to me,
'Fear not; I will tell thee my case. I am a Marid of the Jinn and
came to thee because of thy poor estate; but today thou knowest
not the amount of thy wealth; and now I have need of thee and if
thou do my will, it shall be well for thee.' I asked, 'What is
it?' and he answered, 'I have a mind to marry thee to a girl like
the full moon.' Quoth I, 'How so?'; and quoth he, 'Tomorrow don
thou thy richest dress and mount thy mule, with the saddle of
gold and ride to the Haymarket. There enquire for the shop of the
Sharif[FN#234] and sit down beside him and say to him, 'I come to
thee as a suitor craving thy daughter's hand.' 'If he say to
thee, 'Thou hast neither cash nor rank nor family'; pull out a
thousand dinars and give them to him, and if he ask more, give
him more and tempt him with money.' Whereto I replied, 'To hear
is to obey; I will do thy bidding, Inshallah!' So on the next
morning I donned my richest clothes, mounted my she mule with
trappings of gold and rode to the Haymarket where I asked for the
Sharif's shop, and finding him there seated, alighted and saluted
him and seated myself beside him"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Three Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
Mohammed Lazybones continued: "So I alighted and, saluting him,
seated myself beside him, and my Mamelukes and negro-slaves stood
before me. Said the Sharif, 'Haply, thou hast some business with
us which we may have pleasure of transacting?' Replied I, 'Yes, I
have business with thee.' Asked he, 'And what is it?'; and I
answered, 'I come to thee as a suitor for thy daughter's hand.'
So he said, 'Thou hast neither cash nor rank nor family;'
whereupon I pulled him out a purse of a thousand dinars, red
gold, and said to him, 'This is my rank[FN#235] and my family;
and he (whom Allah bless and keep!) hath said, The best of ranks
is wealth. And how well quoth the poet,

'Whoso two dithams hath, his lips have learnt * Speech of all
     kinds with eloquence bedight:
Draw near[FN#236] his brethren and crave ear of him, * And him
     thou seest haught in pride-full height:
Were 't not for dirhams wherein glories he, * Hadst found him
     'mid man kind in sorry plight.
When richard errs in words they all reply, * "Sooth thou hast
     spoken and hast said aright!"
When pauper speaketh truly all reply * 'Thou liest;' and they
     hold his sayings light.[FN#237]
Verily dirhams in earth's every stead * Clothe men with rank and
     make them fair to sight
Gold is the very tongue of eloquence; * Gold is the best of arms
     for might who'd fight!'


Now when the Sharif heard these my words and understood my verse,
he bowed his head awhile groundwards then raising it, said, 'If
it must be so, I will have of thee other three thousand gold
pieces.' 'I hear and I obey,' answered I, and sent one of my
Mamelukes home for the money. As soon as he came back with it, I
handed it to the Sharif who, when he saw it in his hands, rose,
and bidding his servants shut his shop, invited his brother
merchants of the bazar the wedding; after which he carried me to
his house and wrote out my contract of marriage with his daughter
saying to me, 'After ten days, I will bring thee to pay her the
first visit.' So I went home rejoicing and, shutting myself up
with the ape, told him what had passed; and he said 'Thou hast
done well.' Now when the time appointed by the Sharif drew near,
the ape said to me, 'There is a thing I would have thee do for
me; and thou shalt have of me (when it is done) whatso thou
wilt.' I asked, 'What is that?' and he answered, 'At the upper
end of the chamber wherein thou shalt meet thy bride, the
Sharif's daughter, stands a cabinet, on whose door is a
ring-padlock of copper and the keys under it. Take the keys and
open the cabinet in which thou shalt find a coffer of iron with
four flags, which are talismans, at its corners; and in its midst
stands a brazen basin full of money, wherein is tied a white cock
with a cleft comb; while on one side of the coffer are eleven
serpents and on the other a knife. Take the knife and slaughter
the cock; cut away the flags and upset the chest, then go back to
the bride and do away her maidenhead. This is what I have to ask
of thee.' 'Hearkening and obedience,' answered I, and betook
myself to the house of the Sharif. So as soon as I entered the
bride-chamber, I looked for the cabinet and found it even as the
ape had described it. Then I went in unto the bride and marvelled
at her beauty and loveliness and stature and symmetrical-grace,
for indeed they were such as no tongue can set forth. I rejoiced
in her with exceeding joy; and in the middle of the night, when
my bride slept, I rose and, taking the keys, opened the cabinet.
Then I seized the knife and slew the cock and threw down the
flags and upset the coffer, whereupon the girl awoke and, seeing
the closet open and the cock with cut throat, exclaimed, 'There
is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great! The Marid hath got hold of me!' Hardly had she made an
end of speaking, when the Marid swooped down upon the house and,
snatching up the bride, flew away with her; whereupon there arose
a mighty clamour and behold, in came the Sharif, buffetting his
face and crying, 'O Abu Mohammed, what is this deed thou hast
done? Is it thus thou requiitest us? I made this talisman in the
cabinet fearing for my daughter from this accursed one who, for
these six years, hath sought to steal-away the girl, but could
not. But now there is no more abiding for thee with us, so wend
thy ways.' Thereupon I went forth and returned to my own house,
where I made search for the ape but could not find him nor any
trace of him; whereby I knew that it was he who was the Marid,
and that he had carried off my wife and had tricked me into
destroying the talisman and the cock, the two things which
hindered him from taking her, and I repented, rending my raiment
and cuffing my face. And there was no land but was straitened
upon me; so I made for the desert forthright and ceased not
wandering on till night overtook me, for I knew not whither I was
going. And whilst I was deep in sad thought behold, I met two
serpents, one tawny and the other white, and they were fighting
to kill each other. So I took up a stone and with one cast slew
the tawny serpent, which was the aggressor; whereupon the white
serpent glided away and was absent for a while, but presently she
returned accompanied by ten other white serpents which glided up
to the dead serpent and tore her in pieces, so that only the head
was left. Then they went their ways and I fell prostrate for
weariness on the ground where I stood; but as I lay, pondering my
case lo! I heard a Voice though I saw no one and the Voice
versified with these two couplets,

'Let Fate with slackened bridle fare her pace, * Nor pass the
     night with mind which cares an ace
Between eye-closing and its opening, * Allah can foulest change
     to fairest case.'

Now when I heard this, O Commander of the Faithful, great concern
get hold of me and I was beyond measure troubled, and behold, I
heard a Voice from behind me extemporise these couplets,

'O Moslem! thou whose guide is Alcoran, * Joy in what brought
     safe peace to thee, O man.
Fear not what Satan haply whispered thee, * And in us see a
     Truth-believing

Then said I, 'I conjure thee, by the truth of Him thou wore
shippest, let me know who thou art!' Thereupon the Invisible
Speaker assumed the form of a man and said, 'Fear not; for the
report of thy good deed hath reached us, and we are a people of
the true-believing Jinn. So, if thou lack aught, let us know it
that we may have the pleasure of fulfilling thy want.' Quoth I,
'Indeed I am in sore need, for I am afflicted with a grievous
affliction and no one was ever afflicted as I am!' Quoth he,
'Perchance thou art Abu Mohammed Lazybones?' and I replied,
'Yes.' He rejoined, 'I, O Abu Mohammed, am the brother of the
white serpent, whose foe thou slewest, we are four brothers by
one father and mother, and we are all indebted to thee for thy
kindness. And know thou that he who played this trick on thee in
the likeness of an ape, is a Marid of the Marids of the Jinn; and
had he not used this artifice, he had never been able to get the
girl; for he hath loved her and had a mind to take her this long
while, but he was hindered of that talisman; and had it remained
as it was, he could never have found access to her. However, fret
not thyself for that; we will bring thee to her and kill the
Marid; for thy kindness is not lost upon us.' Then he cried out
with a terrible outcry"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Three Hundred and fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifrit
continued, "'Verily thy kindness is not lost upon us.' Then he
cried out with a terrible outcry in a horrible voice, and behold,
there appeared a troop of the Jinn, of whom he enquired
concerning the ape; and one of them said, 'I know his abiding-
place;' and the other asked 'Where abideth he?' Said the speaker
'He is in the City of Brass whereon sun riseth not.' Then said
the first Jinni to me, 'O Abu Mohammed, take one of these our
slaves, and he will carry thee on his back and teach thee how
thou shalt get back the girl; but know that this slave is a Marid
of the Marids and beware, whilst he is carrying thee, lest thou
utter the name of Allah, or he will flee from thee and thou wilt
fall and be destroyed.' 'I hear and obey,' answered I and chose
out one of the slaves, who bent down and said to me, 'Mount.' So
I mounted on his back, and he flew up with me into the firmament,
till I lost sight of the earth and saw the stars as they were the
mountains of earth fixed and firm[FN#238] and heard the angels
crying, 'Praise be to Allah,' in heaven while the Marid held me
in converse, diverting me and hindering me from pronouncing the
name of Almighty Allah.[FN#239] But, as we flew, behold, One clad
in green raiment,[FN#240] with streaming tresses and radiant
face, holding in his hand a javelin whence flew sparks of fire,
accosted me, saying, 'O Abu Mohammed, say:--There is no god but
the God and Mohammed is the Apostle of God; or I will smite thee
with this javelin.' Now already I felt heart-broken by my forced
silence as regards calling on the name of Allah; so I said,
'There is no god but the God, and Mohammed is the Apostle of God.
Whereupon the shining One smote the Marid with his javelin and he
melted away and became ashes; whilst I was thrown from his back
and fell headlong towards the earth, till I dropped into the
midst of a dashing sea, swollen with clashing surge. And behold I
fell hard by a ship with five sailors therein, who seeing me,
made for me and took me up into the vessel; and they began to
speak to me in some speech I knew not; but I signed to them that
I understood not their speech. So they fared on till the last of
the day, when they cast out a net and caught a great fish and
they broiled it and gave me to eat; after which they ceased not
sailing on till they reached their city and carried me to their
King and set me in his presence. So I kissed ground before him,
and he bestowed on me a dress of honour and said to me in Arabic
(which he knew well), 'I appoint thee one of my officers.'
Thereupon I asked him the name of the city, and he replied, 'It
is called Hanad[FN#241] and is in the land of China.' Then he
committed me to his Wazir, bidding him show me the city, which
was formerly peopled by Infidels, till Almighty Allah turned them
into stones; and there I abode a month's space, diverting myself
with viewing the place, nor saw I ever greater plenty of trees
and fruits than there. And when this time had past, one day, as I
sat on the bank of a river, behold, there accosted me a horseman,
who said to me, 'Art thou not Abu Mohammed Lazybones?' 'Yes,'
answered I; whereupon, he said, 'Fear not, for the report of thy
good deed hath reached us.' Asked I, 'Who art thou?' and he
answered, 'I am a brother of the white serpent, and thou art hard
by the place where is the damsel whom thou seekest.' So saying,
he took off his clothes and clad me therein, saying, 'Fear not,
for the slave who perished under thee was one of our slaves.'
Then the horseman took me up behind him and rode on with me to a
desert place, when he said, 'Dismount now and walk on between
these two mountains, till thou seest the City of Brass;[FN#242]
then halt afar off and enter it not, ere I return to thee and
tell thee how thou shalt do.' 'To hear is to obey,' replied I
and, dismounting from behind him, walked on till I came to the
city, the walls whereof I found of brass. Then I began to pace
round about it, hoping to find a gate, but found none; and
presently as I persevered, behold, the serpent's brother rejoined
me and gave me a charmed sword which should hinder any from
seeing me,[FN#243] then went his way. Now he had been gone but a
little while, when lo! I heard a noise of cries and found myself
in the midst of a multitude of folk whose eyes were in their
breasts; and seeing me quoth they, 'Who art thou and what cast
thee into this place?' So I told them my story, and they said,
'The girl thou seekest is in this city with the Marid; but we
know not what he hath done with her. Now we are brethren of the
white serpent,' adding, 'Go thou to yonder spring and note where
the water entereth, and enter thou with it; for it will bring
thee into the city.' I did as they bade me, and followed the
water-course, till it brought me to a Sardab, a vaulted room
under the earth, from which I ascended and found myself in the
midst of the city. Here I saw the damsel seated upon a throne of
gold, under a canopy of brocade, girt round by a garden full of
trees of gold, whose fruits were jewels of price, such as rubies
and chrysolites, pearls and coral. And the moment she saw me, she
knew me and accosted me with the Moslem salutation, saying, 'O my
lord, who guided thee hither?' So I told her all that had passed,
and she said, 'Know, that the accursed Marid, of the greatness of
his love for me, hath told me what bringeth him bane and what
bringeth him gain; and that there is here a talisman by means
whereof he could, an he would, destroy the city and all that are
therein; and whoso possesseth it, the Ifrits will do his
commandment in everything. It standeth upon a pillar'--Whereat I
asked her, 'And where is the pillar?' and she answered, 'It is in
such a place.' 'And what manner of thing may the talisman be?'
said I: said she, 'It is in the semblance of a vulture[FN#244]
and upon it is a writing which I cannot read. So go thou thither
and seize it, and set it before thee and, taking a chafing dish,
throw into it a little musk, whereupon there will arise a smoke
which will draw the Ifrits to thee, and they will all present
themselves before thee, nor shall one be absent; also they shall
be subject to thy word and, whatsoever thou biddest them, that
will they do. Arise therefore and fall to this thing, with the
blessing of Almighty Allah.' I answered, 'Hearkening and
obedience' and, going to the column, did as she bade me, where-
upon the Ifrits all presented themselves before me saying, 'Here
are we, O our lord! Whatsoever thou biddest us, that will we do.'
Quoth I, 'Bind the Marid who brought the damsel hither from her
home.' Quoth they, 'We hear and obey,' and off they flew and
bound that Marid in straitest bonds and returned after a while,
saying, 'We have done thy bidding.' Then I dismissed them and,
repairing to my wife, told her what had happened and said to her,
'O my bride, wilt thou go with me?' 'Yes,' answered she. So I
carried her forth of the vaulted chamber whereby I had entered
the city and we fared on, till we fell in with the folk who had
shown me the way to find her." And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Three Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that he
continued on this wise: "And we fared on till we fell in with the
folk who had shown me the way to her. So I said to them, 'Point
me out a path which shall lead me to my home,' and they did
accordingly, and brought us a-foot to the sea-shore and set us
aboard a vessel which sailed on before us with a fair wind, till
we reached Bassorah-city. And when we entered the house of my
father-in-law and her people saw my wife, they rejoiced with
exceeding joy. Then I fumigated the vulture with musk and lo! the
Ifrits flocked to me from all sides, saying, 'At thy service what
wilt thou have us do?' So I bade them transport all that was in
the City of Brass of monies and noble metals and stones of price
to my house in Bassorah, which they did; and I then ordered them
to bring me the ape. They brought him before me, abject and
contemptible, and I said to him, 'O accursed, why hast thou dealt
thus perfidiously with me?' Then I com mended the Ifrits to shut
him in a brazen vessel[FN#245] so they put him in a brazen
cucurbite and sealed it with lead. But I abode with my wife in
joy and delight; and now, O Commander of the Faithful, I have
under my hand precious things in such measure and rare jewels and
other treasure and monies on such wise as neither reckoning may
express nor may limits comprise; and, if thou lust after wealth
or aught else, I will command the Jinn at once to do thy desire.
But all this is of the bounty of Almighty Allah." Thereupon the
Commander of the Faithful wondered greatly and bestowed on him
imperial gifts, in exchange for his presents, and entreated him
with the favour he deserved. And men also tell the tale of the




            GENEROUS DEALING OF YAHYA BIN KHALID THE
                     BARMECIDE WITH MANSUR.



It is told that Harun al-Rashid, in the days before he became
jealous of the Barmecides, sent once for one of his guards, Salih
by name, and said to him, "O Salih, go to Mansur[FN#246] and say
to him: 'Thou owest us a thousand thousand dirhams and we require
of thee immediate payment of this amount.' And I command thee, O
Salih, unless he pay it between this hour and sundown, sever his
head from his body and bring it to me." "To hear is to obey,"
answered Salih and, going to Mansur, acquainted him with what the
Caliph had said, whereupon quoth he, "I am a lost man, by Allah;
for all my estate and all my hand owneth, if sold for their
utmost value, would not fetch a price of more than an hundred
thousand dirhams. Whence then, O Salih, shall I get the other
nine hundred thousand?" Salih replied, "Contrive how thou mayst
speedily acquit thyself, else thou art a dead man; for I cannot
grant thee an eye-twinkling of delay after the time appointed me
by the Caliph; nor can I fail of aught which the Prince of True
Believers hath enjoined on me. Hasten, therefore, to devise some
means of saving thyself ere the time expire." Quoth Mansur, "O
Salih, I beg thee of thy favour to bring me to my house, that I
may take leave of my children and family and give my kinsfolk my
last injunctions." Now Salih relateth: "So I went with him to his
house where he fell to bidding his family farewell, and the house
was filled with a clamour of weeping and lamentations and calling
for help on Almighty Allah. Thereupon I said to him, 'I have
bethought me that Allah may haply vouchsafe thee relief at the
hands of the Barmecides. Come, let us go to the house of Yahya
bin Khalid.' So we went to Yahya's house, and Mansur told him his
case, whereat he was sore concerned and bowed him groundwards for
a while, then raising his head, he called his treasurer and said
to him, 'How much have we in our treasury?' 'A matter of five
thousand dirhams,' answered the treasurer, and Yahya bade him
bring them and sent a messenger to his son, Al-Fazl, saying, 'I
am offered for sale a splendid estate which may never be laid
waste; so send me somewhat of money.' Al-Fazl sent him a thousand
thousand dirhams, and he despatched a mes senger with a like
message to his son Ja'afar, saying, 'We have a matter of much
moment and for it we want money;' whereupon Ja'afar at once sent
him a thousand thousand dirhams; nor did Yahya leave sending to
his kinsmen of the Barmecides, till he had collected from them a
great sum of money for Mansur. But Salih and the debtor knew not
of this; and Mansur said to Yahya, 'O my lord, I have laid hold
upon thy skirt, for I know not whither to look for the money but
to thee, in accordance with thy wonted generosity; so discharge
thou the rest of my debt for me and make me thy freed slave.'
Thereupon Yahya hung down his head and wept; then he said to a
page, 'Harkye, boy, the Commander of the Faithful gave our slave-
girl Dananir a jewel of great price: go thou to her and bid her
send it to us.' The page went out and presently returned with the
jewel, whereupon quoth Yahya, 'O Mansur, I bought this jewel of
the merchant for the Commander of the Faithful, at a price of two
hundred thousand dinars,[FN#247] and he gave it to our slave-girl
Dananir, the lute-player; and when he sees it with thee, he will
know it and spare thy blood and do thee honour for our sake; and
now, O Mansur, verily thy money is complete.' (Salih continued)
So I took the money and the jewel and carried them to al-Rashid
together with Mansur, but on the way I heard him repeat this
couplet, applying it to his own case,

''Twas not of love that fared my feet to them; * 'Twas that I
     feared me lest they shoot their shafts!'

Now when I heard this, I marvelled at his evil nature and his
depravity and mischief-making and his ignoble birth and
provenance and, turning upon him, I said, 'There is none on the
face of the earth better or more righteous than the Barmecides,
nor any baser nor more wrongous than thou; for they bought thee
off from death and delivered thee from destruction, giving thee
what should save thee; yet thou thankest them not nor praises"
them, neither acquittest thee after the manner of the noble; nay,
thou meetest their benevolence with this speech.' Then I went to
Al-Rashid and acquainted him with all that had passed" And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Three Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Salih con
tinued: "So I acquainted the Commander of the Faithful with all
that passed and Al-Rashid marvelled at the generosity and
benevolence of Yahya and the vileness and ingratitude of Mansur,
and bade restore the jewel to Yahya, saying, 'Whatso we have
given it befitteth us not to take again.' After that Salih
returned to Yahya and acquainted him with the tale of Mansur and
his ill-conduct; whereupon replied he, 'O Salih, when a man is in
want, sick at heart and sad of thought, he is not to be blamed
for aught that falleth from him; for it cometh not from the
heart;' and on this wise he took to seeking excuse for Mansur.
But Salih wept and exclaimed, 'Never shall the revolving heavens
bring forth into being the like of thee, O Yahya! Alas, and well-
away, that one of such noble nature and generosity should be laid
in the dust!' And he repeated these two couplets,

'Haste to do kindness thou cost intend; * Thou canst not always
     on boons expend:
How many from bounty themselves withheld, * Till means of bounty
     had come to end!'"

And men tell another tale of the




            GENEROUS DEALING OF YAHYA SON OF KHALID
             WITH A MAN WHO FORGED A LETTER IN HIS
                             NAME.



There was between Yahya bin Khalid and Abdullah bin Malik al-
Khuza'i,[FN#248] an enmity which they kept secret; the reason of
the hatred being that Harun al-Rashid loved Abdullah with
exceeding love, so that Yahya and his sons were wont to say that
he had bewitched the Commander of the Faithful. And thus they
abode a long while, with rancour in their hearts, till it fell
out that the Caliph invested Abdullah with the government of
Armenia[FN#249] and despatched him thither. Now soon after he had
settled himself in his seat of government, there came to him one
of the people of Irak, a man of good breeding and excellent parts
and abundant cleverness; but he had lost his money and wasted his
wealth and his estate was come to ill case; so he forged a letter
to Abdullah bin Malik in the name of Yahya bin Khalid and set out
therewith for Armenia. Now when he came to the Governor's gate,
he gave the letter to one of the Chamberlains, who took it and
carried it to his master. Abdullah opened it and read it and,
considering it attentively, knew it to be forged; so he sent for
the man, who presented himself before him and called down
blessings upon him and praised him and those of his court. Quoth
Abdullah to him, "What moved thee to weary thyself on this wise
and bring me a forged letter? But be of good heart; for we will
not disappoint thy travail." Replied the other, "Allah prolong
the life of our lord the Wazir! If my coming annoy thee, cast not
about for a pretext to repel me, for Allah's earth is wide and He
who giveth daily bread still liveth. Indeed, the letter I bring
thee from Yahya bin Khalid is true and no forgery." Quoth
Abdullah, "I will write a letter to my agent[FN#250] at Baghdad
and command him enquire concerning this same letter. If it be
true, as thou sayest, and genuine and not forged by thee, I will
bestow on thee the Emirship of one of my cities; or, if thou
prefer a present, I will give thee two hundred thousand dirhams,
besides horses and camels of price and a robe of honour. But, if
the letter prove a forgery, I will order thou be beaten with two
hundred blows of a stick and thy beard be shaven." So Abdullah
bade confine him in a chamber and furnish him therein with all he
needed, till his case should be made manifest. Then he despatched
a letter to his agent at Baghdad, to the following effect: "There
is come to me a man with a letter purporting to be from Yahya bin
Khalid. Now I have my suspicions of this letter: therefore delay
thou not in the matter, but go thyself and look carefully into
the case and let me have an answer with all speed, in order that
we may know what is true and what is untrue." When the letter
reached Baghdad, the agent mounted at once,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Three Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the agent
of Abdullah, son of Malik al-Khuza'i, on receipt of the letter at
Baghdad, mounted at once and repaired to the house of Yahya bin
Khalid, whom he found sitting with his officers and boon-
companions. After the usual salute he gave him the letter and
Yahya read it and said to the agent, "Come back to me tomorrow
for my written answer." Now when the agent had gone away, Yahya
turned to his companions and said, "What doth he deserve who
forgeth a letter in my name and carrieth it to my foe?" They
answered all and each, saying this and that, and every one
proposing some kind of punishment; but Yahya said, "Ye err in
that ye say and this your counsel is of the baseness of your
spirits and the meanness of your minds. Ye all know the close
favour of Abdullah with the Caliph and ye weet of what is between
him and us of anger and enmity; and now Almighty Allah hath made
this man the means of reconciliation between us; and hath fitted
him for such purpose and hath appointed him to quench the fire of
ire in our hearts, which hath been growing these twenty years;
and by his means our differences shall be adjusted. Wherefore it
behoveth me to requite such man by verifying his assertion and
amending his estate; so I will write him a letter to Abdullah son
of Malik, praying that he may use him with increase of honour and
continue to him his liberality." Now when his companions heard
what he said, they called down blessings on him and marvelled at
his generosity and the greatness of his magnanimity. Then he
called for paper and ink and wrote Abdullah a letter in his own
hand, to the following effect: "In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating' the Compassionate! Of a truth thy letter hath
reached me (Allah give thee long life!) and I am glad to hear of
thy safety and am pleased to be assured of thine immunity and
prosperity. It was thy thought that a certain worthy man had
forged a letter in my name and that he was not the bearer of any
message from the same; but the case is not so, for the letter I
myself wrote, and it was no forgery; and I hope, of thy courtesy
and consideration and the nobility of thy nature, that thou wilt
gratify this generous and excellent man of his hope and wish, and
honour him with the honour he deserveth and bring him to his
desire and make him the special-object of thy favour and
munificence. Whatso thou dost with him, it is to me that thou
dost the kindness, and I am thankful to thee accordingly." Then
he superscribed the letter and after sealing it, delivered it to
the agent, who despatched it to Abdullah. Now when the Governor
read it, he was charmed with its contents, and sending for the
man, said to him, "Whichever of the two promised boons is the
more acceptable to thee that will I give thee." The man replied,
"The money gift were more acceptable to me than aught else,"
whereupon Abdullah ordered him two hundred thousand dirhams and
ten Arab horses, five with housings of silk and other five with
richly ornamented saddles, used in state processions; besides
twenty chests of clothes and ten mounted white slaves and a
proportionate quantity of jewels of price. Moreover, he bestowed
on him a dress of honour and sent him to Baghdad in great
splendour. So when he came thither, he repaired to the door of
Yahya's house, before he went to his own folk, and craved
permission to enter and have audience. The Chamberlain went in to
Yahya and said to him, "O my lord, there is one at the door who
craveth speech of thee; and he is a man of apparent wealth,
courteous in manner, comely of aspect and attended by many
servants." Then Yahya bade admit him; and, when he entered and
kissed the ground before him, Yahya asked him, "Who art thou?" He
answered, "Hear me, O my lord, I am he who was done dead by the
tyranny of fortune, but thou didst raise me to life again from
the grave of calamities and exalt me to the paradise of my
desires. I am the man who forged a letter in thy name and carried
it to Abdullah bin Malik al-Khuza'i." Yahya asked, "How hath he
dealt with thee and what did he give thee?"; and the man
answered, "He hath given me, thanks to thy hand and thy great
liberality and benevolence and to thy comprehensive kindness and
lofty magnanimity and thine all-embracing generosity, that which
hath made me a wealthy man and he hath distinguished me with his
gifts and favours. And now I have brought all that he gave me and
here it is at thy door; for it is thine to decide and the command
is in thy hand." Rejoined Yahya, "Thou hast done me better
service than I did thee and I owe thee a heavy debt of gratitude
and every gift the white hand[FN#251] can give, for that thou
hast changed into love and amity the hate and enmity that were
between me and a man whom I respect and esteem. Wherefore I will
give thee the like of what Abdullah bin Malik gave thee." Then he
ordered him money and horses and chests of apparel, such as
Abdullah had given him; and thus that man's fortune was restored
to him by the munificence of these two generous ones. And folk
also relate the tale of the




                CALIPH AL-MAAMUN AND THE STRANGE
                            SCHOLAR.



It is said of Al-Maamun that, among the Caliphs of the house of
Abbas, there was none more accomplished in all branches of
knowledge than he. Now on two days in each week, he was wont to
preside at conferences of the learned, when the lawyers and
theologians disputed in his presence, each sitting in his
several-rank and room. One day as he sat thus, there came into
the assembly a stranger, clad in ragged white clothes, who took
seat in an obscure place behind the doctors of the law. Then the
assembly began to speak and debate difficult questions, it being
the custom that the various propositions should be submitted to
each in turn, and that whoso bethought him of some subtle
addition or rare conceit, should make mention of it. So the
question went round till it came to the strange man, who spake in
his turn and made a goodlier answer than any of the doctors'
replies; and the Caliph approved his speech.----And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

        When it was the Three Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
Al-Maamun approved his speech and ordered him to come up from
his low place to a high stead. Now when the second question came
to him, he made a still more notable answer, and Al-Maamun
ordered him to be preferred to a yet higher seat; and when the
third question reached him, he made answer more justly and
appropriately than on the two previous occasions, and Al-Maamun
bade him come up and sit near himself. Presently the discussion
ended when water was brought and they washed their hands after
which food was set on and they ate; and the doctors arose and
withdrew; but Al-Maamun forbade the stranger to depart with them
and, calling him to himself, treated him with especial-favour and
promised him honour and profit. Thereupon they made ready the
seance of wassail; the fair-faced cup-companions came and the
pure wine[FN#252] went round amongst them, till the cup came to
the stranger, who rose to his feet and spake thus, "If the
Commander of the Faithful permit me, I will say one word."
Answered the Caliph, "Say what thou wilt." Quoth the man "Verily
the Exalted Intelligence (whose eminence Allah increase!) knoweth
that his slave was this day, in the august assembly, one of the
unknown folk and of the meanest of the company; and the Commander
of the Faithful raised his rank and brought him near to himself,
little as were the wit and wisdom he displayed, preferring him
above the rest and advancing him to a station and a degree where
to his thought aspired not. But now he is minded to part him from
that small portion of intellect which raised him high from his
lowness and made him great after his littleness. Heaven forfend
and forbid that the Commander of the Faithful should envy his
slave what little he hath of understanding and worth and renown!
Now, if his slave should drink wine, his reason would depart far
from him and ignorance draw near to him and steal-away his good
breeding, so would he revert to that low and contemptible degree,
whence he sprang, and become ridiculous and despicable in the
eyes of the folk. I hope, therefore, that the August
Intelligence, of his power and bounty and royal-generosity and
magnanimity, will not despoil his slave of this jewel." When the
Caliph Al-Maamun heard his speech, he praised him and thanked him
and making him sit down again in his place, showed him high
honour and ordered him a present of an hundred thousand silver
pieces. Moreover he mounted him upon a horse and gave him rich
apparel; and in every assembly he was wont to exalt him and show
him favour over all the other doctors of law and religion till he
became the highest of them all in rank. And Allah is All
knowing.[FN#253] Men also tell a tale of




                 ALI SHAR[FN#254] AND ZUMURRUD.



There lived once in the days of yore and the good old times long
gone before, in the land of Khorasan, a merchant called Majd
al-Din, who had great wealth and many slaves and servants, white
and black, young and old; but he had not been blessed with a
child until he reached the age of threescore, when Almighty Allah
vouchsafed him a son, whom he named Ali Shar. The boy grew up
like the moon on the night of fulness; and when he came to man's
estate and was endowed with all kinds of perfections, his father
fell sick of a death-malady and, calling his son to him, said, "O
my son, the fated hour of my decease is at hand, and I desire to
give thee my last injunctions." He asked, "And what are they, O
my father?"; and he answered, "O my son, I charge thee, be not
over-familiar with any[FN#255] and eschew what leadeth to evil
and mischief. Beware lest thou sit in company with the wicked;
for he is like the blacksmith; if his fire burn thee not, his
smoke shall bother thee: and how excellent is the saying of the
poet,[FN#256]

'In thy whole world there is not one,
Whose friendship thou may'st count upon,
Nor plighted faith that will stand true,
When times go hard, and hopes are few.
Then live apart and dwell alone,
Nor make a prop of any one, 
I've given a gift in that I've said,
Will stand thy friend in every stead:'

And what another saith,

'Men are a hidden malady; * Rely not on the sham in them:
For perfidy and treachery * Thou'lt find, if thou examine them.'

And yet a third saith,

'Converse with men hath scanty weal, except * To while away the
     time in chat and prate:
Then shun their intimacy, save it be * To win thee lore, or
     better thine estate.'

And a fourth saith,

'If a sharp-witted wight e'er tried mankind, * I've eaten that
     which only tasted he:[FN#257]
Their amity proved naught but wile and guile, * Their faith I
     found was but hypocrisy.'"

Quoth Ali, "O my father, I have heard thee and I will obey thee
what more shall I do?" Quoth he, "Do good whereas thou art able;
be ever kind and courteous to men and regard as riches every
occasion of doing a good turn; for a design is not always easily
carried out; and how well saith the poet,

"Tis not at every time and tide unstable, * We can do kindly acts
     and charitable:
When thou art able hasten thee to act, * Lest thine endeavour
     prove anon unable!'"

Said Ali, "I have heard thee and I will obey thee."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Three Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
replied, "I have heard thee and I will obey thee; what more?" And
his sire continued, "Be thou, O my son, mindful of Allah, so
shall He be mindful of thee. Ward thy wealth and waste it not;
for an thou do, thou wilt come to want the least of mankind. Know
that the measure of a man's worth is according to that which his
right hand hendeth: and how well saith the poet,[FN#258]

'When fails my wealth no friend will deign befriend, * And when
     it waxeth all men friendship show:
How many a foe for wealth became my friend, * Wealth lost, how
     many a friend became a foe!'"

Asked Ali, "What more?" And Majd al-Din answered, "O my son, take
counsel of those who are older than thou and hasten not to do thy
heart's desire. Have compassion on those who are below thee, so
shall those who are above thee have compassion on thee; and
oppress none, lest Allah empower one who shall oppress thee. How
well saith the poet,

'Add other wit to thy wit, counsel craving, * For man's true
     course hides not from minds of two
Man is a mirror which but shows his face, * And by two mirrors he
     his back shall view.'

And as saith another,[FN#259]

'Act on sure grounds, nor hurry fast,
To gain the purpose that thou hast
And be thou kindly to all men
So kindly thou'lt be called again; 
For not a deed the hand can try, 
Save 'neath the hand of God on high, 
Nor tyrant harsh work tyranny, 
Uncrushed by tyrant harsh as he.'

And as saith yet another,[FN#260]

'Tyrannize not, if thou hast the power to do so; for the
     tyrannical-is in danger of revenges.
Thine eye will sleep while the oppressed, wakeful, will call down
     curses on thee, and God's eye sleepeth not.'

Beware of wine-bibbing, for drink is the root of all evil: it
doeth away the reason and bringeth to contempt whoso useth it;
and how well saith the poet,

'By Allah, wine shall not disturb me, while my soul * Join body,
     nor while speech the words of me explain:
No day will I be thralled to wine-skin cooled by breeze[FN#261] *
     Nor choose a friend save those who are of cups unfair.'

This, then, is my charge to thee; bear it before thine eyes, and
Allah stand to thee in my stead." Then he swooned away and kept
silent awhile; and, when he came to himself, he besought pardon
of Allah and pronounced the profession of the Faith, and was
admitted to the mercy of the Almighty. So his son wept and
lamented for him and presently made proper preparation for his
burial; great and small walked in his funeral-procession and
Koran readers recited Holy Writ about his bier; nor did Ali Shar
omit aught of what was due to the dead. Then they prayed over him
and committed him to the dust and wrote these two couplets upon
his tomb,

'Thou west create of dust and cam'st to life, * And learned'st in
     eloquence to place thy trust;
Anon, to dust returning, thou becamest * A corpse, as though
     ne'er taken from the dust."

Now his son Ali Shar grieved for him with sore grief and mourned
him with the ceremonies usual among men of note; nor did he cease
to weep the loss of his father till his mother died also, not
long afterwards, when he did with her as he had done with his
sire. Then he sat in the shop, selling and buying and consorting
with none of Almighty Allah's creatures, in accordance with his
father's injunction. This wise he continued to do for a year, at
the end of which time there came in to him by craft certain
whoreson fellows and consorted with him, till he turned after
their example to lewdness and swerved from the way of
righteousness, drinking wine in flowing bowls and frequenting
fair women night and day; for he said to himself, "Of a truth my
father amassed this wealth for me, and if I spend it not, to whom
shall I leave it? By Allah, I will not do save as saith the poet,

'An through the whole of life * Thou gett'st and gain'st for
     self;
Say, when shalt thou enjoy * Thy gains and gotten pelf?'"
    
And Ali Shar ceased not to waste his wealth all whiles of the day
and all watches of the night, till he had made away with the
whole of his riches and abode in pauper case and troubled at
heart. So he sold his shop and lands and so forth, and after this
he sold the clothes off his body, leaving himself but one suit;
and, as drunkenness quitted him and thoughtfulness came to him,
he fell into grief and sore care. One day, when he had sat from
day-break to mid-afternoon without breaking his fast, he said in
his mind, "I will go round to those on whom I spent my monies:
perchance one of them will feed me this day." So he went the
round of them all; but, as often as he knocked at any one's door
of them, the man denied himself and hid from him, till his
stomach ached with hunger. Then he betook himself to the bazar of
the merchants,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Three Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali Shar
feeling his stomach ache with hunger, betook himself to the
merchants' bazar where he found a crowd of people assembled in
ring, and said to himself, "I wonder what causeth these folk to
crowd together thus? By Allah, I will not budge hence till I see
what is within yonder ring!" So he made his way into the ring and
found therein a damsel exposed for sale who was five feet
tall,[FN#262] beautifully proportioned, rosy of cheek and high of
breast; and who surpassed all the people of her time in beauty
and loveliness and elegance and grace; even as saith one,
describing her,

"As she willed she was made, and in such a way that when * She
     was cast in Nature's mould neither short nor long was she:
Beauty woke to fall in love with the beauties of her form, *
     Where combine with all her coyness her pride and pudency:
The full moon is her face[FN#263]and the branchlet is her shape,
     * And the musk-pod is her scent--what like her can there be?
'Tis as though she were moulded from water of the pearl, * And in
     every lovely limblet another moon we see!"

And her name was Zumurrud--the Smaragdine. So when Ali Shar saw
her, he marvelled at her beauty and grace and said, "By Allah, I
will not stir hence till I see how much this girl fetcheth, and
know who buyeth her!" So he took standing-place amongst the
merchants, and they thought he had a mind to buy her, knowing the
wealth he had inherited from his parents. Then the broker stood
at the damsel's head and said, "Ho, merchants! Ho, ye men of
money! Who will open the gate of biddings for this damsel, the
mistress of moons, the union pearl, Zumurrud the curtain-maker,
the sought of the seeker and the delight of the desirous? Open
the biddings' door and on the opener be nor blame nor reproach
for evermore." Thereupon quoth one merchant, "Mine for five
hundred dinars;" "And ten," quoth another. "Six hundred," cried
an old man named Rashid al-Din, blue of eye[FN#264] and foul of
face. "And ten," cried another. "I bid a thousand," rejoined
Rashid al-Din; whereupon the rival merchants were tongue-tied,
and held their peace and the broker took counsel with the girl's
owner, who said, "I have sworn not to sell her save to whom she
shall choose: so consult her." Thereupon the broker went up to
Zumurrud and said to her, "O mistress of moons this merchant hath
a mind to buy thee." She looked at Rashid al-Din and finding him
as we have said, replied, "I will not be sold to a gray-beard,
whom decrepitude hath brought to such evil plight. Allah inspired
his saying who saith,

'I craved of her a kiss one day; but soon as she beheld * My
     hoary hairs, though I my luxuries and wealth display'd;
She proudly turned away from me, showed shoulders, cried aloud:--
     * 'No! no! by Him, whose hest mankind from nothingness hath
     made
For hoary head and grizzled chin I've no especial-love: * What!
     stuff my mouth with cotton[FN#265] ere in sepulchre I'm
     laid?'"

Now when the broker heard her words he said, "By Allah, thou art
excusable, and thy price is ten thousand gold pieces!" So he told
her owner that she would not accept of old man Rashid al-Din, and
he said, "Consult her concerning another." Thereupon a second man
came forward and said, "Be she mine for what price was offered by
the oldster she would have none of;" but she looked at him and
seeing that his beard was dyed, said "What be this fashion lewd
and base and the blackening of the hoary face?" And she made a
great show of wonderment and repeated these couplets,

"Showed me Sir Such-an-one a sight and what a frightful sight! *
     A neck by Allah, only made for slipper-sole to smite[FN#266]
A beard the meetest racing ground where gnats and lice contend, *
     A brow fit only for the ropes thy temples chafe and
     bite.[FN#267]
O thou enravish" by my cheek and beauties of my form, * Why so
     translate thyself to youth and think I deem it right?
Dyeing disgracefully that white of reverend aged hairs, * And
     hiding for foul purposes their venerable white!
Thou goest with one beard and comest back with quite another, *
     Like Punch-and-Judy man who works the Chinese shades by
     night.[FN#268]

And how well saith another'

Quoth she, 'I see thee dye thy hoariness:'[FN#269] * 'To hide, O
     ears and eyes! from thee,' quoth I:
She roared with laugh and said, 'Right funny this; * Thou art so
     lying e'en

Now when the broker heard her verse he exclaimed, "By Allah thou
hast spoken sooth!" The merchant asked what she said: so the
broker repeated the verses to him; and he knew that she was in
the right while he was wrong and desisted from buying her. Then
another came forward and said, "Ask her if she will be mine at
the same price;" but, when he did so, she looked at him and
seeing that he had but one eye, said, "This man is one-eyed; and
it is of such as he that the poet saith,[FN#270]

'Consort not with the Cyclops e'en a day; * Beware his falsehood
     and his mischief fly:
Had this monocular a jot of good, * Allah had ne'er brought
     blindness to his eye!'"

Then said the broker, pointing to another bidder, "Wilt thou be
sold to this man?" She looked at him and seeing that he was short
of stature[FN#271] and had a beard that reached to his navel,
cried, "This is he of whom the poet speaketh,

'I have a friend who hath a beard * Allah to useless length
     unroll'd:
'Tis like a certain[FN#272] winter night, * Longsome and
     darksome, drear and cold.'"

Said the broker, "O my lady, look who pleaseth thee of these that
are present, and point him out, that I may sell thee to him." So
she looked round the ring of merchants, examining one by one
their physiognomies, till her glance fell on Ali Shar,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Three Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
girl's glance fell on Ali Shar, she cast at him a look with
longing eyes, which cost her a thousand sighs, and her heart was
taken with him; for that he was of favour passing fair and
pleasanter than zephyr or northern air; and she said, "O broker,
I will be sold to none but to this my lord, owner of the handsome
face and slender form whom the poet thus describeth,

'Displaying that fair face * The tempted they assailed 
Who, had they wished me safe * That lovely face had veiled!'

For none shall own me but he, because his cheek is smooth and the
water of his mouth sweet as Salsabil;[FN#273] his spittle is a
cure for the sick and his charms daze and dazzle poet and proser,
even as saith one of him,

'His honey dew of lips is wine; his breath * Musk and those
     teeth, smile shown, are camphor's hue:
Rizwan[FN#274] hath turned him out o' doors, for fear * The
     Houris lapse from virtue at the view
Men blame his bearing for its pride, but when * I