lacing my
heart of those who wronged me." Then she praised the Creator of
the earth and the heavens and repeated these couplets,

"They ruled awhile and theirs was harsh tyrannic rule, * But soon
     that rule went by as though it never were:
If just they had won justice; but they sinned, and so * The world
     collected all its bane for them to bear:
So died they and their case's tongue declares aloud * This is for
     that so of the world your blaming spare."

And when her verse was ended she called to mind her lord Ali Shar
and wept flowing tears; but presently recovered herself and said,
"Haply Allah, who hath given mine enemies into my hand, will
vouchsafe me the speedy return of my beloved;" and she begged
forgiveness of Allah (be He extolled and exalted')--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
begged forgiveness of Allah (be He extolled and exalted!), and
said, "Haply He will vouchsafe me speedy reunion with my beloved
Ali Shar for He can do what He willeth and to His servants
showeth grace, ever mindful of their case!" Then she praised
Allah and again besought forgiveness of Him, submitting herself
to the decrees of destiny, assured that each beginning hath his
end, and repeating the saying of the poet,

"Take all things easy; for all worldly things * In Allah's hand
     are ruled by Destiny:
Ne'er shall befal thee aught of things forbidden, * Nor what is
     bidden e'er shall fail to thee!"

And what another saith.

"Roll up thy days[FN#314] and easy shall they roll * Through
     life, nor haunt the house of grief and dole:
Full many a thing, which is o'er hard to find,* Next hour shall
     bring thee to delight thy soul."

And what a third saith,[FN#315]

"Be mild what time thou'rt ta'en with anger and despite * And
     patient, if there fall misfortune on thy head.
Indeed, the nights are quick and great with child by Time * And
     of all wondrous things are hourly brought to bed."

And what a fourth saith,

"Take patience which breeds good if patience thou can learn; * Be
     calm soured, scaping anguish-draughts that gripe and bren:
Know, that if patience with good grace thou dare refuse, * With
     ill-graced patience thou shalt bear what wrote the Pen."

After which she abode thus another whole month's space, judging
the folk and bidding and forbidding by day, and by night weeping
and bewailing her separation from her lord Ali Shar. On the first
day of the fifth month, she bade them spread the banquet on the
race-plain, according to custom, and sat down at the head of the
tables, whilst the lieges awaited the signal to fall to, leaving
the place before the dish of rice vacant. She sat with eyes fixed
upon the gate of the horse-course, noting all who entered and
saying in her soul, "O Thou who restoredest Joseph to Jacob and
diddest away the sorrows of Job,[FN#316] vouchsafe of Thy might
and Thy majesty to restore me my lord Ali Shar; for Thou over all
things art Omnipotent, O Lord of the Worlds! O Guide of those who
go astray! O Hearer of those that cry! O Answerer of those who
pray, answer Thou my prayer, O Lord of all creatures." Now hardly
had she made an end of her prayer and supplication when behold,
she saw entering the gate of the horse-plain a young man, in
shape like a willow branch, the comeliest of youths and the most
accomplished, save that his face was wan and his form wasted by
weariness. Now as he entered and came up to the tables, he found
no seat vacant save that over against the dish of sweet rice so
he sat down there; and, when Zumurrud looked upon him, her heart
fluttered and, observing him narrowly, she knew him for her lord
Ali Shar, and was like to have cried out for joy, but restrained
herself, fearing disgrace before the folk and, albeit her bowels
yearned over him and her heart beat wildly, she hid what she
felt. Now the cause of his coming thither was on this wise. After
he fell asleep upon the bench and Zumurrud let herself down to
him and Jawan the Kurd seized her, he presently awoke and found
himself lying with his head bare, so he knew that some one had
come upon him and had robbed him of his turband whilst he slept.
So he spoke the saying which shall never shame its sayer and,
which is, "Verily, we are Allah's and to Him are we returning!"
and, going back to the old woman's house, knocked at the door.
She came out and he wept before her, till he fell down in a
fainting fit. Now when he came to himself, he told her all that
had passed, and she blamed him and chid him for his foolish
doings saying, "Verily thine affliction and calamity come from
thyself." And she gave not over reproaching him, till the blood
streamed from his nostrils and he again fainted away. When he
recovered from his swoon,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali
Shar recovered from his swoon he saw the old woman bewailing his
griefs and weeping over him; so he complained of his hard lot and
repeated these two couplets,

"How bitter to friends is a parting, * And a meeting how sweet to
     the lover!
Allah join all the lovers He parteth, * And save me who of love
     ne'er recover."[FN#317]

The old woman mourned over him and said to him, "Sit here, whilst
I go in quest of news for thee and return to thee in haste." "To
hear is to obey," answered he. So she left him on her good errand
and was absent till midday, when she returned and said to him, "O
Ali, I fear me thou must die in thy grief; thou wilt never see
thy beloved again save on the bridge Al-Sirat;[FN#318] for the
people of the Christian's house, when they arose in the morning,
found the window giving on the garden torn from its hinges and
Zumurrud missing, and with her a pair of saddle-bags full of the
Christian's money. And when I came thither, I saw the Chief of
Police standing at the door, he and his many, and there is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!" Now, as Ali Shar heard these words, the light in his
sight was changed to the darkness of night and he despaired of
life and made sure of death; nor did he leave weeping, till he
lost his senses. When he revived, love and longing were sore upon
him; there befel him a grievous sickness and he kept his house a
whole year; during which the old woman ceased not to bring him
doctors and ply him with ptisanes and diet-drinks and make him
savoury broths till, after the twelve-month ended, his life
returned to him. Then he recalled what had passed and repeated
these couplets,

"Severance-grief nighmost, Union done to death, * Down-railing
     tear-drops, heart fire tortureth!
Redoubleth pine in one that hath no peace * For love and wake and
     woe he suffereth:
O Lord, if there be thing to joy my soul * Deign Thou bestow it
     while I breathe my breath."

When the second year began, the old woman said to him, "O my son,
all this thy weeping and wailing will not bring thee back thy
mistress. Rise, therefore, gird the loins of resolution and seek
for her in the lands: peradventure thou shalt light on some news
of her." And she ceased not to exhort and hearten him, till he
took courage and she carried him to the Hammam. Then she made him
drink strong wine and eat white meats, and thus she did with him
for a whole month, till he regained strength; and setting out
journeyed without ceasing till he arrived at Zumurrud's city
where he went to the horse-course, and sat down before the dish
of sweet rice and put out his hand to eat of it. Now when the
folk saw this, they were concerned for him and said to him, "O
young man, eat not of that dish, for whoso eateth thereof,
misfortune befalleth him." Answered he, "Leave me to eat of it,
and let them do with me what they will, so haply shall I be at
rest from this wearying life." Accordingly he ate a first
mouthful, and Zumurrud was minded to have him brought before her,
but then she bethought her that belike he was an hungered and
said to herself, "It were properer to let him eat his fill." So
he went on eating, whilst the folk looked at him in astonishment,
waiting to see what would betide him; and, when he had satisfied
himself, Zumurrud said to certain of her eunuchry, "Go to yonder
youth who eateth of the rice and bring him to me in courteous
guise, saying: 'Answer the summons of the King who would have a
word with thee on some slight matter.'" They replied, "We hear
and obey," and going straightways up to Ali Shar, said to him, "O
my lord, be pleased to answer the summons of the King and let thy
heart be at ease." Quoth he, "Hearkening and obedience;" and
followed the eunuchs,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali Shar
rejoined, "Hearkening and obedience;" and followed the eunuchs,
whilst the people said to one another, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I
wonder what the King will do with him!" And others said, "He will
do him naught but good: for had he intended to harm him, he had
not suffered him to eat his fill." Now when the Castratos set him
in presence of Zumurrud he saluted and kissed the earth before
her, whilst she returned his salutation and received him with
honour. Then she asked him, "What may be thy name and trade, and
what brought thee to our city?"; and he answered, "O King my name
is Ali Shar; I am of the sons of the merchants of Khorasan; and
the cause of my coming hither is to seek for a slave-girl whom I
have lost for she was dearer to me than my hearing and my seeing,
and indeed my soul cleaveth to her, since I lost her; and such is
my tale." So saying he wept, till he swooned away; whereupon she
bade them sprinkle rose-water on his face, which they did till he
revived, when she said, "Here with the table of sand and the
brass pen." So they brought them and she took the pen and struck
a geomantic scheme which she considered awhile; and then cried,
"Thou hast spoken sooth, Allah will grant thee speedy reunion
with her; so be not troubled." Upon this she commanded her head-
chamberlain to carry him to the bath and afterwards to clothe him
in a handsome suit of royal-apparel, and mount him on one of the
best of the King's horses and finally bring him to the palace at
the last of the day. So the Chamberlain, after saying "I hear and
I obey," took him away, whilst the folk began to say to one
another, "What maketh the King deal thus courteously with yonder
youth?" And quoth one, "Did I not tell you that he would do him
no hurt?; for he is fair of aspect; and this I knew, ever since
the King suffered him to eat his fill." And each said his say;
after which they all dispersed and went their ways. As for
Zumurrud, she thought the night would never come, that she might
be alone with the beloved of her heart. As soon as it was dark,
she withdrew to her sleeping-chamber and made her attendants
think her overcome with sleep; and it was her wont to suffer none
to pass the night with her save those two little eunuchs who
waited upon her. After a while when she had composed herself, she
sent for her dear Ali Shar and sat down upon the bed, with
candles burning over her head and feet, and hanging lamps of gold
lighting up the place like the rising sun. When the people heard
of her sending for Ali Shar, they marvelled thereat and each man
thought his thought and said his say; but one of them declared,
"At all events the King is in love with this young man, and to-
morrow he will make him generalissimo of the army."[FN#319] Now
when they brought him into her, he kissed the ground between her
hands and called down blessings her, and she said in her mind,
"There is no help for it but that I jest with him awhile, before
I make myself known to him.''[FN#320] Then she asked him, "O Ali,
say me, hast thou been to the Hammam?"[FN#321] and he answered,
"Yes, O my lord." Quoth she, "Come, eat of this chicken and meat,
and drink of this wine and sherbet of sugar; for thou art weary;
and after that come thou hither." "I hear and I obey," replied he
and did as she commanded him do. Now when he had made an end of
eating and drinking, she said to him, "Come up with me on the
couch and shampoo[FN#322] my feet." So he fell to rubbing feet
and kneading calves, and found them softer than silk. Then said
she, "Go higher with the massage;" and he, "Pardon me, O my lord,
to the knee but no farther!" Whereupon quoth she, "Durst thou
disobey me?: it shall be an ill-omened night for thee!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zumurrud
cried to her lord, Ali Shar, "Durst thou disobey me?: it shall be
an ill-omened night for thee! Nay, but it behoveth thee to do my
bidding and I will make thee my minion and appoint thee one of my
Emirs." Asked Ali Shar, "And in what must I do thy bidding, O
King of the age?" and she answered, "Doff thy trousers and lie
down on thy face." Quoth he, "That is a thing in my life I never
did; and if thou force me thereto, verily I will accuse thee
thereof before Allah on Resurrection-day. Take everything thou
hast given me and let me go from thy city." And he wept and
lamented; but she said, "Doff thy trousers and lie down on thy
face, or I will strike off thy head." So he did as she bade him
and she mounted upon his back; and he felt what was softer than
silk and smoother than cream and said in himself, "Of a truth,
this King is nicer than all the women!" Now for a time she abode
on his back, then she turned over on the bed, and he said to
himself, "Praised be Allah! It seemeth his yard is not standing."
Then said she, "O Ali, it is of the wont of my prickle that it
standeth not, except they rub it with their hands; so, come, rub
it with thy hand, till it be at stand, else will I slay thee." So
saying, she lay down on her back and taking his hand, set it to
her parts, and he found these same parts softer than silk; white,
plumply-rounded, protuberant, resembling for heat the hot room of
the bath or the heart of a lover whom love-longing hath wasted.
Quoth Ali in himself, "Verily, our King hath a coynte; this is
indeed a wonder of wonders!" And lust get hold on him and his
yard rose and stood upright to the utmost of its height; which
when Zumurrud saw, she burst out laughing and said to him, "O my
lord, all this happeneth and yet thou knowest me not!" He asked
"And who art thou, O King?"; and she answered, "I am thy slave-
girl Zumurrud." Now whenas he knew this and was certified that
she was indeed his very slave-girl, Zumurrud, he kissed her and
embraced her and threw himself upon her as the lion upon the
lamb. Then he sheathed his steel rod in her scabbard and ceased
not to play the porter at her door and the preacher in her pulpit
and the priest[FN#323] at her prayer niche, whilst she with him
ceased not from inclination and prostration and rising up and
sitting down, accompanying her ejaculations of praise and of
"Glory to Allah!" with passionate movements and wrigglings and
claspings of his member[FN#324] and other amorous gestures, till
the two little eunuchs heard the noise. So they came and peeping
from behind the curtains saw the King lying on his back and upon
him Ali Shar, thrusting and slashing whilst she puffed and blew
and wriggled. Quoth they, "Verily, this be no man's wriggle:
belike this King is a woman.''[FN#325] But they concealed their
affair and discovered it to none. And when the morrow came,
Zumurrud summoned all the troops and the lords of the realm and
said to them, "I am minded to journey to this man's country; so
choose you a viceroy, who shall rule over you till I return to
you." And they answered, "We hear and we obey." Then she applied
herself to making ready the wants of the way, to wit provaunt and
provender, monies and rarities for presents, camels and mules and
so forth; after which she set out from her city with Ali Shar,
and they ceased not faring on, till they arrived at his native
place, where he entered his house and gave many gifts to his
friends and alms and largesse to the poor. And Allah vouchsafed
him children by her, and they both lived the gladdest and
happiest of lives, till there came to them the Destroyer of
delights and the Severer of societies and the Garnerer of graves.
And glorified be He the Eternal without cease, and praised be He
in every case! And amongst other tales they tell one of




             THE LOVES OF JUBAYR BIN UMAYR AND THE
                          LADY BUDUR.



It is related that the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid
was uneasy[FN#326] one night and could not sleep; so that he
ceased not to toss from side to side for very restlessness, till,
growing weary of this, he called Masrur and said to him, "Ho,
Masrur, find me some one who may solace me in this my
wakefulness." He answered, "O Prince of True Believers, wilt thou
walk in the palace-garden and divert thyself with the sight of
its blooms and gaze upon the stars and constellations and note
the beauty of their ordinance and the moon among them rising in
sheen over the water?" Quoth the Caliph, "O Masrur, my heart
inclineth not to aught of this." Quoth he, "O my lord, there are
in thy palace three hundred concubines, each of whom hath her
separate chamber. Do thou bid all and every retire into her own
apartment and then do thou go thy rounds and amuse thyself with
gazing on them without their knowledge." The Caliph replied, "O
Masrur, the palace is my palace and the girls are my property:
furthermore my soul inclineth not to aught of this." Then Masrur
rejoined, "O my lord, summon the doctors of law and religion and
the sages of science and poets, and bid them contend before thee
in argument and disputation and recite to thee songs and verses
and tell thee tales and anecdotes." Replied the Caliph, "My soul
inclineth not to aught of this;" and Masrur rejoined, "O my lord,
bid pretty boys and the wits and the cup-companions attend thee
and solace thee with witty sallies." "O Masrur," ejaculated the
Caliph, "indeed my soul inclineth not to aught of this." "Then, O
my lord," cried Masrur, "strike off my head;"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Masrur
cried out to the Caliph, "O my lord, strike off my head; haply
that will dispel thine unease and do away the restlessness that
is upon thee." So Al-Rashid laughed at his saying and said, "See
which of the boon-companions is at the door." Thereupon he went
out and returning, said, "O my lord, he who sits without is Ali
bin Mansur of Damascus, the Wag."[FN#327] "Bring him to me,"
quoth Harun: and Masrur went out and returned with Ibn Mansur,
who said, on entering, "Peace be with thee, O Commander of the
Faithful!" The Caliph returned his salutation and said to him, "O
Ibn Mansur, tell us some of thy stories." Said the other, "O
Commander of the Faithful, shall I tell thee what I have seen
with my eyes or what I have only heard tell?" Replied the Caliph,
"If thou have seen aught worth telling, let us hear it; for
hearing is not like seeing." Said Ibn Mansur, "O Commander of the
Faithful, lend me thine ear and thy heart;" and he answered, "O
Ibn Mansur, behold, I am listening to thee with mine ears and
looking at thee with mine eyes and attending to thee with my
heart." So Ibn Mansur began: "Know then, O Commander of the
Faithful, that I receive a yearly allowance from Mohammed bin
Sulayman al-Hashimi, Sultan of Bassorah; so I went to him once
upon a time, as usual, and found him ready to ride out hunting
and birding. I saluted him and he returned my salute, and said,
'O son of Mansur, mount and come with us to the chase:' but I
said, 'O my lord, I can no longer ride; so do thou station me in
the guest-house and give thy chamberlains and lieutenants charge
over me.' And he did so and departed for his sport. His people
entreated me with the utmost honour and entertained me with the
greatest hospitality; but said I to myself, 'By Allah, it is a
strange thing that for so long I have been in the habit of coming
from Baghdad to Bassorah, yet know no more of this town than from
palace to garden and from garden to palace. When shall I find an
occasion like this to view the different parts and quarters of
Bassorah? I will rise forthwith and walk forth alone and divert
myself and digest what I have eaten.' Accordingly I donned my
richest dress and went out a walking about Bassorah. Now it is
known to thee, O Commander of the Faithful, that it hath seventy
streets, each seventy leagues[FN#328] long, the measure of Irak;
and I lost myself in its by-streets and thirst overcame me.
Presently, as I went along, O Prince of True Believers, behold, I
came to a great door, whereon were two rings of brass,[FN#329]
with curtains of red brocade drawn before it. And on either side
of the door was a stone bench and over it was a trellis, covered
with a creeping vine that hung down and shaded the door way. I
stood still to gaze upon the place, and presently heard a
sorrowful voice, proceeding from a heart which did not rejoice,
singing melodiously and chanting these cinquains,

'My body bides the sad abode of grief and malady, * Caused by a
     fawn whose land and home are in a far countrie:
O ye two Zephyrs of the wold which caused such pain in me * By
     Allah, Lord of you! to him my heart's desire, go ye
           And chide him so perchance ye soften him I pray.


And tell us all his words if he to hear your speech shall deign,
     * And unto him the tidings bear of lovers 'twixt you twain:
And both vouchsafe to render me a service free and fain, * And
     lay my case before him showing how I e'er complain:
          And say, 'What ails thy bounder thrall this wise to     
               drive away,

Without a fault committed and without a sin to show; * Or heart
     that leans to other wight or would thy love forego:
Or treason to our plighted troth or causing thee a throe?' * And
     if he smile then say ye twain in accents soft and slow,
          'An thou to him a meeting grant 'twould be the kindest
               way!

For he is gone distraught for thee, as well indeed, he might *
     His eyes are wakeful and he weeps and wails the livelong
     night :'
If seem he satisfied by this why then 'tis well and right, * But
     if he show an angry face and treat ye with despite,
          Trick him and 'Naught we know of him!' I beg you both
               to say.'

Quoth I to myself, 'Verily, if the owner of this voice be fair,
she conjoineth beauty of person and eloquence and sweetness of
voice.' Then I drew near the door, and began raising the curtain
little by little, when lo! I beheld a damsel, white as a full
moon when it mooneth on its fourteenth night, with joined
eyebrows twain and languorous lids of eyne, breasts like
pomegranates twin and dainty, lips like double carnelian, a mouth
as it were the seal-of Solomon, and teeth ranged in a line that
played with the reason of proser and rhymer, even as saith the
poet,

'O pearly mouth of friend, who set those pretty pearls in line, *
     And filled thee full of whitest chamomile and reddest wine?
Who lent the morning-glory in thy smile to shimmer and shine *
     Who with that ruby-padlock dared thy lips to seal-and sign!
Who looks on thee at early morn with stress of joy and bliss *
     Goes mad for aye, what then of him who wins a kiss of
     thine?'[FN#330]

And as saith another,

    'O pearl-set mouth of friend    * Pity poor Ruby's cheek 
     Boast not o'er one who owns    * Thee, union and unique.'

In brief she comprised all varieties of loveliness and was a
seduction to men and women, nor could the gazer satisfy himself
with the sight of her charms; for she was as the poet hath said
of her,

'When comes she, slays she; and when back he turns, * She makes
     all men regard with loving eyes:
A very sun! a very moon! but still * Prom hurt and harmful ills
     her nature flies.
Opes Eden's garden when she shows herself, * And full moon see we
     o'er her necklace rise.'

How as I was looking at her through an opening of the curtain,
behold, she turned; and, seeing me standing at the door, said to
her handmaid, 'See who is at the door.' So the slave-girl came up
to me and said, 'O Shaykh, hast thou no shame, or do impudent
airs suit hoary hairs?' Quoth I, 'O my mistress, I confess to the
hoary hairs, but as for impudent airs, I think not to be guilty
of unmannerliness.' Then the mistress broke in, 'And what can be
more unmannerly than to intrude thyself upon a house other than
thy house and gaze on a Harim other than thy Harim?' I pleaded,
'O my lady, I have an excuse;' and when she asked, 'And what is
thine excuse?' I answered, 'I am a stranger and so thirsty that I
am well nigh dead of thirst.' She rejoined, 'We accept thine
excuse,' --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When It was the Three Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
lady rejoined, 'We accept thine excuse,' and calling one of her
slave maids, said to her, 'O Lutf,[FN#331] give him to drink in
the golden tankard.' So she brought me a tankard of red gold, set
with pearls and gems of price, full of water mingled with virgin
musk and covered with a napkin of green silk, and I addressed
myself to drink and was long about my drinking, for I stole
glances at her the while, till I could prolong my stay no longer.
Then I returned the tankard to the girl, but did not offer to go;
and she said to me, 'O Shaykh, wend thy way.' But I said, 'O my
lady, I am troubled in mind.' She asked me 'for what?' and I
answered, 'For the turns of Time and the change of things.'
Replied she, 'Well mayst thou be troubled thereat for Time
breedeth wonders. But what hast thou seen of such surprises that
thou shouldst muse upon them?' Quoth I, 'I was thinking of the
whilom owner of this house, for he was my intimate in his
lifetime.' Asked she, 'What was his name?'; and I answered,
'Mohammed bin Ali the Jeweller and he was a man of great wealth.
Tell me did he leave any children?' Said she, 'Yes, he left a
daughter, Budur by name, who inherited all his wealth?' Quoth I,
'Meseemeth thou art his daughter?' 'Yes,' answered she, laughing;
then added, 'O Shaykh, thou best talked long enough; now wend thy
ways.' Replied I, 'Needst must I go, but I see thy charms are
changed by being out of health; so tell me thy case; it may be
Allah will give thee comfort at my hands.' Rejoined she, 'O
Shayth, if thou be a man of discretion, I will discover to thee
my secret; but first tell me who thou art, that I may know
whether thou art worthy of confidence or not; for the poet
saith,[FN#332]

'None keepeth a secret but a faithful person: with the best of
     mankind remaineth concealed.
I have kept my secret in a house with a lock, whose key is lost
     and whose door is sealed.'

Thereto I replied, 'O my lady, an thou wouldest know who I am, I
am Ali bin Mansur of Damascus, the Wag, cup-companion to the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid.' Now when she heard
my name, she came down from her seat and saluting me, said,
'Welcome, O Ibn Mansur! Now will I tell thee my case and entrust
thee with my secret. I am a lover separated from her beloved.' I
answered, 'O my lady, thou art fair and shouldest be on love
terms with none but the fair. Whom then dost thou love?' Quoth
she, 'I love Jubayr bin Umayr al-Shaybani, Emir of the Banu
Shayban;[FN#333]' and she described to me a young man than whom
there was no prettier fellow in Bassorah. I asked, 'O my lady,
have interviews or letters passed between you?' and she answered
'Yes, but our love was tongue-love souls, not heart and souls-
love; for he kept not his trust nor was he faithful to his
troth.' Said I, 'O my lady, and what was the cause of your
separation?', and she replied, 'I was sitting one day whilst my
handmaid here combed my hair. When she had made an end of combing
it, she plaited my tresses, and my beauty and loveliness charmed
her; so she bent over me and kissed my cheek.[FN#334] At that
moment he came in unawares, and, seeing the girl kiss my cheek,
straightways turned away in anger, vowing eternal-separation and
repeating these two couplets,

'If another share in the thing I love, * I abandon my love and
     live lorn of love.
My beloved is worthless if aught she will, * Save that which her
     lover doth most approve.

And from the time he left me to this present hour, O Ibn Mansur,
he hath neither written to me nor answered my letters.' Quoth I,
'And what purposes" thou to do?' Quoth she, 'I have a mind to
send him a letter by thee. If thou bring me back an answer, thou
shalt have of me five hundred gold pieces; and if not, then an
hundred for thy trouble in going and coming.' I answered, 'Do
what seemeth good to thee; I hear and I obey thee.' Whereupon she
called to one of her slave-girls, 'Bring me ink case and paper,'
and she wrote thereon these couplets,

'Beloved, why this strangeness, why this hate? * When shall thy
     pardon reunite us two?
Why dost thou turn from me in severance? * Thy face is not the
     face I am wont to know.
Yes, slanderers falsed my words, and thou to them * Inclining,
     madest spite and envy grow.
An hast believed their tale, the Heavens forbid * Now thou
     believe it when dost better bow!
By thy life tell what hath reached thine ear, * Thou know'st what
     said they and so justice show.
An it be true I spoke the words, my words * Admit interpreting
     and change allow:
Given that the words of Allah were revealed, * Folk changed the
     Torah[FN#335] and still changing go:
What slanders told they of mankind before! * Jacob heard Joseph
     blamed by tongue of foe.
Yea, for myself and slanderer and thee * An awful day of
     reckoning there shall be.'

Then she sealed the letter and gave it to me; and I took it and
carried it to the house of Jubayr bin Umayr, whom I found absent
a hunting. So I sat down to wait for him; and behold, he returned
from the chase; and when I saw him, O Prince of True Believers,
come riding up, my wit was confounded by his beauty and grace. As
soon as he sighted me sitting at the house-door, he dismounted
and coming up to me embraced me and saluted me; and meseemed I
embraced the world and all therein. Then he carried me into his
house and, seating me on his own couch, called for food. They
brought a table of Khalanj-wood of Khorasan with feet of gold,
whereon were all manners of meats, fried and roasted and the
like. So I seated myself at the table and examining it with care
found these couplets engraved upon it:"[FN#336]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say,

       When it was the Three Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali son of
Mansur continued: "So I seated myself at the table of Jubayr bin
Umayr al-Shaybani and, examining it with care, found these
couplets engraved upon it,

          'On these which once were-chicks,
          Your mourning glances fix,
Late dwellers in the mansion of the cup,
          Now nearly eaten up!
               Let tears bedew
          The memory of that stew,
          Those partridges, once roast,
               Now lost!

The daughters of the grouse in plaintive strain
Bemourn, and still bemourn, and mourn again!
          The children of the fry,
               We lately saw 
          Half smothered in pilau
With buttery mutton fritters smoking by!
          Alas! my heart, the fish! 
               Who filled his dish,

With flaky form in varying colours spread
On the round pastry cake of household bread! 
          Heaven sent us that kabob! 
               For no one could 
          (Save heaven he should rob)
Produce a thing so excellently good, 
          Or give us roasted meat
With basting oil so savourily replete!

But, oh! mine appetite, alas! for thee! 
          Who on that furmeaty
So sharpset west a little while ago--
That furmeaty, which mashed by hands of snow, 
          A light reflection bore,
Of the bright bracelets that those fair hands wore; 
          Again remembrance glads my sense 
          With visions of its excellence!

          Again I see the cloth unrolled 
          Rich worked in many a varied fold! 
          Be patient, oh! my soul, they say 
          Fortune rules all that's new and strange, 
          And though she pinches us to day,
To-morrow brings full rations, and a change!'[FN#337]

Then said Jubayr, 'Put forth thy hand to our food and ease our
heart by eating of our victual.' Answered I, 'By Allah, I will
not eat a mouthful, till thou grant me my desire.' He asked,
'What is thy desire?'; so I brought out the letter and gave it to
him; but, when he had read it and mastered its contents, he tore
it in pieces and throwing it on the floor, said to me, 'O Ibn
Mansur, I will grant thee whatever thou askest save thy desire
which concerneth the writer of this letter, for I have no answer
to her.' At this I rose in anger; but he caught hold of my
skirts, saying, 'O Ibn Mansur, I will tell thee what she said to
thee, albeit I was not present with you.' I asked, 'And what did
she say to me?'; and he answered, 'Did not the writer of this
letter say to thee, If thou bring me back an answer, thou shalt
have of me five hundred ducats; and if not, an hundred for thy
pains?' 'Yes,' replied I; and he rejoined, 'Abide with me this
day and eat and drink and enjoy thyself and make merry, and thou
shalt have thy five hundred ducats.' So I sat with him and ate
and drank and made merry and enjoyed myself and entertained him
with talk deep in to the night;[FN#338] after which I said to
him, 'O my master, is there no music in thy house.' He answered,
'Verily for many a day we have drunk without music.' Then he
called out, saying, 'Ho, Shajarat al-Durr?' Whereupon a slave-
girl answered him from her chamber and came in to us, with a lute
of Hindu make, wrapped in a silken bag. And she sat down and,
laying the lute in her lap, preluded in one and twenty modes;
then, returning to the first, she sang to a lively measure these
couplets,

'We have ne'er tasted of Love's sweets and bitter draught, * No
     difference kens 'twixt presence-bliss and absence-stress;
And so, who hath declined from Love's true road, * No diference
     kens 'twixt smooth and ruggedness:
I ceased not to oppose the votaries of love, * Till I had tried
     its sweets and bitters not the less:
How many a night my pretty friend conversed with me * And sipped
     I from his lips honey of love liesse:
Now have I drunk its cup of bitterness, until * To bondman and to
     freedman I have proved me base.
How short-aged was the night together we enjoyed, * When seemed
     it daybreak came on nightfall's heel to press!
But Fate had vowed to disunite us lovers twain, * And she too
     well hath kept her vow, that votaress.
Fate so decreed it! None her sentence can withstand: * Where is
     the wight who dares oppose his Lord's command?'

Hardly had she finished her verses, when her lord cried out with
a great cry and fell down in a fit; whereupon exclaimed the
damsel, 'May Allah not punish thee, O old man! This long time
have we drunk without music, for fear the like of this falling
sickness befal our lord. But now go thou to yonder chamber and
there sleep.' So I went to the chamber which she showed me and
slept till the morning, when behold, a page brought me a purse of
five hundred dinars and said to me, 'This is what my master
promised thee; but return thou not to the damsel who sent thee,
god let it be as though neither thou nor we had ever heard of
this matter.' 'Hearkening and obedience,' answered I and taking
the purse, went my way. Still I said to myself, 'The lady must
have expected me since yesterday; and by Allah there is no help
but I return to her and tell her what passed between me and him:
otherwise she will revile me and revile all who come from my
country.' So I went to her and found her standing behind the
door; and when she saw me she said, 'O Ibn Mansur, thou hast done
nothing for me?' I asked, 'Who told thee of this?'; and she
answered, 'O Ibn Mansur, yet another thing hath been revealed to
me;[FN#339] and it is that, when thou handedst him the letter, he
tore it in pieces. and throwing it on the floor, said to thee: 'O
Ibn Mansur, I will grant thee whatever thou askest save thy
desire which concerneth the writer of this letter; for I have no
answer to her missive.' Then didst thou rise from beside him in
anger; but he laid hold of thy skirts, saying: 'O son of Mansur,
abide with me to day, for thou art my guest, and eat and drink
and make merry; and thou shalt have thy five hundred ducats.' So
thou didst sit with him, eating and drinking and making merry,
and entertainedst him with talk deep into the night and a slave-
girl sang such an air and such verses, whereupon he fell down in
a fit.' So, O Commander of the Faithful, I asked her 'West thou
then with us?'; and she answered, 'O Ibn Mansur, hast thou not
heard the saying of the poet,

'The hearts of lovers have eyes I ken, * Which see the unseen by
     vulgar men.'

However, O Ibn Mansur, the night and day shift not upon anything
but they bring to it change.'--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady
exclaimed, 'O Ibn Mansur, the night and the day shift not upon
anything but they bring to it change!' Then she raised her glance
to heaven and said, 'O my God and my Leader and my Lord, like as
Thou hast afflicted me with love of Jubayr bin Umayr, even so do
Thou afflict him with love of me, and transfer the passion from
my heart to his heart!'[FN#340] Then she gave me an hundred
sequins for my trouble in going and coming and I took it and
returned to the palace, where I found the Sultan come home from
the chase; so I got my pension of him and fared back to Baghdad.
And when next year came, I repaired to Bassorah, as usual, to
seek my pension, and the Sultan paid it to me; but, as I was
about to return to Baghdad, I bethought me of the Lady Budur and
said to myself, 'By Allah, I must needs go to her and see what
hath befallen between her and her lover!' So I went to her house
and finding the street before her door swept and sprinkled and
eunuchs and servants and pages standing before the entrance, said
to myself, 'Most like grief hath broken the lady's heart and she
is dead, and some Emir or other hath taken up his abode in her
house.' So I left it and went on to the house of Jubayr, son of
Umayr the Shaybani, where I found the benches of the porch broken
down and ne'er a page at the door, as of wont and said to myself,
'Haply he too is dead.' Then I stood still before the door of his
house and with my eyes running over with tears, bemoaned it in
these couplets,

'O Lords of me, who fared but whom my heart e'er followeth, *
     Return and so my festal-days with you shall be renewed!
I stand before the home of you, bewailing your abode; * Quiver
     mine eyelids and my eyes with tears are ever dewed:
I ask the house and its remains that seem to weep and wail, *
     'Where is the man who whilom wont to lavish goods and
good?''
It saith, 'Go, wend thy way; those friends like travellers have
     fared * From Springtide-camp, and buried lie of earth and
     worms the food!'
Allah ne'er desolate us so we lose their virtues' light * In
     length and breadth, but ever be the light in spirit viewed!'

As I, O Prince of True Believers, was thus keening over the folk
of the house,[FN#341] behold, out came a black slave therefrom
and said to me, 'Hold thy peace, O Shaykh! May thy mother be reft
of thee! Why do I see thee bemoaning the house in this wise?'
Quoth I, 'I frequented it of yore, when it belonged to a good
friend of mine.' Asked the slave, 'What was his name?'; and I
answered, 'Jubayr bin Umayr the Shaybani.' Rejoined he, And what
hath befallen him? Praised be Allah, he is yet here with us in
the enjoyment of property and rank and prosperity, except that
Allah hath stricken him with love of a damsel called the Lady
Budur;, and he is so whelmed by his love of her and his longing
for her, that he is like a great rock cumbering the ground. If he
hunger, he saith not, 'Give me meat;' nor, if he thirst, doth he
say, 'Give me drink.' Quoth I, 'Ask leave for me to go in to
him.' Said the slave, 'O my lord, wilt thou go in to one who
understandeth or to one who understandeth not?'; and I said
'There is no help for it but I see him whatever be the case.'
Accordingly he went in to ask and presently returned with
permission for me to enter, whereupon I went in to Jubayr and
found him like a rock that cumbereth the ground, understanding
neither sign nor speech; and when I spoke to him he answered me
not. Then said one of his servants, 'O my lord, if thou remember
aught of verse, repeat it and raise thy voice; and he will be
aroused by this and speak with thee.' So I versified in these two
couplets,

'Hast quit the love of Moons[FN#342] or dost persist? * Dost wake
     o' nights or close in sleep thine eyes?
If aye thy tears in torrents flow, then learn * Eternal-thou
     shalt dwell in Paradise.'[FN#343]

When he heard these verses he opened his eyes and said; 'Welcome,
O son of Mansur! Verily, the jest is become earnest.' Quoth I, 'O
my lord, is there aught thou wouldst have me do for thee?'
Answered he, 'Yes, I would fain write her a letter and send it to
her by thee. If thou bring me back her answer, thou shalt have of
me a thousand dinars; and if not, two hundred for thy pains.' So
I said, 'Do what seemeth good to thee;'--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibn Mansur
continued: "So I said, 'Do what seemeth good to thee;' whereupon
he called to one of his slave-girls, 'Bring me ink case and
paper;' and wrote these couplets,

'I pray in Allah's name, O Princess mine, be light * On me, for
     Love hath robbed me of my reason's sight'
'Slaved me this longing and enthralled me love of you; * And clad
     in sickness garb, a poor and abject wight.
I wont ere this to think small things of Love and hold, * O
     Princess mine, 'twas silly thing and over-slight.
But when it showed me swelling surges of its sea, * To Allah's
     hest I bowed and pitied lover's plight.
An will you, pity show and deign a meeting grant, * An will you
     kill me still forget not good requite.'[FN#344]

Then he sealed the letter and gave it to me. So I took it and,
repairing to Budur's house, raised the door-curtain little by
little, as before, and looking in behold, I saw ten damsels,
high-bosomed virgins, like moons, and the Lady Budur as she were
the full moon among the stars, sitting in their midst, or the
sun, when it is clear of clouds and mist; nor was there on her
any trace of pain or care. And as I looked and marvelled at her
case, she turned her glance upon me and, seeing me standing at
the door, said to me, 'Well come, and welcome and all hail to
thee, O Ibn Mansur! Come in.' So I entered and saluting her gave
her the letter; and she read it and when she understood it, she
said laughingly to me, 'O Ibn Mansur, the poet lied not when he
sang,

'Indeed I'll bear my love for thee with firmest soul, * Until
     from thee to me shall come a messenger.

'Look'ye, O Ibn Mansur, I will write thee an answer, that he may
give thee what he promised thee.' And I answered, 'Allah requite
thee with good!' So she called out to a handmaid, 'Bring inkcase
and paper,' and wrote these couplets,

'How comes it I fulfilled my vow the while that vow broke you? *
     And, seen me lean to equity, iniquity wrought you?
'Twas you initiated wrongous dealing and despite: * You were the
     treachetour and treason came from only you!
I never ceased to cherish mid the sons of men my troth, * And
     keep your honour brightest bright and swear by name of you
Until I saw with eyes of me what evil you had done; * Until I
     heard with ears of me what foul report spread you.
Shall I bring low my proper worth while raising yours so high? *
     By Allah had you me eke I had honoured you!
But now uprooting severance I will fain console my heart, * And
     wring my fingers clean of you for evermore to part!'

Quoth I, 'By Allah, O my lady, between him and death there is but
the reading of this letter!' So I tore it in pieces and said to
her, 'Write him other than these lines.' 'I hear and obey
answered she and wrote the following couplets,

'Indeed I am consoled now and sleep without a tear, * And all
     that happened slandering tongues have whispered in mine ear:
My heart obeyed my hest and soon forgot thy memory, * And learnt
     mine eyelids 'twas the best to live in severance sheer:
He lied who said that severance is a bitterer thing than gall: *
     It never disappointed me, like wine I find it cheer:
I learnt to hate all news of thee, e'en mention of thy name, *
     And turn away and look thereon with loathing pure and mere:
Lookye! I cast thee out of heart and far from vitals mine; * Then
     let the slanderer wot this truth and see I am sincere.'

Quoth I, 'By Allah, O my lady, when he shall read these verses,
his soul will depart his body!' Quoth she, 'O Ibn Mansur, is
passion indeed come to such a pass with him that thou sayest this
saying?' Quoth I, 'Had I said more than this verily it were but
the truth: but mercy is of the nature of the noble.' Now when she
heard this her eyes brimmed over with tears and she wrote him a
note, I swear by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, there is
none in thy Chancery could write the like of it; and therein were
these couplets,

'How long shall I thy coyness and thy great aversion see? * Thou
     hast satisfied my censurers and pleased their enmity:
I did amiss and wot it not; so deign to tell me now * Whatso they
     told thee, haply 'twas the merest calumny.
I wish to welcome thee, dear love, even as welcome I * Sleep to
     these eyes and eyelids in the place of sleep to be.
And since 'tis thou hast made me drain th' unmixed cup of love, *
     If me thou see with wine bemused heap not thy blame on me!'

And when she had written the missive,--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Budur
had written the missive, she sealed it and gave it to me; and I
said, 'O my lady, in good sooth this thy letter will make the
sick man whole and ease the thirsting soul.' Then I took it and
went from her, when she called me back and said to me, 'O son of
Mansur, say to him: 'She will be thy guest this night.' At this I
joyed with exceeding great joy and carried the letter to Jubayr,
whom I found with his eyes fixed intently on the door, expecting
the reply and as soon as I gave him the letter and he opened and
read it and understood it, he uttered a great cry and fell down
in a fainting fit. When he came to himself, he said to me, 'O Ibn
Mansur, did she indeed write this note with her hand and feel it
with her fingers?' Answered I, 'O my lord, do folk write with
their feet?' And by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I had not
done speaking these words, when we heard the tinkle-tinkle of her
anklets in the vestibule and she entered. And seeing her he
sprang to his feet as though nothing pained or ailed him and
embraced her like the letter L embraceth the letter A;[FN#345]
and the infirmity, that erst would not depart at once left
him.[FN#346] Then he sat down, but she abode standing and I said
to her, 'O my lady, why dost thou not sit?' Said she, 'O Ibn
Mansur, save on a condition that is between us, I will not sit.'
I asked, 'And what is that?'; and she answered, 'None may know
lovers' secrets,' and putting her mouth to Jubayr's ear whispered
to him; where upon he replied, 'I hear and I obey.' Then he rose
and said somewhat in a whisper to one of his slaves, who went out
and returned in a little while with a Kazi and two witnesses.
Thereupon Jubayr stood up and taking a bag containing an hundred
thousand dinars, said, O Kazi, marry me to this young lady and
write this sum to her marriage-settlement.' Quoth the Kazi to
her, 'Say thou, I consent to this.' 'I consent to this,' quoth
she, whereupon he drew up the contract of marriage and she opened
the bag; and, taking out a handful of gold, gave it to the Kazi
and the witnesses and handed the rest to Jubayr. Thereupon the
Kazi and the witnesses withdrew, and I sat with them, in mirth
and merriment, till the most part of the night was past, when I
said in my mind, 'These are lovers and they have been this long
while separated. I will now arise and go sleep in some place afar
from them and leave them to their privacy, one with other.' So I
rose, but she caught hold of my skirts, saying, 'What thinkest
thou to do?' 'Nothing but so and so,' answered I; upon which she
rejoined, 'Sit thee down; and when we would be rid of thee, we
will send thee away.' So I sat down with them till near daybreak,
when she said to me, 'O Ibn Mansur, go to yonder chamber; for we
have furnished it for thee and it is thy sleeping-place.'
Thereupon I arose and went thither and slept till morning, when a
page brought me basin and ewer, and I made the ablution and
prayed the dawn-prayer. Then I sat down and presently, behold,
Jubayr and his beloved came out of the bath in the house, and I
saw them both wringing their locks.[FN#347] So I wished them good
morning and gave them joy of their safety and reunion, saying to
Jubayr, 'That which began with constraint and conditions hath
ended in cordial-contentment.' He answered, 'Thou sayest well,
and indeed thou deservest thy honorarium;' and he called his
treasurer, and said, 'Bring hither three thousand dinars.' So he
brought a purse containing the gold pieces and Jubayr gave it to
me, saying, 'Favour us by accepting this.' But I replied, 'I will
not accept it till thou tell me the manner of the transfer of
love from her to thee, after so huge an aversion.' Quoth he,
'Hearkening and obedience! Know that we have a festival-called
New Year's day,[FN#348] when all the people fare forth and
take boat and go a-pleasuring on the river. So I went out with my
comrades, and saw a skiff, wherein were ten damsels like moons
and amongst them, the Lady Budur lute in hand. She preluded in
eleven modes, then, returning to the first, sang these two
couplets,

'Fire is cooler than fires in my breast, * Rock is softer than
     heart of my lord
Marvel I that he's formed to hold * In water soft frame heart
     rock-hard!'

Said I to her, 'Repeat the couplets and the air!' But she would
not:'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Jubayr
continued, 'So cried I to her, Repeat the couplets and the air!'
But she would not; whereupon I bade the boatmen pelt her with
oranges, and they pelted her till we feared her boat would
founder Then she went her way, and this is how the love was
transferred from her heart to mine.' So I wished them joy of
their union and, taking the purse with its contents, I returned
to Baghdad." Now when the Caliph heard Ibn Mansur's story his
heart was lightened and the restlessness and oppression from
which he suffered forsook him. And they also tell the tale of




          THE 