et him when he enters Paradise and so forth. It was borrowed
from the highly imaginative faith of the Guebre, the Zoroastrian.
On Chinavad or Chanyud-pul (Sirat), the Judgement bridge, 37 rods
(rasan) long, straight and 37 fathoms broad for the good, and
crooked and narrow as sword-edge for the bad, a nymph-like form
will appear to the virtuous and say, "I am the personification of
thy good deeds!" In Hell there will issue from a fetid gale a
gloomy figure with head like a minaret, red eyeballs, hooked nose,
teeth like pillars, spear-like fangs, snaky locks etc. and when
asked who he is he will reply, "I am the personification of thine
evil acts!" (Dabistan i. 285.) The Hindus also personify
everything.

[FN#414]  Arab. "Banu Israil;" applied to the Jews when theirs was
the True Faith i.e. before the coming of Jesus, the Messiah, whose
mission completed that of Moses and made it obsolete (Matruk) even
as the mission of Jesus was completed and abrogated by that of
Mohammed. The term "Yahud"=Jew is applied scornfully to the Chosen
People after they rejected the Messiah, but as I have said
"Israelite" is used on certain occasions, Jew on others.

[FN#415]  Arab. "Kasa'ah," a wooden bowl, a porringer; also applied
to a saucer.

[FN#416]  Arab. "Rasul"=one sent, an angel, an "apostle;" not to be
translated, as by the vulgar, "prophet." Moreover Rasul is higher
than Nabi (prophet), such as Abraham, Isaac, etc., depositaries of
Al-Islam, but with a succession restricted to their own families.
Nabi-mursil (Prophet-apostle) is the highest of all, one sent with
a book: of these are now only four, Moses, David, Jesus and
Mohammed, the writings of the rest having perished. In Al-Islam
also angels rank below men, being only intermediaries (=       ,
nuncii, messengers) between the Creator and the Created. This
knowledge once did me a good turn at Harar, not a safe place in
those days. (First Footsteps in East Africa, p. 349.)

[FN#417]  A doctor of law in the reign of Al-Maamun.

[FN#418]  Here the exclamation is= D.V.; and it may be assumed
generally to have that sense.

[FN#419]  Arab. "Taylasan," a turban worn hood-fashion by the
"Khatib" or preacher. I have sketched it in my Pilgrimage and
described it (iii. 315). Some Orientalists derive Taylasan from
Atlas=satin, which is peculiarly inappropriate. The word is
apparently barbarous and possibly Persian like Kalansuwah, the
Dervish cap. "Thou son of a Taylasan"=a barbarian. (De Sacy,
Chrest. Arab. ii. 269.)

[FN#420]  Arab. " Kinyah" vulg. "Kunyat" = patronymic or
matronymic; a name beginning with "Abu" (father) or with "Umm"
(mother). There are so few proper names in Al-Islam that such
surnames, which, as will be seen, are of infinite variety, become
necessary to distinguish individuals. Of these sobriquets I shall
give specimens further on.

[FN#421]  "Whoso seeth me in his sleep, seeth me truly; for Satan
cannot assume my semblance," said (or is said to have said)
Mohammed. Hence the vision is true although it comes in early night
and not before dawn. See Lane M. E., chaps. ix.

[FN#422]  Arab. "Al-Maukab ;" the day when the pilgrims march out
of the city; it is a holiday for all, high and low.

[FN#423]  "The Gate of Salutation ;" at the South-Western corner of
the Mosque where Mohammed is buried. (Pilgrimage ii. 60 and plan.)
Here "Visitation" (Ziyarah) begins.

[FN#424]  The tale is told by Al-Ishaki in the reign of Al-Maamun.

[FN#425]  The speaker in dreams is the Heb. "Waggid," which the
learned and angry Graetz (Geschichte, etc. vol. ix.) absurdly
translates "Traum souffleur."

[FN#426]  Tenth Abbaside. A.D. 849-861

[FN#427]  Arab. "Muwallad" (fem. "Muwalladah"); a rearling, a slave
born in a Moslem land. The numbers may appear exaggerated, but even
the petty King of Ashanti had, till the last war, 3333 "wives."

[FN#428]  The Under-prefect of Baghdad.

[FN#429]  "Ja'afar," our old Giaffar (which is painfully like
"Gaffer," i.e. good father) means either a rushing river or a
rivulet.

[FN#430]  A regular Fellah's name also that of a village
(Pilgrimage i. 43) where a pleasant story is told about one Haykal.

[FN#431]  The "Mountain" means the rocky and uncultivated ground
South of Cairo, such as Jabal-al-Ahmar and the geological-sea-coast
flanked by the old Cairo-Suez highway.

[FN#432]  A popular phrase=our "sharp as a razor."

[FN#433]  i.e. are men so few; a favourite Persian phrase.

[FN#434]  She is a woman of rank who would cause him to be
assassinated.

[FN#435]  This is not Al-Hakimbi' Amri'llah the famous or infamous
founder of the Druze ((Duruz)) faith and held by them to be, not an
incarnation of the Godhead, but the Godhead itself in propria
persona, who reigned A.D. 926-1021: our Hakim is the orthodox
Abbaside Caliph of Egypt who dated from two centuries after him
(A.D. 1261). Had the former been meant, it would have thrown back
this part of The Nights to an earlier date than is generally
accepted. But in a place still to come I shall again treat of the
subject.

[FN#436]  For an account of a similar kind which was told to me
during the last few years see "Midian Revisited," i. 15. These
hiding-places are innumerable in lands of venerable antiquity like
Egypt; and, if there were any contrivance for detecting hidden
treasure, it would make the discoverer many times a millionaire.

[FN#437]  i.e. it had been given to him or his in writing, like the
book left to the old woman before quoted in "Midian," etc.

[FN#438]  Arab. "Kird" (pron. in Egypt "Gird"). It is usually the
hideous Abyssinian cynocephalus which is tamed by the ape-leader
popularly called Kuraydati (Lane, M.E., chaps. xx.). The beast has
a natural-penchant for women ; I heard of one which attempted to
rape a girl in the public street and was prevented only by a
sentinel's bayonet. They are powerful animals and bite like
greyhounds.

[FN#439]  Easterns attribute many complaints (such as toothache) to
worms, visible as well as microscopic, which may be held a fair
prolepsis of the "germ-theory" the bacterium. the bacillus, the
microbe. Nymphomania, the disease alluded to in these two tales is
always attributed to worms in the vagina.

[FN#440]  Bestiality, very rare in Arabia is fatally common amongst
those most debauched of debauched races, the Egyptian proper and
the Sindis. Hence the Pentateuch, whose object was to breed a
larger population of fighting men, made death the penalty for lying
with a beast (Deut. xxvii. 21). C. S. Sonnini (Travels, English
translation, p. 663) gives a curious account of Fellah lewdness.
"The female crocodile during congress is turned upon her back ( ?)
and cannot rise without difficulty. Will it be believed that there
are men who take advantage of the helpless situation of the female,
drive off the male, and supplant him in this frightful intercourse
? Horrible embraces, the knowledge of which was wanting to complete
the disgusting history of human perversity!" The French traveller
forgets to add the superstitious explanation of this congress which
is the sovereignest charm for rising to rank and riches. The Ajaib
al-Hind tells a tale (chaps. xxxix.) of a certain Mohammed bin
Bullishad who had issue by a she-ape: the young ones were hairless
of body and wore quasi-human faces; and the father's sight had
become dim by his bestial-practice. 










This etext was produced by J.C. Byers at jcbyers@capitalnet.com.
Proofreaders were: J.C. Byers, Norm Wolcott, Dianne Doefler and
Charles Wilson.




This etext was scanned by J.C. Byers
(www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm)
and proofread by Doris Ringbloom




                        THE BOOK OF THE 
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT 
                A Plain and Literal Translation 
             of the Arabian Nights Entertainments 
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by 
                       Richard F. Burton 
                                
                          VOLUME FOUR 
                                
                To Foster Fitzgerald Arbuthnot. 

My Dear Arbuthnot,


     I have no fear that a friend, whose friendship has lasted
nearly a third of a century, will misunderstand my reasons for
inscribing his name upon these pages. You have lived long enough
in the East and, as your writings show, observantly enough, to
detect the pearl which lurks in the kitchen-midden, and to note
that its lustre is not dimmed nor its value diminished by its
unclean surroundings. 

                    Ever yours sincerely,    
                    Richard F. Burton. 

Athenæum Club, October 1, 1885 

Contents of the Fourth Volume

Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman (continued)
     a.   Ni'amar Bin Al-Rabi'a and Naomi His Slave-girl
     b.   Conclusion of the Tale of Kamar Al-Zaman 
22.  Ala Al-Din Abu Al-Shamat 
23.  Hatim of the Trive of Tayy 
24.  Ma'an the Son of Zaidah 
25.  Ma'an the Son of Zaidah and the Badawi 
26.  The City of Labtayt 
27.  The Caliph Hisham and the Arab Youth 
28.  Ibrahim Bin Al-Mahdi and the Barber-Surgeon 
29.  The City of Many-Columned Iram and Abdullah Son of Abi
     Kilabah 
30.  Isaac of Mosul 
31.  The Sweep and the Noble Lady
32.  The Mock Caliph 
33.  Ali the Persian 
34.  Haru Al-Rashid and the Slave-Girl and the Iman Abu Yusuf 
35.  The Lover Who Feigned Himself A Thief 
36.  Ja'afar the Barmecide and the Bean-Seller 
37.  Abu Mohammed Hight Lazybones 
38.  Generous Dealing of Yahya Bin Khálid The Barmecide with
     Mansur 
39.  Generous Dealing of Yahya Son of Khálid with a Man Who
     Forged a Letter in his Name 
40.  Caliph Al-Maamum and the Strange Scholar 
41.  Ali Shar and Zumurrud 
42.  The Loves of Jubayr Bin Umayr and the Lady Budur 
43.  The Man of Al-Yaman and His Six Slave-Girls 
44.  Harun Al-Rashid and the Damsel and Abu Nowas 
45.  The Man Who Stole the Dish of Gold Wherein The Dog Ate 
46.  The Sharper of Alexandria and the Chief of Police 
47.  Al-Malik Al-Nasir and the Three Chiefs of Police
     a.   Story of the Chief of Police of Cairo
     b.   Story of the Chief of the Bulak Police
     c.   Story of the Chief of the Old Cairo Police 
48.  The Thief and the Shroff 
49.  The Chief of the Kus Police and the Sharper 
50.  Ibrahim Bin Al-Mahdi and the Merchant's Sister 
51.  The Woman Whose Hands were Cut Off For Giving Alms to the
     Poor 
52.  The Devout Israelite 
53.  Abu Hassan Al-Ziyadi and the Khorasan 
54.  The Poor Man and His Friend in Need 
55.  The Ruined Man Who became Rich Again Through A Dream 
56.  Caliph Al-Mutawakkil and His Concubine Mahbubah 
57.  Wardan the Butcher; His Adventure With the Lady and the Bear 
58.  The King's Daughter and the Ape





          The Book of the Thousand Nights and A Night




        Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a and Naomi his Slave-girl.



There lived once in the city of Cufa[FN#1] a man called Al-Rabí'a
bin Hátim, who was one of the chief men of the town, a wealthy
and a healthy, and Heaven had vouchsafed him a son, whom he named
Ni'amah Allah.[FN#2] One day, being in the slave-brokers' mart,
he saw a woman exposed for sale with a little maid of wonderful
beauty and grace on her arm. So he beckoned to the broker and
asked him, "How much for this woman and her daughter?" He
answered "Fifty dinars." Quoth Al-Rabi'a "Write the contract of
sale and take the money and give it to her owner." Then he gave
the broker the price and his brokerage and taking the woman and
her child, carried them to his house. Now when the daughter of
his uncle who was his wife saw the slave, she said to her
husband, "O my cousin, what is this damsel?" He replied, "Of a
truth, I bought her for the sake of the little one on her arm;
for know that, when she groweth up, there will not be her like
for beauty, either in the land of the Arabs or the Ajams." His
wife remarked, "Right was thy rede", and said to the woman "What
is thy name?" She replied, "O my lady, my name is Tauflík.[FN#3]"
"And what is thy daughter's name?" asked she? Answered the slave,
"Sa'ad, the happy." Rejoined her mistress; "Thou sayst sooth,
thou art indeed happy, and happy is he who hath bought thee."
Then quoth she to her husband, "O my cousin, what wilt thou call
her?"; and quoth he, "Whatso thou chooses"; so she said, "Then
let us call her Naomi," and he rejoined "Good is thy device." The
little Naomi was reared with Al-Rabi'a's son Ni'amah in one
cradle, so to speak, till the twain reached the age of ten and
each grew handsomer than the other; and the boy used to address
her, "O my sister!" and she, "O my brother!", till they came to
that age when Al-Rabi'a said to Ni'amah, "O my son, Naomi is not
thy sister but thy slave. I bought her in thy name whilst thou
wast yet in the cradle; so call her no more sister from this day
forth." Quoth Ni'amah, "If that be so, I will take her to wife."
Then he went to his mother and told her of this, and she said to
him, "O my son, she is thy handmaid." So he wedded and went in
unto Naomi and loved her; and two[FN#4] years passed over them
whilst in this condition, nor was there in all Cufa a fairer girl
than Naomi, or a sweeter or a more graceful. As she grew up she
learnt the Koran and read works of science and excelled in music
and playing upon all kinds of instruments; and in the beauty of
her singing she surpassed all the folk of her time. Now one day
as she sat with her husband in the wine chamber, she took the
lute, tightened the strings, and sang these two couplets,

"While thou'rt my lord whose bounty's my estate, * A sword
     whereby my woes to annihilate,
Recourse I never need to Amru or Zayd,[FN#5] * Nor aught save
     thee if way to me grow strait!"

Ni'amah was charmed with these verses and said to her, "By my
life, O Naomi, sing to us with the tambourine and other
instruments!" So she sang these couplets to a lively measure,

"By His life who holds my guiding rein, I swear * I'll meet on
     love ground parlous foe nor care:
Good sooth I'll vex revilers, thee obey * And quit my slumbers
     and all joy forswear:
And for thy love I'll dig in vitals mine * A grave, nor shall my
     vitals weet 'tis there!"

And Ni'amah exclaimed, "Heaven favoured art thou, O Naomi!" But
whilst they led thus the most joyous life, behold!
Al-Hajjáj,[FN#6] the Viceroy of Cufa said to himself, "Needs must
I contrive to take this girl named Naomi and send her to the
Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwán, for he hath
not in his palace her like for beauty and sweet singing." So he
summoned an old woman of the duennas of his wives and said to
her, "Go to the house of Al-Rabi'a and foregather with the girl
Naomi and combine means to carry her off; for her like is not to
be found on the face of the earth." She promised to do his
bidding; the next morning she donned the woollen clothes of a
devotee and hung around her neck a rosary of beads by the
thousand; and, henting in hand a staff and a leather water bottle
of Yamani manufacture.-- And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old
woman promised to do the bidding of Al-Hajjaj, and whenas it was
morning she donned the woollen clothes of a devotee[FN#7] and
hung around her neck a rosary of beads by the thousand and hent
in hand a staff and a leather water bottle of Yamani manufacture
and fared forth crying, "Glory be to Allah! Praised be Allah!
There is no god but the God! Allah is Most Great! There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!" Nor did she leave off her lauds and her groaning in
prayer whilst her heart was full of guile and wiles, till she
came to the house of Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a at the hour of noon
prayer, and knocked at the door. The doorkeeper opened and said
to her, "What dost thou want?" Quoth she, "I am a poor pious
woman, whom the time of noon prayer hath overtaken, and fief
would I pray in this blessed place." Answered the porter, "O old
woman, this is no mosque nor oratory, but the house of Ni'amah
son of al Rabi'a." She replied, "I know there is neither
cathedral-mosque nor oratory like the house of Ni'amah bin
al-Rabi'a. I am a chamberwoman of the palace of the Prince of
True Believers and am come out for worship and the visitation of
Holy Places." But the porter rejoined, "Thou canst not enter;"
and many words passed between them, till at last she caught hold
and hung to him saying, "Shall the like of me be denied admission
to the house of Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a, I who have free access to
the houses of Emirs and Grandees?" Anon, out came Ni'amah and,
hearing their loud language, laughed and bade the old woman enter
after him. So she followed him into the presence of Naomi, whom
she saluted after the godliest and goodliest fashion, and, when
she looked on her, she was confounded at her exceeding seemliness
and said to her, "O my lady, I commend thee to the safeguard of
Allah, who made thee and thy lord fellows in beauty and
loveliness!" Then she stood up in the prayer niche and betook
herself to inclination and prostration and prayer, till day
departed and night darkened and starkened, when Naomi said to
her, "O my mother, rest thy legs and feet awhile." Replied the
old woman "O my lady, whoso seeketh the world to come let him
weary him in this world, and whoso wearieth not himself in this
world shall not attain the dwellings of the just in the world to
come." Then Naomi brought her food and said to her, "Eat of my
bread and pray Heaven to accept my penitence and to have mercy on
me." But she cried, "O my lady, I am fasting. As for thee, thou
art but a girl and it befitteth thee to eat and drink and make
merry; Allah be indulgent to thee!; for the Almighty saith: All
shall be punished except him who shall repent and believe and
shall work a righteous work."[FN#8] So Naomi continued sitting
with the old woman in talk and presently said to Ni'amah, "O my
lord, conjure this ancient dame to sojourn with us awhile, for
piety and devotion are imprinted on her countenance." Quoth he,
"Set apart for her a chamber where she may say her prayers; and
suffer no one to go in to her: peradventure, Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) shall prosper us by the blessing of her presence
and never separate us." So the old woman passed her night in
praying and reciting the Koran; and when Allah caused the morn to
dawn, she went in to Ni'amah and Naomi and, giving them good
morning, said to them, "I pray Allah have you in His holy
keeping!" Quoth Naomi, "Whither away, O my mother? My lord hath
bidden me set apart for thee a chamber, where thou mayst seclude
thee for thy devotions." Replied the old woman, "Allah give him
long life, and continue His favour to you both! But I would have
you charge the doorkeeper not to stay my coming in to you; and,
Inshallah! I will go the round of the Holy Places and pray for
you two at the end of my devotions every day and night." Then she
went out (whilst Naomi wept for parting with her knowing not the
cause of her coming), and returned to Al-Hajjaj who said to her,
"As thou do my bidding soon, thou shalt have of me abundant
good." Quoth she, "I ask of thee a full month;" and quoth he
"Take the month." Thereupon the old hag fell to daily visiting
Ni'amah's house and frequented his slave-wife, Naomi.-- And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old hag
fell to visiting daily Ni'amah's house and frequenting his slave
wife, Naomi; and both ceased not to honour her, and she used to
go in to them morning and evening and all in the house respected
her till, one day, being alone with Naomi, she said to her, "O my
lady! by Allah, when I go to the Holy Places, I will pray for
thee; and I only wish thou wert with me, that thou mightest look
on the Elders of the Faith who resort thither, and they should
pray for thee, according to thy desire." Naomi cried, "I conjure
thee by Allah take me with thee!"; and she replied, "Ask leave of
thy mother in law, and I will take thee." So Naomi said to her
husband's mother, "O my lady, ask my master to let us go forth,
me and thee, one day with this my old mother, to prayer and
worship with the Fakirs in the Holy Places." Now when Ni'amah
came in and sat down, the old woman went up to him and would have
kissed his hand, but he forbade her; so she invoked
blessings[FN#9] on him and left the house. Next day she came
again, in the absence of Ni'amah, and she addressed Naomi,
saying, "We prayed for thee yesterday; but arise now and divert
thyself and return ere thy lord come home." So Naomi said to her
mother-in-law, "I beseech thee, for Allah's sake, give me leave
to go with this pious woman, that I may sight the saints of Allah
in the Holy Places, and return speedily ere my lord come back."
Quoth Ni'amah's mother, "I fear lest thy lord know;" but said the
old woman, "By Allah, I will not let her take seat on the floor;
no, she shall look, standing on her feet, and not tarry." So she
took the damsel by guile and, carrying her to Al-Hajjaj's palace,
told him of her coming, after placing her in a lonely chamber;
whereupon he went in to her and, looking upon her, saw her to be
the loveliest of the people of the day, never had he beheld her
like. Now when Naomi caught sight of him she veiled her face from
him; but he left her not till he had called his Chamberlain, whom
he commanded to take fifty horsemen; and he bade him mount the
damsel on a swift dromedary, and bear her to Damascus and there
deliver her to the Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin
Marwan. Moreover, he gave him a letter for the Caliph, saying,
"Bear him this letter and bring me his answer and hasten thy
return to me." So the Chamberlain, without losing time, took the
damsel (and she tearful for separation from her lord) and,
setting out with her on a dromedary, gave not over journeying
till he reached Damascus. There he sought audience of the
Commander of the Faithful and, when it was granted, the
Chamberlain delivered the damsel and reported the circumstance.
The Caliph appointed her a separate apartment and going into his
Harim, said to his wife, "Al Hajjaj hath bought me a slave-girl
of the daughters of the Kings of Cufa[FN#10] for ten thousand
dinars, and hath sent me this letter."-- And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Two Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph acquainted his wife with the story of the slave-girl, she
said to him, "Allah increase to thee His favour!" Then the
Caliph's sister went in to the supposed slave-girl and, when she
saw her, she said, "By Allah, not unlucky is the man who hath
thee in his house, were thy cost an hundred thousand dinars!" And
Naomi replied, "O fair of face, what King's palace is this, and
what is the city?" She answered, "This is the city of Damascus,
and this is the palace of my brother, the Commander of the
Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan.[FN#11]" Then she resumed,
"Didst thou not know all this?" Naomi said, "By Allah, O my lady,
I had no knowledge of it!"; when the other asked, "And he who
sold thee and took thy price did he not tell thee that the Caliph
had bought thee?" Now when Naomi heard these words, she shed
tears and said to herself, "Verily, I have been tricked and the
trick hath succeeded," adding to herself, "If I speak, none will
credit me; so I will hold my peace and take patience, for I know
that the relief of Allah is near." Then she bent her head for
shame, and indeed her cheeks were tanned by the journey and the
sun. So the Caliph's sister left her that day and returned to her
on the morrow with clothes and necklaces of jewels, and dressed
her; after which the Caliph came in to her and sat down by her
side, and his sister said to him, "Look on this handmaid in whom
Allah hath conjoined every perfection of beauty and loveliness."
So he said to Naomi, "Draw back the veil from thy face;" but she
would not unveil, and he beheld not her face. However, he saw her
wrists and love of her entered his heart; and he said to his
sister, "I will not go in unto her for three days, till she be
cheered by thy converse." Then he arose and left her, but Naomi
ceased not to brood over her case and sigh for her separation
from her master, Ni'amah, till she fell sick of a fever during
the night and ate not nor drank; and her favour faded and her
charms were changed. They told the Caliph of this and her
condition grieved him; so he visited her with physicians and men
of skill, but none could come at a cure for her. This is how it
fared with her; but as regards Ni'amah, when he returned home he
sat down on his bed and cried, "Ho, Naomi!" But she answered not;
so he rose in haste and called out, yet none came to him, as all
the women in the house had hidden themselves for fear of him.
Then he went out to his mother, whom he found sitting with her
cheek on her hand, and said to her, "O my mother, where is
Naomi?" She answered, "O my son, she is with one who is worthier
than I to be trusted with her, namely, the devout old woman; she
went forth with her to visit devotionally the Fakirs and return."
Quoth Ni'amah, "Since when hath this been her habit and at what
hour went she forth?" Quoth his mother, "She went out early in
the morning." He asked, "And how camest thou to give her leave
for this?"; and she answered, "O my son, 'twas she persuaded me."
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!" exclaimed Ni'amah and, going forth from his
home in a state of distraction, he repaired to the Captain of the
Watch to whom said he, "Doss thou play tricks upon me and
steal-my slave-girl away from my house? I will assuredly complain
of thee to the Commander of the Faithful." Said the Chief of
Police, "Who hath taken her?" and Ni'amah replied, "An old woman
of such and such a mien, clad in woollen raiment and carrying a
rosary of beads numbered by thousands." Rejoined the other, "Find
me the old woman and I will get thee back thy slave-girl." "And
who knows the old woman?" retorted Ni'amah. "And who knows the
hidden things save Allah (may He be extolled and exalted!)?"
cried the Chief, who knew her for Al-Hajjaj's procuress. Cried
Ni'amah, "I look to thee for my slave-girl, and Al-Hajjaj shall
judge between thee and me;" and the Master of Police answered,
"Go to whom thou wilt." So Ni'amah went to the palace of
Al-Hajjaj, for his father was one of the chief men of Cufa; and,
when he arrived there, the Chamberlain went in to the Governor
and told him the case; whereupon Al-Hajjaj said, "Hither with
him!" and when he stood before him enquired, "What be thy
business?" Said Ni'amah, "Such and such things have befallen me;"
and the Governor said, "Bring me the Chief of Police, and we will
commend him to seek for the old woman." Now he knew that the
Chief of Police was acquainted with her; so, when he came, he
said to him, "I wish thee to make search for the slave-girl of
Ni'amah son of Al-Rabi'a." And he answered, "None knoweth the
hidden things save Almighty Allah." Rejoined Al-Hajjaj, "There
is no help for it but thou send out horsemen and look for the
damsel in all the roads, and seek for her in the towns."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Hajjaj
said to the Captain of the Watch, "There is no help for it but
thou send out horsemen, and look for the damsel on all the roads
and seek for her in the towns." Then he turned to Ni'amah and
said to him, "And thy slave-girl return not, I will give thee ten
slave-girls from my house and ten from that of the Chief of
Police." And he again bade the Captain of the Watch, "Go and seek
for the girl." So he went out, and Ni'amah returned home full of
trouble and despairing of life; for he had now reached the age of
fourteen and there was yet no hair on his side cheeks. So he wept
and lamented and shut himself up from his household; and ceased
not to weep and lament, he and his mother, till the morning, when
his father came in to him and said, "O my son, of a truth,
Al-Hajjaj hath put a cheat upon the damsel and hath taken her;
but from hour to hour Allah giveth relief." However grief
redoubled on Ni'amah, so that he knew not what he said nor knew
he who came in to him, and he fell sick for three months his
charms were changed, his father despaired of him and the
physicians visited him and said, "There is no remedy for him save
the damsel." Now as his father was sitting one day, behold he
heard tell of a skillful Persian physician, whom the folk gave
out for perfect in medicine and astrology and geomancy. So
Al-Rabi'a sent for him and, seating him by his side, entreated
him with honour and said to him, "Look into my son's case."
Thereupon quoth he to Ni'amah, "Give me thy hand." The young man
gave him his hand and he felt his pulse and his joints and looked
in his face; then he laughed and, turning to his father, said,
"Thy son's sole ailment is one of the heart."[FN#12] He replied,
Thou sayest sooth, O sage, but apply thy skill to his state and
case, and acquaint me with the whole thereof and hide naught from
me of his condition." Quoth the Persian, "Of a truth he is
enamoured of a slave-girl and this slave-girl is either in
Bassorah or Damascus; and there is no remedy for him but reunion
with her." Said Al-Rabi'a, "An thou bring them together, thou
shalt live all thy life in wealth and delight." Answered the
Persian, "In good sooth this be an easy matter and soon brought
about," and he turned to Ni'amah and said to him, "No hurt shall
befall thee; so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear." Then quoth he to Al-Rabi'a, "Bring me out four thousand
dinars of your money;" so he gave them to him, and he added, "I
wish to carry thy son with me to Damascus; and Almighty Allah
willing, I will not return thence but with the damsel." Then he
turned to the youth and asked, "What is thy name?"; and he
answered "Ni'amah." Quoth the Persian, "O Ni'amah, sit up and be
of good heart, for Allah will reunite thee with the damsel." And
when he sat up the leach continued, "Be of good cheer for we set
out for Damascus this very day: put thy trust in the Lord and eat
and drink and be cheerful so as to fortify thyself for travel."
Upon this the Persian began making preparation of all things
needed, such as presents and rarities; and he took of Al-Rabi'a
in all the sum of ten thousand dinars, together with horses and
camels and beasts of burden and other requisites. Then Ni'amah
farewelled his father and mother and journeyed with the physician
to Aleppo. They could find no news of Naomi there so they fared
on to Damascus, where they abode three days, after which the
Persian took a shop and he adorned even the shelves with vessels
of costly porcelain, with covers of silver, and with gildings and
stuffs of price. Moreover, he set before himself vases and
flagons of glass full of all manner of ointments and ups, and he
surrounded them with cups of crystal--and, placing astrolabe and
geomantic tablet facing him, he donned a physician's habit and
took his seat in the shop. Then he set Ni'amah standing before
him clad in a shirt and gown of silk and, girding his middle with
a silken kerchief gold-embroidered, said to him, "O Ni'amah,
henceforth thou art my son; so call me naught but sire, and I
will call thee naught but son." And he replied, "I hear and I
obey." Thereupon the people of Damascus flocked to the Persian's
shop that they might gaze on the youth's goodliness and the
beauty of the shop and its contents, whilst the physician spoke
to Ni'amah in Persian and he answered him in the same tongue, for
he knew the language, after the wont of the sons of the notables.
So that Persian doctor soon became known among the townsfolk and
they began to acquaint him with their ailments, and he to
prescribe for them remedies. Moreover, they brought him the water
of the sick in phials,[FN#13] and he would test it and say, "He,
whose water this is, is suffering from such and such a disease,"
and the patient would declare, "Verily this physician sayeth
sooth." So he continued to do the occasions of the folk and they
to flock to him, till his fame spread throughout the city and
into the houses of the great. Now, one day as he sat in his-shop,
behold, there came up an old woman riding on an ass with a
stuffed saddle of brocade embroidered with jewels; and, stopping
before the Persian's shop, drew rein and beckoned him, saying,
"Take my hand." He took her hand, and she alighted and asked him
"Art thou the Persian physician from Irak?" "Yes," answered he,
and she said, "Know that I have a sick daughter." Then she
brought out to him a phial--and the Persian looked at it and said
to her, "O my mistress, tell me thy daughter's name, that I may
calculate her horoscope and learn the hour in which it will befit
her to drink medicine." She replied, "O my brother the
Persian,[FN#14] her name is Naomi."-- And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Persian heard the name of Naomi, he fell to calculating and
writing on his hand and presently said, "O my lady, I cannot
prescribe a medicine for her till I know what country woman she
is, because of the difference of climate: so tell me in what land
she was brought up and what is her age." The old woman replied
"She is fourteen years old and she was brought up in Cufa of
Irak." He asked, "And how long hath she sojourned in this
country?" "But a few months," answered she. Now when Ni'amah
heard the old woman's words and recognised the name of his slave-
girl, his heart fluttered and he was like to faint. Then said the
Persian, "Such and such medicines will suit her case;" and the
old woman rejoined, "Then make them up and give me what thou hast
mentioned, with the blessing of Almighty Allah." So saying, she
threw upon the shop board ten gold pieces, and he looked at
Ni'amah and bade him prepare the necessary drugs; whereupon she
also looked at the youth and exclaimed, "Allah have thee in his
keeping, O my son! Verily, she favoureth thee in age and mien."
Then said she to the physician, "O my brother the Persian, is
this thy slave or thy son?" "He is my son," answered he. So
Ni'amah put up the medicine and, placing it in a little box, took
a piece of paper and wrote thereon these two couplets,[FN#15]

"If Naomi bless me with a single glance, * Let Su'adá sue and
     Juml joy to
They said, "Forget her: twenty such thou'lt find." * But none is
     like her--I will not forget!"

He pressed the paper into the box and, sealing it up, wrote upon
the cover the following words in Cufic characters, "I am Ni'amah
of al-Rabi'a of Cufa." Then he set it before the old woman who
took it and bade them farewell and returned to the Caliph's
palace, and when she went up with the drugs to the damsel she
placed the little box of medicine at her feet, saying, "O my
lady, know that there is lately come to our town a Persian
physician, than whom I never saw a more skilful nor a better
versed in matters of malady. I told him thy name, after showing
him the water-bottle, and forthwith he knew thine ailment and
prescribed a remedy. Then he bade his son make thee up this
medicine; and there is not in Damascus a comelier or a seemlier
youth than this lad of his, nor hath anyone a shop the like of
his shop." So Naomi took the box and, seeing the names of her
lord and his father written on the cover, changed colour and said
to herself, "Doubtless, the owner of this shop is come in search
of me." So she said to the old woman, "Describe to me this
youth." Answered the old woman, "His name is Ni'amah, he hath a
mole on his right eyebrow, is richly clad and is perfectly
handsome." Cried Naomi, "Give me the medicine, whereon be the
blessing and help of Almighty Allah!" So she drank off the potion
(and she laughing) and said, "Indeed, it is a blessed medicine!"
Then she sought in the box and, finding the paper, opened it,
read it, understood it and knew that this was indeed her lord,
whereas her heart was solaced and she rejoiced. Now when the old
woman saw her laughing, she exclaimed, "This is indeed a blessed
day!"; and Naomi said, "O nurse, I have a mind for something to
eat and drink." The old woman said to the serving women, "Bring a
tray of dainty viands for your mistress;" whereupon they set food
before her and she sat down to eat. And behold in came the Caliph
who, seeing her sitting at meat, rejoiced; and the old woman said
to him, "O Commander of the Faithful, I give thee joy of thy hand
maid Naomi's recovery! And the cause is that there is lately come
to this our city a physician than whom I never saw a better
versed in diseases and their remedies. I fetched her medicine
from him and she hath drunken of it but once and is restored to
health." Quoth he, "Take a thousand dinars and apply thyself to
her treatment, till she be completely recovered." And he went
away, rejoicing in the damsel's recovery, whilst the old woman
betook herself to the Persian's house and delivered the thousand
dinars, giving him to know that she was become the Caliph's slave
and also handing him a letter which Naomi had written. He took it
and gave the letter to Ni'amah, who at first sight knew her hand
and fell down in a swoon. When he revived he opened the letter
and found these words written therein: "From the slave despoiled
of her Ni'amah, her delight; her whose reason hath been beguiled
and who is parted from the core of her heart. But afterwards of a
truth thy letter hath reached me and hath broadened my breast,
and solaced my soul, even as saith the poet,

"Thy note came: long lost hungers wrote that note, * Till drop
     they sweetest scents for what they wrote:
Twas Moses to his mother's arms restored; * 'Twas Jacob's eye-
     sight cured by Joseph's coat!"[FN#16]

When Ni'amah read these verses, his eyes ran over with tears and
the old woman said to him, "What maketh thee to weep, O my son?
Allah never cause thine eye to shed tears!" Cried the Persian, "O
my lady, how should my son not weep, seeing that this is his
slave-girl and he her lord, Ni'amah son of al-Rabi'a of Cufa; and
her health dependeth on her seeing him, for naught aileth her but
loving him.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Persian
cried out to the old woman, "How shall my son not weep, seeing
that this is his slave-girl and he her lord, Ni'amah son of
al-Rabi'a of Cufa; and the health of this damsel dependeth on her
seeing him and naught aileth her but loving him. So, do thou, O
my lady, take these thousand dinars to thyself and thou shalt
have of me yet more than this; only look on us with eyes of rush;
for we know not how to bring this affair to a happy end save
through thee." Then she said to Ni'amah, "Say, art thou indeed
her lord?" He replied, "Yes," and she rejoined, "Thou sayest
sooth; for she ceaseth not continually to name thee." Then he
told her all that had passed from first to last, and she said, "O
youth, thou shalt owe thy reunion with her to none but myself."
So she mounted and, at once returning to Naomi, looked in her
face and laughed saying, "It is just, O my daughter, that thou
weep and fall sick for thy separation from thy master, Ni'amah,
son of Al-Rabi'a of Cufa." Quoth Naomi, "Verily, the veil hath
been withdrawn for thee and the truth revealed to thee." Rejoined
the old woman, "Be of good cheer and take heart, for I will
assuredly bring you together, though it cost me my life." Then
she returned to Ni'amah and said to him, "I went to thy slave-
girl and conversed with her, and I find that she longeth for thee
yet more than thou for her; for although the Commander of the
Faithful is minded to become intimate with her, she refuseth
herself to him. But if thou be stout of purpose and firm of
heart, I will bring you together and venture my life for you, and
play some trick and make shift to carry thee into the Caliph's
palace, where thou shalt meet her, for she cannot come forth."
And Ni'amah answered, "Allah requite thee with good!" Then she
took leave of him and went back to Naomi and said, "Thy lord is
indeed dying of love for thee and would fain see thee and
foregather with thee. What sayest thou?" Naomi replied, "And I
too am longing for his sight and dying for his love." Whereupon
the old woman took a parcel of women's clothes and ornaments and,
repairing to Ni'amah, said to him, "Come with me into some place
apart." So he brought her into the room behind the shop where she
stained his hands and decked his wrists and plaited his hair,
after which she clad him in a slave-girl's habit and adorned him
after the fairest fashion of woman's adornment, till he was as
one of the Houris of the Garden of Heaven, and when she saw him
thus she exclaimed, "Blessed be Allah, best of Creators! By
Allah, thou art handsomer than the damsel.[FN#17] Now, walk with
thy left shoulder forwards and thy right well behind, and sway
thy hips from side to side."[FN#18] So he walked before her, as
she bade him; and, when she saw he had caught the trick of
woman's gait, she said to him, "Expect me tomorrow night, and
Allah willing, I will take and carry thee to the palace. But when
thou seest the Chamberlains and the Eunuchs be bold, and bow thy
head and speak not with any, for I will prevent their speech; and
with Allah is success!" Accordingly, when the morning dawned, she
returned and, carrying him to the palace, entered before him and
he after her step by step. The Chamberlain would have stopped his
entering, but the old woman said to him, "O most ill omened of
slaves, this is the handmaid of Naomi, the Caliph's favourite.
How durst thou stay her when she would enter?" Then said she,
"Come in, O damsel!"; and the old woman went in and they ceased
not faring on, till they drew near the door leading to the inner
piazza of the palace, when she said to him, "O Ni'amah, hearten
thyself and take courage and enter and turn to the left: then
count five doors and pass through the sixth, for it is that of
the place prepared for thee. Fear nothing, and if any speak to
thee, answer not, neither stop." Then she went up with him to the
door, and the Chamberlain there on guard accosted her, saying
"What damsel is this?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Chamberlain accosted the old woman, saying, "What damsel is
this?"; quoth the ancient dame, "Our lady hath a mind to buy
her;" and he rejoined, "None may enter save by leave of the
Commander of the Faithful; so do thou go back with her. I can not
let her pass for thus am I commanded." Replied the old woman, "O
Chief Chamberlain, use thy reason. Thou knowest that Naomi, the
Caliph's slave-girl, of whom he is enamoured, is but now restored
to health and the Commander of the Faithful hardly yet crediteth
her recovery. She is minded to buy this hand maid; so oppose thou
not her entrance, lest haply it come to Naomi's knowledge and she
be wroth with thee and suffer a relapse and this cause thy head
to be cut off." Then said she to Ni'amah, "Enter, O damsel; pay
no heed to what he saith and tell not the Queen-consort that her
Chamberlain opposed thine entrance." So Ni'amah bowed his head
and entered the palace, and would have turned to the left, but
mistook the direction and walked to his right; and, meaning to
count five doors and enter the sixth, he counted six and entering
the seventh, found himself in a place whose floor was carpeted
with brocade and whose walls were hung with curtains of gold-
embroidered silk. And therein stood censers of aloes-wood and
ambergris and strong-scented musk, and at the upper end was a
couch bespread with cloth of gold on which he seated himself,
marvelling at the magnificence he saw and knowing not what was
written for him in the Secret Purpose. As he sat musing on his
case, the Caliph's sister, followed by her handmaid, came in upon
him; and, seeing the youth seated there took him for a slave-girl
and accosted him and said, "Who art thou O damsel? and what is
thy case and who brought thee hither?" He made no reply, and was
silent, when she continued, "O damsel! if thou be one of my
brother's concubines and he be wroth with thee, I will intercede
with him for thee and get thee grace." But he answered her not a
word; so she said to her slave-girl, "Stand at the door and let
none enter." Then she went up to Ni'amah and looking at him was
amazed at his beauty and said to him, "O lady, tell me who thou
art and what is thy name and how thou camest here; for I have
never seen thee in our palace." Still he answered not, whereat
she was angered and, putting her hand to his bosom, found no
breasts and would have unveiled him, that she might know who he
was; but he said to her, "O my lady, I am thy slave and I cast
myself on thy protection: do thou protect me." She said, "No harm
shall come to thee, but tell me who thou art and who brought thee
into this my apartment." Answered he, "O Princess, I am known as
Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a of Cufa and I have ventured my life for the
sake of my slave-girl, Naomi, whom Al-Hajjaj took by sleight and
sent hither." Said she, "Fear not: no harm shall befall thee;"
then, calling her maid, she said to her, "Go to Naomi's chamber
and send her to me." Meanwhile the old woman went to Naomi's
bedroom and said to her, "Hath thy lord come to thee?" "No, by
Allah!" answered Naomi, and the other said, "Belike he hath gone
astray and entered some chamber other than thine and lost
himself." So Naomi cried, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Our last hour is
come and we are all lost." And while they were sitting and sadly
enough pondering their case, in came the Princess's handmaid and
saluting Naomi said to her, "My lady biddeth thee to her
banquet." "I hear and I obey," answered the damsel and the old
woman said, "Belike thy lord is with the Caliph's sister and the
veil of secrecy hath been rent." So Naomi at once sprang up and
betook herself to the Princess, who said to her, "Here is thy
lord sitting with me; it seemeth he hath mistaken the place; but,
please Allah, neither thou nor he has any cause for fear." When
Naomi heard these words, she took heart of grace and went up to
Ni'amah; and her lord when he saw her.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Ni'amah saw his handmaid Naomi, he rose to meet her and strained
her to his bosom and both fell to the ground fainting. As soon as
they came to themselves, the Caliph's sister said to them, "Sit
ye down and take we counsel for your deliverance from this your
strait." And they answered, "O our lady, we hear and obey: it is
thine to command." Quoth she, "By Allah, no harm shall befall you
from us!" Then she bade her handmaids bring meat and drink which
was done, and they sat down and ate till they had enough, after
which they sat drinking. Then the cup went round amongst them and
their cares ceased from them; but Ni'amah said, "Would I knew how
this will end." The Princess asked, "O Ni'amah, dost thou love
thy slave Naomi?"; and he answered, "Of a truth it is my passion
for her which hath brought me to this state of peril for my
life." Then said she to the damsel, "O Naomi, dost thou love thy
lord Ni'amah?"; and she replied, "O my lady, it is the love of
him which hath wasted my body and brought me to evil case."
Rejoined the Princess, "By Allah, since ye love each other thus,
may he not be who would part you! Be of good cheer and keep your
eyes cool and clear." At this they both rejoiced and Naomi called
for a lute and, when they brought it, she took it and tuned it
and played a lively measure which enchanted the hearers, and
after the prelude sang these couplets,

"When the slanderers cared but to part us twain, * We owed no
     blood-debt could raise their ire
And they poured in our ears all the din of war, * And aid failed
     and friends, when my want was dire:
I fought them hard with mine eyes and tears; * With breath and
     sword, with the stream and fire!"

Then Naomi gave the lute to her master, Ni'amah, saying, "Sing
thou to us some verse." So he took it and playing a lively
measure, intoned these couplets,

"Full Moon if unfreckled would favour thee, * And Sun uneclipsed
     would reflect thy blee:
I wonder (but love is of wonders full * And ardour and passion
     and ecstasy)
How short the way to my love I fare, * Which, from her faring, so
     long I see."

Now when he had made an end of his song, Naomi filled the cup and
gave it to him, and he took it and drank it off; then she filled
again and gave the cup to the Caliph's sister who also emptied
it; after which the Princess in her turn took the lute and
tightened the strings and tuned it and sang these two couplets,

"Grief, cark and care in my heart reside, * And the fires of love
     in my breast
My wasted form to all eyes shows clear; * For Desire my body hath
     mortified."

Then she filled the cup and gave it to Naomi, who drank it off
and taking the lute, sang these two couplets,

"O to whom I gave soul which thou tortures", * And in vain I'd
     recover from fair Unfaith
Do grant thy favours my care to cure * Ere I die, for this be my
     latest breath."

And they ceased not to sing verses and drink to the sweet sound
of the strings, full of mirth and merriment and joy and jollity
till behold! in came the Commander of the Faithful. Now when they
saw him, they rose and kissed the ground before him; and he,
seeing Naomi with the lute in her hand, said to her, "O Naomi,
praised be Allah who hath done away from thee sickness and
suffering!" Then he looked at Ni'amah (who was still disguised as
a woman), and said to the Princess, "O my sister, what damsel is
this by Naomi's side?" She replied, "O Commander of the Faithful,
thou hast here a handmaid, one of thy concubines and the bosom
friend of Naomi who will neither eat nor drink without her." And
she repeated the words of the poet,

"Two contraries, and both concur in opposite charms, * And charms
     so contraried by contrast lovelier show."

Quoth the Caliph, "By Allah Omnipotent, verily she is as handsome
as Naomi, and to-morrow I will appoint her a separate chamber
beside that of her friend and send her furniture and stuffs and
all that befitteth her, in honour of Naomi." Then the Princess
called for food and set it before her brother, who ate and made
himself at home in their place and company. Then filling a cup he
signed to Naomi to sing; so she took the lute, after draining two
of them and sang these two couplets,

"Since my toper-friend in my hand hath given * Three cups that
     brim and bubble, e'er since
I've trailed my skirts throughout night for pride * As tho',
     Prince of the Faithful, I were thy Prince!"

The Prince of True Believers was delighted and filling another
cup, gave it to Naomi and bade her sing again; so after draining
the cup and sweeping the strings, she sang as follows:--

"O most noble of men in this time and stound, * Of whom none may
     boast he is equal-found!
O matchless in greatness of soul and gifts, * O thou Chief, O
     thou King amongst all renowned:
Lord, who dealest large boons to the Lords of Earth, * Whom thou
     vexest not nor dost hold them bound
The Lord preserve thee, and spoil thy foes, * And ne'er cease thy
     lot with good Fortune crowned!"

Now when the Caliph heard these couplets, he exclaimed, "By
Allah, good! By Allah, excellent! Verily the L