ord hath been
copious[FN#19] to thee, O Naomi! How clever is thy tongue and how
dear is thy speech!" And they ceased not their mirth and good
cheer till midnight, when the Caliph's sister said to him, "Give
ear, O Commander of the Faithful to a tale I have read in books
of a certain man of rank." "And what is this tale?" quoth he.
Quoth she "Know, O Prince of the Faithful that there lived once
in the city of Cufa a youth called Ni'amah, son of Al-Rabi'a, and
he had a slave-girl whom he loved and who loved him. They had
been reared in one bed; but when they grew up and mutual-love get
hold of them, Fortune smote them with her calamities and Time,
the tyrant, brought upon them his adversity and decreed
separation unto them. Thereupon designing and slanderous folk
enticed her by sleight forth of his house and, stealing her away
from his home, sold her to one of the Kings for ten thousand
dinars. Now the girl loved her lord even as he loved her, so he
left kith and kin and house and home and the gifts of fortune,
and set out to search for her and when she was found he devised
means to gain access to her".--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Caliph's sister said, "And Ni'amah ceased not absenting himself
from his kith and kin and patrial-stead, that he might gain
access to his handmaid, and he incurred every peril and lavished
his life till he gained access to her, and her name was Naomi,
like this slave-girl. But the interview was short; they had not
been long in company when in came the King, who had bought her of
her kidnapper, and hastily ordered them to be slain, without
doing justice by his own soul and delaying to enquire into the
matter before the command was carried out. Now what sayest thou,
O Commander of the Faithful, of this King's wrongous conduct?"
Answered the Caliph; "This was indeed a strange thing: it behoved
that King to pardon when he had the power to punish; and he ought
to have regarded three things in their favour. The first was that
they loved each other; the second that they were in his house and
in his grasp; and the third that it befitteth a King to be
deliberate in judging and ordering between folk, and how much
more so in cases where he himself is concerned! Wherefore this
King thus did an unkingly deed." Then said his sister, "O my
brother, by the King of the heavens and the earth, I conjure
thee, bid Naomi sing and hearken to that she shall sing!" So he
said "O Naomi, sing to me;" whereupon she played a lively measure
and sang these couplets,

"Beguiled us Fortune who her guile displays, * Smiting the heart,
     bequeathing thoughts that craze
And parting lovers whom she made to meet, * Till tears in torrent
     either cheek displays:
They were and I was and my life was glad, * While Fortune often
     joyed to join our ways;
I will pour tear flood, will rain gouts of blood, * Thy loss
     bemoaning through the nights and days!"

Now when the Commander of the Faithful heard this verse, he was
moved to great delight and his sister said to him, "O my brother,
whoso decideth in aught against himself, him it behoveth to abide
by it and do according to his word; and thou hast judged against
thyself by this judgement." Then said she, "O Ni'amah, stand up
and do thou likewise up stand, O Naomi!" So they stood up and she
continued, "O Prince of True Believers, she who standeth before
thee is Naomi the stolen, whom Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf al-Sakafi
kidnapped and sent to thee, falsely pretending in his letter to
thee that he had bought her for ten thousand gold pieces. And
this other who standeth before thee is her lord, Ni'amah, son of
Al-Rabi'a; and I beseech thee, by the honour of thy pious
forebears and by Hamzah and Ukayl and Abbas,[FN#20] to pardon
them both and overlook their offence and bestow them one on the
other, that thou mayst win rich reward in the next world of thy
just dealing with them; for they are under thy hand and verily
they have eaten of thy meat and drunken of thy drink; and behold,
I make intercession for them and beg of thee the boon of their
blood." Thereupon quoth the Caliph, "Thou speakest sooth: I did
indeed give judgement as thou sayst, and I am not one to pass
sentence and to revoke it." Then said he, "O Naomi, say, be this
thy lord?" And she answered "Even so, O Commander of the
Faithful." Then quoth he, "No harm shall befall you, I give you
each to other;" adding to the young man, "O Ni'amah, who told
thee where she was and taught thee how to get at this place?" He
replied, "O Commander of the Faithful, hearken to my tale and
give ear to my history; for, by the virtue of thy pious
forefathers, I will hide nothing from thee!" And he told him all
that had passed between himself and the Persian physician and the
old nurse, and how she had brought him into the palace and he had
mistaken the doors; whereat the Caliph wondered with exceeding
wonder and said, "Fetch me the Persian." So they brought him into
the presence and he was made one of his chief officers. Moreover
the King bestowed on him robes of honour and ordered him a
handsome present, saying, "When a man hath shown like this man
such artful management, it behoveth us to make him one of our
chief officers." The Caliph also loaded Ni'amah and Naomi with
gifts and honours and rewarded the old nurse; and they abode with
him seven days in joy and content and all delight of life, when
Ni'amah craved leave to return to Cufa with his slave-girl. The
Caliph gave them permission and they departed and arrived in due
course at Cufa, where Ni'amah was restored to his father and
mother, and they abode in all the joys and jollities of life,
till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the
Sunderer of societies. Now when Amjad and As'ad heard from Bahram
this story, they marvelled with extreme marvel and said, "By
Allah, this is indeed a rare tale!"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Amjad
and As'ad heard this story from Bahram the Magian who had become
a Moslem, they marvelled with extreme marvel and thus passed that
night; and when the next morning dawned, they mounted and riding
to the palace, sought an audience of the King who granted it and
received them with high honour. Now as they were sitting together
talking, of a sudden they heard the towns folk crying aloud and
shouting to one another and calling for help; and the Chamberlain
came in to the King and said to him, "Some King hath encamped
before the city, he and his host, with arms and weapons
displayed, and we know not their object and aim." The King took
counsel with his Wazir Amjad and his brother As'ad; and Amjad
said, "I will go out to him and learn the cause of his coming."
So he took horse and, riding forth from the city, repaired to the
stranger's camp, where he found the King and with him a mighty
many and mounted Mamelukes. When the guards saw him, they knew
him for an envoy from the King of the city; so they took him and
brought him before their Sultan. Then Amjad kissed the ground
before him; but lo! the King was a Queen, who was veiled with a
mouth-veil, and she said to Amjad, "Know that I have no design on
this your city and that I am come hither only in quest of a
beardless slave of mine, whom if I find with you, I will do you
no harm, but if I find him not, then shall there befall sore
onslaught between me and you." Asked Amjad, "O Queen, what like
is thy slave and what is his story and what may be his name?"
Said she, "His name is As'ad and my name is Marjanah, and this
slave came to my town in company of Bahram, a Magian, who refused
to sell him to me; so I took him by force, but his master fell
upon him by night and bore him away by stealth and he is of such
and such a favour." When Amjad heard that, he knew it was indeed
his brother As'ad whom she sought and said to her, "O Queen of
the age, Alhamdolillah, praised be Allah, who hath brought us
relief! Verily this slave whom thou seekest is my brother." Then
he told her their story and all that had befallen them in the
land of exile, and acquainted her with the cause of their
departure from the Islands of Ebony, whereat she marvelled and
rejoiced to have found As'ad. So she bestowed a dress of honour
upon Amjad and he returned forthright to the King and told him
what had passed, at which they all rejoiced and the King went
forth with Amjad and As'ad to meet Queen Marjanah. When they were
admitted to her presence and sat down to converse with her and
were thus pleasantly engaged, behold, a dust cloud rose and flew
and grew, till it walled the view. And after a while it lifted
and showed beneath it an army dight for victory, in numbers like
the swelling sea, armed and armoured cap-à-pie who, making for
the city, encompassed it around as the ring encompasseth the
little finger;[FN#21] and a bared brand was in every hand. When
Amjad and As'ad saw this, they exclaimed, "Verily to Allah we
belong and to Him we shall return! What is this mighty host?
Doubtless, these are enemies, and except we agree with this Queen
Marjanah to fight them, they will take the town from us and slay
us. There is no resource for us but to go out to them and see who
they are." So Amjad arose and took horse and passed through the
city gate to Queen Marjanah's camp; but when he reached the
approaching army he found it to be that of his grand sire, King
Ghayur, father of his mother Queen Budur.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Amjad
reached the approaching host, he found it to be that of his
grandsire, Lord of the Isles and the Seas and the Seven Castles;
and when he went into the presence, he kissed the ground between
his hands and delivered to him the message. Quoth the King, "My
name is King Ghayur and I come wayfaring in quest of my daughter
Budur whom fortune hath taken from me, for she left me and
returned not to me, nor have I heard any tidings of her or of her
husband Kamar al-Zaman. Have ye any news of them?" When Amjad
heard this, he hung his head towards the ground for a while in
thought till he felt assured that this King was none other than
his grandfather, his mother's father; where upon he raised his
head and, kissing ground before him, told him that he was the son
of his daughter Budur; on hearing which Ghayur threw himself upon
him and they both fell a weeping.[FN#22] Then said Ghayur,
"Praised be Allah, O my son, for safety, since I have
foregathered with thee," and Amjad told him that his daughter
Budur was safe and sound, and her husband Kamar al-Zaman
likewise, and acquainted him that both abode in a city called the
City of Ebony. Moreover, he related to him how his father, being
wroth with him and his brother, had commended that both be put to
death, but that his treasurer had taken pity on them and let them
go with their lives. Quoth King Ghayur, "I will go back with thee
and thy brother to your father and make your peace with him." So
Amjad kissed the ground before him in huge delight and the King
bestowed a dress of honour upon him, after which he returned,
smiling, to the King of the City of the Magians and told him what
he had learnt from King Ghayur, whereat he wondered with
exceeding wonder. Then he despatched guest-gifts of sheep and
horses and camels and forage and so forth to King Ghayur, and did
the like by Queen Marjanah; and both of them told her what
chanced; whereupon quoth she, "I too will accompany you with my
troops and will do my endeavour to make this peace." Meanwhile
behold, there arose another dust cloud and flew and grew till it
walled the view and blackened the day's bright hue; and under it
they heard shouts and cries and neighing of steeds and beheld
sword glance and the glint of levelled lance. When this new host
drew near the city and saw the two other armies, they beat their
drums and the King of the Magians exclaimed, "This is indeed
naught but a blessed day. Praised be Allah who hath made us of
accord with these two armies; and if it be His will, He shall
give us peace with yon other as well." Then said he to Amjad and
As'ad, "Fare forth and fetch us news of these troops, for they
are a mighty host, never saw I a mightier." So they opened the
city gates, which the King had shut for fear of the beleaguering
armies, and Amjad and As'ad went forth and, coming to the new
host, found that it was indeed a mighty many. But as soon as they
came to it behold, they knew that it was the army of the King of
the Ebony Islands, wherein was their father, King Kamar al-Zaman
in person. Now when they looked upon him, they kissed ground and
wept; but, when he beheld them, he threw himself upon them
weeping, with sore weeping, and strained them to his breast for a
full hour. Then he excused himself to them and told them what
desolation he had suffered for their loss and exile; and they
acquainted him with King Ghayur's arrival, whereupon he mounted
with his chief officers and taking with him his two sons,
proceeded to that King's camp. As they drew near, one of the
Princes rode forward and informed King Ghayur of Kamar al-Zaman's
coming, whereupon he came out to meet him and they joined
company, marvelling at these things and how they had chanced to
foregather in that place. Then the townsfolk made them banquets
of all manner of meats and sweetmeats and presented to them
horses and camels and fodder and other guest-gifts and all that
the troops needed. And while this was doing, behold, yet another
cloud of dust arose and flew till it walled the view, whilst
earth trembled with the tramp of steed and tabors sounded like
stormy winds. After a while, the dust lifted and discovered an
army clad in coats of mail and armed cap-à-pie; but all were in
black garb, and in their midst rode a very old man whose beard
flowed down over his breast and he also was clad in black. When
the King of the city and the city folk saw this great host, he
said to the other Kings, "Praised be Allah by whose omnipotent
command ye are met here, all in one day, and have proved all
known one to the other! But what vast and victorious army is this
which hemmeth in the whole land like a wall?" They answered,
"Have no fear of them; we are three Kings, each with a great
army, and if they be enemies, we will join thee in doing battle
with them, were they three times as many as they now are."
Meanwhile, up came an envoy from the approaching host, making for
the city. So they brought him before Kamar al-Zaman, King Ghayur,
Queen Marjanah and the King of the city; and he kissed the ground
and said, "My liege lord cometh from Persia-land; for many years
ago he lost his son and he is seeking him in all countries. If he
find him with you, well and good; but if he find him not, there
will be war between him and you and he will waste your city."
Rejoined Kamar al-Zaman, "It shall not come to that; but how is
thy master called in Ajam land?" Answered the envoy, "He is
called King Shahriman, lord of the Khálidan Islands; and he hath
levied these troops in the lands traversed by him, whilst seeking
his son." No-vv when Kamar al-Zaman heard these words, he cried
out with a great cry and fell down in a fainting fit which lasted
a long while; and anon coming to himself he wept bitter tears and
said to Amjad and As'ad, "Go ye, O my sons, with the herald,
salute your grandfather and my father, King Shahriman and give
him glad tidings of me, for he mourneth my loss and even to the
present time he weareth black raiment for my sake." Then he told
the other Kings all that had befallen him in the days of his
youth, at which they wondered and, going down with him from the
city, repaired to his father, whom he saluted, and they embraced
and fell to the ground senseless for excess of joy. And when they
revived after a while, Kamar al-Zaman acquainted his father with
all his adventures and the other Kings saluted Shahriman. Then,
after having married Marjanah to As'ad, they sent her back to her
kingdom, charging her not to cease correspondence with them; so
she took leave and went her way. Moreover they married Amjad to
Bostan, Bahram's daughter, and they all set out for the City of
Ebony. And when they arrived there, Kamar al-Zaman went in to his
father-in-law, King Armanus, and told him all that had befallen
him and how he had found his sons; whereat Armanus rejoiced and
gave him joy of his safe return. Then King Ghayur went in to his
daughter, Queen Budur,[FN#23] and saluted her and quenched his
longing for her company, and they all abode a full month's space
in the City of Ebony; after which the King and his daughter
returned to their own country.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say,

       When it was the Two Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Ghayur
set out with his daughter and his host for his own land, and they
took with them Amjad and returned home by easy marches. And when
Ghayur was settled again in his kingdom, he made his grandson
King in his stead; and as to Kamar al-Zaman he also made As'ad
king in his room over the capital of the Ebony Islands, with the
consent of his grandfather, King Armanus and set out himself,
with his father, King Shahriman, till the two made the Islands of
Khálidan. Then the lieges decorated the city in their honour and
they ceased not to beat the drums for glad tidings a whole month;
nor did Kamar al-Zaman leave to govern in his father's place,
till there overtook them the Destroyer of delights and the
Sunderer of societies; and Allah knoweth all things! Quoth King
Shahryar, "O Shahrazad, this is indeed a most wonderful tale!"
And she answered, "O King, it is not more wonderful than that of




                ALA AL-DIN ABU AL-SHAMAT.[FN#24]



"What is that?" asked he, and she said, It hath reached me that
there lived, in times of yore and years and ages long gone
before, a merchant of Cairo[FN#25] named Shams al-Din, who was of
the best and truest spoken of the traders of the city; and he had
eunuchs and servants and negro-slaves and handmaids and Mame
lukes and great store of money. Moreover, he was Consul[FN#26] of
the Merchants of Cairo and owned a wife, whom he loved and who
loved him; except that he had lived with her forty years, yet had
not been blessed with a son or even a daughter. One day, as he
sat in his shop, he noted that the merchants, each and every, had
a son or two sons or more sitting in their shops like their
sires. Now the day being Friday, he entered the Hammam-bath and
made the total-ablution: after which he came out and took the
barber's glass and looked in it, saying, "I testify that there is
no god but the God and I testify that Mohammed is the Messenger
of God!" Then he considered his beard and, seeing that the white
hairs in it covered the black, bethought himself that hoariness
is the harbinger of death. Now his wife knew the time of his
coming home and had washed and made herself ready for him, so
when he came in to her, she said, "Good evening," but he replied
"I see no good." Then she called to the handmaid, "Spread the
supper-tray;" and when this was done quoth she to her husband
"Sup, O my lord." Quoth he, "I will eat nothing," and pushing the
tray away with his foot, turned his back upon her. She asked,
"Why dost thou thus? and what hath vexed thee?"; and he answered,
"Thou art the cause of my vexation."--And Shahrazed perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say,

        When it was the Two Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams
al-Din said to his wife, "Thou art the cause of my vexation." She
asked, "Wherefore?" and he answered, "When I opened my shop this
morning, I saw that each and every of the merchants had with him
a son or two sons or more, sitting in their shops like their
fathers; and I said to myself:--He who took thy sire will not
spare thee. Now the night I first visited thee,[FN#27] thou
madest me swear that I would never take a second wife over thee
nor a concubine, Abyssinian or Greek or handmaid of other race;
nor would lie a single night away from thee: and behold, thou art
barren, and having thee is like boring into the rock." Rejoined
she, "Allah is my witness that the fault lies with thee, for that
thy seed is thin." He asked, "And what showeth the man whose
semen is thin?" And she answered, "He cannot get women with
child, nor beget children." Quoth he, "What thickeneth the seed?
tell me and I will buy it: haply, it will thicken mine." Quoth
she, "Enquire for it of the druggists." So he slept with her that
night and arose on the morrow, repenting of having spoken angrily
to her; and she also regretted her cross words. Then he went to
the market and, finding a druggist, saluted him; and when his
salutation was returned said to him, "Say, hast thou with thee a
seed-thickener?" He replied, "I had it, but am out of it: enquire
thou of my neighbour." Then Shams al-Din made the round till he
had asked every one, but they all laughed at him, and presently
he returned to his shop and sat down, sore troubled. Now there
was in the bazar a man who was Deputy Syndic of the brokers and
was given to the use of opium and electuary and green
hashish.[FN#28] He was called Shaykh Mohammed Samsam and being
poor he used to wish Shams al-Din good morrow every day. So he
came to him according to his custom and saluted him. The merchant
returned his salute, but in ill-temper, and the other, seeing him
vexed, said, "O my lord, what hath crossed thee?" Thereupon Shams
al-Din told him all that occurred between himself and his wife,
adding, "These forty years have I been married to her yet hath
she borne me neither son nor daughter; and they say:--The cause
of thy failure to get her with child is the thinness of thy seed;
so I have been seeking a some thing wherewith to thicken my semen
but found it not." Quoth Shaykh Mohammed, "O my lord, I have a
seed-thickener, but what wilt thou say to him who causeth thy
wife to conceive by thee after these forty years have passed?"
Answered the merchant, "If thou do this, I will work thy
weal--and reward thee." "Then give me a dinar," rejoined the
broker, and Shams al-Din said, "Take these two dinars." He took
them and said, "Give me also yonder big bowl of porcelain." So he
gave it to him and the broker betook himself to a hashish-seller,
of whom he bought two ounces of concentrated Roumi opium and
equal-parts of Chinese cubebs, cinnamon, cloves, cardamoms,
ginger, white pepper and mountain skink[FN#29]; and, pounding
them all together, boiled them in sweet olive-oil; after which he
added three ounces of male frankincense in fragments and a cupful
of coriander-seed; and, macerating the whole, made it into an
electuary with Roumi bee honey. Then he put the confection in the
bowl and carried it to the merchant, to whom he delivered it,
saying, "Here is the seed-thickener, and the manner of using it
is this. Take of my electuary with a spoon after supping, and
wash it down with a sherbet made of rose conserve; but first sup
off mutton and house pigeon plentifully seasoned and hotly
spiced." So the merchant bought all this and sent the meat and
pigeons to his wife, saying, "Dress them deftly and lay up the
seed-thickener until I want it and call for it." She did his
bidding and, when she served up the meats, he ate the evening
meal, after which he called for the bowl and ate of the
electuary. It pleased him well, so he ate the rest and knew his
wife. That very night she conceived by him and, after three
months, her courses ceased, no blood came from her and she knew
that she was with child. When the days of her pregnancy were
accomplished, the pangs of labour took her and they raised loud
lullilooings and cries of joy. The midwife delivered her with
difficulty, by pronouncing over the boy at his birth the names of
Mohammed and Ali, and said, "Allah is Most Great!"; and she
called in his ear the call to prayer. Then she wrapped him up and
passed him to his mother, who took him and gave him the breast;
and he sucked and was full and slept. The midwife abode with them
three days, till they had made the mothering-cakes of sugared
bread and sweetmeats; and they distributed them on the seventh
day. Then they sprinkled salt against the evil eye and the
merchant, going in to his wife, gave her joy of her safe
delivery, and said, "Where is Allah's deposit?" So they brought
him a babe of surpassing beauty, the handiwork of the Orderer who
is ever present and, though he was but seven days old, those who
saw him would have deemed him a yearling child. So the merchant
looked on his face and, seeing it like a shining full moon, with
moles on either cheek, said he to his wife, "What hast thou named
him?" Answered she, "If it were a girl I had named her; but this
is a boy, so none shall name him but thou." Now the people of
that time used to name their children by omens; and, whilst the
merchant and his wife were taking counsel of the name, behold,
one said to his friend, "Ho my lord, Ala al-Din!" So the merchant
said, "We will call him Ala al-Din Abú al-Shámát."[FN#30] Then he
committed the child to the nurse, and he drank milk two years,
after which they weaned him and he grew up and throve and walked
upon the floor. When he came to seven years old, they put him in
a chamber under a trap-door, for fear of the evil eye, and his
father said, "He shall not come out, till his beard grow." So he
gave him in charge to a handmaid and a blackamoor; the girl
dressed him his meals and the slave carried them to him. Then his
father circumcised him and made him a great feast; after which he
brought him a doctor of the law, who taught him to write and read
and repeat the Koran, and other arts and sciences, till he became
a good scholar and an accomplished. One day it so came to pass
that the slave, after bringing him the tray of food went away and
left the trap door open: so Ala al-Din came forth from the vault
and went in to his mother, with whom was a company of women of
rank. As they sat talking, behold, in came upon them the youth as
he were a white slave drunken[FN#31] for the excess of his
beauty; and when they saw him, they veiled their faces and said
to his mother, "Allah requite thee, O such an one! How canst thou
let this strange Mameluke in upon us? Knowest thou not that
modesty is a point of the Faith?" She replied, "Pronounce Allah's
name[FN#32] and cry Bismillah! this is my son, the fruit of my
vitals and the heir of Consul Shams al-Din, the child of the
nurse and the collar and the crust and the crumb."[FN#33] Quoth
they, "Never in our days knew we that thou hadst a son"; and
quoth she, "Verily his father feared for him the evil eye and
reared him in an under-ground chamber;"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala
al-Din's mother said to her lady-friends, "Verily his father
feared for him the evil eye and reared him in an underground
chamber; and haply the slave forgot to shut the door and he fared
forth; but we did not mean that he should come out, before his
beard was grown." The women gave her joy of him, and the youth
went out from them into the court yard where he seated himself in
the open sitting room; and behold, in came the slaves with his
father's she mule, and he said to them, "Whence cometh this
mule?" Quoth they, "We escorted thy father when riding her to the
shop, and we have brought her back." He asked, "What may be my
father's trade?"; and they answered, "Thy father is Consul of the
merchants in the land of Egypt and Sultan of the Sons of the
Arabs." Then he went in to his mother and said to her, "O my
mother, what is my father's trade?" Said she, "O my son, thy sire
is a merchant and Consul of the merchants in the land of Egypt
and Sultan of the Sons of the Arabs. His slaves consult him not
in selling aught whose price is less than one thousand gold
pieces, but merchandise worth him an hundred and less they sell
at their own discretion; nor cloth any merchandise whatever,
little or much, leave the country without passing through his
hands and he disposeth of it as he pleaseth; nor is a bale packed
and sent abroad amongst folk but what is under his disposal. And
"Almighty Allah, O my son, hath given thy father monies past
compt." He rejoined, "O my mother, praised be Allah, that I am
son of the Sultan of the Sons of the Arabs and that my father is
Consul of the merchants! But why, O my mother, do ye put me in
the underground chamber and leave me prisoner there?" Quoth she,
"O my son, we imprisoned thee not save for fear of folks' eyes:
'the evil eye is a truth,'[FN#34] and most of those in their long
homes are its victims." Quoth he, "O my mother, and where is a
refuge-place against Fate? Verily care never made Destiny
forbear; nor is there flight from what is written for every
wight. He who took my grandfather will not spare myself nor my
father; for, though he live to day he shall not live tomorrow.
And when my father dieth and I come forth and say, 'I am Ala
al-Din, son of Shams al-Din the merchant', none of the people
will believe me, but men of years and standing will say, 'In our
lives never saw we a son or a daughter of Shams al-Din.' Then the
public Treasury will come down and take my father's estate, and
Allah have mercy on him who said, 'The noble dieth and his wealth
passeth away, and the meanest of men take his women.' Therefore,
O my mother, speak thou to my father, that he carry me with him
to the bazar and open for me a shop; so may I sit there with my
merchandise, and teach me to buy and sell and take and give."
Answered his mother, "O my son, as soon as thy sire returneth I
will tell him this." So when the merchant came home, he found his
son Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat sitting with his mother and said to
her, "Why hast thou brought him forth of the underground
chamber?" She replied, "O son of my uncle, it was not I that
brought him out; but the servants forgot to shut the door and
left it open; so, as I sat with a company of women of rank,
behold, he came forth and walked in to me." Then she went on to
repeat to him his son's words; so he said, "O my son, to-morrow,
Inshallah! I will take thee with me to the bazar; but, my boy,
sitting in markets and shops demandeth good manners and courteous
carriage in all conditions." Ala al-Din passed the night
rejoicing in his father's promise and, when the morrow came, the
merchant carried him to the Hammam and clad him in a suit worth a
mint of money. As soon as they had broken their fast and drunk
their sherbets, Shams al-Din mounted his she mule and putting his
son upon another, rode to the market, followed by his boy. But
when the market folk saw their Consul making towards them,
foregoing a youth as he were a slice of the full moon on the
fourteenth night, they said, one to other, "See thou yonder boy
behind the Consul of the merchants; verily, we thought well of
him, but he is, like the leek, gray of head and green at
heart."[FN#35] And Shaykh Mohammed Samsam, Deputy Syndic of the
market, the man before mentioned, said to the dealers, "O
merchants, we will not keep the like of him for our Shaykh; no,
never!" Now it was the custom anent the Consul when he came from
his house of a morning and sat down in his shop, for the Deputy
Syndic of the market to go and recite to him and to all the
merchants assembled around him the Fátihah or opening chapter of
the Koran,[FN#36] after which they accosted him one by one and
wished him good morrow and went away, each to his business place.
But when Shams al-Din seated himself in his shop that day as
usual, the traders came not to him as accustomed; so he called
the Deputy and said to him, "Why come not the merchants together
as usual?" Answered Mohammed Samsam, "I know not how to tell thee
these troubles, for they have agreed to depose thee from the
Shaykh ship of the market and to recite the Fatihah to thee no
more." Asked Shams al-Din, "What may be their reason?"; and asked
the Deputy, "What boy is this that sitteth by thy side and thou a
man of years and chief of the merchants? Is this lad a Mameluke
or akin to thy wife? Verily, I think thou lovest him and inclines
lewdly to the boy." Thereupon the Consul cried out at him,
saying, "Silence, Allah curse thee, genus and species! This is my
son." Rejoined the Deputy, "Never in our born days have we seen
thee with a son," and Shams al-Din answered, "When thou gavest me
the seed-thickener, my wife conceived and bare this youth; but I
reared him in a souterrain for fear of the evil eye, nor was it
my purpose that he should come forth, till he could take his
beard in his hand.[FN#37] However, his mother would not agree to
this, and he on his part begged I would stock him a shop and
teach him to sell and buy." So the Deputy Syndic returned to the
other traders and acquainted them with the truth of the case,
whereupon they all arose to accompany him; and, going in a body
to Shams al-Din's shop, stood before him and recited the "Opener"
of the Koran; after which they gave him joy of his son and said
to him, "The Lord prosper root and branch! But even the poorest
of us, when son or daughter is born to him, needs must cook a
pan-full of custard[FN#38] and bid his friends and kith and kin;
yet hast thou not done this." Quoth he, "This I owe you; be our
meeting in the garden."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

Her sister Dunyazad said to her, "Pray continue thy story for us,
as thou be awake and not inclined to sleep." Quoth she:--With
pleasure and goodwill: it hath reached me, O auspicious King,
that the Consul of the merchants promised them a banquet and said
"Be our meeting in the garden." So when morning dawned he
despatched the carpet layer to the saloon of the garden-pavilion
and bade him furnish the two. Moreover, he sent thither all that
was needful for cooking, such as sheep and clarified butter and
so forth, according to the requirements of the case; and spread
two tables, one in the pavilion and another in the saloon. Then
Shams al-Din and his boy girded themselves, and he said to Ala
al-Din "O my son, whenas a greybeard entereth, I will meet him
and seat him at the table in the pavilion; and do thou, in like
manner, receive the beardless youths and seat them at the table
in the saloon." He asked, "O my father, why dost thou spread two
tables, one for men and another for youths?"; and he answered, "O
my son, the beardless is ashamed to eat with the bearded." And
his son thought this his answer full and sufficient. So when the
merchants arrived, Shams al-Din received the men and seated them
in the pavilion, whilst Ala al-Din received the youths and seated
them in the saloon. Then the food was set on and the guests ate
and drank and made merry and sat over their wine, whilst the
attendants perfumed them with the smoke of scented woods, and the
elders fell to conversing of matters of science and traditions of
the Prophet. Now there was amongst them a merchant called Mahmúd
of Balkh, a professing Moslem but at heart a Magian, a man of
lewd and mischievous life who loved boys. And when he saw Ala
al-Din from whose father he used to buy stuffs and merchandise,
one sight of his face sent him a thousand sighs and Satan dangled
the jewel before his eyes, so that he was taken with love-longing
and desire and affection and his heart was filled with mad
passion for him. Presently he arose and made for the youths, who
stood up to receive him; and at this moment Ala Al-Din being
taken with an urgent call of Nature, withdrew to make water;
whereupon Mahmud turned to the other youths and said to them, "If
ye will incline Ala al-Din's mind to journeying with me, I will
give each of you a dress worth a power of money." Then he
returned from them to the men's party; and, as the youths were
sitting, Ala al-Din suddenly came back, when all rose to receive
him and seated him in the place of highest honour. Presently, one
of them said to his neighbour, "O my lord Hasan, tell me whence
came to thee the capital--whereon thou trades"." He replied,
"When I grew up and came to man's estate, I said to my sire, 'O
my father, give me merchandise.' Quoth he, 'O my son, I have none
by me; but go thou to some merchant and take of him money and
traffic with it; and so learn to buy and sell, give and take.' So
I went to one of the traders and borrowed of him a thousand
dinars, wherewith I bought stuffs and carrying them to Damascus,
sold them there at a profit of two for one. Then I bought Syrian
stuffs and carrying them to Aleppo, made a similar gain of them;
after which I bought stuffs of Aleppo and repaired with them to
Baghdad, where I sold them with like result, two for one; nor did
I cease trading upon my capital till I was worth nigh ten
thousand ducats." Then each of the others told his friend some
such tale, till it came to Ala al-Din's turn to speak, when they
said to him, "And thou, O my lord Ala al-Din?" Quoth he, "I was
brought up in a chamber underground and came forth from it only
this week; and I do but go to the shop and return home from the
shop." They remarked, "Thou art used to wone at home and wottest
not the joys of travel, for travel is for men only." He replied,
"I reck not of voyaging and wayfaring cloth not tempt me."
Whereupon quoth one to the other, "This one is like the fish:
when he leaveth the water he dieth." Then they said to him, "O
Ala al Din, the glory of the sons of the merchants is not but in
travel for the sake of gain." Their talk angered him; so he left
them weeping-eyed and heavy-hearted and mounting his mule
returned home. Now his mother saw him in tears and in bad temper
and asked him, "What hath made thee weep, O my son?"; and he
answered, "Of a truth, all the sons of the merchants put me to
shame and said, 'Naught is more glorious for a merchant's son
than travel for gain and to get him gold.'"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din
said to his mother, "Of a truth all the sons of the merchants put
me to shame and said, 'Naught is more honourable for a merchant's
son than travel for gain.'" "O my son, hast thou a mind to
travel?" "Even so!" "And whither wilt thou go?" "To the city of
Baghdad; for there folk make double the cost price on their
goods." "O my son, thy father is a very rich man and, if he
provide thee not with merchandise, I will supply it out of my own
monies." "The best favour is that which is soonest bestowed; if
this kindness is to be, now is the time." So she called the
slaves and sent them for cloth packers, then, opening a store
house, brought out ten loads of stuffs, which they made up into
bales for him. Such was his case; but as regards his father,
Shams al-Din, he looked about and failed to find Ala al-Din in
the garden and enquiring after him, was told that he had mounted
mule and gone home; so he too mounted and followed him. Now when
he entered the house, he saw the bales ready bound and asked what
they were; whereupon his wife told him what had chanced between
Ala al-Din and the sons of the merchants; and he cried, "O my
son, Allah's malison on travel and stranger-hood! Verily Allah's
Apostle (whom the Lord bless and preserve!) hath said, 'It is of
a man's happy fortune that he eat his daily bread in his own
land', and it was said of the ancients, 'Leave travel, though but
for a mile.'" Then quoth he to his son, "Say, art thou indeed
resolved to travel and wilt thou not turn back from it?" Quoth
the other, "There is no help for it but that I journey to Baghdad
with merchandise, else will I doff clothes and don dervish gear
and fare a-wandering over the world." Shams al-Din rejoined, "I
am no penniless pauper but have great plenty of wealth;" then he
showed him all he owned of monies and stuffs and stock-in-trade
and observed, "With me are stuffs and merchandise befitting every
country in the world." Then he showed him among the rest, forty
bales ready bound, with the price, a thousand dinars, written on
each, and said, "O my son take these forty loads, together with
the ten which thy mother gave thee, and set out under the
safeguard of Almighty Allah. But, O my child, I fear for thee a
certain wood in thy way, called the Lion's Copse,[FN#39] and a
valley highs the Vale of Dogs, for there lives are lost without
mercy." He said, "How so, O my father?"; and he replied, "Because
of a Badawi bandit named Ajlan." Quoth Ala al-Din, "Such is
Allah's luck; if any share of it be mine, no harm shall hap to
me." Then they rode to the cattle bazar, where behold, a
cameleer[FN#40] alighted from his she mule and kissing the
Consul's hand, said to him, "O my lord, it is long, by Allah,
since thou hast employed us in the way of business." He replied,
"Every time hath its fortune and its men,[FN#41] and Allah have
truth on him who said,

'And the old man crept o'er the worldly ways * So bowed, his
     beard o'er his knees down flow'th:
Quoth I, 'What gars thee so doubled go?' * Quoth he (as to me his
     hands he show'th)
'My youth is lost, in the dust it lieth; * And see, I bend me to
     find my youth.'"[FN#42]

Now when he had ended his verses, he said, "O chief of the
caravan, it is not I who am minded to travel, but this my son."
Quoth the cameleer, "Allah save him for thee." Then the Consul
made a contract between Ala al-Din and the man, appointing that
the youth should be to him as a son, and gave him into his
charge, saying, "Take these hundred gold pieces for thy people."
More-over he bought his son threescore mules and a lamp and a
tomb-covering for the Sayyid Abd al-Kadir of Gílán[FN#43] and
said to him, "O my son, while I am absent, this is thy sire in my
stead: whatsoever he biddeth thee, do thou obey him." So saying,
he returned home with the mules and servants and that night they
made a Khitmah or perfection of the Koran and held a festival--in
honour of the Shaykh Abd al-Kadir al-Jiláni. And when the morrow
dawned, the Consul gave his son ten thousand dinars, saying, "O
my son, when thou comest to Baghdad, if thou find stuffs easy of
sale, sell them; but if they be dull, spend of these dinars."
Then they loaded the mules and, taking leave of one another, all
the wayfarers setting out on their journey, marched forth from
the city. Now Mahmud of Balkh had made ready his own venture for
Baghdad and had moved his bales and set up his tents without the
walls, saying to himself, "Thou shalt not enjoy this youth but in
the desert, where there is neither spy nor marplot to trouble
thee." It chanced that he had in hand a thousand dinars which he
owed to the youth's father, the balance of a business-transaction
between them; so he went and bade farewell to the Consul, who
charged him, "Give the thousand dinars to my son Ala al-Din;" and
commended the lad to his care, saying, "He is as it were thy
son." Accordingly, Ala al-Din joined company with Mahmud of
Balkh.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din
joined company with Mahmud of Balkh who, before beginning the
march, charged the youth's cook to dress nothing for him, but
himself provided him and his company with meat and drink. Now he
had four houses, one in Cairo, another in Damascus, a third in
Aleppo and a fourth in Baghdad. So they set out and ceased not
journeying over waste and wold till they drew near Damascus when
Mahmud sent his slave to Ala al-Din, whom he found sitting and
reading. He went up to him and kissed his hands, and Ala al-Din
having asked him what he wanted, he answered, "My master saluteth
thee and craveth thy company to a banquet at his place." Quoth
the youth, "Not till I consult my father Kamal al-Din, the
captain of the caravan." So he asked advice of the
Makaddam,[FN#44] who said, "Do not go." Then they left Damascus
and journeyed on till they came to Aleppo, where Mahmud made a
second entertainment and sent to invite Ala al-Din; but he
consulted the Chief Cameleer who again forbade him. Then they
marched from Aleppo and fared on, till there remained between
them and Baghdad only a single stage. Here Mahmud prepared a
third feast and sent to bid Ala al-Din to it: Kamal-al-Din once
more forbade his accepting it, but he said, "I must needs go." So
he rose and, slinging a sword over his shoulder, under his
clothes, repaired to the tent of Mahmud of Balkh, who came to
meet him and saluted him. Then he set before him a sumptuous
repast and they ate and drank and washed hands. At last Mahmud
bent towards Ala al-Din to snatch a kiss from him, but the youth
received the kiss on the palm of his hand and said to him, "What
wouldest thou be at?" Quoth Mahmud, "In very sooth I brought thee
hither that I might take my pleasure with thee in this jousting
ground, and we will comment upon the words of him who saith,

'Say, canst not come to us one momentling, * Like milk of ewekin
     or aught glistening
And eat what liketh thee of dainty cake, * And take thy due of
     fee in silverling,
And bear whatso thou wilt, without mislike, * Of spanling,
     fistling or a span long thing?'"

Then Mahmud of Balkh would have laid hands on Ala al-Din to
ravish him; but he rose and baring his brand, said to him, "Shame
on thy gray hairs! Hast thou no fear of Allah, and He of
exceeding awe?[FN#45] May He have mercy on him who saith,

'Preserve thy hoary hairs from soil and stain, * For whitest
     colours are the easiest stained!'"

And when he ended his verses he said to Mahmud of Balkh, "Verily
this merchandise[FN#46] is a trust from Allah and may not be
sold. If I sold this property to other than thee for gold, I
would sell it to thee for silver; but by Allah, O filthy villain,
I will never again company with thee; no, never!" Then he
returned to Kamal-Al-Din the guide and said to him, "Yonder man
is a lewd fellow, and I will no longer consort with him nor
suffer his company by the way." He replied, "O my son, did I not
say to thee, 'Go not near him'? But if we part company with him,
I fear destruction for ourselves; so let us still make one
caravan." But Ala al-Din cried, "It may not be that I ever again
travel with him." So he loaded his beasts and journeyed onwards,
he and his company, till they came to a valley, where Ala al-Din
would have halted, but the Cameleer said to him, "Do not halt
here; rather let us fare forwards and press our pace, so haply we
make Baghdad before the gates are closed, for they open and shut
them with the sun, in fear lest the Rejectors[FN#47] should take
the city and throw the books of religious learning into the
Tigris." But Ala al Din replied to him, "O my father, I came not
forth from home with this merchandise, or travelled hither for
the sake of traffic, but to divert myself with the sight of
foreign lands and folks;" and he rejoined, "O my son, we fear for
thee and for thy goods from the wild Arabs." Whereupon the youth
answered "Harkye, fellow, art thou master or man? I will not
enter Baghdad till the morning, that the sons of the city may see
my merchandise and know me." "Do as thou wilt," said the other "I
have given thee the wisest advice, but thou art the best judge of
thine own case." Then Ala al-Din bade them unload the mule; and
pitch the tent; so they did his bidding and abode there till the
middle of the night, when he went out to obey a call of nature
and suddenly saw something gleaming afar off. So he said to
Kamal-al-Din, "O captain, what is yonder glittering?" The
Cameleer sat up and, considering it straitly, knew it for the
glint of spear heads and the steel of Badawi weapons and swords.
And lo and behold! this was a troop of wild Arabs under a chief
called Ajlán Abú Náib, Shaykh of the Arabs, and when they neared
the camp and saw the bales and baggage, they said one to another,
"O night of loot!" Now when Kamal-al-Din heard these their words
he cried, "Avaunt, O vilest of Arabs!" But Abu Naib so smote him
with his throw spear in the breast, that the point came out
gleaming from his back, and he fell down dead at the tent door.
Then cried the water carrier,[FN#48] "Avaunt, O foulest of
Arabs!" and one of them smote him with a sword upon the shoulder,
that it issued shining from the tendons of the throat, and he
also fell down dead. (And all this while Ala Al-Din stood looking
on.) Then the Badawin surrounded and charged the caravan from
every side and slew all Ala al-Din's company without sparing a
man: after which they loaded the mules with the spoil and made
off. Quoth Ala al-Din to himself, "Nothing will slay thee save
thy mule and thy dress!"; so he arose and put off his gown and
threw it over the back of a mule, remaining in his shirt and bag
trousers only; after which he looked towards the tent door and,
seeing there a pool of gore flowing from the slaughtered,
wallowed in it with his remaining clothes till he was as a slain
man drowned in his own blood. Thus it fared with him; but as
regards the Shaykh of the wild Arabs, Ajlan, he said to his
banditti, "O Arabs, was this caravan bound from Egypt for Baghdad
or from Baghdad for Egypt?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Badawi asked his banditti, "O Arabs, was this caravan bound from
Egypt for Baghdad or from Baghdad for Egypt?"; they answered,
"'Twas bound from Egypt for Baghdad;" and he said, "Return ye to
the slain, for methinks the owner of this caravan is not dead."
So they turned back to the slain and fell to prodding and
slashing them with lance and sword till they came to Ala al-Din,
who had thrown himself down among the corpses. And when they came
to him, quoth they, "Thou dost but feign thyself dead, but we
will make an end of thee," and one of the Badawin levelled his
javelin and would have plunged it into his breast when he cried
out, "Save me, O my lord Abd al-Kadir, O Saint of Gilan!" and
behold, he saw a hand turn the lance away from his breast to that
of Kamal-al-Din the cameleer, so that it pierced him and spared
himself.[FN#49] Then the Arabs made off; and, when Ala al-Din saw
that the birds were flown with their god send, he sat up and
finding no one, rose and set off running; but, behold! Abu Náib
the Badawi looked back and said to his troop, "I see somewhat
moving afar off, O Arabs!" So one of the bandits turned back and,
spying Ala al-Din running, called out to him, saying, "Flight
shall not forward thee and we after thee;" and he smote his mare
with his heel and she hastened after him. Then Ala al-Din seeing
before him a watering tank and a cistern beside it, climbed up
into a niche in the cistern and, stretching himself at full
length, feigned to be asleep and said, "O gracious Protector,
cover me with the veil of Thy protection which may not be torn
away!" And lo! the Badawi came up to the cistern and, standing in
his stirrup irons put out his hand to lay hold of Ala al-Din; but
he said, "O my lady Nafísah[FN#50]! Now is thy time!" And behold,
a scorpion stung the Badawi in the palm and he cried out, saying,
"Help, O Arabs! I am stung;" and he alighted from his mare's
back. So his comrades came up to him and mounted him again,
asking, "What hath befallen thee?" whereto he answered, "A young
scorpion[FN#51] stung me." So they departed, with the caravan.
Such was their case; but as regards Ala al-Din, he tarried in the
niche, and Mahmud of Balkh bade load his beasts and fared
forwards