 till he came to the Lion's Copse where he found Ala
al-Din's attendants all lying slain. At this he rejoiced and went
on till he reached the cistern and the reservoir. Now his mule
was athirst and turned aside to drink, but she saw Ala al-Din's
shadow in the water and shied and started; whereupon Mahmud
raised his eyes and, seeing Ala al-Din lying in the niche,
stripped to his shirt and bag trousers, said to him, "What man
this deed to thee hath dight and left thee in this evil plight?"
Answered Ala alDin, "The Arabs," and Mahmud said, "O my son, the
mules and the baggage were thy ransom; so do thou comfort thyself
with his saying who said,

'If thereby man can save his head from death, * His good is worth
     him but a slice of nail!'

But now, O my son, come down and fear no hurt." Thereupon he
descended from the cistern-niche and Mahmud mounted him on a
mule, and they fared on till they reached Baghdad, where he
brought him to his own house and carried him to the bath, saying
to him, "The goods and money were the ransom of thy life, O my
son; but, if thou wilt hearken to me, I will give thee the worth
of that thou hast lost, twice told." When he came out of the
bath, Mahmud carried him into a saloon decorated with gold with
four raised floors, and bade them bring a tray with all manner of
meats. So they ate and drank and Mahmud bent towards Ala al-Din
to snatch a kiss from him; but he received it upon the palm of
his hand and said, "What, dost thou persist in thy evil designs
upon me? Did I not tell thee that, were I wont to sell this
merchandise to other than thee for gold, I would sell it thee for
silver?" Quoth Mahmud, "I will give thee neither merchandise nor
mule nor clothes save at this price; for I am gone mad for love
of thee, and bless him who said,

'Told us, ascribing to his Shaykhs, our Shaykh * Abú Bilál, these
     words they wont to utter:[FN#52]
Unhealed the lover wones of love desire, * By kiss and clip, his
     only cure's to futter!'"

Ala al-Din replied, "Of a truth this may never be, take back thy
dress and thy mule and open the door that I may go out." So he
opened the door, and Ala al-Din fared forth and walked on, with
the dogs barking at his heels, and he went forwards through the
dark when behold, he saw the door of a mosque standing open and,
entering the vestibule, there took shelter and concealment; and
suddenly a light approached him and on examining it he saw that
it came from a pair of lanthorns borne by two slaves before two
merchants. Now one was an old man of comely face and the other a
youth; and he heard the younger say to the elder, "O my uncle,, I
conjure thee by Allah, give me back my cousin!" The old man
replied, "Did I not forbid thee, many a time, when the oath of
divorce was always in thy mouth, as it were Holy Writ?" Then he
turned to his right and, seeing Ala al-Din as he were a slice of
the full moon, said to him, "Peace be with thee! who art thou, O
my son?" Quoth he, returning the salutation of peace, "I am Ala
al-Din, son of Shams al-Din, Consul of the merchants for Egypt. I
besought my father for merchandise; so he packed me fifty loads
of stuffs and goods."--And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din
continued, "So he packed me fifty loads of goods and gave me ten
thousand dinars, wherewith I set out for Baghdad; but when I
reached the Lion's Copse, the wild Arabs came out against me and
took all my goods and monies. So I entered the city knowing not
where to pass the night and, seeing this place, I took shelter
here." Quoth the old man, "O my son, what sayest thou to my
giving thee a thousand dinars and a suit of clothes and a mule
worth other two thousand?" Ala al-Din asked, "To what end wilt
thou give me these things, O my uncle?" and the other answered,
'This young man who accompanieth me is the son of my brother and
an only son; and I have a daughter called Zubaydah[FN#53] the
lutist, an only child who is a model of beauty and loveliness, so
I married her to him. Now he loveth her, but she loatheth him;
and when he chanced to take an oath of triple divorcement and
broke it, forthright she left him. Whereupon he egged on all the
folk to intercede with me to restore her to him; but I told him
that this could not lawfully be save by an intermediate marriage,
and we have agreed to make some stranger the intermediary[FN#54]
in order that none may taunt and shame him with this affair. So,
as thou art a stranger, come with us and we will marry thee to
her; thou shalt lie with her to-night and on the morrow divorce
her and we will give thee what I said." Quoth Ala al-Din to
himself, "By Allah, to bide the night with a bride on a bed in a
house is far better than sleeping in the streets and vestibules!"
So he went with them to the Kazi whose heart, as soon as he saw
Ala al-Din, was moved to love him, and who said to the old man,
"What is your will?" He replied, "We wish to make this young man
an intermediary husband for my daughter; but we will write a bond
against him binding him to pay down by way of marriage-settlement
ten thousand gold pieces. Now if after passing the night with her
he divorce her in the morning, we will give him a mule and dress
each worth a thousand dinars, and a third thousand of ready
money; but if he divorce her not, he shall pay down the ten
thousand dinars according to contract." So they agreed to the
agreement and the father of the bride-to-be received his bond for
the marriage-settlement. Then he took Ala al-Din and, clothing
him anew, carried him to his daughter's house and there he left
him standing at the door, whilst he himself went in to the young
lady and said, "Take the bond of thy marriage-settlement, for I
have wedded thee to a handsome youth by name Ala al-Din Abu
al-Shamat: so do thou use him with the best of usage." Then he
put the bond into her hands and left her and went to his own
lodging. Now the lady's cousin had an old duenna who used to
visit Zubaydah, and he had done many a kindness to this woman, so
he said to her, "O my mother, if my cousin Zubaydah see this
handsome young man, she will never after accept my offer; so I
would fain have thee contrive some trick to keep her and him
apart." She answered, "By the life of thy youth,[FN#55] I will
not suffer him to approach her!" Then she went to Ala al-Din and
said to him, "O my son, I have a word of advice to give thee, for
the love of Almighty Allah and do thou accept my counsel, as I
fear for thee from this young woman: better thou let her lie
alone and feel not her person nor draw thee near to her." He
asked, "Why so?"; and she answered, "Because her body is full of
leprosy and I dread lest she infect thy fair and seemly youth."
Quoth he, "I have no need of her." Thereupon she went to the lady
and said the like to her of Ala al-Din, and she replied, "I have
no need of him, but will let him lie alone, and on the morrow he
shall gang his gait." Then she called a slave-girl and said to
her, "Take the tray of food and set it before him that he may
sup." So the handmaid carried him the tray of food and set it
before him and he ate his fill: after which he sat down and
raised his charming voice and fell to reciting the chapter called
Y. S.[FN#56] The lady listened to him and found his voice as
melodious as the psalms of David sung by David himself,[FN#57]
which when she heard, she exclaimed, "Allah disappoint the old
hag who told me that he was affected with leprosy! Surely this is
not the voice of one who hath such a disease; and all was a lie
against him."[FN#58] Then she took a lute of India-land
workmanship and, tuning the strings, sang to it in a voice so
sweet its music would stay the birds in the heart of heaven; and
began these two couplets,

"I love a fawn with gentle white black eyes, * Whose walk the
     willow-wand with envy kills:
Forbidding me he bids for rival-mine, * 'Tis Allah's grace who
     grants to whom He wills!"

And when he heard her chant these lines he ended his recitation
of the chapter, and began also to sing and repeated the following
couplet,

"My Salám to the Fawn in the garments concealed, * And to roses
     in gardens of cheek revealed."

The lady rose up when she heard this, her inclination for him
redoubled and she lifted the curtain; and Ala al-Din, seeing her,
recited these two couplets,

"She shineth forth, a moon, and bends, a willow wand, * And
     breathes out ambergris, and gazes, a gazelle.
Meseems as if grief loved my heart and when from her *
     Estrangement I abide possession to it fell."[FN#59]

Thereupon she came forward, swinging her haunches and gracefully
swaying a shape the handiwork of Him whose boons are hidden; and
each of them stole one glance of the eyes that cost them a
thousand sighs. And when the shafts of the two regards which met
rankled in his heart, he repeated these two couplets,

"She 'spied the moon of Heaven, reminding me * Of nights when met
     we in the meadows li'en:
True, both saw moons, but sooth to say, it was * Her very eyes I
     saw, and she my eyne."

And when she drew near him, and there remained but two paces
between them, he recited these two couplets,

"She spread three tresses of unplaited hair * One night, and
     showed me nights not one but four;
And faced the moon of Heaven with her brow, * And showed me two-
    fold moons in single hour."

And as she was hard by him he said to her, "Keep away from me,
lest thou infect me." Whereupon she uncovered her wrist[FN#60] to
him, and he saw that it was cleft, as it were in two halves, by
its veins and sinews and its whiteness was as the whiteness of
virgin silver. Then said she, "Keep away from me, thou! for thou
art stricken with leprosy, and maybe thou wilt infect me." He
asked, "Who told thee I was a leper?" and she answered, "The old
woman so told me." Quoth he, "'Twas she told me also that thou
wast afflicted with white scurvy;" and so saying, he bared his
forearms and showed her that his skin was also like virgin
silver. Thereupon she pressed him to her bosom and he pressed her
to his bosom and the twain embraced with closest embrace, then
she took him and, lying down on her back, let down her petticoat
trousers, and in an instant that which his father had left him
rose up in rebellion against him and he said, "Go it, O Shayth
Zachary[FN#61] of shaggery, O father of veins!"; and putting both
hands to her flanks, he set the sugar-stick[FN#62] to the mouth
of the cleft and thrust on till he came to the wicket called
"Pecten." His passage was by the Gate of Victories[FN#63] and
therefrom he entered the Monday market, and those of Tuesday and
Wednesday and Thursday,[FN#64] and, finding the carpet after the
measure of the dais floor,[FN#65] he plied the box within its
cover till he came to the end of it. And when morning dawned he
cried to her, "Alas for delight which is not fulfilled! The
raven[FN#66] taketh it and flieth away!" She asked, "What meaneth
this saying?"; and he answered, "O my lady, I have but this hour
to abide with thee." Quoth she "Who saith so?" and quoth he, "Thy
father made me give him a written bond to pay ten thousand dinars
to thy wedding-settlement; and, except I pay it this very day,
they will imprison me for debt in the Kazi's house; and now my
hand lacketh one-half dirham of the sum." She asked, "O my lord,
is the marriage-bond in thy hand or in theirs?"; and he answered,
"O my lady, in mine, but I have nothing." She rejoined, "The
matter is easy; fear thou nothing. Take these hundred dinars: an
I had more, I would give thee what thou lackest; but of a truth
my father, of his love for my cousin, hath transported all his
goods, even to my jewellery from my lodging to his. But when they
send thee a serjeant of the Ecclesiastical Court,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.


      When it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
lady rejoined to Ala al-Din, "And when they send thee at an early
hour a serjeant of the Ecclesiastical-Court, and the Kazi and my
father bid thee divorce me, do thou reply, By what law is it
lawful and right that I should marry at nightfall and divorce in
the morning? Then kiss the Kazi's hand and give him a present,
and in like manner kiss the Assessors' hands and give each of
them ten gold pieces. So they will all speak with thee, and if
they ask thee, 'Why dost thou not divorce her and take the
thousand dinars and the mule and suit of clothes, according to
contract duly contracted?' do thou answer, 'Every hair of her
head is worth a thousand ducats to me and I will never put her
away, neither will I take a suit of clothes nor aught else.' And
if the Kazi say to thee, 'Then pay down the marriage-settlement,'
do thou reply, 'I am short of cash at this present;' whereupon he
and the Assessors will deal in friendly fashion with thee and
allow thee time to pay." Now whilst they were talking, behold,
the Kazi's officer knocked at the door; so Ala al-Din went down
and the man said to him, "Come, speak the Efendi,[FN#67] for thy
fatherinlaw summoneth thee." So Ala al-Din gave him five dinars
and said to him, "O Summoner, by what law am I bound to marry at
nightfall and divorce next morning?" The serjeant answered, "By
no law of ours at all, at all; and if thou be ignorant of the
religious law, I will act as thine advocate." Then they went to
the divorce court and the Kazi said to Ala al-Din, "Why dost thou
not put away the woman and take what falleth to thee by the
contract?" Hearing this he went up to the Kazi; and, kissing his
hand, put fifty dinars in it and said, "O our lord the Kazi, by
what law is it lawful and right that I should marry at nightfall
and divorce in the morning in my own despite?" The Kazi,
answered, "Divorce as a compulsion and by force is sanctioned by
no school of the Moslems." Then said the young lady's father, "If
thou wilt not divorce, pay me the ten thousand dinars, her
marriage-settlement." Quoth Ala al-Din, "Give me a delay of three
days;" but the Kazi, said, "Three days is not time enough; he
shall give thee ten." So they agreed to this and bound him after
ten days either to pay the dowry or to divorce her. And after
consenting he left them and taking meat and rice and clarified
butter[FN#68] and what else of food he needed, returned to the
house and told the young woman all that had passed; whereupon she
said, "'Twixt night and day, wonders may display; and Allah bless
him for his say:--

'Be mild when rage shall come to afflict thy soul; * Be patient
     when calamity breeds ire;
Lookye, the Nights are big with child by Time, * Whose pregnancy
     bears wondrous things and dire.'"

Then she rose and made ready food and brought the tray, and they
two ate and drank and were merry and mirthful. Presently Ala
al-Din besought her to let him hear a little music; so she took
the lute and played a melody that had made the hardest stone
dance for glee, and the strings cried out in present ecstacy, "O
Loving One!'';[FN#69] after which she passed from the adagio into
the presto and a livelier measure. As they thus spent their
leisure in joy and jollity and mirth and merriment, behold, there
came a knocking at the door and she said to him; "Go see who is
at the door." So he went down and opened it and finding four
Dervishes standing without, said to them, "What want ye?" They
replied, "O my lord, we are foreign and wandering religious
mendicants, the viands of whose souls are music and dainty verse,
and we would fain take our pleasure with thee this night till
morning cloth appear, when we will wend our way, and with
Almighty Allah be thy reward; for we adore music and there is not
one of us but knoweth by heart store of odes and songs and
ritornellos."[FN#70] He answered, "There is one I must consult;"
and he returned and told Zubaydah who said, "Open the door to
them." So he brought them up and made them sit down and welcomed
them; then he fetched them food, but they would not eat and said,
"O our lord, our meat is to repeat Allah's name in our hearts and
to hear music with our ears: and bless him who saith,

'Our aim is only converse to enjoy, * And eating joyeth only
     cattle-kind.'[FN#71]

And just now we heard pleasant music in thy house, but when we
entered, it ceased; and fain would we know whether the player was
a slave-girl, white or black, or a maiden of good family." He
answered, "It was this my wife," and told them all that had
befallen him, adding, "Verily my father-in-law hath bound me to
pay a marriage-settlement of ten thousand dinars for her, and
they have given me ten days' time." Said one of the Dervishes,
"Have no care and think of naught but good; for I am Shaykh of
the Convent and have forty Dervishes under my orders. I will
presently collect from them the ten thousand dinars and thou
shalt pay thy father-in-law the wedding settlement. But now bid
thy wife make us music that we may be gladdened and pleasured;
for to some folk music is meat, to others medicine and to others
refreshing as a fan." Now these four Dervishes were none other
than the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, his Wazir Ja'afar the Barmecide,
Abu al-Nowás al-Hasan son of Háni[FN#72] and Masrur the sworder;
and the reason of their coming to the house was that the Caliph,
being heavy at heart, had summoned his Minister and said, "O
Wazir! it is our will to go down to the city and pace its
streets, for my breast is sore straitened." So they all four
donned dervish dress and went down and walked about, till they
came to that house where, hearing music, they were minded to know
the cause. They spent the night in joyance and harmony and
telling tale after tale until morning dawned, when the Caliph
laid an hundred gold pieces under the prayer-carpet and all
taking leave of Ala al-Din, went their way. Now when Zubaydah
lifted the carpet she found beneath it the hundred dinars and she
said to her husband, "Take these hundred dinars which I have
found under the prayer-carpet; assuredly the Dervishes when about
to leave us laid them there, without our knowledge." So Ala
al-Din took the money and, repairing to the market, bought
therewith meat and rice and clarified butter and all they
required. And when it was night, he lit the wax-candles and said
to his wife, "The mendicants, it is true, have not brought the
ten thousand dinars which they promised me; but indeed they are
poor men." As they were talking, behold, the Dervishes knocked at
the door and she said, "Go down and open to them." So he did her
bidding and bringing them up, said to them, "Have you brought me
the ten thousand dinars you promised me?" They answered, "We have
not been able to collect aught thereof as yet; but fear nothing:
Inshallah, tomorrow we will compound for thee some
alchemical-cookery. But now bid thy wife play us her very best
pieces and gladden our hearts for we love music." So she took her
lute and made them such melody that had caused the hardest rocks
to dance with glee; and they passed the night in mirth and
merriment, converse and good cheer, till morn appeared with its
sheen and shone, when the Caliph laid an hundred gold pieces
under the prayer-carpet and all, after taking leave of Ala
al-Din, went their way. And they ceased not to visit him thus
every night for nine nights; and each morning the Caliph put an
hundred dinars under the prayer carpet, till the tenth night,
when they came not. Now the reason of their failure to come was
that the Caliph had sent to a great merchant, saying to him,
"Bring me fifty loads of stuffs, such as come from Cairo,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince
of True Believers said to that merchant, "Bring me fifty loads of
stuffs such as come from Cairo, and let each one be worth a
thousand dinars, and write on each bale its price; and bring me
also a male Abyssinian slave." The merchant did the bidding of
the Caliph who committed to the slave a basin and ewer of gold
and other presents, together with the fifty loads; and wrote a
letter to Ala al-Din as from his father Shams al-Din and said to
him, "Take these bales and what else is with them, and go to such
and such a quarter wherein dwelleth the Provost of the merchants
and say, 'Where be Ala al-Din Abu al Shamat?' till folk direct
thee to his quarter and his house." So the slave took the letter
and the goods and what else and fared forth on his errand. Such
was his case; but as regards Zubaydah's cousin and first husband,
he went to her father and said to him, "Come let us go to Ala
al-Din and make him divorce the daughter of my uncle." So they
set out both together and, when they came to the street in which
the house stood, they found fifty he mules laden with bales of
stuffs, and a blackamoor riding on a she mule. So they said to
him, "Whose loads are these?" He replied, "They belong to my lord
Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat; for his father equipped him with
merchandise and sent him on a journey to Baghdad-city; but the
wild Arabs came forth against him and took his money and goods
and all he had. So when the ill news reached his father, he
despatched me to him with these loads, in lieu of those he had
lost; besides a mule laden with fifty thousand dinars, a parcel
of clothes worth a power of money, a robe of sables[FN#73] and a
basin and ewer of gold." Whereupon the lady's father said, "He
whom thou seekest is my son-in-law and I will show thee his
house." Meanwhile Ala al-Din was sitting at home in huge concern,
when lo! one knocked at the door and he said, "O Zubaydah, Allah
is all-knowing! but I fear thy father hath sent me an officer
from the Kazi or the Chief of Police." Quoth she, "Go down and
see what it is." So he went down; and, opening the door, found
his father-in-law, the Provost of the merchants with an
Abyssinian slave, dusky complexioned and pleasant of favour,
riding on a mule. When the slave saw him he dismounted and kissed
his hands, and Ala al-Din said, "What dost thou want?" He
replied, "I am the slave of my lord Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, son
of Shams al-Din, Consul of the merchants for the land of Egypt,
who hath sent me to him with this charge." Then he gave him the
letter and Ala al-Din opening it found written what
followeth:[FN#74]

"Ho thou my letter! when my friend shall see thee, * Kiss thou
     the ground and buss his sandal-shoon:
Look thou hie softly and thou hasten not, * My life and rest are
     in those hands so boon.

"After hearty salutations and congratulations and high estimation
from Shams al-Din to his son, Abu al-Shamat. Know, O my son, that
news hath reached me of the slaughter of thy men and the plunder
of thy monies and goods; so I send thee herewith fifty loads of
Egyptian stuffs, together with a suit of clothes and a robe of
sables and a basin and ewer of gold. Fear thou no evil, and the
goods thou hast lost were the ransom of thy life; so regret them
not and may no further grief befall thee. Thy mother and the
people of the house are doing well in health and happiness and
all greet thee with abundant greetings. Moreover, O my son, it
hath reached me that they have married thee, by way of
intermediary, to the lady Zubaydah the lutist and they have
imposed on thee a marriage-settlement of ten thousand dinars;
wherefore I send thee also fifty thousand dinars by the slave
Salím."[FN#75] Now when Ala al-Din had made an end of reading the
letter, he took possession of the loads and, turning to the
Provost, said to him, "O my father-in-law, take the ten thousand
dinars, the marriage-settlement of thy daughter Zubaydah, and
take also the loads of goods and dispose of them, and thine be
the profit; only return me the cost price." He answered, "Nay, by
Allah, I will take nothing; and, as for thy wife's settlement, do
thou settle the matter with her." Then, after the goods had been
brought in, they went to Zuhaydah and she said to her sire, "O my
father, whose loads be these?" He said, "These belong to thy
husband, Ala al-Din: his father hath sent them to him instead of
those whereof the wild Arabs spoiled him. Moreover, he hath sent
him fifty thousand dinars with a parcel of clothes, a robe of
sables, a she mule for riding and a basin and ewer of gold. As
for the marriage-settlement that is for thy recking." Thereupon
Ala al-Din rose and, opening the money box, gave her her
settlement and the lady's cousin said, "O my uncle, let him
divorce to me my wife;" but the old man replied, "This may never
be now; for the marriage tie is in his hand." Thereupon the young
man went out, sore afflicted and sadly vexed and, returning home,
fell sick, for his heart had received its death blow; so he
presently died. But as for Ala al-Din, after receiving his goods
he went to the bazar and buying what meats and drinks he needed,
made a banquet as usual--against the night, saying to Zubaydah,
"See these lying Dervishes; they promised us and broke their
promises." Quoth she, "Thou art the son of a Consul of the
merchants, yet was thy hand short of half a dirham; how then
should it be with poor Dervishes?" Quoth he, "Almighty Allah hath
enabled us to do without them; but if they come to us never again
will I open the door to them." She asked, "Why so, whenas their
coming footsteps brought us good luck; and, moreover, they put an
hundred dinars under the prayer carpet for us every night?
Perforce must thou open the door to them an they come." So when
day departed with its light and in gloom came night, they lighted
the wax candles and he said to her, "Rise, Zubaydah, make us
music;" and behold, at this moment some one knocked at the door,
and she said, "Go and look who is at the door." So he went down
and opened it and seeing the Dervishes, said, "Oh, fair welcome
to the liars! Come up." Accordingly they went up with him and he
seated them and brought them the tray of food; and they ate and
drank and became merry and mirthful, and presently said to him,
"O my lord, our hearts have been troubled for thee: what hath
passed between thee and thy father-in-law?" He answered, "Allah
compensated us beyond and above our desire." Rejoined they, "By
Allah, we were in fear for thee".--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.
                                
           When it was the Two Hundred and and Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Dervishes thus addressed Ala al-Din, "By Allah, we were in fear
for thee and naught kept us from thee but our lack of cash and
coin." Quoth he, "Speedy relief hath come to me from my Lord; for
my father hath sent me fifty thousand dinars and fifty loads of
stuffs, each load worth a thousand dinars; besides a riding-mule,
a robe of sables, an Abyssinian slave and a basin and ewer of
gold. Moreover, I have made my peace with my father-in-law and my
wife hath become my lawful wife by my paying her settlement; so
laud to Allah for that!" Presently the Caliph rose to do a
necessity; whereupon Ja'afar bent him towards Ala al-Din and
said, "Look to thy manners, for thou art in the presence of the
Commander of the Faithful " Asked he, "How have I failed in good
breeding before the Commander of the Faithful, and which of you
is he?" Quoth Ja'afar, "He who went out but now to make water is
the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, and I am the
Wazir Ja'afar; and this is Masrur the executioner and this other
is Abu Nowas Hasan bin Hani.. And now, O Ala al-Din, use thy
reason and bethink thee how many days' journey it is between
Cairo and Baghdad." He replied, "Five and forty days' journey;"
and Ja'afar rejoined, "Thy baggage was stolen only ten days ago;
so how could the news have reached thy father, and how could he
pack thee up other goods and send them to thee five-and-forty
days' journey in ten days' time?" Quoth Ala al-Din, "O my lord
and whence then came they?" "From the Commander of the Faithful,"
replied Ja'afar, "of his great affection for thee." As they were
speaking, lo! the Caliph entered and Ala al-Din rising, kissed
the ground before him and said, "Allah keep thee, O Prince of the
Faithful, and give thee long life; and may the lieges never lack
thy bounty and beneficence!" Replied the Caliph, "O Ala al-Din,
let Zubaydah play us an air, by way of house-warming[FN#76] for
thy deliverance." Thereupon she played him on the lute so rare a
melody that the very stones shook for glee, and the strings cried
out for present ecstasy, "O Loving One!" They spent the night
after the merriest fashion, and in the morning the Caliph said to
Ala al-Din, "Come to the Divan to-morrow." He answered,
"Hearkening and obedience, O Commander of the Faithful; so Allah
will and thou be well and in good case!" On the morrow he took
ten trays and, putting on each a costly present, went up with
them to the palace; and the Caliph was sitting on the throne
when, behold, Ala al-Din appeared at the door of the Divan,
repeating these two couplets,

"Honour and Glory wait on thee each morn! * Thine enviers' noses
     in the dust be set!
Ne'er cease thy days to be as white as snow; * Thy foeman's days
     to be as black as jet!"

"Welcome, O Ala Al-Din!" said the Caliph, and he replied, "O
Commander of the Faithful, the Prophet (whom Allah bless and
assain!)[FN#77] was wont to accept presents; and these ten trays,
with what is on them, are my offering to thee." The Caliph
accepted his gift and, ordering him a robe of honour, made him
Provost of the merchants and gave him a seat in the Divan. And as
he was sitting behold, his father-in-law came in and, seeing Ala
al-Din seated in his place and clad in a robe of honour, said to
the Caliph, "O King of the age, why is this man sitting in my
place and wearing this robe of honour?" Quoth the Caliph, "I have
made him Provost of the merchants, for offices are by investiture
and not in perpetuity, and thou art deposed." Answered the
merchant, "Thou hast done well, O Commander of the Faithful, for
he is ours and one of us. Allah make the best of us the managers
of our affairs! How many a little one hath become great!" Then
the Caliph wrote Ala al-Din a Firman[FN#78] of investiture and
gave it to the Governor who gave it to the crier,[FN#79] and the
crier made proclamation in the Divan saying, "None is Provost of
the merchants but Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, and his word is to be
heard, and he must be obeyed with due respect paid, and he
meriteth homage and honour and high degree!" Moreover, when the
Divan broke up, the Governor went down with the crier before Ala
Al-Din!" and the crier repeated the proclamation and they carried
Ala al-Din through the thoroughfares of Baghdad, making
proclamation of his dignity. Next day, Ala al-Din opened a shop
for his slave Salim and set him therein, to buy and sell, whilst
he himself rode to the palace and took his place in the Caliph's
Divan.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

        When it was the Two Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din
rode to the palace and took his place in the Caliph's Divan. Now
it came to pass one day, when he sat in his stead as was his
wont, behold, one said to the Caliph, "O Commander of the
Faithful, may thy head survive such an one the cup-companion!;
for he is gone to the mercy of Almighty Allah, but be thy life
prolonged!"[FN#80] Quoth the Caliph, "Where is Ala al-Din Abu
al-al-Shamat?" So he went up to the Commander of the Faithful,
who at once clad him in a splendid dress of honour and made him
his boon-companion; appointing him a monthly pay and allowance of
a thousand dinars. He continued to keep him company till, one
day, as he sat in the Divan, according to his custom attending
upon the Caliph, lo and behold! an Emir came up with sword and
shield in hand and said, "O Commander of the Faithful, may thy
head long outlive the Head of the Sixty, for he is dead this
day;" whereupon the Caliph ordered Ala al-Din a dress of honour
and made him Chief of the Sixty, in place of the other who had
neither wife nor son nor daughter. So Ala al-Din laid hands on
his estate and the Caliph said to him, "Bury him in the earth and
take all he hath left of wealth and slaves and handmaids."[FN#81]
Then he shook the handkerchief[FN#82] and dismissed the Divan,
whereupon Ala al-Din went forth, attended by Ahmad al-Danaf,
captain of the right, and Hasan Shúmán, captain of the left,
riding at his either stirrup, each with his forty men.[FN#83]
Presently, he turned to Hasan Shuman and his men and said to
them, "Plead ye for me with the Captain Ahmad al-Danaf that he
please to accept me as his son by covenant before Allah." And
Ahmad assented, saying, "I and my forty men will go before thee
to the Divan every morning." Now after this Ala al-Din continued
in the Caliph's service many days; till one day it chanced that
he left the Divan and returning home, dismissed Ahmad al-Danaf
and his men and sat down with his wife Zubaydab, the lute-player,
who lighted the wax candles and went out of the room upon an
occasion. Suddenly he heard a loud shriek; so he rose up and
running in haste to see what was the matter, found that it was
his wife who had cried out. She was lying at full length on the
ground and, when he put his hand to her breast, he found her
dead. Now her father's house faced that of Ala al-Din, and he,
hearing the shriek, came in and said, "What is the matter, O my
lord Ala al-Din?" He replied, "O my father, may thy head outlive
thy daughter Zubaydah! But, O my father, honour to the dead is
burying them." So when the morning dawned, they buried her in the
earth and her husband and father condoled with and mutually
consoled each other. Thus far concerning her; but as regards Ala
al-Din he donned mourning dress and declined the Divan, abiding
tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted at home. After a while, the Caliph
said to Ja'afar, "O Watir, what is the cause of Ala al-Din's
absence from the Divan?" The Minister answered, "O Commander of
the Faithful, he is in mourning for his wife Zubaydah; and is
occupied in receiving those who come to console him;" and the
Caliph said, "It behoveth us to pay him a visit of condolence."
"I hear and I obey," replied Ja'afar. So they took horse, the
Caliph and the Minister and a few attendants, and rode to Ala
al-Din's house and, as he was sitting at home, behold, the party
came in upon him; whereupon he rose to receive them and kissed
the ground before the Caliph, who said to him, "Allah make good
thy loss to thee!" Answered Ala Al-Din, "May Allah preserve thee
to us, O Commander of the Faithful!" Then said the Caliph, "O Ala
al-Din, why hast thou absented thyself from the Divan?" And he
replied, "Because of my mourning for my wife, Zubaydah, O
Commander of the Faithful." The Caliph rejoined, "Put away grief
from thee: verily she is dead and gone to the mercy of Almighty
Allah and mourning will avail thee nothing; no, nothing." But Ala
al-Din said "O Commander of the Faithful, I shall never leave
mourning for her till I die and they bury me by her side." Quoth
the Caliph, "In Allah is compensation for every decease, and
neither device nor riches can deliver from death; and divinely
gifted was he who said,

'All sons of woman, albe long preserved, * Are borne upon the
     bulging bier some day.[FN#84]
How then shall 'joy man joy or taste delight, * Upon whose cheeks
     shall rest the dust and clay?'"

When the Caliph had made an end of condoling with him, he charged
him not to absent himself from the Divan and returned to his
palace. And Ala Al-Din, after a last sorrowful night, mounted
early in the morning and, riding to the court, kissed the ground
before the Commander of the Faithful who made a movement if
rising from the throne[FN#85] to greet and welcome him; and bade
him take his appointed place in the Divan, saying, "O Ala al-Din,
thou art my guest to-night." So presently he carried him into his
serraglio and calling a slave-girl named Kút al-Kulúb, said to
her, "Ala al-Din had a wife called Zubaydah, who used to sing to
him and solace him of cark and care; but she is gone to the mercy
of Almighty Allah, and now I would have thee play him an air upon
the lute,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
said to the damsel Kut al-Kulub, "I would have thee play him upon
the lute an air, of fashion sweet and rare, that he may be
solaced of his cark and care." So she rose and made sweet music;
and the Caliph said to Ala al-Din, "What sayst thou of this
damsel's voice?" He replied, "Verily, O Commander of the
Faithful, Zubaydah's voice was the finer; but she is skilled in
touching the lute cunningly and her playing would make a rock
dance with glee." The Caliph asked, "Doth she please thee?'' and
he answered, "She doth, O Commander of the Faithful;" whereupon
the King said, "By the life of my head and the tombs of my
forefathers, she is a gift from me to thee, she and her waiting-
women!" Ala al-Din fancied that the Caliph was jesting with him;
but, on the morrow, the King went in to Kut al-Kulub and said to
her, "I have given thee to Ala Al-Din, whereat she rejoiced, for
she had seen and loved him. Then the Caliph returned from his
serraglio palace to the Divan; and, calling porters, said to
them, "Set all the goods of Kut al-Kulub and her waiting-women in
a litter, and carry them to Ala al-Din's home." So they conducted
her to the house and showed her into the pavilion, whilst the
Caliph sat in the hall of audience till the dose of day, when the
Divan broke up and he retired to his harem. Such was his case;
but as regards Kut al-Kulub, when she had taken up her lodging in
Ala al-Din's mansion, she and her women, forty in all, besides
the eunuchry, she called two of these caponised slaves and said
to them, "Sit ye on stools, one on the right and another on the
left hand of the door; and, when Ala al-Din cometh home, both of
you kiss his hands and say to him, "Our mistress Kut al-Kulub
requesteth thy presence in the pavilion, for the Caliph hath
given her to thee, her and her women." They answered, "We hear
and obey;" and did as she bade them. So, when Ala al-Din
returned, he found two of the Caliph's eunuchs sitting at the
door and was amazed at the matter and said to himself, "Surely,
this is not my own house; or else what can have happened?" Now
when the eunuchs saw him, they rose to him and, kissing his
hands, said to him, "We are of the Caliph's household and slaves
to Kut al-Kulub, who saluteth thee, giving thee to know that the
Caliph hath bestowed her on thee, her and her women, and
requesteth thy presence." Quoth Ala al-Din, "Say ye to her, 'Thou
art welcome; but so long as thou shalt abide with me, I will not
enter the pavilion wherein thou art, for what was the master's
should not become the man's;' and furthermore ask her, 'What was
the sum of thy day's expenditure in the Caliph's palace?'" So
they went in and did his errand to her, and she answered, "An
hundred dinars a day;" whereupon quoth he to himself, "There was
no need for the Caliph to give me Kut al-Kulub, that I should be
put to such expense for her; but there is no help for it." So she
abode with him awhile and he assigned her daily an hundred dinars
for her maintenance; till, one day, he absented himself from the
Divan and the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "O Watir, I gave not Kut
al-Kulub unto Ala al-Din but that she might console him for his
wife; why, then, doth he still hold aloof from us?" Answered
Ja'afar, "O Commander of the Faithful, he spake sooth who said,
'Whoso findeth his fere, forgetteth his friends.'" Rejoined the
Caliph, "Haply he hath not absented himself without excuse, but
we will pay him a visit." Now some days before this, Ala al-Din
had said to Ja'afar, "I complained to the Caliph of my grief and
mourning for the loss of my wife Zubaydah and he gave me Kut
al-Kulub;" and the Minister replied, "Except he loved thee, he
had not given her to thee. Say hast thou gone in unto her, O Ala
al-Din?" He rejoined, "No, by Allah! I know not her length from
her breadth." He asked "And why?" and he answered, "O Wazir, what
befitteth the lord befitteth not the liege." Then the Caliph and
Ja'afar disguised themselves and went privily to visit Ala
al-Din; but he knew them and rising to them kissed the hands of
the Caliph, who looked at him and saw signs of sorrow in his
face. So he said to him, "O Al-Din, whence cometh this sorrow
wherein I see thee? Hast thou not gone in unto Kut al-Kulub?" He
replied, "O Commander of the Faithful, what befitteth the lord
befitteth not the thrall. No, as yet I have not gone in to visit
her nor do I know her length from her breadth; so pray quit me of
her." Quoth the Caliph, "I would fain see her and question her of
her case;" and quoth Ala al-Din, "I hear and I obey, O Commander
of the Faithful." So the Caliph went in,--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
went in to Kut al-Kulub, who rose to him on sighting him and
kissed the ground between his hands; when he said to her, "Hath
Ala al-Din gone in unto thee?" and she answered, "No, O Commander
of the Faithful, I sent to bid him come, but he would not." So
the Caliph bade carry her back to the Harim and saying to Ala
Al-Din, "Do not absent thyself from us," returned to his palace.
Accordingly, next morning, Ala Al-Din, mounted and rode to the
Divan, where he took his seat as Chief of the Sixty. Presently
the Caliph ordered his treasurer to give the Wazir Ja'afar ten
thousand dinars and said when his order was obeyed, "I charge
thee to go down to the bazar where handmaidens are sold and buy
Ala Al-Din, a slave-girl with this sum." So in obedience to the
King, Ja'afar took Ala al-Din and went down with him to the
bazar. Now as chance would have it, that very day, the Emir
Khálid, whom the Caliph had made Governor of Baghdad, went down
to the market to buy a slave-girl for his son and the cause of
his going was that his wife, Khátún by name, had borne him a son
called Habzalam Bazázah,[FN#86] and the same was foul of favour
and had reached the age of twenty, without learning to mount
horse; albeit his father was brave and bold, a doughty rider
ready to plunge into the Sea of Darkness.[FN#87] And it happened
that on a certain night he had a dream which caused
nocturnal-pollution whereof he told his mother, who rejoiced and
said to his father, "I want to find him a wife, as he is now ripe
for wedlock." Quoth Khálid, "The fellow is so foul of favour and
withal-so rank of odour, so sordid and beastly that no woman
would take him as a gift." And she answered, "We will buy him a
slave-girl." So it befell, for the accomplishing of what Allah
Almighty had decreed, that on the same day, Ja'afar and Ala
al-Din, the Governor Khálid and his son went down to the market
and behold, they saw in the hands of a broker a beautiful girl,
lovely faced and of perfect shape, and the Wazir said to him, "O
broker, ask her owner if he will take a thousand dinars for her."
And as the broker passed by the Governor with the slave, Hahzalam
Bazazah cast at her one glance of the eyes which entailed for
himself one thousand sighs; and he fell in love with her and
passion got hold of him and he said, "O my father, buy me yonder
slave-girl." So the Emir called the broker, who brought the girl
to him, and asked her her name. She replied, "My name is
Jessamine;" and he said to Hahzalam Bazazah, "O my son, as she
please thee, do thou bid higher for her." Then he asked the
broker, "What hath been bidden for her?" and he replied, "A
thousand dinars." Said the Governor's son, "She is mine for a
thousand pieces of gold and one more;" and the broker passed on
to Ala al-Din who bid two thousand dinars for her; and as often
as the Emir's son bid another dinar, Ala al-Din bid a thousand.
The ugly youth was vexed at this and said, "O broker! who is it
that outbiddeth me for the slave-girl?" Answered the broker, "It
is the Wazir Ja'afar who is minded to buy her for Ala al-Din Abu
al-Shamat." And Ala al-Din continued till he brought her price up
to ten thousand dinars, and her owner was satisfied to sell her
for that sum. Then he took the girl and said to her, "I give thee
thy freedom for the love of Almighty Allah;" and forthwith wrote
his contract of marriage with her and carried her to his house.
Now when the broker returned, after having received his
brokerage, the Emir's son summoned him and said to him, "Where is
the girl?" Quoth he, "She was bought for ten thousand dinars by
Ala al-Din, who hath set her free and married her." At this the
young man was greatly vexed and cast down and, sighing many a
sigh, returned home, sick for love of the damsel; and he threw
himself on his bed and refused food, for love and longing were
sore upon him. Now when his mother saw him in this plight, she
said to him, "Heaven assain thee, O my son! What aileth thee?"
And he answered, "Buy me Jessamine, O my mother." Quoth she,
"When the flower-seller passeth I will buy thee a basketful of
jessamine." Quoth he, "It is not the jessamine one smells, but a
slave-girl named Jessamine, whom my father would not buy for me."
So she said to her husband, "Why and wherefore didest thou not
buy him the girl?" and he replied, "What is fit for the lord is
not fit for the liege and I have no power to take her: no less a
man bought her than Ala Al-Din, Chief of the Sixty." Then the
youth's weakness redoubled upon him, till he gave up sleeping and
eating, and his mother bound her head with the fillets of
mourning. And while in her sadness she sat at home, lamenting
over her son, behold, came in to her an old woman, known as the
mother of Ahmad Kamákim[FN#88] the arch-thief, a knave who would
bore through a middle wall and scale the tallest of the tall and
steal the very kohl off the eye-ball.[FN#89] From his earliest
years he had been given to these malpractices, till they made him
Captain of the Watch, when he stole a sum of money; and the Chief
of Police, coming upon him in the act, carried him to the Caliph,
who bade put him to death on the common execution-ground.[FN#90]
But he implored protection of the Wazir whose intercession the
Caliph never rejected, so he pleaded for him with the Commander
of the Faithful who said, "How canst thou intercede for this pest
of the human race?" Ja'afar answered, "O Commander of the
Faithful, do thou imprison him; whoso built the first jail was a
sage, seeing that a jail is the grave of the living and a joy for
the foe." So the Caliph bade lay him in bilboes and write
thereon, "Appointed to remain here until death and not to be
loosed but on the corpse washer's bench;" and they cast him
fettered into limbo. Now his mother was a frequent visitor to the
house of the Emir Khálid, who was Governor and Chief of Police;
and she used to go in to her son in jail and say to him, "Did I
not warn thee to turn from thy wicked ways?''[FN#91] And he would
always answer her, "Allah decreed this to me; but, O my mother,
when thou visitest the Emir's wife make her intercede for me with
her husband." So when the old woman came into the Lady Khatun,
she found her bound with the fillets of mourning and said to her,
"Wherefore dost thou mourn?" She replied, "For my son Habzalam
Bazazah;" and the old woman exclaimed, "Heaven assain thy son!;
what hath befallen him?" So the mother told her the whole story,
and she said, "What thou say of him who should achieve such a
feat as would save thy son?" Asked the lady, "And what feat wilt
thou do?" Quoth the old woman, "I have a son called Ahmad
Kamakim, the arch-thief, who lieth chained in jail and on his
bilboes is written, 'Appointed to remain till death'; so do thou
don thy richest clothes and trick thee out with thy finest jewels
and present thyself to thy husband with an open face and smiling
mien; and when he seeketh of thee what men seek of women, put him
off and baulk him of his will and say, 'By Allah, 'tis a strange
thing! When a man desireth aught of his wife he dunneth her till
she doeth it; but if a wife desire aught of her husband, he will
not grant it to her.' Then he will say, 'What dost thou want?';
and do thou answer, 'First swear to grant my request.' If he
swear to thee by his head or by Allah, say to him, 'Swear to me
the oath of divorce', and do not yield to him, except he do this.
And whenas he hath sworn to thee the oath of divorce, say to him,
'Thou keepest in prison a man called Ahmad Kamakim, and he hath a
poor old mother, who hath set upon me and who urgeth me in the
matter and who saith, 'Let thy husband intercede for him with the
Caliph, that my son may repent and thou gain heavenly guerdon.'"
And the Lady Khatun replied, "I hear and obey." So when her
husband came into her--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.   

       When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Governor came in to his wife, who spoke to him as she had been
taught and made him swear the divorce-oath before she would yield
to his wishes. He lay with her that night and, when morning
dawned, after he had made the Ghusl-ablution and prayed the dawn-
prayer, he repaired to the prison and said, "O Ahmad Kamakim, O
thou arch-thief, dost thou repent of thy works?"; whereto he
replied, "I do indeed repent and turn to Allah and say with heart
and tongue, 'I ask pardon of Allah.'" So the Governor took him
out of jail and carried him to the Court (he being still in
bilboes) and, approaching the Caliph, kissed ground before him.
Quoth the King, "O Emir Khálid, what seekest thou?"; whereupon he
brought forward Ahmad Kamakim, shuffling and tripping in his
fetters, and the Caliph said to him, "What! art thou yet alive, O
Kamakim?" He replied, "O Commander of the Faithful, the miserable
are long-lived." Quoth the Caliph to the Emir, "Why hast thou
brought him hither?"; and quoth he, "O Commander of the Faithful,
he hath a poor old mother cut off from the world who hath none
but this son and she hath had recourse to thy slave, imploring
him to intercede with thee to strike off his chains, for he
repenteth of his evil courses; and to make him Captain of the
Watch as before." The Caliph asked Ahmad Kamakim, "Doss thou
repent of thy sins?" "I do indeed repent me to Allah, O Commander
of the Faithful," answered he; whereupon the Caliph called for
the blacksmith and made him strike off his irons on the corpse-
washer's bench.[FN#92] Moreover, he restored him to his former
office and charged him to walk in the ways of godliness and
righteousness. So he kissed the Caliph's hands and, being
invested with the uniform of Captain of the Watch, he went forth,
whilst they made proclamation of his appointment. Now for a long
time he abode in the exercise of his office, till one day his
mother went in to the Governor's wife, who said to her, "Praised
be Allah who hath delivered thy son from prison and restored him
to health and safety! But why dost thou not bid him contrive some
trick to get the girl Jessamine for my son Hahzalam Bazazah?"
"That will I," answered she and, going out from her, repaired to
her son. She found him drunk with wine and said to him, "O my
son, no one caused thy release from jail but the wife of the
Governor, and she would have thee find some means to slay Ala
al-Din Abu al-Shamat and get his slave-girl Jessamine for her son
Habzalam Bazazah." He answered, "That will be the easiest of
things; and I must needs set about it this very night." Now this
was the first night of the new month, and it was the custom of
the Caliph to spend that night with the Lady Zubaydah, for the
setting free of a slave-girl or a Mameluke or something of the
so