rt. Moreover, on such occasions he used to doff his
royal-habit, together with his rosary and dagger-sword and
royal-signet, and set them all upon a chair in the sitting-
saloon: and he had also a golden lanthorn, adorned with three
jewels strung on a wire of gold, by which he set great store; and
he would commit all these things to the charge of the eunuchry,
whilst he went into the Lady Zubaydah's apartment. So arch-thief
Ahmad Kamakin waited till midnight, when Canopus shone bright,
and all creatures to sleep were dight whilst the Creator veiled
them with the veil of night. Then he took his drawn sword in his
right and his grappling hook in his left and, repairing to the
Caliph's sitting-saloon planted his scaling ladder and cast his
grapnel on to the side of the terrace-roof; then, raising the
trap-door, let himself down into the saloon, where he found the
eunuchs asleep. He drugged them with hemp-fumes;[FN#93] and,
taking the Caliph's dress; dagger, rosary, kerchief, signet-ring
and the lanthorn whereupon were the pearls, returned whence he
came and betook himself to the house of Ala al-Din, who had that
night celebrated his wedding festivities with Jessamine and had
gone in unto her and gotten her with child. So arch-thief Ahmad
Kamakim climbed over into his saloon and, raising one of the
marble slabs from the sunken part of the floor,[FN#94] dug a hole
under it and laid the stolen things therein, all save the
lanthorn, which he kept for himself. Then he plastered down the
marble slab as it before was, and returning whence he came, went
back to his own house, saying, "I will now tackle my drink and
set this lanthorn before me and quaff the cup to its
light."[FN#95] Now as soon as it was dawn of day, the Caliph went
out into the sitting-chamber; and, seeing the eunuchs drugged
with hemp, aroused them. Then he put his hand to the chair and
found neither dress nor signet nor rosary nor dagger-sword nor
kerchief nor lanthorn; whereat he was exceeding wroth and donning
the dress of anger, which was a scarlet suit,[FN#96] sat down in
the Divan. So the Wazir Ja'afar came forward and kissing the
ground before him, said, "Allah avert all evil from the Commander
of the Faithful!" Answered the Caliph, "O Wazir, the evil is
passing great!" Ja'afar asked, "What has happened?" so he told
him what had occurred; and, behold, the Chief of Police appeared
with Ahmad Kamakim the robber at his stirrup, when he found the
Commander of the Faithful sore enraged. As soon as the Caliph saw
him, he said to him, "O Emir Khálid, how goes Baghdad?" And he
answered, "Safe and secure." Cried he "Thou liest!" "How so, O
Prince of True Believers?" asked the Emir. So he told him the
case and added, "I charge thee to bring me back all the stolen
things." Replied the Emir, "O Commander of the Faithful, the
vinegar worm is of and in the vinegar, and no stranger can get at
this place."[FN#97] But the Caliph said, "Except thou bring me
these things, I will put thee to death." Quoth he, "Ere thou slay
me, slay Ahmad Kamakim, for none should know the robber and the
traitor but the Captain of the Watch." Then came forward Ahmad
Kamakim and said to the Caliph, "Accept my intercession for the
Chief of Police, and I will be responsible to thee for the thief
and will track his trail till I find him; but give me two Kazis
and two Assessors for he who did this thing feareth thee not, nor
cloth he fear the Governor nor any other." Answered the Caliph,
"Thou shalt have what thou wantest; but let search be made first
in my palace and then in those of the Wazir and the Chief of the
Sixty." Rejoined Ahmad Kamakim, "Thou sayest well, O Commander of
the Faith ful; belike the man that did this ill deed be one who
hath been reared in the King's household or in that of one of his
officers." Cried the Caliph, "As my head liveth, whosoever shall
have done the deed I will assuredly put him to death, be it mine
own son!" Then Ahmad Kamakim received a written warrant to enter
and perforce search the houses;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ahmad
Kamakim got what he wanted, and received a written warrant to
enter and perforce search the houses; so he fared forth, taking
in his hand a rod[FN#98] made of bronze and copper, iron and
steel, of each three equal-parts. He first searched the palace of
the Caliph, then that of the Wazir Ja'afar; after which he went
the round of the houses of the Chamberlains and the Viceroys till
he came to that of Ala al-Din. Now when the Chief of the Sixty
heard the clamour before his house, he left his wife Jessamine
and went down and, opening the door, found the Master of Police
without in the midst of a tumultuous crowd. So he said, "What is
the matter, O Emir Khálid?" Thereupon the Chief told him the case
and Ala al-Din said, "Enter my house and search it." The Governor
replied, "Pardon, O my lord; thou art a man in whom trust is
reposed and Allah forfend that the trusty turn traitor!" Quoth
Ala al-Din, "There is no help for it but that my house be
searched." So the Chief of Police entered, attended by the Kazi
and his Assessors; whereupon Ahmad Kamakim went straight to the
depressed floor of the saloon and came to the slab, under which
he had buried the stolen goods and let the rod fall upon it with
such violence that the marble broke in sunder and behold
something glittered underneath. Then said he, "Bismillah; in the
name of Allah! Mashallah; whatso Allah willeth! By the blessing
of our coming a hoard hath been hit upon, wait while we go down
into this hiding-place and see what is therein." So the Kazi and
Assessors looked into the hole and finding there the stolen
goods, drew up a statement[FN#99] of how they had discovered them
in Ala al-Din's house, to which they set their seals. Then, they
bade seize upon Ala al-Din and took his turban from his head, and
officially registered all his monies and effects which were in
the mansion. Meanwhile, arch-thief Ahmad Kamakim laid hands on
Jessamine, who was with child by Ala al-Din, and committed her to
his mother, saying, "Deliver her to Khatun, the Governor's lady:"
so the old woman took her and carried her to the wife of the
Master of Police. Now as soon as Habzalam Bazazah saw her, health
and heart returned to him and he arose without stay or delay and
joyed with exceeding joy and would have drawn near her; but she
plucks a dagger from her girdle and said, "Keep off from me, or I
will kill thee and kill myself after." Exclaimed his mother, "O
strumpet, let my son have his will of thee!" But Jessamine
answered "O bitch, by what law is it lawful for a woman to marry
two men; and how shall the dog be admitted to the place of the
lion?" With this, the ugly youth's love-longing redoubled and he
sickened for yearning and unfulfilled desire; and refusing food
returned to his pillow. Then said his mother to her, "O harlot,
how canst thou make me thus to sorrow for my son? Needs must I
punish thee with torture, and as for Ala al-Din, he will
assuredly be hanged." "And I will die for love of him," answered
Jessamine. Then the Governor's wife arose and stripped her of her
jewels and silken raiment and, clothing her in petticoat-trousers
of sack-cloth and a shift of hair-cloth, sent her down into the
kitchen and made her a scullery-wench, saying, "The reward for
thy constancy shall be to break up fire-wood and peel onions and
set fire under the cooking-pots." Quoth she, "I am willing to
suffer all manner of hardships and servitude, but I will not
suffer the sight of thy son." However, Allah inclined the hearts
of the slave-girls to her and they used to do her service in the
kitchen. Such was the case with Jessamine; but as regards Ala
al-Din they carried him, together with the stolen goods, to the
Divan where the Caliph still sat upon his throne. And behold, the
King looked upon his effects and said, "Where did ye find them?"
They replied, "In the very middle of the house belonging to Ala
al-Din Abu al-Shamat;" whereat the Caliph was filled with wrath
and took the things, but found not the lanthorn among them and
said, "O Ala al-Din, where is the lanthorn?" He answered "I stole
it not, I know naught of it; I never saw it; I can give no
information about it!" Said the Caliph, "O traitor, how cometh it
that I brought thee near unto me and thou hast cast me out afar,
and I trusted in thee and thou betrayest me?" And he commanded to
hang him. So the Chief of Police took him and went down with him
into the city, whilst the crier preceded them proclaiming aloud
and saying, "This is the reward and the least of the reward he
shall receive who doth treason against the Caliphs of True
Belief!" And the folk flocked to the place where the gallows
stood. Thus far concerning him; but as regards Ahmad al-Danaf,
Ala al-Din's adopted father, he was sitting making merry with his
followers in a garden, and carousing and pleasuring when lo! in
came one of the water-carriers of the Divan and, kissing the hand
of Ahmad al-Danaf, said to him, "O Captain Ahmad, O Danaf! thou
sittest at thine ease with water flowing at thy feet,[FN#100] and
thou knowest not what hath happened." Asked Ahmad, "What is it?"
and the other answered, "They have gone down to the gallows with
thy son Ala al-Din, adopted by a covenant before Allah!" Quoth
Ahmad, "What is the remedy here, O Hasan Shuuman, and what sayst
thou of this?" He replied, "Assuredly Ala al-Din is innocent and
this blame hath come to him from some one enemy."[FN#101] Quoth
Ahmad, "What counsellest thou?" and Hasan said, "We must rescue
him, Inshallah!" Then he went to the jail and said to the gaolor,
"Give us some one who deserveth death." So he gave him one that
was likest of men to Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat; and they covered
his head and carried him to the place of execution between Ahmad
al-Danaf and Ali al-Zaybak of Cairo.[FN#102] Now they had brought
Ala al-Din to the gibbet, to hang him, but Ahmad al-Danaf came
forward and set his foot on that of the hangman, who said, "Give
me room to do my duty." He replied, "O accursed, take this man
and hang him in Ala al-Din's stead; for he is innocent and we
will ransom him with this fellow, even as Abraham ransomed
Ishmael with the ram."[FN#103] So the hangman seized the man and
hanged him in lieu of Ala al-Din; whereupon Ahmad and Ali took
Ala al-Din and carried him to Ahmad's quarters and, when there,
Ala al-Din turned to him and said, "O my sire and chief, Allah
requite thee with the best of good!" Quoth he, "O Ala al-Din"--
And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Calamity
Ahmad cried, "O Ala al-Din, what is this deed thou hast done? The
mercy of Allah be on him who said, 'Whoso trusteth thee betray
him not, e'en if thou be a traitor.' Now the Caliph set thee in
high place about him and styled thee 'Trusty' and 'Faithful'; how
then couldst thou deal thus with him and steal his goods?" "By
the Most Great Name, O my father and chief," replied Ala al-Din,
"I had no hand in this, nor did I such deed, nor know I who did
it." Quoth Ahmad, "Of a surety none did this but a manifest enemy
and whoso doth aught shall be requited for his deed; but, O Ala
al-Din, thou canst sojourn no longer in Baghdad, for Kings, O my
son, may not pass from one thing to another, and when they go in
quest of a man, ah! longsome is his travail." "Whither shall I
go, O my chief?" asked Ala al-Din; and he answered, "O my son, I
will bring thee to Alexandria, for it is a blessed place; its
threshold is green and its sojourn is agreeable." And Ala al-Din
rejoined, "I hear and I obey, O my chief." So Ahmad said to Hasan
Shuuman, "Be mindful and, when the Caliph asketh for me, say, 'He
is gone touring about the provinces'." Then, taking Ala al-Din,
he went forth of Baghdad and stayed not going till they came to
the outlying vineyards and gardens, where they met two Jews of
the Caliph's tax-gatherers, riding on mules. Quoth Ahmad Al-Danaf
to these, "Give me the black-mail."[FN#104] and quoth they, "Why
should we pay thee black mail?" whereto he replied, "Because I am
the watchman of this valley." So they gave him each an hundred
gold pieces, after which he slew them and took their mules, one
of which he mounted, whilst Ala al-Din bestrode the other. Then
they rode on till they came to the city of Ayás[FN#105] and put
up their beasts for the night at the Khan. And when morning
dawned, Ala al-Din sold his own mule and committed that of Ahmad
to the charge of the door-keeper of the caravanserai, after which
they took ship from Ayas port and sailed to Alexandria. Here they
landed and walked up to the bazar and behold, there was a broker
crying a shop and a chamber behind it for nine hundred and fifty
dinars. Upon this Ala al-Din bid a thousand which the broker
accepted, for the premises belonged to the Treasury; and the
seller handed over to him the keys and the buyer opened the shop
and found the inner parlour furnished with carpets and cushions.
Moreover, he found there a store-room full of sails and masts,
cordage and seamen's chests, bags of beads and cowrie[FN#106]-
shells, stirrups, battle-axes, maces, knives, scissors and such
matters, for the last owner of the shop had been a dealer in
second-hand goods.[FN#107]ook his seat in the shop and Ahmad
al-Danaf said to him, "O my son, the shop and the room and that
which is therein are become thine; so tarry thou here and buy and
sell; and repine not at thy lot for Almighty Allah blesseth
trade." After this he abode with him three days and on the fourth
he took leave of him, saying, "Abide here till I go back and
bring thee the Caliph's pardon and learn who hath played thee
this trick." Then he shipped for Ayas, where he took the mule
from the inn and, returning to Baghdad met Pestilence Hasan and
his followers, to whom said he, "Hath the Caliph asked after
me?"; and he replied, "No, nor hast thou come to his thought." So
he resumed his service about the Caliph's person and set himself
to sniff about for news of Ala al-Din's case, till one day he
heard the Caliph say to the Watir, "See, O Ja'afar, how Ala
al-Din dealt with me!" Replied the Minister, "O Commander of the
Faithful, thou hast requited him with hanging and hath he not met
with his reward?" Quoth he, "O Wazir, I have a mind to go down
and see him hanging;" and the Wazir answered, "Do what thou wilt,
O Commander of the Faithful." So the Caliph, accompanied by
Ja'afar, went down to the place of execution and, raising his
eyes, saw the hanged man to be other than Ala al-Din Abu
al-Shamat, surnamed the Trusty, and said, "O Wazir, this is not
Ala al-Din!" "How knowest thou that it is not he?" asked the
Minister, and the Caliph answered, "Ala al-Din was short and this
one is tall " Quoth Ja'afar, "Hanging stretcheth." Quoth the
Caliph, "Ala al-Din was fair and this one's face is black." Said
Ja'afar "Knowest thou not, O Commander of the Faithful, that
death is followed by blackness?" Then the Caliph bade take down
the body from the gallows tree and they found the names of the
two Shaykhs, Abu Bakr and Omar, written on its heels[FN#108]
whereupon cried the Caliph, "O Wazir, Ala al Din was a Sunnite,
and this fellow is a Rejecter, a Shi'ah." He answered, "Glory be
to Allah who knoweth the hidden things, while we know not whether
this was Ala al-Din or other than he." Then the Caliph bade bury
the body and they buried it; and Ala al-Din was forgotten as
though he never had been. Such was his case; but as regards
Habzalam Bazazah, the Emir Khálid's son, he ceased not to
languish for love and longing till he died and they joined him to
the dust. And as for the young wife Jessamine, she accomplished
the months of her pregnancy and, being taken with labour-pains,
gave birth to a boy-child like unto the moon. And when her fellow
slave-girls said to her, "What wilt thou name him?" she answered,
"Were his father well he had named him; but now I will name him
Aslán."[FN#109] She gave him suck for two successive years, then
weaned him, and he crawled and walked. Now it so came to pass
that one day, whilst his mother was busied with the service of
the kitchen, the boy went out and, seeing the stairs, mounted to
the guest-chamber.[FN#110] And the Emir Khálid who was sitting
there took him upon his lap and glorified his Lord for that which
he had created and fashioned then closely eyeing his face, the
Governor saw that he was the likest of all creatures to Ala
al-Din Abu al-Shamat. Presently, his mother Jessamine sought for
him and finding him not, mounted to the guest-chamber, where she
saw the Emir seated, with the child playing in his lap, for Allah
had inclined his heart to the boy. And when the child espied his
mother, he would have thrown himself upon her; but the Emir held
him tight to his bosom and said to Jessamine, "Come hither, O
damsel." So she came to him, when he said to her, "Whose son is
this?"; and she replied, "He is my son and the fruit of my
vitals." "And who is his father?" asked the Emir; and she
answered, "His father was Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, but now he is
become thy son." Quoth Khálid, "In very sooth Ala al-Din was a
traitor." Quoth she, "Allah deliver him from treason! the Heavens
forfend and forbid that the 'Trusty' should be a traitor!" Then
said he, "When this boy shall grow up and reach man's estate and
say to thee, 'Who is my father?' say to him, 'Thou art the son of
the Emir Khálid, Governor and Chief of Police.'" And she
answered, "I hear and I obey." Then he circumcised the boy and
reared him with the goodliest rearing, and engaged for him a
professor of law and religious science, and an expert penman who
taught him to read and write; so he read the Koran twice and
learnt it by heart and he grew up, saying to the Emir, "O my
father!" Moreover, the Governor used to go down with him to the
tilting-ground and assemble horsemen and teach the lad the
fashion of fight and fray, and the place to plant lance-thrust
and sabre-stroke; so that by the time he was fourteen years old,
he became a valiant wight and accomplished knight and gained the
rank of Emir. Now it chanced one day that Aslan fell in with
Ahmad Kamakim, the arch-thief, and accompanied him as cup-
companion to the tavern[FN#111] and behold, Ahmad took out the
jewelled lanthorn he had stolen from the Caliph and, setting it
before him, pledged the wine cup to its light, till he became
drunken. So Aslan said to him, "O Captain, give me this
lanthorn;" but he replied, "I cannot give it to thee." Asked
Aslan, "Why not?"; and Ahmad answered, "Because lives have been
lost for it." "Whose life?" enquired Aslan; and Ahmad rejoined,
"There came hither a man who was made Chief of the Sixty; he was
named Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat and he lost his life through this
lanthorn." Quoth Aslan, "And what was that story, and what
brought about his death?" Quoth Ahmad Kamakim, "Thou hadst an
elder brother by name Hahzalam Bazazah, and when he reached the
age of sixteen and was ripe for marriage, thy father would have
bought him a slave-girl named Jessamine." And he went on to tell
him the whole story from first to last of Habzalam Bazazah's
illness and what befell Ala al-Din in his innocence. When Aslan
heard this, he said in thought, "Haply this slave-girl was my
mother Jessamine, and my father was none other than Ala al-Din
Abu al-Shamat." So the boy went out from him sorrowful, and met
Calamity Ahmad, who at sight of him exclaimed, "Glory be to Him
unto whom none is like!" Asked Hasan the Pestilence, "Whereat
dost thou marvel, O my chief?" and Ahmad the Calamity replied,
"At the make of yonder boy Aslan, for he is the likest of human
creatures to Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat." Then he called the lad
and said to him, "O Aslan what is thy mother's name?"; to which
he replied, "She is called the damsel Jessamine;" and the other
said, "Harkye, Aslan, be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool
and clear; for thy father was none other than Ala al-Din Abu
al-Shamat: but, O my son, go thou in to thy mother and question
her of thy father." He said, "Hearkening and obedience," and,
going in to his mother put the question; whereupon quoth she,
"Thy sire is the Emir Khálid!" "Not so," rejoined he, "my father
was none other than Ala al-Din Abu al Shamat." At this the mother
wept and said, "Who acquainted thee with this, O my son?" And he
answered "Ahmad al-Danaf, Captain of the Guard." So she told him
the whole story, saying, "O my son, the True hath prevailed and
the False hath failed:[FN#112] know that Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat
was indeed thy sire, but it was none save the Emir Khálid who
reared thee and adopted thee as his son. And now, O my child,
when thou seest Ahmad al-Danaf the captain, do thou say to him,
'I conjure thee, by Allah, O my chief, take my blood-revenge on
the murderer of my father Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat!'" So he went
out from his mother,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Aslan went
out from his mother and, betaking himself to Calamity Ahmad,
kissed his hand. Quoth the captain, "What aileth thee, O Aslan?"
and quoth he, "I know now for certain that my father was Ali
al-Din Abu al-Shamat and I would have thee take my blood-revenge
on his murderer." He asked, "And who was thy father's murderer?"
whereto Aslan answered, "Ahmad Kamakim the arch-thief." "Who told
thee this?" enquired he, and Aslan rejoined, "I saw in his hand
the jewelled lanthorn which was lost with the rest of the
Caliph's gear, and I said to him, 'Give me this lanthorn!' but he
refused, saying, 'Lives have been lost on account of this'; and
told me it was he who had broken into the palace and stolen the
articles and deposited them in my father's house." Then said
Ahmad al-Danaf, "When thou seest the Emir Khálid don his harness
of war, say to him, 'Equip me like thyself and take me with
thee.' Then do thou go forth and perform some feat of prowess
before the Commander of the Faithful, and he will say to thee,
'Ask a boon of me, O Aslan!' And do thou make answer, 'I ask of
thee this boon, that thou take my blood-revenge on my father's
murderer.' If he say, 'Thy father is yet alive and is the Emir
Khálid, the Chief of the Police'; answer thou, 'My father was Ala
al-Din Abu al-Shamat, and the Emir Khálid hath a claim upon me
only as the foster-father who adopted me.' Then tell him all that
passed between thee and Ahmad Kamakim and say, 'O Prince of True
Believers, order him to be searched and I will bring the lanthorn
forth from his bosom.'" Thereupon said Aslan to him, "I hear and
obey;" and, returning to the Emir Khálid, found him making ready
to repair to the Caliph's court and said to him, "I would fain
have thee arm and harness me like thyself and take me with thee
to the Divan." So he equipped him and carried him thither. Then
the Caliph sallied forth of Baghdad with his troops and they
pitched tents and pavilions without the city; whereupon the host
divided into two parties and forming ranks fell to playing Polo,
one striking the ball with the mall, and another striking it back
to him. Now there was among the troops a spy, who had been hired
to slay the Caliph; so he took the ball and smiting it with the
bat drove it straight at the Caliph's face, when behold, Aslan
fended it off and catching it drove it back at him who smote it,
so that it struck him between the shoulders and he fell to the
ground. The Caliph exclaimed, "Allah bless thee, O Aslan!" and
they all dismounted and sat on chairs. Then the Caliph bade them
bring the smiter of the ball before him and said, "Who tempted
thee to do this thing and art thou friend or foe?" Quoth he, "I
am thy foe and it was my purpose to kill thee." Asked the Caliph
"And wherefore? Art not a Moslem?" Replied the spy; "No' I am a
Rejecter.''[FN#113] So the Caliph bade them put him to death and
said to Aslan, "Ask a boon of me." Quoth he, "I ask of thee this
boon, that thou take my blood-revenge on my father's murderer."
He said, "Thy father is alive and there he stands on his two
feet." "And who is he?" asked Aslan, and the Caliph answered, "He
is the Emir Khálid, Chief of Police." Rejoined Aslan, "O
Commander of the Faithful, he is no father of mine, save by right
of fosterage; my father was none other than Ala al-Din Abu al
Shamat." "Then thy father was a traitor," cried the Caliph.
"Allah forbid, O Commander of the Faithful," rejoined Aslan,
"that the 'Trusty' should be a traitor! But how did he betray
thee?" Quoth the Caliph, "He stole my habit and what was
therewith." Aslan retorted, "O Commander of the Faithful, Allah
forfend that my father should be a traitor! But, O my lord, when
thy habit was lost and found didst thou likewise recover the
lanthorn which was stolen from thee?" Answered the Caliph, "We
never got it back," and Aslan said, "I saw it in the hands of
Ahmad Kamakim and begged it of him; but he refused to give it me,
saying, 'Lives have been lost on account of this.' Then he told
me of the sickness of Habzalam Bazazah, son of the Emir Khálid,
by reason of his passion for the damsel Jessamine, and how he
himself was released from bonds and that it was he who stole the
habit and the lamp: so do thou, O Commander of the Faithful, take
my blood-revenge for my father on him who murdered him." At once
the Caliph cried, "Seize ye Ahmad Kamakim!" and they seized him,
whereupon he asked, "Where be the Captain, Ahmad al-Danaf?" And
when he was summoned the Caliph bade him search Kamakim; so he
put his hand into the thief's bosom and pulled out the lanthorn.
Said the Caliph, "Come hither, thou traitor: whence hadst thou
this lanthorn?" and Kamakim replied, "I bought it, O Commander of
the Faithful!" The Caliph rejoined, "Where didst thou buy it?"
Then they beat him till he owned that he had stolen the lanthorn,
the habit and the rest, and the Caliph said "What moved thee to
do this thing O traitor, and ruin Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, the
Trusty and Faithful?" Then he bade them lay hands on him and on
the Chief of Police, but the Chief said, "O Commander of the
Faithful, indeed I am unjustly treated thou badest me hang him,
and I had no knowledge of this trick, for the plot was contrived
between the old woman and Ahmad Kamakim and my wife. I crave
thine intercession,[FN#114] O Aslan." So Aslan interceded for him
with the Caliph, who said, "What hath Allah done with this
youngster's mother?" Answered Khálid, "She is with me," and the
Caliph continued, "I command that thou order thy wife to dress
her in her own clothes and ornaments and restore her to her
former degree, a lady of rank; and do thou remove the seals from
Ala al-Din's house and give his son possession of his estate." "I
hear and obey," answered Khálid; and, going forth, gave the order
to his wife who clad Jessamine in her own apparel; whilst he
himself removed the seals from Ala al-Din's house and gave Aslan
the keys. Then said the Caliph, "Ask a boon of me, O Aslan;" and
he replied, "I beg of thee the boon to unite me with my father."
Whereat the Caliph wept and said, "Most like thy sire was he that
was hanged and is dead; but by the life of my forefathers, whoso
bringeth me the glad news that he is yet in the bondage of this
life, I will give him all he seeketh!" Then came forward Ahmad
al-Danaf and, kissing the ground between his hands, said, "Grant
me indemnity, O Commander of the Faithful!" "Thou hast it,"
answered the Caliph; and Calamity Ahmad said, "I give thee the
good news that Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, the Trusty, the
Faithful, is alive and well." Quoth the Caliph "What is this thou
sayest?" Quoth Al-Danaf, "As thy head liveth I say sooth; for I
ransomed him with another, of those who deserved death; and
carried him to Alexandria, where I opened for him a shop and set
him up as a dealer in second hand goods." Then said the Prince of
True Believers,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
ordered Calamity Ahmad, saying, "I charge thee fetch him to me;"
and the other replied, "To hear is to obey;" whereupon the Caliph
bade them give him ten thousand gold pieces and he fared forth
for Alexandria. On this wise it happed with Aslan; but as regards
his father, Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, he sold in course of time
all that was in his shop excepting a few things and amongst them
a long bag of leather. And happening to shake the bag there fell
out a jewel which filled the palm of the hand, hanging to a chain
of gold and having many facets but especially five, whereon were
names and talismanic characters, as they were ant-tracks. So he
rubbed each face; but none answered him[FN#115] and he said to
himself, "Doubtless it is a piece of variegated onyx;" and then
hung it up in the shop. And behold, a Consul[FN#116] passed along
the street; and, raising his eyes, saw the jewel hanging up; so
he seated himself over against the shop and said to Ala al-Din,
"O my lord, is the jewel for sale?" He answered, "All I have is
for sale." Thereupon the Frank said, "Wilt thou sell me that same
for eighty thousand dinars?" "Allah open!" replied Ala al-Din.
The Frank asked, "Wilt thou sell it for an hundred thousand
dinars?", and he answered, "I sell it to thee for a hundred
thousand dinars; pay me down the monies." Quoth the Consul, "I
cannot carry about such sum as its price, for there be robbers
and sharpers in Alexandria; but come with me to my ship and I
will pay thee the price and give thee to boot a bale of Angora
wool, a bale of satin, a bale of velvet and a bale of
broadcloth." So Ala al-Din rose and locked up his shop, after
giving the jewel to the Frank, and committed the keys to his
neighbour, saying, "Keep these keys in trust for me, whilst I go
with this Consul to his ship and return with the price of my
jewel. If I be long absent and there come to thee Ahmad al-Danaf,
the Captain who stablished me in this shop, give him the keys and
tell him where I am." Then he went with the Consul to his ship
and no sooner had he boarded it than the Prank set him a stool
and, making him sit down, said to his men, "Bring the money." So
they brought it and he paid him the price of the jewel and gave
him the four bales he had promised him and one over; after which
he said to him, "O my lord, honour me by accepting a bite or a
sup." And Ala al-Din answered, "If thou have any water, give me
to drink." So the Frank called for sherbets and they brought
drink drugged with Bhang, of which no sooner had Ala al-Din
drunk, than he fell over on his back; whereupon they stowed away
the chairs and shipped the shoving-poles and made sail. Now the
wind blew fair for them till it drove them into blue water, and
when they were beyond sight of land the Kaptán[FN#117] bade bring
Ala al-Din up out of the hold and made him smell the counter-drug
of Bhang; whereupon he opened his eyes and said, "Where am I?" He
replied, "Thou art bound and in my power and if thou hadst said,
Allah open! to an hundred thousand dinars for the jewel, I would
have bidden thee more." "What art thou?" asked Ala al-Din, and
the other answered, "I am a sea-captain and mean to carry thee to
my sweetheart." Now as they were talking, behold, a strip hove in
sight carrying forty Moslem merchants; so the Frank captain
attacked the vessel and made fast to it with grappling-irons;
then he boarded it with his men and took it and plundered it;
after which he sailed on with his prize, till he reached the city
of Genoa. There the Kaptan, who was carrying off Ala al-Din,
landed and repaired to a palace whose pastern gave upon the sea,
and behold, there came down to him a damsel in a chin-veil who
said, "Hast thou brought the jewel and the owner?" "I have
brought them both," answered he; and she said, "Then give me the
jewel." So he gave it to her; and, returning to the port, fired
his cannon to announce his safe return; whereupon the King of the
city, being notified of that Kaptan's arrival, came down to
receive him and asked him, "How hath been this voyage?" He
answered, "A right prosperous one, and while voyaging I have made
prize of a ship with one-and-forty Moslem merchants." Said the
King, "Land them at the port:" so he landed the merchants in
irons and Ala al-Din among the rest; and the King and the Kaptan
mounted and made the captives walk before them till they reached
the audience-chamber, when the Franks seated themselves and
caused the prisoners to pass in parade order, one by one before
the King who said to the first, "O Moslem, whence comest thou?"
He answered, "From Alexandria;" whereupon the King said, "O
headsman, put him to death." So the sworder smote him with the
sword and cut off his head: and thus it fared with the second and
the third, till forty were dead and there remained but Ala
al-Din, who drank the cup of his comrades' sighs and agony and
said to himself, "Allah have mercy on thee, O Ala al-Din Thou art
a dead man." Then said the King to him, "And thou, what
countryman art thou?" He answered, "I am of Alexandria," and the
King said, "O headsman, strike off his head." So the sworder
raised arm and sword, and was about to strike when behold, an old
woman of venerable aspect presented herself before the King, who
rose to do her honour, and said to him, "O King, did I not bid
thee remember, when the Captain came back with captives, to keep
one or two for the convent, to serve in the church?" The King
replied, "O my mother, would thou hadst come a while earlier! But
take this one that is left." So she turned to Ala al-Din and said
to him, "Say, wilt thou serve in the church, or shall I let the
King slay thee?" Quoth he, "I will serve in the church." So she
took him and carried him forth of the court and went to the
church, where he said to her, "What service must I do?" She
replied, "Thou must rise with the dawn and take five mules and go
with them to the forest and there cut dry fire-wood and saw it
short and bring it to the convent-kitchen. Then must thou take up
the carpets and sweep and wipe the stone and marble pavements and
lay the carpets down again, as they were; after which thou must
take two bushels and a half of wheat and bolt it and grind it and
knead it and make it into cracknels[FN#118] for the convent; and
thou must take also a bushel of lentils[FN#119] and sift and
crush and cook them. Then must thou fetch water in barrels and
fill the four fountains; after which thou must take three hundred
and threescore and six wooden bowls and crumble the cracknels
therein and pour of the lentil-pottage over each and carry every
monk and patriarch his bowl." Said Ala al-Din,[FN#120] "Take me
back to the King and let him kill me, it were easier to me than
this service." Replied the old woman, "If thou do truly and
rightly the service that is due from thee thou shalt escape
death; but, if thou do it not, I will let the King kill thee."
And with these words Ala al-Din was left sitting heavy at heart.
Now there were in the church ten blind cripples, and one of them
said to him, "Bring me a pot." So he brought it him and he cacked
and eased himself therein and said, "Throw away the ordure." He
did so, and the blind man said, "The Messiah's blessing be upon
thee, O servant of the church!" Presently behold, the old woman
came in and said to him, "Why hast thou not done thy service in
the church?" Answered he, "How many hands have I, that I should
suffice for all this work?" She rejoined, 'Thou fool, I brought
thee not hither except to work;" and she added, "Take, O my son,
this rod (which was of copper capped with a cross) and go forth
into the highway and, when thou meetest the governor of the city,
say to him, 'I summon thee to the service of the church, in the
name of our Lord the Messiah.' And he will not disobey thee. Then
make him take the wheat, sift, grind, bolt, knead, and bake it
into cracknels; and if any gainsay thee, beat him and fear none."
"To hear is to obey," answered he and did as she said, and never
ceased pressing great and small into his service; nor did he
leave to do thus for the space of seventeen years. Now one day as
he sat in church, lo! the old woman came to him and said, "Go
forth of the convent." He asked, "Whither shall I go?" and she
answered, "Thou canst pass the night in a tavern or with one of
thy comrades." Quoth he, "Why dost thou send me forth of the
church?" and quote she, "The Princess Husn Maryam, daughter of
Yohanná,[FN#121] King of this city, purposeth to visit the church
and it befitteth not that any abide in her way." So he made a
show of obeying her orders and rose up and pretended that he was
leaving the church; but he said in his mind, "I wonder whether
the Princess is like our women or fairer than they! At any rate I
will not go till I have had a look at her." So he hid himself in
a closet with a window looking into the church and, as he
watched, behold, in came the King's daughter. He cast at her one
glance of eyes that cost him a thousand sighs, for he found her
like the full moon when it cometh swimming out of the clouds; and
he saw with her a young lady,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ala
al-Din looked at the King's daughter, he saw with her a young
lady to whom he heard her say, "Thy company hath cheered me, O
Zubaydah." So he looked straitly at the damsel and found her to
be none other than his dead wife, Zubaydah the Lutist. Then the
Princess said to Zubaydah, "Come, play us an air on the lute."
But she answered, "I will make no music for thee, till thou grant
my wish and keep thy word to me." Asked the Princess, "And what
did I promise thee?"; and Zubaydah answered, "That thou wouldst
reunite me with my husband Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, the Trusty,
the Faithful." Rejoined the Princess, "O Zubaydah, be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear; play us a piece as a
thank-offering and an ear-feast for reunion with thy husband Ala
al-Din." "Where is he?" asked Zubaydah, and Maryam answered, "He
is in yonder closet listening to our words." So Zubaydah played
on the lute a melody which had made a rock dance for glee; and
when Ala al-Din heard it, his bowels yearned towards her and he
came forth from the closet and, throwing himself upon his wife
Zubaydah, strained her to his bosom. She also knew him and the
twain embraced and fell to the ground in a swoon. Then came
forward the Princess Husn Maryam and sprinkled rose water on
them, till they revived when she said to them, "Allah hath
reunited you." Replied Ala al-Din, "By thy kind of offices, O
lady." Then, turning to his wife, he said to her, "O Zubaydah,
thou didst surely die and we tombed thee in the tomb: how then
returnedst thou to life and camest thou to this place?" She
answered, "O my lord, I did not die; but an Aun[FN#122] of the
Jinn snatched me up and dew with me hither. She whom thou
buriedst was a Jinniyah, who shaped herself to my shape and
feigned herself dead; but when you entombed her she broke open
the tomb and came forth from it and returned to the service of
this her mistress, the Princess Husn Maryam. As for me I was
possessed[FN#123] and, when I opened my eyes, I found myself with
this Princess thou seest; so I said to her, 'Why hast thou
brought me hither?' Replied she, 'I am predestined to marry thy
husband, Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat: wilt thou then, O Zubaydah,
accept me to co-consort, a night for me and a night for thee?'
Rejoined I, 'To hear is to obey, O my lady, but where is my
husband?' Quoth she, 'Upon his forehead is written what Allah
hath decreed to him; as soon as the writing which is there writ
is fulfilled to him, there is no help for it but he come hither,
and we will beguile the time of our separation from him with
songs and playing upon instruments of music, till it please Allah
to unite us with him.' So I abode all these days with her till
Allah brought us together in this church." Then Husn Maryam
turned to him and said, "O my lord, Ala al-Din, wilt thou be to
me baron and I be to thee femme?" Quoth he, "O my lady, I am a
Moslem and thou art a Nazarene; so how can I intermarry with
thee?" Quoth she, "Allah forbid that I should be an infidel! Nay,
I am a Moslemah; for these eighteen years I have held fast the
Faith of Al-Islam and I am pure of any creed other than that of
the Islamite." Then said he, "O my lady, I desire a return to my
native land;" and she replied, "Know that I see written on thy
forehead things which thou must needs accomplish, and then thou
shalt win to thy will. Moreover, be fief and fain, O Ala al-Din,
that there hath been born to thee a son named Aslan; who now
being arrived at age of discretion, sitteth in thy place with the
Caliph. Know also that Truth hath prevailed and that Falsehood
naught availed; and that the Lord hath withdrawn the curtain of
secrecy from him who stole the Caliph's goods, that is, Ahmad
Kamakim the arch-thief and traitor; and he now lieth bound and in
jail. And know further 'twas I who sent thee the jewel and had it
put in the bag where thou foundest it, and 'twas I who sent the
captain that brought thee and the jewel; for thou must know that
the man is enamoured of me and seeketh my favours and would
possess me; but I refused to yield to his wishes or let him have
his will of me; and I said him, 'Thou shalt never have me till
thou bring me the jewel and its owner.' So I gave him an hundred
purses and despatched him to thee, in the habit of a merchant,
whereas he is a captain and a war-man; and when they led thee to
thy death after slaying the forty captives, I also sent thee this
old woman to save thee from slaughter." Said he, "Allah requite
thee for us with all good! Indeed thou hast done well." Then Husn
Maryam renewed at his hands her profession of Al-Islam; and, when
he was assured of the truth of her speech, he said to her, O my
lady, tell me what are the virtues of this jewel and whence
cometh it?" She answered, "This jewel came from an enchanted
hoard, and it hath five virtues which will profit us in time of
need. Now my lady grandmother, the mother of my father, was an
enchantress and skilled in solving secrets and finding hidden
treasures from one of which came the jewel into her hands. And as
I grew up and reached the age of fourteen, I read the Evangel and
other books and I found the name of Mohammed (whom Allah bless
and preserve!) in the four books, namely the Evangel, the
Pentateuch, the Psalms and the Koran;[FN#124] so I believed in
Mohammed and became a Moslemah, being certain and assured that
none is worship worth save Allah Almighty, and that to the Lord
of all mankind no faith is acceptable save that of Al-Islam. Now
when my lady-grandmother fell sick, she gave me this jewel and
taught me its five virtues. Moreover, before she died, my father
said to her, 'Take thy tablets of geomancy and throw a figure,
and tell us the issue of my affair and what will befal-me.' And
she foretold him that the far off one[FN#125] should die, slain
by the hand of a captive from Alexandria. So he swore to kill
every prisoner from that place and told the Kaptan of this,
saying, 'There is no help for it but thou fall on the ships of
the Moslems and seize them and whomsoever thou findest of
Alexandria, kill him or bring him to me.' The Captain did his
bidding until he had slain as many in number as the hairs of his
head. Then my grandmother died and I took a geomantic tablet,
being minded and determined to know the future, and I said to
myself, 'Let me see who will wed me!' Whereupon I threw a figure
and found that none should be my husband save one called Ala
al-Din Abu al-Shamat, the Trusty, the Faithful. At this I
marvelled and waited till the times were accomplished and I
foregathered with thee." So Ala al-Din took her to wife and said
to her, "I desire to return to my own country." Quoth she, "If it
be so, rise up and come with me." Then she took him and, hiding
him in a closet of her palace, went in to her father, who said to
her, "O my daughter, my heart is exceeding heavy this day; sit
down and let us make merry with wine, I and thou." So she sat
down with him and he called for a table of wine; and she plied
him till he lost his wits, when she drugged a cup with Bhang and
he drank it off and fell upon his back. Then she brought Ala
al-Din out of the closet and said to him, "Come; verily thine
enemy lieth prostrate, for I made him drunk and drugged him; so
do thou with him as thou wilt." Accordingly Ala al-Din went to
the King and, finding him lying drugged and helpless, pinioned
him fast and manacled and fettered him with chains. Then he gave
him the counter-drug and he came to himself,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ala al-Din
gave the antidote of Bhang to King Yohanna, father of Husn
Maryam, and he came to himself and found Ala al-Din and his
daughter sitting on his breast. So he said to her, "O my
daughter, dost thou deal thus with me?" She answered "If I be
indeed thy daughter, become a Moslem, even as I became a
Moslemah, for the truth was shown to me and I attested it; and
the false, and I deserted it. I have submitted myself unto Allah,
The Lord of the Three Worlds, and am pure of all faiths contrary
to that of Al-Islam in this world and in the next world.
Wherefore, if thou wilt become a Moslem, well and good; if not,
thy death were better than thy life." Ala al-Din also exhorted
him to embrace the True Faith; but he refused and was
contumacious; so Ala al-Din drew a dagger and cut his throat from
ear to ear.[FN#126] Then he wrote a scroll, setting forth what
had happened and laid it on the brow of the dead, after which
they took what was light of load and weighty of worth and turned
from the palace and returned to the church. Here the Princess
drew forth the jewel and, placing her hand upon the facet where
was figured a couch, rubbed it; and behold, a couch appeared
before her and she mounted upon it with Ala al-Din and his wife
Zubaydah, the lutist, saying, "I conjure thee by the virtue of
the names and talismans and characts engraver on this jewel, rise
up with us, O Couch!" And it rose with them into the air and
flew, till it came to a Wady wholly bare of growth, when the
Princess turned earthwards the facet on which the couch was
figured, and it sank with them to the ground. Then she turned up
the face where on was fashioned a pavilion and tapping it said,
"Let a pavilion be pitched in this valley;" and there appeared a
pavilion, wherein they seated themselves. Now this Wady was a
desert waste, without grass or water; so she turned a third face
of the jewel towards the sky, and said, "By the virtue of the
names of Allah, let trees upgrow here and a river flow beside
them!" And forthwith trees sprang up and by their side ran a
river plashing and dashing. They made the ablution and prayed and
drank of the stream; after which the Princess turned up the three
other facets till she came to the fourth, whereon was portrayed a
table of good, and said, "By the virtue of the names of Allah,
let the table be spread!" And behold, there appeared before them
a table, spread with all manner of rich meats, and they ate and
drank and made merry and were full of joy. Such was their case;
but as regards Husn Maryam's father, his son went in to waken him
and found him slain; and, seeing Ala al-Din's scroll, took it and
read it, and readily understood it. Then he sought his sister and
finding her not, betook himself to the old woman in the church,
of whom he enquired for her, but she said, "Since yesterday I
have not seen her." So he returned to the troops and cried out,
saying, "To horse, ye horsemen!" Then he told them what had
happened, so they mounted and rode after the fugitives, till they
drew near the pavilion. Presently Husn Maryam arose and looked up
and saw a cloud of dust which spread till it walled the view,
then it lifted and flew, and lo! stood disclosed her brother and
his troops, crying aloud, "Whither will ye fly, and we on your
track!" Then said she to Ala al-Din, "Are thy feet firm in
fight?" He replied, "Even as the stake in bran, I know not war
nor battle, nor swords nor spears." So she pulled out the jewel
and rubbed the fifth face, that on which were graven a horse and
his rider, and behold, straightway a cavalier appeared out of the
desert and ceased not to do battle with the pursuing host and
smite them with the sword, till he routed them and put them to
flight. Then the Princess asked Ala al-Din, "Wilt thou go to
Cairo or to Alexandria?"; and he answered, "To Alexandria." So
they mounted the couch and she pronounced over it the
conjuration, whereupon it set off with them and, in the twinkling
of an eye, brought them to Alexandria. They alighted without the
city and Ala al-Din hid the women in a cavern, whilst he went
into Alexandria and fetched them outer clothing, wherewith he
covered them. Then he carried them to his shop and, leaving them
in the "ben"[FN#127] walked forth to fetch them the morning-meal,
and behold he met Calamity Ahmad who chanced to be coming from
Baghdad. He saw him in the street and received him with open
arms, saluting him and welcoming him. Whereupon Ahmad al-Danaf
gave him the good news of his son Aslan and how he was now come
to the age of twenty: and Ala al-Din, in his turn, told the
Captain of the Guard all that had befallen him from first to
last, whereat he marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then he brought
him to his shop and sitting room where they passed the night; and
next day he sold his place of business and laid its price with
other monies. Now Ahmad al-Danaf had told him that the Caliph
sought him; but he said, "I am bound first for Cairo, to salute
my father and mother and the people of my house." So they all
mounted the couch and it carried them to Cairo the God-guarded;
and here they alighted in the street called Yellow,[FN#128] where
stood the house of Shams al-Din. Then Ala al-Din knocked at the
door, and his mother said, "Who is at the door, now that we have
lost our beloved for evermore?" He replied, " 'Tis I! Ala
al-Din!" whereupon they came down and embraced him. Then he sent
his wives and baggage into the house and entering himself with
Ahmad al-Danaf, rested there three days, after which he was
minded to set out for Baghdad. His father said, "Abide with me, O
my son;" but he answered; "I cannot bear to be parted from my
child Aslan." So he took his father and mother and fared forth
for Baghdad. Now when they came thither, Ahmad al-Danaf went in
to the Caliph and gave him the glad tidings of Ala al-Din's
arrival--and told him his story whereupon the King went forth to
greet him taking the youth Aslan, and they met and embraced each
other. Then the Commander of the Faithful summoned the arch-thief
Ahmad Kamakim and said to Ala al-Din, "Up and at thy foe!" So he
drew his sword and smote off Ahmad Kamakim's head. Then the
Caliph held festival for Ala al-Din and, summoning the Kazis and
witnesses, wrote the contract and married him to the Princess
Husn Maryam; and he went in unto her and found her an unpierced
pearl. Moreover, the Caliph made Aslan Chief of the Sixty and
bestowed upon him and his father sumptuous dresses of honour; and
they abode in the enjoyment of all joys and joyance of life, till
there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of
societies. But the tales of generous men are manifold and amongst
them is the story of




                  HATIM OF THE TRIBE OF TAYY.



It is told of Hátim of the tribe of Tayy,[FN#129] that when he
died, they buried him on the top of a mountain and set over his
grave two troughs hewn out of two rocks and stone girls wi