er which the rivals, each in her turn, shall do the like
with the former; and be this illustrated with citations from Holy
Writ and somewhat of anecdotes and,; verse, so as to show forth
your fine breeding and elegance of your pleading.' And they
answered him, 'We hear and we obey!;"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
handmaids answered the man of Al-Yaman, "'We hear and we obey!'
Accordingly the blonde rose first and, pointing at the black
girl, said to her: 'Out on thee, blackamoor! It is told by
tradition that whiteness saith, 'I am the shining light, I am the
rising moon of the fourteenth night. My hue is patent and my brow
is resplendent and of my beauty quoth the poet,'

'White girl with softly rounded polished cheeks * As if a pearl
     concealed by Beauty's boon:
Her stature Alif-like;[FN#354] her smile like Mím[FN#355] * And
     o'er her eyes two brows that bend like Nún.[FN#356]
'Tis as her glance were arrow, and her brows * Bows ever bent to
     shoot Death-dart eftsoon:
If cheek and shape thou view, there shalt thou find * Rose,
     myrtle, basil and Narcissus wone.
Men wont in gardens plant and set the branch, * How many garths
     thy stature-branch cloth own!'

'So my colour is like the hale and healthy day and the newly
culled orange spray and the star of sparkling ray;[FN#357] and
indeed quoth Almighty Allah, in His precious Book, to his prophet
Moses (on whom be peace!), Put thy hand into thy bosom; it shall
come forth white, without hurt.'[FN#358] And again He saith, But
they whose faces shall become white, shall be in the mercy of
Allah; therein shall they remain forever.'[FN#359] My colour is a
sign, a miracle, and my loveliness supreme and my beauty a term
extreme. It is on the like of me that raiment showeth fair and
fine and to the like of me that hearts incline. Moreover, in
whiteness are many excellences; for instance, the snow falleth
white from heaven, and it is traditional-that the beautifullest
of a colours white. The Moslems also glory in white turbands, but
I should be tedious, were I to tell all that may be told in
praise of white; little and enough is better than too much of
unfilling stuff. So now I will begin with thy dispraise, O black,
O colour of ink and blacksmith's dust, thou whose face is like
the raven which bringeth about the parting of lovers. Verily, the
poet saith in praise of white and blame of black,

'Seest not that pearls are prized for milky hue, * But with a
     dirham buy we coals in load?
And while white faces enter Paradise, * Black faces crowd
     Gehenna's black abode.'

And indeed it is told in certain histories, related on the
authority of devout men, that Noah (on whom be peace!) was
sleeping one day, with his sons Cham and Shem seated at his head,
when a wind sprang up and, lifting his clothes, uncovered his
nakedness; whereat Cham looked and laughed and did not cover him:
but Shem arose and covered him. Presently, their sire awoke and
learning, what had been done by his sons, blessed Shem and cursed
Cham. So Shem's face was whitened and from him sprang the
prophets and the orthodox Caliphs and Kings; whilst Cham's face
was blackened and he fled forth to the land of Abyssinia, and of
his lineage came the blacks.[FN#360] All people are of one mind
in affirming the lack of understanding of the blacks, even as
saith the adage, 'How shall one find a black with a mind?' Quoth
her master, 'Sit thee down, thou hast given us sufficient and
even excess.' Thereupon he signed to the negress, who rose and,
pointing her finger at the blonde, said: Dost thou not know that
in the Koran sent down to His prophet and apostle, is transmitted
the saying of God the Most High, 'By the night when it covereth
all things with darkness; by the day when it shineth
forth!'[FN#361] If the night were not the more illustrious,
verily Allah had not sworn by it nor had given it precedence of
the day. And indeed all men of wit and wisdom accept this.
Knowest thou not that black is the ornament of youth and that,
when hoariness descendeth upon the head, delights pass away and
the hour of death draweth in sight? Were not black the most
illustrious of things, Allah had not set it in the core of the
heart[FN#362] and the pupil of the eye; and how excellent is the
saying of the poet,

'I love not black girls but because they show * Youth's colour,
     tinct of eye and heartcore's hue;
Nor are in error who unlove the white, * And hoary hairs and
     winding-sheet eschew.'

And that said of another,

'Black[FN#363] girls, not white, are they * All worthy love I
     see: 
Black girls wear dark-brown lips;[FN#364] * Whites, blotch of
     leprosy.'

And of a third,

'Black girls in acts are white, and 'tis as though * Like eyes,
     with purest shine and sheen they show;
If I go daft for her, be not amazed; * Black bile[FN#365] drives
     melancholic-mad we know
'Tis as my colour were the noon of night; * For all no moon it
     be, its splendours glow.

Moreover, is the foregathering of lovers good but in the night?
Let this quality and profit suffice thee. What protecteth lovers
from spies and censors like the blackness of night's darkness;
and what causeth them to fear discovery like the whiteness of the
dawn's brightness? So, how many claims to honour are there not in
blackness and how excellent is the saying of the poet,

'I visit them, and night-black lendeth aid to me * Seconding
     love, but dawn-white is mine enemy.'

And that of another,

'How many a night I've passed with the beloved of me, * While
     gloom with dusky tresses veilèd our desires:
But when the morn-light showed it caused me sad affright; * And I
     to Morning said, 'Who worship light are liars!'[FN#366]

And saith a third,

'He came to see me, hiding neath the skirt of night, * Hasting
     his steps as wended he in cautious plight.
I rose and spread my cheek upon his path like rug, * Abject, and
     trailed my skirt to hide it from his sight;
But rose the crescent moon and strave its best to show * The
     world our loves like nail-slice raying radiant
     light:[FN#367]
Then what befel befel: I need not aught describe; * But think thy
     best, and ask me naught of wrong or right.
Meet not thy lover save at night for fear of slander * The Sun's
     a tittle-tattler and the Moon's a pander.'

And a fifth,

'I love not white girls blown with fat who puff and pant; * The
     maid for me is young brunette embonpoint-scant.
I'd rather ride a colt that's darn upon the day * Of race, and
     set my friends upon the elephant.'

And a sixth,

My lover came to me one night, * And clips we both with fond
     embrace; 
And lay together till we saw * The morning come with swiftest
     pace. 
Now I pray Allah and my Lord * To reunite us of His grace
And make night last me long as he * Lies in the arms that tightly
     lace.'

Were I to set forth all the praises of blackness, my tale would
be tedious; but little and enough is better than too much of
unfilling stuff. As for thee, O blonde, thy colour is that of
leprosy and thine embrace is suffocation;[FN#368] and it is of
report that hoar-frost and icy cold[FN#369] are in Gehenna for
the torment of the wicked. Again, of things black and excellent
is ink, wherewith is written Allah's word; and were it not for
black ambergris and black musk, there would be no perfumes to
carry to Kings. How many glories I may not mention dwell in
blackness, and how well saith the poet,

'Seest not that musk, the nut brown musk, e'er claims the highest
     price * Whilst for a load of whitest lime none more than
     dirham bids?
And while white speck upon the eye deforms the loveliest youth, *
     Black eyes discharge the sharpest shafts in lashes from
     their lids.'

Quoth her master, 'Sit thee down: this much sufficeth.' So she
sat down and he signed to the fat girl, who rose"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the man of
Al-Yaman, the master of the handmaids, signed to the fat girl who
rose and, pointing her finger at the slim girl, bared her calves
and wrists and uncovered her stomach, showing its dimples and the
plump rondure of her navel. Then she donned a shift of fine
stuff, that exposed her whole body, and said: 'Praised be Allah
who created me, for that He beautified my face and made me fat
and fair of the fattest and fairest; and likened me to branches
laden with fruit, and bestowed upon me abounding beauty and
brightness: and praised be He no less, for that He hath given me
the precedence and honoured me, when He mentioneth me in His holy
Book! Quoth the Most High, 'And he brought a fatted
calf.'[FN#370] And He hath made me like unto a vergier full of
peaches and pomegranates. In very sooth even as the townsfolk
long for fat birds and eat of them and love not lean birds, so do
the sons of Adam desire fat meat and eat of it. How many vauntful
attributes are there not in fatness, and how well saith the poet,

'Farewell thy love, for see, the Cafilah's[FN#371] on the move: *
     O man, canst bear to say adieu and leave thy love?
'Tis as her going were to seek her neighbour's tent, * The gait
     of fat fair maid, whom hearts shall all approve.'

Sawest thou ever one stand before a flesher's stall but sought of
him fat flesh? The wise say, 'Joyance is in three things, eating
meat and riding meat and putting meat into meat.'[FN#372] As for
thee, O thin one, thy calves are like the shanks of sparrows or
the pokers of furnaces; and thou art a cruciform plank of a piece
of flesh poor and rank; there is naught in thee to gladden the
heart; even as saith the poet,

'With Allah take I refuge from whatever driveth me * To bed with
     one like footrasp[FN#373] or the roughest ropery:
In every limb she hath a horn that butteth me whene'er * I fain
     would rest, so morn and eve I wend me wearily.'

Quoth her master, 'Sit thee down: this much sufficeth.' So she
sat down and he signed to the slender girl, who rose, as she were
a willow-wand, or a rattan-frond or a stalk of sweet basil, and
said: 'Praised be Allah who created me and beautified me and made
my embraces the end of all desire and likened me to the branch,
whereto all hearts incline. If I rise, I rise lightly; if I sit,
I sit prettily; I am nimble-witted at a jest and merrier-souled
than mirth itself. Never heard I one describe his mistress,
saying, 'My beloved is the bigness of an elephant or like a
mountain long and broad;' but rather, 'My lady hath a slender
waist and a slim shape.'[FN#374] Furthermore a little food
filleth me and a little water quencheth my thirst; my sport is
agile and my habit active; for I am sprightlier than the sparrow
and lighter-skipping than the starling. My favours are the
longing of the lover and the delight of the desirer; for I am
goodly of shape, sweet of smile and graceful as the bending
willow-wand or the rattan-cane[FN#375] or the stalk of the basil-
plant; nor is there any can compare with me in loveliness, even
as saith one of me,

'Thy shape with willow branch I dare compare, * And hold thy
     figure as my fortunes fair:
I wake each morn distraught, and follow thee, * And from the
     rival's eye in fear I fare.'

It is for the like of me that amourists run mad and that those
who desire me wax distracted. If my lover would draw me to him, I
am drawn to him; and if he would have me incline to him, I
incline to him and not against him. But now, as for thee, O fat
of body, thine eating is the feeding of an elephant, and neither
much nor little filleth thee. When thou liest with a man who is
lean, he hath no ease of thee; nor can he anyways take his
pleasure of thee; for the bigness of thy belly holdeth him off
from going in unto thee and the fatness of thy thighs hindereth
him from coming at thy slit. What goodness is there in thy
grossness, and what courtesy or pleasantness in thy coarseness?
Fat flesh is fit for naught but the flasher, nor is there one
point therein that pleadeth for praise. If one joke with thee,
thou art angry; if one sport with thee, thou art sulky; if thou
sleep, thou snorest if thou walk, thou lollest out thy tongue! if
thou eat, thou art never filled. Thou art heavier than mountains
and fouler than corruption and crime. Thou hast in thee nor
agility nor benedicite nor thinkest thou of aught save meat and
sleep. When thou pissest thou swishes"; if thou turd thou
gruntest like a bursten wine skin or an elephant transmogrified.
If thou go to the water closet, thou needest one to wash thy gap
and pluck out the hairs which overgrow it; and this is the
extreme of sluggish ness and the sign, outward and visible, of
stupidity[FN#376] In short, there is no good thing about thee,
and indeed the poet Title of thee,

'Heavy and swollen like an urine-bladder blown, * With hips and
     thighs like mountain propping piles of stone;
Whene'er she walks in Western hemisphere, her tread * Makes the
     far Eastern world with weight to moan and groan.'

Quoth her master, 'Sit thee down, this sufficeth;' so she sat
down and he signed to the yellow girl, who rose to her feet and
praised Allah Almighty and magnified His name, calling down peace
and blessing on Mohammed the best of His creatures; after which
she pointed her finger at the brunette and said to her," And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
yellow girl stood up and praised Almighty Allah and magnified His
name; after which she pointed her finger at the brown girl and
said to her: 'I am the one praised in the Koran, and the
Compassionate hath described my complexion and its excellence
over all other hues in His manifest Book, where Allah saith, 'A
yellow, pure yellow, whose colour gladdeneth the
beholders.'[FN#377] Wherefore my colour is a sign and portent and
my grace is supreme and my beauty a term extreme; for that my
tint is the tint of a ducat and the colour of the planets and
moons and the hue of ripe apples. My fashion is the fashion of
the fair, and the dye of saffron outvieth all other dyes; so my
semblance is wondrous and my colour marvellous. I am soft of body
and of high price, comprising all qualities of beauty. My colour
is essentially precious as virgin gold, and how many boasts and
glories cloth it not unfold! Of the like of me quoth the poet,

'Her golden yellow is the sheeny sun's; * And like gold sequins
     she delights the sight:
Saffron small portion of her glance can show; * Nay,[FN#378] she
     outvies the moon when brightest bright.'

And I shall at once begin in thy dispraise, O berry-brown girl!
Thy tincture is that of the buffalo, and all souls shudder at thy
sight. If thy colour be in any created thing, it is blamed; if it
be in food, it is poisoned; for thy hue is the hue of the dung-
fly; it is a mark of ugliness even in dogs; and among the colours
it is one which strikes with amazement and is of the signs of
mourning. Never heard I of brown gold or brown pearls or brown
gems. If thou enter the privy, thy colour changeth, and when thou
comest out, thou addest ugliness to ugliness. Thou art a non-
descript; neither black, that thou mayst be recognised, nor
white, that thou mayst be described; and in thee there is no good
quality, even as saith the poet,

'The hue of dusty motes is hers; that dull brown hue of hers * Is
     mouldy like the dust and mud by Cossid's foot
     upthrown:[FN#379]
 I never look upon her brow, e'en for eye-twinkling's space, *
     But in brown study fall I and my thoughts take browner
     tone.'

Quoth her master, 'Sit thee down; this much sufficeth;' so she
sat down and he signed to the brunette. Now she was a model of
beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace; soft of
skin, slim of shape, of stature rare, and coal-black hair; with
cheeks rosy-pink, eyes black rimmed by nature's hand, face fair,
and eloquent tongue; moreover slender-waisted and heavy-hipped.
So she rose and said: 'Praise be to Allah who hath created me
neither leper-white nor bile-yellow nor charcoal-black, but hath
made my colour to be beloved of men of wit and wisdom, for all
the poets extol berry-brown maids in every tongue and exalt their
colour over all other colours. To 'brown of hue (they say) praise
is due;' and Allah bless him who singeth,

'And in brunettes is mystery, could'st" thou but read it right, *
     Thy sight would never dwell on others, be they red or white:
Free-flowing conversation, amorous coquettishness * Would teach
     Hárut himself a mightier spell of magic might.'

And saith another,

'Give me brunettes, so limber, lissom, lithe of sway, * Brunettes
     tall, slender straight like Samhar's nut-brown
     lance;[FN#380]
Languid of eyelids and with silky down on either cheek, * Who
     fixed in lover's heart work to his life mischance.'

And yet another,

'Now, by my life, brown hue hath point of comeliness * Leaves
     whiteness nowhere and high o'er the Moon takes place;
But an of whiteness aught it borrowed self to deck, * 'Twould
     change its graces and would pale for its disgrace:
Not with his must[FN#381] I'm drunken, but his locks of musk *
     Are wine inebriating all of human race.
His charms are jealous each of each, and all desire * To be the
     down that creepeth up his lovely face.'

And again another,

'Why not incline me to that show of silky down, * On cheeks of
     dark brunette, like bamboo spiring brown?
Whenas high rank in beauty poets sing, they say * Brown ant-like
     specklet worn by nenuphar in crown.
And see I sundry lovers tear out others' eyne * For the brown
     mole beneath that jetty pupil shown,
Then why do censors blame me for one all a mole? * Allah I pray
     demolish each molesting clown!'[FN#382]

My form is all grace and my shape is built on heavy base; Kings
desire my colour which all adore, rich and poor. I am pleasant,
active, handsome, elegant, soft of skin and prized for price: eke
I am perfect in seemlibead and breeding and eloquence; my aspect
is comely and my tongue witty; my temper is bright and my play a
pretty sight. As for thee, thou art like unto a mallow growing
about the Lúk Gate;[FN#383] in hue sallow and streaked-yellow and
made all of sulphur. Aroynt thee, O copper-worth of jaundiced
sorrel, O rust of brass-pot, O face of owl in gloom, and fruit of
the Hell-tree Zakkúm;[FN#384] whose bedfellow, for heart-break,
is buried in the tomb. And there is no good thing in thee, even
as saith the poet of the like of thee,

'Yellowness, tincturing her tho' nowise sick or sorry, *
     Straitens my hapless heart and makes my head sore ache;
An thou repent not, Soul! I'll punish thee with kissing[FN#385] *
     Her lower face that shall mine every grinder break!'

And when she ended her lines, quoth her master, 'Sit thee down,
this much sufficeth!'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when the
yellow girl ended her recitation, quoth her master, 'Sit thee
down; this much sufficeth!' Then he made peace between them and
clad them all in sumptuous robes of honour and hanselled them
with precious jewels of land and sea. And never have I seen, O
Commander of the Faithful, any when or any where, aught fairer
than these six damsels fair." Now when Al-Maamun heard this story
from Mohammed of Bassorah, he turned to him and said, "O
Mohammed, knowest thou the abiding-place of these damsels and
their master, and canst thou contrive to buy them of him for us?"
He answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, indeed I have heard
that their lord is wrapped up in them and cannot bear to be
parted from them." Rejoined the Caliph, "Take thee ten thousand
gold pieces for each girl, that is sixty thousand for the whole
purchase; and carry the coin to his house and buy them of him."
So Mohammed of Bassorah took the money and, betaking himself to
the Man of Al-Yaman, acquainted him with the wish of the Prince
of True Believers. He consented to part with them at that price
to pleasure the Caliph; and despatched them to Al-Maamun, who
assigned them an elegant abode and therein used to sit with them
as cup-companions; marvelling at their beauty and loveliness, at
their varied colours and at the excellence of their conversation.
Thus matters stood for many a day; but, after awhile, when their
former owner could no longer bear to be parted from them, he sent
a letter to the Commander of the Faithful complaining to him of
his own ardent love-longing for them and containing, amongst
other contents, these couplets,

"Captured me six, all bright with youthful blee; * Then on all
     six be best salams from me!
They are my hearing, seeing, very life; * My meat, my drink, my
     joy, my jollity:
I'll ne'er forget the favours erst so charmed * Whose loss hath
     turned my sleep to insomny:
Alack, O longsome pining and O tears! * Would I had farewelled
     all humanity:
Those eyes, with bowed and well arched eyebrows[FN#386] dight, *
     Like bows have struck me with their archery."

Now when the letter came to the hands of Al-Maamun, he robed the
six damsels in rich raiment; and, giving them threescore thousand
dinars, sent them back to their lord who joyed in them with
exceeding joy[FN#387] (more especially for the monies they
brought him), and abode with them in all the comfort and
pleasance of life, till there came to them the Destroyer of
delights and the Severer of societies. And men also recount the
tale of




             HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE DAMSEL AND ABU
                             NOWAS.



The Caliph, Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, being one
night exceedingly restless and thoughtful with sad thought, rose
from his couch and walked about the by-ways of his palace, till
he came to a chamber, over whose doorway hung a curtain. He
raised that curtain and saw, at the upper end of the room, a
bedstead whereon lay something black, as it were a man asleep,
with a wax taper on his right hand and another on his left; and
as the Caliph stood wondering at the sight, behold, he remarked a
flagon full of old wine whose mouth was covered by the cup. The
Caliph wondered even more at this, saying, "How came this black
by such wine-service?" Then, drawing near the bedstead, he found
that it was a girl lying asleep there, curtained by her hair; so
he uncovered her face and saw that it was like the moon, on the
night of his fulness.[FN#388] So the Caliph filled himself a cup
of wine and drank it to the roses of her cheeks; and, feeling
inclined to enjoy her, kissed a mole on her face, whereupon she
started up from sleep, and cried out, "O Trusted of
Allah,[FN#389] what may this be?" Replied he, "A guest who
knocketh at thy door, hoping that thou wilt give him hospitality
till the dawn;" and she answered; "Even so! I will serve him with
my hearing and my sight." So she brought forward the wine and
they drank together, after which she took the lute and tuning the
strings, preluded in one-and-twenty modes, then returning to the
first, played a lively measure and sang these couplets,

"The tongue of love from heart bespeaks my sprite, * Telling I
     love thee with love infinite:
I have an eye bears witness to my pain, * And fluttering heart
     sore hurt by parting-plight.
I cannot hide the love that harms my life; * Tears ever roll and
     growth of pine I sight:
I knew not what love was ere loving thee; * But Allah's destiny
     to all is dight."

And when her verses were ended she said, "O Commander of the
Faithful, I have been wronged!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
cried, "O Commander of the Faithful, I have been wronged!" Quoth
he, "How so, and who hath wronged thee?" Quoth she "Thy son
bought me awhile ago, for ten thousand dirhams, meaning to give
me to thee; but thy wife, the daughter of thine uncle, sent him
the said price and bade him shut me up from thee in this
chamber." Whereupon said the Caliph, "Ask a boon of me," and she,
"I ask thee to lie with me to-morrow night." Replied the Caliph,
"Inshallah!" and leaving her, went away. Now as soon as it was
morning, he repaired to his sitting-room and called for Abu
Nowas, but found him not and sent his chamberlain to ask after
him. The chamberlain found him in a tavern, pawned and pledged
for a score of a thousand dirhams, which he had spent on a
certain beardless youth, and questioned him of his case. So he
told him what had betided him with the comely boy and how he had
spent upon him a thousand silver pieces; whereupon quoth the
chamberlain, "Show him to me; and if he be worth this, thou art
excused." He answered, "Patience, and thou shalt see him
presently.' As they were talking together, up came the lad, clad
in a white tunic, under which was another of red and under this
yet another black. Now when Abu Nowas saw him, he sighed a loud
sigh and improvised these couplets,

"He showed himself in shirt of white, * With eyes and eyelids
     languor-digit.
Quoth I, 'Doss pass and greet me not? * Though were thy greeting
     a delight?
Blest He who clothed in rose thy cheeks, * Creates what wills He
     by His might!'
Quoth he, 'Leave prate, forsure my Lord * Of works is wondrous
     infinite:
My garment's like my face and luck; * All three are white on
     white on white.'"

When the beardless one heard these words, he doffed the white
tunic and appeared in the red; and when Abu Nowas saw him he
redoubled in expressions of admiration and repeated these
couplets,

"He showed in garb anemone-red, * A foeman 'friend' entitulèd:
Quoth I in marvel, 'Thou'rt full moon * Whose weed shames rose
     however red:
Hath thy cheek stained it red, or hast * Dyed it in blood by
     lovers bled?'
Quoth he, 'Sol gave me this for shirt * When hasting down the
     West to bed
So garb and wine and hue of cheek * All three are red on red on
     red.'"

And when the verses came to an end, the beardless one doffed the
red tunic and stood in the black; and, when Abu Nowas saw him, he
redoubled in attention to him and versified in these couplets,

"He came in sable-huèd sacque * And shone in dark men's heart to
     rack:
Quoth I, 'Doss pass and greet me not? * Joying the hateful
     envious pack?
Thy garment's like thy locks and like * My lot, three blacks on
     black on black.'"

Seeing this state of things and understanding the case of Abu
Nowas and his love-longing, the Chamberlain returned to the
Caliph and acquainted him therewith; so he bade him pouch a
thousand dirhams and go and take him out of pawn. Thereupon the
Chamberlain returned to Abu Nowas and, paying his score, carried
him to the Caliph, who said, "Make me some verses containing the
words, O Trusted of Allah, what may this be?" Answered he, "I
hear and I obey, O Commander of the Faithful."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Three Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Nowas
answered, "I hear and I obey, O Commander of the Faithful!" and
forthwith he improvised these couplets,

"Long was my night for sleepless misery; * Weary of body and of
     thought ne'er free:
I rose and in my palace walked awhile, * Then wandered thro' the
     halls of Haremry: 
Till chanced I on a blackness, which I found * A white girl hid
     in hair for napery:
Here to her for a moon of brightest sheen! * Like willow-wand and
     veiled in pudency:
I quaffed a cup to her; then drew I near, * And kissed the
     beauty-spot on cheek had she:
She woke astart, and in her sleep's amaze, * Swayed as the
     swaying branch in rain we see;
Then rose and said to me, 'O Trusted One * Of Allah, O Amin, what
     may this be?
Quoth I, 'A guest that cometh to thy tents * And craves till morn
     thy hospitality.'
She answered, 'Gladly I, my lord, will grace * And honour such a
     guest with ear and eye.'"

Cried the Caliph, "Allah strike thee dead! it is as if thou hadst
been present with us.''[FN#390] Then he took him by the hand and
carried him to the damsel and, when Abu Nowas saw her clad in a
dress and veil of blue, he expressed abundant admiration and
improvised these couplets,

"Say to the pretty one in veil of blue, * 'By Allah, O my life,
     have ruth on dole!
For, when the fair entreats her lover foul, * Sighs rend his
     bosom and bespeak his soul
By charms of thee and whitest cheek I swear thee, * Pity a heart
     for love lost all control
Bend to him, be his stay 'gainst stress of love, * Nor aught
     accept what saith the ribald fool.'"

Now when he ended his verse, the damsel set wine before the
Caliph; and, taking the lute, played a lively measure and sang
these couplets,

"Wilt thou be just to others in thy love, and do * Unright, and
     put me off, and take new friend in lieu?
Had lovers Kazi unto whom I might complain * Of thee, he'd
     peradventure grant the due I sue:
If thou forbid me pass your door, yet I afar * Will stand, and
     viewing you waft my salams to you!"

The Caliph bade her ply Abu Nowas with wine, till he lost his
right senses, thereupon he gave him a full cup, and he drank a
draught of it and held the cup in his hand till he slept. Then
the Commander of the Faithful bade the girl take the cup from his
grasp and hide it; so she took it and set it between her thighs,
moreover he drew his scymitar and, standing at the head of Abu
Nowas, pricked him with the point; whereupon he awoke and saw the
drawn sword and the Caliph standing over him. At this sight the
fumes of the wine fled from his head and the Caliph said to him,
"Make me some verses and tell me therein what is become of thy
cup; or I will cut off thy head." So he improvised these
couplets,

"My tale, indeed, is tale unlief; * 'Twas yonder fawn who play'd
     the thief!
She stole my cup of wine, before * The sips and sups had dealt
     relief,
And hid it in a certain place, * My heart's desire and longing
     grief.
I name it not, for dread of him * Who hath of it command-in-
    chief."

Quoth the Caliph, "Allah strike thee dead![FN#391] How knewest
thou that? But we accept what thou sayst." Then he ordered him a
dress of honour and a thousand dinars, and he went away
rejoicing. And among tales they tell is one of




           THE MAN WHO STOLE THE DISH OF GOLD WHEREIN
                          THE DOG ATE.



Sometime erst there was a man, who had accumulated debts, and his
case was straitened upon him, so that he left his people and
family and went forth in distraction; and he ceased not wandering
on at random till he came after a time to a city tall of walls
and firm of foundations. He entered it in a state of despondency
and despair, harried by hunger and worn with the weariness of his
way. As he passed through one of the main streets, he saw a
company of the great going along; so he followed them till they
reached a house like to a royal-palace. He entered with them, and
they stayed not faring forwards till they came in presence of a
person seated at the upper end of a saloon, a man of the most
dignified and majestic aspect, surrounded by pages and eunuchs,
as he were of the sons of the Wazirs.When he saw the visitors, he
rose to greet them and received them with honour; but the poor
man aforesaid was confounded at his own boldness, when
beholding----And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the poor
man aforesaid was confounded at his own boldness, when beholding
the goodliness of the place and the crowd of servants and
attendants; so drawing back, in perplexity and fear for his life
sat down apart in a place afar off. where none should see him.
Now it chanced that whilst he was sitting, behold, in came a man
with four sporting-dogs, whereon were various kinds of raw silk
and brocade[FN#392] and wearing round their necks collars of gold
with chains of silver, and tied up each dog in a place set privy
for him; after which he went out and presently returned with four
dishes of gold, full of rich meats, which he set severally before
the dogs, one for each. Then he went away and left them, whilst
the poor man began to eye the food, for stress of hunger, and
longed to go up to one of the dogs and eat with him, but fear of
them withheld him. Presently, one of the dogs looked at him and
Allah Almighty inspired the dog with a knowledge of his case; so
he drew back from the platter and signed to the man, who came and
ate till he was filled. Then he would have withdrawn, but the dog
again signed to him to take for himself the dish and what food
was left in it, and pushed it towards him with his fore-paw. So
the man took the dish and leaving the house, went his way, and
none followed him. Then he journeyed to another city where he
sold the dish and buying with the price a stock-in-trade,
returned to his own town. There he sold his goods and paid his
debts; and he throve and became affluent and rose to perfect
prosperity. He abode in his own land; but after some years had
passed he said to himself, "Needs must I repair to the city of
the owner of the dish, and, carry him a fit and handsome present
and pay him the money-value of that which his dog bestowed upon
me." So he took the price of the dish and a suitable gift; and,
setting out, journeyed day and night, till he came to that city;
he entered it and sought the place where the man lived; but he
found there naught save ruins mouldering in row and croak of
crow, and house and home desolate and all conditions in changed
state. At this, his heart and soul were troubled, and he repeated
the saying of him who saith,

"Void are the private rooms of treasury: * As void were hearts of
     fear and piety:
Changed is the Wady nor are its gazelles * Those fawns, nor sand-
    hills those I wont to see."

And that of another,

"In sleep came Su'adá's[FN#393] shade and wakened me * Near dawn,
     when comrades all a-sleeping lay:
But waking found I that the shade was fled, * And saw air empty
     and shrine far away."

Now when the man saw these mouldering ruins and witnessed what
the hand of time had manifestly done with the place, leaving but
traces of the substantial-things that erewhiles had been, a
little reflection made it needless for him to enquire of the
case; so he turned away. Presently, seeing a wretched man, in a
plight which made him shudder and feel goose-skin, and which
would have moved the very rock to rush, he said to him, "Ho thou!
What have time and fortune done with the lord of this place?
Where are his lovely faces, his shining full moons and splendid
stars; and what is the cause of the ruin that is come upon his
abode, so that nothing save the walls thereof remain?" Quoth the
other, "He is the miserable thou seest mourning that which hath
left him naked. But knowest thou not the words of the Apostle
(whom Allah bless and keep!), wherein is a lesson to him who will
learn by it and a warning to whoso will be warned thereby and
guided in the right way, 'Verily it is the way of Allah Almighty
to raise up nothing of this world, except He cast it down
again?'[FN#394] If thou question of the cause of this accident,
indeed it is no wonder, considering the chances and changes of
Fortune. I was the lord of this place and I builded it and
founded it and owned it; and I was the proud possessor of its
full moons lucent and its circumstance resplendent and its
damsels radiant and its garniture magnificent, but Time turned
and did away from me wealth and servants and took from me what it
had lent (not given); and brought upon me calamities which it
held in store hidden. But there must needs be some reason for
this thy question: so tell it me and leave wondering." Thereupon,
the man who had waxed wealthy being sore concerned, told him the
whole story, and added, "I have brought thee a present, such as
souls desire, and the price of thy dish of gold which I took; for
it was the cause of my affluence after poverty, and of the
replenishment of my dwelling-place, after desolation, and of the
dispersion of my trouble and straitness." But the man shook his
head, and weeping and groaning and complaining of his lot
answered, "Ho thou! methinks thou art mad; for this is not the
way of a man of sense. How should a dog of mine make generous
gift to thee of a dish of gold and I meanly take back the price
of what a dog gave? This were indeed a strange thing! Were I in
extremest unease and misery, by Allah, I would not accept of thee
aught; no, not the worth of a nail-paring! So return whence thou
camest in health and safety."[FN#395] Whereupon the merchant
kissed his feet and taking leave of him, returned whence he came,
praising him and reciting this couplet,

"Men and dogs together are all gone by, * So peace be with all of
     them! dogs and men!'

And Allah is All knowing! Again men tell the tale of




           THE SHARPER OF ALEXANDRIA AND THE CHIEF OF
                            POLICE.



There was once in the coast-fortress of Alexandria, a Chief of
Police, Husám al-Din highs, the sharp Scymitar of the Faith. Now
one night as he sat in his seat of office, behold, there came in
to him a trooper-wight who said, "Know, O my lord the Chief, that
I entered your city this night and alighted at such a khan and
slept there till a third part of the night was past when I awoke
and found my saddle-bags sliced open and a purse of a thousand
gold pieces stolen from them." No sooner had he done speaking
than the Chief summoned his chief officials and bade them lay
hands on all in the khan and clap them in limbo till the morning;
and on the morrow, he caused bring the rods and whips used in
punishment, and, sending for the prisoners, was about to flog
them till they confessed in the presence of the owner of the
stolen money when, lo! a man broke through the crowd till he came
up to the Chief of Police,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Chief
was about to flog them when lo! a man broke through the crowd
till he came up to the Chief of Police and the trooper and said;
"Ho! Emir, let these folk go, for they are wrongously accused. It
was I who robbed this trooper, and see, here is the purse I stole
from his saddle-bags." So saying, he pulled out the purse from
his sleeve and laid it before Husam al-Din, who said to the
soldier, "Take thy money and pouch it; thou now hast no ground of
complaint against the people of the khan." Thereupon these folk
and all who were present fell to praising the thief and blessing
him; but he said, "Ho! Emir, the skill is not in that I came to
thee in person and brought thee the purse; the cleverness was in
taking it a second time from this trooper." Asked the Chief, "And
how didst thou do to take it, O sharper?"; and the robber
replied, "O Emir, I was standing in the Shroff's[FN#396] bazar at
Cairo, when I saw this soldier receive the gold in change and put
it in yonder purse; so I followed him from by-street to by-
street, but found no occasion of stealing it. Then he travelled
from Cairo and I followed him from town to town, plotting and
planning by the way to rob him, but without avail, till he
entered this city and I dogged him to the khan. I took up my
lodging beside him and watched him till he fell asleep and I
heard him sleeping; when I went up to him softly, softly; and I
slit open his saddle-bags with this knife, and took the purse in
the way I am now taking it." So saying, he put out his hand and
took the purse from before the Chief of Police and the trooper,
both of whom, together with the folk, drew back watching him and
thinking he would show them how he took the purse from the
saddle-bags. But, behold! he suddenly broke into a run and threw
himself into a pool of standing water[FN#397] hard by. So the
Chief of the Police shouted to his officers, "Stop thief!" and
many made after him; but before they could doff their clothes and
descend the steps, he had made off; and they sought for him, but
found him not; for that the by-streets and lanes of Alexandria
all communicate. So they came back without bringing the purse;
and the Chief of Police said to the trooper, "Thou hast no demand
upon the folk; for thou fondest him who robbed thee and
receivedst back thy money, but didst not keep it." So the trooper
went away, having lost his money, whilst the folk were delivered
from his hands and those of the Chief of Police, and all this was
of the favour of Almighty Allah.[FN#398] And they also tell the
tale of




           AL-MALIK AL-NASIR AND THE THREE CHIEFS OF
                            POLICE.



Once upon a time Al-Malik al-Násir[FN#399] sent for the Wális or
Chiefs of Police of Cairo, Bulak, and Fostat[FN#400] and said to
them, "I desire each of you to recount me the marvellousest thing
that hath befallen him during his term of office."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth
Al-Malik al-Nasir to the three Walis, "I desire each of you to
recount me the marvellousest thing which hath befallen him during
his term of office." So they answered, "We hear and we obey."
Then said the Chief of the Police of Cairo, "Know thou, O our
lord the Sultan, the most wonderful thing that befel me, during
my term of office, was on this wise:" and he began




The Story of the Chief of Police of Cairo.



"There were in this city two men of good repute fit to bear
witness[FN#401] in matters of murder and wounds; but they were
both secretly addicted to intrigues with low women and to wine-
bibbing and to dissolute doings, nor could I succeed (do what I
would) in bringing them to book, and I began to despair of
success. So I charged the taverners and confectioners and
fruiterers and candle-chandlers and the keepers of brothels and
bawdy houses to acquaint me of these two good men whenever they
should anywhere be engaged in drinking or other debauchery, or
together or apart; and ordered that, if they both or if either of
them bought at their shops aught for the purpose of wassail and
carousel, the vendors should not conceal-it from me. And they
replied, 'We hear and obey.' Presently it chanced that one night,
a man came to me and said, 'O my master, know that the two just
men, the two witnesses, are in such a street in such a house,
engaged in abominable wickedness.' So I disguised myself, I and
my body-servant, and ceased not trudging till I came to the house
and knocked at the door, whereupon a slave-girl came out and
opened to me, saying, 'Who art thou?' I entered without answering
her and saw the two legal-witnesses and the house-master sitting,
and lewd women by their side and before them great plenty of
wine. When they saw me, they rose to receive me, and made much of
me, seating me in the place of honour and saying to me, 'Welcome
for an illustrious guest and well come for a pleasant cup-
companion!' And on this wise they met me without showing a sign
of alarm or trouble. Presently, the master of the house arose
from amongst us and went out and returned after a while with
three hundred dinars, when the men said to me, without the least
fear, 'Know, O our lord the Wali, it is in thy power to do even
more than disgrace and punish us; but this will bring thee in
return nothing but weariness: so we reck thou wouldest do better
to take this much money and protect us; for Almighty Allah is
named the Protector and loveth those of His servants who protect
their Moslem neighbours; and thou shalt have thy reward in this
world and due recompense in the world to come.' So I said to
myself, 'I will take the money and protect them this once, but,
if ever again I have them in my power, I will take my wreak of
them;' for, you see, the money had tempted me. Thereupon I took
it and went away thinking that no one would know it; but, next
day, on a sudden one of the Kazi's messengers came to me and said
to me, 'O Wali, be good enough to answer the summons of the Kazi
who wanteth thee.' So I arose and accompanied him, knowing not
the meaning of all this; and when I came into the judge's
presence, I saw the two witnesses and the master of the house,
who had given me the money, sitting by his side. Thereupon this
man rose and sued me for three hundred dinars, nor was it in my
power to deny the debt; for he produced a written obligation and
his two companions, the legal witnesses, testified against me
that I owed the amount. Their evidence satisfied the Kazi and he
ordered me to pay the sum, nor did I leave the Court till they
had of me the three hundred gold pieces. So I went away, in the
utmost wrath and shame, vowing mischief and vengeance against
them and repenting that I had not punished them. Such, then is
the most remarkable event which befel me during my term of
office." Thereupon rose the Chief of the Bulak Police and said,
"As for me, O our lord the Sultan, the most marvellous thing that
happened to me, since I became Wali, was as follows:" and he
began




The Story of the Chief of the Bulak Police.



"I was once in debt to the full amount of three hundred thousand
gold pieces;[FN#402] and, being distressed thereby, I sold all
that was behind me and what was before me and all I hent in hand,
but I could collect no more than an hundred thousand dinars"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wali of
Bulak continued: "So I sold all that was behind and before me,
but could collect no more than an hundred thousand dinars and
remained in great perplexity. Now one night, as I sat at home in
this state, behold, there came a knocking; so I said to one of my
servants, 'See who is at the door.' He went out and returned, wan
of face, changed in countenance and with his side-muscles a-
quivering; so I asked him, 'What aileth thee?'; and he answered,
'There is a man at the door; he is half naked, clad in skins,
with sword in hand and knife in girdle, and with him are a
company of the same fashion and he asketh for thee.' So I took my
sword and going out to see who these were, behold, I found them
as the boy had reported and said to them, 'What is your
business?' They replied, 'Of a truth we be thieves and have done
fine work this night; so we appointed the swag to thy use, that
thou mayst pay therewith the debts which sadden thee and deliver
thee from thy distress.' Quoth I, 'Where is the plunder?'; and
they brought me a great chest, full of vessels of gold and
silver; which when I saw, I rejoiced and said to myself,
'Herewith I will settle all claims upon me and there will remain
as much again.' So I took the money and going inside said in my
mind, 'It were ignoble to let them fare away empty-handed.'
Whereupon I brought out the hundred thousand dinars I had by me
and gave it to them, thanking them for their kindness; and they
pouched the monies and went their way, under cover of the night
so that none might know of them. But when morning dawned I
examined the contents of the chest, and found them copper and
tin[FN#403] washed with gold worth five hundred dirhams at the
most; and this was grievous to me, for I had lost what monies I
had and trouble was added to my trouble. Such, then, is the most
remarkable event which befel me during my term of office." Then
rose the Chief of the Police of Old Cairo and said, "O our lord
the Sultan, the most marvellous thing that happened to me, since
I became Wali, was on this wise;" and he began




The Story of the Chief of the Old Cairo Police.



"I once hanged ten thieves each on his own gibbet, and especially
charged the guards to watch them and hinder the folk from taking
any one of them down. Next morning when I came to look at them, I
found two bodies hanging from one gallows and said to the guards,
'Who did this, and where is the tenth gibbet?' But they denied
all knowledge of it, and I was about to beat them till they owned
the truth, when they said, 'Know, O Emir, that we fell asleep
last night, and when we awoke, we found that some one had stolen
one of the bodies, gibbet and all; so we were alarmed and feared
thy wrath. But, behold, up came a peasant-fellow driving his ass;
whereupon we laid hands on him and killed him and hanged his body
upon this gallows, in the stead of the thief who had been
stolen.'[FN#404] Now when I heard this, I marvelled and asked
them, 'What had he with him?'; and they answered, 'He had a pair
of saddle-bags on the ass.' Quoth I, 'What was in them?'; quoth
they, 'We know not.' So I said, 'Bring them hither;' and when
they brought them to me I bade open them, behold, therein was the
body of a murdered man, cut in pieces. Now as soon as I saw this,
I marvelled at the case and said in myself, 'Glory to God! The
cause of the hanging of this peasant was none other but his crime
against this murdered man; and thy Lord is not unjust towards His
servants.'"[FN#405] And men also tell the tale of




                   THE THIEF AND THE SHROFF.



A certain Shroff, bearing a bag of gold pieces, once passed by a
company of thieves, and one of these sharpers said to the others,
"I, and I only, have the power to steal yonder purse." So they
asked, "How wilt thou do it?"; and he answered, "Look ye all!";
and followed the money-changer, till he entered his house, when
he threw the bag on a shelf[FN#406] and, being affected with
diabetes, went into the chapel of ease to do his want, calling to
the slave-girl, "Bring me an ewer of water." She took the ewer
and followed him to the privy, leaving the door open, whereupon
the thief entered and, seizing the money-bag, made off with it to
his companions, to whom he told what had passed.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the thief
took the money-bag and made off with it to his companions to whom
he told what had passed. Said they, "By Allah, thou hast played a
clever trick! ''tis not every one could do it; but, presently the
money-changer will come out of the privy; and missing the bag of
money, he will beat the slave-girl and torture her with grievous
torture. 'Tis as though thou hast at present done nothing worthy
of praise; so, if thou be indeed a sharper, return and save the
girl from being beaten and questioned." Quoth he, ' Inshallah! I
will save both girl and purse." Then the prig went back to the
Shroff's house and found him punishing the girl because of the
purse; so he knocked at the door and the man said, "Who is
there?" Cried the thief, "I am the servant of thy neighbour in
the Exchange;" whereupon he came out to him and said, "What is
thy business?" The thief replied, "My master saluteth thee and
saith to thee: 'Surely thou art deranged and thoroughly so, to
cast the like of this bag of money down at the door of thy shop
and go away and leave it.' Had a stranger hit upon it he had made
off with it and, except my master had seen it and taken care of
it, it had assuredly been lost to thee." So saying, he pulled out
the purse and showed it to the Shroff who on seeing it said,
"That is my very purse," and put out his hand to take it; but the
thief said, "By Allah, I will not give thee this same, till thou
write me a receipt declaring that thou hast received it! for
indeed I f