 (Deut. xxvii. 21). C. S. Sonnini (Travels, English
translation, p. 663) gives a curious account of Fellah lewdness.
"The female crocodile during congress is turned upon her back ( ?)
and cannot rise without difficulty. Will it be believed that there
are men who take advantage of the helpless situation of the female,
drive off the male, and supplant him in this frightful intercourse
? Horrible embraces, the knowledge of which was wanting to complete
the disgusting history of human perversity!" The French traveller
forgets to add the superstitious explanation of this congress which
is the sovereignest charm for rising to rank and riches. The Ajáib
al-Hind tells a tale (chaps. xxxix.) of a certain Mohammed bin
Bullishad who had issue by a she-ape: the young ones were hairless
of body and wore quasi-human faces; and the father's sight had
become dim by his bestial-practice. 





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael Hart]





This etext was produced by anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteers





The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Complete Works of
Artemus Ward (Charles Farrar Browne) Part 4

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF ARTEMUS WARD PART 4, TO CALIFORNIA AND RETURN

(CHARLES FARRAR BROWNE)

With a biographical sketch by Melville D. Landon, "Eli Perkins"

CONTENTS.

PART IV.

TO CALIFORNIA AND RETURN.

4.1.  On the Steamer.

4.2.  The Isthmus.

4.3.  Mexico.

4.4.  California.

4.5.  Washoe.

4.6.  Mr. Pepper.

4.7.  Horace Greeley's Ride to Placerville.

4.8.  To Reese River.

4.9.  Great Salt Lake City.

4.10.  The Mountain Fever.

4.11.  "I am Here."

4.12.  Brigham Young.

4.13.  A Piece is Spoken.

4.14.  The Ball.

4.15.  Phelp's Almanac.

4.16.  Hurrah for the Road.

4.17.  Very Much Married.

4.18.  The Revelation of Joseph Smith.

PART IV.  TO CALIFORNIA AND RETURN.

4.1.  ON THE STEAMER.

                                        New York, Oct. 13, 1868.

The steamer Ariel starts for California at noon.

Her decks are crowded with excited passengers, who instantly
undertake to "look after" their trunks and things; and what with
our smashing against each other, and the yells of the porters, and
the wails over lost baggage, and the crash of boxes, and the roar
of the boilers, we are for the time being about as unhappy a lot of
maniacs as was ever thrown together.

I am one of them.  I am rushing around with a glaring eye in search
of a box.

Great jam, in which I find a sweet young lady, with golden hair,
clinging to me fondly, and saying, "Dear George, farewell!"--
Discovers her mistake, and disappears.

I should like to be George some more.

Confusion so great that I seek refuge in a stateroom which contains
a single lady of forty-five summers, who says, "Base man! leave
me!"  I leave her.

By and by we cool down, and become somewhat regulated.

NEXT DAY

When the gong sounds for breakfast we are fairly out on the sea,
which runs  roughly, and the Ariel rocks wildly.  Many of the
passengers are sick, and a young naval officer establishes a
reputation as a wit by carrying to one of the invalids a plate of
raw salt pork, swimming in cheap molasses.  I am not sick; so I
roll round the deck in the most cheerful sea-dog manner.

                   .     .      .      .

The next day and the next pass by in a serene manner.  The waves
are smooth now, and we can all eat and sleep.  We might have
enjoyed ourselves very well, I fancy, if the Ariel, whose capacity
was about three hundred and fifty passengers, had not on this
occasion carried nearly nine hundred, a hundred, at least of whom
were children of an unpleasant age.  Captain Semmes captured the
Ariel once, and it is to be deeply regretted that that thrifty
buccaneer hadn't made mince-meat of her, because she is a miserable
tub at best, and hasn't much more right to be afloat than a second-
hand coffin has.  I do not know her proprietor, Mr. C. Vanderbilt.
But I know of several excellent mill privileges in the State of
Maine, and not one of them is so thoroughly "Dam'd" as he was all
the way from New York to Aspinwall.

I had far rather say a pleasant thing than a harsh one; but it is
due to the large number of respectable ladies and gentleman who
were on board the steamer Ariel with me that I state here that the
accommodations on that steamer were very vile.  If I did not so
state, my conscience would sting me through life, and I should have
harried dreams like Richard III. Esq.

The proprietor apparently thought we were undergoing transportation
for life to some lonely island, and the very waiters who brought us
meals, that any warden of any penitentiary would blush to offer
convicts, seemed to think it was a glaring error our not being in
chains.

As a specimen of the liberal manner in which this steamer was
managed I will mention that the purser (a very pleasant person, by
the way) was made to unite the positions of purser, baggage clerk,
and doctor; and I one day had a lurking suspicion that he was among
the waiters in the dining-cabin, disguised in a white jacket and
slipshod pumps.
                   .     .      .      .

I have spoken my Piece about the Ariel, and I hope Mr. Vanderbilt
will reform ere it is too late.  Dr. Watts says the vilest sinner
may return as long as the gas-meters work well, or words to that
effect.
                   .     .      .      .

We were so densely crowded on board the Ariel that I cannot
conscientiously say we were altogether happy.  And sea-voyages at
best are a little stupid. On the whole I should prefer a voyage on
the Erie Canal, where there isn't any danger, and where you can
carry picturesque scenery along with you--so to speak.

II.--THE ISTHMUS.

On the ninth day we reach Aspinwall in the Republic of Granada.
The President of New Granada is a Central American named Mosquero.
I was told that he derived quite a portion of his income by
carrying passengers' valises and things from the steamer to the
hotels in Aspinwall.  It was an infamous falsehood.  Fancy A.
Lincoln carrying carpet-bags and things! and indeed I should rather
trust him with them than Mosquero, because the former gentleman, as
I think some one has before observed, is "honest."

I intrust my bag to a speckled native, who confidentially gives me
to understand that he is the only strictly honest person in
Aspinwall.  The rest, he says, are niggers--which the colored
people of the Isthmus regard as about as scathing a thing as they
can say of one another.

I examine the New Grenadian flag, which waves from the
chamber-window of the refreshment saloon.  It is of simple design.
You can make one.

Take half of a cotton shirt, that has been worn two months, and dip
it in molasses of the Day & Martin brand.  Then let the flies
gambol over it for a few days, and you have it.  It is an emblem of
Sweet Liberty.

At the Howard House the man of sin rubbeth the hair of the horse to
the bowels of the cat, and our girls are waving their lily-white
hoofs in the dazzling waltz.

We have a quadrille, in which an English person slips up and jams
his massive brow against my stomach.  He apologizes, and I say,
"all right, my lord."  I subsequently ascertained that he
superintended the shipping of coals for the British steamers, and
owned fighting cocks.

The ball stops suddenly.

Great excitement.  One of our passengers intoxicated and riotous in
the street.  Openly and avowedly desires the entire Republic of New
Grenada to "come on."

In case they do come on, agrees to make it lively for them.  Is
quieted down at last, and marched off to prison, by a squad of
Grenadian troops.  Is musical as he passes the hotel, and smiling
sweetly upon the ladies and children on the balcony, expresses a
distinct desire to be an Angel, and with the Angels stand.  After
which he leaps nimbly into the air and imitates the war-cry of the
red man.
                   .     .      .      .

The natives amass wealth by carrying valises, &c., then squander it
for liquor.  My native comes to me as I sit on the veranda of the
Howard House smoking a cigar, and solicits the job of taking my
things to the cars next morning.  He is intoxicated, and has been
fighting, to the palpable detriment of his wearing apparel; for he
has only a pair of tattered pantaloons and a very small quantity of
shirt left.

We go to bed.  Eight of us are assigned to a small den upstairs,
with only two lame apologies for beds.

Mosquitoes and even rats annoy us fearfully.  One bold rat gnaws at
the feet of a young Englishman in the party.  This was more than
the young Englishman could stand, and rising from his bed he asked
us if New Grenada wasn't a Republic?  We said it was.  "I thought
so," he said.  "Of course I mean no disrespect to the United States
of America in the remark, but I think I prefer a bloated monarchy!"
He smiled sadly--then handing his purse and his mother's photograph
to another English person, he whispered softly.  "If I am eaten up,
give them to Me mother--tell her I died like a true Briton, with no
faith whatever in the success of a republican form of government!"
And then he crept back to bed again.

                   .     .      .      .

We start at seven the next morning for Panama.

My native comes bright and early to transport my carpet sack to the
railway station.  His clothes have suffered still more during the
night, for he comes to me now dressed only in a small rag and one
boot.

At last we are off.  "Adios, Americanos!" the natives cry; to which
I pleasantly reply, "ADOUS! and long may it be before you have a
chance to Do us again."

The cars are comfortable on the Panama railway, and the country
through which we pass is very beautiful.  But it will not do to
trust it much, because it breeds fevers and other unpleasant
disorders, at all seasons of the year.  Like a girl we most all
have known, the Isthmus is fair but false.

There are mud huts all along the route, and half-naked savages gaze
patronizingly upon us from their doorways.  An elderly lady in
spectacles appears to be much scandalized by the scant dress of
these people, and wants to know why the Select Men don't put a stop
to it.  From this, and a remark she incidentally makes about her
son, who has invented a washing machine which will wash, wring, and
dry a shirt in ten minutes, I infer that she is from the hills of
Old New England, like the Hutchinson family.

                   .     .      .      .

The Central American is lazy.  The only exercise he ever takes is
to occasionally produce a Revolution.  When his feet begin to swell
and there are premonitory symptoms of gout, he "revolushes" a
spell, and then serenely returns to his cigarette and hammock under
the palm-trees.

These Central American Republics are queer concerns.  I do not of
course precisely know what a last year's calf's ideas of immortal
glory may be, but probably they are about as lucid as those of a
Central American in regard to a republican form of government.

And yet I am told they are a kindly people in the main.  I never
met but one of them--a Costa-Rican; on board the Ariel.  He lay
sick with fever, and I went to him and took his hot hand gently in
mine.  I shall never forget his look of gratitude.  And the next
day he borrowed five dollars of me, shedding tears as he put it in
his pocket.
                   .     .      .      .

At Panama we lose several of our passengers, and among them three
Peruvian ladies, who go to Lima, the city of volcanic eruptions and
veiled black-eyed beauties.

The Senoritas who leave us at Panama are splendid creatures.  They
learned me Spanish, and in the soft moonlight we walked on deck and
talked of the land of Pizarro.  (You know old Piz. conquered Peru!
and although he was not educated at West Point, he had still some
military talent.)  I feel as though I had lost all my relations,
including my grandmother and the cooking stove when these gay young
Senoritas go away.

They do not go to Peru on a Peruvian bark, but on an English
steamer.  Off to Acapulco.

4.3.  MEXICO.

We make Acapulco, a Mexican coast town of some importance, in a few
days, and all go ashore.

The pretty peasant girls peddle necklaces made of shells and
oranges, in the streets of Acapulco, on steamer days.  They are
quite naive about it.  Handing you a necklace they will say, "Me
give you pres-ENT, Senor," and then retire with a low curtsey.
Returning, however, in a few moments, they say quite sweetly, "You
give me pres-ENT, Senor, of quarter dollar!" which you at once do
unless you have a heart of stone.

Acapulco was shelled by the French a year or so before our arrival
there, and they effected a landing.  But the gay and gallant
Mexicans peppered them so persisently and effectually from the
mountains near by that they concluded to sell out and leave.

Napoleon has no right in Mexico.  Mexico may deserve a licking.
That is possible enough.  Most people do.  But nobody has any right
to lick Mexico except the United States.  We have a right, I
flatter myself, to lick this entire continent, including ourselves,
any time we want to.

The signal gun is fired at 11, and we go off to the steamer in
small boats.

In our boat is an inebriated United States official, who flings his
spectacles overboard, and sings a flippant and absurd song about
his grandmother's spotted calf, with his ri-fol-lol-tiddery-i-do.
After which he crumbles, in an incomprehensible manner, into the
bottom of the boat, and howls dismally.

We reach Manzanillo, another coast place, twenty-four hours after
leaving Acapulco.  Manzanillo is a little Mexican village, and
looked very wretched indeed, sweltering away there on the hot
sands.  But it is a port of some importance, nevertheless, because
a great deal of merchandise finds its way to the interior from
there.  The white and green flag of Mexico floats from a red
steam-tug (the navy of Mexico, by the way, consists of two tugs,
a disabled raft, and a basswood life-preserver), and the Captain
of the Port comes off to us in his small boat, climbs up the side
of the St. Louis, and folds the healthy form of Captain Hudson to
his breast.  There is no wharf here, and we have to anchor off
the town.

There was a wharf, but the enterprising Mexican peasantry, who
subsist by poling merchandise ashore in dug-outs, indignantly tore
it up.  We take on here some young Mexicans, from Colima, who are
going to California.  They are of the better class, and one young
man (who was educated in Madrid) speaks English rather better than
I write it.  Be careful not to admire any article of an educated
Mexican's dress, because if you do he will take it right off and
give it to you, and sometimes this might be awkward.

I said:  "What a beautiful cravat you wear!"

"It is yours!" he exclaimed, quickly unbuckling it; and I could not
induce him to take it back again.

I am glad I did not tell his sister, who was with him and with whom
I was lucky enough to get acquainted, what a beautiful white hand
she had.  She might have given it to me on the spot; and that, as
she had soft eyes, a queenly form, and a half million or so in her
own right, would have made me feel bad.

Reports reach us here of high-handed robberies by the banditti all
along the road to the City of Mexico.  They steal clothes as well
as coin.  A few days since the mail coach entered the city with all
the passengers stark-naked!  They must have felt mortified.

4.4.  CALIFORNIA.

We reach San Francisco one Sunday afternoon.  I am driven to the
Occidental Hotel by a kind-hearted hackman, who states that
inasmuch as I have come out there to amuse people, he will only
charge me five dollars.  I pay it in gold, of course, because
greenbacks are not current on the Pacific coast.

Many of the citizens of San Francisco remember the Sabbath day to
keep it jolly; and the theatres, the circus, the minstrels, and the
music halls are all in full blast to-night.

I "compromise," and go to the Chinese theatre, thinking perhaps
there can be no great harm in listening to worldly sentiments when
expressed in a language I don't understand.

The Chinaman at the door takes my ticket with the remark, "Ki hi-hi
ki!  Shoolah!"

And I tell him that on the whole I think he is right.

The Chinese play is "continued," like a Ledger story, from night to
night. It commences with the birth of the hero or heroine, which
interesting event occurs publicly on the stage; and then follows
him or her down to the grave, where it cheerfully ends.

Sometimes a Chinese play lasts six months.  The play I am speaking
of had been going on for about two months.  The heroine had grown
up into womanhood, and was on the point, as I inferred, of being
married to a young Chinaman in spangled pantaloons and a long black
tail.  The bride's father comes in with his arms full of tea-chests,
and bestows them, with his blessing, upon the happy couple.  As
this play is to run four months longer, however, and as my time
is limited, I go away at the close of the second act, while the
orchestra is performing an overture on gongs and one-stringed
fiddles.

The door-keeper again says, "Ki hi-hi ki!  Shoolah!" adding, this
time however, "Chow-wow."  I agree with him in regard to the ki hi
and hi ki, but tell him I don't feel altogether certain about the
chow-wow.

To Stockton from San Francisco.

Stockton is a beautiful town, that has ceased to think of becoming
a very large place, and has quietly settled down into a state of
serene prosperity.  I have my boots repaired here by an artist who
informs me that he studied in the penitentiary; and I visit the
lunatic asylum, where I encounter a vivacious maniac who invites me
to ride in a chariot drawn by eight lions and a rhinoceros.

John Phoenix was once stationed at Stockton, and put his mother
aboard the San Francisco boat one morning with the sparkling
remark, "Dear mother, be virtuous and you will be happy!"

                   .     .      .      .

Forward to Sacramento--which is the capital of the State, and a
very nice old town.

They had a flood here some years ago, during which several blocks
of buildings sailed out of town and had never been heard from
since.  A Chinaman concluded to leave in a wash tub, and actually
set sail in one of those fragile barks.  A drowning man hailed him
piteously, thus:  "Throw me a rope, oh throw me a rope!"  To which
the Chinaman excitedly cried, "No have got--how can do?" and went
on, on with the howling current.  He was never seen more; but a few
weeks after his tail was found by some Sabbath-school children in
the north part of the State.

                   .     .      .      .

I go to the mountain towns.  The sensational mining days are over,
but I find the people jolly and hospitable nevertheless.

At Nevada I am called upon, shortly after my arrival, by an
athletic scarlet-faced man, who politely says his name is Blaze.

"I have a little bill against you, sir," he observes.

"A bill--what for?"

"For drinks."

"Drinks?"

"Yes, sir--at my bar, I keep the well known and highly respected
coffee-house down the street."

"But, my dear sir, there is a mistake--I never drank at your bar in
my life."

"I know it, sir.  That isn't the point.  The point is this:  I pay
out money for good liquors, and it is people's own fault if they
don't drink them.  There are the liquors--do as you please about
drinking them, BUT YOU MUST PAY FOR THEM!  Isn't that fair?"

His enormous body (which Puck wouldn't put a girdle around for
forty dollars) shook gleefully while I read this eminently original
bill.

Years ago Mr. Blaze was an agent of the California Stage Company.
There was a formidable and well-organized opposition to the
California Stage Company at that time, and Mr. Blaze rendered them
such signal service in his capacity of agent that they were very
sorry when he tendered his resignation.

"You are some sixteen hundred dollars behind in your accounts, Mr.
Blaze," said the President, "but in view of your faithful and
efficient services we shall throw off eight hundred dollars off
that amount."

Mr. Blaze seemed touched by this generosity.  A tear stood in his
eye and his bosom throbbed audibly.

"You WILL throw off eight hundred dollars--you WILL?" he at last
cried, seizing the President's hand and pressing it passionately to
his lips.

"I will," returned the President.

"Well, sir," said Mr. Blaze, "I'm a gentleman, I AM, you bet!  And
I won't allow no Stage Company to surpass me in politeness.  I'LL
THROW OFF THE OTHER EIGHT HUNDRED, AND WE'LL CALL IT SQUARE!  No
gratitude, sir--no thanks; it is my duty."

                   .     .      .      .

I get back to San Francisco in a few weeks, and am to start home
Overland from here.

The distance from Sacramento to Atchison, Kansas, by the Overland
stage route, is 2200 miles, but you can happily accomplish a part
of the journey by railroad.  The Pacific Railroad id completed
twelve miles to Folsom, leaving only 2188 miles to go by stage.
This breaks the monotony; but as it is midwinter and as there are
well substantiated reports of the Piute savages being in one of
their sprightly moods when they scalp people, I do not I may say
that I do not leave the Capital of California in a light-hearted
and joyous manner.  But "leaves have their time to fall," and I
have my time to leave, which is now.

We ride all day and all night, and ascend and descend some of the
most frightful hills I ever saw.  We make Johnson's Pass, which is
6752 feet high, about two o'clock in the morning, and go down the
great Kingsbury grade with locked wheels.  The driver, with whom I
sit outside, informs me, as we slowly roll down this fearful
mountain road, which looks down on either side into an appalling
ravine, that he has met accidents in his time, and cost the
California Stage Company a great deal of money; "because," he says,
"juries is agin us on principle, and every man who sues us is sure
to recover.  But it will never be so agin, not with ME, you bet."

"How is that?" I said.

It was frightfully dark.  It was snowing withal, and
notwithstanding the brakes were kept hard down, the coach slewed
wildly, often fairly touching the brink of the black precipice.

"How is that?" I said.

"Why, you see," he replied, "that corpses never sue for damages,
but maimed people do.  And the next time I have a overturn I shall
go round and keerfully examine the passengers.  Them as is dead I
shall let alone; but them as is mutilated I shall finish with the
king-bolt!  Dead folks don't sue.  They ain't on it."

Thus with anecdote did this driver cheer me up.

4.5.  WASHOE.

We reach Carson City about nine o'clock in the morning.  It is the
capital of the silver-producing territory of Nevada.

They shoot folks here somewhat, and the law is rather partial than
otherwise to first-class murderers.

I visit the territorial Prison, and the Warden points out the
prominent convicts to me thus:

"This man's crime was horse-stealing.  He is here for life."

"This man is in for murder.  He is here for three years."

But shooting isn't as popular in Nevada as it once was.  A few
years since they used to have a dead man for breakfast every
morning.  A reformed desperado told my that he supposed he had
killed men enough to stock a graveyard.  "A feeling of remorse,"
he said, "sometimes comes over me!  But I'm an altered man now.
I hain't killed a man for over two weeks!  What'll yer poison
yourself with?" he added, dealing a resonant blow on the bar.

There used to live near Carson City a notorious desperado, who
never visited town without killing somebody.  He would call for
liquor at some drinking-house, and if anybody declined joining him
he would at once commence shooting.  But one day he shot a man too
many.  Going into the St. Nicholas drinking-house he asked the
company present to join him in a North American drink.  One
individual was rash enough to refuse.  With a look of sorrow rather
than anger the desperado revealed his revolver, and said, "Good
God!  MUST I kill a man every time I come to Carson?" and so saying
he fired and killed the individual on the spot.  But this was the
last murder the bloodthirsty miscreant ever committed, for the
aroused citizens pursued him with rifles and shot him down in his
own dooryard.
                   .     .      .      .

I lecture in the theatre at Carson, which opens out of a drinking
and gambling house.  On each side of the door where my ticket-taker
stands there are monte-boards and sweat-cloths, but they are
deserted to-night, the gamblers being evidently of a literary turn
of mind.
                   .     .      .      .

Five years ago there was only a pony-path over the precipitous
hills on which now stands the marvelous city of Virginia, with its
population of twelve thousand persons, and perhaps more.  Virginia,
with its stately warehouses and gay shops; its splendid streets,
paved with silver ore; its banking houses and faro-banks; its
attractive coffee-houses and elegant theatre, its music halls and
its three daily newspapers.

Virginia is very wild, but I believe it is now pretty generally
believed that a mining city must go through with a certain amount
of unadulterated cussedness before it can settle down and behave
itself in a conservative and seemly manner.  Virginia has grown up
in the heart of the richest silver regions in the world, the El
Dorado of the hour; and of the immense numbers who are swarming
thither not more than half carry their mother's Bible or any
settled religion with them.  The gambler and the strange woman as
naturally seek the new sensational town as ducks take to that
element which is so useful for making cocktails and bathing one's
feet; and these people make the new town rather warm for a while.
But by and by the earnest and honest citizens get tired of this
ungodly nonsense and organize a Vigilance Committee, which hangs
the more vicious of the pestiferous crowd to a sour-apple tree; and
then come good municipal laws, ministers, meeting-houses, and a
tolerably sober police in blue coats with brass buttons.  About
five thousand able-bodied men are in the mines underground, here;
some as far down as five hundred feet.  The Gould and Curry Mine
employs nine hundred men, and annually turns out about twenty
million dollars' worth of "demnition gold and silver," as Mr.
Mantalini might express it, though silver chiefly.

There are many other mines here and at Gold Hill (another startling
silver city, a mile from here), all of which do nearly as well.
The silver is melted down into bricks of the size of common house
bricks; then it is loaded into huge wagons, each drawn by eight and
twelve mules, and sent off to San Francisco.  To a young person
fresh from the land of greenbacks this careless manner of carting
off solid silver is rather a startler.  It is related that a young
man who came Overland from New Hampshire a few months before my
arrival became so excited about it that he fell in a fit, with the
name of his Uncle Amos on his lips!  The hardy miners supposed he
wanted his uncle there to see the great sight, and faint with him.
But this was pure conjecture, after all.

                   .     .      .      .

I visit several of the adjacent mining towns, but I do not go to
Aurora.  No, I think not.  A lecturer on psychology was killed
there the other night by the playful discharge of a horse-pistol in
the hands of a degenerate and intoxicated Spaniard.  This
circumstance, and a rumor that the citizens are "agin" literature,
induce me to go back to Virginia.

                   .     .      .      .

I had pointed out to me at a restaurant a man who had killed four
men in street broils, and who had that very day cut his own
brother's breast open in a dangerous manner with a small supper
knife.  He was a gentleman, however.  I heard him tell some men so.
He admitted it himself.  And I don't think he would lie about a
little thing like that.

The theatre at Virginia will attract the attention of the stranger,
because it is an unusually elegant affair of the kind, and would be
so regarded anywhere.  It was built, of course, by Mr. Thomas
Maguire, the Napoleonic manager of the Pacific, and who has built
over twenty theatres in his time and will perhaps build as many
more, unless somebody stops him--which, by the way, will not be a
remarkably easy thing to do.

As soon as a mining camp begins to assume the proportions of a
city, at about the time the whiskey-vender draws his cork or the
gambler spreads his green cloth, Maguire opens a theatre, and with
a hastily-organized "Vigilance Committee" of actors, commences to
execute Shakespeare.

4.6.  MR. PEPPER.

My arrival at Virginia City was signalized by the following
incident:

I had no sooner achieved my room in the garret of the International
Hotel than I was called upon by an intoxicated man who said he was
an Editor.  Knowing how rare it was for an Editor to be under the
blighting influence of either spiritous or malt liquors, I received
this statement doubtfully.  But I said:

"What name?"

"Wait!" he said, and went out.

I heard him pacing unsteadily up and down the hall outside.  In ten
minutes he returned, and said:

"Pepper!"

Pepper was indeed his name.  He had been out to see if he could
remember it; and he was so flushed with his success that he
repeated it joyously several times, and then, with a short laugh he
went away.

I had often heard of a man being "so drunk that he didn't know what
town he lived in," but here was a man so hideously inebriated that
he didn't know what his name was.

I saw him no more, but I heard from him.  For he published a notice
of my lecture, in which he said I had A DISSIPATED AIR!

4.7.  HORACE GREELEY'S RIDE TO PLACERVILLE.

When Mr. Greeley was in California ovations awaited him at every
town.  He had written powerful leaders in the "Tribune" in favor of
the Pacific railroad, which had greatly endeared him to the
citizens of the Golden State.  And therefore they made much of him
when he went to see them.

At one town the enthusiastic populace tore his celebrated white
coat to pieces, and carried the pieces home to remember him by.

The citizens of Placerville prepared to fete the great journalist,
and an extra coach, with extra relays of horses, was chartered to
the California Stage Company to carry him from Folsom to
Placerville--distance, forty miles.  The extra was in some way
delayed, and did not leave Folsom until late in the afternoon.  Mr.
Greeley was to be feted at 7 o'clock that evening by the citizens
of Placerville, and it was altogether necessary that he should be
there by that hour.  So the Stage Company said to Henry Monk, the
driver of the extra:  "Henry, this great man must be there by 7
to-night."  And Henry answered, "The great man shall be there."

The roads were in an awful state, and during the first few miles
out of Folsom slow progress was made.

"Sir," said Mr. Greeley, "are you aware that I MUST be at
Placerville at 7 o'clock to-night?"

"I've got my orders!" laconically returned Henry Monk.

Still the coach dragged slowly forward.

"Sir," said Mr. Greeley, "this is not a trifling matter.  I MUST be
there at 7!"

Again came the answer, "I've got my orders!"

But the speed was not increased, and Mr. Greeley chafed away
another half hour; when, as he was again about to remonstrate with
the driver, the horses suddenly started into a furious run, and all
sorts of encouraging yells filled the air from the throat of Henry
Monk.

"That is right, my good fellow!" cried Mr. Greeley.  "I'll give you
ten dollars when we get to Placerville.  Now we ARE going!"

They were indeed, and at a terrible speed.

Crack, crack! went the whip, and again "that voice" split the air.
"Git up!  Hi yi!  G'long!  Yip--yip!"

And on they tore over stones and ruts, up hill and down, at a rate
of speed never before achieved by stage horses.

Mr. Greeley, who had been bouncing from one end of the coach to the
other like an india-rubber ball, managed to get his head out of the
window, when he said:

"Do--on't--on't--on't you-u-u think we-e-e-e shall get there by
seven if we do--on't--on't go so fast?"

"I've got my orders!"  That was all Henry Monk said.  And on tore
the coach.

It was becoming serious.  Already the journalist was extremely sore
from the terrible jolting, and again his head "might have been
seen" at the window.

"Sir," he said, "I don't care--care--AIR, if we DON'T get there at
seven!"

"I've got my orders!"  Fresh horses.  Forward again, faster than
before.  Over rocks and stumps, on one of which the coach narrowly
escaped turning a summerset.

"See here!" shrieked Mr. Greeley, "I don't care if we don't get
there at all!"

"I've got my orders!  I work for the California Stage Company, _I_
do.  That's wot I WORK for.  They said, 'git this man through by
seving.'  An' this man's goin' through.  You bet!  Gerlong!  Whoo-
ep!"

Another frightful jolt, and Mr. Greeley's bald head suddenly found
its way through the roof of the coach, amidst the crash of small
timbers and the ripping of strong canvas.

"Stop, you ---- maniac!" he roared.

Again answered Henry Monk:

"I've got my orders!  KEEP YOUR SEAT, HORACE!"

At Mud Springs, a village a few miles from Placerville, they met a
large delegation of the citizens of Placerville, who had come out
to meet the celebrated editor, and escort him into town.  There was
a military company, a brass band, and a six-horse wagon load of
beautiful damsels in milk-white dresses representing all the States
in the Union.  It was nearly dark now, but the delegation were
amply provided with torches, and bonfires blazed all along the road
to Placerville.

The citizens met the coach in the outskirts of Mud Springs, and Mr.
Monk reined in his foam-covered steeds.

"Is Mr. Greeley on board?" asked the chairman of the committee.

"HE WAS, A FEW MILES BACK!" said Mr. Monk; "yes," he added, after
looking down through the hole which the fearful jolting had made in
the coach-roof--"yes, I can see him!  He is there!"

"Mr. Greeley," said the Chairman of the Committee, presenting
himself at the window of the coach, "Mr. Greeley, sir!  We are come
to most cordially welcome you, sir--why, God bless me, sir, you are
bleeding at the nose!"

"I've got my orders!" cried Mr. Monk.  "My orders is as follers:
Get him there by seving!  It wants a quarter to seving.  Stand out
of the way!"

"But, sir," exclaimed the Committee-man, seizing the off leader by
the reins--"Mr Monk, we are come to escort him into town!  Look at
the procession, sir, and the brass bands, and the people, and the
young women, sir!"

"I'VE GOT MY ORDERS!" screamed Mr. Monk.  "My orders don't say
nothin' about no brass bands and young women.  My orders says, 'git
him there by seving!'  Let go them lines!  Clear the way there!
Whoo-ep!  KEEP YOUR SEAT, HORACE!" and the coach dashed wildly
through the procession, upsetting a portion of the brass band, and
violently grazing the wagon which contained the beautiful young
women in white.

Years hence, gray-haired men, who were little boys in this
procession, will tell their grandchildren how this stage tore
through Mud Springs, and how Horace Greeley's bald head ever and
anon showed itself, like a wild apparition, above the coach-roof.

Mr. Monk was on time.  There is a tradition that Mr. Greeley was
very indignant for a while; then he laughed, and finally presented
Mr. Monk with a brand new suit of clothes.

Mr. Monk himself is still in the employ of the California Stage
Company, and is rather fond of relating a story that has made him
famous all over the Pacific coast.  But he says he yields to no man
in his admiration for Horace Greeley.

4.8.  TO REESE RIVER.

I leave Virginia for Great Salt Lake City, via the Reese River
Silver Diggings.

There are eight passengers of us inside the coach--which, by the
way, isn't a coach, but a Concord covered mud wagon.

Among the passengers is a genial man of the name of Ryder, who has
achieved a widespread reputation as a strangler of unpleasant bears
in the mountain fastnesses of California, and who is now an eminent
Reese River miner.

We ride night and day, passing through the land of the Piute
Indians.  Reports reach us that fifteen hundred of these savages
are on the Rampage, under the command of a red usurper named
Buffalo Jim, who seems to be a sort of Jeff Davis, inasmuch as he
and his followers have seceded from the regular Piut organization.
The seceding savages have announced that they shall kill and scalp
all pale-faces [which makes our face pale, I reckon] found loose in
that section.  We find the guard doubled at all the stations where
we change horses, and our passengers nervously examine their
pistols and readjust the long glittering knives in their belts.  I
feel in my pockets to see if the key which unlocks the carpet-bag
containing my revolvers is all right--for I had rather brilliantly
locked my deadly weapons up in that article, which was strapped
with the other baggage to the rack behind.  The passengers frown on
me for this carelessness, but the kind-hearted Ryder gives me a
small double-barrelled gun, with which I narrowly escape murdering
my beloved friend Hingston in cold blood.  I am not used to guns
and things, and in changing the position of this weapon I pulled
the trigger rather harder than was necessary.

When this wicked rebellion first broke out I was among the first--
to stay at home--chiefly because of my utter ignorance of firearms.
I should be valuable to the Army as a Brigadier-General only so far
as the moral influence of--my name went.

                   .     .      .      .

When this wicked rebellion first broke out I was among the first to
stay at home -chiefly because of my utter ignorance of firearms.  I
should be valuable to the army as a Brigadier General only so far
as the moral influence of my name went.

                   .     .      .      .

However, we pass safely through the land of the Piutes, unmolested
by Buffalo James.  This celebrated savage can read and write, and
is quite an orator, like Metamora, or the last of the Wampanoags.
He went on to Washington a few years ago and called Mr. Buchanan
his Great Father, and the members of the Cabinet his dear Brothers.
They gave him a great many blankets, and he returned to his
beautiful hunting grounds and went to killing stage drivers.  He
made such a fine impression upon Mr. Buchanan during his sojourn in
Washington that that statesman gave a young English tourist, who
crossed the plain a few years since, a letter of introduction to
him.  The great Indian chief read the English person's letter with
considerable emotion, and then ordered him scalped, and stole his
trunks.

Mr. Ryder knows me only as "Mr. Brown," and he refreshes me during
the journey by quotations from my books and lectures.

"Never seen Ward?" he said.

"Oh, no."

"Ward says he likes little girls, but he likes large girls just as
well.  Haw, haw, haw!  I should like to see the d--- fool!"

He referred to me.

He even woke me up in the middle of the night to tell me one of
Ward's jokes.

                   .     .      .      .

I lecture at Big Creek.

Big Creek is a straggling, wild, little village; and the house in
which I had the honor of speaking a piece had no other floor than
the bare earth. The roof was of sagebrush.  At one end of the
building a huge wood fire blazed, which, with half-a-dozen
tallow-candles, afforded all the illumination desired.  The
lecturer spoke from behind the drinking bar.  Behind him long rows
of decanters glistened; above him hung pictures of race-horses and
prize-fighters; and beside him, in his shirt-sleeves and wearing
a cheerful smile, stood the bar-keeper.  My speeches at the Bar
before this had been of an elegant character, perhaps, but quite
brief.  They never extended beyond "I don't care if I do," "No
sugar in mine,"  And short gems of a like character.

I had a good audience at Big Creek, who seemed to be pleased, the
bar-keeper especially; for at the close of any "point" that I
sought to make he would deal the counter a vigorous blow with his
fist, and exclaim, "Good boy from the New England States! listen
to William W. Shakespeare!"

Back to Austin.  We lose our way, and hitching our horses to a
tree, go in search of some human beings.  The night is very dark.
We soon stumble upon a camp-fire, and an unpleasantly modulated
voice asks us to say our prayers, adding that we are on the point
of going to Glory with our boots on.  I think perhaps there may be
some truth in this, as the mouth of a horse-pistol almost grazes my
forehead, while immediately behind the butt of that death-dealing
weapon I perceive a large man with black whiskers.  Other large men
begin to assemble, also with horse-pistols.  Dr. Hingston hastily
explains, while I go back to the carriage to say my prayers, where
there is more room.  The men were miners on a prospecting tour, and
as we advanced upon them without sending them word they took us for
highway robbers.

I must not forget to say that my brave and kind-hearted friend
Ryder of the mail coach, who had so often alluded to "Ward" in our
ride from Virginia to Austin, was among my hearers at Big Creek.
He had discovered who I was, and informed me that he had debated
whether to wollop me or give me some rich silver claims.

4.9.  GREAT SALT LAKE CITY.

How was I to be greeted by the Mormons?  That was rather an
exciting question with me.  I had been told on the plains that a
certain humorous sketch of mine (written some years before) had
greatly incensed the Saints, and a copy of the Sacramento "Union"
newspaper had a few days before fallen into my hands in which a
Salt Lake correspondent quite clearly intimated that my reception
at the new Zion might be unpleasantly warm.  I ate my dinner
moodily and sent out for some cigars.  The venerable clerk brought
me six.  They cost only two dollars.  They were procured at a store
near by.  The Salt Lake House sells neither cigars nor liquors.

I smoke in my room, having no heart to mingle with the people in
the office.

Dr. Hingston "thanks God he never wrote against the Mormons," and
goes out in search of a brother Englishman.  Comes back at night
and says there is a prejudice against me.  Advises me to keep in.
Has heard that the Mormons thirst for my blood and are on the
lookout for me.

Under these circumstances I keep in.

The next day is Sunday, and we go to the Tabernacle, in the
morning.  The Tabernacle is located on -- street, and is a long
rakish building of adobe, capable of seating some twenty-five
hundred persons.  There is a wide platform and a rather large
pulpit at one end of the building, and at the other end is another
platform for the choir.  A young Irishman of the name of Sloan
preaches a sensible sort of discourse, to which a Presbyterian
could hardly have objected.  Last night this same Mr. Sloan enacted
a character in a rollicking Irish farce at the theatre!  And he
played it well, I was told; not so well, of course, as the great
Dan Bryant could; but I fancy he was more at home in the Mormon
pulpit than Daniel would have been.

The Mormons, by the way, are preeminently an amusement-loving
people, and the Elders pray for the success of their theatre with
as much earnestness as they pray for anything else.  The
congregation doesn't startle us.  It is known, I fancy, that the
heads of the Church are to be absent to-day, and the attendance is
slim.  There are no ravishingly beautiful women present, and no
positively ugly ones.  The men are fair to middling.  They will
never be slain in cold blood for their beauty, nor shut up in jail
for their homeliness.

There are some good voices in the choir to-day, but the orchestral
accompaniment is unusually slight.  Sometimes they introduce a full
brass and string band in Church.  Brigham Young says the devil has
monopolized the good music long enough, and it is high time the
Lord had a portion of it.  Therefore trombones are tooted on
Sundays in Utah as well as on other days; and there are some
splendid musicians there.  The Orchestra in Brigham Young's theatre
is quite equal to any in Broadway.  There is a youth in Salt Lake
City (I forget his name) who plays the cornet like a North American
angel.

Mr. Stenhouse relieves me of any anxiety I had felt in regard to
having my swan-like throat cut by the Danites, but thinks my
wholesale denunciation of a people I had never seen was rather
hasty.  The following is the paragraph to which the Saints
objected.  It occurs in an "Artemus Ward" paper on Brigham Young,
written some years ago:

"I girded up my Lions and fled the Seen.  I packt up my duds and
left Salt Lake, which is a 2nd Soddum and Germorer, inhabited by as
theavin' & onprincipled a set of retchis as ever drew Breth in eny
spot on the Globe."

I had forgotten all about this, and as Elder Stenhouse read it to
me "my feelings may be better imagined than described," to use
language I think I have heard before.  I pleaded, however, that it
was a purely burlesque sketch, and that this strong paragraph
should not be interpreted literally at all. The Elder didn't seem
to see it in that light, but we parted pleasantly.

4.10.  THE MOUNTAIN FEVER.

I go back to my hotel and go to bed, and I do not get up again for
two weary weeks.  I have the mountain fever (so called in Utah,
though it closely resembles the old-style typhus) and my case is
pronounced dangerous.  I don't regard it so.  I don't, in fact,
regard anything.  I am all right, MYSELF.  My poor Hingston shakes
his head sadly, and Dr. Williamson, from Camp Douglas, pours all
kinds of bitter stuff down my throat.  I drink his health in a dose
of the cheerful beverage known as jalap, and thresh the sheets with
my hot hands.  I address large assemblages, who have somehow got
into my room, and I charge Dr. Williamson with the murder of Luce,
and Mr. Irwin, the actor, with the murder of Shakspeare.  I have a
lucid spell now and then, in one of which James Townsend, the
landlord, enters.  He whispers, but I hear what he says far too
distinctly:  "This man can have anything and everything he wants;
but I'm no hand for a sick room.  I NEVER COULD SEE ANYBODY DIE."

That was cheering, I thought.  The noble Californian, Jerome
Davis -he of the celebrated ranch- sticks by me like a twin
brother, although I fear that in my hot frenzy I more than once
anathematised his kindly eyes.  Nursers and watchers, Gentile and
Mormon, volunteer their services in hoops and rare wines are sent
to me from all over the city, which, if I can't drink, the
venerable and excellent Thomas can, easy.

I lay there in this wild, broiling way for nearly two weeks, when
one morning I woke up with my head clear and an immense plaster on
my stomach. The plaster had OPERATED.  I was so raw that I could by
no means say to Dr. Williamson, "Well done, thou good and faithful
servant".  I wished he had lathed me before he plastered me.  I was
fearfully weak.  I was frightfully thin.  With either one of my
legs you could have cleaned the stem of a meerschaum pipe.  My
backbone had the appearance of a clothesline with a quantity of
English walnuts strung upon it.  My face was almost gone.  My nose
was so sharp that I didn't dare stick it into other people's
business for fear it would stay there.  But by borrowing my agent's
overcoat I succeeded in producing a shadow.

                   .     .      .      .

I have been looking at Zion all day, and my feet are sore and my
legs are weary.  I go back to the Salt Lake House and have a talk
with landlord Townsend about the State of Maine.  He came from that
bleak region, having skinned his infantile eyes in York county.  He
was at Nauvoo, and was forced to sell his entire property there for
50 dollars.  He has thrived in Utah, however, and is much thought
of by the Church.  He is an Elder, and preaches occasionally.  He
has only two wives.  I hear lately that he has sold his property
for 25,000 dollars to Brigham Young, and gone to England to make
converts.  How impressive he may be as an expounder of the Mormon
gospel, I don't know.  His beefsteaks and chicken-pies, however,
were first-rate.  James and I talk about Maine, and cordially agree
that so far as pine boards and horse-mackerel are concerned, it is
equalled by few and excelled by none.  There is no place like home,
as Clara, the Maid of Milan, very justly observes; and while J.
Townsend would be unhappy in Maine, his heart evidently beats back
there now and then.

I heard the love of home oddly illustrated in Oregon, one night, in
a country bar-room.  Some well-dressed men, in a state of strong
drink, were boasting of their respective places of nativity.

"I," said one, "was born in Mississippi, where the sun ever shines
and the magnolias bloom all the happy year round."

"And I," said another, "was born in Kentucky--Kentucky, the home of
impassioned oratory:  the home of Clay, the State of splendid
women, of gallant men!"

"And I," said another, "was born in Virginia, the home of
Washington:  the birthplace of statesmen:  the State of chivalric
deeds and noble hospitality!"

"And I," said a yellow-haired and sallow-faced man, who was not of
this party at all, and who had been quietly smoking a short black
pipe by the fire during their magnificent conversation--"and I was
born in the garden-spot of America."

"Where is that?" they said.

"SKEOUHEGAN, MAINE!" he replied; "kin I sell you a razor strop?"

4.11.  "I AM HERE."

There is no mistake about that, and there is a good prospect of my
staying here for some time to come.  The snow is deep on the
ground, and more is falling.

The Doctor looks glum, and speaks of his ill-starred countryman, of
Sir. J. Franklin, who went to the Arctic once too much.

A good thing happened down here the other day, said a miner from
New Hampshire to me.  "A man of Boston dressin' went through there,
and at one of the stations there wasn't any mules.  Says the man
who was fixed out to kill in his Boston dressin', 'Where's them
mules?'  Says the driver, 'Them mules is into the sage brush.  You
go catch 'em--that's wot YOU do.'  Says the man of Boston dressin',
'Oh no!'  Says the driver!  'Oh, yes!' and he took his long
coach-whip and licked the man of Boston dressin' till he went and
caught them mules.  How does that strike you for a joke?"

It didn't strike me as much of a joke to pay a hundred and
seventy-five dollars in gold fare, and then be horse-whipped by
stage-drivers, for declining to chase mules.  But people's ideas
of humor differ in regard to shrewdness which "reminds me of a
little story."

Sitting in a New England country store one day I overheard the
following dialogue between two brothers:

"Say, Bill, wot you done with that air sorrel mare of yourn?"

"Sold her," said William, with a smile of satisfaction.

"Wot'd you git?"

"Hund'd an' fifty dollars, cash deown!"

"Show!  Hund'd an' fifty for that kickin' spavin'd critter!  Who'd
you sell her to?"

"Sold her to mother!"

"Wot!" exclaimed brother No. 1, "did you railly sell that kickin'
spavin'd critter to mother?  Wall, you AIR a shrewd one!"

A Sensation--Arrival by the Overland Stage of two Missouri girls,
who had come unescorted all the way through.  They are going to
Nevada territory to join their father.  They are pretty, but,
merciful heavens! how they throw the meat and potatoes down their
throats.  "This is the first squar' meal we've had since we left
Rocky Thompson's," said the eldest.  Then addressing herself to me,
she said:

"Air you the literary man?"

I politely replied that I was one of "them fellers."

"Wall, don't make fun of our clothes in the papers.  We air goin'
right through in these here clothes, WE air!  We ain't goin' to RAG
OUT till we git to Nevady!  Pass them sassiges!"

4.12.  BRIGHAM YOUNG.

Brigham Young sends word I may see him tomorrow.  So I go to bed
singing the popular Mormon hymn:

         "Let the chorus still be sung,
          Long live Brother Brigham Young,
             And blessed be the vale of Desere't--ret--ret!
             And blessed be the vale of Deseret."

At two o'clock the next afternoon Mr. Hiram B. Clawson, Brigham
Young's son-in-law and chief business manager, calls for me with
the Prophet's private sleigh, and we start for that distinguished
person's block.

I am shown into the 