Prophet's chief office.  He comes forward,
greets me cordially, and introduces me to several influential
Mormons who are present.

Brigham Young is 62 years old, of medium height, and with sandy
hair and whiskers.  An active, iron man, with a clear sharp eye.
A man of consummate shrewdness--of great executive ability.  He
was born in the State of Vermont, and so by the way was Heber C.
Kimball, who will wear the Mormon Belt when Brigham leaves the
ring.

Brigham Young is a man of great natural ability.  If you ask me,
How pious is he?  I treat it as a conundrum, and give it up.
Personally he treated me with marked kindness throughout my sojourn
in Utah.

His power in Utah is quite as absolute as that of any living
sovereign, yet he uses it with such consummate shrewdness that his
people are passionately devoted to him.

He was an Elder at the first formal Mormon "stake" in this country,
at Kirtland, Ohio, and went to Nauvoo with Joseph Smith.  That
distinguished Mormon handed his mantle and the Prophet business
over to Brigham when he died at Nauvoo.

Smith did a more flourishing business in the Prophet line than B.Y.
does. Smith used to have his little Revelation almost every day--
sometimes two before dinner.  B.Y. only takes one once in a while.

The gateway of his block is surmounted by a brass American eagle,
and they say ("they say" here means anti-Mormons) that he receives
his spiritual dispatches through this piece of patriotic poultry.
They also say that he receives revelations from a stuffed white
calf that is trimmed with red ribbons and kept in an iron box.  I
don't suppose these things are true.  Rumor says that when the Lion
House was ready to be shingled, Brigham received a message from the
Lord stating that the carpenters must all take hold and shingle it,
and not charge a red cent for their services. Such carpenters as
refused to shingle would go to hell, and no postponement on account
of the weather.  They say that Brigham, whenever a train of
emigrants arrives in Salt Lake City, orders all the women to march
up and down before his block, while he stands on the portico of the
Lion House and gobbles up the prettiest ones.

He is an immensely wealthy man.  His wealth is variously estimated
at from ten to twenty millions of dollars.  He owns saw mills,
grist mills, woollen factories, brass and iron foundries, farms,
brick-yards, &c., and superintends them all in person.  A man in
Utah individually owns what he grows and makes, with the exception
of a one-tenth part: that must go to the Church; and Brigham Young,
as the first President, is the Church's treasurer.  Gentiles, of
course, say that he abuses this blind confidence of his people, and
speculates with their money, and absorbs the interest if he doesn't
the principle.  The Mormons deny this, and say that whatever of
their money he does use is for the good of the Church; that he
defrays the expenses of emigrants from far over the seas; that he
is foremost in all local enterprises tending to develop the
resources of the territory, an that, in short, he is incapable of
wrong in any shape.

Nobody seems to know how many wives Brigham Young has.  Some set
the number as high as eighty, in which case his children must be
too numerous to mention.  Each wife has a room to herself.  These
rooms are large and airy, and I suppose they are supplied with all
the modern improvements.  But never having been invited to visit
them I can't speak very definitely about this.  When I left the
Prophet he shook me cordially by the hand, and invited me to call
again.  This was flattering, because if he dislikes a man at the
first interview he never sees him again.  He made no allusion to
the "letter" I had written about his community.  Outside guards
were pacing up and down before the gateway, but they smiled upon me
sweetly.  The veranda was crowded with Gentile miners, who seemed
to be surprised that I didn't return in a wooden overcoat, with my
throat neatly laid open from ear to ear.

Nobody seems to know how many wives Brigham Young has.  Some set
the number as high as eighty, in which case his children must be
too numerous to mention.  Each wife has a room to herself, These
rooms are large ans airy, and I suppose they are supplied with all
the modern improvements.  But never having been invited to visit
them, I can't speak very definitely about this.  When I left the
Prophet he shook me cordially by the hand, and invited me to call
again.  This was flattering, because if he dislikes a man at the
first interview he never sees him again.  He made no allusion to
the "letter" I had written about his community.  Outside guards
were pacing up and down before the gateway, but they smiled upon me
sweetly.  The verandah was crowded with Gentile miners, who seemed
to be surprised that I didn't return in a wooden overcoat, with my
throat neatly laid open from ear to ear.

                   .     .      .      .

I go to the Theatre to-night.  The play is Othello.  This is a
really fine play and was a favourite of G. Washington, the father
of his country.  On this stage, as upon all stages, the good old
conventionalities are strictly adhered to.  The actors cross each
other at oblique angles from L.U.E. to R. I. E. on the slightest
provocation.  Othello howls, Iago scowls, and the boys all laugh
when Roderigo dies.  I stay to see charming Mrs. Irwin (Desdemona)
die, which she does very sweetly.

                   .     .      .      .

I was an actor once, myself.  I supported Edwin Forrest at a
theatre in Philadelphia.  I played a pantomimic part.  I removed
the chairs between scenes, and I did it so neatly that Mr. F. said
I would make a cabinet-maker if I "applied" myself.

                   .     .      .      .

The parquette of the theatre is occupied exclusively by the Mormons
and their wives and children.  They wouldn't let a Gentile in there
any more than they would a serpent.  In the side seats are those of
President Young's wives who go the play, and a large and varied
assortment of children.  It is an odd sight to see a jovial old
Mormon file down the parquette aisle with ten or twenty robust
wives at his heels.  Yet this spectacle may be witnessed every
night the theatre is opened.  The dress circle is chiefly occupied
by the officers from Camp Douglas and the Gentile Merchants.  The
upper circles are filled by the private soldiers and Mormon boys.
I feel bound to say that a Mormon audience is quite as appreciative
as any other kind of an audience.  They prefer comedy to tragedy.
Sentimental plays, for obvious reasons, are unpopular with them. It
will be remembered that when C. Melnotte, in the Lady of Lyons,
comes home from the wars, he folds Pauline to his heaving heart and
makes several remarks of an impassioned and slobbering character.
One night when the Lady of Lyons was produced here, an aged Mormon
arose and went out with his twenty-four wives, angrily stating that
he wouldn't sit and see a play where a man made such a CUSSED FUSS
OVER ONE WOMAN.  The prices of the theatre are: Parquette, 75
cents; second and third upper circles, 25 cents.  In an audience of
two thousand persons (and there are almost always that number
present probably a thousand will pay in cash, and the other
thousand in grain and a variety of articles; all of which will
command money however.

Brigham Young usually sits in the middle of the parquette, in a
rocking-chair, and with his hat on.  He does not escort his wives
to the theatre.  They go alone.  When the play drags he either
falls into a tranquil sleep or walks out.  He wears in winter time
a green wrapper, and his hat in the style introduced into this
country by Louis Kossuth, Esq. the liberator of Hungaria.  I
invested a dollar in the liberty of Hungaria nearly fifteen years
ago.

4.13.  A PIECE IS SPOKEN.

A piece hath its victories no less than war.

"Blessed are the Piece-makers."  That is Scripture.

The night of the "comic oration" is come, and the speaker is
arranging his back hair in the star dressing-room of the theatre.
The orchestra is playing selections from the Gentile opera of "Un
Ballo in Maschera," and the house is full.  Mr. John F. Caine, the
excellent stage manager, has given me an elegant drawing-room scene
in which to speak my little piece.

[In Iowa, I once lectured in a theatre, and the heartless manager
gave me a dungeon scene.]

The curtain goes up, and I stand before a Salt Lake of upturned
faces.

I can only say that I was never listened to more attentively and
kindly in my life than I was by this audience of Mormons.

Among my receipts at the box-office this night were--

20 bushels of wheat.
5 bushels of corn.
4 bushels of potatoes.
2 bushels of oats.
4 bushels of salt.
2 hams.
1 live pig (Dr. Hingston chained him in the box-office.)
1 wolf-skin.
5 pounds of honey in the comb.
16 strings of sausages--2 pounds to the string.
1 cat-skin.
1 churn (two families went in on this; it is an ingenious churn,
and fetches butter in five minutes by rapid grinding.)
1 set of children's under-garments, embroidered.
1 firkin of butter.
1 keg of apple-sauce.

One man undertook to pass a dog (a cross between a Scotch terrier
and a Welsh rabbit) at the box-office, and another presented a
German-silver coffin-plate, but the Doctor very justly repulsed
them both.

4.14.  THE BALL.

The Mormons are fond of dancing.  Brigham and Heber C. dance.  So
do Daniel H. Wells, and the other heads of the Church.  Balls are
opened with prayer, and when they break up a benediction is
pronounced.

I am invited to a ball at Social Hall, and am escorted thither by
Brothers Stenhouse and Clawson.

Social Hall is a spacious and cheerful room.  The motto of "Our
Mountain Home" in brilliant evergreen capitals adorns one end of
the hall, while at the other a platform is erected for the
musicians, behind whom there is room for those who don't dance to
sit and look at the festivities.  Brother Stenhouse, at the request
of President Young, formally introduces me to company from the
platform.  There is a splendor of costumery about the dancers I had
not expected to see.  Quadrilles only are danced.  The mazourka is
considered sinful.  Even the old-time round waltz is tabooed.

I dance.

The Saints address each other here, as elsewhere, as Brother and
Sister.  "This way, Sister!"  "Where are you going, Brother?" &c.,
&c.  I am called Brother Ward.  This pleases me, and I dance with
renewed vigor.

The Prophet has some very charming daughters, several of whom are
present to-night.

I was told they spoke French and Spanish.

The Prophet is more industrious than graceful as a dancer.  He
exhibits, however, a spryness of legs quite remarkable in a man at
his time of life. I didn't see Heber C. Kimball on the floor.  I am
told he is a loose and reckless dancer, and that many a lily-white
toe has felt the crushing weight of his cow-hide monitors.

The old gentleman is present, however, with a large number of
wives.  It is said he calls them his "heifers."

"Ain't you goin' to dance with some of my wives?" said a Mormon to
me.

These things make a Mormon ball more spicy than a Gentile one.

The supper is sumptuous, and bear and beaver adorn the bill of
fare.

I go away at the early hour of two in the morning.  The moon is
shining brightly on the snow-covered streets.  The lamps are out,
and the town is still as a graveyard.

4.15.  PHELP'S ALMANAC.

There is an eccentric Mormon at Salt Lake City of the name of W.W.
Phelps. He is from Cortland, State of New York, and has been a
Saint for a good many years.  It is said he enacts the character of
the Devil, with a pea-green tail, in the Mormon initiation
ceremonies.  He also published an almanac, in which he blends
astronomy with short moral essays, and suggestions in regard to the
proper management of hens.  He also contributes a poem, entitled
"The Tombs," to his almanac for the current year, from which I
quote the last verse:--

           "Choose ye:  to rest with stately grooms;
             Just such a place there is for sleeping;
             Where everything, in common keeping,
             Is free from want and worth and weeping;
             There folly's harvest is a reaping.
            Down in the grave among the tombs."

Now, I know that poets and tin-pedlars are "licensed," but why does
W.W.P. advise us to sleep in the barn with the ostlers?  These are
the most dismal tombs on record, not except the Tomb of the
Capulets, the Tombs of New York, or the Toombs of Georgia.

Under the head of "OLD Sayings," Mr. P. publishes the following.
There is a modesty about the last "saying" which will be pretty apt
to strike the reader:--

          "The Lord does good and Satan evil, said Moses.
           Sun and moon, see me conquer, said Joshua.
           Virtue exalts a woman, said David.
           Fools and folly frolic, said Solomon.
           Judgments belong to God, said Isaiah.
           The path of the just is plain, said Jeremiah.
           The soul that sins dies, said Ezekiel.
           The wicked do wicked, said Daniel.
           Ephraim fled and hid, said Hosea.
           The Gentiles war and waste, said Joel.
           The second reign is peace and plenty, said Amos.
           Zion is the house of the gods, said Obadiah,
           A fish saved me, said Jonah.
           Our Lion will be terrible, said Micah.
           Doctor, cure yourself, said the Saviour.
           Live to live again, said W.W. Phelps."

4.16.  HURRAH FOR THE ROAD!

TIME, Wednesday afternoon, February 10.  The Overland Stage, Mr.
William Glover on the box, stands before the veranda of the Salt
Lake House.  The genial Nat Stein is arranging the waybill.  Our
baggage (the Overland passenger is allowed twenty-five pounds) is
being put aboard, and we are shaking hands, at a rate altogether
furious, with Mormon and Gentile.  Among the former are Brothers
Stenhouse, Caine, Clawson and Townsend; among the latter are Harry
Riccard, the big-hearted English mountaineer (though once he wore
white kids and swallow-tails in Regent Street, and in boyhood went
to school with Miss Edgeworth, the novelist), the daring explorer
Rood, from Wisconsin; th e Rev. James McCormick, missionary, who
distributes pasteboard tracts among the Bannock miners; and the
pleasing child of gore, Captain D. B. Stover, of the commissary
department.

We go away on wheels, but the deep snow compels us to substitute
runners twelve miles out.

There are four passengers of us.  We pierce the Wahsatch mountains
by Parley's canyon.

A snowstorm overtakes us as the night thickens, and the wind
shrieks like a brigade of strong-lunged maniacs.  Never mind.  We
are well covered up- our cigars are good.  I have on deerskin
pantaloons, a deerskin overcoat, a beaver cap and buffalo
overshoes; and so, as I tersely observed before, Never mind.  Let
us laugh the winds to scorn, brave boys!  But why is William
Glover, driver, lying flat on his back by the roadside; and why am
I turning a handspring in the road; and why are the horses tearing
wildly down the Wahsatch mountains?  It is because William Glover
has been thrown from his seat, and the horses are running away.  I
see him fall off and it occurs to me I had better get out.  In
doing so, such is the velocity of the sleigh, I turn a handspring.

Far ahead I hear the runners clash with the rocks, and I see Dr.
Hingston's lantern (he always would have a lantern), bobbing about
like the binnacle light of an oyster sloop, very loose in a choppy
sea.  Therefore I do not laugh the winds to scorn as much as I did,
brave boys.

William G. is not hurt, and together we trudge on after the
runaways in the hope of overtaking them, which we do some two miles
off.  They are in a snowbank, and "nobody hurt".

We are soon on the road again, all serene; though I believe the
Doctor did observe that such a thing would not have occurred under
a monarchial form of government.

We reach Weber station, thirty miles from Salt Lake City and wildly
situated at the foot of the grand Echo Canyon, at 3 o'clock the
following morning.  We remain over a day here with James Bromley,
agent of the Overland Stage line, and who is better known on the
plains than Shakspeare is; although Shakspeare has done a good deal
for the stage.  James Bromley has seen the Overland line grow up
from its ponyicy; and as Fitz-Green Halleck happily observes, none
know him BUT TO LIKE HIS STYLE.  He was intended for an agent.  In
his infancy he used to lisp the refrain,

                 "I want to be an agent,
                  And with the agents stand."

I part with this kind-hearted gentleman, to whose industry and
ability the Overland line owes much of its success, with sincere
regret; and I hope he will soon get rich enough to transplant his
charming wife from the desert to the "White settlements".

Forward to Fort Bridger, in an open sleigh.  Night clear, cold, and
moonlit.  Driver Mr. Samuel Smart.  Through Echo Canyon to Hanging
Rock Station.  The snow is very deep, there is no path, and we
literally shovel our way to Robert Pollock's station, which we
achieve in the Course of Time.  Mr. P. gets up and kindles a fire,
and a snowy nightcap and a pair of very bright black eyes beam upon
us from the bed.  That is Mrs. Robert Pollock.  The log cabin is a
comfortable one.  I make coffee in my French coffee-pot, and let
loose some of the roast chickens in my basket. (Tired of fried
bacon saleratus bread--the principle bill of fare at the stations
--we had supplied ourselves with chicken, boiled ham, onions,
sausages, sea bread, canned butter, cheese, honey, &c. &c., an
example all Overland traders would do well to follow.)  Mrs.
Pollock tells me where I can find cream for the coffee, and cups
and saucers for the same, and appears so kind, that I regret our
stay is so limited that we can't see more of her.

On to Yellow Creek Station.  Then Needle Rock--a desolate hut on
the Desert, house and barn in one building.  The station-keeper is
a miserable, toothless wretch, with shaggy yellow hair, but says
he's going to get married.  I think I see him.

To Bear River.  A pleasant Mormon named Myers this station, and he
gives us a first-rate breakfast, Robert Curtis takes the reins from
Mr. Smart here, and we get on to wheels again.  Begin to see groups
of trees- a new sight to us.

Pass Quaking Asp Springs and Muddy to Fort Bridger.  Here are a
group of white buildings, built round a plaza, across the middle of
which runs a creek.  There are a few hundred troops here under the
command of Major Gallergher, a gallant officer and a gentleman,
well worth knowing.  We stay here two days.

We are on the road again, Sunday the 14th, with a driver of the
highly floral name of Primrose.  At 7 the next morning we reach
Green River Station, and enter Idaho Territory.  This is the Bitter
Creek division of the Overland route, of which we had heard so many
unfavorable stories.  The division is really well managed by Mr.
Stewart, though the country through which it stretches is the most
wretched I ever saw.  The water is liquid alkali, and the roads are
soft sand.  The snow is gone now, and the dust is thick and
blinding.  So drearily, wearily we drag onward.

We reach the summit of the Rocky Mountains at midnight on the 17th.
The climate changes suddenly, and the cold is intense.  We resume
runners, have a breakdown, and are forced to walk four miles.

I remember that one of the numerous reasons urged in favor of
General Fremont's election to the Presidency in 1856 was his
finding the path across the Rocky Mountains.  I wrung my
frostbitten hands on that dreadful night, and declared that for me
to deliberately go over that path in mid-winter was a sufficient
reason for my election to any lunatic asylum, by an overwhelming
vote.  Dr. Hingston made a similar remark, and wondered if he
should ever clink glasses with his friend Lord Palmerston again.

Another sensation.  Not comic this time.  One of our passengers, a
fair-haired German boy, whose sweet ways had quite won us all, sank
on the snow, and said--Let me sleep.  We knew only too well what
that meant, and tried hard to rouse him.  It was in vain.  Let me
sleep, he said.  And so in the cold starlight he died.  We took him
up tenderly from the snow, and bore him to the sleigh that awaited
us by the roadside, some two miles away.  The new moon was shining
now, and the smile on the sweet white face told how painlessly the
poor boy had died.  No one knew him.  He was from the Bannock
mines, was ill-clad, had no baggage or money, and his fare was paid
to Denver.  He had said that he was going back to Germany.  That
was all we knew.  So at sunrise the next morning we buried him at
the foot of the grand mountains that are snow-covered and icy all
the year round, far away from the Faderland, where it may be, some
poor mother is crying for her darling who will not come.

                   .     .      .      .

We strike the North Platte on the 18th.  The fare at the stations is
daily improving, and we often have antelope steaks now.  They tell
us of eggs not far off, and we encourage (by a process not wholly
unconnected with bottles) the drivers to keep their mules in
motion.

Antelopes by the thousand can be seen racing the plains from the
coach windows.

At Elk Mountain we encounter a religious driver named Edward
Whitney, who never swears at the mules.  This has made him
distinguished all over the plains.  This pious driver tried to
convert the Doctor, but I am mortified to say that his efforts were
not crowned with success,  Fort Halleck is a mile from Elk, and
here are some troops of the Ohio 11th regiment, under the command
of Major Thomas L. Mackey.

On the 20th we reach Rocky Thomas's justly celebrated station at 5
in the morning, and have a breakfast of hashed black-tailed deer,
antelope steaks, ham, boiled bear, honey, eggs, coffee, tea, and
cream.  That was the squarest meal on the road except at Weber.
Mr. Thomas is a Baltimore "slosher," he informed me.  I don't know
what that is, but he is a good fellow, and gave us a breakfast fir
for a lord, emperor, czar, count, &c.  A better couldn't be found
at Delmonicp's or Parker's.  He pressed me to linger with him for a
few days and shoot bears.  It was with several pangs that I
declined the generous Baltimorean's invitation.

To Virginia Dale.  Weather clear and bright.  Virginia Dale is a
pretty spot, as it ought to be with such a pretty name; but I
treated with no little scorn the advice of a hunter I met there,
who told me to give up "literatoor," form a matrimonial alliance
with some squaws, and "settle down thar."

Bannock on the brain!  That is what is the matter now.  Wagon-load
after wagon-load of emigrants, bound to the new Idaho gold regions,
meet us every hour.  Canvas-covered and drawn for the most part by
fine large mules, they make a pleasant panorama, as they stretch
slowly over the plains and uplands.  We strike the South Platte
Sunday, 21st, and breakfast at Latham, a station of one-horse
proportions.  We are now in Colorado ("Pike's Peak"), and we
diverge from the main route here and visit the flourishing and
beautiful city of Denver.  Messrs, Langrish & Dougherty, who have
so long and so admirably catered to the amusement lovers of the Far
West, kindly withdrew their dramatic corps for a night, and allow
me to use their pretty little theatre.

We go to the mountains from Denver, visiting the celebrated
gold-mining towns of Black Hawk and Central City.  I leave this
queen of all the territories, quite firmly believing that its
future is to be no less brilliant than its past has been.

I had almost forgotten to mention that on the way from Latham to
Denver Dr. Hingston and Dr. Seaton (late a highly admired physician
and surgeon in Kentucky, and now a prosperous gold miner) had a
learned discussion as to the formation of the membranes of the
human stomach, in which they used words that were over a foot long
by actual measurement.  I have never heard such splendid words in
my life; but such were their grandiloquent profundity, and their
far-reaching lucidity, that I understood rather less about it when
they had finished than I did when they commenced.

                   .     .      .      .

Back to Latham again over a marshy road, and on to Nebraska by the
main stage-line.

I meet Col. Chivington, commander of the district of Colorado, at
Latham.

Col. Chivington is a Methodist clergyman, and was once a presiding
elder.  A thoughtful, earnest man, an eloquent preacher, a sincere
believer in the war, he, of course brings to his new position a
great deal of enthusiasm.  This, with his natural military tact,
makes him an officer of rare ability; and on more occasions than
one he has led his troops against the enemy with resistless skill
and gallantry.  I take the liberty of calling the President's
attention to the fact that this brave man ought to have long ago
been a brigadier-general.

Col. Chivington vanquished the rebels with his brave Colorado
troops, in New Mexico last year, as most people know.  At the
commencement of the action, which was hotly contested, a shell from
the enemy exploded near him, tearing up the ground, and causing
Captain Rogers to swear in an awful manner.

"Captain Rogers," said the Colonel, " gentlemen do not swear on a
solemn occasion like this.  We may fall, but falling in a glorious
cause, let us die as Christians, not as rowdies, with oaths upon
our lips.  Captain Rogers, let us -"

Another shell, a sprightlier one than its predecessor, tears the
earth fearfully in the immediate vicinity of Col. Chivington,
filling his eyes with dirt and knocking off his hat.

"Why, G-   d-       Their souls to h-   ," he roared, "they've put
my eyes out- AS CAPTAIN ROGERS WOULD SAY!"

But the Colonel's eyes were not seriously damaged, and he went in.
Went in, and came out victorious.

                   .     .      .      .

We reach Julesberg, Colorado, the 1st of March.  We are in the
country of the Sioux Indians now, and encounter them by the
hundred.  A Chief offers to sell me his daughter (a fair young
Indian maiden) for six dollars and two quarts of whisky.  I decline
to trade.

Meals which have hitherto been 1 dol. Are now 75 cents.  Eggs
appear on the table occasionally, and we hear of chickens farther
on.  Nine miles from here we enter Nebraska territory.  Here is an
occasionally fenced farm, and the ranches have bar-rooms.  Buffalo
skins and buffalo tongues are on sale at most of the stations.  We
reach South Platte on the 2d, and Fort Kearney on the 3d.  The 7th
Iowa Calvary are here, under the command of Captain Wood.  At
Cottonwood, a days ride back, we had taken aboard Major O'Brien,
commanding the troops there, and a jovial warrior he is, too.

Meals are now down to 50 cents, and a good deal better than when
they were 1 dol.

KANSAS, 105 miles from Atchison.  Atchison!  No traveller by sea
ever longed to set his foot on shore as we longed to reach the end
of our dreary coach-ride over the wildest part of the whole
continent.  How we talked Atchison, and dreamed Atchison, for the
next fifty hours!  Atchison, I shall always love you.  You were
evidently mistaken, Atchison, when you told me that in case I
"lectured" there, immense crowds would throng to the hall; but you
are very dear to me.  Let me kiss you for your maternal parent!

We are passing through the reservation of the Otoe Indians, who
long ago washed the war-paint from their faces, buried the
tomahawk, and settled down into quiet, prosperous farmers.

                   .     .      .      .

We rattle leisurely into Atchison on a Sunday evening.  Lights
gleam in the windows of milk-white churches, and they tell us, far
better than anything else could, that we are back to civilization
again.

An overland journey in winter is a better thing to have done than
to do.  In the spring, however, when the grass is green on the
great prairies, I fancy one might make the journey a pleasant one,
with his own outfit and a few choice friends.

4.17.  VERY MUCH MARRIED.

Are the Mormon women happy?

I give it up.  I don't know.

It is at Great Salt Lake City as it is at Boston.  If I go out to
tea at the Wilkinses in Boston, I'm pretty sure to find Mr. Wilkins
all smiles and Sunshine, or Mrs. Wilkins all gentleness and
politeness.  I am entertained delightfully, and after tea little
Miss Wilkins shows me her photograph album, and plays the march
from "Faust" on the piano for me.  I go away highly pleased with my
visit; and yet the Wilkinses may fight like cats and dogs in
private.  I may no sooner have struck the sidewalk than Mr. W. will
be reaching for Mrs. W's throat.

This is the City of Saints.  Apparently, the Mormon women are
happy.  I saw them at their best, of course--at balls, tea-parties
and the like.  They were like other women as far as my observation
extended.  They were hooped, and furbelowed, and shod, and white-
collard, and bejewelled; and like women all over the world, they
were softer-eyed and kinder-hearted than men can ever hope to be.

The Mormon girl is reared to believe that the plurality-wife system
as it is delicately called here is strictly right; and in linking
her destiny with a man who has twelve wives, she undoubtedly
considers she is doing her duty.  She loves the man, probably, for
I think it is not true, as so many writers have stated, that girls
are forced to marry whomsoever "the Church" may dictate.  Some
parents no doubt advise, connive, threaten, and in aggravated cases
incarcerate here, as some parents have always done elsewhere, and
always will do as long as petticoats continue to be an institution.

How these dozen or twenty wives get along without heart-burnings
and hairpullings I can't see.

There are instances on record, you know, where a man don't live in
a state of uninterrupted bliss with ONE wife.  And to say that a
man can possess twenty wives without having his special favorite,
or favorites, is to say that he is an angel in boots--which is
something I have never been introduced to.  You never saw an angel
with a Beard, although you may have seen the Bearded Woman.

The Mormon woman is early taught that man, being created in the
image of the Saviour, is far more godly than she can ever be, and
that for her to seek to monopolize his affections is a species of
rank sin.  So she shares his affections with five or six or twenty
other women, as the case may be.

A man must be amply able to support a number of wives before he can
take them.  Hence, perhaps, it is that so many old chaps in Utah
have young and blooming wives in their seraglios, and so many young
men have only one.

I had a man pointed out to me who married an entire family.  He had
originally intended to marry Jane, but Jane did not want to leave
her widowed mother.  The other three sisters were not in the
matrimonial market for the same reason; so this gallant man married
the whole crowd, including the girl's grandmother, who had lost all
her teeth, and had to be fed with a spoon.  The family were in
indigent circumstances, and they could not but congratulate
themselves on securing a wealthy husband.  It seemed to affect the
grandmother deeply, for the first words she said on reaching her
new home were:  "Now, thank God!  I shall have my gruel reg'lar!"

The name of Joseph Smith is worshipped in Utah; and, "they say,"
that although he had been dead a good many years, he still keeps on
marrying women by proxy.  He "reveals" who shall act as his earthly
agent in this matter, and the agent faithfully executes the defunct
Prophet's commands.

A few years ago I read about a couple being married by telegraph--
the young man was in Cincinatti and the young woman was in New
Hampshire.  They did not see each other for a year afterwards.  I
don't see what fun there is in this sort of thing.

I have somewhere stated that Brigham Young is said to have eighty
wives.  I hardly think he has so many.  Mr. Hyde, the backslider,
says in his book that "Brigham always sleeps by himself, in a
little chamber behind his office;" and if he has eighty wives I
don't blame him.  He must be bewildered.  I know very well that if
I had eighty wives of my bosom I should be confused, and shouldn't
sleep anywhere.  I undertook to count the long stockings, on the
clothes-line, in his back yard one day, and I used up the
multiplication table in less than half an hour.  It made me dizzy--
it did!

In this book I am writing chiefly of what I saw.  I saw plurality
at its best.  I have shown the silver lining of this great social
cloud.  That back of this silver lining the cloud must be thick and
black, I feel quite sure.  But to elaborately denounce, at this
late day, a system we all know must be wildly wrong, would be
simply to impeach the intelligence of the readers of this book.

4.18.  THE REVELATION OF JOSEPH SMITH.

I have not troubled the reader with extracts from Mormon documents.
The Book of Mormon is ponderous, but gloomy, and at times
incoherent; and I will not, by any means, quote from that.  But the
Revelation of Joseph Smith in regard to the absorbing question of
plurality or polygamy may be of sufficient interest to reproduce
here.  The reader has my full consent to form his own opinion of
it:--

REVELATION GIVEN TO JOSEPH SMITH, NAUVOO, JULY, 12, 1843.

Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph, that
inasmuch as you have inquired of my hand to know and understand
wherein I, the Lord, justified my servants, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; as also Moses, David, and Solomon, my servants, as touching
the principle and doctrine of their having many wives and
concubines:  Behold! and lo, I am the Lord thy God, and will answer
thee as touching this matter:  therefore prepare thy heart to
receive and obey the instructions which I am about to give unto
you; for all those who have this law revealed unto them must obey
the same; for behold!  I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting
covenant, and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned;
for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into
my glory; for all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide
the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions
thereof, as was instituted from before the foundations of the
world; and as pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, it
was instituted for the fulness of my glory; and he that receiveth a
fulness thereof, must and shall abide the law, or he shall be
damned, saith the Lord God.

And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law are
these:  All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows,
performances, connections, associations or expectations, that are
not made, and entered into, and sealed, by the Holy Spirit of
promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all
eternity, and that, too, most holy, by revelation and commandment,
through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the
earth to hold this power (and I have appointed unto my servant
Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but
one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this
priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in
and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that
are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead.

Behold!  Mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and
not a house of confusion.  Will I accept of an offering, saith the
Lord, that is not made in my name?  Or will I receive at your hands
that which I have not appointed?  And will I appoint unto you,
saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father
ordained unto you, before the world was?  I am the Lord thy God,
and I give unto you this commandment, that no man shall come unto
the Father but by me, or by my word, which is my law, saith the
Lord; and everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained
of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of
name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me, or by my word,
saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after
men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord
your God; for what soever things remaineth are by me, and
whatsoever things are not by me, shall be shaken and destroyed.

Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her
not by me, nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he
is in the world, and she with him, their covenant and marriage is
not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the
world; therefore they are not bound by any law when they are out of
the world:  therefore when they are out of the world, they neither
marry nor are given in marriage, but are appointed angels in
heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for
those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an
eternal weight of glory; for these angels did not abide my law,
therefore they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately, and
singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all
eternity, and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God
for ever and ever.

And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife, and make a
covenant with her for time and for all eternity, if that covenant
is not by me or by my word, which is my law, and is not sealed by
the Holy Spirit of promise, through him whom I have anointed and
appointed unto this power, then it is not valid, neither of force
when they are out of the world, because they are not joined by me,
saith the Lord, neither by my word; when they are out of the world,
it cannot be received there, because the angels and the gods are
appointed there, by whom they cannot pass; they cannot, therefore,
inherit my glory, for my house is a house of order, saith the Lord
God.

And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife by my word,
which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is
sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is
anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of
this priesthood, and it shall be said unto them, Ye shall come
forth in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first
resurrection, in the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones,
kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and
depths, then shall it be written in the Lamb's Book of Life that he
shall commit no murder, whereby to shed innocent blood; and if ye
abide in my covenant, and commit no murder whereby to shed innocent
blood, it shall be done unto them in all things whatsoever my
servant hath put upon them in time and through all eternity; and
shall be of full force when they are out of the world, and they
shall pass by the angels and the gods, which are set there, to
their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon
their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of
the seeds for ever and ever.

Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall
they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue;
then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto
them.  Then shall they be gods because they have all power, and the
angels are subject unto them.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law, ye cannot
attain to this glory; for straight is the gate, and narrow the way,
that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and
few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world,
neither do ye know me.  But if ye receive me in the world, then
shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation, that where I
am, ye shall be also.  This is eternal life to know the only wise
and true God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent.  I am he.
Receive ye, therefore, my law.  Broad is the gate, and wide the way
that leadeth to the death, and many there are that go in thereat,
because they receive me not, neither do they abide in my law.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man marry a wife according to
my word, and they are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise
according to mine appointment, and he or she shall commit any sin
or transgression of the new and everlasting covenant whatever, and
all manner of blasphemies; and if they commit no murder, wherein
they shed innocent blood, yet they shall come forth in the first
resurrection, and enter into their exaltation; but they shall be
destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings
of Satan, unto the day of redemption, saith the Lord God.

The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which shall not be forgiven
in the world nor out of the world, is in that ye commit murder,
wherein ye shed innocent blood, and assent unto my death, after ye
have received my new and everlasting covenant, saith the Lord God:
and he that abideth not this law can in no wise enter into my
glory, but shall be damned, saith the Lord.

I am the Lord thy God, and will give unto thee the law of my holy
priesthood, as was ordained by me and my Father before the world
was.  Abraham received all things, whatsoever he received, by
revelation and commandment, by my word, saith the Lord, and hath
entered into his exaltation, and sitteth upon his throne.

Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of
his loins--from whose loins ye are, viz., my servant Joseph--which
were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching
Abraham and his seed out of the world, they should continue; both
in the world and out of the world should they continue as
innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the
seashore, ye could not number them.  This promise is yours also
because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham,
and by this law are the continuation of the works of my Father,
wherein he glorifieth himself.  Go ye, therefore, and do the works
of Abraham; enter ye into my law, and ye shall be saved.  But if ye
enter not into my law, ye cannot receive the promises of my Father,
which he made unto Abraham.

God commanded Abraham, and Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham to wife.
And why did she do it?  Because this was the law, and from Hagar
sprang many people.  This, therefore, was fulfilling, among other
things, the promises.  Was Abraham, therefore, under condemnation?
Verily, I say unto you, NAY; for the Lord commanded it.  Abraham
was commanded to offer his son Isaac; nevertheless it was written,
Thou shalt not kill.  Abraham, however, did not refuse, and it was
accounted unto him for righteousness.

Abraham received concubines, and they bare him children, and it was
accounted unto him for righteousness, because they were given unto
him, and he abode in my law; as Isaac, also, and Jacob, did none
other things than that which they were commanded; and because they
did none other things than that which they were commanded, they
have entered into their exaltation, according to the promises, and
sit upon thrones; and are not angels, but are gods.  David also
received many wives and concubines, as also Solomon and Moses my
servant, as also many others of my servants, from the beginning of
creation until this time, and in nothing did they sin, save in
those things which they received not of me.

David's wives and concubines were given unto him of me by the hand
of Nathan my servant, and others of the prophets who had the keys
of this power; and in none of these things did he sin against me,
save in the case of Uriah and his wife; and, therefore, he hath
fallen from his exaltation, and received his portion; and he shall
not inherit them out of the world, for I gave them unto another,
saith the Lord.

I am the Lord thy God, and I gave unto thee, my servant Joseph, by
appointment, and restore all things; ask what ye will, and it shall
be given unto you, according to my word; and as ye have asked
concerning adultery, verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man
receiveth a wife in the new and everlasting covenant, and if she be
with another man, and I have not appointed unto her by the holy
anointing, she hath committed adultery, and shall be destroyed.  If
she be not in the new and everlasting covenant, and she be with
another man, she has committed adultery; and if her husband be with
another woman, and he was under a vow, he hath broken his vow, and
hath committed adultery; and if she hath not committed adultery,
but is innocent, and hath not broken her vow, and knoweth it, and I
reveal it unto you, my servant Joseph, then shall you have power,
by the power of my holy priesthood, to take her, and give her unto
him that hath not committed adultery, but hath been faithful; for
he shall be made ruler over many; for I have conferred upon you the
keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things and
make own unto you all things in due time.

And verily, verily, I say unto you, that whatsoever you seal on
earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth,
in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally
bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth,
shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins
you retain on earth, shall be retained in heaven.

And again, verily, I say, whomsoever you bless, I will bless, and
whomsoever you curse, I will curse, saith the Lord; for I, the
Lord, am thy God.

And again, verily, I say unto you, my servant Joseph, that
whatsoever you give on earth, and to whomsoever you give any one on
earth, by my word and according to my law, it shall be visited with
blessings and not cursings, and with my power, saith the Lord, and
shall be without condemnation on earth and in heaven, for I am the
Lord thy God, and will be with thee even unto the end of the world,
and through all eternity; for verily I seal upon you your
exaltation, and prepare a throne for you in the kingdom of my
Father, with Abraham your father.  Behold! I have seen your
sacrifices, and will forgive all your sin; I have seen your
sacrifices, in obedience to that which I have told you; go,
therefore, and I make a way for your escape, as I accepted the
offering of Abraham of his son Isaac.

Verily, I say unto you, a commandment I give unto mine handmaid,
Emma Smith, your wife, whom I have given unto you, that she stay
herself, and partake of that which I commanded you to offer unto
her; for I did it, saith the Lord, to prove you all, as I did
Abraham, and that I might require an offering at your hand by
covenant and sacrifice; and let mine handmaid, Emma Smith, receive
all those that have been given unto my servant Joseph, and who are
virtuous and pure before me; and those who are not pure, and have
said they were pure, shall be destroyed, saith the Lord God; for I
am the Lord thy God, and ye shall obey my voice; and I give unto my
servant Joseph, that he shall be made ruler over many things, for
he hath been faithful over a few things, and from henceforth I will
strengthen him.

And I command mine handmaid, Emma Smith, to abide and cleave unto
my servant Joseph and to none else.  But if she will not abide this
commandment, she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord, for I am the
Lord thy God, and will destroy her if she abide not in my law:  but
if she will not abide this commandment, then shall my servant
Joseph do all things for her, as he hath said; and I will bless
him, and multiply him, and give unto him an hundredfold in this
world, of fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, houses and
lands, wives and children, and crowns of eternal lives in the
eternal worlds.  And again, verily I say, let mine handmaid forgive
my servant Joseph his trespasses, and then shall she be forgiven
her trespasses, wherein she hath trespassed against me; and I, the
Lord thy God, will bless her, and multiply her, and make her heart
to rejoice.

And again, I say, let not my servant Joseph put his property out of
his hands, lest an enemy come and destroy him--for Satan seeketh to
destroy--for I am the Lord thy God, and he is my servant; and
behold! and lo, I am with him, as I was with Abraham thy father,
even unto his exaltation and glory.

Now, as touching the law of the priesthood, there are many things
pertaining thereunto.  Verily, if a man be called of my Father, as
was Aaron, by mine own voice, and by the voice of him that sent me,
and I have endowed him with the keys of the power of this
priesthood, if he do anything in my name, and according to my law,
and by my word, he will not commit sin, and I will justify him.
Let no one, therefore, set on my servant Joseph, for I will justify
him:  for he shall do the sacrifice which I require at his hands,
for his transgressions, saith the Lord your God.

And again, as pertaining to the law of the priesthood; if any man
espouse a virgin, and desire to espouse another, and the first give
her consent; and if he espouse the second, and they are virgins,
and have vowed to no other man, then is he justified; he cannot
commit adultery, for they are given unto him; for he cannot commit
adultery with that that belongeth unto him, and to none else; and
if he have ten virgins given unto him by this law, he cannot commit
adultery, for they belong to him, and they are given unto him;
therefore is he justified.  But if one or either of the ten
virgins, after she is espoused, shall be with another man, she has
committed adultery, and shall be destroyed; for they are given unto
him to multiply and replenish the earth, according to my
commandment, and to fulfil the promise which was given by my Father
before the foundation of the world, and for their exaltation in the
eternal worlds, that they may bear the souls of men; for herein is
the work of my Father continued, that he may be glorified.

And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, if any man have a wife
who holds the keys of this power, and he teaches unto her the law
of my priesthood as pertaining to these things, then shall she
believe and administer unto him, or she shall be destroyed, saith
the Lord your God; for I will destroy her; for I will magnify my
name upon all those who receive and abide in my law.  Therefore it
shall be lawful in me, if she receive not this law, for him to
receive all things whatsoever I, the Lord his God, will give unto
him, because she did not believe and administer unto him according
to my word; and she then becomes the transgressor, and he is exempt
from the law of Sarah, who administered unto Abraham according to
the law, when I commanded Abraham to take Hagar to wife.  And, now
as pertaining to this law, verily, verily, I say unto you I will
reveal more unto you hereafter, therefore let this suffice for the
present.  Behold!  I am Alpha and Omega.  AMEN.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by J.C. Byers at jcbyers@capitalnet.com.
and proofread by
Nancy Bloomquist, JC Byers, Wanda Chapman, Diane Doerfler, Emma
Dudding, Jennifer Lee, Marilyn McCelland, Laura Shaffer, Charles
Wilson.





                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                          VOLUME FIVE
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                     To Doctor George Bird.
  
My Dear Bird,
     This is not a strictly medical work, although in places
treating of subjects which may modestly be called hygienic.  I
inscribe it to you because your knowledge of Egypt will enable
you to appreciate its finer touches; and for another and a yet
more cogent reason, namely, that you are one of my best and
oldest friends.

Ever yours sincerely,

Richard F. Burton

Athenaeum Club, October 20, 1885.

