ee; else hath he Mamelukes
and negro slaves, pages, eunuchs and attendants out of number,
each goodlier than other." Whenas she heard this, it commended
itself to her reason and she believed him; so she rose
forthright;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Persian sage acquainted the Princess with the case of the King's
son, she believed him; so she rose forthright; and, putting her
hand in his, said, "O my father, what hast thou brought me to
ride?" He replied, "O my lady, thou shalt ride the horse thou
camest on;" and she, "I cannot ride it by myself." Whereupon he
smiled and knew that he was her master and said, "I will ride
with thee myself." So he mounted and, taking her up behind him
bound her to himself with firm bonds, while she knew not what he
would with her. Then he turned the ascent-pin, whereupon the
belly of the horse became full of wind and it swayed to and fro
like a wave of the sea, and rose with them high in air nor
slackened in its flight, till it was out of sight of the city.
Now when Shams al-Nahir saw this, she asked him, "Ho thou! what
is become of that thou toldest me of my Prince, making me believe
that he sent thee to me?" Answered the Persian, "Allah damn the
Prince! he is a mean and skin-flint knave." She cried, "Woe to
thee! How darest thou disobey thy lord's commandment?" Whereto
the Persian replied, "He is no lord of mine: knowest thou who I
am?" Rejoined the Princess, "I know nothing of thee save what
thou toldest me;" and retorted he, "What I told thee was a trick
of mine against thee and the King's son: I have long lamented the
loss of this horse which is under us; for I constructed it and
made myself master of it. But now I have gotten firm hold of it
and of thee too, and I will burn his heart even as he hath burnt
mine; nor shall he ever have the horse again; no, never! So be of
good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear; for I can be of
more use to thee than he; and I am generous as I am wealthy; my
servants and slaves shall obey thee as their mistress; I will
robe thee in finest raiment and thine every wish shall be at thy
will." When she heard this, she buffeted her face and cried out,
saying, "Ah, well-away! I have not won my beloved and I have lost
my father and mother!" And she wept bitter tears over what had
befallen her, whilst the Sage fared on with her, without ceasing,
till he came to the land of the Greeks[FN#24] and alighted in a
verdant mead, abounding in streams and trees. Now this meadow lay
near a city wherein was a King of high puissance, and it chanced
that he went forth that day to hunt and divert himself. As he
passed by the meadow, he saw the Persian standing there, with the
damsel and the horse by his side; and, before the Sage was ware,
the King's slaves fell upon him and carried him and the lady and
the horse to their master who, noting the foulness of the man's
favour and his loathsomeness and the beauty of the girl and her
loveliness, said, "O my lady, what kin is this oldster to thee?"
The Persian made haste to reply, saying, "She is my wife and the
daughter of my father's brother." But the lady at once gave him
the lie and said, "O King, by Allah, I know him not, nor is he my
husband; nay, he is a wicked magician who hath stolen me away by
force and fraud." Thereupon the King bade bastinado the Persian
and they beat him till he was well-nigh dead; after which the
King commanded to carry him to the city and cast him into jail;
and, taking from him the damsel and the ebony horse (though he
knew not its properties nor the secret of its motion), set the
girl in his serraglio and the horse amongst his hoards. Such was
the case with the Sage and the lady; but as regards Prince Kamar
al-Akmar, he garbed himself in travelling gear and taking what he
needed of money, set out tracking their trail in very sorry
plight; and journeyed from country to country and city to city
seeking the Princess and enquiring after the ebony horse, whilst
all who heard him marvelled at him and deemed his talk
extravagant. Thus he continued doing a long while; but, for all
his enquiry and quest, he could hit on no new news of her. At
last he came to her father's city of Sana'a and there asked for
her, but could get no tidings of her and found her father
mourning her loss. So he turned back and made for the land of the
Greeks, continuing to enquire concerning the twain as he went,--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King's
son made for the land of the Greeks, continuing to enquire
concerning the two as he went along, till, as chance would have
it, he alighted at a certain Khan and saw a company of merchants
sitting at talk. So he sat down near them and heard one say, "O
my friends, I lately witnessed a wonder of wonders." They asked,
"What was that?" and he answered, "I was visiting such a district
in such a city (naming the city wherein was the Princess), and I
heard its people chatting of a strange thing which had lately
befallen. It was that their King went out one day hunting and
coursing with a company of his courtiers and the lords of his
realm; and, issuing from the city, they came to a green meadow
where they espied an old man standing, with a woman sitting hard
by a horse of ebony. The man was foulest-foul of face and loathly
of form, but the woman was a marvel of beauty and loveliness and
elegance and perfect grace; and as for the wooden horse, it was a
miracle, never saw eyes aught goodlier than it nor more gracious
than its make." Asked the others, "And what did the King with
them?"; and the merchant answered, "As for the man the King
seized him and questioned him of the damsel and he pretended that
she was his wife and the daughter of his paternal uncle; but she
gave him the lie forthright and declared that he was a sorcerer
and a villain. So the King took her from the old man and bade
beat him and cast him into the trunk-house. As for the ebony
horse, I know not what became of it." When the Prince heard these
words, he drew near to the merchant and began questioning him
discreetly and courteously touching the name of the city and of
its King; which when he knew, he passed the night full of joy.
And as soon as dawned the day he set out and travelled sans
surcease till he reached that city; but, when he would have
entered, the gate-keepers laid hands on him, that they might
bring him before the King to question him of his condition and
the craft in which he was skilled and the cause of his coming
thither-such being the usage and custom of their ruler. Now it
was supper-time when he entered the city, and it was then
impossible to go in to the King or take counsel with him
respecting the stranger. So the guards carried him to the jail,
thinking to lay him by the heels there for the night; but, when
the warders saw his beauty and loveliness, they could not find it
in their hearts to imprison him: they made him sit with them
without the walls; and, when food came to them, he ate with them
what sufficed him. As soon as they had made an end of eating,
they turned to the Prince and said, "What countryman art thou?"
"I come from Fars," answered he, "the land of the Chosroes." When
they heard this they laughed and one of them said, "O
Chosroan,[FN#25] I have heard the talk of men and their histories
and I have looked into their conditions; but never saw I or heard
I a bigger liar than the Chosroan which is with us in the jail."
Quoth another, "And never did I see aught fouler than his favour
or more hideous than his visnomy." Asked the Prince. "What have
ye seen of his lying?"; and they answered, "He pretendeth that he
is one of the wise! Now the King came upon him, as he went a-
hunting, and found with him a most beautiful woman and a horse of
the blackest ebony, never saw I a handsomer. As for the damsel,
she is with the King, who is enamoured of her and would fain
marry her; but she is mad, and were this man a leach as he
claimeth to be, he would have healed her, for the King doth his
utmost to discover a cure for her case and a remedy for her
disease, and this whole year past hath he spent treasure upon
physicians and astrologers, on her account; but none can avail to
cure her. As for the horse, it is in the royal hoard-house, and
the ugly man is here with us in prison; and as soon as night
falleth, he weepeth and bemoaneth himself and will not let us
sleep."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
warders had recounted the case of the Persian egromancer they
held in prison and his weeping and wailing, the Prince at once
devised a device whereby he might compass his desire; and
presently the guards of the gate, being minded to sleep, led him
into the jail and locked the door. So he overheard the Persian
weeping and bemoaning himself, in his own tongue, and saying,
"Alack, and alas for my sin, that I sinned against myself and
against the King's son, in that which I did with the damsel; for
I neither left her nor won my will of her! All this cometh of my
lack of sense, in that I sought for myself that which I deserved
not and which befitted not the like of me; for whoso seeketh what
suiteth him not at all, falleth with the like of my fall." Now
when the King's son heard this, he accosted him in Persian,
saying, "How long will this weeping and wailing last? Say me,
thinkest thou that hath befallen thee that which never befel
other than thou?" Now when the Persian heard this, he made
friends with him and began to complain to him of his case and
misfortunes. And as soon as the morning morrowed, the warders
took the Prince and carried him before their King, informing him
that he had entered the city on the previous night, at a time
when audience was impossible. Quoth the King to the Prince,
"Whence comest thou and what is thy name and trade and why hast
thou travelled hither?" He replied, "As to my name I am called in
Persian Harjah;[FN#26] as to my country I come from the land of
Fars; and I am of the men of art and especially of the art of
medicine and healing the sick and those whom the Jinns drive mad.
For this I go round about all countries and cities, to profit by
adding knowledge to my knowledge, and whenever I see a patient I
heal him and this is my craft."[FN#27] Now when the King heard
this, he rejoiced with exceeding joy and said, "O excellent Sage,
thou hast indeed come to us at a time when we need thee." Then he
acquainted him with the case of the Princess, adding, "If thou
cure her and recover her from her madness, thou shalt have of me
everything thou seekest." Replied the Prince, "Allah save and
favour the King: describe to me all thou hast seen of her
insanity and tell me how long it is since the access attacked
her; also how thou camest by her and the horse and the Sage." So
the King told him the whole story, from first to last, adding,
"The Sage is in goal." Quoth the Prince, "O auspicious King, and
what hast thou done with the horse?" Quoth the King, "O youth, it
is with me yet, laid up in one of my treasure-chambers,"
whereupon said the Prince within himself, "The best thing I can
do is first to see the horse and assure myself of its condition.
If it be whole and sound, all will be well and end well; but, if
its motor-works be destroyed, I must find some other way of
delivering my beloved." Thereupon he turned to the King and said
to him, "O King, I must see the horse in question: haply I may
find in it somewhat that will serve me for the recovery of the
damsel." "With all my heart," replied the King, and taking him by
the hand, showed him into the place where the horse was. The
Prince went round about it, examining its condition, and found it
whole and sound, whereat he rejoiced greatly and said to the
King, "Allah save and exalt the King! I would fain go in to the
damsel, that I may see how it is with her; for I hope in Allah to
heal her by my healing hand through means of the horse." Then he
bade them take care of the horse and the King carried him to the
Princess's apartment where her lover found her wringing her hands
and writhing and beating herself against the ground, and tearing
her garments to tatters as was her wont; but there was no madness
of Jinn in her, and she did this but that none might approach
her. When the Prince saw her thus, he said to her, "No harm shall
betide thee, O ravishment of the three worlds;" and went on to
soothe her and speak her fair, till he managed to whisper, "I am
Kamar al-Akmar;" whereupon she cried out with a loud cry and fell
down fainting for excess of joy; but the King thought this was
epilepsy[FN#28] brought on by her fear of him, and by her
suddenly being startled. Then the Prince put his mouth to her ear
and said to her, "O Shams al-Nahar, O seduction of the universe,
have a care for thy life and mine and be patient and constant;
for this our position needeth sufferance and skilful contrivance
to make shift for our delivery from the tyrannical King. My first
move will be now to go out to him and tell him that thou art
possessed of a Jinn and hence thy madness; but that I will engage
to heal thee and drive away the evil spirit, if he will at once
unbind thy bonds. So when he cometh in to thee, do thou speak him
smooth words, that he may think I have cured thee, and all will
be done for us as we desire." Quoth she, "Hearkening and
obedience;" and he went out to the King in joy and gladness, and
said to him, "O august King, I have, by thy good fortune,
discovered her disease and its remedy, and have cured her for
thee. So now do thou go in to her and speak her softly and treat
her kindly, and promise her what may please her; so shall all
thou desirest of her be accomplished to thee."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prince feigned himself a leach and went in to the damsel and made
himself known to her and told her how he purposed to deliver her,
she cried "Hearkening and obedience!" He then fared forth from
her and sought the King and said, "Go thou in to her and speak
her softly and promise her what may please her; so shall all thou
desirest of her be accomplished to thee." Thereupon the King went
in to her and when she saw him, she rose and kissing the ground
before him, bade him welcome and said, "I admire how thou hast
come to visit thy handmaid this day;" whereat he was ready to fly
for joy and bade the waiting-women and the eunuchs attend her and
carry her to the Hammam and make ready for her dresses and
adornment. So they went in to her and saluted her, and she
returned their salams with the goodliest language and after the
pleasantest fashion; whereupon they clad her in royal apparel
and, clasping a collar of jewels about her neck, carried her to
the bath and served her there. Then they brought her forth, as
she were the full moon; and, when she came into the King's
presence, she saluted him and kissed ground before him; whereupon
he joyed in her with joy exceeding and said to the Prince, "O
Sage, O philosopher, all this is of thy blessing. Allah increase
to us the benefit of thy healing breath!"[FN#29] The Prince
replied, "O King, for the completion of her cure it behoveth that
thou go forth, thou and all thy troops and guards, to the place
where thou foundest her, not forgetting the beast of black wood
which was with her; for therein is a devil; and, unless I
exorcise him, he will return to her and afflict her at the head
of every month." "With love and gladness," cried the King, "O
thou Prince of all philosophers and most learned of all who see
the light of day." Then he brought out the ebony horse to the
meadow in question and rode thither with all his troops and the
Princess, little weeting the purpose of the Prince. Now when they
came to the appointed place, the Prince, still habited as a
leach, bade them set the Princess and the steed as far as eye
could reach from the King and his troops, and said to him, "With
thy leave, and at thy word, I will now proceed to the fumigations
and conjurations, and here imprison the adversary of mankind,
that he may never more return to her. After this, I shall mount
this wooden horse which seemeth to be made of ebony, and take the
damsel up behind me; whereupon it will shake and sway to and fro
and fare forwards, till it come to thee, when the affair will be
at an end; and after this thou mayst do with her as thou wilt."
When the King heard his words, he rejoiced with extreme joy; so
the Prince mounted the horse and, taking the damsel up behind
him, whilst the King and his troops watched him, bound her fast
to him. Then he turned the ascending-pin and the horse took
flight and soared with them high in air, till they disappeared
from every eye. After this the King abode half the day, expecting
their return; but they returned not. So when he despaired of
them, repenting him greatly of that which he had done and
grieving sore for the loss of the damsel, he went back to the
city with his troops. He then sent for the Persian who was in
prison and said to him, "O thou traitor, O thou villian, why
didst thou hide from me the mystery of the ebony horse? And now a
sharper hath come to me and hath carried it off, together with a
slave-girl whose ornaments are worth a mint of money, and I shall
never see anyone or anything of them again!" So the Persian
related to him all his past, first and last, and the King was
seized with a fit of fury which well-nigh ended his life. He shut
himself up in his palace for a while, mourning and afflicted; but
at last his Wazirs came in to him and applied themselves to
comfort him, saying, "Verily, he who took the damsel is an
enchanter, and praised be Allah who hath delivered thee from his
craft and sorcery!" And they ceased not from him, till he was
comforted for her loss. Thus far concerning the King; but as for
the Prince, he continued his career towards his father's capital
in joy and cheer, and stayed not till he alighted on his own
palace, where he set the lady in safety; after which he went in
to his father and mother and saluted them and acquainted them
with her coming, whereat they were filled with solace and
gladness. Then he spread great banquets for the towns-folk,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King's
son spread great banquets for the towns-folk and they held high
festival a whole month, at the end of which time he went in to
the Princess and they took their joy of each other with exceeding
joy. But his father brake the ebony horse in pieces and destroyed
its mechanism for flight; moreover the Prince wrote a letter to
the Princess's father, advising him of all that had befallen her
and informing him how she was now married to him and in all
health and happiness, and sent it by a messenger, together with
costly presents and curious rarities. And when the messenger
arrived at the city which was Sana'a and delivered the letter and
the presents to the King, he read the missive and rejoiced
greatly thereat and accepted the presents, honouring and
rewarding the bearer handsomely. Moreover, he forwarded rich
gifts to his son-in-law by the same messenger, who returned to
his master and acquainted him with what had passed; whereat he
was much cheered. And after this the Prince wrote a letter every
year to his father-in-law and sent him presents till, in course
of time, his sire King Sabur deceased and he reigned in his
stead, ruling justly over his lieges and conducting himself well
and righteously towards them, so that the land submitted to him
and his subjects did him loyal service; and Kamar al-Akmar and
his wife Shams al-Nahar abode in the enjoyment of all
satisfaction and solace of life, till there came to them the
Destroyer of deligights and Sunderer of societies; the Plunderer
of palaces, the Caterer for cemeteries and the Garnerer of
graves. And now glory be to the Living One who dieth not and in
whose hand is the dominion of the worlds visible and invisible!
Moreover I have heard tell the tale of





           UNS AL-WUJUD AND THE WAZIR'S DAUGHTER AL-
            WARD FI'L-AKMAM OR ROSE-IN-HOOD.[FN#30]


There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, a King of great power and lord of glory and dominion
galore; who had a Wazir Ibrahim hight, and this Wazir's daughter
was a damsel of extraordinary beauty and loveliness, gifted with
passing brilliancy and the perfection of grace, possessed of
abundant wit, and in all good breeding complete. But she loved
wassail and wine and the human face divine and choice verses and
rare stories; and the delicacy of her inner gifts invited all
hearts to love, even as saith the poet, describing her,

     "Like moon she shines amid the starry sky, *
          Robing in tresses blackest ink outvie. 
     The morning-breezes give her boughs fair drink, *
          And like a branch she sways with supple ply: 
     She smiles in passing us. O thou that art *
          Fairest in yellow robed, or cramoisie, 
     Thou playest with my wit in love, as though *
          Sparrow in hand of playful boy were I."[FN#31]

Her name was Rose-in-Hood and she was so named for her young and
tender beauty and the freshness of her brilliancy; and the King
loved her in his cups because of her accomplishments and fine
manners. Now it was the King's custom yearly to gather together
all the nobles of his realm and play with the ball.[FN#32] So
when the day came round whereon the folk assembled for ballplay,
the Minister's daughter seated herself at her lattice, to divert
herself by looking on at the game; and, as they were at play, her
glance fell upon a youth among the guards than whom never was
seen a comelier face nor a goodlier form; for he was bright of
favour showing white teeth when he smiled, tall-statured and
broad-shouldered. She looked at him again and again and could not
take her fill of gazing; and presently said to her nurse, "What
is the name of yonder handsome young man among the troops?"
Replied the nurse, "O my daughter, the dear fellows are all
handsome. Which of them dost thou mean?" Said Rose-in-Hood, "Wait
till he come past and I will point him out to thee." So she took
an apple and as he rode by dropped it on him, whereupon he raised
his head, to see who did this, and espied the Wazir's daughter at
the window, as she were the moon of fullest light in the darkness
of the night; nor did he withdraw his eyes, till his heart was
utterly lost to her, and he recited these lines,

     "Was't archer shot me, or was't thine eyes *
          Ruined lover's heart that thy charms espies? 
     Was the notched shaft[FN#33] from a host outshot, *
          Or from latticed window in sudden guise?"

When the game was at an end, and all had left the ground, she
asked her nurse, "What is the name of that youth I showed thee?";
and the good woman answered, "His name is Uns al-Wujud;" whereat
Rose-in-Hood shook her head and lay down on her couch, with
thoughts a-fire for love. Then, sighing deeply, she improvised
these couplets,

     "He missed not who dubbed thee, 'World's delight,' *
          A world's love conjoining to bounty's light:[FN#34] 
     O thou, whose favour the full moon favours, *
          Whose charms make life and the living bright! 
     Thou hast none equal among mankind; *
          Sultan of Beauty, and proof I'll cite: 
     Thine eye-brows are likest a well-formed Nun,[FN#35] *
          And thine eyes a Sad,[FN#36] by His hand indite; 
     Thy shape is the soft, green bough that gives *
          When asked to all with all-gracious sprite: 
     Thou excellest knights of the world in stowre, *
          With delight and beauty and bounty dight."

When she had finished her verses, she wrote them on a sheet of
paper, which she folded in a piece of golf-embroidered silk and
placed under her pillow. Now one of her nurses had seen her; so
she came up to her and held her in talk till she slept, when she
stole the scroll from under her pillow; and, after reading it,
knew that she had fallen in love with Uns al-Wujud. Then she
returned the scroll to its place and when her mistress awoke, she
said to her, "O my lady, indeed I am to thee a true counsellor
and am tenderly anxious on thy account. Know that love is a
tyrant and the hiding it melteth iron and entaileth sickness and
unease; nor for whoso confesseth it is there aught of reproach."
Rejoined Rose-in-Hood, "And what is the medicine of passion, O
nurse mine?" Answered the nurse, "The medicine of passion is
enjoyment" Quoth she, "And how may one come by enjoyment?" Quoth
the other, "By letters and messages, my lady; by whispered words
of compliment and by greetings before the world;[FN#37] all this
bringeth lovers together and makes hard matters easy. So if thou
have aught at heart, mistress mine, I am the fittest to keep thy
secret and do thy desires and carry thy letters." Now when the
damsel heard this, her reason flew and fled for joy; but she
restrained herself from speech till she should see the issue of
the matter, saying within herself, "None knoweth this thing of
me, nor will I trust this one with my secret, till I have tried
her." Then said the woman, "O my lady, I saw in my sleep as
though a man came to me and said: 'Thy mistress and Uns al-Wujud
love each other; so do thou serve their case by carrying their
messages and doing their desires and keeping their secrets; and
much good shall befal thee.' So now I have told thee my vision
and it is thine to decide." Quoth Rose-in-Hood, after she heard
of the dream,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Rose-in-
Hood asked her nurse after hearing of the dream, "Tell me, canst
thou keep a secret, O my nurse?"; whereto she answered, "And how
should I not keep secrecy, I that am of the flower of the
free?"[FN#38] Then the maiden pulled out the scroll, whereon she
had written the verses and said, "Carry me this my letter to Uns
al-Wujud and bring me his reply." The nurse took the letter and,
repairing to Uns al-Wujud, kissed his hands and greeted him right
courteously, then gave him the paper; and he read it and,
comprehending the contents, wrote on the back these couplets,

     "I soothe my heart and my love repel; *
          But my state interprets my love too well: 
     When tears flow I tell them mine eyes are ill, *
          Lest the censor see and my case fortell, 
     I was fancy-free and unknew I Love; *
          But I fell in love and in madness fell. 
     I show you my case and complain of pain, *
          Pine and ecstasy that your ruth compel: 
     I write you with tears of eyes, so belike *
          They explain the love come my heart to quell; 
     Allah guard a face that is veiled with charms, *
          Whose thrall is Moon and the Stars as well: 
     In her beauty I never beheld the like; *
          From her sway the branches learn sway and swell: 
     I beg you, an 'tis not too much of pains, *
          To call;[FN#39] 'twere boon without parallel. 
     I give you a soul you will haply take. *
          To which Union is Heaven, Disunion Hell."

Then he folded the letter and kissing it, gave it to the go-
between and said to her, "O nurse, incline the lady's heart to
me." "To hear is to obey," answered she and carried the script to
her mistress, who kissed it and laid it on her head, then she
opened it and read it and understood it and wrote at the foot of
it these couplets,

     "O whose heart by our beauty is captive ta'en, *
          Have patience and all thou shalt haply gain! 
     When we knew that thy love was a true affect, *
          And what pained our heart to thy heart gave pain, 
     We had granted thee wished-for call and more; *
          But hindered so doing the chamberlain. 
     When the night grows dark, through our love's excess *
          Fire burns our vitals with might and main: 
     And sleep from our beds is driven afar, *
          And our bodies are tortured by passion-bane. 
     'Hide Love!' in Love's code is the first command; *
          And from raising his veil thy hand restrain: 
     I fell love-fulfilled by yon gazelle: *
          Would he never wander from where I dwell!"

Then she folded the letter and gave it to the nurse, who took it
and went out from her mistress to seek the young man; but, as she
would fare forth, the chamberlain met her and said to her,
"Whither away?" "To the bath," answered she; but in her fear and
confusion, she dropped the letter, without knowing it, and went
off unrecking what she had done; when one of the eunuchs, seeing
it lying in the way, picked it up. When the nurse came without
the door, she sought for it, but found it not, so turned back to
her mistress and told her of this and what had befallen her.
Meanwhile, the Wazir came out of the Harim and seated himself on
his couch; whereupon behold, the eunuch, who had picked up the
letter, came in to him, hending it in hand and said, "O my lord,
I found this paper lying upon the floor and picked it up." So the
Minister took it from his hand, folded as it was, and opening it,
read the verses as above set down. Then, after mastering the
meaning, he examined the writing and knew it for his daughter's
hand; whereupon he went to her mother, weeping so abundant tears
that his beard was wetted. His wife asked him, "What maketh thee
weep, O my lord?"; and he answered, "Take this letter and see
what is therein." So she took it and found it to be a love-letter
from her daughter Rose-in-Hood to Uns al-Wujud: whereupon the
ready drops sprang to her eyes; but she composed her mind, and,
gulping down her tears, said to her husband, "O my lord, there is
no profit in weeping: the right course is to cast about for a
means of keeping thine honour and concealing the affair of thy
daughter." And she went on to comfort him and lighten his
trouble; but he said, "I am fearful for my daughter by reason of
this new passion. Knowest thou not that the Sultan loveth Uns al-
Wujud with exceeding love? And my fear hath two causes. The first
concerneth myself; it is, that she is my daughter: the second is
on account of the King; for that Uns al-Wujud is a favourite with
the Sultan and peradventure great troubles shall come out of this
affair. What deemest thou should be done?"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir,
after recounting the affair of his daughter, asked his wife,
"What deemest thou should be done?" And she answered, "Have
patience whilst I pray the prayer for right direction." So she
prayed a two-bow prayer according to the prophetic[FN#40]
ordinance for seeking divine guidance; after which she said to
her husband, "In the midst of the Sea of Treasures[FN#41]
standeth a mountain named the Mount of the Bereaved Mother (the
cause of which being so called shall presently follow in its
place, Inshallah!); and thither can none have access, save with
pains and difficulty and distress: do thou make that same her
abiding-place." Accordingly the Minister and his wife agreed to
build on that mountain a virgin castle and lodge their daughter
therein with the necessary provision to be renewed year by year
and attendants to cheer and to serve her. Accordingly he
collected carpenters, builders and architects and despatched them
to the mountain, where they builded her an impregnable castle,
never saw eyes the like thereof. Then he made ready vivers and
carriage for the journey and, going in to his daughter by night,
bade her prepare to set out on a pleasure-excursion. Thereupon
her heart presaged the sorrows of separation and, when she went
forth and saw the preparations for the journey, she wept with
sore weeping and wrote that upon the door which might acquaint
her lover with what had passed and with the transports of passion
and grief that were upon her, transports such as would make the
flesh to shiver and hair to stare, and melt the hardest stone
with care, and tear from every eye a tear. And what she wrote
were these couplets,

   "By Allah, O thou house, if my beloved a morn go by, *
      And greet with signs and signals lover e'er is wont to fly, 
   I pray thee give him our salams in pure and fragrant guise, *
      For he indeed may never know where we this eve shall lie. 
   I wot not whither they have fared, thus bearing us afar *
      At speed, and lightly-quipt, the lighter from one love to
      fly: 
   When starkens night, the birds in brake or branches snugly
      perched * Wail for our sorrow and announce our hapless
      destiny: 
   The tongue of their condition saith, 'Alas, alas for woe, *
      And heavy brunt of parting-blow two lovers must aby': 
   When viewed I separation-cups were filled to the brim *
      And us with merest sorrow-wine Fate came so fast to ply, 
   I mixed them with becoming share of patience self to excuse, *
      But Patience for the loss of you her solace doth refuse."

Now when she ended her lines, she mounted and they set forward
with her, crossing and cutting over wold and wild and riant dale
and rugged hill, till they came to the shore of the Sea of
Treasures; here they pitched their tents and built her a great
ship, wherein they went down with her and her suite and carried
them over to the mountain. The Minister had ordered them, on
reaching the journey's end, to set her in the castle and to make
their way back to the shore, where they were to break up the
vessel. So they did his bidding and returned home, weeping over
what had befallen. Such was their case; but as regards Uns al-
Wujud, he arose from sleep and prayed the dawn-prayer, after
which he took horse and rode forth to attend upon the Sultan. On
his way, he passed by the Wazir's house, thinking perchance to
see some of his followers as of wont; but he saw no one and,
looking upon the door, he read written thereon the verses
aforesaid. At this sight, his senses failed him; fire was kindled
in his vitals and he returned to his lodging, where he passed the
day in trouble and transports of grief, without finding ease or
patience, till night darkened upon him, when his yearning and
love-longing redoubled. Thereupon, by way of concealment, he
disguised himself in the ragged garb of a Fakir,[FN#42] and set
out wandering at random through the glooms of night, distracted
and knowing not whither he went. So he wandered on all that night
and next day, till the heat of the sun waxed fierce and the
mountains flamed like fire and thirst was grievous upon him.
Presently, he espied a tree, by whose side was a thin thread of
running water; so he made towards it and sitting down in the
shade, on the bank of the rivulet, essayed to drink, but found
that the water had no taste in his mouth;[FN#43] and, indeed his
colour had changed and his face had yellowed, and his feet were
swollen with travel and travail. So he shed copious tears and
repeated these couplets,

   "The lover is drunken with love of friend; *
      On a longing that groweth his joys depend: 
   Love-distracted, ardent, bewildered, lost *
      From home, nor may food aught of pleasure lend: 
   How can life be delightsome to one in love, *
      And from lover parted, 'twere strange, unkenned!
   I melt with the fire of my pine for them, *
      And the tears down my cheek in a stream descend. 
   Shall I see them, say me, or one that comes *
      From the camp, who th' afflicted heart shall tend?"

And after thus reciting he wept till he wetted the hard dry
ground; but anon without loss of time he rose and fared on again
over waste and wold, till there came out upon him a lion, with a
neck buried in tangled mane, a head the bigness of a dome, a
mouth wider than the door thereof and teeth like elephants'
tusks. Now when Uns al-Wujud saw him, he gave himself up for
lost, and turning[FN#44] towards the Temple of Meccah, pronounced
the professions of the faith and prepared for death. He had read
in books that whoso will flatter the lion, beguileth him,[FN#45]
for that he is readily duped by smooth speech and gentled by
being glorified; so he began and said, "O Lion of the forest! O
Lord of the waste! O terrible Leo! O father of fighters! O Sultan
of wild beasts! Behold, I am a lover in longing, whom passion and
severance have been wronging; since I parted from my dear, I have
lost my reasoning gear; wherefore, to my speech do thou give ear
and have ruth on my passion and hope and fear." When the lion
heard this, he drew back from him and sitting down on his
hindquarters, raised his head to him and began to frisk tail and
paws; which when Uns al-Wujud saw, he recited these couplets,

   "Lion of the wold wilt thou murther me, *
      Ere I meet her who doomed me to slavery?
    I am not game and I bear no fat; *
      For the loss of my love makes me sickness dree; 
   And estrangement from her hath so worn me down *
      I am like a shape in a shroud we see. 
   O thou sire of spoils,[FN#46] O thou lion of war, *
      Give not my pains to the blamer's gree. 
   I burn with love, I am drowned in tears *
      For a parting from lover, sore misery! 
   And my thoughts of her in the murk of night *
      For love hath make my being unbe."

As he had finished his lines the lion rose,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as Uns al-
Wujud ended his lines, the lion arose and stalked slowly up to
him, with eyes tear-railing and licked him with his tongue, then
walked on before him, signing to him as though saying, "Follow
me." So he followed him, and the beast ceased not leading him on
for a while till he brought him up a mountain, and guided him to
the farther side, where he came upon the track of a caravan over
the desert, and knew it to be that of Rose-in-Hood and her
company. Then he took the trail and, when the lion saw that he
knew the track for that of the party which escorted her, he
turned back and went his way; whilst Uns al-Wujud walked along
the foot-marks day and night, till they brought him to a dashing
sea, swollen with clashing surge. The trail led down to the sandy
shore and there broke off; whereby he knew that they had taken
ship and had continued their journey by water. So he lost hope of
finding his lover and with hot tears he repeated these couplets,

   "Far is the fane and patience faileth me; *
      How can I seek them[FN#47] o'er the abyssmal sea; 
   Or how be patient, when my vitals burn *
      For love of them, and sleep waxed insomny? 
   Since the sad day they left the home and fled, *
      My heart's consumed by love's ardency: 
   Sayhun, Jayhun,[FN#48] Euphrates-like my tears, *
      Make flood no deluged rain its like can see: 
   Mine eyelids chafed with running tears remain, *
      My heart from fiery sparks is never free; 
   The hosts of love and longing pressed me *
      And made the hosts of patience break and flee. 
   I've risked my life too freely for their love; *
      And risk of life the least of ills shall be. 
   Allah ne'er punish eye that saw those charms *
      Enshrined, and passing full moon's brilliancy! 
   I found me felled by fair wide-opened eyes, *
      Which pierced my heart with stringless archery: 
   And soft, lithe, swaying shape enraptured me *
      As sway the branches of the willow-tree: 
   Wi' them I covet union that I win, *
      O'er love-pains cark and care, a mastery. 
   For love of them aye, morn and eve I pine, *
      And doubt all came to me from evil eyne."

And when his lines were ended he wept, till he swooned away, and
abode in his swoon a long while; but as soon as he came to
himself, he looked right and left and seeing no one in the
desert, he became fearful of the wild beasts; so he clomb to the
top of a high mountain, where he heard the voice of a son of Adam
speaking within a cave. He listened and lo! they were the accents
of a devotee, who had forsworn the world and given himself up to
pious works and worship. He knocked thrice at the cavern-door,
but the hermit made him no answer, neither came forth to him;
wherefore he groaned aloud and recited these couplets.

   "What pathway find I my desire t'obtain, *
      How 'scape from care and cark and pain and bane? 
   All terrors join to make me old and hoar *
      Of head and heart, ere youth from me is ta'en: 
   Nor find I any aid my passion, nor *
      A friend to lighten load of bane and pain. 
   How great and many troubles I've endured! *
      Fortune hath turned her back I see unfain. 
   Ah mercy, mercy on the lover's heart, *
      Doomed cup of parting and desertion drain! 
   A fire is in his heart, his vitals waste, *
      And severance made his reason vainest vain. 
   How dread the day I came to her abode *
      And saw the writ they wrote on doorway lain! 
   I wept, till gave I earth to drink my grief; *
      But still to near and far[FN#49] I did but feign: 
   Then strayed I till in waste a lion sprang *
      On me, and but for flattering words had slain: 
   I soothed him: so he spared me and lent me aid, *
      He too might haply of love's taste complain. 
   O devotee, that idlest in thy cave, *
      Meseems eke thou hast learned Love's might and main; 
   But if, at end of woes, with them I league, *
      Straight I'll forget all suffering and fatigue."

Hardly had he made an end of these verses when, behold! the door
of the cavern opened and he heard one say, "Alas, the pity of
it!"[FN#50] So he entered and saluted the devotee, who returned
his salam and asked him, "What is thy name?" Answered the young
man, "Uns al-Wujud." "And what caused thee to come hither?" quoth
the hermit. So he told him his story in its entirety, omitting
naught of his misfortunes; whereat he wept and said, "O Uns al-
Wujud, these twenty years have I passed in this place, but never
beheld I any man here, until yesterday, when I heard a noise of
weeping and lamentation and, looking forth in the direction of
the sound, saw many people and tents pitched on the sea-shore;
and the party at once proceeded to build a ship, in which certain
of them embarked and sailed over the waters. Then some of the
crew returned with the ship and breaking it up, went their way;
and I suspect that those who embarked in the ship and returned
not, are they whom thou seekest. In that case, O Uns al-Wujud,
thy grief must needs be great and sore and thou art excusable,
though never yet was lover but suffered love-longing." Then he
recited these couplets,

   "Uns al-Wujud, dost deem me fancy-free, *
      When pine and longing slay and quicken me? 
   I have known love and yearning from the years *
      Since mother-milk I drank, nor e'er was free.
    Long struggled I with Love, till learnt his might; *
      Ask thou of him, he'll tell with willing gree. 
   Love-sick and pining drank I passion-cup, *
      And well-nigh perished in mine agony. 
   Strong was I, but my strength to weakness turned, *
      And eye-sword brake through Patience armoury: 
   Hope not to win love-joys, without annoy; *
      Contrary ever links with contrary. 
   But fear not change from lover true; be true *
      Unto thy wish, some day thine own 'twill be. 
   Love hath forbidden to his votaries *
      Relinquishment as deadliest heresy."

The eremite, having ended his verse, rose and, coming up to Uns
al-Wujud, embraced him,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the eremite
having ended his verse, rose and coming up to Uns al-Wujud
embraced him, and they wept together, till the hills rang with
their cries and they fell down fainting. When they revived, they
swore brotherhood[FN#51] in Allah Almighty; after which said Uns
al-Wujud, "This very night will I pray to God and seek of Him
direction[FN#52] anent what thou shouldst do to attain thy
desire." Thus it was with them; but as regards Rose-in-Hood, when
they brought her to the mountain and set her in the castle and
she beheld its ordering, she wept and exclaimed, "By Allah, thou
art a goodly place, save that thou lackest in thee the presence
of the beloved!"[FN#53] Then seeing birds in the island, she bade
her people set snares for them and put all they caught in cages
within the castle; and they did so. But she sat at a lattice and
bethought her of what had passed, and desire and passion and
distraction redoubled upon her, till she burst into tears and
repeated these couplets,

   "O to whom now, of my desire complaining sore, shall I *
      Bewail my parting from my fere compelled thus to fly?
   Flames rage within what underlies my ribs, yet hide them I *
      In deepest secret dreading aye the jealous hostile spy: 
   I am grown as lean, attenuate as any pick of tooth,[FN#54] *
      By sore estrangement, absence, ardour, ceaseless sob and
      sigh. 
   Where is the eye of my beloved to see how I'm become *
      Like tree stripped bare of leafage left to linger and to
      die. 
   They tyrannised over me whom they confined in place *
      Whereto the lover of my heart may never draw him nigh: 
   I beg the Sun for me to give greetings a thousandfold, *
      At time of rising and again when setting from the sky, 
   To the beloved one who shames a full moon's loveliness, *
      When shows that slender form that doth the willow-branch
      outvie. 
   If Rose herself would even with his cheek, I say of her *
      'Thou art not like it if to me my portion thou
      deny:'[FN#55] 
   His honey-dew of lips is like the grateful water draught *
      Would cool me when a fire in heart upflameth fierce and
      high: 
   How shall I give him up who is my heart and soul of me, *
      My malady my wasting cause, my love, sole leach of me?"

Then, as the glooms of night closed around her, her yearning
increased and she called to mind the past and recited also these
couplets,

   "'Tis dark: my transport and unease now gather might and main,
      * And love-desire provoketh me to wake my wonted pain: 
   The pang of parting takes for ever place within my breast, *
      And pining makes me desolate in destitution lain. 
   Ecstasy sore maltreats my soul and yearning burns my sprite, *
      And tears betray love's secresy which I would lief contain: 
   I weet no way, I know no case that can make light my load, *
      Or heal my wasting body or cast out from me this bane. 
   A hell of fire is in my heart upflames with lambent tongue *
      And Laza's furnace-fires within my liver place have ta'en. 
   O thou, exaggerating blame for what befel, enough *
      I bear with patience whatsoe'er hath writ for me the Pen! 
   I swear, by Allah, ne'er to find aught comfort for their loss;
      * "Tis oath of passion's children and their oaths are ne'er
      in vain. 
   O Night! Salams of me to friends and let to them be known *
      Of thee true knowledge how I wake and waking ever wone."

Meanwhile, the hermit said to Uns al-Wujud, "Go down to the palm-
grove in the valley and fetch some fibre."[FN#56] So he went and
returned with the palm-fibre, which the hermit took and, twisting
into ropes, make therewith a net,[FN#57] such as is used for
carrying straw; after which he said, "O Uns al-Wujud, in the
heart of the valley groweth a gourd, which springeth up and
drieth upon its roots. Go down there and fill this sack
therewith; then tie it together and, casting it into the water,
embark thereon and make for the midst of the sea, so haply thou
shalt win thy wish; for whoso never ventureth shall not have what
he seeketh." "I hear and obey," answered Uns al-Wujud. Then he
bade the hermit farewell after the holy man had prayed for him;
and, betaking himself to the sole of the valley, did as his
adviser had counselled him; made the sack, launched it upon the
water, and pushed from shore. Then there arose a wind, which
drave him out to sea, till he was lost to the eremite's view; and
he ceased not to float over the abysses of the ocean, one billow
tossing him up and another bearing him down (and he beholding the
while the dangers and marvels of the deep), for the space of
three days. At the end of that time Fate cast him upon the Mount
of the Bereft Mother, where he landed, giddy and tottering like a
chick unfledged, and at the last of his strength for hunger and
thirst; but, finding there streams flowing and birds on the
branches cooing and fruit-laden trees in clusters and singly
growing, he ate of the fruits and drank of the rills. Then he
walked on till he saw some white thing afar off, and making for
it, found that it was a strongly fortified castle. So he went up
to the gate and seeing it locked, sat down by it; and there he
sat for three days when behold, the gate opened and an eunuch
came out, who finding Uns al-Wujud there seated, said to him,
"Whence camest thou and who brought thee hither?" Quoth he, "From
Ispahan and I was voyaging with merchandise when my ship was
wrecked and the waves cast me upon the farther side of this
island." Whereupon the eunuch wept and embraced him, saying,
"Allah preserve thee, O thou friendly face! Ispahan is mine own
country and I have there a cousin, the daughter of my father's
brother, whom I loved from my childhood and cherished with fond
affection; but a people stronger than we fell upon us in foray
and taking me among other booty, cut off my yard[FN#58] and sold
me for a castrato, whilst I was yet a lad; and this is how I came
to be in such case."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the eunuch
who came forth from the castle, where Rose-in-Hood was confined,
told Uns al-Wujud all his tale and said:--"The raiders who
captured me cut off my yard and sold me for a castrato; and this
is how I came to be in such case."[FN#59] And after saluting him
and wishing him long life, the eunuch carried him into the
courtyard of the castle, where he saw a great tank of water,
surrounded by trees, on whose branches hung cages of silver, with
doors of gold, and therein birds were warbling and singing the
praises of the Requiting King. And when he came to the first cage
he looked in and lo! a turtle dove, on seeing him, raised her
voice and cried out, saying, "O Thou Bounty-fraught!" Whereat he
fell down fainting and after coming to himself, he sighed heavily
and recited these couplets,

   "O turtle dove, like me art thou distraught? *
      Then pray the Lord and sing 'O Bounty-fraught!' 
   Would I knew an thy moan were sign of joy, *
      Or cry of love-desire in heart inwrought,--
   An moan thou pining for a lover gone *
      Who left thee woe begone to pine in thought,--
   Or if like me hast lost thy fondest friend, *
      And severance long desire to memory brought? 
   O Allah, guard a faithful lover's lot *
      I will not leave her though my bones go rot!"

Then, after ending his verses, he fainted again; and, presently
reviving he went on to the second cage, wherein he found a
ringdove. When it saw him, it sang out, "O Eternal, I thank
thee!" and he groaned and recited these couplets,

   "I heard a ringdove chanting plaintively, *
      'I thank Thee, O Eternal for this misery!