' 
   Haply, perchance, may Allah, of His grace, *
      Send me by this long round my love to see. 
   Full oft[FN#60] she comes with honeyed lips dark red, *
      And heaps up lowe upon love's ardency. 
   Quoth I (while longing fires flame high and fierce *
      In heart, and wasting life's vitality, 
   And tears like gouts of blood go railing down *
      In torrents over cheeks now pale of blee), 
   'None e'er trod earth that was not born to woe, *
      But I will patient dree mine agony, 
   So help me Allah! till that happy day *
      When with my mistress I unite shall be: 
   Then will I spend my good on lover-wights, *
      Who're of my tribe and of the faith of me; 
   And loose the very birds from jail set free, *
      And change my grief for gladdest gree and glee!'"

Then he went on to the third cage, wherein he found a
mockingbird[FN#61] which, when it saw him, set up a song, and he
recited the following couplets,

   "Pleaseth me yon Hazar of mocking strain *
      Like voice of lover pained by love in vain. 
   Woe's me for lovers! Ah how many men *
      By nights and pine and passion low are lain! 
   As though by stress of love they had been made *
      Morn-less and sleep-less by their pain and bane. 
   When I went daft for him who conquered me *
      And pined for him who proved of proudest strain, 
   My tears in streams down trickled and I cried *
      'These long-linkt tears bind like an adamant-chain:' 
   Grew concupiscence, severance long, and I *
      Lost Patience' hoards and grief waxed sovereign: 
   If Justice bide in world and me unite *
      With him I love and Allah veil us deign, 
   I'll strip my clothes that he my form shall sight *
      With parting, distance, grief, how poor of plight!"

Then he went to the fourth cage, where he found a Bulbul[FN#62]
which, at sight of him, began to sway to and fro and sing its
plaintive descant; and when he heard its complaint, he burst into
tears and repeated these couplets.

   "The Bulbul's note, whenas dawn is nigh, *
      Tells the lover from strains of strings to fly: 
   Complaineth for passion Uns al-Wujud, *
      For pine that would being to him deny. 
   How many a strain do we hear, whose sound *
      Softens stones and the rock can mollify: 
   And the breeze of morning that sweetly speaks *
      Of meadows in flowered greenery. 
   And scents and sounds in the morning-tide *
      Of birds and zephyrs in fragrance vie; 
   But I think of one, of an absent friend, *
      And tears rail like rain from a showery sky; 
   And the flamy tongues in my breast uprise *
      As sparks from gleed that in dark air fly. 
   Allah deign vouchsafe to a lover distraught *
      Someday the face of his dear to descry! 
   For lovers, indeed, no excuse is clear, *
      Save excuse of sight and excuse of eye."

Then he walked on a little and came to a goodly cage, than which
was no goodlier there, and in it a culver of the forest, that is
to say, a wood-pigeon,[FN#63] the bird renowned among birds as
the minstrel of love-longing, with a collar of jewels about its
neck marvellous fine and fair. He considered it awhile and,
seeing it absently brooding in its cage, he shed tears and
repeated these couplets,

   "O culver of copse,[FN#64] with salams I greet; *
      O brother of lovers who woe must weet! 
   I love a gazelle who is slender-slim, *
      Whose glances for keenness the scymitar beat: 
   For her love are my heart and my vitals a-fire, *
      And my frame consumes in love's fever-heat. 
   The sweet taste of food is unlawful for me, *
      And forbidden is slumber, unlawfullest sweet. 
   Endurance and solace have travelled from me, *
      And love homes in my heart and grief takes firm seat: 
   How shall life deal joy when they flee my sight *
      Who are joy and gladness and life and sprite?"

As soon as Uns al-Wujud had ended his verse,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as soon as
Uns al-Wujud had ended his verse, the wood-culver awoke from its
brooding and cooed a reply to his lines and shrilled and trilled
with its thrilling notes till it all but spake with human
speech;[FN#65] and the tongue of the case talked for it and
recited these couplets,

   "O lover, thou bringest to thought a tide *
      When the strength of my youth first faded and died; 
   And a friend of whose form I was 'namoured, *
      Seductive and dight with beauty's pride; 
   Whose voice, as he sat on the sandhill-tree, *
      From the Nay's[FN#66] sweet sound turned my heart aside; 
   A fowler snared him in net, the while *
      'O that man would leave me at large!' he cried; 
   I had hoped he might somewhat of mercy show *
      When a hapless lover he so espied; 
   But Allah smite him who tore me away, *
      In his hardness of heart, from my lover's side; 
   But aye my desire for him groweth more, *
      And my heart with the fires of disjunction is fried: 
   Allah guard a true lover, who strives with love, *
      And hath borne the torments I still abide! 
   And, seeing me bound in this cage, with mind *
      Of ruth, release me my love to find."

Then Uns al-Wujud turned to his companion, the Ispahahi, and
said, "What palace is this? Who built it and who abideth in it?"
Quoth the eunuch, "The Wazir of a certain King built it to guard
his daughter, fearing for her the accidents of Time and the
incidents of Fortune, and lodged her herein, her and her
attendants; nor do we open it save once in every year, when their
provision cometh to them." And Uns al-Wujud said to himself, "I
have gained my end, though I may have long to wait." Such was his
case; but as regards Rose-in-Hood, of a truth she took no
pleasure in eating or drinking, sitting or sleeping; but her
desire and passion and distraction redoubled on her, and she went
wandering about the castle-corners, but could find no issue;
wherefore she shed tears and recited these couplets,

   "They have cruelly ta'en me from him, my beloved, *
      And made me taste anguish in prison ta'en: 
   They have fired my heart with the flames of love, *
      Barred all sight of him whom to see I'm fain: 
   In a lofty palace they prisoned me *
      On a mountain placed in the middle main. 
   If they'd have me forget him, right vain's their wish, *
      For my love is grown of a stronger strain. 
   How can I forget him whose face was cause *
      Of all I suffer, of all I 'plain? 
   The whole of my days in sorrow's spent, *
      And in thought of him through the night I'm lain. 
   Remembrance of him cheers my solitude, *
      While I lorn of his presence and lone remain. 
   Would I knew if, after this all, my fate *
      To oblige the desire of my hear will deign."

When her verses were ended, she ascended to the terrace-roof of
the castle after donning her richest clothes and trinkets and
throwing a necklace of jewels around her neck. Then binding
together some dresses of Ba'albak[FN#67] stuff by way of rope,
she tied them to the crenelles and let herself down thereby to
the ground. And she fared on over wastes and waterless wilds,
till she came to the shore, where she saw a fisherman plying here
and there over the sea, for the wind had driven him on to the
island. When he saw her, he was affrighted[FN#68] and pushed off
again, flying from her; but she cried out and made pressing signs
to him to return, versifying with these couplets,

   "O fisherman no care hast thou to fear, *
      I'm but an earth-born maid in mortal sphere; 
   I pray thee linger and my prayer grant *
      And to my true unhappy tale give ear: 
   Pity (so Allah spare thee!) warmest love; *
      Say, hast thou seen him-my beloved fere? 
   I love a lovely youth whose face excels *
      Sunlight, and passes moon when clearest clear: 
   The fawn, that sees his glance, is fain to cry *
      'I am his thrall' and own himself no peer: 
   Beauty hath written, on his winsome cheek, *
      Rare lines of pregnant sense for every seer; 
   Who sights the light of love his soul is saved; *
      Who strays is Infidel to Hell anear: 
   An thou in mercy show his sight, O rare![FN#69] *
      Thou shalt have every wish, the dearest dear, 
   Of rubies and what likest are to them *
      Fresh pearls and unions new, the seashell's tear: 
   My friend, thou wilt forsure grant my desire *
      Whose heart is melted in love's hottest fire.

When the fisherman heard her words, he wept and made moan and
lamented; then, recalling what had betided himself in the days of
his youth, when love had the mastery over him and longing and
desire and distraction were sore upon him and the fires of
passion consumed him, replied with these couplets,

   "What fair excuse is this my pining plight, *
      With wasted limbs and tears' unceasing blight; 
   And eyelids open in the nightly murk, *
      And heart like fire-stick[FN#70] ready fire to smite; 
   Indeed love burdened us in early youth, *
      And true from false coin soon we learned aright: 
   Then did we sell our soul on way of love, *
      And drunk of many a well[FN#71] to win her sight; 
   Venturing very life to gain her grace, *
      And make high profit perilling a mite. 
   'Tis Love's religion whoso buys with life *
      His lover's grace, with highest gain is dight."

And when he ended his verse, he moored his boat to the beach and
said to her, "Embark, so may I carry thee whither thou wilt."
Thereupon she embarked and he put off with her; but they had not
gone far from land, before there came out a stern-wind upon the
boat and drove it swiftly out of sight of shore. Now the
fisherman knew not whither he went, and the strong wind blew
without ceasing three days, when it fell by leave of Allah
Almighty, and they sailed on and ceased not sailing till they
came in sight of a city sitting upon the sea-shore,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
fisherman's craft, carrying Rose-in-Hood, made the city sitting
upon the sea-shore, the man set about making fast to the land.
Now the King of the city was a Prince of pith and puissance named
Dirbas, the Lion; and he chanced at that moment to be seated,
with his son, at a window in the royal palace giving upon the
sea; and happening to look out seawards, they saw the fishing-
boat make the land. They observed it narrowly and espied therein
a young lady, as she were the full moon overhanging the horizon-
edge, with pendants in her ears of costly balass-rubies and a
collar of precious stones about her throat. Hereby the King knew
that this must indeed be the daughter of some King or great noble
and, going forth of the sea-gate of the palace, went down to the
boat, where he found the lady asleep and the fisherman busied in
making fast to shore. So he went up to her and aroused her,
whereupon she awoke, weeping; and he asked her, "Whence comest
thou and whose daughter art thou and what be the cause of thy
coming hither?"; and she answered, "I am the daughter of Ibrahim,
Wazir to King Shamikh; and the manner of my coming hither is
wondrous and the cause thereof marvellous." And she told him her
whole story first and last, hiding naught from him; then she
groaned aloud and recited these couplets,

"Tear-drops have chafed mine eyelids and rail down in wondrous
     wise, * For parting pain that fills my sprite and turns to
     springs mine eyes, 
For sake of friend who ever dwells within my vitals homed, * And
     I may never win my wish of him in any guise. 
He hath a favour fair and bright, and brilliant is his face, *
     Which every Turk and Arab wight in loveliness outvies: 
The Sun and fullest Moon lout low whenas his charms they sight, *
     And lover-like they bend to him whene'er he deigneth rise. 
A wondrous spell of gramarye like Kohl bedecks his eyne, * And
     shows thee bow with shaft on string make ready ere it flies: 
O thou, to whom I told my case expecting all excuse, * Pity a
     lover-wight for whom Love-shafts such fate devise! 
Verily, Love hath cast me on your coast despite of me * Of will
     now weak, and fain I trust mine honour thou wilt prize: 
For noble men, whenas perchance alight upon their bounds, *
     Grace-worthy guests, confess their worth and raise to
     dignities. Then, 
O thou hope of me, to lovers' folly veil afford * And be to them
     reunion cause, thou only liefest lord!"

And when she had ended her verses, she again told the King her
sad tale and shed plenteous tears and recited these couplets
bearing on her case,

"We lived till saw we all the marvels Love can bear; * Each month
     to thee we hope shall fare as Rajab[FN#72] fare: 
Is it not wondrous, when I saw them march amorn * That I with
     water o' eyes in heart lit flames that flare? 
That these mine eyelids rain fast dropping gouts of blood? * That
     now my cheek grows gold where rose and lily were? 
As though the safflower hue, that overspread my cheeks, * Were
     Joseph's coat made stain of lying blood to wear."

Now when the King heard her words he was certified of her love
and longing and was moved to ruth for her; so he said to her,
"Fear nothing and be not troubled; thou hast come to the term of
thy wishes; for there is no help but that I win for thee thy will
and bring thee to thy desire." And he improvised these couplets,

     "Daughter of nobles, who thine aim shalt gain; *
          Hear gladdest news nor fear aught hurt of bane!
     This day I'll pack up wealth, and send it on *
          To Shamikh, guarded by a champion-train;
     Fresh pods of musk I'll send him and brocades, *
          And silver white and gold of yellow vein:
     Yes, and a letter shall inform him eke *
          That I of kinship with that King am fain:
     And I this day will lend thee bestest aid, *
          That all thou covetest thy soul assain.
     I, too, have tasted love and know its taste *
          And can excuse whoso the same cup drain."[FN#73]

Then, ending his verse, he went forth to his troops and summoned
his Wazir; and, causing him to pack up countless treasure,
commanded him carry it to King Shamikh and say to him, "Needs
must thou send me a person named Uns al-Wujud;" and say moreover
"The King is minded to ally himself with thee by marrying his
daughter to Uns al-Wujud, thine officer. So there is no help but
thou despatch him to me, that the marriage may be solemnized in
her father's kingdom." And he wrote a letter to King Shamikh to
this effect, and gave it to the Minister, charging him strictly
to bring back Uns al-Wujud and warning him, "An thou fail thou
shalt be deposed and degraded." Answered the Wazir, "I hear and
obey;" and, setting out forthright with the treasures, in due
course arrived at the court of King Shamikh whom he saluted in
the name of King Dirbas and delivered the letter and the
presents. Now when King Shamikh read the letter and saw the name
of Uns al-Wujud, he burst into tears and said to the Wazir "And
where, or where, is Uns al-Wujud?; he went from us and we know
not his place of abiding; only bring him to me, and I will give
thee double the presents thou hast brought me." And he wept and
groaned and lamented, saying these couplets,

     "To me restore my dear;     * I want not wealth untold: 
     Nor crave I gifts of pearls * Or gems or store of gold: 
     He was to us a moon         * In beauty's heavenly fold. 
     Passing in form and soul;   * With roe compare withhold! 
     His form a willow-wand,     * His fruit, lures manifold; 
     But willow lacketh power    * Men's hearts to have and hold. 
     I reared him from a babe    * On cot of coaxing roll'd; 
     And now I mourn for him     * With woe in soul ensoul'd."

Then, turning to the Wazir who had brought the presents and the
missive, he said, "Go back to thy liege and acquaint him that Uns
al-Wujud hath been missing this year past, and his lord knoweth
not whither he is gone nor hath any tidings of him." Answered the
Minister of King Dirbas, "O my lord, my master said to me, 'An
thou fail to bring him back, thou shalt be degraded from the
Wazirate and shall not enter my city. How then can I return
without him?'" So King Shamikh said to his Wazir Ibrahim, "Take a
company and go with him and make ye search for Uns al-Wujud
everywhere." He replied, "Hearkening and obedience;" and, taking
a body of his own retainers, set out accompanied by the Wazir of
King Dirbas seeking Uns al-Wujud.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim,
Wazir to King Shamikh, took him a body of his retainers and,
accompanied by the Minister of King Dirbas, set out seeking Uns
al-Wujud. And as often as they fell in with wild Arabs or others
they asked of the youth, saying, "Tell us have ye seen a man
whose name is so and so and his semblance thus and thus?" But
they all answered, "We know him not." Still they continued their
quest, enquiring in city and hamlet and seeking in fertile plain
and stony hall and in the wild and in the wold, till they made
the Mountain of the Bereaved Mother; and the Wazir of King Dirbas
said to Ibrahim, "Why is this mountain thus called?" He answered,
"Once of old time, here sojourned a Jinniyah, of the Jinn of
China, who loved a mortal with passionate love; and, being in
fear of her life from her own people, searched all the earth over
for a place, where she might hide him from them, till she
happened on this mountain and, finding it cut off from both men
and Jinn, there being no access to it, carried off her beloved
and lodged him therein. There, when she could escape notice of
her kith and kin, she used privily to visit him, and continued so
doing till she had borne him a number of children; and the
merchants, sailing by the mountain, in their voyages over the
main, heard the weeping of the children, as it were the wailing
of a woman bereft of her babes, and said, 'Is there here a mother
bereaved of her children?' For which reason the place was named
the Mountain of the Bereaved Mother." And the Wazir of King
Dirbas marvelled at his words. Then they landed and, making for
the castle, knocked at the gate which was opened to them by an
eunuch, who knew the Wazir Ibrahim and kissed his hands. The
Minister entered and found in the courtyard, among the serving-
men, a Fakir, which was Uns al-Wujud, but he knew him not and
said, "Whence cometh yonder wight?" Quoth they, "He is a
merchant, who hath lost his goods, but saved himself; and he is
an ecstatic."[FN#74] So the Wazir left him and went on into the
castle, where he found no trace of his daughter and questioned
her women, who answered, "We wot not how or whither she went;
this place misliked her and she tarried in it but a short time."
Whereupon he wept sore and repeated these couplets,

     "Ho thou, the house, whose birds were singing gay, *
          Whose sills their wealth and pride were wont display! 
     Till came the lover wailing for his love, *
          And found thy doors wide open to the way; 
     Would Heaven I knew where is my soul that erst *
          Was homed in house, whose owners fared away! 
     'Twas stored with all things bright and beautiful, *
          And showed its porters ranged in fair array:
     They clothed it with brocades a bride become;[FN#75] *
          Would I knew whither went its lords, ah, say!"

After ending his verses he again shed tears, and groaned and
bemoaned himself, exclaiming, "There is no deliverance from the
destiny decreed by Allah; nor is there any escape from that which
He hath predestined!" Then he went up to the roof and found the
strips of Ba'albak stuff tied to the crenelles and hanging down
to the ground, and thus it was he knew that she had descended
thence and had fled forth, as one distracted and demented with
desire and passion. Presently, he turned and seeing there two
birds, a gor-crow and an owl he justly deemed this an omen of
ill; so he groaned and recited these couplets,

     "I came to my dear friends' door, of my hopes the goal, *
          Whose sight mote assuage my sorrow and woes of soul: 
     No friends found I there, nor was there another thing *
          To find, save a corby-crow and an ill-omened owl. 
     And the tongue o' the case to me seemed to say, *
          'Indeed This parting two lovers fond was cruel and
          foul! 
     So taste thou the sorrow thou madest them taste and live *
          In grief: wend thy ways and now in thy sorrow prowl!'"

Then he descended from the castle-roof, weeping, and bade the
servants fare forth and search the mount for their mistress; so
they sought for her, but found her not. Such was their case; but
as regards Uns al-Wujud, when he was certified that Rose-in-Hood
was indeed gone, he cried with a great cry and fell down in a
fainting-fit, nor came to himself for a long time, whilst the
folk deemed that his spirit had been withdrawn by the
Compassionating One; and that he was absorbed in contemplation of
the splendour, majesty and beauty of the Requiting One. Then,
despairing of finding Uns al-Wujud, and seeing that the Wazir
Ibrahim was distracted for the loss of his daughter, the Minister
of King Dirbas addressed himself to return to his own country,
albeit he had not attained the object of his journey, and while
bidding his companion adieu, said to him, "I have a mind to take
the Fakir with me; it may be Allah Almighty will incline the
King's heart to me by his blessing, for that he is a holy man;
and thereafter, I will send him to Ispahan, which is near our
country." "Do as thou wilt," answered Ibrahim. So they took leave
of each other and departed, each for his own mother land, the
Wazir of King Dirbas carrying with him Uns al-Wujud,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Three Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
of King Dirbas carried with him Uns al-Wujud who was still
insensible. They bore him with them on mule-back (he unknowing if
he were carried or not) for three days, when he came to himself
and said, "Where am I?" "Thou art in company with the Minister of
King Dirbas," replied they and went and gave news of his
recovering to the Wazir, who sent him rose-water and sherbet of
sugar, of which they gave him to drink and restored him. Then
they ceased not faring on till they drew near King Dirbas's
capital and the King, being advised of his Wazir's coming, wrote
to him, saying, "If Uns al-Wujud be not with thee, come not to me
ever." Now when the Wazir read the royal mandate, it was grievous
to him, for he knew not that Rose-in-Hood was with the King, nor
why he had been sent in quest of Uns al-Wujud, nor the King's
reason for desiring the alliance; whilst Uns al-Wujud also knew
not whither they were bearing him or that the Wazir had been sent
in quest of him; nor did the Wazir know that the Fakir he had
with him was Uns al-Wujud himself. And when the Minister saw that
the sick man was whole, he said to him, "I was despatched by the
King on an errand, which I have not been able to accomplish. So,
when he heard of my return, he wrote to me, saying, 'Except thou
have fulfilled my need enter not my city.'" "And what is the
King's need?" asked Uns al-Wujud. So the Wazir told him the whole
tale, and he said, "Fear nothing, but go boldly to the King and
take me with thee; and I will be surety to thee for the coming of
Uns al-Wujud." At this the Wazir rejoiced and cried, "Is this
true which thou sayest?" "Yes," replied he; whereupon the Wazir
mounted and carried him to King Dirbas who, after receiving their
salutations said to him, "Where is Uns al-Wujud?" Answered the
young man, "O King, I know where he is." So the King called him
to him and said, "Where?" Returned Uns al-Wujud, "He is near-hand
and very near; but tell me what thou wouldst with him, and I will
fetch him into thy presence." The King replied, "With joy and
good gree, but the case calleth for privacy." So he ordered the
folk to withdraw and, carrying Uns al-Wujud into his cabinet,
told him the whole story; whereupon quoth the youth, "Robe me in
rich raiment, and I will forthright bring Uns al-Wujud to thee."
So they brought him a sumptuous dress, and he donned it and said,
"I am Uns al-Wujud, the World's Delight, and to the envious a
despite"; and presently he smote with his glances every sprite,
and began these couplets to recite,

"My loved one's name in cheerless solitude aye cheereth me * And
     driveth off my desperance and despondency: 
I have no helper[FN#76] but my tears that ever flow in fount, * 
     And as they flow, they lighten woe and force my grief to
     flee. 
My longing is so violent naught like it ere was seen; * My love-
     tale is a marvel and my love a sight to see: 
I spend the night with lids of eye that never close in sleep, *
     And pass in passion twixt the Hells and Edens heavenly. 
I had of patience fairish store, but now no more have I; * And
     love's sole gift to me hath been aye-growing misery: 
My frame is wasted by the pain of parting from my own, * And
     longing changed my shape and form and made me other be. 
Mine eyelids by my torrent tears are chafed, and ulcerate, * The
      tears, whose flow to stay is mere impossibility.
My manly strength is sore impaired for I have lost my heart; *
     How many griefs upon my griefs have I been doomed to dree! 
My heart and head are like in age with similar hoariness * By
     loss of Beauty's lord,[FN#77] of lords the galaxy: 
Despite our wills they parted us and doomed us parted wone, *
     While they (our lords) desire no more than love in unity. 
Then ah, would Heaven that I wot if stress of parting done, *
     The world will grant me sight of them in union fain and
     free--
Roll up the scroll of severance which others would unroll-- *
     Efface my trouble by the grace of meeting's jubilee! 
And shall I see them homed with me in cup-company, * And change
     my melancholic mood for joy and jollity?"

And when he had ended his verses the King cried aloud, "By Allah,
ye are indeed a pair of lovers true and fain and in Beauty's
heaven of shining stars a twain: your story is wondrous and your
case marvellous." Then he told him all that had befalled Rose-in-
Hood; and Uns al-Wujud said, "Where is she, O King of the age?"
"She is with me now," answered Dirbas and, sending for the Kazi
and the witnesses, drew up the contract of marriage between her
and him. Then he honoured Uns al-Wujud with favours and bounties
and sent to King Shamikh acquainting him with what had befallen,
whereat this King joyed with exceeding joy and wrote back the
following purport. "Since the ceremony of contract hath been
performed at thy court, it behoveth that the marriage and its
consummation be at mine." Then he made ready camels, horses and
men and sent them in quest of the pair; and when the embassy
reached King Dirbas, he gave the lovers much treasure and
despatched them to King Shamikh's court with a company of his own
troops. The day of their arrival was a notable day, never was
seen a grander; for the King gathered together all the singing-
women and players on instruments of music and made wedding
banquets and held high festival seven days; and on each day he
gave largesse to the folk and bestowed on them sumptuous robes of
honour. Then Uns al-Wujud went in to Rose-in-Hood and they
embraced and sat weeping for excess of joy and gladness, whilst
she recited these couplets,

     "Joyance is come, dispelling cark and care; *
          We are united, enviers may despair. 
     The breeze of union blows, enquickening *
          Forms, hearts and vitals, fresh with fragrant air: 
     The splendour of delight with scents appears, *
          And round us[FN#78] flags and drums show gladness rare. 
     Deem not we're weeping for our stress of grief;*  
          It is for joy our tears as torrents fare: 
     How many fears we've seen that now are past! *
          And bore we patient what was sore to bear: 
     One hour of joyance made us both forget *
          What from excess of terror grey'd our hair."

And when the verses were ended, they again embraced and ceased
not from their embrace, till they fell down in a swoon,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Uns al-
Wujud and Rose-in-Hood embraced when they foregathered and ceased
not from their embrace, till they fell down in a swoon for the
delight of reunion; and when they came to themselves, Uns al-
Wujud recited these couplets,

     "How joyously sweet are the nights that unite, *
          When my dearling deigns keep me the troth she did
          plight; 
     When union conjoins us in all that we have, *
          And parting is severed and sundered from sight, 
     To us comes the world with her favour so fair, *
          After frown and aversion and might despight!
     Hath planted her banner Good Fortune for us, *
          And we drink of her cup in the purest delight. 
     We have met and complained of the pitiful Past, *
          And of nights a full many that doomed us to blight. 
     But now, O my lady, the Past is forgot; *
          The Compassionate pardon the Past for unright! 
     How sweet is existence, how glad is to be! *
          This union my passion doth only incite."

And when he ended his verses they once more embraced, drowned in
the sea of passion; and lay down together in the private
apartment carousing and conversing and quoting verses and telling
pleasant tales and anecdotes. On this wise seven days passed over
them whilst they knew not night from day and it was to them, for
very stress of gaiety and gladness, pleasure and possession, as
if the seven days were but one day with ne'er a morrow. Not did
they know the seventh day,[FN#79] but by the coming of the
singers and players on instruments of music; whereat Rose-in-Hood
beyond measure wondered and improvised these couplets,

     "In spite of enviers' jealousy, at end *
          We have won all we hoped of the friend: 
     We've crowned our meeting with a close embrace *
          On quilts where new brocades with sendal blend; 
     On bed of perfumed leather, which the spoils *
          Of downy birds luxuriously distend. 
     But I abstain me from unneeded wine, *
          When honey-dews of lips sweet musk can lend: 
     Now from the sweets of union we unknow *
          Time near and far, if slow or fast it wend, 
     The seventh night hath come and gone, O strange! *
          How went the nights we never reckt or kenned; 
     Till, on the seventh wishing joy they said, *
          'Allah prolong the meet of friend with friend!'"

When she had finished her song, Uns al-Wujud kissed her, more
than an hundred times, and recited these couplets,

     "O day of joys to either lover fain! *
          The loved one came and freed from lonely pain: 
     She blest me with all inner charms she hath; *
          And companied with inner grace deep lain: 
     She made me drain the wine of love till I, *
          Was faint with joys her love had made me drain: 
     We toyed and joyed and on each other lay; *
          Then fell to wine and soft melodious strain: 
     And for excess of joyance never knew, *
          How went the day and how it came again. 
     Fair fall each lover, may he union win *
          And gain of joy like me the amplest gain; 
     Nor weet the taste of severance' bitter fruit *
          And joys assain them as they us assain!"

Then they went forth and distributed to the folk alms and
presents of money and raiment and rare gifts and other tokens of
generosity; after which Rose-in-Hood bade clear the bath for
her[FN#80] and, turning to Uns al-Wujud said to him, "O coolth of
my eyes, I have a mind to see thee in the Hammam, and therein we
will be alone together." He joyfully consented to this, and she
let scent the Hammam with all sorts of perfumed woods and
essences, and light the wax-candles. Then of the excess of her
contentment she recited these couplets,

     "O who didst win my love in other date *
          (And Present e'er must speak of past estate); 
     And, oh! who art my sole sufficiency, *
          Nor want I other friends with me to mate: 
     Come to the Hammam, O my light of eyes, *
          And enter Eden through Gehenna-gate! 
     We'll scent with ambergris and aloes-wood *
          Till float the heavy clouds with fragrant freight; 
     And to the World we'll pardon all her sins *
          And sue for mercy the Compassionate; 
     And I will cry, when I descry thee there, *
          'Good cheer, sweet love, all blessings on thee
          wait!'"[FN#81]

Whereupon they arose and fared to the bath and took their
pleasure therein; after which they returned to their palace and
there abode in the fulness of enjoyment, till there came to them
the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of societies; and
glory be to Him who changeth not neither ceaseth, and to whom
everything returneth! And they also tell a tale of




             ABU NOWAS WITH THE THREE BOYS AND THE
                 CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID[FN#82]



Abu Nowas one day shut himself up and, making ready a
richly-furnished feast, collected for it meats of all kinds and
of every colour that lips and tongue can desire.  Then he went
forth, to seek a minion worthy of such entertainment, saying,
"Allah, my Lord and my Master, I beseech Thee to send me one who
befitteth this banquet and who is fit to carouse with me this
day!"  Hardly had he made an end of speaking when he espied three
youths handsome and beardless, as they were of the boys of
Paradise,[FN#83] differing in complexion but fellows in
incomparable beauty; and all hearts yearned with desire to the
swaying of their bending shapes, even to what saith the poet,

     "I passed a beardless pair without compare *
          And cried, 'I love you, both you ferly fir!'
     'Money'd?' quoth one: quoth I, 'And lavish too;' *
          Then said the fair pair, 'Pere, c'est notre affaire.'"

Now Abu Nowas was given to these joys and loved to sport and make
merry with fair boys and cull the rose from every brightly
blooming check, even as saith the bard,

     Full many a reverend Shaykh feels sting of flesh, *
          Loves pretty faces, shows at Pleasure's depot:
     Awakes in Mosul,[FN#84] land of purity; *
          And all the day dreams only of Aleppo.[FN#85]

So he accosted them with the salutation, and they returned his
greeting with civility and all honour and would have gone their
several ways, but he stayed them, repeating these couplets,

    "Steer ye your steps to none but me *
         Who hath a mine of luxury:-
    Old wine that shines with brightest blee *
         Made by the monk in monastery;
    And mutton-meat the toothsomest *
         And birds of all variety.
    Then eat of these and drink of those *
         Old wines that bring you jollity:
    And have each other, turn by turn,  *
         Shampooing this my tool you see."[FN#86]

Thereupon the youths were beguiled by his verses and consented to
his wishes,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
Nowas beguiled the youths with his wishes, saying, "We hear and
obey;" and accompanied him to his lodging, where they found all
ready that he had set forth in his couplets.  They sat down and
ate and drank and made merry awhile, after which they appealed to
Abu Nowas to decide which of them was handsometh of face and
shapliest of form.  So he pointed to one of them and, having
kissed him twice over, recited the following verses,

     "I'll ransom that beauty-spot with my soup; *
          Where's it and where is a money-dole?[FN#87]
     Praise Him who hairless hath made that cheek *
          And bid Beauty bide in that mole, that mole!"

Then he pointed to another and, kissing his lips, repeated these
couplets,

     "And loveling weareth on his cheek a mole *
          Like musk, which virgin camphor ne'er lets off it:
     My peepers marvel such a contrast seeing; *
          And cried the Mole to me, 'Now bless the
          Prophet.'"[FN#88]

Then he pointed to the third and, after kissing him half a score
times repeated these couplets,

     "Melted pure gold in silvern bowl to drain *
          The youth, whose fingers wore a winey stain:
     He with the drawers[FN#89] served one cup of wine, *
          And served his wandering eyes the other twain.
     A loveling, of the sons of Turks,[FN#90] a fawn *
          Whose waist conjoins the double Mounts Honayn.[FN#91]
     Could Eve's corrupting daughers[FN#92] tempt my heart *
          Content with two-fold lure 'twould bear the bane.
     Unto Diyar-I-Bakr ('maid-land '[FN#93] this one lures; *
          That lures to two-mosqued cities of the plain."[FN#94]

Now each of the youths had drunk two cups, and when it came to
the turn of Abu Nowas, he took the goblet and repeated these
couplets,

"Drink not strong wine save at the slender dearling's hand; *
     Each like to other in all gifts the spirt grace:
For wine can never gladden toper's heart and soul, *
     Unless the cup-boy show a bright and sparkling face."

Then he drank off his cup and the bowl went round, and when it
came to Abu Nowas again, joyance got the mastery of him and he
repeated these couplets,

     "For cup-friends cup succeeding cup assign, *
          Brimming with grape-juice, brought in endliess line,
     By hand of brown-lipped[FN#95] Beauty who is sweet *
          At wake as apple or musk finest fine.[FN#96]
     Drink not the wine except from hand of fawn *
          Whose cheek to kiss is sweeter than the wine."

Presently the drink got into his noddle, drunkenness mastered him
and he knew not hand from head, so that he lolled from side to
side in joy and inclined to the youths one and all, anon kissing
them and anon embracing them leg overlying leg.  And he showed no
sense of sin or shame, but recited these couplets,

     "None wotteth best joyance but generous youth *
          When the pretty ones deign with him company keep:
     This sings to him, sings to him that, when he wants *
          A pick-me-up[FN#97] lying there all of a heap:
     And when of a loveling he needeth a kiss, *
          He takes from his lips or a draught or a nip;
     Heaven bless them!  How sweetly my day with them sped; *
          A wonderful harvest of pleasure I reap:
     Let us drink our good liquor both watered and pure, *
          And agree to swive all who dare slumber and sleep."

While they were in this deboshed state behold, there came a
knocking at the door; so they bade him who knocked enter, and
behold, it was the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid. 
When they saw him, they all rose and kissed ground before him;
and Abu Nowas threw off the fumes of the wine for awe of the
Caliph, who said to him, "Holla, Abu Nowas!"  He replied, "Adsum,
at thy service, O Commander of the Faithful, whom Allah
preserve!"  The Caliph asked, "What state is this?" and the poet
answered, "O Prince of True Believers, my state indubitably
dispenseth with questions."  Quoth the Caliph, "O Abu Nowas, I
have sought direction of Allah Almighty and have appointed thee
Kazi of pimps and panders."  Asked he, "Dost thou indeed invest
me with that high office, O Commander of the Faithful?"; and the
Caliph answered "I do;" whereupon Abu Nowas rejoined, "O
Commander of the Faithful, hast thou any suit to prefer to me?" 
Hereat the Caliph was wroth and presently turned away and left
them, full of rage, and passed the night sore an-angered against
Abu Nowas, who amid the party he had invited spent the merriest
of nights and the jolliest and joyousest.  And when day-break
dawned and the star of morn appeared in sheen and shone, he broke
up the sitting and, dismissing the youths, donned his court-dress
and leaving his house set out for the palace of the Caliph.  Now
it was the custom of the Commander of the Faithful, when the
Divan broke up, to withdraw to his sitting-saloon and summon
thither his poets and cup-companions and musicians, each having
his own place, which he might not overpass.  So it happened that
day, he retired to his saloom, and the friends and familiars came
and seated themselves, each in his rank and degree.  Presently,
in walked Abu Nowas and was about to take his usual seat, when
the Caliph cried to Masrur, the sworder, and bade him strip the
poet of his clothes and bind an ass's packsaddle on his back and
a halter about his head and a crupper under his rump and lead him
round to all the lodgings of the slave-girls, --And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
commanded Masrur, the sworder, to strip Abu Nowas of his
court-suit and bind an ass's packsaddle on his back and a halter
about his head, and a crupper under his rump and lead him round
to all the lodgings of the slave-girls, and the chambers of the
Harim, that the women might make mock of him; then cut off his
head and bring it to him.  "Hearkening and obedience," replied
Masrur and, doing with Abu Nowas as the Caliph had bidden him,
led him round all the chambers whose number equalled the days of
the year; but Abu Nowas was a funny fellow, so he made all the
girls laugh with his buffooneries and each gave him something
whereby he returned not save with a pocketful of money.  And
while this was going on behold, Ja'afar the Barmecide, who had
been absent on an important business for the Commander of the
Faithful, entered and recognising the poet, albeit in this
plight, said to him, "Holla, Abu Nowas!"  He said, "Here at thy
service, O our lord."  Ja'afar asked, "What offence hast thou
committed to bring this punishment on thee?"  Thereupon he
answered, "None whatsoever, except that I made our lord the
Caliph a present of the best of my poetry and he presented me, in
return, with the best of his raiment."  When the Prince of True
Believers head this, he laughed, from a heart full of
wrath,[FN#98] and pardoned Abu Nowas, and also gave him a myriad
of money.  And they also recount the tale of





              ABDALLAH BIN MA'AMAR WITH THE MAN OF
                  BASSORAH AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL.



A certain man of Bassorah once bought a slave-girl and reared and
educated her right well.  Moreover, he loved her very dearly and
spent all his substance in pleasuring and merry-making with her,
til he had naught left and extreme poverty was sore upon him.  So
she said to him, "O my master, sell me; for thou needest my price
and it maketh my heart ache to see thy sorry and want-full
plight.  If thou vend me and make use of my value, 'twill be
better for thee than keeping me by thee, and haply Almighty Allah
will ample thee and amend thy fortune."  He agreed to this for
the straitness of his case, and carried her to the bazar, where
the broker offered her for sale to the Governor of Bassorah, by
name Abdallah bin Ma'amar al-Taymi, and she pleased him.  So he
bought her, for five hundred dinars and paid the sum to her
master; but when he book the money and was about to go away, the
girl burst into tears and repeated these two couplets,

     "May coins though gainest joy in heart instil; *
          For me remaineth naught save saddest ill:
     I say unto my soul which sorely grieves, *
          'Thy friend departeth an thou will nor nill.'"

And when her master heard this, he groaned and replied in these
couplets,

     "Albeit this thy case lack all resource, *
          Nor findeth aught but death's doom, pardon still;
     Evening and morning, thoughts of thee will dole *
          Comfort to heart all woes and griefs full fill:
     Peace be upon thee! Meet we now no more *
          Nor pair except at Ibn Ma'amar's will."

Now when Abdullah bin Ma'amar heard these verses and saw their
affection, he exclaimed, "By Allah, I will not assist fate in
separating you; for it is evident to me that ye two indeed love
each other.  So take the money and the damsel, O man, and Allah
bless thee in both; for verily parting be grievous to lovers." 
So they kissed his hand and going away, ceased not to dwell
together, till death did them part; and glory be to Him whom
death over-taketh not!  And amonst stories is that of




              THE LOVERS OF THE BANU[FN#99] OZRAH



There was once, among the Banu Ozrah, a handsome and accomplished
man, who was never a single day out of love, and it chanced that
he became enamoured of a beauty of his own tribe and sent her
many messages; but she ceased not to entreat him with cruelty and
disdain; till, for stress of love and longing and desire and
distraction, he fell sick of a sore sickness and took to his
pillow and murdered sleep.  His malady redoubled on him and his
torments increased and he was well nigh dead when his case became
known among the folk and his passion notorious;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man
took to his pillow and murdered sleep.  So his case became known
and his passion notorious; and his infirmity grew upon him and
his pains redoubled until he was well nigh dead.  His family and
hers were urgent with her to visit him, but she refused, till he
was at the point of death when, being told of this, she relented
towards him and vouchsafed him a visit.  As soon as he saw her,
his eyes ran over with tears and he repeated from a broken heart,

     "An, by thy life, pass thee my funeral train, *
          A bier upborne upon the necks of four,
     Wilt thou not follow it, and greet the grave *
          Where shall my corpse be graved for evermore?"

Hearing this, she wept with sore weeping and said to him, "By
Allah, I suspected not that passion had come to such a pass with
thee, as to cast thee into the arms of death!  Had I wist of
this, I had been favourable to thy wish, and thou shouldst have
had thy will."  At this his tears streamed down even as the
clouds rail rain, and he repeated this verse,

     "She drew near whenas death was departing us, *
          And deigned union grant when 'twas useless all."

Then he groaned one groan and died.  So she fell on him, kissing
him and weeping and ceased not weeping until she swooned away;
and when she came to herself, she charged her people to bury her
in his grave and with streaming eyes recited these two couplets,

     "We lived on earth a life of fair content; *
          And tribe and house and home of us were proud;
     But Time in whirling flight departed us, *
          To join us now in womb of earth and shroud.[FN#100]"

Then she fell again to weeping, nor gave over shedding tears and
lamenting till she fainted away; and she lay three days,
senseless.  Then she died and was buried in his grave.  This is
one of the strange chances of love.[FN#101]  And I have heard
related a tale of the





            WAZIR OF AL-YAMAN AND HIS YOUNG BROTHER
                                


It is said that Badr al-Din, Wazir of Al-Yaman, had a young
brother of singular beauty and kept strait watch over him; so he
applied himself to seek a tutor for him and, coming upon a Shaykh
of dignified and reverend aspect, chaste and religious, lodged
him in a house next his own.  This lasted a long time, and he
used to come daily from his dwelling to that of Sahib[FN#102]
Badr al-Din and teach the young brother.  After a while, the old
man's heart was taken with love for the youth, and longing grew
upon him and his vitals were troubled, till one day, he bemoaned
his case to the boy, who said, "What can I do, seeing that I may
not leave my brother night or day? and thou thyself seest how
careful he is over me."  Quoth the Shaykh, "My lodging adjoineth
thine; so there will be no difficulty, when thy brother sleepeth,
to rise and, entering the privy, feign thyself asleep.  Then come
to the parapet[FN#103] of the terrace-roof and I will receive
thee on the other side of the wall; so shalt thou sit with me an
eye-twinkling and return without thy brother's knowledge."  "I
hear and obey," answered the lad; and the tutor began to prepare
gifts suitable to his degree.  Now when a while of the night was
past, he entered the water-closet and waited until his brother
lay down on his bed and took patience till he was drowned in
sleep, when he rose and going to the parapet of the terrace-roof,
found standing there to await him the old man, who gave him his
hand and carried him to the sitting-chamber, where he had made
ready various dainties for his entertainment, and they sat down
to carouse.  Now it was the night of the full moon and, as they
sat with the wine-cup going round, her rays shone upon them, and
the governor fell to singing.  But, whilst they were thus in joy
and jollity and mirth and merriment, such as confoundeth the wit
and the sight and defieth description, lo! the Wazir awoke and,
missing his brother, arose in affright and found the door open. 
So he went up to the roof and hearing a noise of talk, climbed
over the parapet to the adjoining terrace and saw a light shining
from the lodging.  He looked in from behind the wall, and espied
his brother and his tutor sitting at carouse; but the Shaykh
became aware of him and sang cup in hand, to a lively measure
these couplets,

     "He made me drain his wine of honeyed lips, *
          Toasting with cheeks which rose and myrtle smother:
     Then nighted in embrace, cheek to my cheek, *
          A loveling midst mankind without another.
     When the full moon arose on us and shone *
          Pray she traduce us not to the big brother."

And it proved the perfect politeness of the Wazir Badr al-Din
that, when he heard this, he said, "By Allah, I will not betray
you!"  And he went away and left them to their diversions.  They
also tell a tale concerning




            THE LOVES OF THE BOY AND GIRL AT SCHOOL



A free boy and a slave-girl once learnt together in school, and
the boy fell passionately in love with the girl.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lad
fell passionately in love with the slave-lass: so one day, when
the other boys were heedless, he took her tablet[FN#104] and
wrote on it these two couplets,

     "What sayest thou of him by sickness waste, *
          Until he's clean distraught for love of thee?
     Who in the transport of his pain complains, *
          Nor can bear load of heart in secrecy?"

Now when the girl took her tablet, she read the verses written
thereon and understanding them, wept for ruth of him; then she
wrote thereunder these two couplets,

     "An if we behold a lover love-fordone *
          Desiring us, our favours he shall see:
     Yea, what he wills of us he shall obtain, *
          And so befal us what befalling be."

Now it chanced that the teacher came in on them and taking the
tablet, unnoticed, read what was written thereon.  So he was
moved to pity of their case and wrote on the tablet beneath those
already written these two couplets addressed to the girl, 

     "Console thy lover, fear no consequence; *
          He is daft with loving lowe's insanity;
     But for the teacher fear not aught from him; *
          Love-pain he learned long before learnt ye."

Presently it so happened that the g