irl's owner entered the school
about the same time and, finding the tablet, read the above
verses indited by the boy, the girl and the schoolmaster; and
wrote under them these two couplets,

     "May Allah never make you parting dree *
          And be your censurer shamed wearily!
     But for the teacher ne'er, by Allah, eye *
          Of mine beheld a bigger pimp than he!"

Then he sent for the Kazi and witnesses and married them on the
spot.  Moreover, he made them a wedding-feast and treated them
with exceeding munificence; and they ceased not abiding together
in joy and happiness, till there came to them the Destroyer of
delights and the Severer of societies.  And equally pleasant is
the story of





               AL-MUTALAMMIS AND HIS WIFE UMAYMAH



It is related Al-Mutalammis[FN#105] once fled from Al-Nu'uman bin
Munzir[FN#106] and was absent so long that folk deemed him dead. 
Now he had a beautiful wife, Umaymah by name, and her family
urged her to marry again; but she refused, for that she loved her
husband Al-Mutalammis very dearly.  However, they were urgent
with her, because of the multitude of her suitors, and importuned
with her till at last she consented, albe reluctantly; and they
espoused her to a man of her own tribe.  Now on the night of the
wedding, Al-Mutalammis came back and, hearing in the camp a noise
of pipes and tabrets and seeing signs of a wedding festival,
asked some of the children what was the merry-making, to which
they replied, "They have married Umaymah wife of Al-Mutalammis,
to such an one, and he goes in to her this night."  When he heard
this, he planned to enter the house amongst the mob of women and
saw the twain seated on the bridal couch.[FN#107]  By and by, the
bridegroom came up to her, whereupon she sighed heavily and
weeping, recited this couplet,

"Would Heaven I knew (but many are the shifts of joy and woe) *
     In what far distant land thou art, my Mutalammis, oh!"

Now Al-Mutalammis was a renowned poet; so he answered her saying;

"Right near at hand, Umaymah mine! when'er the caravan *
     Halted, I never ceased for thee to pine, I would thou know."

When the bridegroom heard this, he guess how the case stood and
went forth from them in hast improvising,

"I was in bestest luck, but now my luck goes contrary: *
     A hospitable house and room contain your loves, you two!"

And he returned not but left the twain to their privacy.  So Al-
Mutalammis and his wife abode together in all comfort and solace
of life and in all its joys and jollities till death parted them. 
And glory be to Him at whose command the earth and the heavens
shall arise!  And among other tales is that of





              THE CALIPH HARUM AL-RASHID AND QUEEN
                      ZUBAYDAH IN THE BATH


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid loved the Lady Zubaydah with exceeding
love and laid out for her a pleasaunce, wherein he made a great
tank and set thereabouts a screen of trees and led thither water
from all sides; hence the trees grew and interlaced over the
basin so densely, that one could go in and wash, without being
seen of any, for the thickness of the leafage.  It chanced, one
day, that Queen Zubaydah entered the garden and, coming to the
swimming-bath,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night

She said, It hath reached me, "O auspicious King, that Queen
Zubaydah entered the garden one day and, coming to the swimming-
bath, gazed upon its goodliness; and the sheen of the water and
the overshading of the trees pleased her.  Now it was a day of
exceeding heat; so she doffed her clothes and, entering the tank,
which was not deep enough to cover the whole person, fell to
pouring the water over herself from an ewer of silver.  It also
happened that the Caliph heard she was in the pool; so he left
his palace and came down to spy upon her through the screen of
the foliage.  He stood behind the trees and espied her mother-
nude, showing everything that is kept hidden.  Presently, she
became aware of him and turning, saw him behind the trees and was
ashamed that he should see her naked.  So she laid her hands on
her parts, but the Mount of Venus escaped from between them, by
reason of its greatness and plumpness; and the Caliph at once
turned and went away, wondering and reciting this couplet,

     "I looked on her with loving eyne *
          And grew anew my old repine:"

But he knew not what to say next; so he sent for Abu Nowas and
said to him, "Make me a piece of verse commencing with this
line."  "I hear and obey," replied the poet and in an eye-
twinkling extemporised these couplets,

     "I looked on her with longing eyne *
          And grew anew my old repine
     For the gazelle, who captured me  *
          Where the two lotus-trees incline:
     There was the water poured on it *
          From ewer of the silvern mine;
     And seen me she had hidden it *
          But 'twas too plump for fingers fine.
     Would Heaven that I were on it, *
          An hour, or better two hours, li'en."[FN#108]

Thereupon the Commander of the Faithful smiled and made him a
handsome present and he went away rejoicing.  And I have heard
another story of





              HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE POETS
                                


The Prince of True Believers, Caliph Harun al-Rashid, was
exceeding restless one night; so he rose and walked about his
palace, till he happened upon a handmaid overcome with wine.  Now
he was prodigiously enamoured of this damsel; so he played with
her and pulled her to him, whereupon her zone fell down and her
petticoat-trousers were loosed and he besought her of amorous
favour.  But she said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful wait
till to-morrow night, for I am unprepared for thee, knowing not
of thy coming."  So he left her and went away.  But, when the
morrow showed its light and the sun shone bright, he sent a page
to her saying, "The Commander of the Faithful is about to visit
thine apartment;" but she replied, "Day doth away with the
promise of night."  So he said to his courtiers, "Make me
somewhat of verse, introducing these words, 'The Promise of Night
is effaced by Day.'" Answered they, "We hear and obey," and Al-
Rakashi[FN#109] came forward and recited the following couplets,

     "By Allah, couldst thou but feel my pain, *
          Thy rest had turned and had fled away.  
     Hath left me in sorrow and love distraught, *
          Unseen and unseeing, that fairest may:
     She promised me grace, then jilted and said, *
          'The promise of night is effaced by day!'"

Then Abu Mus'ab came forward and recited these couplets,

     "When wilt thou be wise and love-heat allay *
          That from food and sleeping so leads astray?
     Suffices thee not ever weeping eye, *
          And vitals on fire when thy name they say?
     He must smile and laugh and in pride must cry *
          'The promise of Night is effaced by Day.'"

Last came Abu Nowas and recited the following couplets,

     "As love waxt longer less met we tway *
          And fell out, but ended the useless fray;
     One night in the palace I found her fou'; *
          Yet of modesty still there was some display:
     The veil from her shoulders had slipt; and showed *
          Her loosened trousers Love's seat and stay:
     And rattled the breezes her huge hind cheeks *
          And the branch where two little pomegranates lay:
     Quoth I, 'Give me tryst;' whereto quoth she *
          To-morrow the fane shall wear best array:'
     Next day I asked her, 'Thy word?'  Said she *
          'The promise of Night is effaced by Day.'"

The Caliph bade give a myriad of money each to Al-Rakashi and Abu
Mus'ab, but bade strike off the head of Abu Nowas, saying, "Thou
wast with us yesternight in the palace."  Said he, "By Allah, I
slept not but in my own house!  I was directed to what I said by
thine own words as to the subject of the verse; and indeed quoth
Almighty Allah (and He is the truest of all speakers): 'As for
poets (devils pursue them!) dost thou not see that they rove as
bereft of their senses through every valley and that they say
that which they do not?'"[FN#110]  So the Caliph forgave him and
gave him two myriads of money.  And another tale is that of





           MUS'AB BIN AL-ZUBAYR AND AYISHAH HIS WIFE



It is told of Mus'ab bin al-Zubayr[FN#111] that he met in Al-
Medinah Izzah, who was one of the shrewdest of women, and said to
her, "I have a mind to marry Ayishah[FN#112] daughter of Talhah,
and I should like thee to go herwards and spy out for me how she
is made."  So she went away and returning to Mus'ab, said, "I
have seen her, and her face is fairer than health; she hath large
and well-opened eyes and under them a nose straight and smooth as
a cane; oval cheeks and a mouth like a cleft pomegranate, a neck
as a silver ewer and below it a bosom with two breasts like twin-
pomegranates and further down a slim waist and a slender stomach
with a navel therein as it were a casket of ivory, and back parts
like a hummock of sand; and plumply rounded thighs and calves
like columns of alabaster; but I saw her feet to be large, and
thou wilt fall short with her in time of need."  Upon this report
he married her,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-seventh Day

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Izzah
this wise reported of Ayishah bint Talhah, Mus'ab married her and
went in to her.  And presently Izzah invited Ayishah and the
women of the tribe Kuraysh to her house, when Ayishah sang these
two couplets with Mus'ab standing by,

     "And the lips of girls, that are perfume sweet; *
          So nice to kiss when with smiles they greet:
     Yet ne'er tasted I them, but in thought of him; *
          And by thought the Ruler rules worldly seat."

The night of Mus'ab's going in unto her, he departed not from
her, till after seven bouts; and on the morrow, a freewoman of
his met him and said to him, "May I be thy sacrifice!  Thou art
perfect, even in this."  And a certain woman said, "I was with
Ayishah, when her husband came in to her, and she lusted for him;
so he fell upon her and she snarked and snorted and made use of
all wonder of movements and marvellous new inventions, and I the
while within hearing.  So, when he came out from her, I said to
her, 'How canst thou do thus with thy rank and nobility and
condition, and I in thy house?'  Quoth she, 'Verily a woman
should bring her husband all of which she is mistress, by way of
excitement and rare buckings and wrigglings and
motitations.[FN#113]  What dislikest thou of this?'  And I
answered 'I would have this by nights.'  Rejoined she, 'Thus is
it by day and by night I do more than this; for when he seeth me,
desire stirreth him up and he falleth in heat; so he putteth it
out to me and I obey him, and it is as thou seest.'"  And there
also hath reached me an account of





                ABU AL-ASWAD AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL



Abu al-Aswad bought a native-born slave-girl, who was blind of an
eye, and she pleased him; but his people decried her to him;
whereat he wondered and, turning the palms of his hands
upwards,[FN#114] recited these two couplets,

     "They find me fault with her where I default ne'er find, *
          Save haply that a speck in either eye may show:
     But if her eyes have fault, of fault her form hath none, *
          Slim-built above the waist and heavily made below."

And this is also told of 






            HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE TWO SLAVE-GIRLS



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid lay one night between two slave-girls,
one from Al-Medinah and the other from Cufa and the Cufite rubbed
his hands, whilst the Medinite rubbed his feet and made his
concern[FN#115] stand up.  Quoth the Cufite, "I see thou wouldst
keep the whole of the stock-in-trade to thyself; give me my share
of it."  And the other answered, "I have been told by Malik, on
the authority of Hisham ibn Orwah,[FN#116] who had it of his
(grand) father, that the Prophet said, 'Whoso quickeneth the
dead, the dead belongeth to him and is his.'  But the Cufite took
her unawares and, pushing her away, seized it all in her own hand
and said, "Al-A'amash telleth us, on the authority of Khaysamah,
who had it of Abdallah bin Mas'ud, that the Prophet declared,
'Game belongeth to him who taketh it, not to him who raiseth
it.'"  And this is also related of





            THE CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE
                          SLAVE-GIRLS
                                


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid once slept with three slave-girls, a
Meccan, a Medinite and an Irakite.  The Medinah girl put her hand
to his yard and handled it, whereupon it rose and the Meccan
sprang up and drew it to herself.  Quoth the other, "What is this
unjust aggression?  A tradition was related to me by
Malik[FN#117] after Al-Zuhri, after Abdallah ibn Salim, after
Sa'id bin Zayd, that the Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless and
keep!) said:  'Whoso enquickeneth a dead land, it is his.'  And
the Meccan answered, "It is related to us by Sufyan, from Abu
Zanad, from Al-A'araj, from Abu Horayrah, that the Apostle of
Allah said: 'The quarry is his who catcheth it, not his who
starteth it.'"  But the Irak girl pushed them both away and
taking it to herself, said, "This is mine, till your contention
be decided."  And they tell a tale of





                    THE MILLER AND HIS WIFE



There was a miller, who had an ass to turn his mill; and he was
married to a wicked wife, whom he loved, while she hated him
because she was sweet upon a neighbour, who misliked her and held
aloof from her.  One night, the miller saw, in his sleep, one who
said to him, "Dig in such a spot of the ass's round in the mill,
and thou shalt find a hoard."  When he awoke, he told his wife
the vision and bade her keep the secret; but she told her
neighbour,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three hundred and Eighty-eighth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
miller's wife told the secret to the neighbour whom she loved,
thinking to win his favour; and he agreed with her to come to her
by night.  So he came and they dug in the mill and found the
treasure and took it forth.  Then he asked her, "How shall we do
with this?" and she answered; "We will divide it into two halves
and will share it equally between us, and do thou leave thy wife
and I will cast about to rid me of my husband.  Then shalt thou
marry me and, when we are conjoined, we will join the two halves
of the treasure one to other, and all will be in our hands." 
Quoth he, "I fear lest Satan seduce thee and thou take some other
man other than myself; for gold in the house is like the sun in
the world.  I reck, therefore, it were right that the money be
all in my hands, so thou give thy whole mind to getting free of
thy husband and coming to me."  Quoth she, "I fear even as thou
fearest, nor will I yield up my part to thee; for it was I
directed thee to it."  When he heard this, greed of gain prompted
him to kill her; so he slew her and threw her body into the empty
hoard-hole; but day overtook him and hindered him from covering
it up; he therefore took the money and went his way.  Now after a
while the miller awoke and, missing his wife, went into the mill,
where he fastened the ass to the beam and shouted to it.  It went
on a little, then stopped; whereupon he beat it grievously; but
the more he bashed it, the more it drew back; for it was
affrighted at the dead woman and could not go forward.  Thereupon
the Miller, unknowing what hindered the donkey, took out a knife
and goaded it again and again, but still it would not budge. 
Then he was wroth with it, knowing not the cause of its
obstinacy, and drove the knife into its flanks, and it fell down
dead.  But when the sun rose, he saw his donkey lying dead and
likewise his wife in the place of the treasure, and great was his
rage and sore his wrath for the loss of his hoard and the death
of his wife and his ass.  All this came of his letting his wife
into his secret and not keeping it to himself.[FN#118]  And I
have heard this tale of





                 THE SIMPLETON AND THE SHARPER



A certain simpleton was once walking along, haling his ass after
him by the halter, when a pair of sharpers saw him and one said
to his fellow, "I will take that ass from yonder wight."  Asked
the other, "How wilt thou do that?"  "Follow me and I will show
thee how," answered the first.  So the cony-catcher went up to
the ass and, loosing it from the halter, gave the beast to his
fellow; then he haltered his own head and followed Tom Fool till
he knew the other had got clean off with the ass, when he stood
still.  The oaf haled at the halter, but the rascal stirred not;
so he turned and seeing the halter on a man's neck, said to him,
"What art thou?"  Quoth the sharper, "I am thine ass and my story
is a wonderous one and 'tis this.  Know that I have a pious old
mother and come in to her one day, drunk; and she said to me: 'O
my son, repent to the Almighty of these thy transgressions.'  But
I took my staff and beat her, whereupon she cursed me and Allah
changed me into an ass and caused me fall into thy hands, where I
have remained till this moment.  However, to-day, my mother
called me to mind and her heart yearned towards me; so she prayed
for me and the Lord restored me to my former shape amongst the
sons of Adam."  Cried the silly one, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!  Allah
upon thee, O my brother, acquit me of what I have done with thee
in the way of riding and so forth."  Then he let the cony-catcher
go and returned home, drunken with chagrin and concern as with
wine.  His wife asked him, "What aileth thee and where is the
donkey?"; and he answered, "Thou knowest not what was this ass;
but I will tell thee."  So he told her the story, and she
exclaimed, "Alack and alas for the punishment we shall receive
from Almighty Allah!  How could we have used a man as a beast of
burden, all this while?  And she gave alms by way of atonement
and prayed pardon of Heaven.[FN#119]  Then the man abode awhile
at home, idle and feckless, till she said to him, "How long wilt
thou sit at home doing naught?  Go to the market and buy us an
ass and ply thy work with it."  Accordingly, he went to the
market and stopped by the ass-stand, where behold, he saw his own
ass for sale.  So he went up to it and clapping his mouth to its
ear, said to it, "Woe to thee, thou ne'er-do-well!  Doubtless
thou hast been getting drunk again and beating thy mother!  But,
by Allah, I will never buy thee more."[FN#120]  and he left it
and went away.  And they tell a tale concerning





            THE KAZI ABU YUSUF WITH HARUN AL-RASHID
                       AND QUEEN ZUBAYDAH



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid went up one noon-tide to his couch, to
lie down; and mounting, found upon the bed-clothes semen freshly
emitted; whereat he was startled and troubled with sore trouble. 
So he called the Lady Zubaydah and said to her, "What is that
spilt on the bed?"  She looked at it and replied, "O Commander of
the Faithful, it is semen."  Quoth he, "Tell me truly what this
meaneth or I will lay violent hands on thee forthright."  Quoth
she, "By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, indeed I know not
how it came there and I am guiltless of that whereof you
suspectest me."  So he sent for the Kazi Abu Yusuf and acquainted
him of the case.  The Judge raised his eyes to the ceiling and,
seeing a crack therein, said to the Caliph, "O Commander of the
Faithful, in very sooth the bat hath seed like that of a
man,[FN#121] and this is bat's semen."  Then he called for a
spear and thrust it into the crevice, whereupon down fell the
bat.  In this manner the Caliph's suspicions were dispelled,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Three hundred and Eighty-ninth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Kazi Abu Yusuf took the spear and thrust it into the crevice,
down fell the bat, and thus the Caliph's suspicions were
dispelled and the innocence of Zubaydah was made manifest;
whereat she gave loud and liberal vent to her joy and promised
Abu Yusuf a magnificent reward.  Now there were with her certain
delicious fruits, out of their season, and she knew of others in
the garden; so she asked Abu Yusuf, "O Imam of the Faith, which
wouldst thou rather have of the two kinds of fruits, those that
are here or those that are not here?"  And he answered, "Our code
forbiddeth us to pronounce judgement on the absent; whenas they
are present, we will give our decision."  So she let bring the
two kinds of fruits before him; and he ate of both.  Quoth she,
"What is the difference between them?" and quoth he, "As often as
I think to praise one kind, the adversary putteth in its claim." 
The Caliph laughed at his answer[FN#122] and made him a rich
present; and Zubaydah also gave him what she had promised him,
and he went away, rejoicing.  See, then the virtues of this Imam
and how his hands were manifest the truth and the innocence of
the Lady Zubaydah.  And amongst other stories is that of





          THE CALIPH AL-HAKIM[FN#123] AND THE MERCHANT



The Caliph Al-Hakim bi-Amri'llah was riding out in state
procession one day, when he passed along a garden, wherein he saw
a man, surrounded by negro-slaves and eunuchs.  He asked him for
a draught of water, and the man gave him to drink, saying,
"Belike, the Commander of the Faithful will honour me by
alighting in this my garden."  So the Caliph dismounted and with
his suite entered the garden; whereupon the said man brought out
to them an hundred rugs and an hundred leather mats and an
hundred cushions; and set before them an hundred dishes of
fruits, an hundred bowls of sweetmeats and an hundred jars of
sugared sherbets; at which the Caliph marvelled with much amaze
and said to his host, "O man, verily this thy case is wondrous:
didst thou know of our coming and make this preparation for us?" 
He replied, "No by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I knew not
of thy coming and I am a merchant of the rest of thy subjects;
but I have an hundred concubines; so, when the Commander of the
Faithful honoured me by alighting with me, I sent to each of
them, bidding her send me her morning-meal in the garden.  So
they sent me each of her furniture and the surplus of her meat
and drink: and every day each sendeth me a dish of meat and
another of cooling marinades, also a platter of fruits and a bowl
of sweetmeats and a jar of sherbet.  This is my noon-day dinner,
nor have I added aught thereto for thee."  Then the Commander of
the Faithful, Al-Hakim bi-Amri'llah prostrated himself in
thanksgiving to the Almighty (extolled and exalted be His name!)
and said, "Praise be Allah, who hath been so bountiful to one of
our lieges, that he entertaineth the Caliph and his host, without
making ready for them; nay, he feedeth them with the surplusage
of his day's provision!"  Then he sent for all the dirhams in the
treasury, that had been struck that year (and they were in number
three thousand and seven hundred thousand); nor did he mount
until the money came, when he gave it to the merchant, saying,
"Use this as thy state may require; and thy generosity deserveth
more than this."  Then he took horse and rode away.  And I have
heard a story concerning





             KING KISRA ANUSHIRWAN[FN#124] AND THE
                         VILLAGE DAMSEL



The Just King, Kisra Anushirwan, one day rode forth to the chase
and, in pursuit of a deer, became separated from his suite. 
Presently, he caught sight of a hamlet near hand and being sore
athirst, he made for it and presenting himself at the door of a
house that lay by the wayside, asked for a draught of water.  So
a damsel came out and looked at him; then, going back into the
house, pressed the juice from a single sugar-cane into a bowl and
mixed it with water; after which she strewed on the top some
scented stuff, as it were dust, and carried it tot he King. 
Thereupon he seeing in it what resembled dust, drank it, little
by little, till he came to the end; when said he to her, "O
damsel, the drink is good, and how sweet it had been but for this
dust in it that troubleth it."  Answered she, "O guest, I put in
that powder for a purpose;" and he asked, "And why didst thou
thus?"; so she replied, "I saw thee exceedingly thirsty and
feared that thou wouldst drain the whole at one draught and that
this would thee mischief; and but for this dust that troubled the
drink so hadst thou done."  The Just King wondered at her words,
knowing that they came of her wit and good sense, and said to
her, "From how many sugar canes didst thou express this draught?" 
"One," answered she; whereat Anushirwan marvelled and, calling
for the register of the village taxes, saw that its assessment
was but little and bethought him to increase it, on his return to
his palace, saying in himself, "A village where they get this
much juice out of one sugar-cane, why is it so lightly taxed?" 
He then left the village and pursued his chase; and, as he came
back at the end of the day, he passed alone by the same door and
called again for drink; whereupon the same damsel came out and,
knowing him at a look, went in to fetch him water.  It was some
time before she returned and Anushirwan wondered thereat and said
to her, "Why hast thou tarried?"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Three hundred and Ninetieth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Anushirwan hurried the damsel and asked her, "Why hast thou
tarried?" she answered, "Because a single sugar-cane gave not
enough for thy need; so I pressed three; but they yielded not to
much as one did before."  Rejoined he, "What is the cause of
that?"; and she replied, "The cause of it is that when the
Sultan's[FN#125] mind is changed against a folk, their prosperity
ceaseth and their good waxeth less."  So Anushirwan laughed and
dismissed from his mind that which he had purposed against the
villagers.  Moreover, he took the damsel to wife then and there,
being pleased with her much wit and acuteness and the excellence
of her speech.  And they tell another tale of the





           WATER-CARRIER[FN#126] AND THE GOLDSMITH'S
                              WIFE
                                
                                

There was once, in the city of Bokhara, a water-carrier, who used
to carry water to the house of a goldsmith and had done this
thirty years.  Now that goldsmith had a wife of exceeding beauty
and loveliness, brilliancy and perfect grace; and she was withal
renowned for piety, chastity and modesty.  One day the water-
carrier came, as of custom, and poured the water into the
cisterns.  Now the woman was standing in the midst of the court;
so he went close up to her and taking her hand, stroked it and
pressed it, then went away and left her.  When her husband came
home from the bazar, she said to him, "I would have thee tell me
what thing thou hast done in the market this day, to anger
Almighty Allah." Quoth he, "I have done nothing to offend the
Lord."  "Nay," rejoined she, "but, by Allah, thou hast indeed
done something to anger Him; and unless thou tell me the whole
truth, I will not abide in thy house, and thou shalt not see me,
nor will I see thee."  So he confessed, "I will tell thee the
truth of what I did this day.  It so chanced that, as I was
sitting in my shop, as of wont, a woman came up to me and bade me
make her a bracelet of gold.  Then she went away and I wrought
her a bracelet and laid it aside.  But when she returned and I
brought her out the bracelet, she put forth her hand and I
clasped the bracelet on her wrist; and I wondered at the
whiteness of her hand and the beauty of her wrist, which would
captivate any beholder; and I recalled what the poet saith,

     'Her fore-arms, dight with their bangles, show *
          Like fire ablaze on the waves a-flow;
     As by purest gold were the water girt, *
          And belted around by a living lowe.'

So I took her hand and pressed it and squeezed it."  Said the
woman, "Great God!  Why didst thou this ill thing?  Know that the
water-carrier, who hath come to our house these thirty years, nor
sawst thou ever any treason in him took my hand this day and
pressed and squeezed it."  Said her husband, "O woman, let us
crave pardon of Allah!  Verily, I repent of what I did, and do
thou ask forgiveness of the Lord for me."  She cried, "Allah
pardon me and thee, and receive us into his holy keeping."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
goldsmith's wife cried out, "Allah pardon me and thee, and
receive us into his holy keeping!"  And on the next day, the
water-carrier came in to the jeweller's wife and, throwing
himself at her feet, grovelled in the dust and besought pardon of
her, saying, "O my lady, acquit me of that which Satan deluded me
to do; for it was he that seduced me and led me astray."  She
answered, "Go thy ways, the sin was not in thee, but in my
husband, for that he did what he did in his shop, and Allah hath
retaliated upon him in this world."  And it related that the
goldsmith, when his wife told him how the water-carrier had used
her, said, "Tit for tat, and blow for blow!; had I done more the
water-carrier had done more";--which became a current byword
among the folk.  Therefore it behoveth a wife to be both outward
and inward with her husband; contenting herself with little from
him, if he cannot give her much, and taking pattern by Ayishah
the Truthful and Fatimah the virgin mother (Allah Almighty accept
of them the twain!), that she may be of the company of the
righteous ancestry.[FN#127]  And I have heard the following tale
of




              KHUSRAU AND SHIRIN AND THE FISHERMAN



King Khusrau[FN#128] Shahinshah of Persia loved fish; and one
day, as he sat in his saloon, he and Shirin his wife, there came
a fisherman, with a great fish, and he laid it before the King,
who was pleased and ordered the man four thousand
dirhams.[FN#129]  Thereupon Shirin said to the King, "Thou hast
done ill."  Asked he, "And why?", and she answered, "Because if,
after this, though give one of thy courtiers a like sum, he will
disdain it and say, 'He hath but given me the like of what he
gave the fisherman.'  And if thou give him less, the same will
say, 'He despiseth me and giveth me less than he gave the
fisherman.'"  Rejoined Khusrau, "Thou art right, but it would
dishonour a king to go back on his gift; and the thing is done." 
Quoth Shirin, "If thou wilt, I will contrive thee a means to get
it back from him."  Quoth he, "How so?"; and she said, "Call
back, if thou so please, the fisherman and ask him if the fish be
male or female.  If he say, 'Male,' say thou, 'We want a female,'
and if he say, 'Female,' say, 'We want a male.'"  So the King
sent for the fisherman, who was a man of wit and astuteness, and
said to him, "Is this fish male or female?" whereupon the
fisherman kissed the ground and answered, "This fish is an
hermaphrodite,[FN#130] neither male nor female."  Khusrau laughed
at his clever reply and ordered him other four thousand dirhams. 
So the fisherman went to the treasurer and, taking his eight
thousand dirhams, put them in a sack he had with him.  Then,
throwing it over his shoulder, he was going away, when he dropped
a dirham; so he laid the bag off his back and stooped down to
pick it up.  Now the King and Shirin were looking on, and the
Queen said, "O King, didst thou note the meanness of the man, in
that he must needs stoop down to pick up the one dirham, and
could not bring himself to leave it for any of the King's
servants?"  When the King heard these words, he was exceeding
wroth with the fisherman and said, "Thou art right, O Shirin!" 
So he called the man back and said to him, "Thou low-minded
carle!  Thou art no man!  How couldst thou put the bag with all
this money off thy back and bend thee groundwards to pick up the
one dirham and grudge to leave it where it fell?"  Thereupon the
fisherman kissed the earth before him and answered, "May Allah
prolong the King's life!  Indeed, I did not pick up the dirham
off the ground because of its value in my eyes; but I raised it
off the earth because on one of its faces is the likeness of the
King and on the other his name; and I feared lest any should
unwittingly set foot upon it, thus dishonouring the name and
presentment of the King, and I be blamed for this offence."  The
King wondered at his words and approved of his wit and
shrewdness, and ordered him yet another four thousand dirhams. 
Moreover, he bade cry abroad in his kingdom, saying, "It behoveth
none to be guided by women's counsel; for whoso followeth their
advice, loseth, with his one dirham, other twain."[FN#131]  And
here is the tale they tell of





             YAHYA BIN KHALID THE BARMECIDE AND THE
                            POOR MAN



Yahya bin Khalid the Barmecide was returning home, one day, from
the Caliph's palace, when he saw, at the gate of his mansion, a
man who rose as he drew near and saluted him, saying, "O Yahya, I
am in sore need of that which is in they hand, and I make Allah
my intermediary with thee."  So Yahya caused a place to be set
aside for him in his house and bade his treasurer carry him a
thousand dirhams every day and ordered that his diet be of the
choicest of his own meat.  The man abode in this case a whole
month, at the end of which time, having received in all thirty
thousand dirhams and fearing lest Yahya should take the money
from him, because of the greatness of the sum, he departed by
stealth.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man,
taking with him the money, departed by stealth.  But when they
told Yahya of this, he said, "By Allah, though he had tarried
with me to the end of his days, yet had I not stinted him of my
largesse nor cut off from him the bounties of my hospitality!" 
For, indeed, the excellences of the Barmecides were past count
nor can their virtues be committed to description, especially
those of Yahya bin Khalid, for he was an ocean[FN#132] of noble
qualities, even as saith the poet of him,

     "I asked of Bounty, 'Art thou free?'  Quoth she, *
          'No, I am slave to Yahya Khalid-son!'
     'Boughten?' asked I.  'Allah forfend,' quoth she, *
          'By heirship, sire to sire's transmission!'"

And the following is related of





              MOHAMMED AL-AMIN AND THE SLAVE-GIRL
                                


Ja'afar bin Musa al-Hadi[FN#133] once had a slave-girl, a lutist,
called Al-Badr al-Kabir, than whom there was not in her time a
fairer of face nor shapelier of shape nor a more elegant of
manners nor a more accomplished in the art of singing and
striking the strings; she was indeed perfect in beauty and
extreme in every charm.  Now Mohammed al-Amin,[FN#134] son of
Zubaydah, heard of her and was urgent with Ja'afar to sell her to
him; but he replied, "Thou knowest it beseemeth not one of my
rank to sell slave-girls nor set prices on concubines; but were
she not a rearling I would send her to thee, as a gift, not
grudge her to thee."  And Mohammed al-Amin, some days after this
went to Ja'afar's house, to make merry; and the host set before
him that which it behoveth to set before true friends and bade
the damsel Al-Badr al-Kabir sing to him and gladden him.  So she
tuned the lute and sang with a ravishing melody; whilst Mohammed
al-Amin fell to drinking and jollity and bade the cupbearers ply
Ja'afar with much wine, till they made him drunken, when he took
the damsel and carried her to his own house, but laid not a
finger on her.  And when the morrow dawned he bade invite
Ja'afar; and when he came, he set wine before him and made the
girl sing to him, from behind the curtain.  Ja'afar knew her
voice and was angered at this, but, of the nobleness of his
nature and the magnanimity of his mind he showed no change.  Now
when the carousal was at an end, Al-Amin commanded one of his
servants to fill the boat, wherein Ja'afar had come, with dirhams
and dinars and all manner of jewels and jacinths and rich raiment
and goods galore.  So he laid therein a thousand myriads of money
and a thousand fine pearls, each worth twenty thousand dirhams;
nor did he give over loading the barge with all manner of things
precious and rare, till the boatmen cried out for help, saying,
"The boat can't hold any more;" whereupon he bade them carry all
this to Ja'afar's palace.  Such are the exploits of the
magnanimous, Allah have mercy on them!  And a tale is related of





           THE SONS OF YAHYA BIN KHALID AND SA'ID BIN
                        SALIM AL-BAHILI



Quoth Sa'id bin Salim al'Bahili,[FN#135] I was once in very
narrow case, during the days of Harun al-Rashid, and debts
accumulated upon me, burdening my back, and these I had no means
of discharging.  I was at my wits' end what to do, for my doors
were blocking up with creditors and I was without cease
importuned for payment by claimants, who dunned me in crowds till
at last I was sore perplexed and troubled.  So I betook myself to
Abdallah bin Malik al-Khuza'i[FN#136] and besought him to extend
the hand of aid with his judgement and direct me of his good
counsel to the door of relief; and he said, 'None can save thee
from this thy strait and sorrowful state save the Barmecides.' 
Quoth I, 'Who can brook their pride and put up patiently with
their arrogant pretensions?' and quoth he, 'Thou wilt put up with
all this for the bettering of thy case.'"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-third Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdallah
ibn Malik al-Khuza'i said to Sa'id bin Salim, "Thou wilt put up
with all this for the bettering of thy case."  "So I left him
suddenly (continued Sa'id) and went straight to Al-Fazl and
Ja'afar, sons of Yahya bin Khalid, to whom I related my
circumstances; whereto they replied, 'Allah give thee His aid,
and render thee by His bounties independent of His creatures and
vouchsafe thee abundant weal and bestow on thee what shall
suffice thee, without the need of any but Himself; for whatso He
willeth that He can, and He is gracious with His servants and
knoweth their wants.'  So I went out from the twain and returned
to Abdallah, with straitened breast and mind perplexed and heavy
of heart, and repeated to him what they had said.  Quoth he,
'Thou wouldst do well to abide with us this day, that we may see
what Allah Almighty will decree.'  So I sat with him awhile, when
lo! up came my servant, who said to me, 'O my lord, there are at
our door many laden mules and with them a man, who says he is the
agent of Al-Fazl and Ja'afar bin Yahya.'  Quoth Abdallah, 'I
trust that relief is come to thee: rise up and go see what is the
matter.'  So I left him and, hastening to my house, found at the
door a man who gave me a note wherein was written the following:
'After thou hadst been with us and we heard thy case, we betook
ourselves to the Caliph and informed him that ill condition had
reduced thee to the humiliation of begging; where upon he ordered
us to supply thee with a thousand thousand dirhams from the
Treasury.  We represented to him: 'The debtor will spend this
money in paying off creditors and wiping off debt; whence then
shall he provide for his subsistence?  So he ordered thee other
three hundred thousand, and each of us hath also sent thee, of
his proper wealth, a thousand thousand dirhams: so that thou hast
now three thousand thousand and three hundred thousand dirhams
wherewithal to order and amend thine estate.'"  See, then, the
munificence of these magnificos: Almighty Allah have mercy on
them!  And a tale is told of





             THE WOMAN'S TRICK AGAINST HER HUSBAND



A man brought his wife a fish one Friday and, bidding her to cook
it against the end of the congregational prayers, went out to his
craft and business.  Meanwhile in came her friend who bade her to
a wedding at his house; so she agreed and, laying the fish in a
jar of water, went off with him and was absent a whole week till
the Friday following;[FN#137] whilst her husband sought her from
house to house and enquired after her; but none could give him
any tidings of her.  Now on the next Friday she came home and he
fell foul of her; but she brought out to him the fish alive from
the jar and assembled the folk against him and told them her
tale.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman
brought out the fish alive from the water-jar and assembled the
folk against her husband, and told them her tale.  He also told
his; but they credited him not and said, "It cannot be that the
fish should have remained alive all this while."  So they proved
him mad and imprisoned him and mocked at him, where upon he shed
tears in floods and recited these two couplets,

     "Old hag, of high degree in filthy life, *
          Whose face her monstrous lewdness witnesses.
     When menstuous she bawds; when clean she whores; *
          And all her time bawd or adulteress is."

And a tale is related of the





              THE DEVOUT WOMAN AND THE TWO WICKED
                         ELDERS[FN#138]



There was in times of yore and in ages long gone before, a
virtuous woman among the children of Israel, who was pious and
devout and used every day to go out to the place of prayer, first
entering a garden, which adjoined thereto, and there making the
minor ablution.  Now there were in this garden two old men, its
keepers, and both Shaykhs fell in love with her and sought her
favours; but she refused, whereupon said they, "Unless thou yield
thy body to us, we will bear witness against thee of
fornication."  Quoth she, "Allah will preserve me from your
frowardness!"  Then they opened the garden-gate and cried out,
and the folk came to them from all places, saying "What aileth
you?"  Quoth they, "We found this damsel in company with a youth
who was doing lewdness with her; but he escaped from our hands." 
Now it was the wont of the people in those days to expose
adulterer and adulteress to public reproach for three days, and
after stone them.  So they cried her name in the public streets
for three days, while the two elders came up to her daily and,
laying their hands on her head, said, "Praised be Allah who hath
sent down on thee His righteous indignation!"  Now on the fourth
day, when they bore her away to stone her, they were followed by
a lad named Daniel, who was then only twelve years old, and this
was to be the first of his miracles (upon our Prophet and upon
him the blessing and peace!).  And he ceased not following them
to the place of execution, till he came up with them and said to
them, "Hasten not to stone her, till I judge between them."  So
they set him a chair and he sat down and summoned the old men
separately.  (Now he was the first ever separated witnesses.) 
Then said he to the first, "What sawest thou?"[FN#139]  So he
repeated to him his story, and Daniel asked, "In what part of the
garden did this befal?" and he answered, "On the eastern side,
under a pear-tree."  Then he called the other old man and asked
him the same question, and he replied, "On the western side of
the garden, under an apple-tree."  Meanwhile the damsel stood by,
with her hands and eyes raised heavenwards, imploring the Lord
for deliverance.  Then Allah Almighty sent down His blasting
leven-fire upon the elders and consumed them, and on this wise
the Lord made manifest the innocence of the damsel.  Such was the
first of the miracles of the Prophet Daniel, on whom be blessing
and peace!  And they relate a tale of





            JA'AFAR THE BARMECIDE AND THE OLD BADAWL



The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, went out one day,
with Abu Ya'Kub the cup-companion[FN#140] and Ja'afar the
Barmecide and Abu Nowas, into the desert, where they fell in with
an old man, propt against his ass.  The Caliph bade Ja'afar learn
of him whence he came; so he asked him, "Whence comest thou?" and
he answered, "From Bassorah."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Ja'afar asked the man, "Whence comest thou?"; he answered "From
Bassorah."  Quoth Ja'afar, "And whither goest thou?"  Quoth the
other, "To Baghdad."  Then Ja'afar enquired "And what wilt thou
do there?" and the old man replied, "I go to seek medicine for my
eye."  Said the Caliph, "O Ja'afar, make thou sport with him,"
and answered Ja'afar, "I shall hear what I shall exceedingly
mislike."[FN#141]  But Al-Rashid rejoined, "I charge thee on my
authority, jest with him."  Thereupon Ja'afar said to the Badawi,
"If I prescribe thee a medicine that shall profit thee, what wilt
thou give me in return?"  Quoth the other, "Allah Almighty will
requite the kindness with what is better for thee than any
requital of mine."  Continued Ja'afar, "Now lend me an ear and I
will give thee a prescription, which I have given to none but
thee."  "What is that?" asked the Badawi; and Ja'afar answered,
"Take three ounces of wind-breaths and the like of sunbeams and
the same of moonshine and as much of lamp-light; mix them well
together and let them lie in the wind three months.  Then place
them three months in a mortar without a bottom and pound them to
a fine powder and after trituration set them in a cleft platter,
and let it stand in the wind other three months; after which use
of this medicine three drachms every night in thy sleep, and,
Inshallah! thou shalt be healed and whole."  Now when the Badawi
heard this, he stretched himself out to full length on the
donkey's back and let fly a terrible loud fart[FN#142] and said
to Ja'afar, "Take this fart in payment of thy prescription.  When
I have followed it, if Allah grant me recovery, I will give thee
a slave-girl, who shall serve thee in they lifetime a service,
wherewith Allah shall cut short thy term; and when thou diest and
the Lord hurrieth thy soul to hell-fire, she shall blacken thy
face with her skite, of her mourning for thee, and shall keen and
beat her face, saying 'O frosty-beard, what a fool thou
wast?'"[FN#143]  thereupon Harun al-Rashid laughed till he fell
backward, and ordered the Badawi three thousand silver pieces. 
And a tale is told of 





             THE CALIPH OMAR BIN AL-KHATTAB AND THE
                          YOUNG BADAWI



The Sharif Husayn bin Rayyan relateth that the Caliph Omar bin
Al-Khattab was sitting one day judging the folk and doing justice
between his subjects, attended by the best and wisest of his
counsellors, when there came up to him a youth comely and cleanly
attired, upon whom two very handsome youths had laid hold and
were haling by the collar till they set him in the presence. 
Whereupon the Commander of the Faithful, Omar, looked at him and
them and bade them loose him; then, calling him near to himself,
asked the twain, "What is your case with him?"  They answered, "O
Prince of True Believers, we are two brothers by one mother and
as followers of verity known are we.  We had a father, a very old
man of good counsel, honoured by the tribes, sound of baseness
renowned for goodliness, who reared us tenderly in childhood, and
loaded us with favours in manhood;"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two
youths said to the Commander of the Faithful, Omar son of Al-
Khattab, "Our father was a man honoured by the tribes, sound of
baseness and renowned for goodliness, who reared us delicately in
childhood and loaded us with favours in manhood; in fine, a sea
of noble and illustrious qualities, worthy of the poet's praise,

     'Is Aub's-Sakr of Shayban[FN#144]?' they asked; *
          Quoth I, 'Nay, by my life, of him's Shayban:
     How many a sire rose high by a noble son, *
          As Allah's prophet glorified Adnan!'[FN#145]

Now he went forth this day to his garden, to refresh himself
amongst its trees and pluck the ripe fruits, when this young man
slew him wrongously and swerved from the road of righteousness;
wherefore we demand of thee the retribution of his crime and call
upon thee to pass judgement upon him, according to the
commandment of Allah."  Then Omar cast a terrible look at the
accused youth and said to him, "Verily thou hearest the complaint
these two young men prefer; what hast thou in reply to aver?" 
But he was brave of heart and bold of speech, having doffed the
robe of pusillanimity and put off the garb of cowardry; so he
smiled and spake in the most eloquent and elegant words; and,
after paying the usual ceremonial compliments to the Caliph,
said, ""By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I have indeed
given ear to their complaint, and they have told the truth in
that which they tell, so far as they have set out what befel; and
the commandment of Allah is a decreed decree.[FN#146]  but I will
forthright state my case between they hands, and it is for thee
to give commands.  Know then, O Prince of the Faithful, that I am
a very Arab of the Arabies,[FN#147] the noblest of those that are
beneath the skies.  I grew up in the dwellings of the wold and
fell, till evil times my tribe befel, when I came to the
outskirts of this town, with my family and whatso goods I own:
and, as I went along one of the paths leading to its gardens,
orchards and garths, with my she-camels highly esteemed and by me
most precious deemed, and midst them a stallion of noble blood
and shape right good, a plenteous getter of brood, by whom the
females abundantly bore and who walked among them as though a
kingly crown he wore, one of the she-camels broke away; and,
running to the garden of these young men's father, where the
trees showed above the wall, put forth her lips and began to feed
as in stall.  I ran to her, to drive her away, when behold, there
appeared, at a breach of the wall, an old man and grey, whose
eyes sparkled with angry ray, holding in his right a stone to
throw and swaying to and fro, with a swing like a lion ready for
a spring.  He cast the stone at my stallion, and it killed him
for it struck a vital part.  When I saw the stallion drop dead
beside me, I felt live coals of anger kindled in my heart; so I
took up the very same stone and throwing it at the old man, it
was the cause of his bane and ban: thus his own wrongful act
returned to him anew, and the man was slain of that wherewith he
slew.  When the stone struck him, he cried out with a great cry
and shrieked out a terrible shriek, whereupon I hastened from the
spot; but these two young men hurried after me and laid hands on
me and before thee carried me."  Quoth Omar (Almighty Allah
accept of him!), "Thou hast confessed what thou committedest, and
of acquittal there is no possible occasion; for urgent is the law
of retaliation and they cried for mercy but it was not a time to
escape."[FN#148]  the youth answered, "I hear and obey the
judgement of the Imam, and I consent to all required by the law
of Al-Islam; but I have a young brother, whose old father, before
his decease, appointed to him wealth in great store and gold
galore, and committed his affair to me before Allah, saying: 'I
give this into thy hand for thy brother; keep it for him with 