all
thy might.'  So I took the money and buried it; nor doth any know
of it but I.  Now, if thou adjudge me to be justiced forthright,
the money will lost and thou shalt be the cause of its loss;
wherefore the child will sue thee for his due on the day when the
Creator shall judge between His creatures.  But, if thou wilt
grant me three days' delay, I will appoint some guardian to
administer the affairs of the boy and return to answer my debt;
and I have one who will be my surety for the fulfillment of this
my promise."  So the Commander of the Faithful bowed his head
awhile, then raised it and looking round upon those present,
said, "Who will stand surety by me for his return to this place?" 
And the youth looked at the faces of those who were in company
and pointing to Abu Zarr,[FN#149] in preference to all present,
said, "This man shall answer for me and be my bail."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
youth pointed to Abu Zarr and said, "This man shall answer for me
and be my bail," Omar (Allah accept of him!) said, O Abu Zarr,
dost thou hear these words and wilt thou be surety to me for the
return of this youth?"  He answered, "Yes, O Commander of the
Faithful, I will be surety for him for three days."  So the
Caliph accepted his guarantee and let the young man go.  Now when
the appointed time passed and the days of grace were nearly or
quite at end yet the youth came not, the Caliph took seat in his
council, with the Companions surrounding him, like the
constellations about the moon, Abu Zarr and the plaintiffs being
also present; and the avengers said, "Where is the defendant, O
Abu Zarr, and how shall he return, having once fled?   But we
will not stir from our places till thou bring him to us, that we
may take of him our blood revenge."  Replied Abu Zarr, "By the
truth of the All-Wise King, if the three days of grace expire and
the young man returneth not, I will fulfill my warranty and
surrender my person to the Imam;" and added Omar (whom Allah
accept!), "By the Lord, if the young man appear not, I will
assuredly execute on Abu Zarr that which is prescribed by the law
of Al-Islam!"[FN#150]  thereupon the eyes of the bystanders ran
over with tears; those who looked on groaned aloud and great was
the clamour.  Then the chiefs of the Companions urged the
plaintiffs to accept the blood-wit and deserve the thanks of the
folk; but they both refused and would accept nothing save the
talion.  However, as the folk were swaying to and fro like waves
and loudly bemoaning Abu Zarr, behold, up came the young Badawi;
and, standing before the Imam, saluted him right courteously
(with sweat-beaded face and shining with the crescent's grace)
and said to him, "I have given the lad in charge to his mother's
brothers and have made them acquainted with all that pertaineth
to his affairs and let them into the secrets of his monies; after
which I braved the heats of noon and have kept my word as a free-
born man."  Thereupon the folk marvelled, seeing his good faith
and loyalty and his offering himself to death with so stout a
heart; and one said to him, "How noble a youth art thou and how
loyal to thy word of honour and thy devoir!"  Rejoined he, "Are
ye not convinced that when death presenteth itself, none can
escape from it?  And indeed, I have kept my word, that it be not
said, 'Good faith is gone from among mankind.' " Said Abu Zarr,
"By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I became warrant for this
young man, without knowing to what tribe he belonged, nor had I
seen him before that day; but, when he turned away from all who
were present and singled me out, saying, 'This man shall answer
for me and be my bail,' I thought it not right to refuse him, and
generosity forbade to disappoint his desire, there being no harm
in compliance therewith, that it be not bruited abroad,
Benevolence is gone from among mankind."  Then said the two young
men, "O Commander of the Faithful, we forgive this youth our
father's blood, seeing that he hath changed desolation into
cheerfulness; that it be not said, Humanity is gone from among
mankind."  So the Caliph rejoiced in the acquittance of the youth
and his truth and good faith; moreover, he magnified the
generosity of Abu Zarr, extolling it over all his companions, and
approved the resolve of the two young men for its benevolence,
giving them praise with thanks and applying to their case the
saying of the poet, 

     "Who doth kindness to men shall be paid again; *
          Ne'er is kindness lost betwixt God and men."

Then he offered to pay them, from the Treasury, the blood-wit for
their father; but they refused, saying, "We forgave him only of
our desire unto Allah,[FN#151] the Bountiful, the Exalted; and he
who is thus intentioned followeth not his benefits with reproach
or with mischief."[FN#152]  and amongst the tales they relate is
that of





                  THE CALIPH AL-MAAMUN AND THE
                   PYRAMIDS[FN#153] OF EGYPT



It is told that the Caliph Al-Maamun, son of Harun al-Rashid,
when he entered the God-guarded city of Cairo, was minded to pull
down the Pyramids, that he might take what was therein; but, when
he went about to do this, he could not succeed, albeit his best
was done.  He expended a mint of money in the attempt,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Three Hundred Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Maamun
attempting to pull down the Pyramids, expended his mint of money,
but succeeded only in opening up a small tunnel in one of them,
where in it is said he found treasure to the exact amount of the
monies he had spent in the works, neither more nor less; whereat
he marvelled and taking what he found there, desisted from his
determination.  Now the Pyramids are three, and they are one of
the Wonders of the World; nor is there on the face of earth aught
like them for height and fashion and mysteries[FN#154]; for they
are built of huge rocks, and the builders proceeded by piercing
one block of stone and setting therein upright rods of
iron[FN#155]; after which they pierced a second block of stone
and lowered it upon the first.  Then they poured melted lead upon
the clamps and set the blocks in geometrical order, till the
building was complete.  Now the height of each pyramid was an
hundred cubits, of the normal measure of the day, and it had four
faces, each three hundred cubits long from the base and thence
battering upwards to a point.  The ancients say that, in the
western Pyramid, are thirty chambers of parti-coloured syenite,
full of precious gems and treasures galore and rare images and
utensils and costly weapons which are anointed with egromantic
unguents, so that they may not rust until the day of
Resurrection.[FN#156]  Therein, also, are vessels of glass which
bend and break not, containing various kinds of compound drugs
and sympathetic waters.  In the second Pyramid are the records of
the priests, written on tablets of syenite, to each priest his
tablet, whereon are engraved the wonders of his craft and his
feats; and on the walls are the human figures like idols, working
with their hands at all manner of mechanism and seated on stepped
thrones.  Moreover, to each Pyramid there is a guardian treasurer
who keepeth watch over it and wardeth it, to all eternity,
against the ravages of time and the shifts of events; and indeed
the marvels of these Pyramids astound all who have sight and
insight.  Many are the poems that describe them, thou shalt
thereby profit no small matter, and among the rest, quoth one of
them,

     "If Kings would see their high emprize preserved, *
          'Twill be by tongues of monuments they laid:
     Seest not the Pyramids?  These two endure *
          Despite what change Time and Change have made."

And quoth another,

     "Look on the Pyramids, and hear the twain *
          Recount their annals of the long-gone Past:
     Could they but speak, high marvels had they told *
          Of what Time did to man from first to last."

And quoth a third,

     "My friend I prithee tell me, 'neath the sky *
          Is aught with Egypt's Pyramids can compare?
     Buildings which frighten Time, albe what dwells *
          On back of earth in fear of Time must fare:
     If on their marvels rest my sight no more, *
          Yet these I ever shall in memory bear."

And quoth a fourth,

     "Where is the man who built the Pyramids? *
          What was his tribe, what day and where his tomb?
     The monuments survive the men who built *
          Awhile, till overthrown by touch of Doom."

And men also tell a tale of





                   THE THIEF AND THE MERCHANT



There was once a thief who repented to Almighty Allah with
sincere penitence; so he opened himself a shop for the sale of
stuffs, where he continued to trade awhile. It so chanced one day
that he locked his shop and went home, and in the night there
came to the bazar an artful thief disguised in the habit of the
merchant, and pulling out keys from his sleeve, said to the
watchman of the market, "Light me this wax-candle."  The watchman
took the taper and went to light it,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
watchman took the taper and went to light it, whilst the thief
opened the shop and lit another candle he had by him.  When the
watchman came back, he found him seated in the shop, account-
books inhand, and reckoning with his fingers; nor did he cease to
do thus till point of day, when he said to the man, "Fetch me a
camel-driver and his camel, to carry some goods for me."  So the
man fetched him a camel, and the thief took four bales[FN#157] of
stuffs and gave them to the cameleer, who loaded them on his
beast.  Then he gave the watchman two dirhams and went away after
the camel-driver, leaving the watchman believing him to be the
owner of the shop.  Now when the morning dawned and day broke the
merchant came and the watchman began greeting him with blessings,
because of the two dirhams; but the shop-keeper wondered at his
words as one not knowing what he meant.  When he opened his shop,
he saw the droppings of the wax and the account-book lying on the
floor, and looking round, found four bales of stuffs missing.  So
he asked the watchman what had happened and he told him what has
passed in the night and what had been said to the cameleer,
whereupon the merchant bade him fetch the man and asked him,
"Whither didst thou carry the stuffs this morning?"  Answered the
driver, "To such a landing-place, and I stowed them on board such
a vessel."  Said the merchant, "Come with me thither;" so the
camel-driver carried him to the landing-place and said to him,
"This be the barque and this be her owner."  Quoth the merchant
to the seaman, "Whither didst thou carry the merchant and the
stuff?"  Answered the boat-master, "To such a place, where he
fetched a camel-driver and, setting the bales on the camel, went
his ways I know not whither."  "Fetch me the cameleer who carried
the goods," said the merchant; so he fetched him and the merchant
said to him, "Whither didst thou carry the bales of goods from
the ship?"  "To such a Khan," answered he; and the merchant
rejoined, "Come thither with me and show it to me."  So the
camel-man went with him to a place far distant from the shore and
showed him the Khan where he had set down the stuffs, and at the
same time the false merchant's magazine, which he opened and
found therein his four bales bound up as they had been packed. 
The thief had laid his cloak over them; so the merchant took the
cloak as well as the bales and delivered them to the camel-
driver, who laid them on his camel; after which he locked the
magazine and went away with the cameleer.  On the way, he was
confronted with the thief who followed him, till he had shipped
the bales, when he said to him, "O my brother (Allah have thee in
His holy keeping!), thou hast indeed recovered thy goods and
naught of them is lost; so give me back my cloak."  The merchant
laughed and, giving him back his cloak, let him go unhindered;
whereupon both went their ways.  And they tell a tale of





              MASRUR THE EUNUCH AND IBN AL-KARIBI



The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, was exceedingly
restless one night; so he said to his Wazir Ja'afar, "I am
sleepless to-night and my breast is straitened and I know not
what to do."  Now his castrato Masrur was standing before him,
and he laughed: whereupon the Caliph said "At whom laughest thou?
Is it to make mock of me or hath madness seized thee?"  Answered
Masrur, "Nay, by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

             When it was the Four Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Harun al-
Rashid said to Masrur the Sworder, "Dost thou laugh to make mock
of me or hath madness seized thee?"  Answered Masrur, "Nay, by
Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I swear by thy kinship to the
Prince of Apostles, I did it not of my free will; but I went out
yesterday to walk within sight of the palace and, coming to the
bank of the Tigris, saw there the folk collected; so I stopped
and found a man, Ibn al-Karibi hight, who was making them laugh;
but just now I recalled what he said, and laughter got the better
of me; and I crave pardon of thee, O Commander of the Faithful!" 
Quoth the Caliph, "Bring him to me forthright;" so Masrur
repaired in all haste to Ibn al-Karibi and said to him, "Answer
the summons of the Commander of the Faithful," whereto he
replied, "I hear and obey."  "But on condition," added Masrur,
"that, if he give thee aught, thou shalt have a quarter and the
rest shall be mine."  Replied the droll, "Nay, thou shalt have
half and I half."  Rejoined Masrur, "Not so, I will have three-
quarters."  Lastly said Ibn al-Karibi, "Thou shalt have two-
thirds and I the other third;" to which Masrur agreed, after much
higgling and haggling, and they returned to the palace together. 
Now when Ibn al-Karibi came into the Caliph's presence he saluted
him as men greet the Caliphate, and stood before him; whereupon
said Al-Rashid to him, "If thou do not make me laugh, I will give
thee three blows with this bag."  Quoth Ibn al-Karibi in his
mind, "And a small matter were blows with that bag, seeing that
beating with whips hurteth me not;" for he thought the bag was
empty.  Then he began to deal out his drolleries, such as would
make the dismallest jemmy guffaw, and gave vent to all manner of
buffooneries; but the Caliph laughed not neither smiled, whereat
Ibn al-Karibi marvelled and was chagrined and affrighted.  Then
said the Commander of the Faithful, "Now hast thou earned the
beating," and gave him a blow with the bag, wherein were four
pebbles each two rotols in weight.  The blow fell on his neck and
he gave a great cry, then calling to mind his compact with
Masrur, said, "Pardon, O Commander of the Faithful!  Hear two
words from me."  Quoth the Caliph, "Say on," and quoth Ibn al-
Karibi, "Masrur made it a condition with me and I a covenant with
him, that whatsoever largesse might come to me of the bounties of
the Commander of the Faithful, one-third thereof should be mine
and the rest his; nor did he agree to leave me so much as one-
third, save after much higgling and haggling.  I have had my
share and here standeth he, ready to receive his portion; so pay
him the two other blows."  Now when the Caliph heard this, he
laughed until he fell on his back; then calling Masrur, he gave
him a blow, whereat he cried out and said, "O Commander of the
Faithful, the one-third sufficeth me: give him the two-thirds."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Masrur
cried out, "O Commander of the Faithful! The one-third sufficeth
me; give him the two-thirds."  So the Caliph laughed at them and
ordered them a thousand dinars each, and they went away,
rejoicing at the largesse.  And of the tales they tell is one of





                       THE DEVOTEE PRINCE



The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, had a son who,
from the time he attained the age of sixteen, renounced the world
and walked in the way[FN#158] of ascetics and devotees.  He was
wont to go out to the graveyards and say, "Ye once ruled the
world, but that saved you not from death, and now are ye come to
your sepulchres!  Would Heaven I knew what ye said and what is
said to you!"[FN#159]  and he wept as one weepeth who is troubled
with fear and apprehension, and repeated the worlds of the poet, 

     "Affright me funerals at every time; *
          And wailing women grieve me to the soul!"

Now it chanced one day, as he sat among the tombs, according to
his custom, his father passed by in all his state, surrounded by
his Wazirs and Lords of the realm and the Officers of his
household, who seeing the Caliph's son with a gown of woollen
stuff on his body and a twist of wool on his head by way of
turband, said to one another, "Verily this youth dishonoureth the
Commander of the Faithful among Kings: but, if he reproved him,
he would leave his present way of life."   The Caliph heard these
words; so quoth he to his son, "O my dear child, of a truth thou
disgracest me by thy present way of life."  The young man looked
at him and made no reply: then he beckoned to a bird perched on
the battlements of the palace, and said to it, "O thou bird, I
conjure thee by Him who created thee, alight upon my hand."
Whereupon straightway it swooped down and perched on his finger. 
Then quoth he, "Return to thy place;" and it did so.  Presently
he said, "Alight on the hand of the Commander of the Faithful;"
but it refused there to perch, and he cried to his father, "It is
thou that disgracest me amongst the Holy[FN#160] Ones, by the
love of the world; and now I am resolved to part from thee, never
to return to thee, save in the world to come."  Then he went down
to Bassorah, where he took to working with those which wrought in
clay,[FN#161] receiving, as his day's hire, but a dirham and a
danik;[FN#162] and with the danik he fed himself and gave alms of
the dirham.  (Quoth Abu Amir of Bassorah) "There fell down a wall
in my house; so I went forth to the station of the artisans to
find a man who should repair it for me, and my eyes fell on a
handsome youth of a radiant countenance.  So I saluted him and
asked him, 'O my friend, dost thou seek work?' 'Yes,' answered
he; and I said, 'Come with me and build a wall.'  He replied, 'On
certain conditions I will make with thee.'  Quoth I 'What are
they, O my friend?'; and quoth he, 'My wage must be a dirham and
a danik, and again when the Mu'ezzin calleth to prayer, thou
shalt let me go pray with the congregation.'  'It is well,'
answered I and carried him to my lace, where he fell to work,
such work as I never saw the like of.  Presented I named to him
the morning-meal; but he said, 'No;' and I knew that he was
fasting.[FN#163]  When he heard the call to prayer, he said to
me, 'Thou knowest the condition?'  'Yes,' answered i.  So he
loosed his girdle and, applying himself to the lesser ablution,
made it after a fashion than which I never saw a fairer;[FN#164]
then he went to the mosque and prayed with the congregation and
returned to his work.  He did the same upon the call to mid-
afternoon prayer, and when I saw him fall to work again
thereafterward, I said to him, 'O my friend, verily the hours of
labour are over; a workman's day is but till the time of
afternoon-prayer.'  But he replied, 'Praise to the Lord, my
service is till the night.'  And he ceased not to work till
nightfall, when I gave him two dirhams; whereupon he asked 'What
is this!'; and I answered, 'By Allah, this is but part of thy
wage, because of thy diligence in my service.'  But he threw them
back to me saying, 'I will have no more than was agreed upon
between us twain.'  I urged him to take them, but could not
prevail upon him; so I gave him the dirham and the danik, and he
went away.  And when morning dawned, I went to the station but
found him not; so I enquired for him and was told, 'He cometh
thither only on Sabbaths.'  Accordingly, when Saturday came, I
betook me to the market and finding him there, said to him,
'Bismillah, do me the favour to come and work for me.'  Said he,
'Upon the conditions thou wottest;' and I answered 'Yes!'  Then
carrying him to my house I stood to watch him where he could not
see me; and he took a handful of puddled clay and laid it on the
wall, when, behold, the stones ranged themselves one upon other;
and I said, 'On this wise are Allah's holy ones.' he worked out
his day and did even more than before; and when it was night, I
gave him his hire, and he took it and walked away.  Now when the
third Saturday came round, I went to the place of standing, but
found him not; so I asked after him and they told me, 'He is sick
and lying in the shanty of such a woman.'  Now this was an old
wife, renowned for piety, who had a hovel of reeds in the burial-
ground.  So I fared thither and found him stretched on the floor
which was bare, with a brick for a pillow and his face beaming
like the new moon with light.  I saluted him and he returned my
salam; and I sat down at his head weeping over his fair young
years and absence from home and submission to the will of his
Lord.  Then said I to him, 'Hast thou any need?'  'Yes,' answered
he; and I said, 'What is it?'  He replied, 'Come hither to-morrow
in the forenoon and thou wilt find me dead.  Wash me and dig my
grave and tell none thereof: but shroud me in this my gown, after
thou hast unsewn it and taken out what thou shalt find in the
bosom-pocket, which keep with thee.  Then, when thou hast prayed
over me and laid me in the dust, go to Baghdad and watch for the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid, till he come forth, when do thou give him
what thou shalt find in the breast of my gown and bear him my
salutation.'  Then he ejaculated the profession of the Faith and
glorified his God in the most eloquent of words, reciting these
couplets,

     'Carry the trust of him whom death awaits *
          To Al-Rashid and God reward thy care!
     And say 'An exile who desired thy sight *
          Long loving, from afar sends greeting fair.
     Nor hate nor irk (No!) him from thee withdrew, *
          Kissing thy right to Heaven brought him near.[FN#165]
     But what estranged his soul, O sire, from thee *
          Is that thy worldly joys it would not share!'

Then he betook himself to prayer, asking pardon of Allah'--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
then betook himself to asking pardon of Allah and to invoking
prayer and praise upon the Apostle and the Lord of the Just and
repeating verses of the Koran; after which he recited these
couplets,

     "O sire, be not deceived by worldly joys; *
          For life must pass, and joy must learn to mourn;
     When thou art told of folk in evil plight, *
          Think thou must answer for all hearts forlorn;
     And when thou bear thy dead towards the tombs, *
          Know thou wilt likewise on that way be bourne."

Continued Abu the Basri, "Now when the youth had ended his charge
and his verses I left him and went home.  On the morrow, I
returned, at the appointed hour, and found him indeed dead, the
mercy of Allah be upon him!  So I washed him and, unsewing his
gown, found in the bosom a ruby worth thousands of gold pieces
and said to myself, 'By Allah, this youth was indeed weaned from
worldly things!'  After I had buried him, I made my way to
Baghdad and, going to the Caliph's palace, waited till he came
forth, when I addressed him in one of the streets and gave him
the ruby, which when he saw, he knew and fell down in a fainting-
fit.  His attendants laid hands on me, but he revived and said to
them, 'Release him and bring him courteously to the palace.' 
They did his bidding, and when he returned, he sent for me and
carrying me into his chamber said to me, 'How doth the owner of
this ruby?'  Quoth I, 'Verily, he is dead;' and told him what had
passed; whereupon he fell a-weeping and said, 'The son hath
gained; but the sire hath lost.'  Then he called out, saying,
'Ho, such an one!'; and behold there came out to him a lady who,
when she saw me, would have withdrawn; but he cried to her,
'Come, and mind him not.'  So she entered and saluted, and he
threw her the ruby, which when she saw and she knew, she shrieked
a great shriek and fell down in a swoon.  As soon as she came to
herself, she said, 'O Commander of the Faithful, what hath Allah
done with my son?'; and he said to me, 'Do thou tell her his
case' (as he could not speak for weeping).  Accordingly, I
repeated the story to her, and she began to shed tears and say in
a faint and wailing voice, 'How I have longed for thy sight, O
solace of mine eyes![FN#166] Would I might have given thee to
drink, when thou hadst none to slake thy thirst!  Would I might
have cheered thee, whenas thou foundest never a cheerer!'  And
she poured forth tears and recited these couplets,

     'I weep for one whose lot a lonely death befel; *
          Without a friend to whom he might complain and moan:
     And after glory and glad union with his friends, *
          He woke to desolation, friendless, lorn and lone;
     What Fortune hides a while she soon to all men shall show; *
          Death never spared a man; no, not a single one:
     O absent one, my Lord decreed thee strangerhood, *
          Far from thy nearest friends and to long exile gone:
     Though Death forbid my hope of meeting here again, *
          On Doom-day's morrow we shall meet again, my
son![FN#167]

Quoth I, 'O Commander of the Faithful, was he indeed thy son?' 
Quoth he, 'Yes, and indeed, before I succeeded to this office, he
was wont to visit the learned and company with the devout; but,
when I became Caliph, he grew estranged from me and withdrew
himself apart.[FN#168]  Then said I to his mother, 'Verily this
thy son hath cut the world and devoted his life to Almighty
Allah, and it may be that hard times shall befal him and he be
smitten with trial of evil chance; wherefore do thou given him
this ruby, which he may find useful in hour of need.'  So she
gave it him, conjuring him to take it, and he obeyed her bidding. 
Then he left to us the things of our world and removed himself
from us; nor did he cease to be absent from us, till he went to
the presence of Allah (to whom be Honour and Glory!), pious and
pure.'  Then said he, 'Come, show me his grave.'  So, I travelled
with him to Bassorah and showed him his son's grave; and when he
saw it, he wept and lamented, till he fell down in a swoon; after
which he recovered and asked pardon of the Lord, saying, 'We are
Allah's and unto Him we are returning!'; and involved blessings
on the dead.  Then he asked me to become his companion, but I
said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful, verily, in thy son's
case is for me the most momentous of admonitions!'  And I recited
these couplets,

     "'Tis I am the stranger, visited by none; *
          I am the stranger though in town my own:
     'Tis I am the stranger! Lacking kith and son, *
          And friend to whom I mote for aidance run.
     I house in mosques which are my only home; *
          My heart there wones and shall for ever wone:
     Then laud ye Allah, Lord of Worlds, as long *
          As soul and body dwell in union!'"

And a famous tale is told of





            THE UNWISE SCHOOLMASTER WHO FELL IN LOVE
                           BY REPORT
                                


Quoth one of the learned, "I passed once by a school, wherein a
schoolmaster was teaching children; so I entered, finding him a
good-looking man and a well-dressed; when he rose to me and made
me sit with him.  Then I examined him in the Koran and in syntax
and prosody and lexicography; and behold, he was perfect in all
required of him, so I said to him, 'Allah strengthen thy purpose! 
Thou art indeed versed in all that is requisite,' thereafter I
frequented him a while, discovering daily some new excellence in
him, and quoth I to myself, 'This is indeed a wonder in any
dominie; for the wise are agreed upon a lack of wit in children's
teachers.'  Then I separated myself from him and sought him and
visited him only every few days, till coming to see him one day
as of wont, I found the school shut and made enquiry of his
neighbors, who replied, 'Some one is dead in his house.'  So I
said in my mind, 'It behoveth me to pay him a visit of
condolence,' and going to his house, knocked at the door, when a
slave-girl came out to me and asked, 'What dost thou want?' and I
answered, 'I want thy master.'  She replied, 'He is sitting
alone, mourning;' and I rejoined, 'Tell him that his friend so
and so seeketh to console him.'  She went in and told him; and he
said, 'Admit him.'  So she brought me in to him, and I found him
seated alone and his head bound with mourning fillets.  So I said
to him, 'Allah requite thee amply! this is a path all must
perforce tread, and it behoveth thee to take patience;' adding,
'But who is dead unto thee?'  He answered, 'One who was dearest
of the folk to me, and best beloved.' 'Perhaps thy father?' 'No!' 
'Thy brother?'  "No!'  "One of thy kindred?'  'No!'  Then asked
I, 'What relation was the dead to thee?'; and he answered, 'My
lover.'  Quoth I to myself, 'This is the first proof to swear by
his lack of wit.'  So I said to him, 'Assuredly there be others
than she and fairer;' and he made answer, 'I never saw her, that
I might judge whether or no there be others fairer than she.' 
Quoth I to myself, 'This is another proof positive.'  Then I said
to him, 'And how couldst thou fall in love with one thou hast
never seen?'  He replied 'Know that I was sitting one day at the
window, when lo! there passed by a man, singing the following
distich,

     'Umm Amr',[FN#169] thy boons Allah repay! *
          Give back my heart be't where it may!'"

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
schoolmaster continued, " 'When I heard the man humming these
words as he passed along the street, I said to myself 'Except
this Umm Amru were without equal in the world, the poets had not
celebrated her in ode and canzon.'  So I fell in love with her;
but, two days after, the same man passed, singing the following
couplet,

     'Ass and Umm Amr' went their way; *
          Nor she, nor ass returned for aye.'

Thereupon I knew she was dead and mourned for her.  This was
three days ago, and I have been mourning ever since.  So I left
him, (concluded the learned one) and fared forth, having assured
myself of the weakness of the gerund-grinder's wit."   And they
tell another and a similar tale of





                  THE FOOLISH DOMINIE[FN#170]



Once upon a time, a schoolmaster was visited by a man of letters
who entered a school and, sitting down by the host's side,
entered into discourse with him and found him an accomplished
theologian, poet grammarian, philologist and poet; intelligent,
well bred and pleasant spoken; whereat he wondered, saying in
himself, "It cannot be that a man who teacheth children in a
school, should have a perfect wit."  Now when he was about to go
away, the pedant said to him, "Thou are my guest to-night;" and
he consented to receive hospitality and accompanied him to his
house, where he made much of him and set food before him.  They
ate and drank and sat talking, till a third part of the night was
past when the host spread his guest a bed and went up to his
Harim.  The stranger lay down and addressed himself to sleep,
when, behold, there arose a great clamour in the women's rooms. 
He asked what was the matter and they said, "A terrible thing
hath befallen the Shaykh and he is at the last gasp."  Said he,
"Take me up to him"; so they took him up to the pedagogue whom he
found lying insensible, with his blood streaming down.  He
sprinkled water on his face and when he revived, he asked him,
"What hath betided thee?  When thou leftest me, thou wast in all
good cheer and whole of body," and he answered, "O my brother,
after I left thee, I sat meditating on the creative works of
Almighty Allah, and said to myself: 'In every thing the Lord hath
created for man, there is an use; for He (to Whom be glory!) made
the hands to seize, the feet to walk, the eyes to see, the ears
to hear and the penis to increase and multiply; and so on with
all the members of the body, except these two ballocks; there is
no use in them.'  So I took a razor I had by me and cut them off;
and there befel me what thou seest."  So the guest left him and
went away, saying, "He was in the right who said, 'Verily no
schoolmaster who teacheth children can have a perfect wit, though
he know all the sciences.'"  And they tell a pleasant tale of the 





            ILLITERATE WHO SET UP FOR A SCHOOLMASTER



There was once, among the menials[FN#171] of a certain mosque, a
man who knew not how to write or even to read and who gained his
bread by gulling folk.  One day, it occurred to him to open a
school and teach children; so he got together writing-tablets and
written papers and hung them up in a high place.  Then he
greatened his turband[FN#172] and sat down at the door of the
school; and when the people, who passed by, saw his huge head-
gear and tablets and scrolls, they thought he must be a very
learned pedagogue; so they brought him their children; and he
would say to this, "Write," and to that "Read"; and thus the
little ones taught each other.  Now one day, as he sat as of
wont, at the door of the school, behold, up came a woman letter
in hand, and he said in his mind, "This woman doubtless seeketh
me, that I may read her the missive she hath in her hand: how
shall I do with her, seeing I cannot read writing?"  And he would
fain have gone down and fled from her; but, before he could do
this, she overtook him and said to him, "Whither away?"  Quoth
he, "I purpose to pray the noon-prayer and return."  Quoth she,
"Noon is yet distant, so read me this letter."  He took the
letter and turning it upside down, fell to looking at it, now
shaking his head till his turband quivered, then dancing his
eyebrows and anon showing anger and concern.  Now the letter came
from the woman's husband, who was absent; and when she saw the
dominie do on this wise, she said to herself, "Doubtless my
husband is dead, and this learned doctor of law and religion is
ashamed to tell me so."  So she said to him, "O my lord, if he be
dead, tell me;" but he shook his head and held his peace.  Then
said she, "Shall I rend my raiment?"  "Rend!" replied he.  "Shall
I beat my face?" asked she; and he answered, "Beat!"  So she took
the letter from his hand and returned home fell a-weeping, she
and her children.  Presently, one of her neighbours heard her
sobbing and asking what aileth her, was answered, "Of a truth she
hath gotten a letter, telling her that her husband is dead." 
Quoth the man, "This is a falsehood; for I had a letter from him
but yesterday, advising me that he is whole and in good health
and will be with her after ten days."  So he rose forthright and
going in to her, said, "Where is the letter which came to thee?" 
She brought it to him, and he took it and read it; and lo! it ran
as follows, "After the usual salutations, I am well and in good
health and whole and will be with you all after ten days. 
Meanwhile, I send you a quilt and an extinguisher."[FN#173]  So
she took the letter and, returning to the schoolmaster, said to
him, "What induced thee to deal thus with me?"  And she repeated
to him what her neighbour had told her of her husband's well-
being and of his having sent her a quilt and an extinguisher.
Answered he, "Thou art in the right, O good woman; for I was, at
the time"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
pedagogue replied, "Verily I was at that time fashed and absent-
minded and, seeing the extinguisher wrapped up in the quilt, I
thought that he was dead and they had shrouded him."  The woman,
not smoking the cheat, said, "Thou art excused," and taking the
letter, went her ways.[FN#174]  And they relate a story of




                THE KING AND THE VIRTUOUS WIFE.



A certain King once went forth in disguise, to look into the
affairs of his lieges. Presently, he came to a great village
which he entered unattended and being athirst, stopped at the
door of a house and asked for water. There came out to him a fair
woman with a gugglet, which she gave him, and he drank. When he
looked at her, he was ravished with her and besought her favours.
Now she knew him; so she led him into the house and, making him
sit down, brought out a book and said to him, "Look therein
whilst I order my affair and return to thee." So he looked into
the book, and behold, it treated of the Divine prohibition
against advoutry and of the punishments which Allah hath prepared
for those who commit adulterous sin. When he read this, his flesh
quaked and his hair bristled and he repented to Almighty Allah:
then he called the woman and, giving her the book, went away. Now
her husband was absent and when he returned, she told him what
had passed, whereat he was confounded and said in himself, "I
fear lest the King's desire have fallen upon her." And he dared
not have to do with her and know her carnally after this. When
some time had past, the wife told her kinsfolk of her husband's
conduct, and they complained of him to the King, saying, "Allah
advance the King! This man hired of us a piece of land for
tillage, and tilled it awhile; then left it fallow and neither
tilled it nor forsook it, that we might let it to one who would
till it. Indeed, harm is come to the field, and we fear its
corruption, for such land as that if it be not sown, spoileth."
Quoth the King to the man, "What hindereth thee from sowing thy
land?" Answered he, "Allah advance the King! It reached me that
the lion entered the field wherefore I stood in awe of him and
dared not draw near it, since knowing that I cannot cope with the
lion, I stand in fear of him." The King understood the parable
and rejoined, saying, "O man, the lion trod and trampled not thy
land, and it is good for seed so do thou till it and Allah
prosper thee in it, for the lion hath done it no hurt." Then he
bade give the man and his wife a handsome present and sent them
away.[FN#175] And amongst the stories is that of





           ABD AL-RAHMAN THE MAGHRIBI'S STORY OF THE
                         RUKH.[FN#176]



There was once a man of the people of West Africa who had
journeyed far and wide and traversed many a desert and a tide. He
was once cast upon an island, where he abode a long while and,
returning thence to his native country, brought with him the
quill of a wing feather of a young Rukh, whilst yet in egg and
unhatched; and this quill was big enough to hold a goat skin of
water, for it is said that the length of the Rukh chick's wing,
when he cometh forth of the egg, is a thousand fathoms. The folk
marvelled at this quill, when they saw it, and the man who was
called Abd al-Rahman the Moor (and he was known, to boot, as the
Chinaman, for his long sojourn in Cathay), related to them the
following adventure, one of many of his traveller's tales of
marvel. He was on a voyage in the China seas--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abd al-
Rahman, the Moorman, the Chinaman, was wont to tell wondrous
tales amongst which was the following. He was on a voyage in the
China seas with a company of merchants, when they sighted an
island from afar; so they steered for it and, making fast
thereto, saw that it was large and spacious. The ship's crew went
ashore to get wood and water, taking with them hatchets and ropes
and water skies (the travellers accompanying them), and presently
espied a great dome, white and gleaming, an hundred cubits long.
So they made towards it and drawing near, found that it was an
egg of the Rukh and fell on it with axes and stones and sticks
till they uncovered the young bird and found the chick as it were
a firm set hill. So they plucked out one of the wing feathers,
but could not do so, save by helping one another, for all the
quills were not full grown, after which they took what they could
carry of the young bird's flesh and cutting the quill away from
the vane, returned to the ship. Then they set sail and putting
out to sea, voyaged with a fair wind all that night, till the sun
rose; and while everything went well, they saw the Rukh come
flying after them, as he were a vast cloud, with a rock in his
talons, like a great heap bigger than the ship. As soon as he
poised himself in air over the vessel, he let fall the rock upon
it; but the craft, having great way on her, outwent the rock,
which fell into the sea with a loud crash and a horrible. So
Allah decreed their deliverance and saved them from doom; and
they cooked the young bird's flesh and ate it. Now there were
amongst them old white bearded men; and when they awoke on the
morrow, they found that their beards had turned black, nor did
any who had eaten of the young Rukh grow gray ever after. Some
said the cause of the return of youth to them and the ceasing of
hoariness from them was that they had heated the pot with arrow
wood, whilst others would have it that it came of eating the Rukh
chick's flesh; and this is indeed a wonder of wonders.[FN#177]
And a story is related of





              ADI BIN ZAYD AND THE PRINCESS HIND.



Al-Nu'uman Bin Al-Munzir, King of the Arabs of Irak, had a
daughter named Hind, who went out one Pasch, which is a feast day
of the Nazarenes, to the White Church, to take the sacrament; she
was eleven years old and was the loveliest woman of her age and
time; and it so chanced that on the same day came to
Hirah[FN#178] a young man called 'Adi bin Zayd[FN#179] with
presents from the Chosroe to Al-Nu'uman, and he also went to the
White Church, to communicate. He was tall of stature and fair of
favour, with handsome eyes and smooth cheeks, and had with him a
company of his people. Now there was with Hind bint al-Nu'uman a
slave girl named Mariyah, who was enamoured of Adi, but had not
been able to foregather with him. So, when she saw him in the
church, she said to Hind, "Look at yonder youth. By Allah, he is
handsomer than all thou seest!" Hind asked, "And who is he?" and
Mariyah answered, "Adi bin Zayd." Quoth Al-Nu'uman's daughter, "I
fear lest he know me, if I draw nearer to look on him." Quoth
Mariyah, "How should he know thee when he hath never seen thee?"
So she drew near him and found him jesting with the youths his
companions; and indeed he surpassed them all, not only in his
personal charms but in the excellence of his speech, the
eloquence of his tongue and the richness of his raiment. When the
Princess saw him, she was ravished with him, her reason was
confounded and her colour changed; and Mariyah, seeing her
inclination to him, said to her, "Speak him." So she spoke to him
and went away. Now when he looked upon her and heard her speech,
he was captivated by her and his wit was dazed; his heart
fluttered, and his colour changed so that his companions
suspected him, and he whispered one of them to follow her and
find out who she was. The young man went after her and returning
informed him that she was princess Hind, daughter of Al-Nu'uman.
So Adi left the church, knowing not whither he went, for excess
of love, and reciting these two couplets,

     "O friends of me, one favour more I pray: *
          Unto the convents[FN#180] find more your way:
      Turn me that so I face the land of Hind; *
          Then go, and fairest greetings for me say."

Then he went to his lodging and lay that night, restless and
without appetite for the food of sleep.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Adi
ended his verses he went to his lodging and lay that night
restless and without appetite for the food of sleep. Now on the
morrow Mariyah accosted him and he received her kindly, though
before he would not incline to her, and said to her, "What is thy
will?" Quoth she, "I have a want of thee;" and quoth he, "Name
it, for by Allah, thou shalt not ask me aught, but I will give it
thee!" So she told him that she loved him, and her want of him
was that he would grant her a lover's privacy; and he agreed to
do her will, on condition that she would serve him with Hind and
devise some device to bring them together. Then he took her into
a vintner's tavern in one of the by streets of Hirah, and lay
with her; after which she returned to Hind and asked her, "Dost
thou not long to see Adi?" She answered, "How can this be? Indeed
my longing for him makes me restless, and no repose is left me
since yesterday." Quoth Mariyah, "I will appoint him to be in
such a place, where thou canst look on him from the palace."
Quoth Hind, "Do what thou wilt," and agreed with her upon the
place. So Adi came, and the Princess looked out upon him; and,
when she saw him, she was like to topple down from the palace top
and said, "O Mariyah, except thou bring him in to me this night,
I shall die." So saying, she fell to the ground in a fainting
fit, and her serving women lifted her up and bore her into the
palace; whilst Mariyah hastened to Al-Nu'uman and discovered the
whole matter to him with perfect truth, telling him that indeed
she was mad for the love of Adi; and except he marry her to him
she must be put to shame and die of love for him, which would
disgrace her father among the Arabs, adding at the end, "There is
no cure for this but wedlock." The King bowed his head awhile in
thought and exclaimed again and again, "Verily, we are Allah's
and unto Him we are returning!" Then said he "Woe to thee! How
shall the marriage be brought about, seeing I mislike to open the
matter?" And she said, "He is yet more ardently in love and yet
more desireful of her than she is of him; and I will so order the
affair that he shall be unaware of his case being known to thee;
but do not betray thyself, O King." Then she went to Adi and,
after acquainting him with everything said, "Make a feast and bid
the King thereto; and, when the wine hath gotten the better of
him, ask of him his daughter, for he will not refuse thee." Quoth
Adi, "I fear lest this enrage him against me and be the cause of
enmity between us." But quoth she, "I came not to thee, till I
had settled the whole affair with him." Then she returned to Al-
Nu'uman and said to him, "Seek of Adi that he entertain thee in
his house." Replied the King, "There is no harm in that;" and
after three days, besought Adi to give him and his lords the
morning meal in his house. He consented and the King went to him;
and when the wine had taken effect on Al-Nu'uman, Adi rose and
sought of him his daughter in wedlock. He consented and married
them and brought her to him after three days; and they abode at
Al-Nu'uman's court, in all solace of life and its delight--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

        When it was the Four Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Adi abode
with Hind bint Al-Nu'uman bin Munzir three years in all solace of
life and its delight, after which time the King was wroth with
Adi and slew him. Hind mourned for him with grievous mourning and
built her an hermitage outside the city, whither she retired and
became a religious, weeping and bewailing her husband till she
died. And her hermitage is seen to this day in the suburbs of
Hirah. They also tell a tale of




          DI'IBIL AL-KHUZA'I WITH THE LADY AND MUSLIM
                         BIN AL-WALID.



Quoth Di'ibil al Khuza'i[FN#181], "I was sitting one day at the
gate of Al Karkh,[FN#182] when a damsel came past. Never saw I a
fairer faced or better formed than she, walking with a voluptuous
swaying gait and ravishing all beholders with her lithe and
undulating pace. Now as my eyes fell on her, I was captivated by
her and my vitals trembled and meseemed my heart flew forth of my
breast; so I stood before her and I accosted her with this verse,

     'The tears of these eyes find easy release; *
          But sleep flies these eyelids without surcease.'

Whereon she turned her face and looking at me, straightway made
answer with this distich,

     'A trifle this an his eyes be sore, *
          When her eyes say 'yes' to his love's caprice!'

I was astounded at the readiness of her reply and the fluency of
her speech and rejoined with this verse,

     'Say, cloth heart of my fair incline to him *
          Whose tears like a swelling stream increase?'

And she answered me without hesitation, thus,

     'If thou crave our love, know that love's a loan; *
          And a debt to be paid by us twain a piece.'

Never entered my ears aught sweeter than her speech nor ever saw
I brighter than her face: so I changed rhyme and rhythm to try
her, in my wonder at her words, and repeated this couplet,

     'Will Fate with joy of union ever bless our sight, *
          And one desireful one with other one unite.'

She smiled at this (never saw I fairer than her mouth nor sweeter
than her lips), and answered me, without stay or delay, in the
following distich,

     "Pray, tell me what hath Fate to do betwixt us twain? *
          Thou'rt Elate: so bless our eyne with union and
          delight.'

At this, I sprang up and fell to kissing her hands and cried, 'I
had not thought that Fortune would vouchsafe me such occasion. Do
thou follow me, not of bidding or against thy will, but of the
grace of thee and thy favour to me.' Then I went on and she after
me. Now at that time I had no lodging I deemed fit for the like
of her; but Muslim bin al-Walid[FN#183] was my fast friend, and
he had a handsome house. So I made for his abode and knocked at
the door, whereupon he came out, and I saluted him, saying, ''Tis
for time like this that friends are treasured up'; and he
replied, 'With love and gladness! Come in you twain.' So we
entered but found money scarce with him: however, he gave me a
kerchief, saying, 'Carry it to the bazar and sell it and buy food
and what else thou needest.' I took the handkerchief, and
hastening to the market, sold it and bought what we required of
victuals and other matters; but when I returned, I found that
Muslim had retired, with her to an underground chamber.[FN#184]
When he heard my step he hurried out and said to me, 'Allah
requite thee the kindness thou hast done me, O Abu Ali and reward
thee in time to come and reckon it of thy good deeds on the Day
of Doom!' So saying, he took from me the food and wine and shut
the door in my face. His words enraged me and I knew not what to
do, but he stood behind the door, shaking for mirth; and, when he
saw me thus, he said to me, 'I conjure thee on my life, O Abu
Ali, tell who it was composed this couplet?,

     'I lay in her arms all night, leaving him *
          To sleep foul-hearted but clean of staff.'

At this my rage redoubled, and I replied, 'He who wrote this
other couplet',

     'One, I wish him in belt a thousand horns, *
          Exceeding in mig