o him solely by virtue of
manhood, it behoveth that thy heart incline and thy sole delight
in the graybeard, equally with the boy; seeing that there is no
distinction between them, in point of male-hood. But the
difference between thee and me turneth upon the accident of
qualities that are sought as constituting the pleasure of
intercourse and its enjoyment; and thou hast adduced no proof of
the superiority of the youth over the young girl in this matter
of non-essentials.' He made answer, 'O reverend lady, knowest
thou not that which is peculiar to the youth of limber shape and
rosy cheeks and pleasant smile and sweetness of speech? Youths
are, in these respects superior to women; and the proof of this
is what they traditionally report of the Prophet (whom Allah
bless and preserve!) that he said, 'Stay not thy gaze upon the
beardless, for in them is a momentary eye glance at the black
eyed girls of Paradise.' Nor indeed is the superiority of the lad
over the lass hidden to any of mankind, and how well saith Abu
Nowas,[FN#235]

     'The least of him is the being free *
          From monthly courses and pregnancy.'

And the saying of another poet,

     'Quoth our Imam, Abu Nowas, who was *
          For mad debauch and waggishness renowned: 
     'O tribe that loves the cheeks of boys, take fill *
          Of joys in Paradise shall ne'er be found!'

So if any one enlarge in praise of a slave girl and wish to
enhance her value by the mention of her beauties, he likeneth her
to a youth,'" --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
continued, "'So if any one enlarge in praise of a slave girl and
wish to enhance her value by the mention of her beauties, he
likeneth her to a youth, because of the illustrious qualities
that belong to the male, even as saith the poet,

     'Boy like of backside, in the deed of kind, *
          She sways, as sways the wand like boughs a-wind.'

An youths, then, were not better and fairer than girls, why
should these be likened to them? And know also (Almighty Allah
preserve thee!) that a youth is easy to be led, adapting himself
to every rede, pleasant of converse and manners, inclining to
assent rather than dissent, especially when his side face is
newly down'd and his upper lip is first embrowned, and the purple
lights of youth on his cheeks abound, so that he is like the full
moon sound; and how goodly is the saying of Abu Tammam[FN#236],

     'The slanderers said 'There's hair upon his cheeks'; *
          Quoth I, 'Exceed not, that's no blemish there.'
     When he could bear that haling of his hips *
          And pearl-beads shaded by mustachio hair;[FN#237]
     And Rose swore solemn, holiest oath that is, *
          From that fair cheek she nevermore would fare
     I spoke with eyelids without need of speech, *
          And they who answered me his eyebrows were.
     He's even fairer than thou knewest him, *
          And cheek down guards from all would overdare.
     Brighter and sweeter now are grown his charms, *
          Since down robes lip and cheek before were bare.
     And those who blame me for my love of him, *
          When him they mention say of him, 'Thy Fair'!'

And quoth al-Hariri[FN#238] and quoth excellently well,

     'My censors say, 'What means this pine for him? *
          Seest not the flowing hair on cheeks a flowing?'
     I say, 'By Allah, an ye deem I dote, *
          Look at the truth in those fine eyes a-showing!
     But for the down that veils his cheek and chin, *
          His brow had dazed all eyes no sight allowing:
     And whoso sojourns in a growthless land, *
          How shall he move from land fair growths a-growing?'

And quoth another,

     'My blamers say of me, 'He is consoled,' And lie! *
          No consolation comes to those who pine and sigh.
     I had no solace when Rose bloomed alone on cheek, *
          Now Basil blooms thereon and now consoled am I.'

And again,

     'Slim waisted one, whose looks with down of cheek *
          In slaughtering mankind each other hurtle
     With the Narcissus blade he sheddeth blood, *
          The baldrick of whose sheath is freshest
          myrtle.'[FN#239]

And again,

     'Not with his must I'm drunk, but verily *
          Those curls turn manly heads like newest wine[FN#240]
     Each of his beauties envies each, and all *
          Would be the silky down on side face li'en.'

Such are the excellencies of the youth which women do not own,
and they more than suffice to give those the preference over
these.' She replied, 'Allah give thee health! verily, thou hast
imposed the debate upon thyself; and thou hast spoken and hast
not stinted and hast brought proofs to support every assertion.
But, 'Now is the truth become manifest;'[FN#241] so swerve thou
not from the path thereof; and, if thou be not content with a
summary of evidence, I will set it before thee in fullest detail.
Allah upon thee, where is the youth beside the girl and who shall
compare kid and wild cow? The girl is soft of speech, fair of
form, like a branchlet of basil, with teeth like chamomile-petals
and hair like halters wherefrom to hang hearts. Her cheeks are
like blood-red anemones and her face like a pippin: she hath lips
like wine and breasts like pomegranates twain and a shape supple
as a rattan-cane. Her body is well formed and with sloping
shoulders dight; she hath a nose like the edge of a sword shining
bright and a forehead brilliant white and eyebrows which unite
and eyes stained by Nature's hand black as night. If she speak,
fresh young pearls are scattered from her mouth forthright and
all hearts are ravished by the daintiness of her sprite; when she
smileth thou wouldst ween the moon shone out her lips between and
when she eyes thee, sword blades flash from the babes of her
eyes. In her all beauties to conclusion come, and she is the
centre of attraction to traveller and stay-at-home. She hath two
lips of cramoisy, than cream smoother and of taste than honey
sweeter,'" --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
preacher woman thus pursued her theme in the praise of fair
maids, "'She hath two lips of cramoisy, than cream smoother and
than honey sweeter;' adding, 'And she hath a bosom, as it were a
way two hills between which are a pair of breasts like globes of
ivory sheen; likewise, a stomach right smooth, flanks soft as the
palm-spathe and creased with folds and dimples which overlap one
another, and liberal thighs, which like columns of pearl arise,
and back parts which billow and beat together like seas of glass
or mountains of glance, and two feet and hands of gracious mould
like unto ingots of virgin gold. So, O miserable! where are
mortal men beside the Jinn? Knowest thou not that puissant
princes and potent Kings before women ever humbly bend and on
them for delight depend? Verily, they may say, 'We rule over
necks and rob hearts.' These women! how many a rich man have they
not paupered, how many a powerful man have they not prostrated
and how many a superior man have they not enslaved! Indeed, they
seduce the sage and send the saint to shame and bring the wealthy
to want and plunge the fortune favoured into penury. Yet for all
this, the wise but redouble in affection of them and honour; nor
do they count this oppression or dishonour. How many a man for
them hath offended his Maker and called down on him self the
wrath of his father and mother! And all this because of the
conquest of their love over hearts. Knowest thou not, O wretched
one, that for them are built pavilions, and slave girls are for
sale;[FN#242] that for them tear floods rail and for them are
collected jewels of price and ambergris and musk odoriferous; and
armies are arrayed and pleasaunces made and wealth heaped up and
smitten off is many a head? And indeed he spoke sooth in the
words, 'Whoso saith the world meaneth woman.' Now as for thy
citation from the Holy Traditions, it is an argument against thee
and not for thee in that the Prophet (whom Allah bless and
preserve!) compareth the beardless with the black eyed girls of
Paradise. Now, doubtless, the subject of comparison is worthier
than the object there with compared; so, unless women be the
worthier and the goodlier, wherefore should other than they be
likened to them? As for thy saying that girls are likened to
boys, the case is not so, but the contrary: boys are likened to
girls; for folk say, Yonder boy is like a girl. As for what proof
thou quotest from the poets, the verses were the product of a
complexion unnatural in this respect; and as for the habitual
sodomites and catamites, offenders against religion, Almighty
Allah hath condemned them in His Holy Book,[FN#243] herein He
denounceth their filthy practices, saying, 'Do ye approach unto
the males among mankind[FN#244] and leave your wives which your
Lord hath created for you? Surely ye are a people who
transgress!' These it is that liken girls to boys, of their
exceeding profligacy and ungraciousness and inclination to follow
the fiend and own lusts, so that they say, 'She is apt for two
tricks,'[FN#245] and these are all wanderers from the way of
right and the righteous. Quoth their chief Abu Nowas,

     'Slim waist and boyish wits delight *
          Wencher, as well as Sodomite,'[FN#246]

As for what thou sayest of a youth's first hair on cheek and lips
and how they add to his beauty and loveliness, by Allah, thou
strayest from the straight path of sooth and sayest that which is
other than the truth; for whiskers change the charms of the
comely into ugliness (quoting these couplets),

     'That sprouting hair upon his face took wreak *
          For lovers' vengeance, all did vainly seek.
     I see not on his face a sign fuli- *
          genous, except his curls are hue of reek.
     If so his paper[FN#247] mostly be begrimed *
          Where deemest thou the reed shall draw a streak?
     If any raise him other fairs above, *
          This only proves the judge of wits is weak.'

And when she ended her verse she resumed, 'Laud be to Allah
Almighty,'" --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
preacher woman ended her verse she resumed, addressing the man, "
'Laud to Allah Almighty! how can it be hid from thee that the
perfect pleasure is in women and that abiding blessings are not
to be found but with them, seeing that Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) hath promised His prophets and saints black eyed
damsels in Paradise and hath appointed these for a recompense of
their godly works. And had the Almighty known that the joy
supreme was in the possession of other than women, He had
rewarded them therewith and promised it to them. And quoth he
(whom Allah bless and preserve!), 'The things I hold dearest of
the things of your world are three: women and perfume and the
solace of my eyes in prayer.' Verily Allah hath appointed boys to
serve his prophets and saints in Paradise, because Paradise is
the abode of joy and delight, which could not be complete without
the service of youths; but, as to the use of them for aught but
service, it is Hell's putridity[FN#248] and corruption and
turpitude. How well saith the poet,

    'Men's turning unto bums of boys is bumptious; *
          Whoso love noble women show their own noblesse.
    How many goodly wights have slept the night, enjoying *
          Buttocks of boys, and woke at morn in foulest mess
    Their garments stained by safflower, which is yellow merde; *
          Their shame proclaiming, showing colour of distress.
    Who can deny the charge, when so bewrayed are they *
          That e'en by day light shows the dung upon their dress?
    What contrast wi' the man, who slept a gladsome night *
          By Houri maid for glance a mere enchanteress,
    He rises off her borrowing wholesome bonny scent; *
          That fills the house with whiffs of perfumed
          goodliness.
    No boy deserved place by side of her to hold; *
          Canst even aloes wood with what fills pool of
          cess!'[FN#249]

Then said she, 'O folk ye have made me to break the bounds of
modesty and the circle of free born women and indulge in idle
talk of chambering and wantonness, which beseemeth not people of
learning. But the breasts of free-borns are the sepulchres of
secrets' and such conversations are in confidence. Moreover,
actions are according to intentions,[FN#250] and I crave pardon
of Allah for myself and you and all Moslems, seeing that He is
the Pardoner and the Compassionate.' Then she held her peace and
thereafter would answer us of naught; so we went our way,
rejoicing in that we had profited by her contention and yet
sorrowing to part from her." And among the tales they tell is one
of




              ABU SUWAYD AND THE PRETTY OLD WOMAN.



Quoth Abu Suwayd, "I and a company of my friends, entered a
garden one day to buy somewhat of fruit; and we saw in a corner
an old woman, who was bright of face, but her head-hair was
white, and she was combing it with an ivory comb. We stopped
before her, yet she paid no heed to us neither veiled her face:
so I said to her, 'O old woman,[FN#251] wert thou to dye thy hair
black, thou wouldst be handsomer than a girl: what hindereth thee
from this?' She raised her head towards me"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Suwayd
continued: "When I spake these words to the ancient dame she
raised her head towards me and, opening wide her eyes, recited
these two couplets, 

     'I dyed what years have dyed, but this my staining *
          Lasts not, while that of days is aye remaining: 
     Days when beclad in gear of youth I fared, *
          Raked fore and aft by men with joy unfeigning.' 

I cried, 'By Allah, favoured art thou for an old woman! How
sincere art thou in thine after-pine for forbidden pleasures and
how false is thy pretence of repentance from frowardness!'" And
another tale is that of





          THE EMIR ALI BIN TAHIR AND THE GIRL MUUNIS.



Once on a time was displayed for sale to Ali bin Mohammed bin
Abdallah bin Tahir[FN#252] a slave-girl called Muunis who was
superior to her fellows in beauty and breeding, and to boot an
accomplished poetess; and he asked her of her name. Replied she,
"Allah advance the Emir, my name is Muunis."[FN#253] Now he knew
this before; so he bowed his head awhile, then raising his eyes
to her, recited this verse, 

     "What sayest of one by a sickness caught *
          For the love of thy love till he waxed distraught?"

Answered she, "Allah exalt the Emir!" and recited this verse in
reply, 

     "If we saw a lover who pains as he ought, *
          Wi' love we would grant him all favours he sought." 

She pleased him: so he bought her for seventy thousand dirhams
and begat on her Obayd' Allah bin Mohammed, afterwards minister
of Police.[FN#254] And we are told by Abu al-Ayna[FN#255] a tale
of




             THE WOMAN WHO HAD A BOY AND THE OTHER
                    WHO HAD A MAN TO LOVER.



Quoth Abu al-Ayna, "There were in our street two women, one of
whom had for lover a man and the other a beardless youth, and
they foregathered one night on the terrace-roof of a house
adjoining mine, knowing not that I was near. Quoth the boy's
lover to the other, 'O my sister, how canst thou bear with
patience the harshness of thy lover's beard as it falleth on thy
breast, when he busseth thee and his mustachios rub thy cheek and
lips?' Replied the other, 'Silly that thou art, what decketh the
tree save its leaves and the cucumber but its warts?[FN#256]
Didst ever see in the world aught uglier than a scald-head bald
of his beard? Knowest thou not that the beard is to men as the
sidelocks to women; and what is the difference between chin and
cheek?[FN#257] Knowest thou not that Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) hath created an angel in Heaven, who saith: 'Glory be to
Him who ornamenteth men with beards and women with long hair?'
So, were not the beard even as the tresses in comeliness, it had
not been coupled with them, O silly! How shall I spread-eagle
myself under a boy, who will emit long before I can go off and
forestall me in limpness of penis and clitoris; and leave a man
who, when he taketh breath clippeth close and when he entereth
goeth leisurely, and when he hath done, repeateth, and when he
pusheth poketh hard, and as often as he withdraweth, returneth?'
The boy's leman was edified by her speech and said, 'I forswear
my lover by the lord of the Ka'abah!'" And amongst tales is one
of





            ALI THE CAIRENE AND THE HAUNTED HOUSE IN
                            BAGHDAD.



There lived once, in the city of Cairo, a merchant who had great
store of monies and bullion, gems and jewels, and lands and
houses beyond count, and his name was Hasan the Jeweller, the
Baghdad man. Furthermore Allah had blessed him with a son of
perfect beauty and brilliancy; rosy-cheeked, fair of face and
well-figured, whom he named Ali of Cairo, and had taught the
Koran and science and elocution and the other branches of polite
education, till he became proficient in all manner of knowledge.
He was under his father's hand in trade but, after a while, Hasan
fell sick and his sickness grew upon him, till he made sure of
death; so he called his son to him,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Jeweller, the Baghdadi, fell sick and made sure of death, he
called to him his son, named Ali of Cairo, and said, "O my son,
verily this world passeth away; but the next world endureth for
aye. Every soul shall taste of death;[FN#258] and now, O my son,
my decease is at hand and I desire to charge thee with a charge,
which if thou observe, thou shalt abide in safety and prosperity,
till thou meet Almighty Allah; but if thou follow it not, there
shall befal thee much weariness and thou wilt repent of having
transgressed mine injunctions." Replied Ali, "O my father, how
shall I do other than hearken to thy words and act according to
thy charge, seeing that I am bounden by the law of the Faith to
obey thee and give ear to thy command?" Rejoined his father, "O
my son, I leave thee lands and houses and goods and wealth past
count; so that wert thou each day to spend thereof five hundred
dinars, thou wouldst miss naught of it. But, O my son, look that
thou live in the fear of Allah and follow His Chosen One,
Mustafa, (whom may He bless and preserve!) in whatso he is
reported to have bidden and forbidden in his traditional
law.[FN#259] Be thou constant in alms-deeds and the practice of
beneficence and in consorting with men of worth and piety and
learning; and look that thou have a care for the poor and needy
and shun avarice and meanness and the conversation of the wicked
or those of suspicious character. Look thou kindly upon thy
servants and family, and also upon thy wife, for she is of the
daughters of the great and is big with child by thee; haply Allah
will vouchsafe thee virtuous issue by her." And he ceased not to
exhort him thus, weeping and saying, "O my son, I beseech Allah
the Bountiful, the Lord of the glorious Empyrean[FN#260] to
deliver thee from all straits that may encompass thee and grant
thee His ready relief!" Thereupon his son wept with sore weeping
and said, "O my father, I am melted by thy words, for these are
as the words of one that saith farewell." Replied the merchant,
"Yes, O my son, I am aware of my condition: forget thou not my
charge." Then he fell to repeating the two professions of the
Faith and to reciting verses of the Koran, until the appointed
hour arrived, when he said, "Draw near unto me, O my son." So Ali
drew near and he kissed him; then he sighed and his soul departed
his body and he went to the mercy of Almighty Allah.[FN#261]
Therewith great grief fell upon Ali; the clamour of keening arose
in his house and his father's friends flocked to him. Then he
betook himself to preparing the body for burial and made him a
splendid funeral. They bore his bier to the place of prayer and
prayed over him, then to the cemetery, where they buried him and
recited over him what suited of the sublime Koran; after which
they returned to the house and condoled with the dead man's son
and wended each his own way. Moreover, Ali prayed the Friday
prayer for his father and had perlections of the Koran every day
for the normal forty, during which time he abode in the house and
went not forth, save to the place of prayer; and every Friday he
visited his father's tomb. So he ceased not from his praying and
reciting for some time, until his fellows of the sons of the
merchants came in to him one day and saluting him, said, "How
long this thy mourning and neglecting thy business and the
company of thy friends? Verily, this is a fashion which will
bring thee weariness, and thy body will suffer for it
exceedingly." Now when they came in to him, Iblis the Accursed
was with them, prompting them; and they went on to recommend him
to accompany them to the bazar, whilst Iblis tempted him to
consent to them, till he yielded,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
sons of the merchants went in to Ali the Cairene, son of Hasan
the Jeweller, they recommended him to accompany them to the
bazar, till he yielded, that the will of Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) might be fulfilled; and he left the house of
mourning with them. Presently they said, "Mount thy she-mule and
ride with us to such a garden, that we may solace us there and
that thy grief and despondency may depart from thee." So he
mounted and taking his slave, went with them to the garden in
question; and when they entered one of them went and making ready
the morning-meal, brought it to them there. So they ate and were
merry and sat in talk, till the end of the day, when they mounted
and returned each to his own lodging, where they passed the
night. As soon as the morrow dawned, they again visited Ali and
said, "Come with us." Asked he, "Whither?"; and they answered,
"To such a garden; for it is finer than the first and more
pleasurable." So he went with them to the garden, and one of
them, going away, made ready the morning-meal and brought it to
them, together with strong heady wine; and after eating, they
brought out the wine, when quoth Ali, "What is this? and quoth
they, "This is what dispelleth sadness and brighteneth gladness.
And they ceased not to commend it to him, till they prevailed
upon him and he drank with them. Then they sat, drinking and
talking, till the end of the day, when each returned home. But as
for Ali, the Cairene, he was giddy with wine and in this plight
went in to his wife, who said to him, "What aileth thee that thou
art so changed?" He said, "We were making merry to-day, when one
of my companions brought us liquor; so my friends drank and I
with them, and this giddiness came upon me." And she replied, "O
my lord, say me, hast thou forgotten thy father's injunction and
done that from which he forbade thee, in consorting with doubtful
folk?" Answered he, "These be of the sons of the merchants; they
are no suspicious folk, only lovers of mirth and good cheer." And
he continued to lead this life with his friends, day after day,
going from place to place and feasting with them and drinking,
till they said to him, "Our turns are ended, and now it is thy
turn." "Well come, and welcome and fair cheer!" cried he; so on
the morrow, he made ready all that the case called for of meat
and drink, two-fold what they had provided, and taking cooks and
tent-pitchers and coffee-makers,[FN#262] repaired with the others
to Al-Rauzah[FN#263] and the Nilometer, where they abode a whole
month, eating and drinking and hearing music and making merry. At
the end of the month, Ali found that he had spent a great sum of
money; but Iblis the Accursed deluded him and said to him,
"Though thou shouldst spend every day a like sum yet wouldst thou
not miss aught of it." So he took no account of money expenses
and continued this way of life for three years, whilst his wife
remonstrated with him and reminded him of his father's charge;
but he hearkened not to her words, till he had spent all the
ready monies he had, when he fell to selling his jewels and
spending their price, until they also were all gone. Then he sold
his houses, fields, farms and gardens, one after other, till they
likewise were all gone and he had nothing left but the tenement
wherein he lived. So he tore out the marble and wood-work and
sold it and spent of its price, till he had made an end of all
this also, when he took thought with himself and, finding that he
had nothing left to expend, sold the house itself and spent the
purchase-money. After that, the man who had bought the house came
to him and said "Seek out for thyself a lodging, as I have need
of my house." So he bethought himself and, finding that he had no
want of a house, except for his wife, who had borne him a son and
daughter (he had not a servant left), he hired a large room in
one of the mean courts[FN#264] and there took up his abode, after
having lived in honour and luxury, with many eunuchs and much
wealth; and he soon came to want one day's bread. Quoth his wife,
"Of this I warned thee and exhorted thee to obey thy father's
charge, and thou wouldst not hearken to me; but there is no
Majesty and there is no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great! Whence shall the little ones eat? Arise then, go round to
thy friends, the sons of the merchants: belike they will give
thee somewhat on which we may live this day." So he arose and
went to his friends one by one; but they all hid their faces from
him and gave him injurious words revolting to hear, but naught
else; and he returned to his wife and said to her, "They have
given me nothing." Thereupon she went forth to beg of her
neighbours the wherewithal to keep themselves alive,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the wife of
Ali the Cairene, seeing her husband return empty-handed, went
forth to beg of her neighbours the wherewithal to keep themselves
alive and repaired to a woman, whom she had known in former days.
When she came in to her and she saw her case, she rose and
receiving her kindly, wept and said, "What hath befallen you?" So
she told her all that her husband had done, and the other
replied, "Well come and welcome and fair cheer!; whatever thou
needest, Seek it of me, without price." Quoth she, "Allah requite
thee abundantly!"[FN#265] Then her friend gave her as much
provision as would suffice herself and her family a whole month,
and she took it and returned to her lodging. When her husband saw
her, he wept and asked, "Whence hadst thou that?"; and she
answered, "I got it of such a woman; for, when I told her what
had befallen us, she failed me not in aught, but said, 'Seek of
me all thou needest.'" Whereupon her husband rejoined, "Since
thou hast this much I will betake myself to a place I have in my
mind; peradventure Allah Almighty will bring us relief."[FN#266]
With these words he took leave of her and kissed his children and
went out, not knowing whither he should go, and he continued
walking on till he came to Bulak, where he saw a ship about to
sail for Damietta.[FN#267] Here he met a man, between whom and
his father there had been friendship, and he saluted him and said
to him, "Whither now?" Replied Ali, "To Damietta: I have friends
there, whom I would enquire after and visit them and then
return." The man took him home and treated him honourably; then,
furnishing him with vivers for the voyage and giving him some
gold pieces, embarked him on board the vessel bound for Damietta.
When they reached it, Ali landed, not knowing whither to go; but
as he was walking along, a merchant saw him and had pity on him,
and carried him to his house. Here he abode awhile, after which
he said in himself, "How long this sojourning in other folk's
homes?" Then he left the merchant's place and walked to the wharf
where, after enquiry, he found a ship ready to sail for Syria.
His hospitable host provided him with provision and embarked him
in the ship; and it set sail and Ali reached in due season the
Syrian shores where he disembarked and journeyed till he entered
Damascus. As he walked about the great thoroughfare behold, a
kindly man saw him and took him to his house, where he tarried
for a time till, one day, going abroad, he saw a caravan about to
start for Baghdad and bethought himself to journey thither with
it. Thereupon he returned to his host and taking leave of him,
set out with the Cafilah. Now Allah (extolled and exalted be He!)
inclined to him the heart of one of the merchants, so that he
took him with him, and Ali ate and drank with him, till they came
within one day's journey of Baghdad. Here, however, a company of
highwaymen fell upon the caravan and took all they had and but
few of the merchants escaped. These made each for a separate
place of refuge; but as for Ali the Cairene he fared for Baghdad,
where he arrived at sundown, as the gatekeepers were about to
shut the gates, and said to them, "Let me in with you." They
admitted him and asked him, "Whence come, and whither wending?"
and he answered, "I am a man from Cairo-city and have with me
mules laden with merchandise and slaves and servants. I forewent
them, to look me out a place wherein to deposit my goods: but, as
I rode along on my she-mule, there fell upon me a company of
banditti, who took my mule and gear; nor did I escape from them
but at my last gasp." The gate-guard entreated him honourably and
bade him be of good cheer, saying, "Abide with us this night, and
in the morning we will look thee out a place befitting thee."
Then he sought in his breast-pocket and, finding a dinar of those
given to him by the merchant at Bulak, handed it to one of the
gatekeepers, saying, "Take this and change it and bring us
something to eat." The man took it and went to the market, where
he changed it, and brought Ali bread and cooked meat: so he ate,
he and the gate-guards, and he lay the night with them. Now on
the morrow, one of the warders carried him to a certain of the
merchants of Baghdad, to whom he told the same story, and he
believed him, deeming that he was a merchant and had with him
loads of merchandise. Then he took him up into his shop and
entreated him with honour; moreover, he sent to his house for a
splendid suit of his own apparel for him and carried him to the
Hammam. "So," quoth Ali of Cairo: "I went with him to the bath,
and when we came out, he took me and brought me to his house,
where he set the morning-meal before us, and we ate and made
merry. Then said he to one of his black slaves, 'Ho Mas'dd, take
this thy lord: show him the two houses standing in such a place,
and whichever pleaseth him, give him the key of it and come
back.' So I went with the slave, till we came to a street-road
where stood three houses side by side, newly built and yet shut
up. He opened the first and I looked at it; and we did the same
to the second; after which he said to me 'Of which shall I give
thee the key?' 'To whom doth the big house belong?' 'To us!'
'Open it, that I may view it.' 'Thou hast no business there.'
'Wherefore?' 'Because it is haunted, and none nighteth there but
in the morning he is a dead man; nor do we use to open the door,
when removing the corpse, but mount the terrace-roof of one of
the other two houses and take it up thence. For this reason my
master hath abandoned the house and saith: 'I will never again
give it to any one.' 'Open it,' I cried, 'that I may view it;'
and I said in my mind, 'This is what I seek; I will pass the
night there and in the morning be a dead man and be at peace from
this my case.' So he opened it and I entered and found it a
splendid house, without its like; and I said to the slave, 'I
will have none other than this house; give me its key.' But he
rejoined, 'I will not give thee this key till I consult my
master,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the negro
(continued Ali of Cairo) "rejoined, 'I will not give thee its key
till I consult my master,'" and going to him, reported, "'The
Egyptian trader saith, 'I will lodge in none but the big house.'"
Now when the merchant heard this, he rose and coming to Ali,
spake thus to him, "O my lord, thou hast no need of this house."
But he answered, "I will lodge in none other than this; for I
care naught for this silly saying." Quoth the other, "Write me an
acknowledgment that, if aught happen to thee, I am not
responsible." Quoth Ali, "So be it;" whereupon the merchant
fetched an assessor from the Kazi's court and, taking the
prescribed acknowledgment, delivered to him the key wherewith he
entered the house. The merchant sent him bedding by a blackamoor
who spread it for him on the built bench behind the door[FN#268]
and walked away. Presently Ali went about and, seeing in the
inner court a well with a bucket, let this down and drew water,
wherewith he made the lesser ablution and prayed the obligatory
prayers. Then he sat awhile, till the slave brought him the
evening meal from his master's house, together with a lamp, a
candle and candlestick, a basin and ewer and a gugglet[FN#269];
after which he left him and returned home. Ali lighted the
candle, supped at his ease and prayed the night-prayer; and
presently he said to himself, "Come, take the bedding and go
upstairs and sleep there; 'twill be better than here." So he took
the bed and carried it upstairs, where he found a splendid
saloon, with gilded ceiling and floor and walls cased with
coloured marbles. He spread his bed there and sitting down, began
to recite somewhat of the Sublime Koran, when (ere he was ware)
he heard one calling to him and asking, "O Ali, O son of Hasan,
say me, shall I send thee down the gold?" And he answered, "Where
be the gold thou hast to send?" But hardly had he spoken, when
gold pieces began to rain down on him, like stones from a
catapult, nor ceased till the saloon was full. Then, after the
golden shower, said the Voice, "Set me free, that I may go my
way; for I have made an end of my service and have delivered unto
thee that which was entrusted to me for thee." Quoth Ali, "I
adjure thee, by Allah the Almighty, to tell me the cause of this
gold-rain." Replied the Voice, "This is a treasure that was
talisman'd to thee of old time, and to every one who entered the
house, we used to come and say: 'O Ali, O son of Hasan, shall we
send thee down the gold?' Whereat he would be affrighted and cry
out, and we would come down to him and break his neck and go
away. But, when thou camest and we accosted thee by thy name and
that of thy father, saying, 'Shall we send thee down the gold?'
and thou madest answer to us, 'And where be the gold?' we knew
thee for the owner of it and sent it down. Moreover, there is yet
another hoard for thee in the land of Al-Yaman and thou wouldst
do well to journey thither and fetch it. And now I would fain
have thee set me free, that I may go my way." Said Ali, "By
Allah, I will not set thee free, till thou bring me hither the
treasure from the land of Al-Yaman!" Said the Voice, "An I bring
it to thee, wilt thou release me and eke the servant of the other
hoard?" "Yes," replied Ali, and the Voice cried, "Swear to me."
So he swore to him, and he was about to go away, when Ali said to
him, "I have one other need to ask of thee;" and he, "What is
that?" Quoth Ali, "I have a wife and children at Cairo in such a
place; thou needs must fetch them to me, at their ease and
without their unease." Quoth he, "I will bring them to thee in a
mule-litter[FN#270] and much state, with a train of eunuchs and
servants, together with the treasure from Al-Yaman,
Inshallah!"[FN#271] Then he took of him leave of absence for
three days, when all this should be with him, and vanished. As
soon as it was morning Ali went round about the saloon, seeking a
place wherein to store the gold, and saw on the edge of the dais
a marble slab with a turning-pin; so he turned the pin and the
slab sank and showed a door which he opened and entering, found a
great closet, full of bags of coarse stuff carefully sewn. So he
began taking out the bags and fell to filling them with gold and
storing them in the closet, till he had transported thither all
the hoarded gold, whereupon he shut the door and turning the pin,
the slab returned to its place. Then he went down and seated
himself on the bench behind the door; and presently there came a
knock; so he opened and found the merchant's slave who, seeing
him comfortably sitting, returned in haste to his master,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
house-owner's black slave returned and knocked at the door, Ali
the Cairene, son of the merchant Hasan, opened it to him and the
negro, seeing him comfortably sitting, returned in haste to his
master with the good tidings, saying, "O my Lord, the merchant,
who is lodged in the house inhabited by the Jinn,[FN#272] is
alive and well and sitteth on the bench behind the door." Then
the merchant rose joyfully and went to the house, taking
breakfast with him; and, when he saw Ali, he embraced him and
kissed him between the eyes, asking, "How hath Allah dealt with
thee?"; and Ali answered, "Right well, I slept upstairs in the
marble saloon." Quoth the merchant, "Did aught come to thee or
didst thou see any thing?" and quoth Ali "No, I recited some
little of the Sublime Koran and slept till morning, when I arose
and, after making the minor ablution and praying, seated myself
on the bench behind the door." "Praised be Allah for safety!"
exclaimed the merchant, then left him and presently sent him
black slaves and white Mamelukes and handmaidens with household
gear. They swept the house from top to bottom and furnished it
with magnificent furniture; after which three white slaves and
three blacks and four slave-girls remained with him, to serve
him, while the rest returned to their master's house. Now when
the merchants heard of him, they sent him presents of all manner
things of price, even to food and drink and clothes, and took him
with them to the market, asking, "When will thy baggage arrive?"
And he answered, "After three days it will surely come." When the
term had elapsed, the servant of the first hoard, the golden
rain, came to him and said, "Go forth and meet the treasure I
have brought thee from Al-Yaman together with thy Harim; for I
bring part of the wealth in the semblance of costly merchandise;
but the eunuchs and Mamelukes and the mules and horses and camels
are all of the Jann." Now the Jinni, when he betook himself to
Cairo, found Ali's wife and children in sore misery, naked and
hungry; so he carried them out of the city in a travelling-litter
and clad them in sumptuous raiment of the stuffs which were in
the treasure of Al-Yaman. So when Ali heard this, he arose and
repairing to the merchants, said to them, "Rise and go forth with
us from the city, to meet the caravan bringing my merchandise,
and honour us with the presence of your Harims, to meet my
Harim." "Hearkening and obedience," answered they and, sending
for their Harims, went forth all together and took seat in one of
the city-gardens; and as they sat talking, behold, a dust-cloud
arose out of the heart of the desert, and they flocked forth to
see what it was. Presently it lifted and discovered mules and
muleteers, tent-pitchers and linkmen, who came on, singing and
dancing, till they reached the garden, when the chief of the
muleteers walked up to Ali and kissing his hand, said to him, "O
my master, we have been long on the way, for we purposed entering
yesterday; but we were in fear of the bandits, so abode in our
station four days, till Almighty Allah rid us of them." Thereupon
the merchants mounted their mules and rode forward with the
caravan, the Harims waiting behind, till Ali's wife and children
mounted with them; and they all entered in splendid train. The
merchants marvelled at the number of mules laden with chests,
whilst the women of the merchants wondered at the richness of the
apparel of his wife and the fine raiment of her children; and
kept saying each to other, "Verily, the King of Baghdad hath no
such gear; no, nor any other of the kings or lords or merchants!"
So they ceased not to fare forwards in high great state, the men
with Ali of Cairo and the Harims with his Harim, till they came
to the mansion,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they ceased
not to fare forwards in high state, the men with Ali's men and
the women with his wife, till they came to the mansion, where
they alighted and brought the mules and their burdens into the
midst of the courtyard. Then they unloaded them and warehoused
the goods whilst the merchants' wives went up with Ali's family
to the saloon, which they found as it were a luxuriant garden,
spread with magnificent furniture. They sat in mirth and good
cheer till noon, when they brought them up the midday meal, all
manner meats and sweetmeats of the very best; and they ate and
drank costly sherbets and perfumed themselves thereafter with
rose-water and scented woods. Then they took leave and went home,
men and women; and, when the merchants returned to their places,
they sent presents to the husband according to their conditions;
and their wives likewise sent presents to the wife, so that there
came to them great store of handmaids and negroes and Mamelukes;
and all kinds of goods, such as grain, sugar and so forth, in
abundance beyond account. As for the Baghdad merchant, the
landlord of the house, he abode with Ali and quitted him not, but
said to him, "Let the black slaves and servants take the mules
and the common cattle into one of my other houses, to rest."
Quoth Ali, "They set out again to-night for such a place." Then
he gave them leave to go forth and camp outside the city, that
they might start on their journey at night-come; whereupon,
hardly believing that they were dismissed, they took leave of him
and departing to the outliers of the city, flew off through the
air to their several abodes. So Ali and his house-owner sat
together till a third of the night was past, when their colloquy
ended and the merchant returned to his own house and Ali went up
to his wife and children and after saluting them, said, "What
hath befallen you in my absence all this time?" So she told him
what they had suffered of hunger and nakedness and travail, and
he said, "Praised be Allah for safety! How did ye come?" Answered
she, "O my lord, I was asleep with my children yesternight, when
suddenly and unexpectedly one raised us from the ground and flew
with us through the firmament without doing us any hurt, nor did
he leave flying with us, till he set us down in a place as it
were an Arab camping-ground, where we saw laden mules and a
travelling litter borne upon two great mules, and around it
servants, all boys and men. So I asked them, 'Who are ye and what
are these loads and where are we?;' and they answered, 'We are
the servants of the merchant Ali of Cairo, son of the merchant-
jeweller, who hath sent us to fetch you to him at Baghdad.' Quoth
I, 'Tell me, is it far or near, hence to Baghdad?' They replied,
'Near: there lieth between us and the city but the darkness of
the night.' Then they mounted us in the litter and, when the
morrow dawned, we found ourselves with thee, without having
suffered any hurt whatever." Quoth he, "Who gave you these
dresses?;" and quoth she, "The chief of the caravan opened one of
the boxes on the mules and taking out thereof these clothes, clad
me and thy children each in a suit; after which he locked the
case and gave me the key, saying, 'Take care of it, till thou
give it to thy husband.' And here it is safe by me." So saying,
she gave him the key, and he said, "Dost thou know the chest?"
Said she, "Yes, I know it." So he took her down to the magazine
and showed her the boxes, when she cried, "This is the one whence
the dresses were taken;" upon which he put the key in the lock
and opened the chest, wherein he found much raiment and the keys
of all the other cases. So he took them and fell to opening them,
one after another, and feasting his eyes upon the gems and
precious ores they contained, whose like was not found with any
of the kings; after which he locked them again, took the keys,
and returned to the saloon, saying to his wife, "This is of the
bounty of Almighty Allah!" Then bringing her to the secret slab
he turned the pin and opened the door of the closet, into which
he entered with her and showed her the gold he had laid up
therein. Quoth she, "Whence came all this to thee?" "It came to
me by the grace of my Lord," answered he:--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali's
wife had looked upon the gold she said to him, "Whence came all
this to thee?" "It came to me by the grace of my Lord," answered
he: "When I left thee in my trouble, I shipped at Bulak for
Damietta and met a friend there who forwarded me to Damascus": in
brief he told her all that had befallen him, from first to last.
Said she, "O my lord, all this cometh by boon of thy father's
blessing and orisons when he prayed for thee, before his death,
saying, 'I beseech Allah to cast thee into no straits except He
grant thee ready relief!' So praised be Allah Almighty for that
He hath brought thee deliverance and hath requited thee with more
than went from thee! But Allah upon thee, O my lord, return not
to thy practice of associating with doubtful folk; but look thou
fear Allah (whose name be exalted!) both in private and in
public." And as she went on to admonish him, he said, "I accept
thine admonition and beg the Almighty to remove the froward from
amongst us and stablish us in His obedience and in the observance
of the law and practice of His Prophet, on whom be blessings and
peace!" After that Ali and his wife and children were in all
solace of life and gladness; and he opened him a shop in the
merchants' bazar and, stocking it with a somewhat of jewels and
bullion, sat therein with his children and white servants.
Presently he became the most considerable of the merchants of
Baghdad, and his report reached the King of that city,[FN#273]
who sent a messenger to command his attendance, saying, "Answer
the summons of the King who requireth thee." He replied, "I hear
and obey," and straightway prepared his present and he took four
trays of red gold and, filling them with jewels and precious
metals, such as no King possessed, went up to the palace and
presenting himself before the presence, kissed the ground between
his hands and wished him endurance of goods and glory in the
finest language he could command. Said the King, "O merchant,
thou cheerest our city with thy presence!" and Ali rejoined, "O
King of the age, thy slave hath brought thee a gift and hopeth
for acceptance thereof from thy favour." Then he laid the four
trays before the King, who uncovered them and seeing that they
contained gems, whose fellows he possessed not and whose worth
equalled treasuries of money, said, "Thy present is accepted, O
merchant, and Inshallah! we will requite thee with its like." And
Ali kissed his hands and went away; whereupon the King called his
grandees and said to them, "How many of the Kings have sought my
daughter in marriage?" "Many," answered they; and he asked, "Hath
any of them given me the like of this gift?"; whereto they
replied, "Not one, for that none of them hath its like;" and he
said, "I have consulted Allah Almighty by lot as to marrying my
daughter to this merchant. What say ye?" "Be it as thou reckest,"
answered they. Then he bade the eunuch carry the four trays into
his serraglio and going in to his wife, laid them before her. She
uncovered them and seeing therein that whose like she possessed
not; no, nor a fraction thereof, said to him, "From which of the
Kings hadst thou these?: perchance of one of the royalties that
seek thy daughter in marriage?" Said he, "Not so, I had them of
an Egyptian merchant, who is lately come to this our city. Now
when I heard of his coming I sent to command him to us, thinking
to make his acquaintance, so haply we might find with him
somewhat of jewels and buy them of him for our daughter's
trousseau. He obeyed our summons and brought us these four trays,
as a present, and I saw him to be a handsome youth of dignified
aspect and intelligent as elegant, almost such as should be the
sons of Kings. Wherefore my heart inclined to him at sight, and
my heart rejoiced in him and I thought good to marry my daughter
to him. So I showed the gift to my grandees, who agreed with me
that none of the Kings hath the like of these and I told them my
project. But what sayst thou?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
King of Baghdad, after showing the presents to his wife and
highly praising Ali, the merchant-jeweller, and informing her of
the proposed marriage, asked, "But what sayst thou?" She replied,
"O King of the age, the ordering this affair is in Allah's hand,
and thine, and whatso Allah willeth shall come to pass." Rejoined
the King, "If it be His will, I will marry her to none other than
this young man." He slept on this resolve and on the morrow, he
went out to his Divan and summoned Ali and the rest of the
merchants of Baghdad, and when all came bade them be seated. Then
said he, "Bring me the Kazi of the Divan" and they brought him;
whereupon the King said to him, "O Kazi, write the contract of
marriage between my daughter and the merchant Ali the Cairene."
But Ali said, "Thy pardon, O our lord the Sultan! It befitteth
not that a trader such as I, be the King's son-in-law." Quoth the
King, "It is my will to bestow this favour upon thee, as well as
the Wazirate;" and he invested him forthwith in the Wazir's
office and ministerial robes. Then Ali sat down in the chair of
the Wazirate and said, "O King of the age, thou hast bestowed on
me this; and indeed I am honoured by thy bounties; but hear one
word I have to say to thee!" He replied, "Say on, and fear not."
Quoth Ali, "Since it is thine august resolution to marry thy
daughter, thou wouldst do better to marry her to my son. Quoth
the King, "Hast thou then a son?"; and Ali replied, "Yes." "Send
for him forthwith," said the King. Thereupon answered Ali
"Hearkening and obedience!", and despatched a servant to fetch
his son, who came and kissing the ground before the King, stood
in an attitude of respect. The King looked at him and seeing him
to be yet comelier than his daughter and goodlier than she in
stature and proportion and brightness and perfection, said to
him, "What is thy name, O my son?" "My name is Hasan, O o