ur lord
the Sultan," replied the young man, who was then fourteen years
old. Then the Sultan said to the Kazi, "Write the contract of
marriage between my daughter Husn al-Wujdd and Hasan, son of the
merchant Ali the Cairene." So he wrote the marriage-contract
between them, and the affair was ended in the goodliest fashion;
after which all in the Divan went their ways and the merchants
followed the Wazir Ali, escorting him to his house, where they
gave him joy of his advancement and departed. Then he went in to
his wife, who seeing him clad in the Wazir's habit, exclaimed,
"What is this?"; when he told her all that had passed from first
to last and she joyed therein with exceeding joy. So sped the
night and on the morrow, he went up to the Divan, where the King
received him with especial favour and seating him close by his
side, said, "O Wazir, we purpose to begin the wedding festivities
and bring thy son in to our daughter." Replied Ali, "O our lord
the Sultan, whatso thou deemest good is good." So the Sultan gave
orders to celebrate the festivities, and they decorated the city
and held high festival for thirty days, in all joy and gladness;
at the end of which time, Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali, went in to
the Princess and enjoyed her beauty and loveliness. When the
Queen saw her daughter's husband, she conceived a warm affection
for him, and in like manner she rejoiced greatly in his mother.
Then the King bade build for his son-in-law Hasan Ali-son a
palace beside his own; so they built him with all speed a
splendid palace in which he took up his abode; and his mother
used to tarry with him some days and then go down to her own
house. After awhile the Queen said to her husband, "O King of the
age, Hasan's lady-mother cannot take up her abode with her son
and leave the Wazir; neither can she tarry with the Wazir and
leave her son." "Thou sayest sooth," replied the King, and bade
edify a third palace beside that of Hasan, which being done in a
few days he caused remove thither the goods of the Wazir, and the
Minister and his wife took up their abode there. Now the three
palaces communicated with one another, so that when the King had
a mind to speak with the Wazir by night, he would go to him or
send to fetch him; and so with Hasan and his father and mother.
On this wise they dwelt in all solace and in the greatest
happiness--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
and the Wazir and his son ceased not to dwell in all solace and
in the greatest happiness awhile, till the King fell ill and his
sickness grew on him. So he summoned the lords of his realm and
said to them, "There is come upon me a sore malady, peradventure
a mortal; and I have therefore summoned you to consult you
respecting a certain matter, on which I would have you counsel me
as you deem well." They asked, "What is the matter of which thou
wouldst take counsel with us, O King?"; and he answered, "I am
old and sickly and I fear for the realm after me from its
enemies; so I would have you all agree upon some one, that I may
proclaim him King in my lifetime and so ye may be at ease."
Whereupon quoth they with one voice, "We all approve of thy
daughter's husband Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali; for we have seen
his wit and perfect understanding, and he knoweth the place of
all, great and small." Asked the King, "Are ye indeed agreed upon
this?" and they answered, "Yes." Rejoined he "Peradventure ye all
say this to my face, of respect for me; but behind my back ye
will say otherwise." However, they all replied, "By Allah, our
word is one and the same in public and in private, and we accept
him frankly and with heartiness of heart and breadth of breast."
Quoth he, "Since the case is thus, bring the Kazi of the Holy Law
and all the Chamberlains and Viceroys and Officers of state
before me to-morrow, and we will order the affair after the
goodliest fashion." "We hear and we obey," answered they and
withdrawing, notified all the Olema,[FN#274] the doctors of the
law and the chief personages among the Emirs. So when the morrow
dawned, they came up to the Divan and, having craved and obtained
permission to enter, they saluted the King, saying, "Here are we
all in thy presence." Whereto he made reply, "O Emirs of Baghdad,
whom will ye have to be King over you after me, that I may
inaugurate him during my lifetime, before the presence of you
all?" Quoth they with one voice, "We are agreed upon thy
daughter's husband Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali." Quoth he, "If it
be so, go all of you and bring him before me." So they all arose
and, repairing to Hasan's palace, said to him, "Rise, come with
us to the King." "Wherefore?" asked he, and they answered, "For a
thing that will benefit both us and thee." So he went in with
them to the King and kissed the ground before his father-in-law
who said to him, "Be seated, O my son!" He sat down and the King
continued, "O Hasan, all the Emirs have approved of thee and
agreed to make thee King over them after me; and it is my purpose
to proclaim thee, whilst I yet live, and so make an end of the
business." But Hasan stood up and, kissing the ground once more
before the King, said to him, "O our lord the King, among the
Emirs there be many who are older than I and greater of worth;
acquit me therefore of this thing." But all the Emirs cried out
saying, "We consent not but that thou be King over us." Then said
Hasan, "My father is older than I, and I and he are one thing;
and it befits not to advance me over him." But Ali said, "I will
consent to nothing save whatso contenteth my brethren; and they
have all chosen and agreed upon thee; wherefore gainsay thou not
the King's commandment and that of thy brethren." And Hasan hung
his head abashed before the King and his father. Then said the
King to the Emirs, "Do ye all accept of him?" "We do," answered
they and recited thereupon seven Fatihahs.[FN#275] So the King
said, "O Kazi, draw up a legal instrument testifying of these
Emirs that they are agreed to make King over them my daughter's
husband Hasan." The Kazi wrote the act and made it binding on all
men,[FN#276] after they had sworn in a body the oath of fealty to
Hasan. Then the King did likewise and bade him take his seat on
the throne of kingship; whereupon they all arose and kissed King
Hasan's hands and did homage to him, and swore lealty to him. And
the new King dispensed justice among the people that day in
fashion right royal, and invested the grandees of the realm in
splendid robes of honour. When the Divan broke up, he went in to
and kissed the hands of his father-in-law who spake thus to him,
"O my son, look thou rule the lieges in the fear of Allah;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Hasan was quit of the Divan, he went in to and kissed the hands
of his wife's father, who spake thus to him, "O my son, look thou
rule the lieges in the fear of Allah;" whereto he replied, "O my
father, through thy prayers for me, the grace and guidance of
Allah will come to me." Then he entered his own palace and was
met by his wife and her mother and their attendants, who kissed
his hands and gave him joy of his advancement, saying, "Be this
day blessed!" Next he went in to his father and mother, who joyed
with exceeding joy in that which Allah had vouchsafed him of his
advancement to the kingship, and his father charged him to fear
Allah and to deal mercifully with his subjects. He passed the
night in glee and gladness, and on the morrow, having prayed the
obligatory prayers ending with the usual short chapters[FN#277]
of the Koran, he went up to the Divan, whither came all his
officers and dignitaries. He passed the day in dispensing justice
among the folk, bidding to graciousness and forbidding
ungraciousness and appointing to place and displacing, till day-
end, when the Divan broke up, after the goodliest fashion, and
all the troops withdrew and each went his own way. Then he arose
and repaired to the palace, where he found his father-in-law's
sickness grown heavy upon him and said to him, "May no ill befal
thee!" At this the old King opened his eyes and said, "O Hasan!"
and he replied, "At thy service, O my lord." Quoth the old King
"Mine appointed hour is at hand: be thou careful of thy wife and
her mother, and look thou fear Allah and honour thy parents; and
bide in awe of the majesty of the Requiting King and bear in mind
that He commandeth justice and good works." And King Hasan
replied, "I hear and obey." Now after this the old King lingered
three days and then departed into the mercy of Almighty Allah. So
they laid him out and shrouded and buried him and held over him
readings and perlections of the Koran, to the end of the
customary forty days. And King Hasan, son of the Wazir, reigned
in his stead, and his subjects joyed in him and all his days were
gladness; moreover, his father ceased not to be his chief Wazir
on his right hand, and he took to himself another Wazir, to be at
his left hand. His reign was a prosperous and well ordered, and
he lived a long life as King of Baghdad; and Allah blessed him,
by the old King's daughter, with three sons who inherited the
kingdom after him; and they abode in the solace of life and its
pleasures till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and
the Severer of societies. And the glory be to Him who is eternal
and in whose hand are annulling and confirming. And of the tales
they tell is one of




               THE PILGRIM MAN AND THE OLD WOMAN.



A man of the pilgrims once slept a long sleep and awaking, found
no trace of the caravan. So he rose up and walked on, but lost
his way and presently came to a tent, where he saw an old woman
standing at the entrance and by her side a dog asleep. He went up
to the tent and, saluting the old woman, sought of her food, when
she replied, "Go to yonder Wady and catch thy sufficiency of
serpents, that I may broil of them for thee and give thee to
eat." Rejoined the pilgrim, "I dare not catch serpents nor did I
ever eat them." Quoth the old woman, "I will go with thee and
catch some; fear not." So she went with him, followed by the dog,
to the valley and, catching a sufficient number of serpents,
proceeded to broil them. He saw nothing for it (saith the story
teller) but to eat, in fear of hunger and exhaustion; so he ate
of the serpents.[FN#278] Then he was athirst and asked for water
to drink; and she answered, "Go to the spring and drink."
Accordingly, he went to the spring and found the water thereof
bitter; yet needs must he drink of it despite its bitterness,
because of the violence of his thirst. Presently he returned to
the old woman and said to her, "I marvel, O ancient dame, at thy
choosing to sojourn in this place"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
palmer-man drank the bitter draught for stress of thirst, he
returned and said "I marvel, O ancient dame, at thy choosing to
sojourn in this place and thy putting up with such meat and
drink!" She asked, "And how is it then in thy country?"; whereto
he answered, "In my country are houses wide and spacious and
fruits ripe and delicious and waters sweet and viands savorous
and of goodly use and meats fat and full of juice and flocks
innumerous and all things pleasant and all the goods of life, the
like whereof are not, save in the Paradise which Allah the
Omnipotent hath promised to His servants pious." Replied she,
"All this have I heard: but tell me, have ye a Sultan who ruleth
over you and is tyrannical in his rule and under whose hand you
are; one who, if any of you commit an offence, taketh his goods
and ruineth him and who, whenas he will, turneth you out of house
and home and uprooteth you, stock and branch?" Replied the man,
"Indeed that may be;" and she rejoined, "If so, by Allah, these
your delicious food and life of daintyhood and gifts however
good, with tyranny and oppression, are but a searching poison,
while our coarse meat which in freedom and safety we eat is a
healthful medicine. Hast thou not heard that the best of boons,
after Al-Islam, the true Faith, are sanity and security?"[FN#279]
"Now such boons (quoth he who telleth the tale) may be by the
just rule of the Sultan, Vice-regent of Allah on His earth, and
the goodness of his polity. The Sultan of time past needed but
little awfulness, for when the lieges saw him, they feared him;
but the Sultan of these days hath need of the most accomplished
polity and the utmost majesty, because men are not as men of
by-gone time and this our age is one of folk opprobrious, and is
greatly calamitous, noted for folly and hardness of heart and
inclined to hate and enmity. If, therefore, the Sultan (which
Almighty Allah forfend!) be weak or wanting in polity and
majesty, this will be the assured cause of his country's ruin.
Quoth the proverb, 'An hundred years of the Sultan's tyranny, but
not one year of the people's tyranny one over other.' When the
lieges oppress one another, Allah setteth over them a tyrannical
Sultan and a terrible King. Thus it is told in history that one
day there was sent to Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf a slip of paper,
whereon was written, 'Fear Allah and oppress not His servants
with all manner of oppression.' When he read this, he mounted the
pulpit (for he was eloquent and ever ready of speech), and said,
'O folk, Allah Almighty hath made me ruler over you, by reason of
your frowardness;'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hajjaj
Yousuf-son read the paper he mounted the pulpit and said, "O
folk, Allah Almighty hath made me ruler over you by reason of
your frowardness; and indeed, though I die yet will ye not be
delivered from oppression, with these your ill deeds; for the
Almighty hath created like unto me many an one. If it be not I,
'twill be one more mischievous than I and a mightier in
oppression and a more merciless in his majesty; even as saith the
poet:[FN#280]--

          'For not a deed the hand can try
          Save 'neath the hand of God on high,
          Nor tyrant harsh work tyranny
          Uncrushed by tyrant harsh as he.'

Tyranny is feared: but justice is the best of all things. We beg
Allah to better our case!" And among tales is that of




                 ABU AL-HUSN AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL
                       TAWADDUD.[FN#281]



There was once in Baghdad a man of consequence and rich in monies
and immoveables, who was one of the chiefs of the merchants; and
Allah had largely endowed him with worldly goods, but had not
vouchsafed him what he longed for of offspring; and there passed
over him a long space of time, without his being blessed with
issue, male or female. His years waxed great; his bones became
wasted and his back bent; weakness and weariness grew upon him,
and he feared the loss of his wealth and possessions, seeing he
had no child whom he might make his heir and by whom his name
should be remembered. So he betook himself with supplication to
Almighty Allah, fasting by day and praying through the night.
Moreover, he vowed many vows to the Living, the Eternal; and
visited the pious and was constant in supplication to the Most
Highest, till He gave ear to him and accepted his prayer and took
pity on his straining and complaining; so that, before many days
were past, he knew carnally one of his women and she conceived by
him the same night. In due time she finished her months and,
casting her burden, bore a male child as he were a slice of the
moon; whereupon the merchant fulfilled his vows in his gratitude
to Allah, (to whom be honour and glory!) and gave alms and
clothed the widow and the orphan. On the seventh night after the
boy's birth, he named him Abu al-Husn,[FN#282] and the wet-nurses
suckled him and the dry-nurses dandled him and the servants and
the slaves carried him and handled him, till he shot up and grew
tall and throve greatly and learnt the Sublime Koran and the
ordinances of Al-Islam and the Canons of the True Faith; and
calligraphy and poetry and mathematics and archery. On this wise
he became the union-pearl of his age and the goodliest of the
folk of his time and his day; fair of face and of tongue fluent,
carrying himself with a light and graceful gait and glorying in
his stature proportionate and amorous graces which were to many a
bait: and his cheeks were red and flower-white was his forehead
and his side face waxed brown with tender down, even as saith
one, describing him,

"The spring of the down on cheeks right clearly shows: * And how
     when the Spring is gone shall last the rose?
Dost thou not see that the growth upon his cheek * Is violet-
     bloom that from its leaves outgrows."

He abode awhile in ease and happiness with his father, who
rejoiced and delighted in him, till he came to man's estate, when
the merchant one day made him sit down before him and said, "O my
son, the appointed term draweth near; my hour of death is at hand
and it remaineth but to meet Allah (to whom belong Majesty and
Might!). I leave thee what shall suffice thee, even to thy son's
son, of monies and mansions, farms and gardens; wherefore, fear
thou Almighty Allah, O my son, in dealing with that which I
bequeath to thee and follow none but those who will help thee to
the Divine favour." Not long after, he sickened and died; so his
son ordered his funeral,[FN#283] after the goodliest wise, and
burying him, returned to his house and sat mourning for him many
days and nights. But behold, certain of his friends came in to
him and said to him, "Whoso leaveth a son like thee is not dead;
indeed, what is past is past and fled and mourning beseemeth none
but the young maid and the wife cloistered." And they ceased not
from him till they wrought on him to enter the Hammam and break
off his mourning.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
al-Husn was visited by his friends and taken to the Hamman and
persuaded to break off his mourning, he presently forgot his
father's charge, and his head was turned by his riches; he
thought fortune would always wone with him as it was, and that
wealth would ever wax and never wane. So he ate and drank and
made merry and took his pleasure and gave gifts of gear and coin
and was profuse with gold and addrest himself up to eating fowls
and breaking the seals of wine-flasks and listening to the giggle
of the daughter of the vine, as she gurgled from the flagon and
enjoying the jingle of the singing-girls; nor did he give over
this way of life, till his wealth was wasted and the case
worsened and all his goods went from him and he bit his
hands[FN#284] in bitter penitence. For of a truth he had nothing
left, after that which he had squandered, but a concubine, a
slave-girl whom his father had bequeathed to him with the rest of
his estate: and she had no equal in beauty and loveliness and
brightness and liveliness and symmetric stature and perfect
grace. She was past mistress in every manner of arts and
accomplishments and endowed with many excellences, surpassing all
the folk of her age and time. She was grown more notorious than a
way-mark,[FN#285] for her seductive genius, and outdid the fair
both in theory and practice, and she was noted for her swimming
gait, flexile and delicate, albeit she was full five feet in
height and by all the boons of fortune deckt and dight, with
strait arched brows twain, as they were the crescent moon of
Sha'aban,[FN#286] and eyes like gazelles' eyne; and nose like the
edge of scymitar fine and cheeks like anemones of blood-red
shine; and mouth like Solomon's seal and sign and teeth like
necklaces of pearls in line; and navel holding an ounce of oil of
benzoin and waist more slender than his body whom love hath
wasted and whom concealment hath made sick with pine and hind
parts heavier than two hills of sand; briefly she was a volume of
charms after his saying who saith, 

"Her fair shape ravisheth, if face to face she did appear, * And
     if she turn, for severance from her she slayeth sheer.
Sun-like, full-moon-like, sapling-like, unto her character *
     Estrangement no wise appertains nor cruelty austere.
Under the bosom of her shift the garths of Eden are * And the
     full-moon revolveth still upon her neck-rings'
     sphere."[FN#287]

She seemed a full moon rising and a gazelle browsing, a girl of
nine plus five[FN#288] shaming the moon and sun, even as saith of
her the sayer eloquent and ingenious,

"Semblance of full-moon Heaven bore, * When five and five are
     conjoined by four;
'Tis not my sin if she made of me * Its like when it riseth
     horizon o'er."[FN#289]

Clean of skin, odoriferous of breath, it seemed as if she were of
fire fashioned and of crystal moulded; rose-red was the cheek of
her and perfect the shape and form of her; even as one saith of
her, describing her,

"Scented with sandal[FN#290] and musk, right proudly doth she go,
     * With gold and silver and rose and saffron-colour aglow.
A flower in a garden she is, a pearl in an ouch of gold * Or an
     image in chapel[FN#291] set for worship of high and low.
Slender and shapely she is; vivacity bids her arise, * But the
     weight of her hips says, 'Sit, or softly and slowly go.'
Whenas her favours I seek and sue for my heart's desire, * 'Be
     gracious,' her beauty says; but her coquetry answers, 'No.'
Glory to Him who made beauty her portion, and that * Of her lover
     to be the prate of the censurers, heigho!"[FN#292]

She captivated all who saw her, with the excellence of her beauty
and the sweetness of her smile,[FN#293] and shot them down with
the shafts she launched from her eyes; and withal she was
eloquent of speech and excellently skilled in verse. Now when Abu
al-Husn had squandered all his gold, and his ill-plight all could
behold, and there remained to him naught save this slave-girl, he
abode three days without tasting meat or taking rest in sleep,
and the handmaid said to him, "O my lord, carry me to the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
slave-girl to her master, "O my lord, carry me to Harun
al-Rashid, fifth of the sons of Abbas, and seek of him to my
price ten thousand dinars. If he deem me dear, say to him: 'O
Prince of True Believers, my handmaid is worth more than this: do
but prove her, and her value will be magnified in thine eyes; for
this slave-girl hath not her equal, and she were unfit to any but
thou.'" And she added, "Beware, O my lord, of selling me at less
than the sum I have named; indeed 'tis but little for the like of
me." Now her owner knew not her worth nor that she had no equal
in her day; but he carried her to the Caliph and set her in the
presence and repeated what she had bidden him say. The Caliph
asked her, "What is thy name?"; to which she answered, "My name
is Tawaddud."[FN#294] He then enquired, "O Tawaddud, in what
branches of knowledge dost thou excel?"; and she replied, "O my
lord, I am versed in syntax and poetry and jurisprudence and
exegesis and philosophy; and I am skilled in music and the
knowledge of the Divine ordinances and in arithmetic and geodesy
and geometry and the fables of the ancients. I know the Sublime
Koran by heart and have read it according to the seven, the ten
and the fourteen modes. I know the number of its chapters and
versets and sections and words; and its halves and fourths and
eighths and tenths; the number of prostrations which occur in it
and the sum total of its letters; and I know what there is in it
of abrogating and abrogated[FN#295]; also what parts of it were
revealed at Al-Medinah and what at Meccah and the cause of the
different revelations. I know the Holy Traditions of the
Apostle's sayings, historical and legendary, the established and
those whose ascription is doubtful; and I have studied the exact
sciences, geometry and philosophy and medicine and logic and
rhetoric and composition; and I have learnt many things by rote
and am passionately fond of poetry. I can play the lute and know
its gamut and notes and notation and the crescendo and
diminuendo. If I sing and dance, I seduce, and if I dress and
scent myself, I slay. In fine, I have reached a pitch of
perfection such as can be estimated only by those of them who are
firmly rooted in knowledge."[FN#296] Now when the Caliph heard
these words spoken by one so young, he wondered at her eloquence,
and turning to Abu al-Husn, said, "I will summon those who shall
discuss with her all she claimeth to know; if she answer
correctly, I will give thee the price thou askest for her and
more; and if not, thou art fitter to have her than I." "With
gladness and goodly gree, O Commander of the Faithful," replied
Abu al-Husn. So the Caliph wrote to the Viceroy of Bassorah, to
send him Ibrahim bin Siyyar the prosodist, who was the first man
of his day in argument and eloquence and poetry and logic, and
bade him bring with him readers of the Koran and learned doctors
of the law and physicians and astrologers and scientists and
mathematicians and philosophers; and Ibrahim was more learned
than all. In a little while they arrived at the palace of the
Caliphate, knowing not what was to do, and the Caliph sent for
them to his sitting-chamber and ordered them to be seated. So
they sat down and he bade bring the damsel Tawaddud who came and
unveiling, showed herself, as she were a sparkling star.[FN#297]
The Caliph set her a stool of gold; and she saluted, and speaking
with an eloquent tongue, said, "O Commander of the Faithful, bid
the Olema and the doctors of law and leaches and astrologers and
scientists and mathematicians and all here present contend with
me in argument." So he said to them, "I desire of you that ye
dispute with this damsel on the things of her faith, and stultify
her argument in all she advanceth;" and they answered, saying,
"We hear and we obey Allah and thee, O Commander of the
Faithful." Upon this Tawaddud bowed her head and said, "Which of
you is the doctor of the law, the scholar, versed in the readings
of the Koran and in the Traditions?" Quoth one of them, "I am the
man thou seekest." Quoth she, "Then ask me of what thou wilt."
Said the doctor, "Hast thou read the precious book of Allah and
dost thou know its cancelling and cancelled parts and hast thou
meditated its versets and its letters?" "Yes," answered she.
"Then," said he, "I will proceed to question thee of the
obligations and the immutable ordinances: so tell me of these, O
damsel, and who is thy Lord, who thy prophet, who thy Guide, what
is thy point of fronting in prayer, and who be thy brethren? Also
what thy spiritual path and what thy highway?" Whereto she
replied, "Allah is my Lord, and Mohammed (whom Allah save and
assain!) my prophet, and the Koran is my guide and the Ka'abah my
fronting; and the True-believers are my brethren. The practice of
good is my path and the Sunnah my highway." The Caliph again
marvelled at her words so eloquently spoken by one so young; and
the doctor pursued, "O damsel, with what do we know Almighty
Allah?" Said she, "With the understanding." Said he, "And what is
the understanding?" Quoth she, "It is of two kinds, natural and
acquired."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
continued, "The understanding is of two kinds, natural and
acquired. The natural is that which Allah (to whom be honour and
glory!) created for the right direction of His servants after His
will; and the acquired is that which men accomplish by dint of
study and fair knowledge." He rejoined, "Thou hast answered
well." Q "Where is the seat of the understanding?"--"Allah
casteth it in the heart whence its lustrous beams ascend to the
brain and there become fixed." Q "How knowest thou the Prophet of
Allah?" "By the reading of Allah's Holy Book and by signs and
proofs and portents and miracles!" Q "What are the obligations
and the immutable ordinances?" "The obligations are five. (1)
Testification that there is no ilah[FN#298] but Allah, no god but
the God alone and One, which for partner hath none, and that
Mohammed is His servant and His apostle. (2) The standing in
prayers.[FN#299] (3) The payment of the poor-rate. (4) Fasting
Ramazan. (5) The Pilgrimage to Allah's Holy House for all to whom
the journey is possible. The immutable ordinances are four; to
wit, night and day and sun and moon, the which build up life and
hope; nor any son of Adam wotteth if they will be destroyed on
the Day of Judgment." Q "What are the obligatory observances of
the Faith?" "They are five, prayer, almsgiving, fasting,
pilgrimage, fighting for the Faith and abstinence from the
forbidden." Q "Why dost thou stand up to pray?" "To express the
devout intent of the slave acknowledging the Deity." Q "What are
the obligatory conditions which precede standing in prayer?"
"Purification, covering the shame, avoidance of soiled clothes,
standing on a clean place, fronting the Ka'abah, an upright
posture, the intent[FN#300] and the pronouncing 'Allaho Akbar' of
prohibition."[FN#301] Q "With what shouldest thou go forth from
thy house to pray?" "With the intent of worship mentally
pronounced." Q "With what intent shouldest thou enter the
mosque?" "With an intent of service." Q "Why do we front the
Kiblah[FN#302]?" "In obedience to three Divine orders and one
Traditional ordinance." Q "What are the beginning, the
consecration and the end of prayer?" "Purification beginneth
prayer, saying the Allaho Akbar of prohibition consecrateth, and
the salutation endeth prayer." Q "What deserveth he who
neglecteth prayer?" "It is reported, among the authentic
Traditions of the Prophet, that he said, 'Whoso neglecteth prayer
wilfully and purposely hath no part in Al-Islam.'"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Four Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
damsel had repeated the words of that Holy Tradition the doctor
cried, "Thou hast replied aright: now say me, what is prayer?"
"Prayer is communion between the slave and his lord, and in it
are ten virtues: (1) it illumineth the heart; (2) it maketh the
face shine; (3) it pleaseth the Compassionate One; (4) it
angereth Satan; (5) it conjureth calamity; (6) it wardeth off the
mischief of enemies; (7) it multiplieth mercy; (8) it forfendeth
vengeance and punishment; (9) it bringeth the slave nigh unto his
lord; and (10) it restraineth from lewdness and frowardness.
Hence it is one of the absolute requisites and obligatory
ordinances and the pillar of the Faith." Q "What is the key of
prayer?" "Wuzd or the lesser ablution."[FN#303] Q "What is the
key to the lesser ablution?" "Intention and naming the Almighty."
Q "What is the key of naming the Almighty?" "Assured faith." Q
"What is the key of faith?" "Trust in the Lord." Q "What is the
key of trust in the Lord?" "Hope." Q "What is the key of hope?"
"Obedience." Q "What is the key of obedience?" "The confession of
the Unity and the acknowledgment of the divinity of Allah." Q
"What are the Divine ordinances of Wuzu, the minor ablution?"
"They are six, according to the canon of the Imam al-Shafi'i
Mohammed bin Idris (of whom Allah accept!): (1) intent while
washing the face; (2) washing the face; (3) washing the hands and
forearms; (4) wiping part of the head; (5) washing the feet and
heels; and (6) observing due order.[FN#304] And the traditional
statutes are ten: (1) nomination; (2) and washing the hands
before putting them into the water-pot; (3) and mouth-rinsing;
(4) and snuffing;[FN#305] (5) and wiping the whole head; (6) and
wetting the ears within and without with fresh water; (7) and
separating a thick beard; (8) and separating the fingers and
toes;[FN#306] (9) and washing the right foot before the left and
(10) doing each of these thrice and all in unbroken order. When
the minor ablution is ended, the worshipper should say, I testify
that there is no god but the God, the One, which for partner hath
none, and I testify that Mohammed is His servant and His apostle.
O my Allah, make me of those who repent and in purity are
permanent! Glory to Thee, O my God, and in Thy praise I bear
witness, that there is no god save Thou! I crave pardon of Thee
and I repent to Thee! For it is reported, in the Holy Traditions,
that the Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!) said of this
prayer, 'Whoso endeth every ablution with this prayer, the eight
gates of Paradise are open to him; he shall enter at which he
pleaseth.'" Q "When a man purposeth ablution, what betideth him
from the angels and the devils?" "When a man prepareth for
ablution, the angels come and stand on his right and the devils
on his left hand.[FN#307] If he name Almighty Allah at the
beginning of the ablution, the devils flee from him and the
angels hover over him with a pavilion of light, having four
ropes, to each an angel glorifying Allah and craving pardon for
him, so long as he remaineth silent or calleth upon the name of
Allah. But if he omit to begin washing with naming Allah (to whom
belong might and majesty!), neither remain silent, the devils
take command of him; and the angels depart from him and Satan
whispereth evil thoughts unto him, till he fall into doubt and
come short in his ablution. For (quoth he on whom be blessing and
peace!), 'A perfect ablution driveth away Satan and assureth
against the tyranny of the Sultan'; and again quoth he, 'If
calamity befal one who is not pure by ablution; verily and
assuredly let him blame none but himself.'" Q "What should a man
do when he awaketh from sleep?" "He should wash his hands thrice,
before putting them into the water vessel." Q "What are the
Koranic and traditional orders anent Ghusl, the complete
ablution[FN#308]?" "The divine ordinances are intent and
'crowning'[FN#309] the whole body with water, that is, the liquid
shall come at every part of the hair and skin. Now the
traditional ordinances are the minor ablution as preliminary;
rubbing the body; separating the hair and deferring in
words[FN#310] the washing of the feet till the end of the
ablution."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had recounted to the doctor what were the divine and
traditional orders anent Ghusl or total ablution, quoth he, "Thou
hast replied aright: now tell me what are the occasions for
Tayammum, or making the ablution with sand and dust; and what are
the ordinances thereof, divine and human?" "The reasons are
seven, viz.: want of water; fear lest water lack; need thereto;
going astray on a march; sickness; having broken bones in splints
and having open wounds.[FN#311] As for its ordinances, the divine
number four, viz., intent, dust, clapping it to the face and
clapping it upon the hands; and the human number two, nomination
and preferring the right before the left hand." Q "What are the
conditions, the pillars or essentials, and the traditional
statutes of prayer?" "The conditions are five: (1) purification
of the members; (2) covering of the privy parts; (3) observing
the proper hours, either of certainty or to the best of one's
belief; (4) fronting the Kiblah; and (5) standing on a clean
place. The pillars or essentials number twelve: (1) intent; (2)
the Takbir or magnification of prohibition; (3) standing when
able to stand[FN#312]; (4) repeating the Fatihah or opening
chapter of the Koran and saying, 'In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate!' with a verse thereof
according to the canon of the Imam Al-Shafi'i; (5) bowing the
body and keeping it bowed; (6) returning to the upright posture
and so remaining for the time requisite; (7) prostration and
permanence therein; (8) sitting between two prostrations and
permanence therein; (9) repeating the latter profession of the
Faith and sitting up therefor; (10) invoking benediction on the
Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!) (11) the first
Salutation,[FN#313] and (12) the intent of making an end of
prayer expressed in words. But the traditional statutes are the
call to prayer; the standing posture; raising the hands (to
either side of the face) whilst pronouncing the prohibition;
uttering the magnification before reciting the Fatihah; seeking
refuge with Allah[FN#314]; saying, 'Amen'; repeating the chapter
of the Koran after the Fatihah, repeating the magnifications
during change of posture; saying, 'May Allah hear him who
praiseth Him! and O our Lord, to Thee be the praise!'; praying
aloud in the proper place[FN#315] and praying under the breath
prayers so prescribed; the first profession of unity and sitting
up thereto; blessing the Prophet therein; blessing his family in
the latter profession and the second Salutation." Q "On what is
the Zakat or obligatory poor-rate taxable?" "On gold and silver
and camels and oxen and sheep and wheat and barley and holcus and
millet and beans and vetches and rice and raisins and dates." Q
"What is the Zakat or poor-rate on gold?" "Below twenty miskals
or dinars, nothing; but on that amount half a dinar for every
score and so on proportionally.[FN#316]" Q "On silver?" "Under
two hundred dirhams nothing, then five dirhams on every two
hundred and so forth." Q "On camels?" "For every five, an ewe, or
for every twenty-five a pregnant camel." Q "On sheep?" "An ewe
for every forty head," Q "What are the ordinances of the Ramazan
Fast?" "The Koranic are intent; abstinence from eating, drinking
and carnal copulation, and the stoppage of vomiting. It is
incumbent on all who submit to the Law, save women in their
courses and forty days after childbirth; and it becomes
obligatory on sight of the new moon or on news of its appearance,
brought by a trustworthy person and commending itself as truth to
the hearer's heart; and among its requisites is that the intent
be pronounced at nightfall. The traditional ordinances of fasting
are, hastening to break the fast at sundown; deferring the
fore-dawn meal,[FN#317] and abstaining from speech, save for good
works and for calling on the name of Allah and reciting the
Koran." Q "What things vitiate not the fast?" "The use of
unguents and eye-powders and the dust of the road and the
undesigned swallowing of saliva and the emission of seed in
nocturnal pollution or at the sight of a strange woman and
blooding and cupping; none of these things vitiates the fast." Q
"What are the prayers of the two great annual Festivals?" "Two
one-bow prayers, which be a traditional ordinance, without call
to prayer or standing up to pronounce the call;[FN#318] but let
the Moslem say, 'Prayer is a collector of all folk!'[FN#319] and
pronounce 'Allaho Akbar' seven times in the first prayer, besides
the Takbir of prohibition; and, in the second, five times,
besides the magnification of rising up (according to the doctrine
of the Imam Al-Shafi'i, on whom Allah have mercy!) and make the
profession of the Faith."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had answered the doctor anent the Festival-prayers, quoth
he, "Thou hast replied aright: now tell me what are the prayers
prescribed on the occasion of an eclipse of the sun or moon?"
"Two one-bow prayers without call to prayer or standing thereto
by the worshipper, who shall make in each two-bow prayer double
standing up and double inclinations and two-fold prostrations,
then sit and testify and salute." Q "What is the ritual of prayer
for rain?" "Two one-bow prayers without call to prayer or
standing thereto; then shall the Moslem make the profession and
salute. Moreover the Imam shall deliver an exhortation and ask
pardon of Allah, in place of the magnification, as in the two
sermons of the Festivals and turn his mantle upper edge downwards
and pray and supplicate." Q "What are the Witr, the additional or
occasional prayers?" "The least is a one-bow prayer and the most
eleven." Q "What is the forenoon prayer?" "At least, two one-bow
prayers and at most, twelve." Q "What hast thou to say of the
I'itikaf or retreat[FN#320]?" "It is a matter of traditional
ordinance." Q "What are its conditions?" "(1) intent; (2) not
leaving the mosque save of necessity; (3) not having to do with a
woman; (4) fasting; and (5) abstaining from speech." Q "Under
what conditions is the Hajj or Pilgrimage[FN#321] obligatory?"
"Manhood, and understanding and being a Moslem and
practicability; in which case it is obligatory on all, once
before death." Q "What are the Koranic statutes of the
Pilgrimage?" "(1) The Ihram or pilgrim's habit; (2) the standing
at Arafat; (3) circumambulating the Ka'abah; (4) running between
Safa and Marwah[FN#322]; and (5) shaving or clipping the hair." Q
"What are the Koranic statutes of the 'Umrah[FN#323] or lesser
pilgrimage?" "Assuming the pilgrim's habit and compassing and
running." Q "What are the Koranic ordinances of the assumption of
the pilgrim's habit?"[FN#324] "Doffing sewn garments, forswearing
perfume and ceasing to shave the head or pare the nails, and
avoiding the killing of game, and eschewing carnal copulation." Q
"What are the traditional statutes of the pilgrimage?" "(1) The
crying out 'Labbay'ka, Adsum, Here am I, O our Lord, here am
I!'[FN#325]4 (2) the Ka'abah-circuitings[FN#326] of arrival and
departure; (3) the passing the night at the Mosque of Muzdalifah
and in the valley of Mina, and (4) the lapidation.[FN#327]" Q
"What is the Jihad or Holy War and its essentials?" "Its
essentials are: (1) the descent of the Infidels upon us; (2) the
presence of the Imam; (3) a state of preparation; and (4)
firmness in meeting the foe. Its traditional ordinance is incital
to battle, in that the Most High hath said, 'O thou my Prophet,
incite the faithful to fight!'[FN#328]" Q "What are the
ordinances of buying and selling?" "The Koranic are: (1) offer
and acceptance and (2) if the thing sold be a white slave, by
whom one profiteth, all possible endeavour to convert him to
Al-Islam; and (3) to abstain from usury; the traditional are:
making void[FN#329] and option before not after separating,
according to his saying (whom Allah bless and preserve!), 'The
parties to a sale shall have the option of cancelling or altering
terms whilst they are yet unseparated.'", Q "What is it forbidden
to sell for what?" "On this point I mind me of an authentic
tradition, reported by Naf'i[FN#330] of the Apostle of Allah,
that he forbade the barter of dried dates for fresh and fresh
figs for dry and jerked for fresh meat and cream for clarified
butter; in fine, all eatables of one and the same kind, it is
unlawful to buy or barter some for other some.[FN#331]" Now when
the doctor of law heard her words and knew that she was wit-keen,
penetrative, ingenious and learned in jurisprudence and the
Traditions and the interpretation of the Koran and what not else,
he said in his mind, "Needs must I manoeuvre with her, that I may
overcome her in the assembly of the Commander of the Faithful."
So he said to her, "O damsel, what is the lexicographical meaning
of Wuzu?" And she answered, "Philologically it signifieth
cleanliness and freedom from impurities." Q "And of Salat or
prayer?" "An invocation of good" Q "And of Ghusl?"
"Purification." Q "And of Saum or fasting?" "Abstention." Q "And
of Zakat?" "Increase. Q "And of Hajj or pilgrimage?"
"Visitation." Q "And of Jihad?" "Repelling." With this the
doctor's arguments were cut off,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
doctor's arguments were cut off, he rose to his feet and said,
"Bear witness against me, O Commander of the Faithful, that this
damsel is more learned in the Law than I am." Quoth she, "I will
ask thee somewhat, which do thou answer me speedily, an thou be
indeed a learned man." Quoth he, "Say on;" and she said, "What
are the arrows of the Faith?" Answered he, "They number ten: (1)
Testification, that is, religion; (2) Prayer, that is, the
covenant; (3) Alms, that is, purification; (4) Fasting, that is,
defensive armour; (5) Pilgrimage, that is, the Law; (6) Fighting
for the Faith, that is, a general duty; (7) Bidding to
beneficence and (8) Forbidding from frowardness, both of which
are a man's honour; (9) Commune,[FN#332] that is, sociableness of
the Faithful; and (10) Seeking knowledge, that is, the
praiseworthy path." She rejoined, "Thou hast replied aright and
now remaineth but one question, 'What be the roots or
fundamentals of Al-Islam?'" He said "They are four: sincerity of
belief, truth of intent, observance of the lawful limit and
keeping the covenant." Then said she, "I have one more question
to ask thee, which if thou answer, it is well; else, I will take
thy clothes." Quoth he, "Speak, O damsel;" and she said, "What
are the branches or superstructure of Al-Islam?" But he was
silent awhile and made no reply: so she cried "Doff thy clothes
and I will expound them to thee." Quoth the Caliph "Expound them,
and I will make him put off his clothes for thee." She said,
"There are two-and-twenty branches: (1) holding fast to the Book
of Allah the Most Highest; (2) taking example by His Apostle
(whom Allah bless and preserve!); (3) abstaining from evil doing;
(4) eating what is lawful and (5) avoiding what is unlawful; (6)
restitution of things wrongfully taken; (7) repentance; (8)
knowledge of the Law; (9) love of the Friend,[FN#333] (10) and of
the followers of the true Revelation; (11) belief in the apostles
of Al-Islam; (12) fear of apostacy; (13) preparation for
departing this life; (14) force of conviction; (15) mercy on all
possible occasions; (16) strength in time of weakness; (17)
patience under trials; (18) knowledge of Allah Almighty and (19)
of what His Prophet hath made known to us; (20) thwarting Iblis
the accursed; (21) striving earnestly against the lusts of the
soul and warring them down, and (22) devotion to the one God."
Now when the Commander of the Faithful heard her words, he bade
the professor put off his clothes and hooded turband; and so did
that doctor and went forth, beaten and confounded, from the
Caliph's presence. Thereupon another man stood up and said to
her, "O damsel, hear a few questions from me." Quoth she, "Say
on;' and he asked, "What are the conditions of purchase by
advance?" whereto she answered, "That the price be fixed, the
kind be fixed and the period of delivery be fixed and known." Q
"What are the Koranic and the traditional canons of eating?" "The
confession that Allah Almighty provideth the eater and giveth him
meat and drink, with thanksgiving to Him therefor." Q "What is
thanksgiving?" "The use by the creature of that which the Creator
vouchsafeth to him, according as it was created for the
creature." Q "What are the traditional canons of eating?" "The
Bismillah[FN#334] and washing both hands; sitting on the left of
the hind part; eating with three fingers, and eating of that
which hath been duly masticated.[FN#335]" Q "What are good
manners in eating?" "Taking small mouthfuls and looking little at
one's table-companion."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had answered concerning good manners in eating, the doctor
who was trying her, rejoined, "Thou hast replied aright. Now tell
me what are the stays of the heart and their supports?"[FN#336]
"The stays and supports both number three: (1) holding fast to
the Faith, the support whereof is the shunning of infidelity; (2)
holding fast to the Traditional Law, and its support the shunning
of innovation; and (3) holding fast to obedience, and its support
the shunning of disobedience." Q "What are the conditions of
Wuzu?" "(1) being a Moslem; (2) discernment of good and evil; (3)
purity of the water, and (4) absence of material or religious
impediments." Q "What is belief?" "It is divided into nine parts:
(1) belief in the One worshipped; (2) belief in the condition of
slavery of the worshipper; (3) belief in the personality of the
Deity; (4) belief in the Two Handfuls;[FN#337] (5) belief in
Providence which allotteth to man his lot; (6) belief in the
Abrogating and (7) in the Abrogated; (8) belief in Allah, His
angels and apostles; and (9) in fore-ordained Fate, general and
individual, its good and ill, its sweet and bitter." Q "What
three things do away other three?" "It is told of Sufyan
al-Sauri[FN#338] that he said, 'Three things do away with other
three. Making light of the pious doth away the future life;
making light of Kings doth away this life; and, making light of
expenditure doth away wealth.'" Q "What are the keys of the
heavens, and how many gates have they.?" "Quoth Almighty Allah,
'And the heaven shall be opened and be full of portals;'[FN#339]
and quoth he whom Allah bless and preserve!, 'None knoweth the
number of the gates of heavens, save He who created the heavens,
and there is no son of Adam but hath two gates allotted to him in
the heavens, one whereby his daily bread descendeth and another
wherethrough his works ascend. The first gate is not closed, save
when his term of life cometh to an end, nor the gate of works,
good and evil, till his soul ascend for judgment.'" Q "Tell me of
a thing and a half thing and a no-thing." "The thing is the
Moslem; the half thing the hypocrite,[FN#340] and the no-thing
the miscreant." Q "Tell me of various kinds of hearts." "There is
the whole heart, the sick heart, the contrite heart, the vowed
heart and the enlightened heart. Now the whole heart is that of
Abraham, the Friend of Allah; the sick heart is that of the
Unbeliever in Al-Islam; the contrite heart is that of the pious
who fear the Lord; the vowed heart is that of our Lord Mohammed
(whom Allah bless and keep!) and the illuminated heart is that of
his followers. Furthermore, the hearts of learned Olema are of
three kinds, the heart which is in love with this world; the
heart which loveth the next world, and the heart which loveth its
Lord; and it is said that hearts are three, the suspended, that
of the infidel; the non-existent, that of the hypocrite; and the
constant, that of the True-believer. Moreover, it is said that
the firm heart is of three kinds, viz., the heart dilated with
light and faith, the heart wounded with fear of estrangement, and
the heart which feareth to be forsaken of its Supreme
Friend."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
second doctor declared. "Thou hast said well," quoth she to the
Caliph, "O Commander of the Faithful, he hath questioned me, till
he is weary, and now I will ask of him two questions. If he
answer them both, it is well; and if not, I will take his clothes
and he shall wend in peace." Quoth the doctor, "Ask me what thou
wilt," and she said, "What sayest thou religion is?" Answered he,
"Religion is confession of Faith with the tongue and conviction
with the heart and correspo