ndent action with the members. He
(upon whom be blessings and peace!) hath said, 'The believer is
not perfect in belief, except he perfect himself in five
qualities, namely: trust in Allah,[FN#341] committal of his
affair to Allah, submission to the commands of Allah,
acquiescence in the decrees of Allah; and that all he doth be
done for sake of Allah; so is he of those who are acceptable to
the Deity, and who give to Him and withhold for Him; and such man
is perfect in belief.'" Then said she, "What is the Divine
ordinance of ordinances and the ordinance which is the initiator
of all ordinances and that of which all others stand in need and
that which comprehendeth all others; and what is the traditional
ordinance that entereth into the Koranic, and the prophetic
practice whereby the Divine is completed?" But he was silent and
made no reply; whereupon the Caliph bade her expound and ordered
him to doff his clothes and give them to her. Said she, "O
doctor, the Koranic ordinance of ordinances is the knowledge of
Allah Almighty; that, which is the initiative of all others, is
the testifying there is no god but the God and Mohammed is the
Apostle of God; that, of which all others have need, is the
Wuzu-ablution; that, which compriseth all others, is the
Ghusl-ablution from defilement[FN#342]; the Traditional ordinance
that entereth into the Koranic, is the separation of the fingers
and the thick beard;[FN#343] and that, wherewith all Koranic
ordinances are completed, is circumcision."[FN#344] Therewith was
made manifest the defeat of the doctor, who rose to his feet and
said, "I call Allah to witness, O Commander of the Faithful, that
this damsel is more learned than I in theology and what
pertaineth to the Law." So saying, he put off his clothes and
went away ignominiously worsted. Then she turned to the rest of
the learned men present and said, "O masters, which of you is the
Koranist, the reader and reciter of the Koran, versed in the
seven readings and in syntax and in lexicography?" Thereupon a
professor arose and, seating himself before her, said "Hast thou
read the Book of Almighty Allah and made thyself thoroughly
acquainted with its signs, that is its verses, and its abrogating
parts and abrogated portions, its unequivocal commands and its
ambiguous; and the difference of its revelations, Meccan and
Medinan? Dost thou understand its interpretation and hast thou
studied it, according to the various traditions and origins?"
"Yes," answered she; and he said, "What then is the number of its
chapters, how many are the decades and versets, how many words
and how many letters and how many acts of prostration and how
many prophets and how many chapters are Medinan and how many are
Meccan and how many birds are mentioned in it?" Replied she, "O
my lord, its chapters are an hundred and fourteen, whereof
seventy were revealed at Meccah and forty-four at Al-Medinah; and
it containeth six hundred and twenty-one decades; six thousand
three hundred and thirty-six versets;[FN#345] seventy-nine
thousand four hundred and thirty-nine words and three hundred and
twenty-three thousand and six hundred and seventy letters; and to
the reader thereof, for every letter, are given ten benefits. The
acts of prostration it compriseth are fourteen."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
professor of Koranic exegesis questioned the damsel, she
continued, "As regards the Prophets named in the Book there be
five-and-twenty, to wit, Adam, Noah,[FN#346] Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Lot, Elisha, Jonah, Salih,[FN#347] or
Heber, Hud,[FN#348] Shua'yb or Jethro,[FN#349] David, Solomon,
Zu'l-kafl or Joshua, Idris, Elias, Yahya or John the Baptist,
Zacharias, Job, Moses, Aaron, Jesus and Mohammed,[FN#350] the
peace of Allah and His blessing be on them all! Moreover, nine
flying things are mentioned in the Koran, namely, the gnat, the
bee, the fly, the ant, the hoopoe, the crow, the locust, the
swallow and the bird of Jesus[FN#351] (on whom be peace!), to
wit, the bat." Q "Which is the most excellent chapter of the
Koran?" "That of The Cow.[FN#352]" Q "Which is the most
magnificent verse?" "That of the Throne; it hath fifty words,
bearing in each fifty blessings." Q "What sign or verse hath in
it nine signs or wonders?" "That in which quoth Allah Almighty,
'Verily, in the creation of the Heaven and the Earth: and in the
vicissitude of night, and day; and in the ship which saileth
through the sea laden with what is profitable for mankind; and in
the rain-water which God sendeth down from Heaven, quickening
thereby the dead ground and replenishing the same with all sorts
of cattle; and in the change of winds and in the clouds that are
compelled to do service between the Heaven and the
Earth;[FN#353]--are signs to people of understanding.'" Q "Which
verse is the most just?" "That in which Allah saith, 'Verily,
Allah enjoineth justice and the doing of good, and the giving
unto kindred what shall be necessary; and He forbiddeth
wickedness and iniquity and oppression'"[FN#354] Q "Which is the
most greedy?" "That in which quoth Allah, 'Is it that every man
of them greedeth to enter the Garden of Delight?'"[FN#355] Q
"Which is the most hopeful?" "That in which quoth Almighty Allah,
'Say: O my servants who have transgressed against your own souls,
despair not of the mercy of Allah; seeing, that Allah forgiveth
all sins; aye Gracious, Merciful is He.'"[FN#356] Q "By what
school of intonation dost thou read?" "By that of the people of
Paradise, to wit, the version of Naf'i." Q "In which verse doth
Allah make prophets lie?"[FN#357] "In that wherein He saith,
'They (the brothers of Joseph) brought his inner garment stained
with false blood.'"[FN#358] Q "In which doth He make unbelievers
speak the truth?" "In that wherein He saith, 'The Jews say, 'The
Christians are grounded on nothing,' and the Christians say, 'The
Jews are grounded on nothing'; and yet they both read the
Scriptures;'[FN#359] and, so saying, all say sooth." Q "In which
doth God speak in his own person?" "In that in which he saith, 'I
have not created Genii and men for any other end than that they
should serve me.'"[FN#360] Q "In which verse do the angels
speak?" "In that which saith, 'But we celebrate Thy praise and
extol Thy holiness.'"[FN#361] Q "What sayest thou of the
formula:--I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned?" "It is
obligatory by commandment of Allah on all before reading the
Koran, as appeareth by His saying, 'When thou readest the Koran,
seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned.'"[FN#362] Q "What
signify the words 'seeking refuge'[FN#363] and what are the
variants of the formula?" "Some say, 'I take refuge with Allah
the All-hearing and All-knowing,' and others, 'With Allah the
Strong;' but the best is that whereof the Sublime Koran speaketh
and the Traditions perpetuate. And he (whom Allah bless and
keep!) was used to ejaculate, 'I seek refuge with Allah from
Satan the Stoned.' And quoth a Tradition, reported by Naf'i on
the authority of his adopted father, 'The apostle of Allah, was
wont when he rose in the night to pray, to say aloud, 'Allaho
Akbar'; God is Most Great, with all Majesty! Praise be to Allah
abundantly! Glory to Allah morn and even be!' Then would he say,
'I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned and from the
delusions of the Devils and their evil suggestions.' And it is
told of Ibn Abbas[FN#364] (of whom Allah accept!) that he said,
'The first time Gabriel came down to the Prophet with revelation
he taught him the 'seeking refuge,' saying, 'O Mohammed, say, I
seek refuge with Allah the All-hearing and All-knowing;' then
say, 'In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the
Compassionate!' Read, in the name of thy Lord who
created;--created man of blood-clots."[FN#365] Now when the
Koranist heard her words he marvelled at her expressions, her
eloquence, her learning, her excellence, and said, "O damsel,
what sayst thou of the verse 'In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate'? Is it one of the verses of
the Koran?" "Yes; it is a verset of 'The Ant'[FN#366] occurring
also at the head of the first and between every two following
chapters; and there is much difference of opinion, respecting
this, among the learned."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had told the professor concerning the difference of
opinion among the learned touching the "Basmalah," he said, "Thou
hast replied aright: now tell me why is not the formula written
at the head of the chapter of Immunity[FN#367]?"; and she
answered, "When this chapter was revealed from on high for the
dissolution of the alliance between the Prophet and the
idolaters, He (whom Allah bless and preserve!) sent Ali[FN#368]
ibn Abi Talib (whose face Allah honour!) therewith, and he read
the chapter to them, but did not read the Basmalah."[FN#369] Q
"What of the excellence of the formula and its blessing?" "It is
told of the Prophet that he said, 'Never is the Basmalah
pronounced over aught, but there is a blessing in it;' and it is
reported, on authority of Him (whom Allah bless and preserve!)
that the Lord of Glory swore by His glory that never should the
Basmalah be pronounced over a sick person, but he should be
healed of his sickness. Moreover, it is said that, when Allah
created the empyrean, it was agitated with an exceeding
agitation; but He wrote on it, 'Bismillah' and its agitation
subsided. When the formula first descended from heaven to the
Prophet, he said, 'I am safe from three things, earthquake and
metamorphosis and drowning; and indeed its boons are great and
its blessings too many to enumerate. It is told of Allah's
Apostle that he said, 'There will be brought on the Judgment-day
a man with whom He shall reckon and finding no good deed to his
account, shall order him to the Fire; but the man will cry, 'O my
God, Thou hast not dealt justly by me!' Then shall Allah (to whom
be honour and glory!) say, 'How so?' and the man shall answer, O
Lord, for that Thou callest Thyself the Compassionating, the
Compassionate, yet wilt Thou punish me with the Fire!' And Allah
(magnified be His Majesty!) shall reply, 'I did indeed name
myself the Compassionating, the Compassionate. Carry My servant
to Paradise, of My mercy, for I am the most Merciful of the
mercifuls!'" Q "What was the origin of the use of the Basmalah?"
"When Allah sent down from Heaven the Koran, they wrote, 'In Thy
name, O my God!'; when Allah revealed the words, 'Say: Call upon
Allah, or call upon the Compassionating, what days ye pray, for
hath He the most excellent names,'[FN#370] they wrote, 'In the
name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate; and, when
He revealed the words, 'Your God is one God, there is no God but
He, the Compassionating, the Compassionate,'[FN#371] they wrote,
'In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate!'"
Now when the Koranist heard her reply, he hung down his head and
said to himself, "This be a marvel of marvels! How hath this
slave-girl expounded the origin of the Basmalah? But, by Allah,
needs must I go a bout with her and haply defeat her." So he
asked, "Did Allah reveal the Koran all at once or at times
manifold?" She answered, "Gabriel the Faithful (on whom be
peace!) descended with it from the Lord of the Worlds upon His
Prophet Mohammed, Prince of the Apostles and Seal of the
Prophets, by detached versets: bidding and forbidding,
covenanting and comminating, and containing advices and instances
in the course of twenty years as occasion called for it." Q
"Which chapter was first revealed?" "According to Ibn Abbas, that
entituled 'Congealed Blood':[FN#372] and, according to Jabir bin
Abdillah,[FN#373] that called 'The Covered' which preceded all
others.[FN#374]" Q "Which verset was the last revealed?" "That of
'Usury',[FN#375] and it is also said, the verse, 'When there
cometh Allah's succour and victory.'"[FN#376]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel told the Koranist which was the last verse he said, "Thou
hast replied aright; now tell me the names of the Companions who
collected the Koran, in the lifetime of the Apostle of Allah."
And she answered "They were four, Ubay ibn Ka'ab, Zayd ibn Sabit,
Abu Obaydah 'Aamir bin Jarrah, and Othman bin Affan[FN#377]
(Allah accept of them one and all!)" Q "Who are the readers, from
whom the accepted reading of the Koran is taken?" "They number
four, Abdallah bin Mas'ud, Ubay bin Ka'ab, Ma'az bin Jabal and
Salim bin Abdillah." Q "What sayest thou of the words of the Most
High, 'That which is sacrificed to stones'"?[FN#378] "The stones
are idols, which are set up and worshipped, instead of Allah the
Most High, and from this we seek refuge with Allah." Q "What
sayest thou of the words of the Most High 'Thou knowest what is
in my soul, and I know not what is in Thy soul'"?[FN#379] "They
mean, 'Thou knowest the truth of me and what is in me, and I know
not what is in Thee;' and the proof of this are His
words,[FN#380] 'Thou art He who wottest the hidden things'; and
it is said, also, 'Thou knowest my essence, but I know not Thine
essence.'" Q "What sayst thou of the words of the Most High, 'O
true believers, forbid not yourselves the good things which Allah
hath allowed you?'"[FN#381] "My Shaykh (on whom Allah have
mercy!) told me that the Companion Al-Zahhak related: 'There was
a people of the True-believers who said, 'We will dock our
members masculine and don sackcloth;' whereupon this verse was
revealed. But Al-Kutadah declareth that it was revealed on
account of sundry Companions of the Apostle of Allah, namely, Ali
ibn Abi Talib and Othman bin Musa'ab and others, who said, 'We
will geld ourselves and don hair cloth and make us monks.'" Q
"What sayest thou of the words of the Most Highest, 'And Allah
took Abraham for His friend'"?[FN#382] "The friend of Allah is
the needy, the poor, and (according to another saying) he is the
lover, he who is detached from the world in the love of Allah
Almighty and in whose attachment there is no falling away." Now
when the Koranist[FN#383] saw her pass on in speech with the
passage of the clouds and that she stayed not in reply, he rose
to his feet and said, "I take Allah to witness, O Commander of
the Faithful, that this damsel is more learned than I in Koranic
exegesis and what pertaineth thereto." Then said she, "I will ask
thee one question, which if thou answer it is well; but if thou
answer not, I will strip off thy clothes." Quoth the Commander of
the Faithful, "Ask on," and she enquired, "Which verset of the
Koran hath in it three-and-twenty Kafs, which sixteen Mims, which
an hundred and forty 'Ayns[FN#384] and which section[FN#385]
lacketh the formula, 'To Whom belong glory and glorification and
majesty[FN#386]?'" The Koranist could not reply, and she said to
him, "Put off thy clothes." So he doffed them, and she continued,
"O Commander of the Faithful, the verset of the sixteen Mims is
in the chapter Hud and is the saying of the Most High, 'It was
said, O Noah, go down in peace from us, and blessing upon
thee!'[FN#387] that of the three-and-twenty Kafs is the verse
called of the Faith, in the chapter of The Cow; that of the
hundred and forty Ayns is in the chapter of Al-A'araf,[FN#388]
where the Lord saith, 'And Moses chose seventy men of his tribe
to attend our appointed time;[FN#389] to each man a pair of
eyes.'[FN#390] And the lesson, which lacketh the formula, 'To
Whom be glory and glorification,' is that which comprises the
chapters, The Hour draweth nigh and the Moon shall be cloven in
twain[FN#391]; The Compassionate and The Event."[FN#392]
Thereupon the professor departed in confusion.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel defeated the Koranist and took off his clothes and sent
him away confused, then came forward the skilled physician and
said to her, "We are free of theology and come now to physiology.
Tell me, therefore, how is man made; how many veins, bones and
vertebrae are there in his body; which is the first and chief
vein and why Adam was named Adam?" She replied, "Adam was called
Adam, because of his udmah, that is, the wheaten colour of his
complexion and also (it is said) because he was created of the
adim of the earth, that is to say, of the surface-soil. His
breast was made of the earth of the Ka'abah, his head of earth
from the East and his legs of earth from the West. There were
created for him seven doors in his head, viz., the eyes, the
ears, the nostrils and the mouth, and two passages, before and
behind. The eyes were made the seat of the sight-sense, the ears
the seat of the hearing-sense, the nostrils the seat of the
smell-sense, the mouth the seat of the taste-sense and the tongue
to utter what is in the heart of man.[FN#393] Now Adam was made
of a compound of the four elements, which be water, earth, fire
and air. The yellow bile is the humour of fire, being hot-dry;
the black bile that of earth, being cold-dry; the phlegm that of
water, being cold-moist, and the blood that of air, being
hot-moist.[FN#394] There were made in man three hundred and sixty
veins, two hundred and forty-nine bones, and three souls[FN#395]
or spirits, the animal, the rational and the natural, to each of
which is allotted its proper function. Moreover, Allah made him a
heart and spleen and lungs and six intestines and a liver and two
kidneys and buttocks and brain and bones and skin and five
senses; hearing, seeing, smell, taste, touch. The heart He set on
the left side of the breast and made the stomach the guide and
governor thereof. He appointed the lungs for a fan to the heart
and stablished the liver on the right side, opposite thereto.
Moreover, He made, besides this, the diaphragm and the viscera
and set up the bones of the breast and latticed them with the
ribs." Q "How many ventricles are there in a man's head?" "Three,
which contain five faculties, styled the intrinsic senses, to
wit, common sense, imagination, the thinking faculty, perception
and memory." Q "Describe to me the configuration of the
bones."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

        When it was the Four Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
physicist said to her, "Describe to me the configuration of the
bones," she replied, "Man's frame consists of two hundred and
forty bones, which are divided into three parts, the head, the
trunk and the extremities. The head is divided into calvarium and
face. The skull is constructed of eight bones, and to it are
attached the four osselets of the ear. The face is furnished with
an upper jaw of eleven bones and a lower jaw of one; and to these
are added the teeth two-and-thirty in number, and the os
hyoides.[FN#396] The trunk is divided into spinal column, breast
and basin. The spinal column is made up of four-and-twenty bones,
called Fikar or vertebrae; the breast, of the breastbone and the
ribs, which are four-and-twenty in number, twelve on each side;
and the basin of the hips, the sacrum[FN#397] and os coccygis.
The extremities divided into upper and lower, arms and legs. The
arms are again divided: firstly into shoulder, comprising
shoulder blades and collar bone; secondly into the upper arm
which is one bone; thirdly into fore-arm, composed of two bones,
the radius and the ulna; and fourthly into the hand, consisting
of the wrist, the metacarpus of five and the fingers, which
number five, of three bones each, called the phalanges, except
the thumb, which hath but two. The lower extremities are divided:
firstly into thigh, which is one bone; secondly into leg,
composed of three bones, the tibia, the fibula and the patella;
and thirdly into the foot, divided, like the hand, into tarsus,
metatarsus and toes; and is composed of seven bones, ranged in
two rows, two in one and five in the other; and the metatarsus is
composed of five bones and the toes number five, each of three
phalanges except the big toe which hath only two." Q "Which is
the root of the veins?" "The aorta, from which they ramify, and
they are many, none knoweth the tale of them save He who created
them; but I repeat, it is said that they number three hundred and
sixty.[FN#398] Moreover, Allah hath appointed the tongue as
interpreter for the thought, the eyes to serve as lanterns, the
nostrils to smell with, and the hands for prehensors. The liver
is the seat of pity, the spleen of laughter[FN#399] and the
kidneys of craft; the lungs are ventilators, the stomach the
store-house, and the heart the prop and pillar of the body. When
the heart is sound, the whole body is sound, and when the heart
is corrupt, the whole body is corrupt." Q "What are the outward
signs and symptoms evidencing disease in the members of the body,
both external and internal?" "A physician, who is a man of
understanding, looketh into the state of the body and is guided
by the feel of the hands,[FN#400] according as they are firm or
flabby, hot or cool, moist or dry. Internal disorders are also
indicated by external symptoms, such as yellowness of the white
of the eyes, which denoteth jaundice, and bending of the back,
which denoteth disease of the lungs." And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had described to the doctor the outer signs and symptoms
quoth he, "Thou hast replied aright! now what are the internal
symptoms of disease?" "The science of the diagnosis of disease by
internal symptoms is founded upon six canons: (1) the patient's
actions; (2) what is evacuated from his body; (3) the nature of
the pain; and (4) the site thereof; (5) swelling; and (6) the
effluvia given off his person." Q "How cometh hurt to the head?"
"By the ingestion of food upon food, before the first be
digested, and by fullness upon fullness; this it is that wasteth
peoples. He who would live long, let him be early with the
morning-meal and not late with the evening-meal; let him be
sparing of commerce with women and chary of such depletory
measures as cupping and blood-letting; and let him make of his
belly three parts, one for food, one for drink and the third for
air; for that a man's intestines are eighteen spans in length and
it befitteth that he appoint six for meat, six for drink, and six
for breath. If he walk, let him go gently; it will be wholesomer
for him and better for his body and more in accordance with the
saying of the Almighty, 'Walk not proudly on the earth.'"[FN#401]
Q "What are the symptoms of yellow bile and what is to be feared
therefrom?" "The symptoms are sallow complexion and bitter taste
in the mouth with dryness; failure of the appetite, venereal and
other, and rapid pulse; and the patient hath to fear high fever
and delirium and eruptions and jaundice and tumour and ulcers of
the bowels and excessive thirst." Q "What are the symptoms of
black bile and what hath the patient to fear from it, an it get
the mastery of the body?" "The symptoms are false appetite and
great mental disquiet and cark and care; and it behoveth that it
be evacuated, else it will generate melancholia[FN#402] and
leprosy and cancer and disease of the spleen and ulceration of
the bowels." Q "Into how many branches is the art of medicine
divided?" "Into two: the art of diagnosing diseases, and that of
restoring the diseased body to health." Q "When is the drinking
of medicine more efficacious than otherwhen?" "When the sap runs
in the wood and the grape thickens in the cluster and the two
auspicious planets, Jupiter and Venus, are in the ascendant; then
setteth in the proper season for drinking of drugs and doing away
of disease." Q "What time is it, when, if a man drink water from
a new vessel, the drink is sweeter and lighter or more digestible
to him than at another time, and there ascendeth to him a
pleasant fragrance and a penetrating?" "When he waiteth awhile
after eating, as quoth the poet,

'Drink not upon thy food in haste but wait awhile; * Else thou
     with halter shalt thy frame to sickness lead:
And patient bear a little thirst from food, then drink; * And
     thus, O brother, haply thou shalt win thy need.[FN#403]'"

Q "What food is it that giveth not rise to ailments?" "That which
is not eaten but after hunger, and when it is eaten, the ribs are
not filled with it, even as saith Jalinus or Galen the physician,
'Whoso will take in food, let him go slowly and he shall not go
wrongly.' And to conclude with His saying (on whom be blessing
and peace!), 'The stomach is the house of disease, and diet is
the head of healing; for the origin of all sickness is
indigestion, that is to say, corruption of the meat'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the damsel said to the doctor, "'The stomach is the house of
disease and diet is the head of healing; for the origin of all
sickness is indigestion, that is to say, corruption of the meat
in the stomach;'" he rejoined, "Thou hast replied aright! what
sayest thou of the Hammam?" "Let not the full man enter it. Quoth
the Prophet, 'The bath is the blessing of the house, for that it
cleanseth the body and calleth to mind the Fire.'" Q "What
Hammams are best for bathing in?" "Those whose waters are sweet
and whose space is ample and which are kept well aired; their
atmosphere representing the four seasons--autumn and summer and
winter and spring." Q "What kind of food is the most profitable?"
"That which women make and which hath not cost overmuch trouble
and which is readily digested. The most excellent of food is
brewis[FN#404] or bread sopped in broth; according to the saying
of the Prophet, 'Brewis excelleth other food, even as Ayishah
excelleth other women.'" Q "What kind of kitchen, or seasoning,
is most profitable?" "'Flesh meat' (quoth the Prophet) 'is the
most excellent of kitchen; for that it is the delight of this
world and the next world.'" Q "What kind of meat is the most
profitable?" "Mutton; but jerked meat is to be avoided, for there
is no profit in it." Q "What of fruits?" "Eat them in their prime
and quit them when their season is past." Q "What sayest thou of
drinking water?" "Drink it not in large quantities nor swallow it
by gulps, or it will give thee head-ache and cause divers kinds
of harm; neither drink it immediately after leaving the Hammam
nor after carnal copulation or eating (except it be after the
lapse of fifteen minutes for a young man and forty for an old
man), nor after waking from sleep." Q "What of drinking fermented
liquors?" "Doth not the prohibition suffice thee in the Book of
Almighty Allah, where He saith, 'Verily, wine and lots and
images, and the divining arrows are an abomination, of Satan's
work; therefore avoid them, that ye may prosper'?[FN#405] And
again, 'They will ask thee concerning wine and lots': Answer, 'In
both there is great sin and also some things of use unto men: but
their sinfulness is greater than their use.'[FN#406] Hence quoth
the poet, 

'O bibber of liquor, art not ashamed * To drink what Allah
     forbade thee drain?
Put it far from thee and approach it not; * It holds what Allah
     forbade as bane.'

And quoth another to the same purport,

'I drank the sin till my reason fled: * Ill drink that reason to
     loss misled!'

As for the advantages that be therein, it disperseth stone and
gravel from the kidneys and strengtheneth the viscera and
banisheth care, and moveth to generosity and preserveth health
and digestion; it conserveth the body, expelleth disease from the
joints, purifieth the frame of corrupt humours, engendereth
cheerfulness, gladdeneth the heart of man and keepeth up the
natural heat: it contracteth the bladder, enforceth the liver and
removeth obstructions, reddeneth the cheeks, cleareth away
maggots from the brain and deferreth grey hairs. In short, had
not Allah (to whom be honour and glory!) forbidden it,[FN#407]
there were not on the face of the earth aught fit to stand in its
stead. As for gambling by lots, it is a game of hazard such as
diceing, not of skill." Q "What wine is best?" "That which is
pressed from white grapes and kept eighty days or more after
fermentation: it resembleth not water and indeed there is nothing
on the surface of the earth like unto it." Q "What sayest thou of
cupping?" "It is for him who is over full of blood and who hath
no defect therein; and whoso would be cupped, let it be during
the wane of the moon, on a day without cloud, wind or rain and on
the seventeenth of the month. If it fall on a Tuesday, it will be
the more efficacious, and nothing is more salutary for the brain
and eyes and for clearing the intellect than cupping."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel enumerated the benefits of cupping, quoth the doctor,
"What is the best time for cupping?" "One should be cupped 'on
the spittle,' that is, in the morning before eating, for this
fortifieth the wit and the memory. It is reported of the Prophet
that, when anyone complained to him of a pain in the head or
legs, he would bid him be cupped and after cupping not eat salt
food, fasting, for it engendereth scurvy; neither eat sour things
as curded milk[FN#408] immediately after cupping." Q "When is
cupping to be avoided?" "On Sabbaths or Saturdays and Wednesdays;
and let him who is cupped on these days blame none but himself.
Moreover, one should not be cupped in very hot weather nor in
very cold weather; and the best season for cupping is
springtide." Quoth the doctor, "Now tell me of carnal
copulation." Hereupon Tawaddud hung her head, for shame and
confusion before the Caliph's majesty; then said, "By Allah, O
Commander of the Faithful, it is not that I am at fault, but that
I am ashamed; though, indeed, the answer is on the edge of my
tongue." Said the Caliph; "Speak, O damsel," whereupon said she,
"Copulation hath in it many and exceeding virtues and
praiseworthy qualities, amongst which are, that it lighteneth a
body full of black bile and calmeth the heat of love and induceth
affection and dilateth the heart and dispelleth the sadness of
solitude; and the excess of it is more harmful in summer and
autumn than in spring and winter." Q "What are its good effects?"
"It banisheth trouble and disquiet, calmeth love and wrath and is
good for ulcers, especially in a cold and dry humour; on the
other hand excess of it weakeneth the sight and engendereth pains
in the legs and head and back: and beware, beware of carnal
connection with old women, for they are deadly. Quoth the Iman
Ali[FN#409] (whose face Allah honour!), 'Four things kill and
ruin the body: entering the Hammam on a full stomach; eating salt
food; copulation on a plethora of blood and lying with an ailing
woman; for she will weaken thy strength and infect thy frame with
sickness; and an old woman is deadly poison.' And quoth one of
them, 'Beware of taking an old woman to wife, though she be
richer in hoards than Karun'"[FN#410] Q "What is the best
copulation?" "If the woman be tender of years, comely of shape,
fair of face, swelling of breast and of noble race, she will add
to thee strength and health of body; and let her be even as saith
a certain poet describing her,

'Seeing thy looks wots she what thou desir'st, * By inspiration;
     wants nor word nor sign;
And, when thou dost behold her rarest grace, * The charms of
     every garden canst decline.'

Q "At what time is copulation good?" "If by night, after food
digested and if by day, after the morning meal." Q "What are the
most excellent fruits?" "Pomegranate and citron." Q "Which is the
most excellent of vegetables?" "Endive.[FN#411]" Q "Which of
sweet-scented flowers?" "Rose and Violet." Q "How is the seed of
man secreted?" "There is in man a vein which feedeth all the
other veins. Now water is collected from the three hundred and
sixty veins and, in the form of red blood, entereth the left
testicle, where it is decocted, by the heat of temperament
inherent in the son of Adam, into a thick, white liquid, whose
odour is as that of the palm-spathe." Q "What flying thing is it
that emitteth seed and menstruateth?" "The flitter-mouse,[FN#412]
that is the bat." Q "What is that which, when confined and shut
out from the air liveth, and when let out to smell the air
dieth?" "The fish." Q "What serpent layeth eggs?" "The Su'ban or
dragon.[FN#413]" With this the physician waxed weary with much
questioning, and held his peace, when Tawaddud said to the
Caliph, "O Commander of the Faithful, he hath questioned me till
he is tired out and now I will ask him one question, which if he
answer not, I will take his clothes as lawful prize."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the damsel said to the Commander of the Faithful, "Verily he hath
questioned me till he is tired out, and now I will ask him one
question, which if he answer not I will take his clothes as
lawful prize," the Caliph cried, "Ask on." So quoth she to the
physician, "What is that thing which resembleth the earth in
roundness, whose resting-place and whose spine are hidden from
men's eyes; little of price and estimation; narrow of chest and
shackled as to throat though it be nor runaway slave nor
pestilent thief; thrust through and through, though not in fray,
and wounded, though not in fight: time eateth its vigour and
water wasteth it away; now it is beaten without blemish, and then
made to serve without stint; united after separation; submissive,
but not to him who caresseth it; pregnant without child in belly;
drooping, yet not leaning on its side; becoming dirty yet
purifying itself; cleaving to its fere, yet changing; copulating
without a yard, wrestling without arms: resting and taking its
ease; bitten, yet not crying out: now more complaisant than a
cup-companion and then more troublesome than summer-heat; leaving
its mate by night and embracing her by day and having its abode
in the corners of the mansions of the noble?" The physician was
silent awhile in perplexity and his colour changed and he bowed
his head and made no reply; whereupon she said to him, "Ho, sir
doctor, speak or doff thy dress." At this, he rose and said, "O
Commander of the Faithful, bear witness against me that this
damsel is more learned than I in medicine and what else, and that
I cannot cope with her." And he put off his clothes and fled
forth. Quoth the Caliph to Tawaddud, "Ree us thy riddle," and she
replied, "O Commander of the Faithful, it is the button and the
button-loop.[FN#414]"--Then she undertook the astronomers and
said, "Let him of you who is an astronomer rise and come
forward." So the astronomer advanced and sat down before her;
and, when she saw him, she laughed and said, "Art thou the
astronomer, the mathematician, the scribe?" "Yes," answered he.
Quoth she, "Ask of what thou wilt; success resteth with Allah."
So he said, "Tell me of the sun and its rising and setting." And
she replied: "Know that the sun riseth from the shadows in the
Eastern hemisphere and setteth in the shadows of the Western, and
each hemisphere compriseth one hundred and eighty degrees. Quoth
Allah Almighty, 'I swear by the Lord of the East and of the
West.'[FN#415] And again, 'He it is who hath ordained the sun to
shine by day, and the moon for a light by night; and hath
appointed her station that ye might know the number of years and
the computation of time.'[FN#416] The moon is Sultan of the night
and the sun Sultan of the day, and they vie with each other in
their courses and follow without overtaking each other. Quoth
Almighty Allah, 'It is not expedient that the sun overtake the
moon in her course; neither doth the night outstrip the day, but
each of these luminaries moveth in a peculiar orbit.'"[FN#417] Q
"When the day cometh, what becometh of the night; and what of the
day, when the night cometh?" "He causeth the night to enter in
upon the day, and He causeth the day to enter in upon the
night."[FN#418] Q "Enumerate to me the mansions of the
moon?"[FN#419] "They number eight-and-twenty, to wit, Sharatan,
Butayn, Suraya, Dabaran, Hak'ah, Han'ah, Zira'a, Nasrah, Tarf,
Jabhah, Zubrah, Sarfah, 'Awwa, Simak, Ghafar, Zubani, Iklil,
Kalb, Shaulah, Na'am, Baldah, Sa'ad al-Zabih, Sa'ad al-Bul'a,
Sa'ad al-Su'ud, Sa'ad al-Akhbiyah, Fargh the Former and Fargh the
Latter; and Rishaa. They are disposed in the order of the letters
of the Abjad-hawwaz or older alphabet,[FN#420] according to their
numerical power, and in them are secret virtues which none
knoweth save Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) and the
stablished in science. They are divided among the twelve Signs of
the Zodiac, two Mansions and a third of a Mansion to each Sign.
Thus Sharatan, Butayn and one-third of Suraya, belong to Aries,
the other two-thirds of Suraya, Dabaran and two-thirds of Hak'ah
to Taurus, the other third of Hak'ah, Han'ah and Zira'a to
Gemini; Nasrah, Tarf and a third of Jabhah to Cancer, the other
two-thirds of Jabhah, Zubrah and two-thirds of Sarfah to Leo; the
other third of Sarfah, 'Awwa and Simak to Virgo; Ghafar, Zubani
and one-third of Iklil to Libra; the other two-thirds of Iklil,
Kalb and two-thirds of Shaulah to Scorpio; the other third of
Shaulah, Na'aim and Baldah to Sagittarius; Sa'ad al-Zabih, Sa'ad
al-Bul'a and one-third of Sa'ad al-Su'ud to Capricorn, the other
two-thirds of Sa'ad al-Su'dd, Sa'ad al-Akhbiyah and two-thirds of
Fargh the Former to Aquarius, the other third of Fargh the
Former, Fargh the Latter and Rishaa to Pisces."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel enumerated the Mansions and distributed them into their
Signs, the astronomer said, "Thou hast replied aright; now tell
me of the planets and their natures, also of their sojourn in the
Zodiacal Signs, their aspects, auspicious and sinister, their
houses, ascendants and descendants. She answered, "The sitting is
narrow for so large a matter, but I will say as much as I can.
Now the planets number seven; which are, the Sun, the Moon,
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. The Sun, hot-dry, sinister
in conjunction, favourable in opposition, abideth thirty days in
each Sign. The Moon, cold-moist and favourable of aspect,
tarrieth in each Sign two days and a third of another day.
Mercury is of a mixed nature, favourable in conjunction with the
favourable, and sinister in conjunction with the sinister
aspects, and abideth in each sign seventeen days and a half day.
Venus, temperate and favourable, abideth in each sign
five-and-twenty days. Mars is sinister and woneth in each sign
ten months. Jupiter is auspicious and abideth in each sign a
year. Saturn, cold-dry and sinister, tarrieth in each sign thirty
months. The house of the Sun is Leo, her ascendant is Aries, and
her descendant Aquarius. The Moon's house is Cancer, his
ascendant Taurus, his descendant Scorpio and his sinister aspect
Capricorn. Saturn's house is Capricorn-Aquarius, his ascendant
Libra, his descendant Aries and his sinister aspects Cancer and
Leo. Jupiter's house is Pisces-Sagittarius, his ascendant Cancer,
his descendant Capricorn and his sinister aspects Gemini and Leo.
Venus's house is Taurus, her ascendant Pisces, her descendant
Libra, and her sinister aspects Aries and Scorpio. Mercury's
house is Gemini-Virgo, his ascendant Virgo, his descendant
Pisces, and his sinister aspect Taurus. Mars' house is
Aries-Scorpio, his ascendant Capricorn, his descendant Cancer and
his sinister aspect Libra." Now when the astronomer saw her
acuteness and comprehensive learning and heard her fair answers,
he bethought him for a sleight to confound her before the
Commander of the Faithful, and said to her, "O damsel, tell me,
will rain fall this month?" At this she bowed her head and
pondered so long, that the Caliph thought her at a loss for an
answer and the astronomer said to her, "Why dost thou not speak?"
Quoth she, "I will not speak except the Commander of the Faithful
give me leave." So the Caliph laughed and said, "How so?" Cried
she "I would have thee give me a sword, that I may strike off his
head, for he is an Infidel, an Agnostic, an Atheist.[FN#421]" At
this, loud laughed the Caliph and those about him laughed, and
she continued "O astronomer, there are five things that none
knoweth save Allah Almighty;" and she repeated the verset; "'Aye!
Allah!--with Him is the knowledge of the hour and He causeth the
rain to descend at His own appointed time --and He knoweth what
is in the wombs of females--but no soul knoweth what it shall
have gotten on the morrow; neither wotteth any soul in what land
it shall die: Verily Allah is knowing, informed of all.'"[FN#422]
Quoth the astronomer, "Thou hast said well, and I, by Allah,
thought only to try thee." Rejoined she, "Know that the
almanack-makers have certain signs and tokens, referring to the
planets and constellations relative to the coming in of the year;
and folk have learned something by experience." Q "What be that?"
"Each day hath a planet that ruleth it: so if the first day in
the year fall on First Day (Sunday) that day is the Sun's and
this portendeth (though Allah alone is All-knowing!) oppression
of kings and sultans and governors and much miasma and lack of
rain; and that people will be in great tumult and the grain-crop
will be good, except lentils, which will perish, and the vines
will rot and flax will be dear and wheat cheap from the beginning
of Tubah to the end of Barmahat.[FN#423] And, in this year there
will be much fighting among kings, and there shall be great
plenty of good in this year, but Allah is All-knowing!" Q "What
if the first day fall on Second Day (Monday)?" "That day
belongeth to the Moon and portendeth righteousness in
administrators and officials and that it will be a year of much
rain and grain-crops will be good, but linseed will decay and
wheat will be cheap in the month Kiyahk;[FN#424] also the plague
will rage and the sheep and goats will die, grapes will be
plentiful and honey scarce and cotton cheap; and Allah is
omniscient!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel ended her notice of Second Day the astronomer said to her
"Now tell me what will occur if New Year's day fall on Third Day
(Tuesday)." She replied, "That is Mars' day and portendeth death
of great men and much destruction and deluge of blood and
dearness of grain; lack of rain and scarcity of fish, which will
anon be in excess and anon fail. Lentils and honey in this year
will be cheap and linseed dear and only barley will thrive, to
the exception of all other cereals: great will be the fighting
among kings and death will be in the blood and there will be much
mortality among asses." Q "What if it fall on Fourth Day?" "That
is Mercury's day and portendeth great tumult among the folk and
much enmity and, though rains be moderate, rotting of some of the
green crops; also that there will be sore mortality among cattle
and young children and much fighting by sea; that wheat will be
dear from Barmudah to Misra[FN#425] and other grains cheap;
thunder and lightning will abound and honey will be dear, palm-
trees will thrive and bear abundantly and flax and cotton will be
plentiful, while radishes and onions will be dear; but Allah is
All-knowing!" Q "What if it fall on Fifth Day?" "That is
Jupiter's day and portendeth equity in Wazirs and righteousness
in Kazis and Fakirs and the Ministers of religion; and that good
will be plentiful: rains and fruit and trees and grain will
abound, and flax, cotton, honey, grapes and fish be cheap; and
Allah is Omniscient!" Q "What if it fall on Meeting Day or
Friday?" "That day appertaineth to Venus and portendeth
oppression in the chiefs of the Jinn and talk of forgery and
back-biting; there will be much dew; the autumn crops will be
good in the land and there will be cheapness in one town and not
in another: ungraciousness will be rife by land and sea; linseed
will be dear, also wheat, in Hatur, but cheap in Amshir; honey
will be dear and grapes and water-melons will rot; and Allah is
Omniscient!" Q "What if it fall on the Sabbath (Saturday)?" "That
is Saturn's day and portendeth the preferment of slaves and
Greeks and those in whom there is no good, neither in their
neighbourhood; there will be great drought and dearth; clouds
will abound and death will be rife among the sons of Adam and woe
to the people of Egypt and Syria from the oppression of the
Sultan and failure of blessing upon the green crops and rotting
of grain; and Allah is All-knowing!"[FN#426] Now with this, the
astronomer hung his head very low, and she said to him, "O
astronomer, I will ask thee one question, which if thou answer
not, I will take thy clothes." "Ask," replied he. Quoth she,
"Where is Saturn's dwelling-place?"; and he answered, "In the
seventh heaven." Q "And that of Jupiter?" "In the sixth heaven."
Q "And that of Mars?" "In the fifth heaven." Q "And that of the
Sun?" "In the fourth heaven." Q "And that of Venus?" "In the
third heaven." Q "And that of Mercury?" "In the second heaven." Q
"And that of the Moon?" "In the first heaven." Quoth she, "Well
answered; but I have one more question to ask thee;" and quoth
he, "Ask!" Accordingly she said, "Now tell me concerning the
stars, into how many parts are they divided." But he was silent
and answered nothing; and she cried to him, "Put off thy
clothes." So he doffed them and she took them; after which the
Caliph said to her, "Tell us the answer to thy question." She
replied: "O Commander of the Faithful, the stars are divided into
three parts, whereof one-third is hung in the sky of the
earth,[FN#427] as it were lamps, to give light to the earth, and
a part is used to shoot the demons withal, when they draw near by
stealth to listen to the talk in heaven. Quoth Allah Almighty,
'Verily, we have dight the sky of the earth with the adornment of
the stars; and have appointed them for projectiles against every
rebellious Satan.'[FN#428] And the third part is hung in air to
illuminate the seas and give light to what is therein." Quoth the
astronomer, "I have one more question to ask, which if she
answer, I will avow myself beaten." "Say on," answered she.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
astronomer said, "Now tell me what four contraries are based upon
other four contraries?" Replied she, "The four qualities of
Caloric and Frigoric, Humidity and Siccity; for of heat Allah
created fire, whose nature is hot-dry; of dryness, earth, which
is cold-dry; of cold, water which is cold-wet; of moisture, air,
which is hot-wet. Moreover, He created twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces; and
appointed them of the four humours; three fiery, Aries, Leo, and
Sagittarius; three earthly, Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; three
airy, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius; and three watery, Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces." Hereupon the astronomer rose, and saying,
"Bear witness against me that she is more learned than I," away
he went beaten. Then quoth the Caliph, "Where is the
philosopher[FN#429]?"; at which one rose hastily and came forward
and said to Tawaddud, "What is Time and what be its limits, and
its days, and what things bringeth it?" Replied she, "Time is a
term applied to the hours of the night and day, which are but the
measures of the courses of the sun and moon in their several
heavens, even as Allah Almighty telleth us when he saith, 'A sign
to them also is the Night, from which we strip off the day, and
lo! they are plunged in darkness, and the Sun runneth to her
place of rest; this is the ordinance of the Sublime, the
All-knowing.'"[FN#430] Q "How cometh unbelief to the son of
Adam?" "It is reported of the Apostle (whom Allah bless and
preserve!) that he said, 'Unbelief in a man runneth as the blood
runneth in his veins, when he revileth the world and Time and
night and the Hour.' And again, 'Let none of you revile Time, for
Time is God; neither revile the world, for she saith, 'May Allah
not aid him who revileth me!;' neither revile the hour, for, 'The
Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt thereof';[FN#431]
neither revile the earth, for it is a portent, according to the
saying of the Most High, 'Out of the ground have we created you,
and into the same will we cause you to return, and we will bring
you forth yet thence another time.'"[FN#432] Q "What are the five
that ate and drank, yet came not out of loins nor womb?" "Adam
and Simeon[FN#433] and Salih's she-camel[FN#434] and Ishmael's
ram and the bird that Abu Bakr the Truth-teller saw in the
cave.[FN#435]" Q "Tell me of five that are in Paradise and are
neither humans, Jinns nor angels?" "Jacob's wolf and the Seven
Sleepers' dog and Esdras's ass and Salih's camel and Duldul the
mule of the Prophet (upon whom be blessings and peace!)." Q "What
man prayed a prayer neither on earth nor in heaven?" "Solomon,
when he prayed on his carpet, borne by the wind." Q "Ree me this
riddle:--A man once looked at a handmaid during dawn-prayer, and
she was unlawful to him; but, at noonday she became lawful to
him: by mid-afternoon,, she was again unlawful, but at sundown,
she was lawful to him: at supper time she was a third time
unlawful, but by daybreak, she became once more lawful to him."
"This was a man who looked at another's slave-girl in the
morning, and she was then unlawful to him; but at midday he
bought her, and she became lawful to him: at mid-afternoon he
freed her, and she became unlawful to him; but at sundown he
married her and she was again lawful to him. At nightfall he
divorced her and she was then a third time unlawful to him; but,
next morning at daybreak, he took her back, and she became once
more lawful to him." Q "Tell me what tomb went about with him
that lay buried therein?" "Jonah's whale, when it had swallowed
him." Q "What spot of lowland is it, upon which the sun shone
once, but will never again shine till Judgment-Day?" "The bottom
of the Red Sea, when Moses smote it with his staff, and the sea
clave asunder in twelve places, according to the number of the
tribes;[FN#436] then the sun shone on the bottom and will do so
nevermore until Judgment-Day." And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
philosopher then addressed the damsel saying, "What was the first
skirt that trailed over the face of the earth?" She replied,
"That of Hagar, out of shame before Sarah; and it became a custom
among the Arabs." Q "What is that which breatheth without life?"
"Quoth Almighty Allah, 'By the morning when it
breatheth!'"[FN#437] Q "Ree me this riddle:--A number of pigeons
came to a high tree and lighted, some on the tree and others
under it. Said th