ose on the tree to those on the ground, 'If one
of you come up to us, ye will be a third part of us all in
number; and if one of us descend to you, we shall be like unto
you in number,' How many pigeons were there in all?" "Twelve:
seven alighted on the tree and five beneath; and, if one go up,
those above would be eight to four; and, if one go down, both
would be six and Allah is all-knowing."[FN#438] With this the
philosopher put off his clothes and fled: whereupon the next
contest took place, for she turned to the Olema present and said,
"Which of you is the rhetorician that can discourse of all arts
and sciences?" There came forward a sage hight Ibrahim bin Siyyar
and said to her, "Think me not like the rest." Quoth she, "It is
the more assured to me that thou wilt be beaten, for that thou
art a boaster; and Allah will help me to victory over thee, that
I may strip thee of thy clothes. So, if thou sentest one to fetch
thee wherewithal to cover thyself, 'twould be well for thee."
Cried he, "By Allah, I will assuredly conquer thee and make thee
a byword among the peoples, generation after generation!"
Rejoined she, "Do penance in advance for thy broken oath." Then
he asked, "What five things did Allah create before he made
man?"; and she answered, "Water and earth and light and darkness
and the fruits of the earth." Q "What did Allah create with the
hand of omnipotence?" "The 'Arsh, throne of God or the empyreal
heaven and the tree Tuba[FN#439] and Adam and the garden of Eden;
these Allah created with the hand of His omnipotence; but to all
other created things He said, 'Be,'--and they were." Q "Who is
thy father in Al-Islam?" "Mohammed, whom Allah bless and
preserve!" Q "Who was the father in Al-Islam of Mohammed?"
"Abraham, the Friend of God." Q "What is the Faith of Al-Islam?"
"The professing that there is no god but the God and that
Mohammed is the apostle of God." Q "What is thy first and thy
last?" "My first is man's seed in the shape of foul water and my
last filthy carrion: the first of me is dust and the last of me
is dust. Quoth the poet,

'Of dust was I created, and man did I become, * In question ever
     ready and aye fluent in reply,
Then, I unto the dust return'd, became of it again, * For that,
     in very deed, of dust at first create was I.'"

He continued, "What thing was it, whose first state was wood and
its last life?" "Moses' staff,[FN#440] when he cast it on the
valley-ground and it became, by permission of Allah, a writhing
serpent." Q "What is the meaning of the word of the Lord, 'And I
have other occasion for it?'"[FN#441] "He, Moses, was wont to
plant his staff in the ground, and it would flower and fruit and
shade him from the heat and from the cold. Moreover, it would
carry him when he was weary, and whilst he slept, guard his sheep
from lions and wild beasts." Q "What woman was born of a man
alone and what man of a woman alone?" "Eve of Adam and Jesus of
Mary.[FN#442]" Q "Tell me of the four fires, what fire eateth and
drinketh; what fire eateth but drinketh not; what fire drinketh
but eateth not and what other neither eateth nor drinketh?" "The
fire of the world eateth but drinketh not; the fire which eateth
and drinketh is Hell-fire; the fire of the sun drinketh but
eateth not, and the fire of the moon neither eateth nor
drinketh." Q "Which is the open door and which the shut?" "The
Traditional Ordinances are the open door, the Koranic the shut
door." Q "Of what doth the poet speak, when he saith,

'And dweller in the tomb whose food is at his head, * When he
     eateth of that meat, of words he waxeth fain: 
He riseth and he walketh and he talketh without tongue; * And
     returneth to the tomb where his kith and kin are lain.
No living wight is he, yet, in honour he abides; * Nor dead yet
     he deserveth that Allah him assain.'"

She replied, "The reed-pen."[FN#443] Quoth he "What doth the poet
refer to in these verses,

'Two vests in one; blood flowing easiest wise; * Rosy red ears
     and mouth wide open lies;
It hath a cock-like form, its belly pecks * And, if you price it,
     half a dirham buys.'"

She replied, "The ink-case." Quoth he, "And in these,

'Ho say to men of wisdom, wit and lore * To sapient, reverend,
     clever counsellor:
Tell me what was't you saw that bird bring forth * When wandering
     Arab-land and Ajam o'er?
No flesh it beareth and it hath no blood, * Nor down nor any
     feathers e'er it wore.
'Tis eaten cooked and eke 'tis eaten cold; * 'Tis eaten buried
     'neath the flames that roar:
It showeth twofold colours, silver white * And yellow brighter
     than pure golden ore:
'Tis not seen living or we count it dead: * So ree my riddle rich
     in marvel-store!'"

She replied, "Thou makest longsome the questioning anent an egg
worth a mite." Q "And this?,

'I waved to and fro and he waved to and fro, * With a motion so
     pleasant, now fast and now slow;
And at last he sunk down on my bosom of snow; * 'Your lover
     friend?'"

"No friend, my fan;"[FN#444] said she. Q "How many words did
Allah speak to Moses?" "It is related of the Apostle that he
said, 'God spoke to Moses fifteen hundred and fifteen words.'" Q
"Tell me of fourteen things that speak to the Lord of the
Worlds?" "The seven heavens and the seven earths, when they say,
'We come obedient to Thy command.'"[FN#445]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel made the answer, the philosopher continued, "Tell me of
Adam and how he was first created?" and she said, "Allah created
Adam of clay: the clay He made of foam and the foam of the sea,
the sea of darkness, darkness of light, light of a fish, the fish
of a rock, the rock of a ruby, the ruby of water, and the water
He created by His Omnipotence according to His saying (exalted be
His name!), 'His commandment when He willeth aught, is but to
say, BE,--and IT IS.'"[FN#446] Q "What is meant by the poet in
these verses,

'And eater lacking mouth and even maw; * Yet trees and beasts to
     it are daily bread:
Well fed it thrives and shows a lively life, * But give it water
     and you do it dead?'"

"This," quoth she, "is Fire." "And in these;" he asked,

"Two lovers barred from every joy and bliss, * Who through the
     livelong night embracing lie:
They guard the folk from all calamities, * But with the rising
     sun apart they fly?"

She answered, "The leaves of a door." Quoth he, "Tell me of the
gates of Gehenna?" Quoth she, "They are seven in number and their
names are comprised in these two couplets,

'Jahannam, next Laza, and third Hatim; * Then count Sa'ir and
     Sakar eke, five-fold,
Sixth comes Jahim and Hawiyah the seventh; * Here are seven Hells
     in four lines briefly told.'"

Quoth he "To what doth the poet refer when he saith,

'She wears a pair of ringlets long let down * Behind her, as she
     comes and goes at speed,
And eye that never tastes of sleep nor sheds * A tear, for ne'er
     a drop it hath at need;
That never all its life wore stitch of clothes; * Yet robes
     mankind in every-mode of weed?'"

Quoth she, "A needle." Q "What is the length and what the breadth
of the bridge Al-Sirat?" "Its length is three thousand years'
journey, a thousand in descent and a thousand in ascent and a
thousand level: it is sharper than a sword and finer than a
hair."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

        When it was the Four Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had described to him Al-Sirat, the philosopher said,
"Inform me how many intercessions with Allah hath the Prophet for
each soul?"[FN#447] "Three." Q "Was Abu Bakr the first who
embraced Al-Islam?" "Yes." Q "Yet Ali became a Moslem before
him?" "Ali came to the Prophet, when he was a boy of seven years
old, for Allah vouchsafed him knowledge of the way of salvation
in his tender youth, so that he never prostrated himself to
idols." Quoth he, "Tell me which is the more excellent, Ali or
Abbas?" Now she knew that, in propounding this question, Ibrahim
was laying a trap for her; for if she said, "Ali is more
excellent than Abbas," she would lack excuse with the Caliph for
undervaluing his ancestor; so she bowed her head awhile, now
reddening, then paling, and lastly said, "Thou askest me of two
excellent men, each having his own excellence. Let us return to
what we were about." When the Caliph Harun al-Rashid heard her,
he stood up and said, "Thou hast spoken well, by the Lord of the
Ka'abah, O Tawaddud!" Then quoth Ibrahim the rhetorician, "What
meaneth the poet when he saith,

'Slim-wasted one, whose taste is sweetest-sweet, * Likest a lance
     whereon no head we scan:
And all the lieges find it work them weal, * Eaten of afternoon
     in Ramazan.'"

She answered, "The sugar-cane;" and he said, "Tell me of many
things." Asked she, "What are they?" and he said, "What is
sweeter than honey; what is sharper than the sword; what is
swifter than poison; what is the delight of a moment and what the
contentment of three days; what is the pleasantest of days; what
is the joy of a week; what is that debt the worst debtor denieth
not; what is the prison of the tomb; what is the joy of the
heart; what is the snare of the soul; what is death-in-life; what
is the disease that may not be healed; what is the shame that may
not be wiped off; what is the beast that woneth not in cultivated
fields, but lodgeth in waste places and hateth the sons of Adam
and hath in him somewhat of the make of seven strong and violent
beasts?" Quoth she, "Hear what I shall say in reply; then put off
thy clothes, that I may explain to thee;" and the Caliph said,
"Expound, and he shall doff his clothes." So she said, "Now that,
which is sweeter than honey, is the love of pious children to
their two parents; that, which is sharper than the sword, is the
tongue; that, which is swifter than poison, is the Envier's eye;
the delight of a moment is carnal copulation and the contentment
of three days is the depilatory for women; the pleasantest of
days is that of profit on merchandise; the joy of a week is the
bride; the debt, which the worst debtor denieth not, is death;
the prison of the tomb is a bad son; the joy of the heart is a
woman obedient to her husband (and it is said also that, when
fleshmeat descendeth upon the heart, it rejoiceth therein); the
snare of the soul is a disobedient slave; death-in-life is
poverty; the disease that may not be healed is an ill-nature, and
the shame that may not be wiped away is an ill daughter; lastly,
the beast that woneth not in cultivated fields, but lodgeth in
waste places and hateth the sons of Adam and hath in him somewhat
of the make of seven strong and violent beasts, is the locust,
whose head is as the head of a horse, its neck as the neck of the
bull, its wings as the wings of the vulture, its feet as the feet
of the camel, its tail as the tail of the serpent, its belly as
the belly of the scorpion and its horns as the horns of the
gazelle." The Caliph was astounded at her quickness and
understanding, and said to the rhetorician, "Doff thy clothes."
So he rose up and cried, "I call all who are present in this
assembly to witness that she is more learned than I and every
other learned man." And he put off his clothes and gave them to
her, saying, "Take them and may Allah not bless them to thee!" So
the Caliph ordered him fresh clothes and said, "O Tawaddud, there
is one thing left of that for which thou didst engage, namely,
chess." And he sent for experts of chess and cards[FN#448] and
trictrac. The chess-player sat down before her, and they set the
pieces, and he moved and she moved; but, every move he made she
speedily countered,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel was playing chess with the expert in presence of the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, whatever move he made
was speedily countered by her, till she beat him and he found
himself checkmated. Quoth he, "I did but lead thee on, that thou
mightest think thyself skilful: but set up again, and thou shalt
see." So they placed the pieces a second time, when he said in
himself, "Open thine eyes or she will beat thee." And he fell to
moving no piece, save after calculation, and ceased not to play,
till she said, "Thy King is dead!--Checkmate." When he saw this
he was confounded at her quickness and understanding; but she
laughed and said, "O professor, I will make a wager with thee on
this third game. I will give thee the queen and the right-hand
castle and the left-hand knight; if thou beat me, take my
clothes, and if I beat thee, I will take thy clothes." Replied
he, "I agree to this;" and they replaced the pieces, she removing
queen, castle and knight.[FN#449] Then said she, "Move, O
master." So he moved, saying to himself, "I cannot but beat her,
with such odds," and planned a combination; but, behold, she
moved on, little by little, till she made one of her
pawns[FN#450] a queen and pushing up to him pawns and other
pieces, to take off his attention, set one in his way and tempted
him to take it. Accordingly, he took it and she said to him, "The
measure is meted and the loads equally balanced.[FN#451] Eat till
thou are over-full; naught shall be thy ruin, O son of Adam, save
thy greed. Knowest thou not that I did but tempt thee, that I
might finesse thee? See: this is check-mate!" adding, "So doff
off thy clothes." Quoth he, "Leave me my bag-trousers, so Allah
repay thee;" and he swore by Allah that he would contend with
none, so long as Tawaddud abode in the realm of Baghdad. Then he
stripped off his clothes and gave them to her and went away.
Thereupon came the backgammon-player, and she said to him, "If I
beat thee, this day, what wilt thou give me?" Quoth he, "I will
give thee ten suits of brocade of Constantinople, figured with
gold, and ten suits of velvet and a thousand gold pieces; and if
I beat thee, I ask nothing but that thou write me an
acknowledgment of my victory." Quoth she, "To it, then, and do
thy best." So they played, and he lost and went away, chattering
in Frankish jargon and saying, "By the bounty of the Commander of
the Faithful, there is not her like in all the regions of the
world!" Then the Caliph summoned players on instruments of music
and asked her, "Dost thou know aught of music?"; when she
answered, "Even so!" He bade bring a worn lute, polished by use,
whose owner forlorn and lone was by parting trodden down; and of
which quoth one, describing it

"Allah watered a land, and upsprang a tree * Struck root deep
     down, and raised head a-sky:
The birds o'ersang it when green its wood; * And the Fair
     o'ersing now the wood is dry."

So they brought the lute in a bag of red satin, with tassels of
saffron-coloured silk: and she opened the bag, and took it out
and behold on it was graven,

"Oft hath a tender bough made lute for maid, * whose swift sweet
     lays at feast men's hearts invade:
She sings; it follows on her song, as though * The
     Bulbuls[FN#452] taught her all the modes she played."

She laid her lute in her lap and with bosom inclining over it,
bent to it with the bending of a mother who suckleth her child;
then she preluded in twelve different modes, till the whole
assembly was agitated with delight, like a waving sea, and she
sang the following,

"Cut short this strangeness, leave unruth of you; * My heart
     shall love you aye, by youth of you!
Have ruth on one who sighs and weeps and moans, * Pining and
     yearning for the troth of you."

The Caliph was ravished and exclaimed, "Allah bless thee and be
merciful to him who taught thee!": whereupon she rose and kissed
the ground before him. Then he sent for money and paid her master
Abu al-Husn an hundred thousand gold pieces to her price; after
which he said to her, "O Tawaddud, ask a boon of me!" Replied
she, "I ask of thee that thou restore me to my lord who sold me."
"'Tis well," answered the Caliph and restored her to her master
and gave her five thousand dinars for herself. Moreover, he
appointed Abu al-Husn one of his cup-companions for a
permanence,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
gave the damsel five thousand dinars for herself and restored her
to her master whom he appointed one of his cup-companions for a
permanence and assigned him a monthly stipend of a thousand
dinars so long as he should live; and he abode with the damsel
Tawaddud in all solace and delight of life. Marvel then, O King,
at the eloquence of this damsel and the hugeness of her learning
and understanding and her perfect excellence in all branches of
art and science; and consider the generosity of the Commander of
the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, in that he gave her master this
money and said to her, "Ask a boon of me;" and she besought him
to restore her to her lord. So he restored her to him and gave
her five thousand dinars for herself and made him one of his
boon-companions. Where is such generosity to be found after the
Abbaside Caliphs?--May Allah Almighty have mercy upon them, one
and all! And they tell a tale of




             THE ANGEL OF DEATH WITH THE PROUD KING
                      AND THE DEVOUT MAN.



It is related, O auspicious King, that one of the olden monarchs
was once minded to ride out in state with the Officers of his
realm and the Grandees of his retinue and display to the folk the
marvels of his magnificence. So he ordered his Lords and Emirs
equip them therefor and commanded his keeper of the wardrobe to
bring him of the richest of raiment, such as befitted the King in
his state; and he bade them bring his steeds[FN#453] of the
finest breeds and pedigrees every man heeds; which being done, he
chose out of the raiment what rejoiced him most and of the horses
that which he deemed best; and, donning the clothes, together
with a collar set with margarites and rubies and all manner
jewels, mounted and set forth in state, making his destrier
prance and curvet among his troops and glorying in his pride and
despotic power. And Iblis came to him and, laying his hand upon
his nose, blew into his nostrils the breath of hauteur and
conceit, so that he magnified and glorified himself and said in
his heart, "Who among men is like unto me?" And he became so
puffed up with arrogance and self-sufficiency, and so taken up
with the thought of his own splendour and magnificence, that he
would not vouchsafe a glance to any man. Presently, there stood
before him one clad in tattered clothes and saluted him, but he
returned not his salam; whereupon the stranger laid hold of his
horse's bridle. "Lift thy hand," cried the King, "thou knowest
not whose bridle-rein it is whereof thou takest hold." Quoth the
other, I have a need of thee." Quoth the King, "Wait till I
alight and then name thy need." Rejoined the stranger, "It is a
secret and I will not tell it but in thine ear." So the King
bowed his head to him and he said, "I am the Angel of Death and I
purpose to take thy soul." Replied the King, "Have patience with
me a little, whilst I return to my house and take leave of my
people and children and neighbours and wife." "By no means so,"
answered the Angel; "thou shalt never return nor look on them
again, for the fated term of thy life is past." So saying, he
took the soul of the King (who fell off his horse's back dead)
and departed thence. Presently the Death Angel met a devout man,
of whom Almighty Allah had accepted, and saluted him. He returned
the salute, and the Angel said to him, "O pious man, I have a
need of thee which must be kept secret." "Tell it in my ear,"
quoth the devotee; and quoth the other, "I am the Angel of
Death." Replied the man, "Welcome to thee! and praised be Allah
for thy coming! I am aweary of awaiting thine arrival; for indeed
long hath been thine absence from the lover which longeth for
thee." Said the Angel, "If thou have any business, make an end of
it;" but the other answered, saying, "There is nothing so urgent
to me as the meeting with my Lord, to whom be honour and glory!"
And the Angel said "How wouldst thou fain have me take thy soul?
I am bidden to take it as thou willest and choosest." He replied,
"Tarry till I make the Wuzu-ablution and pray; and, when I
prostrate myself, then take my soul while my body is on the
ground."[FN#454] Quoth the Angel, "Verily, my Lord (be He
extolled and exalted!) commanded me not to take thy soul but with
thy consent and as thou shouldst wish; so I will do thy will."
Then the devout man made the minor ablution[FN#455] and prayed:
and the Angel of Death took his soul in the act of prostration
and Almighty Allah transported it to the place of mercy and
acceptance and forgiveness. And they tell another tale of




             THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE RICH KING.



A certain King had heaped up coin beyond count and gathered store
of all precious things, which Allah the Most Highest hath
created. So, in order that he might take his pleasure whenas he
should find leisure to enjoy all this abounding wealth he had
collected, he built him a palace wide and lofty such as befitteth
and beseemeth Kings; and set thereto strong doors and appointed,
for its service and its guard, servants and soldiers and
doorkeepers to watch and ward. One day, he bade the cooks dress
him somewhat of the goodliest of food and assembled his household
and retainers and boon-companions and servants to eat with him,
and partake of his bounty. Then he sat down upon the sofa of his
kingship and dominion; and, propping his elbow upon the cushion,
addressed himself, saying, "O soul, thou hast gathered together
all the wealth of the world; so now take thy leisure therein and
eat of this good at thine ease, in long life and prosperity ever
rife!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that hardly had
the King made an end of saying to himself, "Eat of this weal at
thine ease, in long life and prosperity ever rife!" when a man
clad in tattered raiment, with an asker's wallet hanging at his
neck, as he were one who came to beg food, knocked with the
door-ring a knock so loud and terrible that the whole palace
shook as with quake of earth and the King's throne trembled. The
servants were affrighted and rushed to the door, and when they
saw the man who had knocked they cried out at him, saying, "Woe
to thee! what manner of unmannerly fashion be this? Wait till the
King eateth and we will then give thee of what is left." Quoth
he, "Tell your lord to come out and speak with me, for I have of
him a pressing need and a matter to heed." They cried, "Away,
fool! who art thou that we should bid our lord come forth to
thee?" But he said, "Tell him of this." So they went in and told
the King, who said, "Did ye not rebuke him and draw upon him and
threaten him!" Now as he spoke, behold, there came another knock
at the gate, louder than the first knock, whereupon the servants
sprang at the stranger with staves and weapons, to fall upon him
and slay him; but he shouted at them, saying, "Bide in your
steads, for I am the Angel of Death." Hereat their hearts quaked
and their wits forsook them; their understandings were in
confusion, their side-muscles quivered in perturbation and their
limbs lost the power of motion. Then said the King to them, "Tell
him to take a substitute[FN#456] in my place and one to relieve
me in this case." But the Angel answered, saying, "I will take no
substitute, and I come not but on thine account, to cause
separation between thee and the goods thou hast gathered together
and the riches thou hast heaped up and entreasured." When the
King heard this, he wept and groaned, saying, "Allah curse the
treasure which hath deluded and undone me and diverted me from
the service of my Lord! I deemed it would profit me, but to-day
it is a regret for me and a calamity to me, and behold, I go
forth, empty-handed of it, and leave it to my foes." Thereupon
Allah caused the Treasure to speak out and it said, "Wherefore
cursest thou me?[FN#457] Curse thyself, for Allah created both me
and eke thyself of the dust and appointed me to be in thine hand,
that thou mightest provide thee with me a viaticum for the next
world and give alms with me to the poor and the needy and the
sick; and build mosques and hospices and bridges and aqueducts,
so might I be an aidance unto thee in the world to come. But thou
didst garner me and hoard me up and on thine own vanities
bestowedst me, neither gavest thou thanks for me, as was due, but
wast ungrateful to me; and now thou must leave me to thy foes and
thou hast naught save thy regretting and thy repenting. But what
is my sin, that thou shouldest revile me?" Then the Angel of
Death took the King's soul as he sat on his throne before he ate
of the food, and he fell down dead. Quoth Allah Almighty, "While
they were rejoicing for that which had been given them, we
suddenly laid hold on them; and, behold, they were seized with
despair."[FN#458] And they tell another tale of




             THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE KING OF THE
                      CHILDREN OF ISRAEL.



There was a puissant despot among the Kings of the Banu Israil,
who sat one day upon the throne of his kingship, when he saw come
in to him, by the gate of the hall, a man of forbidding aspect
and horrible presence. The King was affrighted at his sudden
intrusion and his look terrified him; so he sprang up before him
and said, "Who art thou, O man? Who gave thee leave to come in to
me and who invited thee to enter my house?" Quoth the stranger,
"Verily the Lord of the House sent me to thee, nor can any
doorkeeper exclude me, nor need I leave to come in to Kings; for
I reck not of a Sultan's majesty neither of the multitude of his
guards. I am he from whom no tyrant is at rest, nor can any man
escape from my grasp: I am the Destroyer of delights and the
Sunderer of societies." Now when the King heard this a palsy
crept over him[FN#459] and he fell on his face in a swoon; but
presently coming to himself, he asked, "Art thou then the Angel
of Death?"; and the stranger answered, "Yes." "I conjure thee, by
Allah," quoth the King, "grant me one single day's respite, that
I may pray pardon of my sins and ask absolution of my Lord and
restore to their rightful owners the monies which are in my
treasures, so I may not be burdened with the woe of a reckoning
nor with the misery of punishment therefor." Replied the Angel,
"Well-away! well-away! this may be in no way."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
Death-messenger to the King, "Well-away, well-away! this may be
in no way. How can I grant thee a reprieve when the days of thy
life are counted and thy breaths numbered and thy moments fixed
and written?" "Grant me an hour," asked the King; but the Angel
answered saying, "The hour was in the account and hath sped, and
thou unheeding aught; and hath fled, and thou taking no thought:
and now thy breathings are accomplished, and there remaineth to
thee but one breath." Quoth the King, "Who will be with me when I
am transported to my tomb?" Quoth the Angel, "Naught will be with
thee but thy works good or evil." "I have no works," said the
King; and the Angel, "Doubtless thy long home will be in
hell-fire and thy doom the wrath of the Almighty." Then he seized
the soul of the King, and he fell off his throne and dropped on
the earth dead. And there arose a mighty weeping and wailing and
clamour of keening for him among the people of his court, and had
they known that to which he went of the wrath of his Lord, their
weeping for him had been sorer and their wailing louder and more
abounding. And a story is told of




              ISKANDAR ZU AL-KARNAYN[FN#460] AND A
                  CERTAIN TRIBE OF POOR FOLK.



It is related that Iskandar Zu al-Karnayn[FN#461] once came, in
his journeyings, upon a tribe of small folk, who owned naught of
the weals of the world and who dug their graves over against the
doors of their houses and were wont at all times to visit them
and sweep the earth from them and keep them clean and pray at
them and worship Almighty Allah at them; and they had no meat
save grasses and the growth of the ground. So Iskandar sent a man
to summon their King, but he refused to come, saying, "I have no
need of him." Thereupon Iskandar went to him and said, "How is it
with you and what manner of men are ye?; for I see with you
forsooth naught of gold or silver, nor find I with you aught of
the weals of the world." Answered the King, "None hath his fill
of the weals of the world." Iskandar then asked "Why do you dig
your graves before your house-doors?"; and the King answered,
"That they may be the prospective of our eye-glances; so we may
look on them and ever renew talk and thought of death, neither
forget the world to come; and on this wise the love of the world
be banished from our hearts and we be not thereby distracted from
the service of our Lord, the Almighty." Quoth Iskandar, "Why do
ye eat grasses?"; and the other replied, "Because we abhor to
make our bellies the tombs of animals and because the pleasure of
eating outstrippeth not the gullet." Then putting forth his hand
he brought out a skull of a son of Adam and, laying it before
Iskandar, said, "O Zu al-Karnayn, Lord of the Two Horns, knowest
thou who owned this skull?" Quoth he, "Nay;" and quoth the other,
"He who owned this skull was a King of the Kings of the world,
who dealt tyrannously with his subjects, specially wronging the
weak and wasting his time in heaping up the rubbish of this
world, till Allah took his sprite and made the fire his
abiding-site; and this is his head." He then put forth his hand
and produced another skull and, laying it before Iskandar, said
to him, "Knowest thou this?" "No," answered the conqueror; and
the other rejoined, "This is the skull of another King, who dealt
justly by his lieges and was kindly solicitous for the folk of
his realm and his dominions, till Allah took his soul and lodged
him in His Garden and made high his degree in Heaven." Then
laying his hands on Iskandar's head he said, "Would I knew which
of these two art thou." Whereupon Iskandar wept with sore weeping
and straining the King to his bosom cried, "If thou be minded to
company with me, I will commit to thee as Wazir the government of
my affairs and share with thee my kingdom." Cried the other,
"Well-away, well-away! I have no mind to this." "And why so?"
asked Iskandar, and the King answered, "Because all men are thy
foes by reason of the wealth and the worlds thou hast won: while
all men are my true friends, because of my contentment and
pauperdom, for that I possess nothing, neither covet aught of the
goods of life; I have no desire to them nor wish for them,
neither reck I aught save contentment." So Iskandar pressed him
to his breast and kissed him between the eyes and went his
way.[FN#462] And among the tales they tell is one concerning




                   THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF KING
                      ANUSHIRWAN.[FN#463] 



It is told of Anushirwan, the Just King, that once upon a time he
feigned himself sick, and bade his stewards and intendants go
round about the provinces of his empire and the quarters of his
dominion and seek him out a mud-brick thrown away from some
ruined village, that he might use it as medicine, informing his
intimates that the leaches had prescribed this to him. So they
went the round of the provinces of his reign and of all the lands
under his sway and said to him on return, "In all the realm we
have found nor ruined site nor castaway mud-brick." At this
Anushirwan rejoiced and rendered thanks to the Lord, saying, "I
was but minded to try my kingdom and prove mine empire, that I
might know if any place therein remained ruined and deserted, so
I might rebuild and repeople it; but, since there be no place in
it but is inhabited, the affairs of the reign are
best-conditioned and its ordinance is excellent; and its
populousness[FN#464] hath reached the pitch of perfection."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
high officials returned and reported, "We have found in the
empire nor ruined site nor rotten brick," the Just King thanked
his God and said, "Verily the affairs of the realm are
best-conditioned and its ordinance is excellent and its
populousness hath reached the pink of perfection." And ken thou,
O King, continued Shahrazad, that these olden Kings strave not
and toiled not for the peopling of their possessions, but because
they knew that the more populous a country is, the more abundant
is that which is desired therein; and because they wist the
saying of the wise and the learned to be true without other view,
namely, "Religion dependeth on the King, the King on the troops,
the troops on the treasury, the treasury on the populousness of
the country and its prosperity on the justice done to the
lieges." Wherefore they upheld no one in tyranny or oppression;
neither suffered their dependants and suite to work injustice,
knowing that kingdoms are not established upon tyranny, but that
cities and places fall into ruin when oppressors are set as
rulers over them, and their inhabitants disperse and flee to
other governments; whereby ruin falleth upon the realm, the
imports fail, the treasuries become empty and the pleasant lives
of the subjects are perturbed; for that they love not a tyrant
and cease not to offer up successive prayers against him; so that
the King hath no ease of his kingdom, and the vicissitudes of
fortune speedily bring him to destruction. And they tell a tale
concerning




              THE JEWISH KAZI AND HIS PIOUS WIFE. 



Among the Children of Israel one of the Kazis had a wife of
surpassing beauty, constant in fasting and abounding in patience
and long-suffering; and he, being minded to make the pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, appointed his own brother Kazi in his stead, during
his absence, and commended his wife to his charge. Now this
brother had heard of her beauty and loveliness and had taken a
fancy to her. So no sooner was his brother gone than he went to
her and sought her love-favours; but she denied him and held fast
to her chastity. The more she repelled him, the more he pressed
his suit upon her; till, despairing of her and fearing lest she
should acquaint his brother with his misconduct whenas he should
return, he suborned false witnesses to testify against her of
adultery; and cited her and carried her before the King of the
time who adjudged her to be stoned. So they dug a pit, and
seating her therein stoned her, till she was covered with stones,
and the man said, "Be this hole her grave!" But when it was dark
a passer-by, making for a neighbouring hamlet, heard her groaning
in sore pain; and, pulling her out of the pit, carried her home
to his wife, whom he bade dress her wounds. The peasant woman
tended her till she recovered and presently gave her her child to
be nursed; and she used to lodge with the child in another house
by night. Now a certain thief saw her and lusted after her. So he
sent to her seeking her love-favours, but she denied herself to
him; wherefore he resolved to slay her and, making his way into
her lodging by night (and she sleeping), thought to strike at her
with a knife; but it smote the little one and killed it. Now when
he knew his misdeed, fear overtook him and he went forth the
house and Allah preserved from him her chastity. But as she awoke
in the morning, she found the child by her side with throat cut;
and presently the mother came and seeing her boy dead, said to
the nurse, "Twas thou didst murther him." Therewith she beat her
a grievous beating and purposed to put her to death; but her
husband interposed and delivered the woman, saying, "By Allah,
thou shalt not do on this wise." So the woman, who had somewhat
of money with her, fled forth for her life, knowing not whither
she should wend. Presently, she came to a village, where she saw
a crowd of people about a man crucified to a tree-stump, but
still in the chains of life. "What hath he done?" she asked, and
they answered, "He hath committed a crime, which nothing can
expiate but death or the payment of such a fine by way of alms."
So she said to them, "Take the money and let him go;" and, when
they did so, he repented at her hands and vowed to serve her, for
the love of Almighty Allah till death should release him. Then he
built her a cell and lodged her therein; after which he betook
himself to woodcutting and brought her daily her bread. As for
her, she was constant in worship, so that there came no sick man
or demoniac to her, but she prayed for him and he was straightway
healed.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
woman's cell was visited by folk (and she constant in worship),
it befel by decree of the Almighty that He sent down upon her
husband's brother (the same who had caused her to be stoned), a
cancer in the face, and smote the villager's wife (the same who
had beaten her) with leprosy, and afflicted the thief (the same
who had murthered the child) with palsy. Now when the Kazi
returned from his pilgrimage, he asked his brother of his wife,
and he told him that she was dead, whereat he mourned sore and
accounted her with her Maker. After awhile, very many folk heard
of the pious recluse and flocked to her cell from all parts of
the length and breadth of the earth; whereupon said the Kazi to
his brother, "O my brother, wilt thou not seek out yonder pious
woman? Haply Allah shall decree thee healing at her hands!" and
he replied, "O my brother, carry me to her" Moreover, the husband
of the leprous woman heard of the pious devotee and carried his
wife to her, as did also the people of the paralytic thief; and
they all met at the door of the hermitage. Now she had a place
wherefrom she could look out upon those who came to her, without
their seeing her; and they waited till her servant came, when
they begged admittance and obtained permission. Presently she saw
them all and recognized them; so she veiled and cloaked face and
body and went out and stood in the door, looking at her husband
and his brother and the thief and the peasant-woman; but they
could not recognize her. Then said she to them, "Ho folk, ye
shall not be relieved of what is with you till ye confess your
sins; for, when the creature confesseth his sins the Creator
relenteth towards him and granteth him that wherefore he
resorteth to him." Quoth the Kazi to his brother, "O my brother,
repent to Allah and persist not in thy frowardness, for it will
be more helpful to thy relief." And the tongue of the case spake
this speech, 

"This day oppressor and oppressed meet, * And Allah sheweth
     secrets we secrete:
This is a place where sinners low are brought; * And Allah
     raiseth saint to highest seat.
Our Lord and Master shows the truth right clear, * Though sinner
     froward be or own defeat:
Alas[FN#465] for those who rouse the Lord to wrath, * As though
     of Allah's wrath they nothing weet!
O whoso seekest honours, know they are * From Allah, and His fear
     with love entreat."

(Saith the relator), Then quoth the brother, "Now I will tell the
truth: I did thus and thus with thy wife;" and he confessed the
whole matter, adding, "And this is my offence." Quoth the leprous
woman, "As for me, I had a woman with me and imputed to her that
of which I knew her to be guiltless, and beat her grievously; and
this is my offence." And quoth the paralytic, "And I went in to a
woman to kill her, after I had tempted her to commit adultery and
she had refused; and I slew a child that lay by her side; and
this is my offence." Then said the pious woman, "O my God, even
as Thou hast made them feel the misery of revolt, so show them
now the excellence of submission, for Thou over all things art
Omnipotent!" And Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!) made
them whole. Then the Kazi fell to looking on her and considering
her straitly, till she asked him why he looked so hard and he
said, "I had a wife and were she not dead, I had said thou art
she." Hereupon, she made herself known to him and both began
praising Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!) for that which
He had vouchsafed them of the reunion of their loves; but the
brother and the thief and the villager's wife joined in imploring
her forgiveness. So she forgave them one and all, and they
worshipped Allah in that place and rendered her due service, till
Death parted them. And one of the Sayyids[FN#466] hath related
this tale of




              THE SHIPWRECKED WOMAN AND HER CHILD.



"I was circuiting the Ka'abah one dark night, when I heard a
plaintive voice, speaking from a contrite heart and saying, 'O
Bountiful One, Thy past boon! Indeed, by my heart shall Thy
covenant never be undone.' Hearing this voice, my heart fluttered
so that I was like to die; but I followed the sound and behold,
it came from a woman, to whom I said, 'Peace be with thee, O
handmaid of Allah;' whereto she replied, 'And with thee be peace,
and the mercy of Allah and His blessings!' Quoth I, 'I conjure
thee, by Allah the Most Great, tell me what is the covenant to
which thy heart is constant.' Quoth she, 'But that thou adjurest
me by the Omnipotent, I would not tell thee my secrets. See what
is before me.' So I looked and lo! there was a child lying asleep
before her and breathing heavily in his slumber. Said she, "Know,
that I set forth, being big with this boy, to make the pilgrimage
to this House and took passage in a ship; but the waves rose
against us and the winds blew contrary and the vessel broke up. I
saved myself on a plank; and, on that bit of wood, I gave birth
to this child; and while he lay on my bosom and the waves beating
upon me,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman
continued, "'Now while the boy lay on my bosom and the waves beat
upon me, there swam up to me one of the sailors, who climbed on
the plank and said, 'By Allah, I desired thee whilst thou wast
yet in the ship, and now I have come at thee: so yield thy body
to me, or I will throw thee into the sea.' Said I, 'Out on thee!
hast thou no memory of that which thou hast seen and is it no
warning to thee?' Quoth he, 'I have seen the like of this many a
time and come off safe and care not.' Quoth I, 'O fellow, we are
now in a calamity, whence we hope to be delivered by obedience to
Allah and not by disobedience.' But he persisted with me, and I
feared him and thought to put him off; so I said to him, 'Wait
till this babe shall sleep'; but he took the child off my lap and
threw him into the sea. Now when I saw this desperate deed, my
heart sank and sorrow was sore upon me; so I raised my eyes
heavenwards and said, 'O Thou that interposest between a man and
his heart, intervene between me and this leonine brute; for Thou
over all things art Omnipotent!' And by Allah, hardly had I
spoken when a beast rose out of the sea and snatched him off the
plank. When I saw myself alone my sorrows redoubled and my grief
and longing for my child, and I recited,

'My coolth of eyes, the darling child of me * Is lost, and racked
     my heart with agony;
My body wrecked, and red-hot coals of love * Burning my liver
     with sore pangs, I see.
In this my sorrow shows no gleam of joy; * Save Thy high grace
     and my expectancy:
Hast seen, O Lord, what unto me befel; * My son aye lost and
     parting pangs I dree:
Take ruth on us and make us meet again; * For now my stay and
     only hope's in Thee!'

I abode in this condition a day and a night; and, when morning
dawned, I caught sight of the sails of a vessel shining afar off,
nor did the waves cease to drive me and the winds to waft me on,
till I reached the ship, whose sails I had sighted. The sailors
took me up and I looked and behold, my babe was amongst them: so
I threw myself upon him and said, 'O folk, this is my child: how
and whence came ye by him?' Quoth they, 'Whilst we were sailing
along the seas the ship suddenly stood still and lo! that which
stayed us was a beast, as it were a great city, and this babe on
its back, sucking his thumbs. So we took him up.' Now when I
heard this, I told them my tale and all that had betided me and
returned thanks to my Lord for His goodness, and vowed to Him
that never, whilst I lived, would I stir from His House nor
swerve from His service; and since then I have never asked of Him
aught but He hath given it me.' Now when she had made an end of
her story (quoth the Sayyid), I put my hand to my alms-pouch and
would have given to her, but she exclaimed, "Away from me, thou
idle man! Have I not told thee of His mercies and the
graciousness of His dealings and shall I take an alms from other
than His hand?" And I could not prevail with her to accept aught
of me: so I left her and went away, reciting these couplets

'How many boons conceals the Deity, * Eluding human sight in
     mystery:
How many graces come on heels of stresses, * And fill the burning
     heart with jubilee:
How many a sorrow in the morn appears, * And turns at night-tide
     into gladdest gree:
If things go hard with thee some day, yet trust * Th' Eterne, th'
     Almighty God of Unity:
And pray the Prophet that he intercede; * Through intercession
     every wish shalt see.'

And she left not the service of her Lord, cleaving unto His
House, till death came to her." And a tale is also told by Malik
bin Dinar[FN#467] (Allah have mercy on him!) of




                    THE PIOUS BLACK SLAVE. 



"We were once afflicted with drought at Bassorah and went forth
sundry times to pray for rain, but saw no sign of our prayers
being accepted. So I went, I and 'Itaa al-Salami and Sabit
al-Banani and Naja al-Bakaa and Mohammed bin Wasi'a and Ayyub
al-Sukhtiyani and Habib al-Farsi and Hassan bin Abi Sinan and
'Otbah al-Ghulam and Salih al-Muzani,[FN#468] till we reached the
oratory,[FN#469] when the boys came out of the schools and we
prayed for rain, but saw no sign of acceptance. So about mid-day
the people went away and I and Sabit al-Banani tarried in the
place of prayer till nightfall, when we saw a black of comely
face, slender of shank[FN#470] and big of belly, approach us,
clad in a pair of woollen drawers; if all he wore had been
priced, it would not have fetched a couple of dirhams. He brought
water and made the minor ablution, then, going up to the
prayer-niche, prayed two inclinations deftly, his standing and
bowing and prostration being exactly similar in both. Then he
raised his glance heavenwards, and said, 'O my God and my Lord
and Master, how long wilt Thou reject Thy servants in that which
offereth no hurt to Thy sovereignty? Is that which is with Thee
wasted or are the treasuries of Thy Kingdom annihilated? I
conjure Thee, by Thy love to me forthwith to pour out upon us Thy
rain-clouds of grace!' He spake and hardly had he made an end of
speaking, when the heavens clouded over and there came a rain, as
if the mouths of waterskins had been opened; and when we left the
oratory, we were knee-deep in water,"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

     When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "hardly had
he spoken when the heavens clouded over and there came a rain, as
if the mouths of waterskins had been opened. And when we left the
oratory we were knee-deep in water, and we were lost in wonder at
the black. So I accosted him and said to him, 'Woe to thee, O
black, art thou not ashamed of what thou saidst?' He turned to me
and asked, 'What said I?'; and I, 'Thy saying to Allah, 'By Thy
love of me;' and what giveth thee to know that He loveth thee?'
Replied he, 'Away from me, O thou distracted by the world from
the care of thine own soul. Where was I, when He gave me strength
to profess the unity of the Godhead and vouchsafed unto me the
knowledge of Him? How deemest thou that He aided me thus except
of His love to me?' adding, 'Verily, His love to me is after the
measure of my love to Him.' Quoth I, 'Tarry awhile with me, so
may Allah have mercy on thee!' But he said, 'I am a chattel and
the Book enjoineth me to obey my lesser master.' So we followed
him afar off, till we saw him enter the house of a slave-broker.
Now the first half of the night was past and the last half was
longsome upon us, so we went away; but next morning, we repaired
to the slave-dealer and said to him, 'Hast thou a lad to sell us
for service?' He answered, 'Yes, I have an hundred lads or so and
they are all for sale.' Then he showed us slave after slave; till
he had shown us some seventy; but my friend was not amongst them,
and the dealer said, 'These are all I have.' But, as we were
going out from him we saw a ruinous hut behind his house and
going in behold, we found the black standing there. I cried,
''Tis he, by the Lord of the Ka'abah!' and turning to the dealer,
said to him, 'Sell me yonder slave.' Replied he, 'O Abu Yahya,
this is a pestilent unprofitable fellow, who hath no concern by
night but weeping and by day but repentance.' I rejoined, 'It is
for that I want him.' So the dealer called him, and he came out,
showing drowsiness. Quoth his master, 'Take him at thine own
price, so thou hold me free of all his faults.' I bought him for
twenty dinars and asked 'What is his name?' and the dealer
answered 'Maymun, the monkey;' and I took him by the hand and
went out with him, intending to go home; but he turned to me and
said, 'O my lesser lord, why and wherefore didst thou buy me? By
Allah, I am not fit for the service of God's creatures!' Replied
I, 'I bought thee that I might serve thee myself; and on my head
be it.' Asked he, 'Why so?' and I answered, 'Wast thou not in
company with us yesterday in the place of prayer?' Quoth he, 'And
didst thou hear me?'; and quoth I, 'It was I accosted thee
yesterday and spoke with thee.' Thereupon he advanced till we
came to a mosque, where he entered and prayed a two-bow prayer;
after which he said, 'O my God and my Lord and Master, the secret
that was between me and Thee Thou hast discovered unto Thy
creatures and hast brought me to shame before the worldling. How
then shall life be sweet to me, now that other than Thou hath
happened upon that which is between Thee and me? I conjure Thee
to take my soul to Thee forthright.[FN#471] So saying, he
prostrated himself, and I awaited awhile without seeing him raise
his head; so I shook him and behold, he was indeed dead, the
mercy of Almighty Allah be upon him! I laid him out stretching
his arms and legs and looked at him, and lo! he was smiling.
Moreover, whiteness had got the better of blackness on his brow,
and his face was radiant with light like a young moon. As we
wondered at his case, the door opened and a young man came in to
us and said, 'Peace be with you! May Allah make great our reward
and yours for our brother Maymun! Here is his shroud: wrap him in
it.' So saying, he gave us two robes, never had we seen the like
of them, and we shrouded him therein. And now his tomb is a place
whither men resort to pray for rain and ask their requirements of
Allah (be He extolled and exalted!); and how excellently well
saith the poet on this 