theme,

     'The heart of Gnostic[FN#472] homed in heavenly Garth * 
          Heaven decks, and Allah's porters aid afford.
     Lo! here they drink old wine commingled with * 
          Tasnim,[FN#473] the wine of union with the Lord.
     Safe is the secret 'twixt the Friend and them; * 
          Safe from all hearts but from that Heart adored.'"

And they recount another anecdote of




              THE DEVOUT TRAY-MAKER AND HIS WIFE.



There was once, among the Children of Israel, a man of the
worthiest, who was strenuous in the service of his Lord and
abstained from things worldly and drave them away from his heart.
He had a wife who was a helpmate meet for him and who was at all
times obedient to him. They earned their living by making
trays[FN#474] and fans, whereat they wrought all through the
light hours; and, at nightfall, the man went out into the streets
and highways seeking a buyer for what they had made. They were
wont to fast continually by day[FN#475] and one morning they
arose, fasting, and worked at their craft till the light failed
them, when the man went forth, according to custom, to find
purchasers for his wares, and fared on till he came to the door
of the house of a certain man of wealth, one of the sons of this
world, high in rank and dignity. Now the tray-maker was fair of
face and comely of form, and the wife of the master of the house
saw him and fell in love with him and her heart inclined to him
with exceeding inclination; so, her husband being absent, she
called her handmaid and said to her, "Contrive to bring yonder
man to us." Accordingly the maid went out to him and and called
him and stopped him as though she would buy what he held in
hand.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
maid-servant went out to the man and asked him, "Come in; my lady
hath a mind to buy some of thy wares, after she hath tried them
and looked at them." The man thought she spoke truly and, seeing
no harm in this, entered and sat down as she bade him; and she
shut the door upon him. Whereupon her mistress came out of her
room and, taking him by the gaberdine,[FN#476] drew him within
and said, "How long shall I seek union of thee? Verily my
patience is at an end on thine account. See now, the place is
perfumed and provision prepared and the householder is absent
this night, and I give to thee my person without reserve, I whose
favours kings and captains and men of fortune have sought this
long while, but I have regarded none of them." And she went on
talking thus to him, whilst he raised not his eyes from the
ground, for shame before Allah Almighty and fear of the pains and
penalties of His punishment; even as saith the poet,

"'Twixt me and riding many a noble dame, * Was naught but shame
     which kept me chaste and pure:
My shame was cure to her; but haply were * Shame to depart, she
     ne'er had known a cure."

The man strove to free himself from her, but could not; so he
said to her, "I want one thing of thee." She asked, "What is
that?": and he answered, "I wish for pure water that I may carry
it to the highest place of thy house and do somewhat therewith
and cleanse myself of an impurity, which I may not disclose to
thee." Quoth she, "The house is large and hath closets and
corners and privies at command." But he replied, "I want nothing
but to be at a height." So she said to her slave-girl, "Carry him
up to the belvedere on the house-terrace." Accordingly the maid
took him up to the very top and, giving him a vessel of water,
went down and left him. Then he made the ablution and prayed a
two-bow prayer; after which he looked at the ground, thinking to
throw himself down, but seeing it afar off, feared to be dashed
to pieces by the fall.[FN#477] Then he bethought him of his
disobedience to Allah, and the consequences of his sin; so it
became a light matter to him to offer up his life and shed his
blood; and he said, "O my God and my Lord, Thou seest that which
is fallen on me; neither is my case hidden from Thee. Thou indeed
over all things art Omnipotent and the tongue of my case reciteth
and saith, 

'I show my heart and thoughts to Thee, and Thou * Alone my
     secret's secrecy canst know.
If I address Thee fain I cry aloud; * Or, if I'm mute, my signs
     for speech I show.
O Thou to whom no second be conjoined! * A wretched lover seeks
     Thee in his woe.
I have a hope my thoughts as true confirm; * And heart that
     fainteth as right well canst trow.
To lavish life is hardest thing that be, * Yet easy an Thou bid
     me life forego;
But, an it be Thy will to save from stowre, * Thou, O my Hope, to
     work this work hast power!'"

Then the man cast himself down from the belvedere; but Allah sent
an angel who bore him up on his wings and brought him down to the
ground, whole and without hurt or harm. Now when he found himself
safe on the ground, he thanked and praised Allah (to whom belong
Majesty and Might!) for His merciful protection of his person and
his chastity; and he went straight to his wife who had long
expected him, and he empty-handed. Then seeing him, she asked him
why he had tarried and what was come of that he had taken with
him and why he returned empty-handed; whereupon he told her of
the temptation which had befallen him, and she said,
"Alhamdolillah--praised be God-for delivering thee from seduction
and intervening between thee and such calamity!" Then she added,
"O man, the neighbours use to see us light our oven every night;
and, if they see us fireless this night, they will know that we
are destitute. Now it behoveth in gratitude  to Allah, that we
hide our destitution and conjoin the fast of this night to that
of the past and continue it for the sake of Allah Almighty." So
she rose and, filling the oven with wood, lighted it, to baffle
the curiosity of her woman-neighbours, reciting these couplets, 

"Now I indeed will hide desire and all repine; * And light up
     this my fire that neighbours see no sign:
Accept I what befals by order of my Lord; * Haply He too accept
     this humble act of mine."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Seventieth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
goodwife had lit the fire to baffle the curiosity of her
women-neighbours, she and her husband made the Wuzu-ablution and
stood up to pray, when behold, one of the neighbours' wives came
and asked leave to take a fire-brand from the oven. "Do what thou
wilt with the oven," answered they; but, when she came to the
fire, she cried out, saying, "Ho, such an one (to the
tray-maker's wife) take up thy bread ere it burn!" Quoth the wife
to her husband, "Hearest thou what she saith?" Quoth he, "Go and
look." So she went up to the oven, and behold, it was full of
fine bread and white. She took up the scones and carried them to
her husband, thanking Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!)
for His abounding good and great bounty; and they ate of the
bread and drank water and praised the Almighty. Then said the
woman to her husband, "Come let us pray to Allah the Most
Highest, so haply He may vouchsafe us what shall enable us to
dispense with the weariness of working for daily bread and devote
ourselves wholly to worshipping and obeying Him." The man rose in
assent and prayed, whilst his wife said, "Amen," to his prayer,
when the roof clove in sunder and down fell a ruby, which lit the
house with its light. Hereat, they redoubled in praise and
thanksgiving to Allah praying what the Almighty willed,[FN#478]
and rejoiced at the ruby with great joy. And the night being far
spent, they lay down to sleep and the woman dreamt that she
entered Paradise and saw therein many chairs ranged and stools
set in rows. She asked what the seats were and it was answered
her, "These are the chairs of the prophets and those are the
stools of the righteous and the pious." Quoth she, "Which is the
stool of my husband such an one?"; and it was said to her, "It is
this." So she looked and seeing a hole in its side asked, "What
may be this hole?"; and the reply came, "It is the place of the
ruby that dropped upon you from your house-roof." Thereupon she
awoke, weeping and bemoaning the defect in her husband's stool
among the seats of the Righteous; so she told him the dream and
said to him, "Pray Allah, O man, that this ruby return to its
place; for endurance of hunger and poverty during our few days
here were easier than a hole in thy chair among the just in
Paradise."[FN#479] Accordingly, he prayed to his Lord, and lo!
the ruby flew up to the roof and away whilst they looked at it.
And they ceased not from their poverty and their piety, till they
went to the presence of Allah, to whom be Honour and Glory! And
they also tell a tale of




                 AL-HAJJAJ AND THE PIOUS MAN. 



Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf al-Sakafi had been long in pursuit of a
certain man of the notables, and when at last he was brought
before him, he said, "O enemy of Allah, He hath delivered thee
over to me;" and cried, "Hale him to prison and lay him by the
heels in heavy fetters and build a closet over him, that he may
not come forth of it nor any go into him." So they bore him to
jail and summoned the blacksmith with the irons; and every time
the smith gave a stroke with his hammer, the prisoner raised his
eyes to heaven and said, "Is not the whole Creation and the
Empire thereof His?"[FN#480] Then the gaolers built the
cage[FN#481] over him and left him therein, lorn and lone,
whereupon longing and consternation entered into him and the
tongue of his case recited in extempore verse, 

"O, Wish of wistful men, for Thee I yearn; * My heart seeks grace
     of one no heart shall spurn.
Unhidden from thy sight is this my case; * And for one glance of
     thee I pine and burn.
They jailed and tortured me with sorest pains: * Alas for lone
     one can no aid discern!
But, albe lone, I find Thy name befriends * And cheers, though
     sleep to eyes shall ne'er return:
An thou accept of me, I care for naught; * And only Thou what's
     in my heart canst learn!"

Now when night fell dark, the gaoler left his watchmen to guard
him and went to his house; and on the morrow, when he came to the
prison, he found the fetters lying on the ground and the prisoner
gone; whereat he was affrighted and made sure of death. So he
returned to his place and bade his family farewell, after which
he took in his sleeve his shroud and the sweet herbs for his
corpse, and went in to Al-Hajjaj. And as he stood before the
presence, the Governor smelt the perfumes and asked, "What is
that?" when the gaoler answered, "O my lord, it is I who have
brought it." "And what moved thee to that?" enquired the
Governor; whereupon he told him his case,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-first Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
gaoler told his case to Al-Hajjaj, the Governor cried, "Woe to
thee! Didst thou hear him say aught?" Answered the gaoler, "Yes!
whilst the blacksmith was hammering his irons, he ceased not to
look up heavenwards and say, 'Is not the whole Creation and the
Empire thereof His?'" Rejoined Al-Hajjaj, "Dost thou not know
that He, on whom he called in thy presence, delivered him in
thine absence?" And the tongue of the case recited on this theme, 

"O Lord, how many a grief from me hast driven * Nor can I sit or
     stand without Thy hold:
How many many things I cannot count, * Thou sav'st from many many
     and manifold!"

And they also tell a tale of




              THE BLACKSMITH WHO COULD HANDLE FIRE
                         WITHOUT HURT.



It reached the ears of a certain pious man that there abode in
such a town a blacksmith, who could put his hand into the fire
and pull out the iron red-hot, without the flames doing him aught
of hurt.[FN#482] So he set out for the town in question and asked
for the blacksmith; and, when the man was shown to him, he
watched him at work and saw him do as had been reported to him.
He waited till he had made and end of his day's work; then, going
up to him, saluted him with the salam and said, "I would be thy
guest this night." Replied the smith, "With gladness and goodly
gree!" and carried him to his place, where they supped together
and lay down to sleep. The guest watched, but saw no sign in his
host of praying through the night or of special devoutness and
said in his mind, "Haply he hideth himself from me." So he lodged
with him a second and a third night, but found that he did not
exceed the devotions prescribed by the law and custom of the
Prophet and rose but little in the dark hours to pray. At last he
said to him, "O my brother, I have heard of the gift with which
Allah hath favoured thee and have seen the truth of it with mine
eyes. Moreover, I have taken note of thine assiduity in religious
exercises, but find in thee no such piety as distinguisheth those
who work saintly miracles: whence, then, cometh this to thee?" "I
will tell thee," answered the smith, "Know that I was once
passionately enamoured of a slave-girl and ofttimes sued her for
love-liesse, but could not prevail upon her, because she still
held fast by her chastity. Presently there came a year of drought
and hunger and hardship; food failed and there befel a sore
famine. As I was sitting one day at home, somebody knocked at the
door; so I went out and behold, she was standing there; and she
said to me, 'O my brother, I am sorely an-hungered and I lift
mine eyes to thee, beseeching thee to feed me for Allah's sake!'
Quoth I, 'Wottest thou not how I love thee and what I have
suffered for thy sake? Now I will not give thee one bittock of
bread except thou yield thy person to me.' Quoth she, 'Death, but
not disobedience to the Lord!' Then she went away and returned
after two days with the same prayer for food as before. I made
her a like answer, and she entered and sat down in my house being
nigh upon death. I set food before her, whereupon her eyes
brimmed with tears and she cried, 'Give me meat for the love of
Allah, to whom belong Honour and Glory!' But I answered, 'Not so,
by Allah, except thou yield thyself to me.' Quoth she, 'Better is
death to me than the wrath and wreak of Allah the Most Highest;'
and she rose and left the food untouched"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-second Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
man set food before her, the woman said, "Give me meat for the
love of Allah to whom be Honour and Glory!' But I answered, 'Not
so, by Allah, except thou yield to me thy person.' Quoth she,
'Better is death than the wrath and wreak of Allah;' and she rose
and left the food untouched and went away repeating these
couplets, 

'O Thou, the One, whose grace doth all the world embrace; * Thine
     ears have heard, Thine eyes have seen my case!
Privation and distress have dealt me heavy blows; * The woes that
     weary me no utterance can trace.
I am like one athirst who eyes the landscape's eye, * Yet may not
     drink a draught of streams that rail and race.
My flesh would tempt me by the sight of savoury food * Whose joys
     shall pass away and pangs maintain their place.'

She then disappeared for two days, when she again came and
knocked at the door; so I went out to her, and lo! hunger had
taken away her voice; but, after a rest she said, 'O my brother,
I am worn out with want and know not what to do, for I cannot
show my face to any man but to thee. Say, wilt thou feed me for
the love of Allah Almighty?' But I answered, 'Not so, except thou
yield to me thy person.' And she entered my house and sat down.
Now I had no food ready; but, when the meat was dressed and I
laid it in a saucer, behold, the grace of Almighty Allah entered
into me and I said to myself, 'Out on thee! This woman, weak of
wit and faith, hath refrained from food till she can no longer,
for stress of hunger; and, while she refuseth time after time,
thou canst not forbear from disobedience to the Lord!' And I
said, 'O my God, I repent to Thee of that which my flesh
purposed!' Then I took the food and carrying it to her, said,
'Eat, for no harm shall betide thee: this is for the love of
Allah, to whom belong Honour and Glory!' Then she raised her eyes
to heaven and said, 'O my God, if this man say sooth, I pray Thee
forbid fire to harm him in this world and the next, for Thou over
all things art Omnipotent and Prevalent in answering the prayer
of the penitent!' Then I left her and went to put out the fire in
the brasier.[FN#483] Now the season was winter and the weather
cold, and a live coal fell on my body: but by the decree of Allah
(to whom be Honour and Glory!) I felt no pain and it became my
conviction that her prayer had been answered. So I took the coal
in my hand, and it burnt me not; and going in to her, I said, 'Be
of good cheer, for Allah hath granted thy prayer!'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. 

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-third Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
blacksmith continued: "So I went in to her and said, 'Be of good
cheer, for Allah hath granted thy prayer!' Then she dropped the
morsel from her hand and said, 'O my God, now that Thou hast
shown me my desire of him and hast granted me my prayer for him,
take Thou my soul, for Thou over all things art Almighty!' And
straightway He took her soul to Him, the mercy of Allah be upon
her!" And the tongue of the case extemporised and spake on this
theme, 

"She prayed: the Lord of grace her prayer obeyed; * And spared
     the sinner, who for sin had prayed:
He showed her all she prayed Him to grant; * And Death (as prayed
     she) her portion made:
Unto his door she came and prayed for food, * And sued his ruth
     for what her misery made:
He leant to error following his lusts, * And hoped to enjoy her
     as her wants persuade;
But he knew little of what Allah willed; * Nor was Repentance,
     though unsought, denayed.
Fate comes to him who flies from Fate, O Lord, * And lot and
     daily bread by Thee are weighed."

And they also tell of



             THE DEVOTEE TO WHOM ALLAH GAVE A CLOUD
               FOR SERVICE AND THE DEVOUT KING. 



There was once, among the children of Israel, a man of the
devout, for piety acclaimed and for continence and asceticism
enfamed, whose prayers were ever granted and who by supplication
obtained whatso he wanted; and he was a wanderer in the mountains
and was used to pass the night in worship. Now Almighty Allah had
subjected to him a cloud which travelled with him wherever he
went, and poured on him its water-treasures in abundance that he
might make his ablutions and drink. After a long time when things
were thus, his fervour somewhat abated, whereupon Allah took the
cloud away from him and ceased to answer his prayers. On this
account, great was his grief and long was his woe, and he ceased
not to regret the time of grace and the miracle vouchsafed to him
and to lament and bewail and bemoan himself, till he saw in a
dream one who said to him, "An thou wouldest have Allah restore
to thee thy cloud, seek out a certain King, in such a town, and
beg him to pray for thee: so will Allah (be He extolled and
exalted!) give thee back thy cloud and bespread it over thee by
virtue of his pious prayers." And he began repeating these
couplets, 

"Wend to that pious prayerful Emir, * Who can with gladness thy
     condition cheer;
An he pray Allah, thou shalt win thy wish; * And heavy rain shall
     drop from welkin clear.
He stands all Kings above in potent worth; * Nor to compare with
     him doth aught appear:
Near him thou soon shalt hap upon thy want, * And see all joy and
     gladness draw thee near:
Then cut the wolds and wilds unfounted till * The goal thou goest
     for anigh shalt speer!"

So the hermit set out for the town named to him in the dream;
and, coming thither after long travel, enquired for the King's
palace which was duly shown to him. And behold, at the gate he
found a slave-officer sitting on a great chair and clad in
gorgeous gear; so he stood to him and saluted him; and he
returned his salam and asked him, "What is thy business?"
Answered the devotee, "I am a wronged man, and come to submit my
case to the King." Quoth the officer, "Thou hast no access to him
this day; for he hath appointed unto petitioners and enquirers
one day in every seven" (naming the day), "on which they may go
in to him; so wend thy ways in welfare till then." The hermit was
vexed with the King for thus veiling himself from the folk and
said in thought, "How shall this man be a saint of the saints of
Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!) and he on this wise?"
Then he went away and awaited the appointed day. "Now" (quoth
he)"when it came, I repaired to the palace, where I found a great
number of folk at the gate, expecting admission; and I stood with
them, till there came out a Wazir robed in gorgeous raiment and
attended by guards and slaves, who said, 'Let those, who have
petitions to present, enter.' So I entered with the rest and
found the King seated facing his officers and grandees who were
ranged according to their several ranks and degrees. The Wazir
took up his post and brought forward the petitioners, one by one,
till it came to my turn, when the King looked on me and said,
'Welcome to the 'Lord of the Cloud'! Sit thee down till I make
leisure for thee.' I was confounded at his words and confessed
his dignity and superiority; and, when the King had answered the
petitioners and had made an end with them, he rose and dismissed
his Wazirs and Grandees; then, taking my hand he led me to the
door of the private palace, where we found a black slave,
splendidly arrayed, with helm on head, and on his right hand and
his left, bows and coats of mail. He rose to the King; and,
hastening to obey his orders and forestall his wishes, opened the
door. We went in, hand in hand, till we came to a low wicket,
which the King himself opened and led me into a ruinous place of
frightful desolation and thence passed into a chamber, wherein
was naught but a prayer-carpet, an ewer for ablution and some
mats of palm-leaves. Here the King doffed his royal robes and
donned a coarse gown of white wool and a conical bonnet of felt.
Then he sat down and making me sit, called out to his wife, 'Ho,
such an one!' and she answered from within saying, 'Here am I.'
Quoth he, 'Knowest thou who is our guest to-day?' Replied she,
'Yes, it is the Lord of the Cloud.' The King said, 'Come forth:
it mattereth not for him.' And behold, there entered a woman, as
she were a vision, with a face that beamed like the new moon; and
she wore a gown and veil of wool."-And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

    When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that 'when the
King called to his wife, she came forth from the inner room; and
her face beamed like the new moon; and she wore a gown and a veil
of wool. Then said the King, 'O my brother, dost thou desire to
hear our story or that we should pray for thee and dismiss thee?'
Answered the hermit; 'Nay, I wish to hear the tale of you twain,
for that to me were preferable.' Said the King, 'My forefathers
handed down the throne, one to the other, and it descended from
great one to great one, in unbroken succession, till the last
died and it came to me. Now Allah had made this hateful to me,
for I would fain have gone awandering over earth and left the
folk to their own affairs; but I feared lest they should fall
into confusion and anarchy and misgovernment so as to swerve from
divine law, and the union of the Faith be broken up. Wherefore,
abandoning my own plans, I took the kingship and appointed to
every head of them a regular stipend; and donned the royal robes;
and posted slave-officers at the doors, as a terror to the
dishonest and for the defence of honest folk and the maintenance
of law and limitations. Now when free of this, I entered this
place and, doffing my royal habit, donned these clothes thou
seest; and this my cousin, the daughter of my father's brother,
hath agreed with me to renounce the world and helpeth me to serve
the Lord. So we are wont to weave these palm-leaves and earn,
during the day, a wherewithal to break our fast at nightfall; and
we have lived on this wise nigh upon forty years. Abide thou with
us (so Allah have mercy on thee!) till we sell our mats; and thou
shalt sup and sleep with us this night and on the morrow wend thy
ways with that thou wishest, Inshallah!' So he tarried with them
till the end of the day, when there came a boy five years old who
took the mats they had made and carrying them to the market, sold
them for a carat;[FN#484] and with this bought bread and beans
and returned with them to the King. The hermit broke his fast and
lay down to sleep with them; but in the middle of the night they
both arose and fell to praying and weeping. When daybreak was
near, the King said, "O my God, this Thy servant beseecheth Thee
to return him his cloud; and to do this Thou art able; so, O my
God, let him see his prayer granted and restore him his cloud."
The Queen amen'd to his orisons and behold, the cloud grew up in
the sky; whereupon the King gave the hermit joy and the man took
leave of them and went away, the cloud companying him as of old.
And whatsoever he required of Allah after this, in the names of
the pious King and Queen, He granted it without fail and the man
made thereon these couplets,

"My Lord hath servants fain of piety; * Hearts in the Wisdom-
    garden ranging free:
Their bodies' lusts at peace, and motionless * For breasts that
     bide in purest secresy.
Thou seest all silent, awesome of their Lord, * For hidden things
     unseen and seen they see."

And they tell a tale of




             THE MOSLEM CHAMPION AND THE CHRISTIAN
                            DAMSEL. 

The Commander of the Faithful, Omar bin al-Khattab (whom Allah
accept!), once levied for holy war an army of Moslems, to
encounter the foe before Damascus, and they laid close siege to
one of the Christians' strongholds. Now there were amongst the
Moslems two men, brothers, whom Allah had gifted with fire and
bold daring against the enemy; so that the commander of the 
besieged fortress said to his chiefs and braves, "Were but yonder
two Moslems ta'en or slain, I would warrant you against the rest
of their strain." Wherefore they left not to set for them all
manner of toils and snares and ceased not to manoeuvre and lie in
wait and ambush for them, till they took one of them prisoner and
slew the other, who died a martyr. They carried the captive to
the Captain of the fort, who looked at him and said, "Verily, to
kill this man were indeed a pity; but his return to the Moslem
would be a calamity."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
enemy carried their Moslem captive before the Captain of the
fort, the Christian looked at him and said, "Verily to kill this
man were a pity indeed; but his return to the Moslem would be a
calamity. Oh that he might be brought to embrace the Nazarene
Faith and be to us an aid and an arm!" Quoth one of his Patrician
Knights, "O Emir, I will tempt him to abjure his faith, and on
this wise: we know that the Arabs are much addicted to women, and
I have a daughter, a perfect beauty, whom when he sees, he will
be seduced by her." Quoth the Captain, "I give him into thy
charge." So he carried him to his place and clad his daughter in
raiment, such as added to her beauty and loveliness. Then he
brought the Moslem into the room and set before him food and made
the fair girl stand in his presence, as she were a handmaid
obedient to her lord and awaiting his orders that she might do
his bidding. When the Moslem saw the evil sent down upon him, he
commended himself to Allah Almighty and closing his eyes, applied
himself to worship and to reciting the Koran. Now he had a
pleasant voice and a piercing wit; and the Nazarene damsel
presently loved him with passionate love and pined for him with
extreme repine. This lasted seven days, at the end of which she
said to herself, "Would to Heaven he would admit me into the
Faith of Al-Islam!" And the tongue of her case recited these
couplets, 

"Wilt turn thy face from heart that's all thine own, * This heart
     thy ransom and this soul thy wone?
I'm ready home and kin to quit for aye, * And every Faith for
     that of sword[FN#485] disown:
I testify that Allah hath no mate: * This proof is stablished and
     this truth is known.
Haply shall deign He union grant with one * Averse, and hearten
     heart love-overthrown;
For ofttimes door erst shut, is opened wide, * And after evil
     case all good is shown."

At last her patience failed her and her breast was straitened and
she threw herself on the ground before him, saying, "I conjure
thee by thy Faith, that thou give ear to my words!" Asked he,
"What are they?" and she answered, "Expound unto me Al-Islam." So
he expounded to her the tenets of the Faith, and she became a
Moslemah, after which she was circumcised[FN#486] and he taught
her to pray. Then said she to him, "O my brother, I did but
embrace Al-Islam for thy sake and to win thy favours." Quoth he,
"The law of Al-Islam forbiddeth sexual commerce save after a
marriage before two legal witnesses, and a dowry and a guardian
are also requisite. Now I know not where to find witnesses or
friend or parapherne; but, an thou can contrive to bring us out
of this place, I may hope to make the land of Al-Islam, and
pledge myself to thee that none other than thou in all Al-Islam
shall be wife to me." Answered she, "I will manage that"; and,
calling her father and mother, said to them, "Indeed this
Moslem's heart is softened and he longeth to enter the faith, so
I will grant him that which he desireth of my person; but he
saith: 'It befitteth me not to do this in a town where my brother
was slain. Could I but get outside it my heart would be solaced
and I would do that which is wanted of me.' Now there is no harm
in letting me go forth with him to another town, and I will be a
surety to you both and to the Emir for that which ye wish of
him." Therefore her father went to their Captain and told him
this, whereat he joyed with exceeding joy and bade him carry them
forth to a village that she named. So they went out and made the
village where they abode the rest of their day, and when night
fell, they got ready for the march and went their way, even as
saith the poet,

"'The time of parting,' cry they, 'draweth nigh': * 'How oft this
     parting-threat?' I but reply:
I've naught to do but cross the wild and wold * And, mile by
     mile, o'er fountless wastes to fly,
If the beloved seek another land * Sons of the road, whereso they
     wend, wend I.
I make desire direct me to their side, * The guide to show me
     where the way doth lie."

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
prisoner and the lady abode in the village the rest of their day
and, when night fell, made ready for the march and went upon
their way; and travelled all night without stay or delay. The
young Moslem, mounting a swift blood-horse and taking up the
maiden behind him, ceased not devouring the ground till it was
bright morning, when he turned aside with her from the highway
and, alighting, they made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed the
dawn-prayer. Now as they were thus engaged behold, they heard the
clank of swords and clink of bridles and men's voices and tramp
of horse; whereupon he said to her, "Ho, such an one, the
Nazarenes are after us! What shall we do?: the horse is so jaded
and broken down that he cannot stir another step." Exclaimed she,
"Woe to thee! art thou then afraid and affrighted?" "Yes,"
answered he; and she said, "What didst thou tell me of the power
of thy Lord and His readiness to succour those who succour seek?
Come, let us humble ourselves before Him and beseech Him: haply
He shall grant us His succour and endue us with His grace,
extolled and exalted be He!" Quoth he, "By Allah, thou sayest
well!" So they began humbling themselves and supplicating
Almighty Allah and he recited these couplets, 

"Indeed I hourly need thy choicest aid, * And should, though
     crown were placed upon my head:
Thou art my chiefest want, and if my hand * Won what it wisheth,
     all my wants were sped.
Thou hast not anything withholdest Thou; * Like pouring rain Thy
     grace is showered:
I'm shut therefrom by sins of me, yet Thou, * O Clement, deignest
     pardon-light to shed.
O Care-Dispeller, deign dispel my grief! * None can, save Thou,
     dispel a grief so dread."

Whilst he was praying and she was saying, "Amen," and the thunder
of horse-tramp nearing them, lo! the brave heard the voice of his
dead brother, the martyr, speaking and saying, "O my brother,
fear not, nor grieve! for the host whose approach thou hearest is
the host of Allah and His Angels, whom He hath sent to serve as
witnesses to your marriage. Of a truth Allah hath made His Angels
glorify you and He bestoweth on you the meed of the meritorious
and the martyrs; and He hath rolled up the earth for you as it
were a rug so that, by morning, you will be in the mountains of
Al-Medinah. And thou, when thou foregatherest with Omar bin
al-Khattab (of whom Allah accept!) give him my salutation and say
to him: 'Allah abundantly requite thee for Al-Islam, because thou
hast counselled faithfully and hast striven diligently.'"
Thereupon the Angels lifted up their voices in salutation to him
and his bride, saying, "Verily, Almighty Allah appointed her in
marriage to thee two thousand years before the creation of your
father Adam (with whom be peace evermore!)." Then joy and
gladness and peace and happiness came upon the twain; confidence
was confirmed and established was the guidance of the pious pair.
So when dawn appeared, they prayed the accustomed prayer and
fared forward. Now it was the wont of Omar, son of Al-Khattab
(Allah accept him!),  to rise for morning-prayer in the darkness
before dawn and at times he would stand in the prayer-niche with
two men behind him, and begin reciting the Chapter entitled
"Cattle"[FN#487] or that entitled "Women,"[FN#488] whereupon the
sleeper awoke and he who was making his Wuzu-ablution
accomplished it and he who was afar came to prayer; nor had he
made an end of the first bow, ere the mosque was full of folk;
then he would pray his second bow quickly, repeating a short
chapter. But, on that morning he hurried over both first and
second inclinations, repeating in each a short chapter; then,
after the concluding salutation, turning to his companions, he
said to them, "Come, let us fare forth to meet the bride and
bridegroom"; at which they wondered, not understanding his words.
But he went out and they followed him, till they came to the gate
of the city, where they met the young Moslem who, when the day
broke and the standards of Al-Medinah appeared to him, had pushed
forward for the gate closely followed by his bride. There he was
met by Omar who bade make a marriage feast; and the Moslems came
and ate. Then the young Moslem went in unto his bride and
Almighty Allah vouchsafed him children,--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Omar (on
whom be peace!) bade make a marriage-feast; and the Moslems came
and ate. Then the young Moslem went in unto his bride and
Almighty Allah vouchsafed him children, who fought in the Lord's
way and preserved genealogies, for they gloried therein. And how
excellent is what is said on such theme, 

"I saw thee weep before the gates and 'plain, * Whilst only
     curious wight reply would deign:
Hath eye bewitcht thee, or hath evil lot * 'Twixt thee and door
     of friend set bar of bane?
Wake up this day, O wretch, persist in prayer, * Repent as wont
     repent departed men.
Haply shall wash thy sins Forgiveness-showers; * And on thine
     erring head some ruth shall rain:
And prisoner shall escape despite his bonds; * And slave from
     thraldom freedom shall attain."

And they ceased not to be in all solace and delight of life, till
there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of
societies. And a tale is told by Sidi Ibrahim bin
Al-Khawwas[FN#489](on whom be the mercy of Allah!) concerning
himself and




             THE CHRISTIAN KING'S DAUGHTER AND THE
                            MOSLEM.



"My spirit urged me, once upon a time, to go forth into the
country of the Infidels; and I strove with it and struggled to
put away from me this inclination; but it would not be rejected.
So I fared forth and journeyed about the land of the Unbelievers
and traversed it in all its parts; for divine grace enveloped me
and heavenly protection encompassed me, so that I met not a
single Nazarene but he turned away his eyes and drew off from me,
till I came to a certain great city at whose gate I found a
gathering of black slaves, clad in armour and bearing iron maces
in their hands. When they saw me, they rose to their feet and
asked me, 'Art thou a leach?'; and I answered, 'Yes.' Quoth they,
'Come speak to our King,' and carried me before their ruler, who
was a handsome personage of majestic presence. When I stood
before him, he looked at me and said, 'Art a physician, thou?'
'Yes,' quoth I; and quoth he to his officers, 'Carry him to her,
and acquaint him with the condition before he enter.' So they
took me out and said to me, 'Know that the King hath a daughter,
and she is stricken with a sore disease, which no doctor hath
been able to cure: and no leach goeth in to her and treateth,
without healing her, but the King putteth him to death. So
bethink thee what thou seest fitting to do.' I replied, 'The King
drove me to her; so carry me to her.' Thereupon they brought me
to her door and knocked; and behold, I heard her cry out from
within, saying, 'Admit to me the physician, lord of the wondrous
secret!' And she began reciting, 

'Open the door! the leach now draweth near; * And in my soul a
     wondrous secret speer:
How many of the near far distant are![FN#490] * How many distant
     far are nearest near!
I was in strangerhood amidst you all: * But willed the
     Truth[FN#491] my solace should appear.
Joined us the potent bonds of Faith and Creed; * We met as
     dearest fere greets dearest fere:
He sued for interview whenas pursued * The spy, and blamed us
     envy's jibe and jeer:
Then leave your chiding and from blame desist, * For fie upon
     you! not a word I'll hear.
I care for naught that disappears and fleets; * My care's for
     Things nor fleet nor disappear.'

And lo! a Shaykh, a very old man, opened the door in haste and
said to me, 'Enter.' So I entered and found myself in a chamber
strewn with sweet-scented herbs and with a curtain drawn across
one corner, from behind which came a sound of groaning and grame,
weak as from an emaciated frame. I sat down before the curtain
and was about to offer my salam when I bethought me of his words
(whom Allah save and assain!), 'Accost not a Jew nor a Christian
with the salam salutation;[FN#492] and, when ye meet them in the
way, constrain them to the straitest part thereof.' So I withheld
my salutation, but she cried out from behind the curtain, saying,
'Where is the salutation of Unity and Indivisibility, O Khawwas?'
I was astonished at her speech and asked, 'How knowest thou me?';
whereto she answered, 'When the heart and thoughts are whole, the
tongue speaketh eloquently from the secret recesses of the soul.
I begged Him yesterday to send me one of His saints, at whose
hands I might have deliverance, and behold, it was cried to me
from the dark places of my house, 'Grieve not; for we soon will
send thee Ibrahim the Basket-maker.' Then I asked her, 'What of
thee?' and she answered, 'It is now four years since there
appeared to me the Manifest Truth, and He is the Relator and the
Ally, and the Uniter and the Sitter-by; whereupon my folk looked
askance upon me with an evil eye and taxed me with insanity and
suspected me of depravity, and there came not in to me doctor but
terrified me, nor visitor but confounded me.' Quoth I, 'And who
led thee to the knowledge of what thou wottest?' Quoth she, 'The
manifest signs and visible portents of Allah; and, when the path
is patent to thee, thou espiest with thine own eyes both proof
and prover.' Now whilst we were talking, behold, in came the old
man appointed to guard her and said, 'What doth thy doctor?'; and
she replied, 'He knoweth the hurt and hath hit upon the
healing.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

    When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when the
Shaykh, her guardian, went in to her he said, 'What doth thy
doctor?'; and she replied, 'He knoweth the hurt and hath hit upon
the healing.' Hereupon he manifested joy and gladness and
accosted me with a cheerful countenance, then went and told the
King, who enjoined to treat me with all honour and regard. So I
visited her daily for seven days, at the end of which time she
said to me, 'O Abu Ishak, when shall be our flight to the land of
Al-Islam?' 'How canst thou go forth,' replied I, 'and who would
dare to aid thee?' Rejoined she, 'He who sent thee to me, driving
thee as it were;' and I observed, 'Thou sayest sooth.' So when
the morrow dawned, we fared forth by the city-gate and all eyes
were veiled from us, by commandment of Him who when He desireth
aught, saith to it, 'Be,' and it becometh;[FN#493] so that I
journeyed with her in safety to Meccah, where she made a home
hard by the Holy House of Allah and lived seven years; till the
appointed day of her death. The earth of Meccah was her tomb, and
never saw I any more steadfast in prayer and fasting than she;
Allah send down upon her His mercies and have compassion on him
who saith, 

'When they to me had brought the leach (and surely showed *
     The signs of flowing tears and pining malady),
The face-veil he withdrew from me, and 'neath it naught *
     Save breath of one unsouled, unbodied, could he see.
Quoth he, 'This be a sickness Love alone shall cure; *
     Love hath a secret from all guess of man wide free.'
Quoth they, 'An folk ignore what here there be with him *
     Nature of ill and eke its symptomology,
How then shall medicine work a cure?' At this quoth I *
     'Leave me alone; I have no guessing specialty.'"

And they tell a tale of




           THE PROPHET AND THE JUSTICE OF PROVIDENCE.



A certain Prophet[FN#494] made his home for worship on a lofty
mountain, at whose foot was a spring of running water, and he was
wont to sit by day on the summit, that no man might see him,
calling upon the name of Allah the Most Highest and watching
those who frequented the spring. One day, as he sat looking upon
the fountain, behold, he espied a horseman who came up and
dismounted thereby and taking a bag from his neck, set it down
beside him, after which he drank of the water and rested awhile,
then he rode away, leaving behind him the bag which contained
gold pieces. Presently up came another man to drink of the
spring, who saw the bag and finding it full of money took it up;
then, after satisfying his thirst, he made off with it in safety.
A little after came a woodcutter wight with a heavy load of fuel
on his back, and sat down by the spring to drink, when lo! back
came the first horseman in great trouble and asked him, "Where is
the bag which was here?" and when he answered, "I know nothing of
it," the rider drew his sword and smote him and slew him. Then he
searched his clothes, but found naught; so he left him and wended
his ways. Now when the Prophet saw this, he said, "O Lord, one
man hath taken a thousand dinars and another man hath been slain
unjustly." But Allah answered him, saying, "Busy thyself with thy
devotions, for the ordinance of the universe is none of thine
affair. The father of this horseman had violently despoiled of a
thousand dinars the father of the second horseman; so I gave the
son possession of his sire's money. As for the woodcutter, he had
slain the horseman's father, wherefore I enabled the son to
obtain retribution for himself." Then cried the Prophet, "There
is none other god than Thou! Glory be to Thee only! Verily, Thou
art the Knower of Secrets."[FN#495]--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prophet was bidden by inspiration of Allah to busy himself with
his devotions and learned the truth of the case, he cried, "There
is none other god but Thou! Glory be to Thee only! Verily, Thou
and Thou alone wottest hidden things." Furthermore, one of the
poets hath made these verses on the matter, 

"The Prophet saw whatever eyes could see, * And fain of other
     things enquired he;
And, when his eyes saw things misunderstood, * Quoth he, 'O Lord,
     this slain from sin was free.
This one hath won him wealth withouten work; * Albe appeared he
     garbed in penury.
And that in joy of life was slain, although * O man's Creator
     free of sin he be.'
God answered ''Twas his father's good thou saw'st * Him take; by
     heirship not by roguery;
Yon woodman too that horseman's sire had slain; * Whose son
     avenged him with just victory:
Put off, O slave of Me, this thought for I * In men have set
     mysterious secrecy!
Bow to Our Law and humble thee, and learn * For good and evil
     issues Our decree.'"[FN#496]

And a certain pious man hath told us the tale of




            THE FERRYMAN OF THE NILE AND THE HERMIT.



"I was once a ferryman on the Nile and used to ply between the
eastern and the western banks. Now one day, as I sat in my boat,
there came up to me an old man of a bright and beaming
countenance, who saluted me and I returned his greeting; and he
said to me, 'Wilt thou ferry me over for the love of Allah
Almighty?' I answered, 'Yes,' and he continued, 'Wilt thou
moreover give me food for Allah's sake?'; to which again I
answered, 'With all my heart.' So he entered the boat and I rowed
him over to the eastern side, remarking that he was clad in a
patched gown and carried a gourd-bottle and a staff. When he was
about to land, he said to me, 'I desire to lay on thee a heavy
trust.' Quoth I, 'What is it?' Quoth he, 'It hath been revealed
to me that my end is nearhand and that to-morrow about noon thou
wilt come and find me dead under yonder tree. Wash me and wrap me
in the shroud thou wilt see under my head and after thou hast
prayed over me, bury me in this sandy ground and take my gown and
gourd and staff, which do thou deliver to one who shall come and
demand them of thee.' I marvelled at his words, and I slept
there. On the morrow I awaited till noon the event he had
announced, and then I forgot what he had said till near the hour
of afternoon-prayer, when I remembered it and hastening to the
appointed place, found him under the tree, dead, with a new
shroud under his head, exhaling a fragrance of musk. So I washed
him and shrouded him and prayed over him, then dug a hole in the
sand and buried him, after I had taken his ragged gown and bottle
and staff, with which I crossed the Nile to the western side and
there nighted. As soon as morning dawned and the city gate
opened, I sighted a young man known to me as a loose fellow, clad
in fine clothes and his hands stained with Henna, who said to me,
'Art thou not such an one?' 'Yes,' answered I; and he said, 'Give
me the trust.' Quoth I, 'What is that?' Quoth he, 'The gown, the
gourd and the staff.' I asked him, 'Who told thee of them?' and
he answered, 'I know nothing save that I spent yesternight at the
wedding of one of my friends singing and carousing till daylight,
when I lay me down to sleep and take my rest; and behold, there
stood by me a personage who said, 'Verily Allah Almighty hath
taken such a saint to Himself and hath appointed thee to fill his
place; so go thou to a certain person (naming the ferryman), and
take of him the dead man's gown and bottle and staff, for he left
them with him for thee.' So I brought them out and gave them to
him; whereupon he doffed his clothes and, donning the gown, went
his way and left me.[FN#497] And when the glooms closed around
me, I fell a-weeping; but, that night, while sleeping I saw the
Lord of Holiness (glorified and exalted be He!) in a dream
saying, 'O my servant, is it grievous to thee that I have granted
to one of My servants to return to Me? Indeed, this is of My
bounty, that I vouchsafe to whom I will, for I over all things am
Almighty.' So I repeated these couplets, 

'Lover with loved[FN#498] loseth will and aim! * All choice (an
     couldst thou know) were sinful shame.
Or grant He favour and with union grace, * Or from thee turn
     away, He hath no blame.
An from such turning thou no joy enjoy * Depart! the place for
     thee no place became.
Or canst His near discern not from His far? * Then Love's in vain
     and thou'rt a-rear and lame.
If pine for Thee afflict my sprite, or men * Hale me to death,
     the rein Thy hand shall claim!
So turn Thee to or fro, to me 'tis one; * What Thou ordainest
     none shall dare defame:
My love hath naught of aim but Thine approof * And if Thou say we
     part I say the same.'"

And of the tales they tell is one concerning




            THE ISLAND KING AND THE PIOUS ISRAELITE.



There was once a notable of the Children of Israel, a man of
wealth who had a pious and blessed son. When his last hour drew
nigh, his son sat down at his head and said to him, "O my lord,
give me an injunction." Quoth the father, "O dear son, I charge
thee, swear not by Allah or truly or falsely." Then he died and
certain lewd fellows of the Children of Israel heard of the
charge he had laid on his son and began coming to the latter and
saying, "Thy father had such and such monies of mine, and thou
knowest it; so give me what was entrusted to him or else make
oath that there was no trust." The good son would not disobey his
sire's injunction, so gave them all they claimed; and they ceased
not to deal thus with him, till his wealth was spent and he fell
into straitest predicament. Now the young man had a pious and
blessed wife, who had borne him two little sons; so he said to
her, "The folk have multiplied their demands on me and, while I
had the wherewithal to free myself of debt, I rendered it freely;
but naught is now left us, and if others make demands upon me, we
shall be in absolute distress, I and thou; our best way were to
save ourselves by fleeing to some place, where none knoweth us,
and earn our bread among the lower of the folk." Accordingly, he
took ship with her and his two children, knowing not whither he
should wend; but, "When Allah judgeth, there is none to reverse
His judgment;"[FN#499] and quoth the tongue of the case, 

"O flier from thy home when foes affright! * Whom led to weal and
     happiness such flight,
Grudge not this exile when he flees abroad * Where he on wealth
     and welfare may alight.
An pearls for ever did abide in shell, * The kingly crown they
     ne'er had deckt and dight."

The ship was wrecked, yet the man saved himself on a plank and
his wife and children also saved themselves, but on other planks.
The waves separated them and the wife was 