cast up in one country
and one of the boys in another. The second son was picked up by a
ship, and the surges threw the father on a desert island, where
he landed and made the Wuzu-ablution. Then he called the
prayer-call,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Eightieth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
man landed upon the island, he made the Wuzu-ablution to free
himself from the impurities of the sea and called the call to
prayer and stood up to his devotions, when, behold, there came
forth of the sea, creatures of various kinds and prayed with him.
When he had finished, he went up to a tree and stayed his hunger
with its fruits; after which he found a spring of water and drank
thereof and praised Allah, to whom be honour and glory! He abode
thus three days and whenever he stood up to pray, the
sea-creatures came out and prayed in the same manner as he
prayed. Now after the third day, he heard a voice crying aloud
and saying, "O thou just man, and pious, who didst so honour thy
father and revere the decrees of thy Lord, grieve not, for Allah
(be He extolled and exalted!) shall restore to thee all which
left thy hand. In this isle are hoards and monies and things of
price which the Almighty willeth thou shalt inherit, and they are
in such a part of this place. So bring thou them to light; and
verily, we will send ships unto thee; and do thou bestow charity
on the folk and bid them to thee." So he sought out that place,
and the Lord discovered to him the treasures in question. Then
ships began resorting to him, and he gave abundant largesse to
the crews, saying to them, "Be sure ye direct the folk unto me
and I will give them such and such a thing and appoint to them
this and that." Accordingly, there came folk from all parts and
places, nor had ten years passed over him ere the island was
peopled and the man became its King.[FN#500] No one came to him
but he entreated him with munificence, and his name was noised
abroad, through the length and breadth of the earth. Now his
elder son had fallen into the hands of a man who reared him and
taught him polite accomplishments; and, in like manner, the
younger was adopted by one who gave him a good education and
brought him up in the ways of merchants. The wife also happened
upon a trader who entrusted to her his property and made a
covenant with her that he would not deal dishonestly by her, but
would aid her to obey Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!);
and he used to make her the companion of his voyages and his
travels. Now the elder son heard the report of the King and
resolved to visit him, without knowing who he was; so he went to
him and was well received by the King, who made him his
secretary. Presently the other son heard of the King's piety and
justice and was also taken into his service as a steward. Then
the brothers abode awhile, neither knowing the other, till it
chanced that the merchant, in whose home was their mother, also
hearing of the King's righteous and generous dealing with the
lieges, freighted a ship with rich stuffs and other excellent
produce of the land, and taking the woman with him, set sail for
the island. He made it in due course and landing, presented
himself with his gift before the King; who rejoiced therein with
exceeding joy and ordered him a splendid return-present. Now,
there were, among the gifts, certain aromatic roots of which he
would have the merchant acquaint him with the names and uses; so
he said to him, "Abide with us this night."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-first Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
King said, "Abide with us this night," the merchant replied, "We
have in the ship one to whom I have promised to entrust the care
of her to none save myself; and the same is a holy woman whose
prayers have brought me weal and I have felt the blessing of her
counsels." Rejoined the King, "I will send her some trusty men,
who shall pass the night in the ship and guard her and all that
is with her." The merchant agreed to this and abode with the
King, who called his secretary and steward and said to them, "Go
and pass the night in this man's ship and keep it safe,
Inshallah!" So they went up into the ship and seating themselves,
this on the poop and that on the bow, passed a part of the night
in repeating the names of Allah (to whom belong Majesty and
Might!). Then quoth one to the other, "Ho, such an one! The King
bade us keep watch and I fear lest sleep overtake us; so, come,
let us discourse of stories of fortune and of the good we have
seen and the trials of life." Quoth the other, "O my brother, as
for my trials Fate parted me from my mother and a brother of
mine, whose name was even as thine; and the cause of our parting
was this. My father took ship with us from such a place, and the
winds rose against us and were contrary, so that the ship was
wrecked and Allah broke our fair companionship." Hearing this the
first asked, "What was the name of thy mother, O my brother?";
and the second answered, "So and so." Thereat brother threw
himself upon brother saying, "By Allah, thou art my very
brother!" And each fell to telling the other what had befallen
him in his youth, whilst the mother heard all they said, but held
her peace and in patience possessed her soul. Now when it was
morning, one said to the other, "Come, brother, let us go to my
lodging and talk there;" and the other said, "'Tis well." So they
went away and presently, the merchant came back and finding the
woman in great trouble, said to her, "What hath befallen thee and
why this concern?" Quoth she, "Thou sentest to me yesternight men
who tempted me to evil, and I have been in sore annoy with them."
At this, he was wroth and, repairing to the King, reported the
conduct of his two trusty wights. The King summoned the twain
forthwith, as he loved them for their fidelity and piety; and,
sending for the woman, that he might hear from her own lips what
she had to say against them, thus bespake her, "O woman, what
hath betided thee from these two men in whom I trust?" She
replied, "O King, I conjure thee by the Almighty, the Bountiful
One, the Lord of the Empyrean, bid them repeat the words they
spoke yesternight." So he said to them, "Say what ye said and
conceal naught thereof." Accordingly, they repeated their talk,
and lo! the King rising from his throne, gave a great cry and
threw himself upon them, embracing them and saying, "By Allah, ye
are my very sons!" Therewith the woman unveiled her face and
said, "And by Allah, I am their very mother." So they were united
and abode in all solace of life and its delight till death parted
them; and so glory be to Him who delivereth His servant when he
restoreth to Him, and disappointeth not his hope in Him and his
trust! And how well saith the poet on the subject,

"Each thing of things hath his appointed tide * When 'tis, O
     brother, granted or denied.
Repine not an affliction hit thee hard; * For woe and welfare aye
     conjoint abide:
How oft shall woman see all griefs surround * Yet feel a joyance
     thrill what lies inside!
How many a wretch, on whom the eyes of folk * Look down, shall
     grace exalt to pomp and pride!
This man is one long suffering grief and woe; * Whom change and
     chance of Time hath sorely tried:
The World divided from what held he dearest, * After long union
     scattered far and wide;
But deigned his Lord unite them all again, * And in the Lord is
     every good descried.
Glory to Him whose Providence rules all * Living, as surest
     proofs for us decide.
Near is the Near One; but no wisdom clearer * Shows him, nor
     distant wayfare brings Him nearer."

And this tale is told of




                ABU AL-HASAN AND ABU JA'AFAR THE
                         LEPER.[FN#501]



"I had been many times to Meccah (Allah increase its honour!) and
the folk used to follow me for my knowledge of the road and
remembrance of the water-stations. It happened one year that I
was minded to make the pilgrimage to the Holy House and
visitation of the Tomb of His Prophet (on whom be blessing and
peace!) and I said in myself, 'I well know the way and will fare
alone.' So I set out and journeyed till I came to
Al-Kadisiyah[FN#502] and, entering the mosque there, saw a man
suffering from black leprosy seated in the prayer-niche. Quoth he
on seeing me, 'O Abu al-Hasan, I crave thy company to Meccah.'
Quoth I to myself, 'I fled from all my companions, and how shall
I company with lepers?' So I said to him, 'I will bear no man
company'; and he was silent at my words. Next day I walked on
alone, till I came to Al-Akabah,[FN#503] where I entered the
mosque and found the leper seated in the prayer-niche. So I said
to myself, 'Glory be to Allah! how hath this fellow preceded me
hither?' But he raised his head to me and said with a smile, 'O
Abu al-Hasan, He doth for the weak that which surpriseth the
strong!' I passed that night confounded at what I had seen; and,
as soon as morning dawned, set out again by myself; but when I
came to Arafat[FN#504] and entered the mosque, behold, there was
the leper seated in the niche! So I threw myself upon him and
kissing his feet said, 'O my lord, I crave thy company.' But he
answered, 'This may in no way be.' Then I began weeping and
wailing at the loss of his converse, when he said, 'Spare thy
tears which will avail thee naught!'"-And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-second Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
al-Hasan continued: "Now when I saw the leper-man seated in the
prayer-niche, I threw myself upon him and said, 'O my lord, I
crave thy company;' and fell to kissing his feet. But he
answered, 'This may in no way be!' Then I began weeping and
wailing at the loss of his company when he said, 'Spare thy tears
which will avail thee naught!'; and he recited these couplets, 

'Why dost thou weep when I depart and thou didst parting claim; *
     And cravest union when we ne'er shall reunite the same?
Thou lookedest on nothing save my weakness and disease; * And
     saidst 'Nor goes nor comes, or night or day, this sickly
     frame.
Seest not how Allah (glorified His glory ever be!) * Deigneth to
     grant His slave's petition wherewithal he came.
If I, to eyes of men be that and only that they see, * And this
     my body show itself so full of grief and grame,
And have I naught of food that shall supply me to the place *
     Where crowds unto my Lord resort impelled by single aim,
I have a high Creating Lord whose mercies aye are hid; * A Lord
     who hath none equal and no fear is known to Him.
So fare thee safe and leave me lone in strangerhood to wone * For
     He, the only One, consoles my loneliness so lone.'

Accordingly, I left him; but every station I came to, I found he
had foregone me, till I reached Al-Medinah, where I lost sight of
him and could hear no tidings of him. Here I met Abu Yazid
al-Bustami and Abu Bakr al-Shibli and a number of other Shaykhs
and learned men, to whom with many complaints, I told my case and
they said, 'Heaven forbid that thou shouldst gain his company
after this! He was Abu Ja'afar the leper, in whose name folk at
all times pray for rain and by whose blessing-prayers their end
attain.' When I heard their words, my desire for his company
redoubled and I implored the Almighty to reunite me with him.
Whilst I was standing on Arafat,[FN#505] one pulled me from
behind, so I turned and behold, it was my man. At this sight I
cried out with a loud cry and fell down in a fainting fit; but,
when I came to myself he had disappeared from my sight. This
increased my yearning for him and the ceremonies were tedious to
me and I prayed Almighty Allah to give me sight of him; nor was
it but a few days after, when lo! one pulled me from behind, and
I turned and it was he again. Thereupon he said, 'Come, I conjure
thee and ask thy want of me.' So I begged him to pray for me
three prayers; first, that Allah would make me love poverty;
secondly, that I might never lie down at night upon provision
assured to me; and thirdly, that He would vouchsafe me to look
upon His bountiful Face. So he prayed for me as I wished, and
departed from me. And indeed Allah hath granted me what the
devotee asked in prayer: to begin with He hath made me so love
poverty that, by the Almighty! there is naught in the world
dearer to me than it, and secondly since such a year, I have
never lain down to sleep upon assured provision; withal hath He
never let me lack aught. As for the third prayer, I trust that He
will vouchsafe me that also, even as He hath granted the two
precedent, for right Bountiful and Beneficent is His Godhead, and
Allah have mercy on him who said:[FN#506]-

Garb of Fakir, renouncement, lowliness;
His robe of tatters and of rags his dress;

And pallor ornamenting brow as though
'Twere wanness such as waning crescents show.

Wasted him prayer a-through the long-lived night,
And flooding tears ne'er cease to dim his sight.

Memory of Him shall cheer his lonely room:
Th' Almighty nearest is in nightly gloom.

The Refuge helpeth such Fakir in need;
Help e'en the cattle and the winged breed:

Allah for sake of him of wrath is fain,
And for the grace of him shall fall the rain;

And if he pray one day for plague to stay,
'Twill stay, and 'bate man's wrong and tyrants slay.

While folk are sad, afflicted one and each,
He in his mercy's rich, the generous leach:

Bright shines his brow; an thou regard his face
Thy heart illumined shines by light of grace.

O thou who shunnest souls of worth innate
Departs thee (woe to thee!) of sins the weight.

Thou thinkest to overtake them, while thou bearest
Follies, which slay thee whatso way thou farest.

Didst wot their worth thou hadst all honour showed,
And tears in streamlets from thine eyes had flowed.

To catarrh-troubled men flowers lack their smell;
And brokers ken for how much clothes can sell;

So haste and with thy Lord reunion sue,
And haply Fate shall lend thee aidance due,

Rest from rejection and estrangement-stress,
And Joy thy wish and will shall choicely bless.

His court wide open for the suer is dight:--
One, very God, the Lord, th' Almighty might.'"

And they also tell a tale of




               THE QUEEN OF THE SERPENTS.[FN#507]



There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, a Grecian sage called Daniel, who had disciples and
scholars and the wise men of Greece were obedient to his bidding
and relied upon his learning. Withal had Allah denied him a man
child. One night, as he lay musing and weeping over the lack of a
son who might inherit his lore, he bethought him that Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!) heareth the prayer of those who
resort to Him and that there is no doorkeeper at the door of His
bounties and that He favoureth whom He will without compt and
sendeth no supplicant empty away; nay He filleth their hands with
favours and benefits. So he besought the Almighty, the Bountiful,
to vouchsafe him a son to succeed him, and to endow him
abundantly with His beneficence. Then he returned home and
carnally knew his wife who conceived by him the same night.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Grecian
sage returned home and knew his wife who conceived by him the
same night. A few days after this he took ship for a certain
place, but the ship was wrecked and he saved himself on one of
her planks, while only five leaves remained to him of all the
books he had. When he returned home, he laid the five leaves in a
box and locking it, gave the key to his wife (who then showed big
with child), and said to her, "Know that my decease is at hand
and that the time draweth nigh for my translation from this abode
temporal to the home which is eternal. Now thou art with child
and after my death wilt haply bear a son: if this be so, name him
Hasib Karim al-Din[FN#508] and rear him with the best of rearing.
When the boy shall grow up and shall say to thee, 'What
inheritance did my father leave me?'' give him these five leaves,
which when he shall have read and understood, he will be the most
learned man of his time." Then he farewelled her and heaving one
sigh, departed the world and all that is therein--the mercy of
Allah the Most Highest be upon Him! His family and friends wept
over him and washed him and bore him forth in great state and
buried him; after which they wended their ways home. But few days
passed ere his widow bare a handsome boy and named him Hasib
Karim al-Din, as her husband charged her; and immediately after
his birth she summoned the astrologers, who calculated his
ascendants and drawing his horoscope, said to her, "Know, O
woman! that this birth will live many a year; but that will be
after a great peril in the early part of his life, wherefrom can
he escape, he will be given the knowledge of all the exact
sciences." So saying they went their ways. She suckled him two
years,[FN#509] then weaned him, and when he was five years old,
she placed him in a school to learn his book, but he would read
nothing. So she took him from school and set him to learn a
trade; but he would not master any craft and there came no work
from his hands. The mother wept over this and the folk said to
her, "Marry him: haply he will take heart for his wife and learn
him a trade." So she sought out a girl and married him to her;
but, despite marriage and the lapse of time, he remained idle as
before, and would do nothing. One day, some neighbours of hers,
who were woodcutters, came to her and said, "Buy thy son an ass
and cords and an axe and let him go with us to the mountain and
we will all of us cut wood for fuel. The price of the wood shall
be his and ours, and he shall provide thee and his wife with his
share." When she heard this, she joyed with exceeding joy and
bought her son an ass and cords and hatchet; then, carrying him
to the woodcutters, delivered him into their hands and solemnly
committed him to their care. Said they, "Have no concern for the
boy, our Lord will provide for him: he is the son of our Shaykh."
So they carried him to the mountain, where they cut firewood and
loaded their asses therewith; then returned to the city and,
selling what they had cut, spent the monies on their families.
This they did on the next day and the third and ceased not for
some time, till it chanced one day, a violent storm of rain broke
over them, and they took refuge in a great cave till the downfall
should pass away. Now Hasib Karim al-Din went apart from the rest
into a corner of the cavern and sitting down, fell to smiting the
floor with his axe. Presently he noted that the ground sounded
hollow under the hatchet; so he dug there awhile and came to a
round flagstone with a ring in it. When he saw this, he was glad
and called his comrades the woodcutters,--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasib
Karim al-Din saw the flagstone with the ring, he was glad and
called his comrades the woodcutters, who came to him and, finding
it was fact, soon pulled up the stone and discovered under it a
trap-door, which, being opened, showed a cistern full of bees'
honey.[FN#510] Then said they to one another, "This is a large
store and we have nothing for it but to return to the city and
fetch vessels wherein to carry away the honey, and sell it and
divide the price, whilst one of us stands by the cistern, to
guard it from outsiders." Quoth Hasib, "I will stay and keep
watch over it till you bring your pots and pans." So they left
him on guard there and, repairing to the city, fetched vessels,
which they filled with honey and loading their asses therewith,
carried them to the streets and sold the contents. They returned
on the morrow and thus they did several days in succession,
sleeping in the town by night and drawing off the stuff by day,
whilst Hasib abode on guard by it till but little remained, when
they said one to other, "It was Hasib Karim al-Din found the
honey, and tomorrow he will come down to the city and complain
against us and claim the price of it, saying, Twas I found it;'
nor is there escape for us but that we let him down into the
cistern, to bale out the rest of the honey, and leave him there;
so will he die of hunger, and none shall know of him." They all
fell in with this plot as they were making for the place; and,
when they reached it, one said to him, "O Hasib, go down into the
pit and bale out for us the rest of the honey." So he went down
and passed up to them what remained of the honey, after which he
said to them, "Draw me up, for there is nothing left." They made
him no answer; but, loading their asses, went off to the city and
left him alone in the cistern. Thereupon he fell to weeping and
crying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great!" Such was his case; but as regards his
comrades, when they reached the city and sold the honey, they
repaired to Hasib's mother, weeping, and said to her, "May thy
head outlive thy son Hasib!" She asked, "What brought about his
death?" and they answered, "We were cutting wood on the mountain-
top, when there fell on us a heavy downfall of rain and we took
shelter from it in a cavern; and suddenly thy son's ass broke
loose and fled into the valley, and he ran after it, to turn it
back, when there came out upon them a great wolf, who tore thy
son in pieces and ravined the ass." When the mother heard this,
she beat her face and strewed dust on her head and fell to
mourning for her son; and she kept life and soul together only by
the meat and drink which they brought her every day. As for the
woodcutters they opened them shops and became merchants and spent
their lives in eating and drinking and laughing and frolicking.
Meanwhile Hasib Karim al-Din, who ceased not to weep and call for
help, sat down upon the cistern edge when behold, a great
scorpion fell down on him; so he rose and killed it. Then he took
thought and said, "The cistern was full of honey; how came this
scorpion here?" Accordingly he got up and examined the well right
and left, till he found a crevice from which the scorpion had
fallen and saw the light of day shining through it. So he took
out his woodman's knife and enlarged the hole, till it was big as
a window, then he crept through it and, after walking for some
time, came to a vast gallery, which led him to a huge door of
black iron bearing a padlock of silver wherein was a key of gold.
He stole up to the door and, looking through the chink, saw a
great light shining within; so he took the key and, opening the
door, went on for some time, till he came to a large artificial
lake, wherein he caught sight of something that shimmered like
silver. He walked up to it and at last he saw, hard by a hillock
of green jasper and on the hill top, a golden throne studded with
all manner gems,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasib
reached the hillock he found it of green jasper surmounted by a
golden throne studded with all manner gems, round which were set
many stools, some of gold, some of silver and others of leek
green emerald. He clomb the hillock and, counting the stools,
found them twelve thousand in number; then he mounted the throne
which was set on the centre and, seating himself thereon, fell to
wondering at the lake and the stools, and he marvelled till
drowsiness overcame him and he drops asleep. Presently, he was
aroused by a loud snorting and hissing and rustling, so he opened
his eyes; and, sitting up, saw each stool occupied by a huge
serpent, an hundred cubits in length. At this sight, great fear
get hold of him; his spittle dried up for the excess of his dread
and he despaired of life, as all their eyes were blazing like
live coals. Then he turned towards the lake and saw that what he
had taken for shimmering water was a multitude of small snakes,
none knoweth their compt save Allah the Most High. After awhile,
there came up to him a serpent as big as a mule, bearing on its
back a tray of gold, wherein lay another serpent which shone like
crystal and whose face was as that of a woman[FN#511] and who
spake with human speech. And as soon as she was brought up to
Hasib, she saluted him and he returned the salutation. There
upon, one of the serpents seated on the stools came up and,
lifting her off the tray, set her on one of the seats and she
cried out to the other serpents in their language, whereupon they
all fell down from their stools and did her homage. But she
signed to them to sit and they did so. Then she addressed Hasib,
saying, "Have no fear of us, O youth; for I am the Queen of the
Serpents and their Sultanah." When he heard her speak on this
wise, he took heart and she bade the serpents bring him somewhat
of food.[FN#512] So they brought apples and grapes and
pomegranates and pistachio-nuts and filberts and walnuts and
almonds and bananas and set them before him, and the
Queen-serpent said, "Welcome, O youth! What is thy name?"
Answered he, "Hasib Karim al-Din;" and she rejoined, "O Hasib,
eat of these fruits, for we have no other meat and fear thou have
nothing from us at all." Hearing this, he ate his fill and
praised Allah Almighty; and presently they took away the trays
from before him, and the Queen said, "Tell me, O Hasib, whence
thou art and how camest thou hither and what hath befallen thee."
So he told her his story from first to last, the death of his
father; his birth; his being sent to school where he learnt
nothing; his becoming a wood cutter; his finding the honey-
cistern; his being abandoned therein; his killing the scorpion;
his widening the crevice; his finding the iron door and his
coming upon the Queen, and he ended his long tale with saying,
"These be my adventures from beginning to end and only Allah
wotteth what will betide me after all this!" Quoth the Queen,
after listening to his words, "Nothing save good shall betide
thee:"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Serpent-queen had heard his story she said, "Nothing save good
shall betide thee: but I would have thee, O Hasib, abide with me
some time, that I may tell thee my history and acquaint thee with
the wondrous adventures which have happened to me." "I hear and
obey thy hest," answered he; and she began to tell in these
words,




The Adventures of Bulukiya.



"Know thou, O Hasib, there was once in the city of Cairo a King
of the Banu Isra'il, a wise and a pious, who was bent double by
poring over books of learning, and he had a son named Bulukiya.
When he grew old and weak and was nigh upon death, his Grandees
and Officers of state came up to salute him, and he said to them,
'O folk, know that at hand is the hour of my march from this
world to the next, and I have no charge to lay on you, save to
commend to your care my son Bulukiya.' Then said he, 'I testify
that there is no god save the God;' and, heaving one sigh,
departed the world the mercy of Allah be upon him! They laid him
out and washed him and buried him with a procession of great
state. Then they made his son Bulukiya Sultan in his stead; and
he ruled the kingdom justly and the people had peace in his time.
Now it befell one day that he entered his father's treasuries, to
look about him, and coming upon an inner compartment and finding
the semblance of a door, opened it and passed in. And lo! he
found himself in a little closet, wherein stood a column of white
marble, on the top of which was a casket of ebony; he opened this
also and saw therein another casket of gold, containing a book.
He read the book and found in it an account of our lord Mohammed
(whom Allah bless and preserve!) and how he should be sent in the
latter days[FN#513] and be the lord of the first Prophets and the
last. On seeing the personal description Bulukiya's heart was
taken with love of him, so he at once assembled all the notables
of the Children of Israel, the Cohens or diviners, the scribes
and the priests, and acquainted them with the book, reading
portions of it to them and, adding, 'O folk, needs must I bring
my father out of his grave and burn him.' The lieges asked, 'Why
wilt thou burn him?'; and he answered, 'Because he hid this book
from me and imparted it not to me.' Now the old King had
excerpted it from the Torah or Pentateuch and the Books of
Abraham; and had set it in one of his treasuries and concealed it
from all living. Rejoined they, 'O King, thy father is dead; his
body is in the dust and his affair is in the hands of his Lord;
thou shalt not take him forth of his tomb.' So he knew that they
would not suffer him to do this thing by his sire and leaving
them he repaired to his mother, to whom said he, 'O my mother, I
have found, in one of my father's treasuries, a book containing a
description of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!), a prophet
who shall be sent in the latter days; and my heart is captivated
with love of him. Wherefore am I resolved to wander over the
earth, till I foregather with him; else I shall die of longing
for his love.' Then he doffed his clothes and donned an Aba gown
of goat's hair and coarse sandals, saying, 'O my mother, forget
me not in thy prayers.' She wept over him and said, 'What will
become of us after thee?'; but Bulukiya answered, 'I can endure
no longer, and I commit my affair and thine to Allah who is
Almighty.' Then he set out on foot Syria wards without the
knowledge of any of his folk, and coming to the sea board found a
vessel whereon he shipped as one of the crew. They sailed till he
made an island, where Bulukiya landed with the crew, but straying
away from the rest he sat down under a tree and sleep got the
better of him. When he awoke, he sought the ship but found that
she had set sail without him, and in that island he saw serpents
as big as camels and palm trees, which repeated the names of
Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) and blessed Mohammed (whom
the Lord assain and save!), proclaiming the Unity and glorifying
the Glorious; whereat he wondered."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Bulukiya saw the serpents glorifying God and proclaiming the
Unity, he wondered with extreme wonder. When they saw him, they
flocked to him and one of them said to him, 'Who and whence art
thou and whither goest thou. and what is thy name?' Quoth he, 'My
name is Bulukiya; I am of the Children of Israel and, being
distracted for love of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!), I
come in quest of him. But who are ye, O noble creatures?'
Answered they, 'We are of the dwellers in the Jahannam-hell; and
Almighty Allah created us for the punishment of Kafirs.' 'And how
came ye hither?' asked he, and the Serpents answered, 'Know, O
Bulukiya, that Hell[FN#514] of the greatness of her boiling,
breatheth twice a year, expiring in the summer and inspiring in
the winter, and hence the summer heat and winter cold. When she
exhaleth, she casteth us forth of her maw, and we are drawn in
again with her inhaled breath.' Quoth Bulukiya, 'Say me, are
there greater serpents than you in Hell?'; and they said, 'Of a
truth we are cast out with the expired breath but by reason of
our smallness; for in Hell every serpent is so great, that were
the biggest of us to pass over its nose it would not feel
us.[FN#515]' Asked Bulukiya, 'Ye sing the praises of Allah and
invoke blessings on Mohammed, whom the Almighty assain and save!
Whence wot ye of Mohammed?'; and they answered, 'O Bulukiya,
verily his name is written on the gates of Paradise; and, but for
him, Allah had not created the worlds[FN#516] nor Paradise, nor
heaven nor hell nor earth, for He made all things that be, solely
on his account, and hath conjoined his name with His own in every
place; wherefore we love Mohammed, whom Allah bless and
preserve!' Now hearing the serpents' converse did but inflame
Bulukiya's love for Mohammed and yearning for his sight; so he
took leave of them; and, making his way to the sea-shore, found
there a ship made fast to the beach; he embarked therein as a
seaman and sailed nor ceased sailing till he came to another
island. Here he landed and walking about awhile found serpents
great and small, none knoweth their number save Almighty Allah,
and amongst them a white Serpent, clearer than crystal, seated in
a golden tray borne on the back of another serpent as big as an
elephant. Now this, O Hasib, was the Serpent-queen, none other
than myself." Quoth Hasib, "And what answer didst thou make him?"
Quoth she, "Know, O Hasib, that when I saw Bulukiya, I saluted
him with the salam, and he returned my salutation, and I said to
him, 'Who and what art thou and what is thine errand and whence
comest thou and whither goest thou?' Answered he, 'I am of the
Children of Israel; my name is Bulukiya, and I am a wanderer for
the love of Mohammed, whose description I have read in the
revealed scriptures, and of whom I go in search. But what art
thou and what are these serpents about thee?' Quoth I, 'O
Bulukiya, I am the Queen of the Serpents; and when thou shalt
foregather with Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!) bear him
my salutation.' Then Bulukiya took leave of me and journeyed till
he came to the Holy City which is Jerusalem. Now there was in
that stead a man who was deeply versed in all sciences, more
especially in geometry and astronomy and mathematics, as well as
in white magic[FN#517] and Spiritualism; and he had studied the
Pentateuch and the Evangel and the Psalms and the Books of
Abraham. His name was Affan; and he had found in certain of his
books, that whoso should wear the seal ring of our lord Solomon,
men and Jinn and birds and beasts and all created things would be
bound to obey him. Moreover, he had discovered that our lord
Solomon had been buried in a coffin which was miraculously
transported beyond the Seven Seas to the place of burial;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Affan had
found in certain books that none, mortal or spirit, could pluck
the seal ring from the lord Solomon's finger; and that no
navigator could sail his ship upon the Seven Seas over which the
coffin had been carried. Moreover, he had found out by reading
that there was a herb of herbs and that if one express its juice
and anoint therewith his feet, he should walk upon the surface of
any sea that Allah Almighty had created without wetting his
soles, but none could obtain this herb, without he had with him
the Serpent-queen. When Bulukiya arrived at the Holy City, he at
once sat down to do his devotions and worship the Lord; and,
whilst he was so doing, Affan came up and saluted him as a True
Believer. Then seeing him reading the Pentateuch and adoring the
Almighty, he accosted him saying, 'What is thy name, O man; and
whence comest thou and whither goest thou?' He answered, 'My name
is Bulukiya; I am from the city of Cairo and am come forth
wandering in quest of Mohammed, whom Allah bless and preserve!'
Quoth Affan, 'Come with me to my lodging that I may entertain
thee.' 'To hear is to obey,' replied Bulukiya So the devotee took
him by the hand and carried him to his house where he entreated
him with the utmost honour and presentry said to him, 'Tell me
thy history, O my brother, and how thou camest by the knowledge
of Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!) that thy heart hath
been taken with love of him and compelled thee to fare forth and
seek him; and lastly tell me who it was directed thee in this
road.' So he related to him his tale in its entirety; whereupon
Affan, who well nigh lost his wits for wonder, said to him, 'Make
tryst for me with the Queen of the Serpents and I will bring thee
in company with Mohammed, albeit the date of his mission is yet
far distant. We have only to prevail upon the Queen and carry her
in a cage to a certain mountain where the herbs grow; and, as
long as she is with us, the plants as we pass them will parley
with human speech and discover their virtues by the ordinance of
Allah the Most High. For I have found in my books that there is a
certain herb and all who express its juice and anoint therewith
their feet shall walk upon whatsoever sea Almighty Allah hath
made, without wetting sole. When we have found the magical herb,
we will let her go her way; and then will we anoint our feet with
the juice and cross the Seven Seas, till we come to the burial
place of our lord Solomon. Then we will take the ring off his
finger and rule even as he ruled and win all our wishes; we will
enter the Main of Murks[FN#518] and drink of the Water of Life,
and so the Almighty will let us tarry till the End of Time and we
shall foregather with Mohammed, whom Allah bless and preserve!'
Hearing these words Bulukiya replied, 'O Affan, I will make tryst
for thee with the Serpent-queen and at once show thee her abiding
place.' So Affan made him a cage of iron; and, providing himself
with two bowls, one full of wine and the other of milk, took ship
with Bulukiya and sailed till they came to the island, where they
landed and walked upon it. Then Affan set up the cage, in which
he laid a noose and withdrew after placing in it the two bowls;
when he and Bulukiya concealed themselves afar off. Presently, up
came the Queen of the Serpents (that is, myself) and examined the
cage. When she (that is I) smelt the savour of the milk, she came
down from the back of the snake which bore her tray and, entering
the cage, drank up the milk. Then she went to the bowl of wine
and drank of it, whereupon her head became giddy and she slept.
When Affan saw this, he ran up and locking the cage upon her, set
it on his head and made for the ship, he and Bulukiya. After
awhile she awoke and finding herself in a cage of iron on a man's
head and seeing Bulukiya walking beside the bearer, said to him,
'This is the reward of those who do no hurt to the sons of Adam.'
Answered he, 'O Queen, have no fear of us, for we will do thee no
hurt at all. We wish thee only to show us the herb which, when
pounded and squeezed yieldeth a juice, and this rubbed upon the
feet conferreth the power of walking dryshod upon what sea soever
Almighty Allah hath created; and when we have found that, we will
return thee to thy place and let thee wend thy way.' Then Affan
and Bulukiya fared on for the hills where grew the herbs; and, as
they went about with the Queen, each plant they passed began to
speak and avouch its virtues by permission of Allah the Most
High. As they were thus doing and the herbs speaking right and
left, behold, a plant spoke out and said, 'I am the herb ye seek,
and all who gather and crush me and anoint their feet with my
juice, shall fare over what sea soever Allah Almighty hath
created and yet ne'er wet sole.' When Affan heard this, he set
down the cage from his head and, gathering what might suffice
them of the herb, crushed it and filling two vials with the juice
kept them for future use; and with what was left they anointed
their feet. Then they took up the Serpent-queen's cage and
journeyed days and nights, till they reached the island, where
they opened the cage and let out her that is me. When I found
myself at liberty, I asked them what use they would make of the
juice; and they answered, 'We design to anoint our feet and to
cross the Seven Seas to the burial place of our lord
Solomon[FN#519] and take the seal ring from his finger.' Quoth I,
'Far, far is it from your power to possess yourselves of the
ring!' They enquired, 'Wherefore?' and I replied, 'Because
Almighty Allah vouchsafed unto our lord Solomon the gift of this
ring and distinguished him thereby, for that he said to him, 'O
Lord, give me a kingdom which may not be obtained after me; for
Thou verily art the Giver of kingdoms.[FN#520]' 'So that ring is
not for you.' And I added, 'Had ye twain taken the herb, whereof
all who eat shall not die until the First Blast,[FN#521] it had
better availed you than this ye have gotten; for ye shall nowise
come at your desire thereby.' Now when they heard this, they
repented them with exceeding penitence and went their ways."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Bulukiya and Affan heard these words, they repented them with
exceeding penitence and went their ways. Such was their case; but
as regards myself" (continued the Serpent-queen) "I went in quest
of my host and found it fallen in piteous case, the stronger of
them having grown weak in my absence and the weaker having died.
When they saw me, they rejoiced and flocking about me, asked,
'What hath befallen thee, and where hast thou been?' So I told
them what had passed, after which I gathered my forces to "ether
and repaired with them to the mountain Kaf, where I was wont to
winter, summer-freshing in the place where thou now seest me, O
Hasib Karim al-Din. This, then, is my story and what befell me."
Thereupon Hasib marvelled at her words and said to her, "I
beseech thee, of thy favour, bid one of thy guards bear me forth
to the surface of the earth, that I may go to my people." She
replied, "O Hasib, thou shalt not have leave to depart from us
till winter come, and needs must thou go with us to the Mountain
Kaf and solace thyself with the sight of the hills and sands and
trees and birds magnifying the One God, the Victorious; and look
upon Marids and Ifrits and Jinn, whose number none knoweth save
Almighty Allah." When Hasib heard this, he was sore chafed and
chagrined: then he said to her, "Tell me of Affan and Bulukiya;
when they departed from thee and went their way, did they cross
the Seven Seas and reach the burial-place of our lord Solomon or
not; and if they did had they power to take the ring or not?"
Answered she, "Know, that when they left me, they anointed their
feet with the juice; and, walking over the water, fared on from
sea to sea, diverting themselves with the wonders of the deep,
nor ceased they faring till they had traversed the Seven Seas and
came in sight of a mountain, soaring high in air, whose stones
were emeralds and whose dust was musk; and in it was a stream of
running water. When they made it they rejoiced, saying each to
the other, 'Verily we have won our wish'; and they entered the
passes of the mountain and walked on, till they saw from afar a
cavern surmounted by a great dome, shining with light. So they
made for the cavern, and entering it beheld therein a throne of
gold studded with all manner jewels, and about it stools whose
number none knoweth save Allah Almighty. And they saw lying at
full length upon the throne our lord Solomon, clad in robes of
green silk inwoven with gold and broidered with jewels and
precious minerals: his right hand was passed over his breast and
on the middle finger was the seal ring whose lustre outshone that
of all other gems in the place. Then Affan taught Bulukiya
adjurations and conjurations galore and said to him, 'Repeat
these conjurations and cease not repeating until I take the
ring.' Then he went up to the throne; but, as he drew near unto
it lo' c mighty serpent came forth from beneath it and cried out
at him with so terrible a cry that the whole place trembled and
sparks flew from its mouth, saying, 'Begone, or thou art a dead
man' But Affan busied himself with his incantations and suffered
himself not to be startled thereby. Then the serpent blew such a
fiery blast at him, that the place was like to be set on fire,
and said to him, Woe to thee! Except thou turn back, I will
consume thee' Hearing these words Bulukiya left the cave, but
Affan, who suffered himself not to be troubled, went up to the
Prophet: then he put out his hand to the ring and touched it and
strove to draw it off the lord Solomon's finger; and behold, the
serpent blew on him once more and he became a heap of ashes. Such
was his case; but as regards Bulukiya he fell down in a swoon."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued: "When Bulukiya saw Affan burnt up by the fire and
become a heap of ashes, he fell down in a swoon. Thereupon the
Lord (magnified be His Majesty!) bade Gabriel descend earthwards
and save him ere the serpent should blow on him. So Gabriel
descended without delay and, finding Affan reduced to ashes and
Bulukiya in a fit, aroused him from his trance and saluting him
asked, 'How camest thou hither?' Bulukiya related to him his
history from first to last, adding, 'Know that I came not hither
but for the love of Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!), of
whom Affan informed me that his mission would take place at the
End of Time; moreover that none should foregather with him but
those who endured to the latter days by drinking of the Water of
Life through means of Solomon's seal. So I companied him hither
and there befell him what befell; but I escaped the fire and now
it is my desire that thou inform me where Mohammed is to be
found.' Quoth Gabriel, 'O Bulukiya, go thy ways, for the time of
Mohammed's coming is yet far distant.' Then he ascended up to
heaven forthright, and Bulukiya wept with sore weeping and
repented of that which he had done, calling to mind my words,
whenas I said to them, 'Far is it from man's power to possess
himself of the ring.' Then he descended from the mountain and
returned in exceeding confusion to the sea shore and passed the
night there, marvelling at the mountains and seas and islands
around him. When morning dawned, he anointed his feet with the
herb-juice and descending to the water, set out and fared on over
the surface of the seas days and nights, astonied at the terrors
of the main and the marvels and wonders of the deep, till he came
to an island as it were the Garden of Eden. So he landed and,
finding himself in a great and pleasant island, paced about it
and saw with admiration that its dust was saffron and its gravel
carnelian and precious minerals; its hedges were of jessamine,
its vegetation was of the goodliest of trees and of the brightest
of odoriferous shrubs; its brushwood was of Comorin and Sumatran
aloes-wood and its reeds were sugar-canes. Round about it were
roses and narcissus and amaranths and gilly-flowers and
chamomiles and white lilies and violets, and other flowers of all
kinds and colours. Of a truth the island was the goodliest place,
abounding in space, rich in grace, a compendium of beauty
material and spiritual. The birds warbled on the boughs with
tones far sweeter than chaunt of Koran and their notes would
console a lover whom longings unman. And therein the gazelle
frisked free and fain and wild cattle roamed about the plain. Its
trees were of tallest height; its streams flowed bright; its
springs welled with waters sweet and light; and all therein was a
delight to sight and sprite. Bulukiya marvelled at the charms of
the island but knew that he had strayed from the way he had first
taken in company with Affan. He wandered about the place and
solaced him with various spectacles until nightfall, when he
climbed into a tree to sleep; but as he sat there, musing over
the beauty of the site, behold, the sea became troubled and there
rose up to the surface a great beast, which cried out with a cry
so terrible that every living thing upon the isle trembled. As
Bulukiya gazed upon him from the tree and marvelled at the
bigness of his bulk, he was presently followed unexpectedly by a
multitude of other sea beasts in kind manifolds, each holding in
his fore-paw a jewel which shone like a lamp, so that the whole
island became as light as day for the lustre of the gems. After
awhile, there appeared, from the heart of the island, wild beasts
of the land, none knoweth their number save Allah the Most High;
amongst which Bulukiya noted lions and panthers and lynxes and
other ferals; and these land beasts flocked down to the shore;
and, foregathering with the sea beasts, conversed with them till
daybreak, when they separated and each went his own way.
Thereupon Bulukiya, terrified by what he had seen, came down from
the tree and, making the sea shore, anointed his feet with the
magical juice, and set out once more upon the surface of the
water. He fared on days and nights over the Second Sea, till he
came to a great mountain skirting which ran a Wady without end,
the stones whereof were magnetic iron and its beasts, lions and
hares and panthers. He landed on the mountain foot and wandered
from place to place till nightfall, when he sat down sheltered by
one of the base hills on the sea side, to eat of the dried fish
thrown up by the sea. Presently, he turned from his meal and
behold, a huge panther was creeping up to rend and ravin him; so
he anointed his feet in haste with the juice and, descending to
the surface of the water, fled walking over the Third Sea, in the
darkness, for the night was black and the wind blew stark. Nor
did he stay his course till he reached another island, whereon he
landed and found there trees bearing fruits both fresh and
dry.[FN#522] So he took of these fruits and ate and praised Allah
Almighty; after which he walked for solace; about the island till
eventide."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Bulukiya
(continued the Queen) walked for solace about the island till
eventide, when he lay down to sleep. As soon as day brake, he
began to explore the place and ceased not for ten days, after
which he again made the shore and anointed his feet and, setting
out over the Fourth Sea, walked upon it many nights and days,
till he came to a third island of fine white sand without sign of
trees or grass. He walked about it awhile but, finding its only
inhabitants sakers which nested in the sand, he again anointed
his feet and trudged over the Fifth Sea, walking night and day
till he came to a little island, whose soil and hills were like
crystal. Therein were the veins wherefrom gold is worked; and
therein also were marvellous trees whose like he had never seen
in his wanderings, for their blossoms were in hue as gold. He
landed and walked about for diversion till it was nightfall, when
the flowers began to shine through the gloom like stars. Seeing
this sight, he marvelled and said, 'Assuredly, the flowers of
this island are of those which wither under the sun and fall to
the earth, where the winds smite them and they gather under the
rocks and become the Elixir[FN#523] which the folk collect and
thereof make gold.' He slept there all that night and at sunrise
he again anointed his feet and, descending to the shore, fared on
over the Sixth Sea nights and days, till he came to a fifth
island. Here he landed and found, after walking an hour or so,
two mountains covered with a multitude of trees, whose fruits
were as men's heads hanging by the hair, and others whose fruits
were green birds hanging by the feet; also a third kind, whose
fruits were like aloes, if a drop of the juice fell on a man it
burnt like fire; and others, whose fruits wept and laughed,
besides many other marvels wh