ich he saw there. Then he returned
to the sea shore and, finding there a tall tree, sat down beneath
it till supper time when he climbed up into the branches to
sleep. As he sat considering the wonderful works of Allah behold,
the waters became troubled, and there rose therefrom the
daughters of the sea, each mermaid holding in her hand a jewel
which shone like the morning. They came ashore and, foregathering
under the trees, sat down and danced and sported and made merry
whilst Bulukiya amused himself with watching and wondering at
their gambols, which were prolonged till the morning, when they
returned to the sea and disappeared. Then he came down and,
anointing his feet, set out on the surface of the Seventh Sea,
over which he journeyed two whole months, without getting sight
of highland or island or broadland or lowland or shoreland, till
he came to the end thereof. And so doing he suffered exceeding
hunger, so that he was forced to snatch up fishes from the
surface of the sea and devour them raw, for stress of famine. In
such case he pushed on till in early forenoon he came to the
sixth island, with trees a-growing and rills a flowing, where he
landed and walked about, looking right and left, till he came to
an apple tree and put forth his hand to pluck of the fruit, when
lo! one cried out to him from the tree, saying, 'An thou draw
near to this tree and cut of it aught, I will cut thee in twain.'
So he looked and saw a giant forty cubits high, being the cubit
of the people of that day; whereat he feared with sore fear and
refrained from that tree. Then said he to the giant, 'Why cost
thou forbid me to eat of this tree?' Replied the other, 'Because
thou art a son of Adam and thy father Adam forgot the covenant of
Allah and sinned against Him and ate of the tree.' Quoth
Bulukiya, 'What thing art thou and to whom belongeth this island,
with its trees, and how art thou named?' Quoth the tall one, 'My
name is Sharahiya and trees and island belong to King
Sakhr;[FN#524] I am one of his guards and in charge of his
dominion,' presently adding, 'But who art thou and whence comest
thou hither?' Bulukiya told him his story from beginning to end
and Sharahiya said, 'Be of good cheer,' and brought him to eat.
So he ate his fill and, taking leave of the giant, set out again
and ceased not faring on over the mountains and sandy deserts for
ten days; at the end of which time he saw, in the distance, a
dust cloud hanging like a canopy in air; and, making towards it,
he heard a mighty clamour, cries and blows and sounds of mellay.
Presently he reached a great Wady, two months' journey long; and,
looking whence the shouts came, he saw a multitude of horse men
engaged in fierce fight and the blood running from them till it
railed like a river. Their voices were thunderous and they were
armed with lance and sword and iron mace and bow and arrow, and
all fought with the utmost fury. At this sight he felt sore
affright"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued: "When Bulukiya saw the host in fight, he felt sore
affright and was perplexed about his case; but whilst he
hesitated, behold, they caught sight of him and held their hands
one from other and left fighting. Then a troop of them came up to
him, wondering at his make, and one of the horsemen said to him,
'What art thou and whence camest thou hither and whither art
wending; and who showed thee the way that thou hast come to our
country?' Quoth he, 'I am of the sons of Adam and am come out,
distracted for the love of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and
preserve!); but I have wandered from my way.' Quoth the horseman,
'Never saw we a son of Adam till now, nor did any ever come to
this land.' And all marvelled at him and at his speech. 'But what
are ye, O creatures?' asked Bulukiya; and the rider replied, 'We
are of the Jann.' So he said, 'O Knight, what is the cause of the
fighting amongst you and where is your abiding place and what is
the name of this valley and this land?' He replied, 'Our abiding-
place is the White Country; and, every year, Allah Almighty
commandeth us to come hither and wage war upon the unbelieving
Jann.' Asked Bulukiya, 'And where is the White Country?' and the
horseman answered, 'It is behind the mountain Kaf, and distant
seventy-five years journey from this place which is termed the
Land of Shaddad son of 'Ad: we are here for Holy War; and we have
no other business, when we are not doing battle, than to glorify
God and hallow him. More over, we have a ruler, King Sakhr highs,
and needs must thou go with us to him, that he may look upon thee
for his especial delight.' Then they fared on (and he with them)
till they came to their abiding place; where he saw a multitude
of magnificent tents of green silk, none knoweth their number
save Allah the Most High, and in their midst a pavilion of red
satin, some thousand cubits in compass, with cords of blue silk
and pegs of gold and silver. Bulukiya marvelled at the sight and
accompanied them as they fared on and behold, this was the royal
pavilion. So they carried him into the presence of King Sakhr,
whom he found seated upon a splendid throne of red gold, set with
pearls and studded with gems; the Kings and Princes of the Jann
being on his right hand, and on his left his Councillors and
Emirs and Officers of state, and a multitude of others. The King
seeing him bade introduce him, which they did; and Bulukiya went
up to him and saluted him after kissing the ground before him.
The King returned his salute and said, 'Draw near me, O mortal!'
and Bulukiya went close up to him. Hereupon the King, commanding
a chair to be set for him by his royal side, bade him sit down
and asked him 'Who art thou?'; and Bulukiya answered, 'I am a
man, and one of the Children of Israel.' 'Tell me thy story,'
cried King Sakhr, 'and acquaint me with all that hath befallen
thee and how thou camest to this my land.' So Bulukiya related to
him all that had occurred in his wanderings from beginning to
end."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued: "When Bulukiya related to Sakhr what befell him in his
wanderings, he marvelled thereat. Then he bade the servants bring
food and they spread the tables and set on one thousand and five
hundred platters of red gold and silver and copper, some
containing twenty and some fifty boiled camels, and others some
fifty head of sheep; at which Bulukiya marvelled with exceeding
marvel. Then they ate and he ate with them, till he was satisfied
and returned thanks to Allah Almighty; after which they cleared
the tables and set on fruits, and they ate thereof, glorifying
the name of God and invoking blessings on His prophet Mohammed
(whom Allah bless and preserve!) When Bulukiya heard them make
mention of Mohammed, he wondered and said to King Sakhr, 'I am
minded to ask thee some questions.' Rejoined the King, 'Ask what
thou wilt,' and Bulukiya said, 'O King, what are ye and what is
your origin and how came ye to know of Mohammed (whom Allah
assain and save!) that ye draw near to him and love him?' King
Sakhr answered, 'O Bulukiya, of very sooth Allah created the fire
in seven stages, one above the other, and each distant a thousand
years journey from its neighbour. The first stage he named
Jahannam[FN#525] and appointed the same for the punishment of the
transgressors of the True-believers, who die unrepentant; the
second he named Laza and appointed for Unbelievers: the name of
the third is Jahim and is appointed for Gog and Magog.[FN#526]
The fourth is called Sa'ir and is appointed for the host of
Iblis. The fifth is called Sakar and is prepared for those who
neglect prayer. The sixth is called Hatamah and is appointed for
Jews and Christians. The seventh is named Hawiyah and is prepared
for hypocrites. Such be the seven stages.' Quoth Bulukiya, 'Haply
Jahannam hath least of torture for that it is the uppermost.'
'Yes,' quoth King Sakhr, 'the most endurable of them all is
Jahannam; natheless in it are a thousand mountains of fire, in
each mountain seventy thousand cities of fire, in each city
seventy thousand castles of fire, in each castle seventy thousand
houses of fire, in each house seventy thousand couches of fire
and in each couch seventy thousand manners of torment. As for the
other hells, O Bulukiya, none knoweth the number of kinds of
torment that be therein save Allah Most Highest.' When Bulukiya
heard this, he fell down in a fainting-fit, and when he came to
himself, he wept and said, 'O King what will be my case?' Quoth
Sakhr, 'Fear not, and know thou that whoso loveth Mohammed (whom
Allah bless and keep!) the fire shall not burn him, for he is
made free therefrom for his sake; and whoso belongeth to his
Faith the fire shall fly him. As for us, the Almighty Maker
created us of the fire for the first that he made in Jahannam
were two of His host whom he called Khalit and Malit. Now Khalit
was fashioned in the likeness of a lion, with a tail like a
tortoise twenty years' journey in length and ending in a member
masculine; while Malit was like a pied wolf whose tail was
furnished with a member feminine. Then Almighty Allah commanded
the tails to couple and copulate and do the deed of kind, and of
them were born serpents and scorpions, whose dwelling is in the
fire, that Allah may there with torment those whom He casteth
therein; and these increased and multiplied. Then Allah commanded
the tails of Khalit and Malit to couple and copulate a second
time, and the tail of Malit conceived by the tail of Khalit and
bore fourteen children, seven male and seven female, who grew up
and intermarried one with the other. All were obedient to their
sire, save one who disobeyed him and was changed into a worm
which is Iblis (the curse of Allah be upon him!). Now Iblis was
one of the Cherubim, for he had served Allah till he was raised
to the heavens and cherished[FN#527] by the especial favour of
the Merciful One, who made him chief of the Cherubim.'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued: "'Iblis served God and became chief of Cherubim. When,
however, the Lord created Adam (with whom be peace!), He
commanded Iblis to prostrate himself to him, but he drew back; so
Allah Almighty expelled him from heaven and cursed him.[FN#528]
This Iblis had issue and of his lineage are the devils; and as
for the other six males, who were his elders, they are the
ancestors of the true believing Jann, and we are their
descendants. Such, O Bulukiya is our provenance.[FN#529]'
Bulukiya marvelled at the King's words and said, 'O King, I pray
thee bid one of thy guards bear me back to my native land.'
'Naught of this may we do,' answered Sakhr, 'save by commandment
of Allah Almighty; however, an thou desire to leave us and return
home, I will mount thee on one of my mares and cause her carry
thee to the farthest frontiers of my dominions, where thou wilt
meet with the troops of another King, Barakhiya highs, who will
recognize the mare at sight and take thee off her and send her
back to us; and this is all we can do for thee, and no more.'
When Bulukiya heard these words he wept and said, 'Do whatso thou
wilt.' So King Sakhr caused bring the mare and, setting Bulukiya
on her back, said to him, 'Beware lest thou alight from her or
strike her or cry out in her face; for if thou do so she will
slay thee; but abide quietly riding on her back till she stop
with thee; then dismount and wend thy ways.' Quoth Bulukiya, 'I
hear and I obey;' he then mounted and setting out, rode on a long
while between the rows of tents; and stinted not riding till he
came to the royal kitchens where he saw the great cauldrons, each
holding fifty camels, hung up over the fires which blazed
fiercely under them. So he stopped there and gazed with a marvel
ever increasing till King Sakhr thinking him to be anhungered,
bade bring him two roasted camels; and they carried them to him
and bound them behind him on the mare's crupper. Then he took
leave of them and fared on, till he came to the end of King
Sakhr's dominions, where the mare stood still and Bulukiya
dismounted and began to shake the dust of the journey from his
raiment. And behold, there accosted him a party of men who,
recognising the mare, carried her and Bulukiya before their King
Barakhiya. So he saluted him, and the King returned his greeting
and seated him beside himself in a splendid pavilion, in the
midst of his troops and champions and vassal Princes of the Jann
ranged to right and left; after which he called for food and they
ate their fill and pronounced the Alhamdolillah. Then they set on
fruits, and when they had eaten thereof, King Barakhiya, whose
estate was like that of King Sakhr, asked his guest, 'When didst
thou leave King Sakhr?' And Bulukiya answered, 'Two days ago.'
Quoth Barakhiya, 'Dost thou know, how many days' journey thou
hast come in these two days?' Quoth he, 'No,' and the King
rejoined, 'Thou hast come a journey of threescore and ten
months.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued: "Barakhiya said to Bulukiya, 'In two days thou hast
come a journey of threescore and ten months; moreover when thou
mountedst the mare, she was affrighted at thee, knowing thee for
a son of Adam, and would have thrown thee; so they bound on her
back these two camels by way of weight to steady her.' When
Bulukiya heard this, he marvelled and thanked Allah Almighty for
safety. Then said the King, 'Tell me thy adventures and what
brought thee to this our land.' So he told him his story from
first to last, and the King marvelled at his words, and kept
Bulukiya with him two months." Upon this Hasib Karim al-Din after
he had marvelled at her story, again besought the Serpent-queen
saying, "I pray thee of thy goodness and graciousness command one
of thy subjects conduct me to the surface of the earth, that I
may return to my family;" but she answered, "O Hasib, I know that
the first thing thou wilt do, after seeing the face of the earth
will be to greet thy family and then repair to the Hammam bath
and bathe; and the moment thou endest thine ablutions will see
the last of me, for it will be the cause of my death." Quoth
Hasib, "I swear that I will never again enter the Hammam bath so
long as I live, but when washing is incumbent on me, I will wash
at home." Rejoined the Queen, "I would not trust thee though thou
shouldst swear to me an hundred oaths; for such abstaining is not
possible, and I know thee to be a son of Adam for whom no oath is
sacred. Thy father Adam made a covenant with Allah the most High,
who kneaded the clay whereof He fashioned him forty mornings and
made His angels prostrate themselves to him; yet after all his
promise did he forget and his oath violate, disobeying the
commandment of his Lord." When Hasib heard this, he held his
peace and burst into tears; nor did he leave weeping for the
space of ten days, at the end of which time he said to the Queen,
"Prithee acquaint me with the rest of Bulukiya's adventures."
Accordingly, she began again as follows: "Know, O Hasib, that
Bulukiya, after abiding two months with King Barakhiya,
farewelled him and fared on over wastes and deserts nights and
days' till he came to a high mountain which he ascended. On the
summit he beheld seated a great Angel glorifying the names of God
and invoking blessings on Mohammed. Before him lay a tablet
covered with characters, these white and those black,[FN#530]
whereon his eyes were fixed, and his two wings were outspread to
the full, one to the western and the other to the eastern
horizon. Bulukiya approached and saluted the Angel, who returned
his salam adding, 'Who art thou and whence comest thou and
whither wendest thou and what is thy story?' Accordingly, he
repeated to him his history, from first to last, and the Angel
marvelled mightily thereat, whereupon Bulukiya said to him, 'I
pray thee in return acquaint me with the meaning of this tablet
and what is writ thereon; and what may be thine occupation and
thy name.' Replied the Angel, 'My name is Michael, and I am
charged with the shifts of night and day; and this is my
occupation till the Day of Doom.' Bulukiya wondered at his words
and at his aspect and the vastness of his stature and, taking
leave of him, fared onwards, night and day, till he came to a
vast meadow over which he walked observing that it was traversed
by seven streams and abounded in trees. He was struck by its
beauty and in one corner thereof he saw a great tree and under it
four Angels. So he drew near to them and found the first in the
likeness of a man, the second in the likeness of a wild beast,
the third in the likeness of a bird and the fourth in the
likeness of a bull, engaged in glorifying Almighty Allah, and
saying, 'O my God and my Master and my Lord, I conjure Thee, by
Thy truth and by the decree of Thy Prophet Mohammed (on whom be
blessings and peace!) to vouchsafe Thy mercy and grant Thy
forgiveness to all things created in my likeness; for Thou over
all things art Almighty!' Bulukiya marvelled at what he heard but
continued his journey till he came to another mountain and
ascending it, found there a great Angel seated on the summit,
glorifying God and hallowing Him and invoking blessings on
Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!), and he saw that Angel
continually opening and shutting his hands and bending and
extending his fingers. He accosted him and saluted him; whereupon
the Angel returned his salam and enquired who he was and how he
came thither. So Bulukiya acquainted him with his adventures
including his having lost the way; and besought him to tell him,
in turn, who he was and what was his function and what mountain
was that. Quoth the Angel, 'Know, O Bulukiya, that this is the
mountain Kaf, which encompasseth the world; and all the countries
the Creator hath made are in my grasp. When the Almighty is
minded to visit any land with earthquake or famine or plenty or
slaughter or prosperity, He biddeth me carry out His commands and
I carry them out without stirring from my place; for know thou
that my hands lay hold upon the roots of the earth,' "--And
Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued: "When the angel said, 'And know thou that my hands lay
hold upon the roots of the earth,' he asked, 'And hath Allah
created other worlds than this within the mountain Kaf?' The
Angel answered, 'Yes, He hath made a world white as silver, whose
vastness none knoweth save Himself, and hath peopled it with
Angels, whose meat and drink are His praise and hallowing and
continual blessings upon His Prophet Mohammed (whom Allah bless
and keep!). Every Thursday night[FN#531] they repair to this
mountain and worship in congregation Allah until the morning, and
they assign the future recompense of their lauds and litanies to
the sinners of the Faith of Mohammed (whom Allah assain and
save!) and to all who make the Ghusl ablution of Friday; and this
is their function until the Day of Resurrection.' Asked Bulukiya,
'And hath Allah created other mountains behind the mountain
Kaf?'; whereto he answered, 'Yes, behind this mountain is a range
of mountains five hundred years' journey long, of snow and ice,
and this it is that wardeth off the heat of Jahannam from the
world, which verily would else be consumed thereby. Moreover,
behind the mountain Kaf are forty worlds, each one the bigness of
this world forty times told, some of gold and some of silver and
others of carnelian. Each of these worlds hath its own colour,
and Allah hath peopled them with angels, that know not Eve nor
Adam nor night nor day, and have no other business than to
celebrate His praises and hallow Him and make profession of His
Unity and proclaim His Omnipotence and supplicate Him on behalf
of the followers of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!). And
know, also, O Bulukiya, that the earths were made in seven
stages, one upon another, and that Allah hath created one of His
Angels, whose stature and attributes none knoweth but Himself and
who beareth the seven stages upon his shoulders. Under this Angel
Almighty Allah hath created a great rock, and under the rock a
bull, and under the bull a huge fish, and under the fish a mighty
ocean.[FN#532] God once told Isa (with whom be peace! ) of this
fish, and he said, 'O Lord show me the fish, that I may look upon
it.' So the Almighty commanded an angel to take Isa and show him
the fish. Accordingly, he took him up and carried him (with whom
be peace!) to the sea, wherein the fish dwelt, and said, 'Look, O
Isa, upon the fish.' He looked but at first saw nothing, when,
suddenly, the fish darted past like lightning. At this sight Isa
fell down aswoon, and when he came to himself, Allah spake to him
by inspiration, saying, 'O Isa, hast thou seen the fish and
comprehended its length and its breadth?' He replied, 'By Thy
honour and glory, O Lord, I saw no fish; but there passed me by a
great bull, whose length was three days' journey, and I know not
what manner of thing this bull is.' Quoth Allah, 'O Isa, this
that thou sawest and which was three days in passing by thee, was
but the head of the fish;[FN#533] and know that every day I
create forty fishes like unto this.' And Isa hearing this
marvelled at the power of Allah the Almighty. Asked Bulukiya,
'What hath Allah made beneath this sea which containeth the
fish?'; and the Angel answered, 'Under the sea the Lord created a
vast abyss of air, under the air fire, and under the fire a
mighty serpent, by name Falak; and were it not for fear of the
Most Highest, this serpent would assuredly swallow up all that is
above it, air and fire and the Angel and his burden, without
sensing it.'"--And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the angel
said to Bulukiya when describing the serpent, "'And were it not
for fear of the Most Highest, this serpent would assuredly
swallow up all that is above it, air and fire, and the Angel and
his burden, without sensing it. When Allah created this serpent
He said to it by inspiration, 'I will give thee somewhat to keep
for me, so open thy mouth.' The serpent replied, 'Do whatso Thou
wilt;' and opened his mouth and God placed Hell into his maw,
saying, 'Keep it until the Day of Resurrection. When that time
comes, the Almighty will send His angels with chains to bring
Hell and bind it until the Day when all men shall meet; and the
Lord will order Hell to go open its gates and there will issue
therefrom sparks bigger than the mountains.' When Bulukiya heard
these things he wept with sore weeping and, taking leave of the
Angel, fared on westwards, till he came in sight of two creatures
sitting before a great shut gate. As he drew near, he saw that
one of the gatekeepers had the semblance of a lion and the other
that of a bull; so he saluted them and they returned his salam
and enquired who and whence he was and whither he was bound.
Quoth he, 'I am of the sons of Adam, a wanderer for the love of
Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!) and I have strayed from my
way.' Then he asked them what they were and what was the gate
before which they sat, and they answered, 'We are the guardians
of this gate thou seest and we have no other business than the
praise and hallowing of Allah and the invocation of blessings on
Mohammed (whom may He bless and keep!).' Bulukiya wondered and
asked them, 'What is within the gate?'; and they answered, 'We
wot not.' Then quoth he, 'I conjure you, by the truth of your
glorious Lord, open to me the gate, that I may see that which is
therein.' Quoth they, 'We cannot, and none may open this gate, of
all created beings save Gabriel, the Faithful One, with whom be
peace!' Then Bulukiya lifted up his voice in supplication to
Allah, saying, 'O Lord, send me thy messenger Gabriel, the
Faithful One, to open for me this gate that I may see what be
therein;' and the Almighty gave ear unto his prayer and commanded
the Archangel to descend to earth and open to him the gate of the
Meeting-place of the Two Seas. So Gabriel descended and, saluting
Bulukiya, opened the gate to him, saying, 'Enter this door, for
Allah commandeth me to open to thee.' So he entered and Gabriel
locked the gate behind him and flew back to heaven. When Bulukiya
found himself within the gate, he looked and beheld a vast ocean,
half salt and half fresh, bounded on every side by mountain
ranges of red ruby whereon he saw angels singing the praises of
the Lord and hallowing Him. So he went up to them and saluted
them and having received a return of his salam, questioned them
of the sea and the mountains. Replied they, 'This place is
situate under the Arsh or empyreal heaven; and this Ocean causeth
the flux and flow of all the seas of the world; and we are
appointed to distribute them and drive them to the various parts
of the earth, the salt to the salt and the fresh to the
fresh,[FN#534] and this is our employ until the Day of Doom. As
for the mountain ranges they serve to limit and to contain the
waters. But thou, whence comest thou and whither art thou bound?'
So he told them his story and asked them of the road. They bade
him traverse the surface of the ocean which lay before him: so he
anointed his feet with the juice of the herb he had with him, and
taking leave of the angels, set out upon the face of the sea and
sped on over the water nights and days; and as he was faring,
behold, he met a handsome youth journeying along like himself,
whereupon he greeted him and he returned his greeting. After they
parted he espied four great Angels wayfaring over the face of the
sea, and their going was like the blinding lightning; so he
stationed himself in their road, and when they came up to him, he
saluted them and said to them, 'I ask you by the Almighty, the
Glorious, to tell me your names and whither are ye bound?'
Replied the first Angel, 'My name is Gabriel and these my
companions are called Israfil and Mika'il and Azra'il. There hath
appeared in the East a mighty dragon, which hath laid waste a
thousand cities and devoured their inhabitants; wherefore Allah
Almighty hath commanded us to go to him and seize him and cast
him into Jahannam.' Bulukiya marvelled at the vastness of their
stature and fared on, as before, days and nights, till he came to
an island where he landed and walked about for a while,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Bulukiya
landed on the island and walked about for a while, till he saw a
comely young man with light shining from his visage, sitting
weeping and lamenting between two built tombs. So he saluted him
and he returned his salutation, and Bulukiya said to him, 'Who
art thou and what are these two built tombs between which thou
sittest, and wherefore this wailing?' He looked at him and wept
with sore weeping, till he drenched his clothes with his tears;
then said, 'Know thou, O my brother, mine is a marvellous story
and a wondrous; but I would have thee sit by me and first tell me
thy name and thine adventures and who thou art and what brought
thee hither; after which I will, in turn, relate to thee my
history.' So Bulukiya sat down by him and related to him all that
had befallen him from his father's death,[FN#535] adding, 'Such
is my history, the whole of it, and Allah alone knoweth what will
happen to me after this.' When the youth heard his story, he
sighed and said, 'O thou unhappy! How few things thou hast seen
in thy life compared with mine. Know, O Bulukiya, that unlike
thyself I have looked upon our lord Solomon, in his life, and
have seen things past count or reckoning. Indeed, my story is
strange and my case out of range, and I would have thee abide
with me, till I tell thee my history and acquaint thee how I come
to be sitting here.'" Hearing this much Hasib again interrupted
the Queen of the Serpents and said to her, "Allah upon thee, O
Queen, release me and command one of thy servants carry me forth
to the surface of the earth, and I will swear an oath to thee
that I will never enter the Hammam-bath as long as I live." But
she said, "This is a thing which may not be nor will I believe
thee upon thine oath." When he heard this, he wept and all the
serpents wept on his account and took to interceding for him with
their Queen, saying, "We beseech thee, bid one of us carry him
forth to the surface of the earth, and he will swear thee an oath
never to enter the bath his life long." Now when Yamlaykha (for
such was the Queen's name) heard their appeal, she turned to
Hasib and made him swear to her an oath; after which she bade a
serpent carry him forth to the surface of the earth. The serpent
made ready, but as she was about to go away with him, he turned
to Queen Yamlaykha and said, "I would fain have thee tell me the
history of the youth whom Bulukiya saw sitting between two
tombs." So she said: "Know, O Hasib, that when Bulukiya sat down
by the youth and told him his tale, from first to last, in order
that the other might also recount his adventures and explain the
cause of his sitting between the two tombs."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Queen
continued: "When Bulukiya ended his recount, the youth said, 'How
few things of marvel hast thou seen in thy life, O unhappy! Now I
have looked upon our lord Solomon while he was yet living and I
have witnessed wonders beyond compt and conception.' And he began
to relate




The Story of Janshah.[FN#536]



'Know, O my brother, that my sire was a King called Teghmus, who
reigned over the land of Kabul and the Banu Shahlan, ten thousand
warlike chiefs, each ruling over an hundred walled cities and a
hundred citadels; and he was suzerain also over seven vassal
princes, and tribute was brought to him from the broad lands
between East and West. He was just and equitable in his rule and
Allah Almighty had given him all this and had bestowed on him
such mighty empire, yet had He not vouchsafed him a son (though
this was his dearest wish) to inherit the kingdom after his
decease. So one day it befell that he summoned the Olema and
astrologers, the mathematicians and almanac-makers, and said,
'Draw me my horoscope and look if Allah will grant me a son to
succeed me.' Accordingly, they consulted their books and
calculated his dominant star and the aspects thereof; after which
they said to him, 'Know, O King, that thou shalt be blessed with
a son, but by none other than the daughter of the King of
Khorasan.' Hearing this Teghmus joyed with exceeding joy and,
bestowing on the astrologers and wizards treasure beyond
numbering or reckoning, dismissed them. His chief Wazir was a
renowned warrior, by name 'Ayn Zar, who was equal to a thousand
cavaliers in battle; so him he summoned and, repeating to him
what the astrologers had predicted, he said, 'O Wazir, it is my
will that thou equip thee for a march to Khorasan and demand for
me the hand of its King Bahrwan's daughter.' Receiving these
orders the Wazir at once proceeded to get ready for the journey
and encamped without the town with his troops and braves and
retinue, whilst King Teghmus made ready as presents for the King
of Khorasan fifteen hundred loads of silks and precious stones,
pearls and rubies and other gems, besides gold and silver; and he
also prepared a prodigious quantity of all that goeth to the
equipment of a bride; then, loading them upon camels and mules,
delivered them to Ayn Zar, with a letter to the following
purport. 'After invoking the blessing of Heaven, King Teghmus to
King Bahrwan, greeting. Know that we have taken counsel with the
astrologers and sages and mathematicians, and they tell us that
we shall have boon of a boy child, and that by none other than
thy daughter. Wherefore I have despatched unto thee my Wazir Ayn
Zar, with great store of bridal gear, and I have appointed him to
stand in my stead and to enter into the marriage-contract in my
name. Furthermore I desire that of thy favour thou wilt grant him
his request without stay or delay; for it is my own, and all
graciousness thou showest him, I take for myself; but beware of
crossing me in this, for know, O King Bahrwan, that Allah hath
bestowed upon me the Kingdom of Kabul, and hath given me dominion
over the Banu Shahlan and vouchsafed me a mighty empire; and if I
marry thy daughter, we will be, I and thou, as one thing in
kingship; and I will send thee every year as much treasure as
will suffice thee. And this is my desire of thee.' Then King
Teghmus sealed the letter with his own ring and gave it to the
Wazir, who departed with a great company and journeyed till he
drew near the capital of Khorasan. When King Bahrwan heard of his
approach, he despatched his principal Emirs to meet him,[FN#537]
with a convoy of food and drink and other requisites, including
forage for the steeds. So they fared forth with the train till
they met the Wazir; then, alighting without the city, they
exchanged salutations and abode there, eating and drinking, ten
days; at the end of which time they mounted and rode on into the
town, where they were met by King Bahrwan, who came out to greet
the Wazir of King Teghmus and alighting, embraced him and carried
him to his citadel. Then Ayn Zar brought out the presents and
laid them before King Bahrwan, together with the letter of King
Teghmus, which when the King read and understood, he joyed with
joy exceeding and welcomed the Wazir, saying, 'Rejoice in winning
thy wish; and know that if King Teghmus sought of me my life,
verily I would give it to him.' Then he went in forthright to his
daughter and her mother and his kinsfolk, and acquainting them
with the King of Kabul's demand sought counsel of them, and they
said, 'Do what seemeth good to thee.'--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Five Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King
Bahrwan consulted his daughter and her mother and his kinsfolk
and they said, 'Do what seemeth good to thee.' So he returned
straightway to the Minister Ayn Zar and notified to him that his
desire had been fulfilled; and the Wazir, abode with him two
months, at the end of which time he said to him, 'We beseech thee
to bestow upon us that wherefore we came, so we may depart to our
own land.' 'I hear and obey,' answered the King. Then he prepared
all the gear wanted for the wedding; and when this was done he
assembled his Wazirs and all his Emirs and the Grandees of his
realm and the monks and priests who tied the knot of marriage
between his daughter and King Teghmus by proxy. And King Bahrwan
bade decorate the city after the goodliest fashion and spread the
streets with carpets. Then he equipped his daughter for the
journey and gave her all manner of presents and rarities and
precious metals, such as none may describe; and Ayn Zar departed
with the Princess to his own country. When the news of their
approach reached King Teghmus, he bade celebrate the wedding
festivities and adorn the city; after which he went in unto the
Princess and abated her maidenhead; nor was it long before she
conceived by him and, accomplishing her months, bare a man-child
like the moon on the night of its full. When King Teghmus knew
that his wife had given birth to a goodly son, he rejoiced with
exceeding joy and, summoning the sages and astrologers and
mathematicians, said to them, 'I would that ye draw the horoscope
of the newborn child with his ascendant and its aspects and
acquaint me what shall befall him in his lifetime.' So they made
their calculations and found them favourable; but, that he would,
in his fifteenth year, be exposed to perils and hardships, and
that if he survived, he would be happy and fortunate and become a
greater king than his father and a more powerful. The King
rejoiced greatly in this prediction and named the boy Janshah.
Then he delivered him to the nurses, wet and dry, who reared him
excellently well till he reached his fifth year, when his father
taught him to read the Evangel and instructed him in the art of
arms and lunge of lance and sway of sword, so that in less than
seven years he was wont to ride a-hunting, and a-chasing; he
became a doughty champion, perfect in all the science of the
cavalarice and his father was delighted to hear of his knightly
prowess. It chanced one day that King Teghmus and his son
accompanied by the troops rode out for sport into the woods and
wilds and hunted till mid afternoon of the third day, when the
Prince started a gazelle of a rare colour, which fled before him.
So he gave chase to it, followed by seven of King Teghmus's white
slaves all mounted on swift steeds, and rode at speed after the
gazelle, which fled before them till she brought them to the sea
shore. They all ran at her to take her as their quarry, but she
escaped from them and, throwing herself into the waves,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Janshah and the Mamelukes ran at the gazelle, to take her as
their quarry, she escaped from them and, throwing herself into
the waves, swam out to a fishing bark, that was moored near the
shore, and sprang on board. Janshah and his followers dismounted
and, boarding the boat, made prize of the gazelle and were minded
to return to shore with her, when the Prince espied a great
island in the offing and said to his merry men, 'I have a longing
to visit yonder island.' They answered, 'We hear and obey,' and
sailed on till they came to the island, where they landed and
amused themselves with exploring the place. Then they again
embarked and taking with them the gazelle, set out to return
homeward, but the murk of evening overtook them and they missed
their way on the main. Moreover a strong wind arose and crave the
boat into mid-ocean, so that when they awoke in the morning, they
found themselves lost at sea. Such was their case; but as regards
King Teghmus, when he missed his son, he commanded his troops to
make search for him in separate bodies; so they dispersed on all
sides and a company of them, coming to the sea shore, found there
the Prince's white slave whom he had left in charge of the
horses. They asked him what was become of his master and the
other six, and he told them what had passed whereupon they took
him with them and returned to the King and acquainted him with
what they had learnt. When Teghmus heard their report, he wept
with sore weeping and cast the crown from his head, biting his
hands for vexation. Then he rose forthright and wrote letters and
despatched them to all the islands of the sea. Moreover he got
together an hundred ships and filling them with troops, sent them
to sail about in quest of Janshah, while he himself withdrew with
his troops to his capital, where he abode in sore concern. As for
Janshah's mother, when she heard of his loss she buffeted her
face and began the mourning ceremonies for her son making sure
that he was dead. Meanwhile, Janshah and his men ceased not
driving before the wind and those in search of them cruised about
for ten days till, finding no trace they returned and reported
failure to the King. But a stiff gale caught the Prince's craft
which went spooning till they made a second island, where they
landed and walked about. Presently they came upon a spring of
running water in the midst of the island and saw from afar a man
sitting hard by it. So they went up to him and saluted him, and
he returned their salam, speaking in a voice like the
whistle[FN#538] of birds. Whilst Janshah stood marvelling at the
man's speech he looked right and left and suddenly split himself
in twain, and each half went a different way.[FN#539] Then there
came down from the hills a multitude of men of all kinds, beyond
count and reckoning; and they no sooner reached the spring, than
each one divided into two halves and rushed on Janshah and his
Mamelukes to eat them. When the voyagers saw this, they turned
and fled seawards; but the cannibals pursued them and caught and
ate three of the slaves, leaving only three slaves who with
Janshah reached the boat in safety; then launching her made for
the water and sailed nights and days without knowing whither
their ship went. They killed the gazelle, and lived on her flesh,
till the winds drove them to a third island which was full of
trees and waters and flower-gardens and orchards laden with all
fashion of fruits: and streams strayed under the tree shade:
brief, the place was a Garden of Eden. The island pleased the
Prince and he said to his companions, 'Which of you will land and
explore?' Then said one of the slaves, 'That will I do'; but he
replied, 'This thing may not be; you must all land and explore
the place while I abide in the boat.' So he set them ashore,"--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the Prince
set them ashore, and they searched the island, East and West, but
found no one; then they fared on inland to the heart thereof,
till they came to a Castle compassed about with ramparts of white
marble, within which was a palace of the clearest crystal and,
set in its centre a garden containing all manner fruits beyond
description, both fresh and dry, and flowers of grateful odour
and trees and birds singing upon the boughs. Amiddlemost the
garden was a vast basin of water, and beside it a great open hall
with a raised dais whereon stood a number of stools surrounding a
throne of red gold, studded with all kinds of jewels and
especially rubies and seeing the beauty of the Castle and of the
Garden they entered and explored in all directions, but found no
one there, so after rummaging the Castle they returned to Janshah
and told him what they had seen. When he heard their report, he
cried, 'Needs must I solace myself with a sight of it;' so he
landed and accompanied them to the palace, which he entered
marvelling at the goodliness of the place. They then visited
every part of the gardens and ate of the fruits and continued
walking till it waxed dark, when they returned to the estrade and
sat down, Janshah on the throne in the centre and the three
others on the stools ranged to the right and left. Then the
Prince, there seated, called to mind his separation from his
father's throne-city[FN#540] and country and friends and
kinsfolk; and fell a-weeping and lamenting over their loss whilst
his men wept around him. And as they were thus sorrowing behold,
they heard a mighty clamour, that came from seaward and looking
in the direction of the clamour saw a multitude of apes, as they
were swarming locusts. Now the castle and the island belonged to
these apes, who, finding the strangers' boat moored to the
strand, had scuttled it and after repaired to the palace, where
they came upon Janshah and his men seated." Here the Serpent-
queen again broke off her recital saying, "All this, O Hasib, was
told to Bulukiya by the young man sitting between the two tombs."
Quoth Hasib, "And what did Janshah do with the apes?"; so the
Queen resumed her tale: "He and his men were sore affrighted at
the appearance of the apes, but a company of them came up to the
throne whereon he sat and, kissing the earth before him, stood
awhile in his presence with their paws upon their breasts in
posture of respect. Then another troop brought to the castle
gazelles which they slaughtered and skinned; and roasting pieces
of the flesh till fit for food they laid them on platters of gold
and silver and spreading the table, made signs to Janshah and his
men to eat. The Prince and his followers came down from their
seats and ate, and the apes ate with them, till they were
satisfied, when the apes took away the meat and set on fruits of
which they partook and praised Allah the most Highest. Then
Janshah asked the apes by signs what they were and to whom the
palace belonged, and they answered him by signals, 'Know ye that
this island belonged of yore to our lord Solomon, son of David
(on both of whom be peace!), and he used to come hither once
every year for his solace,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Janshah asked the apes by signs to whom the palace belonged, they
answered him by signals, "'Of a truth this place belonged of yore
to our lord Solomon, son of David (on both of whom be peace!),
who used to come hither once every year for his solace, and then
wend his ways.' Presently the apes continued, 'And know, O King,
that thou art become our Sultan and we are thy servants; so eat
and drink, and whatso thou ever bid us, that will we do.' So
saying, they severally kissed the earth between the hands of
Janshah and all took their departure. The Prince slept that night
on the throne and his men on the stools about him, and on the
morrow, at daybreak, the four Wazirs or Captains of the apes
presented themselves before him, attended by their troops, who
ranged themselves about him, rank after rank, until the place was
crowded. Then the Wazirs approached and exhorted him by signs to
do justice amongst them and rule them righteously; after which
the apes cried out to one another and went away, all save a small
party which remained in presence to serve him. After awhile,
there came up a company of apes with huge dogs in the semblance
of horses, each wearing about his head a massive chain; and
signed to Janshah and his three followers to mount and go with
them. So they mounted, marvelling at the greatness of the dogs,
and rode forth, attended by the four Wazirs and a host of apes
like swarming locusts, some riding on dogs and others afoot till
they came to the sea-shore. Janshah looked for the boat which
brought him and finding it scuttled turned to the Wazirs and
asked how this had happened to it; whereto they answered, 'Know,
O King, that, when thou camest to our island, we kenned that thou
wouldst be Sultan over us and we feared lest ye all flee from us,
in our absence; and embark in the boat, so we sank it.' When
Janshah heard this, he turned to his Mamelukes and said to them,
'We have no means of escaping from these apes, and we must
patiently await the ordinance of the Almighty.' Then they fared
on inland and ceased not faring till they came to the banks of a
river, on whose other side rose a high mountain, whereon Janshah
saw a multitude of Ghuls. So he turned to the apes and asked
them, 'What are these Ghuls?' and they answered, 'Know, O King,
that these Ghuls are our mortal foes and we come hither to do
battle with them.' Janshah marvelled to see them riding horses,
and was startled at the vastness of their bulk and the
strangeness of their semblance; for some of them had heads like
bulls and others like camels. As soon as the Ghuls espied the
army of the apes, they charged down to the river bank and
standing there, fell to pelting them with stones as big as maces;
and between them there befell a sore fight. Presently, Janshah,
seeing that the Ghuls were getting the better of the apes, cried
out to his men, saying, 'Unease your bows and arrows and shoot at
them your best shafts and keep them off from us.' They did so and
slew of the Ghuls much people, when there fell upon them sore
dismay and they turned to flee; but the apes, seeing Janshah's
prowess, forded the river and headed by their Sultan chased the
Ghuls, killing many of them in the pursuit, till they reached the
high mountain where they disappeared. And while exploring the
said mountain Janshah found a tablet of alabaster, whereon was
written, 'O thou who enterest this land, know that thou wilt
become Sultan over these apes and that from them there is no
escape for thee, except by the passes that run east and west
through the mountains. If thou take the eastern pass, thou wilt
fare through a country swarming with Ghuls and wild beasts,
Marids and Ifrits, and thou wilt come, after three months'
journeying, to the ocean which encompasseth the earth; but, if
thou travel by the western pass, it will bring thee, after four
months' journeying, to the head of the Wady of Emmets.[FN#541]
When thou hast followed the road, that leads through this
mountain, ten days,' "--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Janshah
read this much upon the tablet and found, at the end of the
inscription, "'Then thou wilt come to a great river, whose
current is so swift that it blindeth the eyes. Now this river
drieth up every Sabbath,[FN#542] and on the opposite bank lies a
city wholly inhabited by Jews, who the faith of Mohammed refuse;
there is not a Moslem among the band nor is there other than this
city in the land. Better therefore lord it over the apes, for so
long as thou shalt tarry amongst them they will be victorious
over the Ghuls. And know also that he who wrote this tablet was
the lord Solomon, son of David (on both be peace!).' When Janshah
read these words, he wept sore and repeated them to his men. Then
they mounted again and, surrounded by the army of the apes who
were rejoicing in their victory, returned to the castle. Here
Janshah abode, Sultaning over them, for a year and a half. And at
the end of this time, he one day commanded the ape-army to mount
and go forth a hunting with him, and they rode out into the woods
and wilds, and fared on from place to place, till they approached
the Wady of Emmets, which Janshah knew by the description of it
upon the alabaster tablet. Here he bade them dismount and they
all abode there, eating and drinking a space of ten days, after
which Janshah took his men apart one night and said, 'I purpose
we flee through the Valley of Emmets and make for the town of the
Jews; it may be Allah will deliver us from these apes and we will
go God's ways.' They replied, 'We hear and we obey:' so he waited
till some little of the night was spent then, donning his armour
and girding his sword and dagger and such like weapons, and his
men doing likewise, they set out and fared on westwards till
morning. When the apes awoke and missed Janshah and his men, they
knew that they had fled. So they mounted and pursued them, some
taking the eastern pass and others that which led to the Wady of
Emmets, nor was it long before the apes came in sight of the
fugitives, as they were about to enter the valley, and hastened
after them. When Janshah and his men saw them, they fled into the
Emmet-valley; but the apes soon overtook them and would have
slain them, when behold, there rose out of the earth a multitude
of ants like swarming locusts, as big as dogs, and charged home
upon the apes. They devoured many of their foes, and these also
slew many of the ants; but help came to the emmets: now an ant
would go up to an ape and smite him and cut him in twain, whilst
ten apes could hardly master one ant and bear him away and tear
him in sunder. The sore battle lasted till the evening but the
emmets 