were victorious. In the gloaming Janshah and his men took
to flight and fled along the sole of the Wady."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "in the
gloaming Janshah and his men took to flight and fled along the
sole of the Wady till the morning. With the break of day, the
apes were up and at them, which when the Prince saw, he shouted
to his men, 'Smite with your swords.' So they bared their blades
and laid on load right and left, till there ran at them an ape,
with tusks like an elephant, and smote one of the Mamelukes and
cut him in sunder. Then the apes redoubled upon Janshah and he
fled with his followers into the lower levels of the valley,
where he saw a vast river and by its side a mighty army of ants.
When the emmets espied Janshah they pushed on and surrounded him,
and one of the slaves fell to smiting them with his sword and
cutting them in twain; whereupon the whole host set upon him and
slew him. At this pass, behold, up came the apes from over the
mountain and fell in numbers upon Janshah; but he tore off his
clothes and, plunging into the river, with his remaining servant,
struck out for the middle of the stream. Presently, he caught
sight of a tree on the other bank; so he swam up to it and laying
hold of one of its branches, hung to it and swung himself ashore,
but as for the last Mameluke the current carried him away and
dashed him to pieces against the mountain. Thereupon Janshah fell
to wringing his clothes and spreading them in the sun to dry,
what while there befell a fierce fight between the apes and the
ants, until the apes gave up the pursuit and returned to their
own land. Meanwhile, Janshah, who abode alone on the river-bank,
could do naught but shed tears till nightfall, when he took
refuge in a cavern and there passed the dark hours, in great fear
and feeling desolate for the loss of his slaves. At daybreak
awaking from his sleep he set out again and fared on nights and
days, eating of the herbs of the earth, till he came to the
mountain which burnt like fire, and thence he made the river
which dried up every Sabbath. Now it was a mighty stream and on
the opposite bank stood a great city, which was the capital of
the Jews mentioned in the tablet. Here he abode till the next
Sabbath, when the river dried up and he walked over to the other
side and entered the Jew city, but saw none in the streets. So he
wandered about till he came to the door of a homestead, which he
opened and entering, espied within the people of the house
sitting in silence and speaking not a syllable. Quoth he, 'I am a
stranger and anhungered;' and they signed to him, as to say, 'Eat
and drink, but speak not.'[FN#543] So he ate and drank and slept
that night and, when morning dawned, the master of the house
greeted him and bade him welcome and asked him, 'Whence comest
thou and whither art thou bound?' At these words Janshah wept
sore and told him all that had befallen him and how his father
was King of Kabul; whereat the Jew marvelled and said, 'Never
heard we of that city, but we have heard from the merchants of
the caravans that in that direction lieth a land called
Al-Yaman.' 'How far is that land from this place?' asked Janshah,
and the Jew answered, 'The Cafilah merchants pretend that it is a
two years and three months' march from their land hither.' Quoth
Janshah, 'And when doth the caravan come?' Quoth the Jew, 'Next
year 'twill come.' "--And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Jew was questioned anent the coming of the caravan, he replied,
"'Next year 'twill come.' At these words the Prince wept sore and
fell a-sorrowing for himself and his Mamelukes; and lamenting his
separation from his mother and father and all which had befallen
him in his wanderings. Then said the Jew, 'O young man, do not
weep, but sojourn with us till the caravan shall come, when we
will send thee with it to thine own country.' So he tarried with
the Jew two whole months and every day he went out walking in the
streets for his solace and diversion. Now it chanced one day,
whilst he paced about the main thoroughfares, as of wont, and was
bending his steps right and left, he heard a crier crying aloud
and saying, 'Who will earn a thousand gold pieces and a slave-
girl of surpassing beauty and loveliness by working for me
between morning and noontide?' But no one answered him and
Janshah said in his mind, 'Were not this work dangerous and
difficult, he would not offer a thousand diners and a fair girl
for half a day's labour.' Then he accosted the crier and said, 'I
will do the work;' so the man carried him to a lofty mansion
where they found one who was a Jew and a merchant, seated on an
ebony chair, to whom quoth the crier, standing respectfully
before him, 'O merchant, I have cried every day these three
months, and none hath answered, save this young man.' Hearing his
speech the Jew welcomed Janshah, led him into a magnificent
sitting-room and signalled to bring food. So the servants spread
the table and set thereon all manner meats, of which the merchant
and Janshah ate, and washed their hands. Then wine was served up
and they drank; after which the Jew rose and bringing Janshah a
purse of a thousand diners and a slave-girl of rare beauty, said
to him, 'Take maid and money to thy hire.' Janshah took them and
seated the girl by his side when the trader resumed, 'To-morrow
to the work!'; and so saying he withdrew and Janshah slept with
the damsel that night. As soon as it was morning, the merchant
bade his slaves clothe him in a costly suit of silk whenas he
came out of the Hammam-Bath. So they did as he bade them and
brought him back to the house, whereupon the merchant called for
harp and lute and wine and they drank and played and made merry
till the half of the night was past, when the Jew retired to his
Harim and Janshah lay with his slave-girl till the dawn. Then he
went to the bath and on his return, the merchant came to him and
said, 'Now I wish thee to do the work for me.' 'I hear and obey,'
replied Janshah. So the merchant bade his slaves bring two she-
mules and set Janshah on one, mounting the other himself. Then
they rode forth from the city and fared on from morn till noon,
when they made a lofty mountain, to whose height was no limit.
Here the Jew dismounted, ordering Janshah to do the same; and
when he obeyed the merchant gave him a knife and a cord, saying,
'I desire that thou slaughter this mule.' So Janshah tucked up
his sleeves and skirts and going up to the mule, bound her legs
with the cord, then threw her and cut her throat; after which he
skinned her and lopped off her head and legs and she became a
mere heap of flesh. Then said the Jew, 'Slit open the mule's
belly and enter it and I will sew it up on thee. There must thou
abide awhile and whatsoever thou seest in her belly, acquaint me
therewith.' So Janshah slit the mule's belly and crept into it,
whereupon the merchant sewed it up on him and withdrew to a
distance,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
merchant sewed up the mule's belly on Janshah and, withdrawing to
a distance, hid himself in the skirts of the mountain. After a
while a huge bird swooped down on the dead mule and snatching it
up, flew up with it to the top of the mountain, where it set down
the quarry and would have eaten it; but Janshah, feeling the bird
begin to feed, slit the mule's belly and came forth. When the
bird saw him, it took fright at him and flew right away;
whereupon he stood up and looking right and left, saw nothing but
the carcasses of dead men, mummied by the sun, and exclaimed,
'There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!' Then he looked down the precipice and
espied the merchant standing at the mountain-foot, looking for
him. As soon as the Jew caught sight of him, he called out to
him, 'Throw me down of the stones which are about thee, that I
may direct thee to a way whereby thou mayst descend.' So Janshah
threw him down some two hundred of the stones, which were all
rubies,[FN#544] chrysolites and other gems of price; after which
he called out to him, saying, 'Show me the way down and I will
throw thee as many more.' But the Jew gathered up the stones and,
binding them on the back of the mule, went his way without
answering a word and left Janshah alone on the mountain-top. When
the Prince found himself deserted, he began to weep and implore
help of Heaven, and thus he abode three days; after which he rose
and fared on over the mountainous ground two month's space,
feeding upon hill-herbs; and he ceased not faring till he came to
its skirts and espied afar off a Wady full of fruitful trees and
birds harmonious, singing the praises of Allah, the One, the
Victorious. At this sight he joyed with great joy and stayed not
his steps till, after an hour or so, he came to a ravine in the
rocks, through which the rain torrents fell into the valley. He
made his way down the cleft till he reached the Wady which he had
seen from the mountain-top and walked on therein, gazing right
and left, nor ceased so doing until he came in sight of a great
castle, towering high in air. As he drew near the gates he saw an
old man of comely aspect and face shining with light standing
thereat with a staff of carnelian in his hand, and going up to
him, saluted him. The Shaykh returned his salam and bade him
welcome, saying, 'Sit down, O my son.' So he sat down at the door
of the castle and the old man said to him, 'How camest thou to
this land, untrodden by son of Adam before thee, and whither art
thou bound?' When Janshah heard his words he wept bitterly at the
thought of all the hardships he had suffered and his tears choked
his speech. Quoth the Shaykh, 'O my son, leave weeping; for
indeed thou makest my heart ache.' So saying, he rose and set
somewhat of food before him and said to him, 'Eat.' He ate and
praised Allah Almighty; after which the old man besought him
saying, 'O my son, I would have thee tell me thy tale and
acquaint me with thine adventures.' So Janshah related to him all
that had befallen him, from first to last, whereat the Shaykh
marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then said the Prince, 'Prithee
inform me who is the lord of this valley and to whom doth this
great castle belong?' Answered the old man, 'Know, O my son, this
valley and all that is therein and this castle with all it
containeth belong to the lord Solomon, son of David (on both be
peace!). As for me, my name is Shaykh Nasr,[FN#545] King of the
Birds; for thou must know that the lord Solomon committed this
castle to my charge,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Shaykh
Nasr pursued, 'Thou must know that the lord Solomon com misted
this castle to my charge and taught me the language of birds and
made me ruler over all the fowls which be in the world; wherefore
each and every come hither once in the twelvemonth, and I pass
them in review: then they depart; and this is why I dwell here.'
When Janshah heard this, he wept sore and said to the Shaykh, 'O
my father, how shall I do to get back to my native land?' Replied
the old man, 'Know, O my son, that thou art near to the mountain
Kaf, and there is no departing for thee from this place till the
birds come, when I will give thee in charge to one of them, and
he will bear thee to thy native country. Meanwhile tarry with me
here and eat and drink and divert thyself with viewing the
apartments of this castle.' So Janshah abode with Shaykh Nasr,
taking his pleasure in the Wady and eating of its fruits and
laughing and making merry with the old man, and leading a right
joyous life till the day appointed for the birds to pay their
annual visit to the Governor. Thereupon the Shaykh said to him,
'O Janshah, take the keys of the castle and solace thyself with
exploring all its apartments and viewing whatever be therein, but
as regards such a room, beware and again beware of opening its
door; and if thou gainsay me and open it and enter there, through
nevermore shalt thou know fair fortune.' He repeated this charge
again and again with much instance; then he went forth to meet
the birds, which came up, kind by kind, and kissed his hands.
Such was his case; but as regards Janshah, he went round about
the castle, opening the various doors and viewing the apartments
into which they led, till he came to the room which Shaykh Nasr
had warned him not to open or enter. He looked at the door and
its fashion pleased him, for it had on it a padlock of gold, and
he said to himself, 'This room must be goodlier than all the
others; would Heaven I wist what is within it, that Shaykh Nasr
should forbid me to open its door! There is no help but that I
enter and see what is in this apartment; for whatso is decreed
unto the creature perforce he must fulfil.' So he put out his
hand and unlocked the door and entering, found himself before a
great basin; and hard by it stood a little pavilion, builded all
of gold and silver and crystal, with lattice-windows of jacinth.
The floor was paved with green beryl and balas rubies and
emeralds and other jewels, set in the ground-work mosaic-fashion,
and in the midmost of the pavilion was a jetting fountain in a
golden basin, full of water and girt about with figures of beasts
and birds, cunningly wrought of gold and silver and casting water
from their mouths. When the zephyr blew on them, it entered their
ears and therewith the figures sang out with birdlike song, each
in its own tongue. Beside the fountain was a great open saloon
with a high dais whereon stood a vast throne of carnelian, inlaid
with pearls and jewels, over which was spread a tent of green
silk fifty cubits in width and embroidered with gems fit for seal
rings and purfled with precious metals. Within this tent was a
closet containing the carpet of the lord Solomon (on whom be
peace!); and the pavilion was compassed about with a vast garden
full of fruit trees and streams; while near the palace were beds
of roses and basil and eglantine and all manner sweet-smelling
herbs and flowers. And the trees bore on the same boughs fruits
fresh and dry and the branches swayed gracefully to the wooing of
the wind. All this was in that one apartment and Janshah wondered
thereat till he was weary of wonderment; and he set out to solace
himself in the palace and the garden and to divert himself with
the quaint and curious things they contained. And first looking
at the basin he saw that the gravels of its bed were gems and
jewels and noble metals; and many other strange things were in
that apartment."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Janshah
saw many strange things and admirable in that apartment. Then he
entered the pavilion and mounting the throne, fell asleep under
the tent set up thereover. He slept for a time and, presently
awaking, walked forth and sat down on a stool before the door. As
he sat, marvelling at the goodliness of that place, there flew up
from mid sky three birds, in dove-form but big as eagles, and
lighted on the brink of the basin, where they sported awhile.
Then they put off their feathers and became three
maidens,[FN#546] as they were moons, that had not their like in
the whole world. They plunged into the basin and swam about and
disported themselves and laughed, while Janshah marvelled at
their beauty and loveliness and the grace and symmetry of their
shapes. Presently, they came up out of the water and began
walking about and taking their solace in the garden; and Janshah
seeing them land was like to lose his wits. He rose and followed
them, and when he overtook them, he saluted them and they
returned his salam; after which quoth he, 'Who are ye, O
illustrious Princesses, and whence come ye?' Replied the youngest
damsel, 'We are from the invisible world of Almighty Allah and we
come hither to divert ourselves.' He marvelled at their beauty
and said to the youngest, 'Have ruth on me and deign kindness to
me and take pity on my case and on all that hath befallen me in
my life.' Rejoined she, 'Leave this talk and wend thy ways';
whereat the tears streamed from his eyes, and he sighed heavily
and repeated these couplets,

'She shone out in the garden in garments all of green, * With
     open vest and collars and flowing hair beseen:
'What is thy name?' I asked her, and she replied, 'I'm she * Who
     roasts the hearts of lovers on coals of love and teen.'
Of passion and its anguish to her made my moan; * 'Upon a rock,'
     she answered, 'thy plaints are wasted clean.'
'Even if thy heart,' I told her, 'be rock in very deed, * Yet
     hath God made fair water well from the rock, I
     ween.'[FN#547]

When the maidens heard his verses, they laughed and played and
sang and made merry. Then he brought them somewhat of fruit, and
they ate and drank and slept with him till the morning, when they
donned their feather-suits, and resuming dove shape flew off and
went their way. But as he saw them disappearing from sight, his
reason well nigh fled with them, and he gave a great cry and fell
down in a fainting fit and lay a-swooning all that day. While he
was in this case Shaykh Nasr returned from the Parliament of the
Fowls and sought for Janshah, that he might send him with them to
his native land, but found him not and knew that he had entered
the forbidden room. Now he had already said to the birds, 'With
me is a young man, a mere youth, whom destiny brought hither from
a distant land; and I desire of you that ye take him up and carry
him to his own country.' And all answered, 'We hear and we obey.'
So he ceased not searching for Janshah till he came to the
forbidden door and seeing it open he entered and found the Prince
lying a-swoon under a tree. He fetched scented waters and
sprinkled them on his face, whereupon he revived and turned."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Shaykh Nasr saw Janshah lying a-swoon under the tree he fetched
him somewhat of scented waters and sprinkled them on his face.
Thereupon he revived and turned right and left, but seeing none
by him save the Shaykh, sighed heavily and repeated these
couplets,

'Like fullest moon she shines on happiest night, * Soft sided
     fair, with slender shape bedight.
Her eye-babes charm the world with gramarye; * Her lips remind of
     rose and ruby light.
Her jetty locks make night upon her hips; * Ware, lovers, ware ye
     of that curl's despight!
Yea, soft her sides are, but in love her heart * Outhardens
     flint, surpasses syenite:
And bows of eyebrows shower glancey shafts * Despite the distance
     never fail to smite.
Then, ah, her beauty! all the fair it passes; * Nor any rival her
     who see the light.'

When Shaykh Nasr heard these verses, he said, 'O my son, did I
not warn thee not to open that door and enter that room? But now,
O my son, tell me what thou sawest therein and acquaint me with
all that betided thee.' So Janshah related to him all that had
passed between him and the three maidens, and Shaykh Nasr, who
sat listening in silence said, 'Know, O my son, that these three
maidens are of the daughters of the Jann and come hither every
year for a day, to divert themselves and make merry until mid
afternoon, when they return to their own country.' Janshah asked,
'And where is their country?'; and the old man answered, 'By
Allah, O my son, I wot not:' presently adding, 'but now take
heart and put away this love from thee and come with me, that I
may send thee to thine own land with the birds.' When Janshah
heard this, he gave a great cry and fell down in a trance; and
presently he came to himself, and said, 'O my father indeed I
care not to return to my native land: all I want is to foregather
with these maidens and know, O my father, that I will never again
name my people, though I die before thee.' Then he wept and
cried, 'Enough for me that I look upon the face of her I love,
although it be only once in the year!' And he sighed deeply and
repeated these couplets,

'Would Heaven the Phantom[FN#548] spared the friend at night *
     And would this love for man were ever dight!
Were not my heart afire for love of you, * Tears ne'er had
     stained my cheeks nor dimmed my sight.
By night and day, I bid my heart to bear * Its griefs, while
     fires of love my body blight.'

Then he fell at Shaykh Nasr's feet and kissed them and wept sore,
crying, 'Have pity on me, so Allah take pity on thee and aid me
in my strait so Allah aid thee!' Replied the old man, 'By Allah O
my son, I know nothing of these maidens nor where may be their
country; but, O my son, if thy heart be indeed set on one of
them, tarry with me till this time next year for they will
assuredly reappear; and, when the day of their coming draweth
near, hide thyself under a tree in the garden. As soon as they
have alighted and doffed their feather-robes and plunged into the
lake and are swimming about at a distance from their clothes,
seize the vest of her whom thy soul desireth. When they see thee,
they will come a bank and she, whose coat thou hast taken, will
accost thee and say to thee with the sweetest of speech and the
most witching of smiles, 'Give me my dress, O my brother, that I
may don it and veil my nakedness withal.' But if thou yield to
her prayer and give her back the vest thou wilt never win thy
wish: nay, she will don it and fly away to her folk and thou wilt
nevermore see her again Now when thou hast gained the vest, clap
it under thine armpit and hold it fast, till I return from the
Parliament of the Fowls, when I will make accord between thee and
her and send thee back to thy native land, and the maiden with
thee. And this, O my son, is all I can do for thee, nothing
more.' "--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "quoth
Shaykh Nasr to Janshah, 'Hold fast the feather-robe of her thy
soul desireth and give it not back to her till I return from the
Parliament of the Fowls. And this, O my son, is all I can do for
thee, nothing more.' When Janshah heard this, his heart was
solaced and he abode with Shaykh Nasr yet another year, counting
the days as they passed until the day of the coming of the birds.
And when at last the appointed time arrived the old man said to
him, 'Do as I enjoined thee and charged thee with the maidens in
the matter of the feather-dress, for I go to meet the birds;' and
Janshah replied, 'I hear and I obey, O my father.' Then the
Shaykh departed whilst the Prince walked into the garden and hid
himself under a tree, where none could see him. Here he abode a
first day and a second and a third, but the maidens came not;
whereat he was sore troubled and wept and sighed from a heart
hard tried; and he ceased not weeping and wailing till he fainted
away. When he came to himself, he fell to looking now at the
basin and now at the welkin, and anon at the earth and anon at
the open country, whilst his heart grieved for stress of
love-longing. As he was in this case, behold, the three doves
appeared in the firmament, eagle-sized as before, and flew till
they reached the garden and lighted down beside the basin. They
turned right and left; but saw no one, man or Jann; so they
doffed their feather-suits and became three maidens. Then they
plunged into the basin and swam about, laughing and frolicking;
and all were mother-naked and fair as bars of virgin silver.
Quoth the eldest, 'O my sister, I fear lest there be some one
lying ambushed for us in the pavilion. Answered the second, 'O
sister, since the days of King Solomon none hath entered the
pavilion, be he man or Jann;' and the youngest added, laughing,
'By Allah, O my sisters, if there be any hidden there, he will
assuredly take none but me.' Then they continued sporting and
laughing and Janshah's heart kept fluttering for stress of
passion: but he hid behind the tree so that he saw without being
seen. Presently they swam out to the middle of the basin leaving
their clothes on the bank. Hereupon he sprang to his feet, and
running like the darting levee to the basin's brink, snatched up
the feather-vest of the youngest damsel, her on whom his heart
was set and whose name was Shamsah the Sun-maiden. At this the
girls turned and seeing him, were affrighted and veiled their
shame from him in the water. Then they swam near the shore and
looking on his favour saw that he was bright faced as the moon on
the night of fullness and asked him, 'Who art thou and how camest
thou hither and why hast thou taken the clothes of the lady
Shamsah?'; and he answered, 'Come hither to me and I will tell
you my tale.' Quoth Shamsah, 'What deed is this, and why hast
thou taken my clothes, rather than those of my sisters?' Quoth
he, 'O light of mine eyes, come forth of the water, and I will
recount thee my case and acquaint thee why I chose thee out.'
Quoth she, 'O my lord and coolth of my eyes and fruit of my
heart, give me my clothes, that I may put them on and cover my
nakedness withal; then will I come forth to thee.' But he
replied, 'O Princess of beautiful ones, how can I give thee back
thy clothes and slay myself for love longing? Verily, I will not
give them to thee, till Shaykh Nasr, the king of the birds, shall
return.' Quoth she, 'If thou wilt not give me my clothes withdraw
a little apart from us, that my sisters may land and dress
themselves and lend me somewhat wherewithal to cover my shame.'
'I hear and obey,' answered he, and walked away from them into
the pavilion, whereupon the three Princesses came out and the two
elder, donning their dress, gave Shamsah somewhat thereof, not
enough to fly withal, and she put it on and came forth of the
water, and stood before him, as she were the rising full moon or
a browsing gazelle. Then Shamsah entered the pavilion, where
Janshah was still sitting on the throne; so she saluted him and
taking seat near him, said, 'O fair of face, thou hast undone
thyself and me; but tell us thy adventures that we may ken how it
is with thee.' At these words he wept till he drenched his dress
with his tears; and when she saw that he was distracted for love
of her, she rose and taking him by the hand, made him sit by her
side and wiped away the drops with her sleeve; and said she, 'O
fair of face, leave this weeping and tell us thy tale.' So he
related to her all that had befallen him and described to her all
he had seen,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
lady Shamsah said to Janshah, 'Tell us thy tale;' so he related
to her all that had befallen him; and, after she had lent
attentive ear she sighed and said, 'O my lord, since thou art so
fondly in love with me, give me my dress, that I may fly to my
folk, I and my sisters, and tell them what affection thou hast
conceived for me, and after I will come back to thee and carry
thee to thine own country.' When he heard this, he wept sore and
replied, 'Is it lawful to thee before Allah to slay me
wrongfully?' She asked, 'O my lord, why should I do such wrongous
deed?'; and he answered, 'If I give thee thy gear thou wilt fly
away from me, and I shall die forthright.' Princess Shamsah
laughed at this and so did her sisters; then said she to him, 'Be
of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for I must
needs marry thee.' So saying, she bent down to him and embraced
him and pressing him to her breast kissed him between the eyes
and on his cheeks. They clipped and clasped each other awhile,
after which they drew apart and sat down on the throne. Then the
eldest Princess went out into the garden and, plucking somewhat
of fruits and flowers, brought them into the pavilion; and they
ate and drank and laughed and sported and made merry. Now Janshah
was singular in beauty and loveliness and slender shape and
symmetry and grace, and the Princess Shamsah said to him, 'O my
beloved, by Allah, I love thee with exceeding love and will never
leave thee!' When he heard her words, his breast broadened and he
laughed for joy till he showed his teeth; and they abode thus
awhile in mirth and gladness and frolic. And when they were at
the height of their pleasure and joyance, behold, Shaykh Nasr
returned from the Parliament of the Fowls and came in to them;
whereupon they all rose to him and saluted him and kissed his
hands. He gave them welcome and bade them be seated. So they sat
down and he said to Princess Shamsah, 'Verily this youth loveth
thee with exceeding love; Allah upon thee, deal kindly with him,
for he is of the great ones of mankind and of the sons of the
kings, and his father ruleth over the land of Kabul and his reign
compasseth a mighty empire.' Quoth she, 'I hear and I obey thy
behest'; and, kissing the Shaykh's hands stood before him in
respect. Quoth he, 'If thou say sooth, swear to me by Allah that
thou wilt never betray him, what while thou abidest in the bonds
of life.' So she swore a great oath that she would never betray
Janshah, but would assuredly marry him, and added, 'Know, O
Shaykh Nasr, that I never will forsake him.' The Shaykh believed
in her oath and said to Janshah, 'Thanks be to Allah, who hath
made you arrive at this understanding!' Hereupon the Prince
rejoiced with exceeding joy, and he and Shamsah abode three
months with Shaykh Nasr, feasting and toying and making merry."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that, "Janshah
and the lady Shamsah abode three months with Shaykh Nasr,
feasting and toying and making merry. And at the end of that time
she said to Janshah, 'I wish to go with thee to thy mother land,
where thou shalt marry me and we will abide there.' 'To hear is
to obey,' answered he and took counsel with Shaykh Nasr who said
to him, 'Go thou home, I commend her to thy care.' Then said she,
'O Shaykh Nasr, bid him render me my feather-suit.' So the Shaykh
bade Janshah give it to her, and he went straightways into the
pavilion and brought it out for her. There upon she donned it and
said to him, 'Mount my back and shut thine eyes and stop thine
ears, so thou mayst not hear the roar of the revolving sphere;
and keep fast hold of my feathers, lest thou fall off.' He did as
she bade him and, as she stretched her wings to fly, Shaykh Nasr
said, 'Wait a while till I describe to thee the land Kabul, lest
you twain miss your way.' So she delayed till he had said his say
and had bidden them farewell, commending the Prince to her care.
She took leave of her sisters and bade them return to her folk
and tell them what had befallen her with Janshah; then, rising
into the air without stay or delay she flew off, like the wafts
of the wind or the ramping leven. Her sisters also took flight
and returning home delivered her message to their people. And she
stayed not her course from the forenoon till the hour of mid-
afternoon prayer (Janshah being still on her back), when she
espied afar off a Wady abounding in trees and streams and she
said to Janshah, 'I am thinking to alight in this valley, that we
may solace ourselves amongst its trees and herbage and here rest
for the night.' Quoth he, "Do what seemeth meet to thee!' So she
swooped down from the lift and alighted in the Wady, when Janshah
dismounted and kissing her between the eyes,[FN#549] sat with her
awhile on the bank of a river there; then they rose and wandered
about the valley, taking their pleasure therein and eating of the
fruits of the trees, until nightfall, when they lay down under a
tree and slept till the morning dawned. As soon as it was day,
the Princess arose and, bidding Janshah mount, flew on with him
till noon, when she perceived by the appearance of the buildings
which Shaykh Nasr had described to her, that they were nearing
the city Kabul. So she swooped down from the welkin and alighted
in a wide plain, a blooming champaign, wherein were gazelles
straying and springs playing and rivers flowing and ripe fruits
growing. So Janshah dismounted and kissed her between the eyes;
and she asked him, 'O my beloved and coolth of mine eyes, knowest
thou how many days' journey we have come since yesterday?'; and
he answered, 'No,' when she said, 'We have come thirty months'
journey.' Quoth he, 'Praised be Allah for safety!' Then they sat
down side by side and ate and drank and toyed and laughed. And
whilst they were thus pleasantly engaged, behold, there came up
to them two of the King's Mamelukes of those who had been of the
Prince's company, one of them was he whom he had left with the
horses, when he embarked in the fishing-boat and the other had
been of his escort in the chase. As soon as they saw Janshah,
both knew him and saluted him; then said they, 'With thy leave,
we will go to thy sire and bear him the glad tidings of thy
coming.' Replied the Prince, 'Go ye to my father and acquaint him
with my case, and fetch us tents, for we will tarry here seven
days to rest ourselves till he make ready his retinue to meet us,
that we may enter in stateliest state.'"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
"Janshah said to the two Mamelukes, 'Go ye to my sire and
acquaint him with my case and fetch us tents, for we will abide
here seven days to rest ourselves, till he make ready his retinue
to meet us that we may enter in the stateliest state.' So the
officers hastened back to King Teghmus and said to him, 'Good
news, O King of the age!' Asked he, 'What good tidings bring ye:
is my son Janshah come back?'; and they answered, 'Yes, thy son
Janshah hath returned from his strangerhood and is now near at
hand in the Kirani mead.' Now when the King heard this, he joyed
with great joy and fell down in a swoon for excess of gladness;
then, coming to himself, he bade his Wazir give each of the
Mamelukes a splendid suit of honour and a sum of money. The
minister replied, 'I hear and obey,' and forthright did his
bidding and said to them, 'Take this in turn for the good tidings
ye bring, whether ye lie or say sooth.' They replied, 'Indeed we
lie not, for but now we sat with him and saluted him and kissed
his hands and he bade us fetch him tents, for that he would
sojourn in the meadow seven days, till such time as the Wazirs
and Emirs and Grandees should come out to meet him.' Quoth the
King, 'How is it with my son?' and quoth they, 'He hath with him
a Houri, as he had brought her out of Paradise.' At this, King
Teghmus bade beat the kettledrums and sound the trumpets for
gladness, and despatched messengers to announce the good news to
Janshah's mother and to the wives of the Emirs and Wazirs and
Lords of the realm: so the criers spread themselves about the
city and acquainted the people with the coming of Prince Janshah.
Then the King made ready, and, setting out for the Kirani meadow
with his horsemen and footmen, came upon Janshah who was sitting
at rest with the lady Shamsah beside him and, behold, all
suddenly drew in sight. The Prince rose to his feet and walked
forward to meet them; and the troops knew him and dismounted, to
salute him and kiss his hands: after which he set out preceded by
the men in single file till he came to his sire, who, at sight of
his son threw himself from his horse's back and clasped him to
his bosom and wept flooding tears of joy. Then they took horse
again with the retinue riding to the right and left and fared
forward till they came to the river banks; when the troops
alighted and pitched their tents and pavilions and standards to
the blare of trump and the piping of fife and the dub-a-dub of
drum and tom-tom. Moreover the King bade the tent pitchers set up
a pavilion of red silk for the Princess Shamsah, who put off her
scanty raiment of feathers for fine robes and, entering the
pavilion, there took seat. And as she sat in her beauty, behold,
the King and his son Janshah came in to her, and when she saw
Teghmus, she rose and kissed the ground before him. The King sat
down and seating Janshah on his right hand and Princess Shamsah
on his left, bade her welcome and said to his son, 'Tell me all
that hath befallen thee in this thy long strangerhood.' So
Janshah related to him the whole of his adventures from first to
last, whereat he marvelled with exceeding marvel and turning to
the Princess, said, 'Laud to Allah for that He hath caused thee
to reunite me with my son! Verily this is of His exceeding
bounty!'"[FN#550]--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King
Teghmus said to the lady Shamsah, 'Laud to Allah for that He hath
caused thee to reunite me with my son! Verily this is of His
exceeding bounty.' And now I would have thee ask of me what thou
wilt, that I may do it in thine honour.' Quoth she, 'I ask of
thee that thou build me a palace in the midst of a flower garden,
with water running under it.' And the King answered, 'I hear and
obey.' And behold, up came Janshah's mother, attended by all the
wives of the Wazirs and Emirs and nobles and city notables. When
her son had sight of her, he rose and leaving the tent, went
forth to meet her and they embraced a long while, whilst the
Queen wept for excess of joy and with tears trickling from her
eyes repeated the following verses,

'Joy so o'ercometh me, for stress of joy * In that which
     gladdeneth me I fain shed tears: 
Tears are become your nature, O my eyes, * Who weep for joyance
     as for griefs and fears.'

And they complained to each other of all their hearts had
suffered from the long separation. Then the King departed to his
pavilion and Janshah carried his mother to his own tent, where
they sat talking till there came up some of the lady Shamsah's
attendants who said, The Princess is now walking hither in order
to salute thee. When the Queen heard this, she rose and going to
meet Shamsah, saluted her and seated her awhile by her side.
Presently the Queen and her retinue of noble women, the spouses
of the Emirs and Grandees, returned with Princess Shamsah to the
tent occupied by her daughter-in-law and sat there. Meanwhile,
King Teghmus gave great largesse to his levies and liege and
rejoiced in his son with exceeding joy, and they tarried there
ten days, feasting and merry making and living a most joyous
life. At the end of this time, the King commanded a march and
they all returned to the capital, so he took horse surrounded by
all the troops with the Wazirs and Chamberlains to his right and
left nor ceased they faring till they entered the city, which was
decorated after the goodliest fashion; for the folk had adorned
the houses with precious stuffs and jewellery and spread costly
bro cedes under the hoofs of the horses. The drums beat for glad
tidings and the Grandees of the kingdom rejoiced and brought rich
gifts and the lookers-on were filled with amazement. Furthermore,
they fed the mendicants and Fakirs and held high festival for the
space of ten days, and the lady Shamsah joyed with exceeding joy
whenas she saw this. Then King Teghmus summoned architects and
builders and men of art and bade them build a palace in that
garden. So they straightway proceeded to do his bidding; and,
when Janshah knew of his sire's command he caused the artificers
to fetch a block of white marble and carve it and hollow it in
the semblance of a chest; which being done he took the feather-
vest of Princess Shamsah wherewith she had flown with him through
the air: then, sealing the cover with melted lead, he ordered
them to bury the box in the foundations and build over it the
arches whereon the palace was to rest. They did as he bade them,
nor was it long before the palace was finished: then they
furnished it and it was a magnificent edifice, standing in the
midst of the garden, with streams flowing under its
walls.[FN#551] Upon this the King caused Janshah's wedding to be
celebrated with the greatest splendour and they brought the bride
to the castle in state procession and went their ways. When the
lady Shamsah entered, she smelt the scent of her feather-gear."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when the
lady Shamsah entered the new palace, she smelt the scent of her
flying feather-gear and knew where it was and determined to take
it. So she waited till midnight, when Janshah was drowned in
sleep; then she rose and going straight to the place where the
marble coffer was buried under the arches she hollowed the ground
alongside till she came upon it; when she removed the lead where
with it was soldered and, taking out the feather-suit, put it on.
Then she flew high in air and perching on the pinnacle of the
palace, cried out to those who were therein, saying, 'I pray you
fetch me Janshah, that I may bid him farewell.' So they told him
and he came out and, seeing her on the terrace roof of the
palace, clad in her feather-raiment, asked her, 'Why hast thou
done this deed?'; and she answered 'O my beloved and coolth of
mine eyes and fruit of my heart, by Allah, I love thee passing
dear and I rejoice with exceeding joy in that I have restored
thee to thy friends and country and thou hast seen thy mother and
father. And now, if thou love me as I love thee, come to me at
Takni, the Castle of Jewels.' So saying, she flew away forthright
to find her family and friends, and Janshah fell down fainting,
being well-nigh dead for despair. They carried the news to King
Teghmus, who mounted at once and riding to the palace, found his
son lying senseless on the ground; whereat he wept knowing that
the swoon was caused by the loss of his love, and sprinkled rose-
water on his face.[FN#552] When the Prince came to himself and
saw his sire sitting at his head, he wept at the thought of
losing his wife and the King asked what had befallen him. So he
replied, 'Know, O my father, that the lady Shamsah is of the
daughters of the Jann and she hath done such and such' (telling
him all that had happened); and the King said, 'O my son, be not
troubled and thus concerned, for I will assemble all the
merchants and wayfarers in the land and enquire of them anent
that castle. If we can find out where it is, we will journey
thither and demand the Princess Shamsah of her people, and we
hope in Allah the Almighty that He will give her back to thee and
thou shalt consummate thy marriage.' Then he went out and,
calling his four Wazirs without stay or delay, bade them assemble
all the merchants and voyagers in the city and question them of
Takni, the Castle of Jewels, adding, 'Whoso knoweth it and can
guide us thither, I will surely give him fifty thousand gold
pieces.' The Wazirs accordingly went forth at once and did as the
King bade them, but neither trader nor traveller could give them
news of Takni, the Castle of Jewels; so they returned and told
the King. Thereupon he bade bring beautiful slave-girls and
concubines and singers and players upon instruments of music,
whose like are not found but with the Kings: and sent them to
Janshah, so haply they might divert him from the love of the lady
Shamsah. Moreover, he despatched couriers and spies to all the
lands and islands and climes, to enquire for Takni, the Castle of
Jewels, and they made quest for it two months long, but none
could give them news thereof. So they returned and told the King,
whereupon he wept bitter tears and going in to his son found
Janshah sitting amidst the concubines and singers and players on
harp and zither and so forth, not one of whom could console him
for the lady Shamsah. Quoth Teghmus, O my son, I can find none
who knoweth this Castle of Jewels; but I will bring thee a fairer
one than she.' When Janshah heard this his eyes ran over with
tears and he recited these two couplets,

'Patience hath fled, but passion fareth not; * And all my frame
     with pine is fever-hot:
When will the days my lot with Shamsah join? * Lo, all my bones
     with passion-lowe go rot!'

Now there was a deadly feud between King Teghmus and a certain
King of Hind, by name Kafid, who had great plenty of troops and
warriors and champions; and under his hand were a thousand
puissant chieftains, each ruling over a thousand tribes whereof
every one could muster four thousand cavaliers. He reigned over a
thousand cities each guarded by a thousand forts and he had four
Wazirs and under him ruled Emirs, Princes and Sovereigns; and
indeed he was a King of great might and prowess whose armies
filled the whole earth. Now King Teghmus had made war upon him
and ravaged his reign and slain his men and of his treasures had
made gain. But when it came to King Kafid's knowledge that King
Teghmus was occupied with the love of his son, so that he
neglected the affairs of the state and his troops were grown few
and weak by reason of his care and concern for his son's state,
he summoned his Wazirs and Emirs and said to them, 'Ye all know
that whilom King Teghmus invaded our dominions and plundered our
possessions and slew my father and brethren, nor indeed is there
one of you, but he hath harried his lands and carried off his
goods and made prize of his wives and slain some kinsmen of his.
Now I have heard this day that he is absorbed in the love of his
son Janshah, and that his troops are grown few and weak; and this
is the time to take our blood revenge on him. So make ready for
the march and don ye your harness of battle; and let nothing stay
or delay you, and we will go to him and fall upon him and slay
him and his son, and possess ourselves of his reign.'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
"Kafid, King of Hind, commanded his troops and armies to mount
and make for the dominions of King Teghmus, saying, 'Get ye ready
for the march and don ye your harness of war; and let nothing
stay or delay you; so we will go to him and fall upon him and
slay him and his son and possess ourselves of his reign.' They
all answered with one voice, saying, 'We hear and obey,' and fell
at once to equipping themselves and levying troops; and they
ceased not their preparations for three months and, when all was
in readiness, they beat the drums and sounded the trumps and flew
the flags and banners: then King Kafid set out at the head of his
host and they fared on till they reached the frontiers of the
land of Kabul, the dominions of King Teghmus, where they began to
harry the land and do havoc among the folk, slaughtering the old
and taking the young prisoners. When the news reached King
Teghmus, he was wroth with exceeding wrath and assembling his
Grandees and officers of state, said to them 'Know that Kafid
hath come to our land and hath entered the realm we command and
is resolved to fight us hand to hand, and he leadeth troops and
champions and warriors, whose number none knoweth save Allah
Almighty; what deme deem ye?' Replied they, 'O King of the age,
let us go out to him and give him battle and drive him forth of
our country; and thus deem we.' So he bade them prepare for
battle and brought forth to them hauberks and cuirasses and
helmets and swords and all manner of warlike gear, such as lay
low warriors and do to death the champions of mankind. So the
troops and braves and champions flocked together and they set up
the standards and beat the drums and sounded the trumpets and
clashed the cymbals and piped on the pipes; and King Teghmus
marched out at the head of his army, to meet the hosts of Hind.
And when he drew near the foe, he called a halt, and encamping
with his host in the Zahran Valley,[FN#553] hard by the frontier
of Kabul despatched to King Kafid by messenger the following
letter: 'Know that what thou hast done is of the doings of the
villain rabble and wert thou indeed a King, the son of a King,
thou hadst not done thus, nor hadst thou invaded my kingdom and
slain my subjects and plundered their property and wrought
upright upon them. Knowest thou not that all this is the fashion
of a tyrant! Verily, had I known that thou durst harry my
dominions, I had come to thee before thy coming and had prevented
thee this long while since. Yet, even now, if thou wilt retire
and leave mischief between us and thee, well and good; but if
thou return not, meet me in the listed field and measure thyself
with me in cut and thrust.' Lastly he sealed his letter and
committed to an officer of his army and sent with him spies to
spy him out news. The messenger fared forth with the missive and,
drawing near the enemy's camp, he descried a multitude of tents
of silk and satin, with pennons of blue sendal, and amongst them
a great pavilion of red satin, surrounded by a host of guards. He
ceased not to advance till he made this tent and found on asking
that it was that of King Kafid, whom he saw seated on a chair set
with jewels, in the midst of his Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees.
So he brought out the letter and straightway there came up to him
a company of guards, who took it from him and carried it to the
King; and Kafid read it and wrote a reply to this purport: 'After
the usual invocations, We let King Teghmus know that we mean to
take our blood-revenge on thee and wash out our stain and waste
thy reign and rend the curtain in twain and slay the old men and
enslave the young men. But to-morrow, come thou forth to combat
in the open plain, and to show thee thrust and fight will I
deign.' Then he sealed the letter and delivered it to the
messenger, who carried it to King Teghmus."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King Kafid
delivered the answering letter to the messenger who carried it to
King Teghmus and delivered it, after kissing the ground between
his hands. Then he reported all that he had seen, saying, 'O King
of the age, I espied warriors and horsemen and footmen beyond
count nor can I assist thee to the amount.' When Teghmus read the
reply and comprehended its contents, he was with furious rage
enraged and bade his Wazir Ayn Zar take horse and fall upon the
army of Kafid with a thousand cavaliers, in the middle watch of
the night when they would easily ride home and slay all before
them. Ayn Zar replied, 'I hear and I obey,' and at once went
forth to do his bidding. Now King Kafid had a Wazir,
Ghatrafan[FN#554] by name, whom he bade take five thousand horse
and attack the host of King Teghmus in like manner. So Ghatrafan
did his bidding and set out on his enterprise marching till
midnight. Thus the two parties met halfway and the Wazir
Ghatrafan fell upon the Wazir, Ayn Zar. Then man cried out
against man and there befell sore battle between them till break
of day, when Kafid's men were routed and fled back to their King
in confusion. As Kafid saw this, he was wroth beyond measure and
said to the fugitives, 'Woe to you! What hath befallen you, that
ye hav