e lost your captains?' and they replied, 'O King of the
age, as the Wazir Ghatrafan rode forth to fall upon King Teghmus,
there appeared to us halfway and when night was half over, the
Wazir, Ayn Zar, with cavaliers and champions, and we met on the
slopes of Wady Zahran; but ere we were where we found ourselves
in the enemy's midst, eye meeting eye; and we fought a fierce
fight with them from midnight till morning, many on either side
being slain. Then the Wazir and his men fell to shouting and
smiting the elephants on the face till they took fright at their
furious blows, and turning tail to flee, trampled down the
horsemen, whilst none could see other for the clouds of dust. The
blood ran like a rain torrent and had we not fled, we had all
been cut off to the last man.' When King Kafid heard this, he
exclaimed, 'May the sun not bless you and may he be wroth with
you and sore be his wrath!' Meanwhile Ayn Zar, the Wazir,
returned to King Teghmus and told him what had happened. The King
gave him joy of his safety and rejoiced greatly and bade beat the
drums and sound the trumpets, in honour of the victory; after
which he called the roll of his troops and behold, two hundred of
his stoutest champions had fallen. Then King Kafid marched his
army into the field and drew them out ordered for battle in
fifteen lines of ten thousand horses each, under the command of
three hundred captains, mounted on elephants and chosen from
amongst the doughtiest of his warriors and his champions. So he
set up his standards and banners and beat the drums and blew the
trumpets whilst the braves sallied forth, offering battle. As for
King Teghmus, he drew out his troops line after line and lo!
there were ten of ten thousand horses each, and with him were an
hundred champions, riding on his right hand and on his left. Then
fared forward to the fight each renowned knight, and the hosts
clashed together in their might, whilst the earth for all its
wideness was straitened because of the multitude of the cavaliers
and ears were deafened by drums and cymbals beating and pipes and
hautboys sounding and trumpets blaring and by the thunder of
horse-tramp and the shouting of men. The dust arched in canopy
over their heads and they fought a sore fight from the first of
the day till the fall of darkness, when they separated and each
army drew off to its own camp."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "each army
drew off to its own camp. Then King Kafid called the roll of his
troops and, finding that he had lost five thousand men, raged
with great rage; and King Teghmus mustered his men and seeing
that of them were slain three thousand riders, the bravest of his
braves, was wroth with exceeding wrath. On the morrow King Kafid
again pushed into the plain and did duty as before, while each
man strove his best to snatch victory for himself; and Kafid
cried out to his men, saying, 'Is there any of you will sally
forth into the field and open us the chapter of fray and fight?'
And behold came out from the ranks a warrior named Barkayk, a
mighty man of war who, when he reached the King, alighted from
his elephant and kissing the earth before him, sought of him
leave to challenge the foe to combat singular. Then he mounted
his elephant and driving into mid-field, cried out, 'Who is for
duello, who is for derring do, who is for knightly devoir?' When
King Teghmus heard this, he said to his troops, 'Which of you
will do single battle with this sworder?' And behold, a cavalier
came out from the ranks, mounted on a charger, mighty of make,
and driving up to the King kissed the earth before him and craved
his permission to engage Barkayk. Then he mounted again and
charged at Barkayk, who said to him, 'Who art thou and what art
thou called, that thou makest mock of me by coming out against me
and challenging me, alone?' 'My name is Ghazanfar[FN#555] son of
Kamkhil,' replied the Kabul champion; and the other, 'I have
heard tell of thee in my own country; so up and do battle between
the ranks of the braves!' Hearing these words Ghazanfar drew a
mace of iron from under his thigh and Barkayk took his good sword
in hand, and they laid on load till Barkayk smote Ghazanfar on
the head with his blade, but the morion turned the blow and no
hurt befell him therefrom; whereupon Ghazanfar, in his turn,
dealt Barkayk so terrible a stroke on the head with his mace,
that he levelled him down to his elephant's back and slew him.
With this out sallied another and crying to Ghazanfar, 'Who be
thou that thou shouldst slay my brother?'; hurled a javelin at
him with such force that it pierced his thigh and nailed his coat
of mail to his flesh. Then Ghazanfar, feeling his hurt, hent his
sword in hand and smote at Barkayk's brother and cut him in
sunder, and he fell to the earth, wallowing in his life blood,
whilst the challenger of Kabul galloped back to King Teghmus. Now
when Kafid saw the death of his champions, he cried out to his
troops, saying, 'Down with you to the plain and strike with might
and main!' as also did King Teghmus, and the two armies fought
the fiercest of fights. Horse neighed against horse and man cried
out upon man and brands were bared, whilst the drums beat and the
trumpets blared; and horseman charged upon horseman and every
brave of renown pushed forward, whilst the faint of heart fled
from the lunge of lance and men heard nought but slogan-cry and
the clash and clang of armoury. Slain were the warriors that were
slain[FN#556] and they stayed not from the mellay till the
decline of the sun in the heavenly dome, when the Kings drew off
their armies and returned each to its own camp.[FN#557] Then King
Teghmus took tally of his men and found that he had lost five
thousand, and four standards had been broken to bits, whereat he
was sore an-angered; whilst King Kafid in like manner counted his
troops and found that he had lost six hundred, the bravest of his
braves, and nine standards were wanting to the full tale. The two
armies ceased joining battle and rested on their arms three days'
space, after which Kafid wrote a letter and sent it by messenger
to a King called Fakun al-Kalb (with whom he claimed kinship by
the spindle side): and this kinsman forthwith mustered his men
and marched to meet the King of Hind."--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King Fakun
mustered his men and marched to meet the King of Hind: and
whileas King Teghmus was sitting at his pleasance, there came one
in to him and said, 'I see from afar a cloud of dust spireing
high in air and overspreading the lift.' So he commanded a
company to fare forth and learn the meaning of this; and, crying,
'To hear is to obey,' they sallied out and presently returned and
said to him, 'O King, when we drew near the cloud of dust, the
wind rent it and it lifted and showed seven standards and under
each standard three thousand horse, making for King Kafid's
camp.' Then King Fakun joined himself to the King of Hind and
saluting him, asked, 'How is it with thee, and what be this war
in which thou arrest?'; and Kafid answered, 'Knowest thou not
that King Teghmus is my enemy and the murtherer of my father and
brothers? Wherefore I am come forth to do battle with him and
take my brood wreak on him.' Quoth Fakun, 'The blessing of the
sun be upon thee!'; and the King of Hind carried King Fakun
al-Kalb to his tent and rejoiced in him with exceeding joy. Such
was the case of the two hostile Kings; but as regards King
Janshah, he abode two months shut up in his palace, without
seeing his father or allowing one of the damsels in his service
to come in to him; at the end of which time he grew troubled and
restless and said to his attendants, 'What aileth my father that
he cometh not to visit me?' They told him that he had gone forth
to do battle with King Kafid, whereupon quoth Janshah, 'Bring me
my steed, that I may go to my sire.' They replied, 'We hear and
obey,' and brought his horse; but he said in himself, 'I am taken
up with the thought of myself and my love and I deem well to
mount and ride for the city of the Jews, where haply Allah shall
grant me the boon to meet the merchant who hired me for the ruby
business and may be he will deal with me as he dealt before, for
none knoweth whence good cometh.' So he took with him a thousand
horse and set out, the folk saying, 'At last Janshah hath fared
forth to join his father in the field, and to fight by his side;'
and they stinted not pushing on till dusk, when they halted for
the night in a vast meadow. As soon as he knew that all his men
were asleep, the Prince rose privily and girding his waist,
mounted his horse and rode away intending to make Baghdad,
because he had heard from the Jews that a caravan came thence to
their city once in every two years and he made up his mind to
journey thither with the next cafilah. When his men awoke and
missed the Prince and his horse, they mounted and sought him
right and left but, finding no trace of him, rejoined his father
and told him what his son had done; whereat he was wroth beyond
measure and cast the crown from his head, whilst the sparks were
like to fly from his mouth, and he said 'There is no Majesty and
there is no Might but in Allah! Verily I have lost my son, and
the enemy is still before me.' But his Wazirs and vassals said to
him, 'Patience, O King of the age! Patience bringeth weal in
wake.' Meanwhile Janshah, parted from his lover and pained for
his father, was in sore sorrow and dismay, with heart seared and
eyes tear-bleared and unable to sleep night or day. But when his
father heard the loss his host had endured, he declined battle,
and fled before King Kafid, and retiring to his city, closed the
gates and strengthened the walls. Thereupon King Kafid followed
him and sat down before the town; offering battle seven nights
and eight days, after which he withdrew to his tents, to tend his
wounded while the citizens defended themselves as they best
could, fortifying the place and setting up mangonels and other
engines on the walls. Such was the condition of the two Kings,
and war raged between them for a space of seven years."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Kings
Teghmus and Kafid continued in this condition for seven years;
but, as regards Janshah, he rode through wild and wold and when
ever he came to a town he asked anent Takni, the Castle of
Jewels, but none knew of it and all answered, 'Of a truth we
never heard of such place, not even by name.' At last he happened
to enquire concerning the city of the Jews from a merchant who
told him that it was situated in the extreme Orient, adding, 'A
caravan will start this very month for the city of Mizrakan in
Hind; whither do thou accompany us and we will fare on to
Khorasan and thence to the city of Shima'un and Khwarazm, from
which latter place the City of the Jews is distant a year and
three months' journey.' So Janshah waited till the departure of
the caravan, when he joined himself thereto and journeyed, till
he reached the city of Mizrakan whence, after vainly asking for
Takni, the Castle of Jewels, he set out and enduring on the way
great hardships and perils galore and the extreme of hunger and
thirst, he arrived at the town of Shima'un. Here he made enquiry
for the City of the Jews, and they directed him to the road
thither. So he fared forth and journeyed days and nights till he
came to the place where he had given the apes the slip, and
continued his journey thence to the river, on the opposite bank
of which stood the City of the Jews. He sat down on the shore and
waited till the Sabbath came round and the river dried up by
decree of Allah Almighty, when he crossed over to the opposite
bank and, entering the city, betook himself to the house wherein
he had lodged on his former journey. The Jew and his family
saluted him and rejoiced in his return and, setting meat and
drink before him, asked, 'Where hast thou been during thine
absence?'; and he answered, 'In the kingdom of Almighty
Allah!'[FN#558] He lay with them that night and on the morrow he
went out to solace himself with a walk about the city and
presently heard a crier crying aloud and saying, 'O folk, who
will earn a thousand gold pieces and a fair slave-girl and do
half a day's work for us?' So Janshah went up to him and said, 'I
will do this work.'[FN#559] Quoth the crier, 'Follow me,' and
carrying him to the house of the Jew merchant, where he had been
afore time, said, 'This young man will do thy need.' The merchant
not recognising him gave him welcome and carried him into the
Harim, where he set meat and drink before him, and he ate and
drank. Then he brought him the money and formally made over to
him the handsome slave-girl with whom he lay that night. As soon
as morning dawned, he took the diners and the damsel and,
committing them to his Jew host with whom he had lodged afore
time, returned to the merchant, who mounted and rode out with
him, till they came to the foot of the tall and towering
mountain, where the merchant, bringing out a knife and cords,
said to Janshah, 'Throw the mare.' So he threw her and bound her
four legs with the cords and slaughtered her and cut off her head
and four limbs and slit her belly, as ordered by the Jew;
whereupon quoth he, 'Enter her belly, till I sew it up on thee;
and whatsoever thou seest therein, tell me of it, for this is the
work whose wage thou hast taken.' So Janshah entered the mare's
belly and the merchant sewed it up on him; then, withdrawing to a
fair distance, hid himself. And after an hour a great bird
swooped down from the lift and, snatching up the carcass in his
pounces soared high toward the sky. Then he perched upon the
mountain peak and would have eaten the prey, but Janshah sensing
his intent took out his knife and slit the mare's belly and came
forth. The bird was scared at his sight and flew away, and
Janshah went up to a place whence he could see below, and looking
down, espied the merchant standing at the foot of the mountain,
as he were a sparrow. So he cried out to him, 'What is thy will,
O merchant?' Replied the Jew, 'Throw me down of the stones that
lie about thee, that I may direct thee in the way down.' Quoth
Janshah, 'Thou art he who didst with me thus and thus five years
ago, and through thee I suffered hunger and thirst and sore toil
and much trouble; and now thou hast brought me hither once more
and thinkest to destroy me. By Allah, I will not throw thee
aught!' So saying, he turned from him and set out for where lived
Shaykh Nasr, the King of the Birds."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Janshah
took the way for where lived Shaykh Nasr, the King of the Birds.
And he ceased not faring on many days and nights, tearful-eyed
and heavy-hearted; eating, when he was anhungered, of the growth
of the ground and drinking, when he thirsted, of its streams,
till he came in sight of the Castle of the lord Solomon and saw
Shaykh Nasr sitting at the gate. So he hastened up to him and
kissed his hands; and the Shaykh saluted him and bade him welcome
and said to him, 'O my son, what aileth thee that thou returnest
to this place, after I sent thee home with the Princess Shamsah,
cool of eyes and broad of breast?' Janshah wept and told him all
that had befallen him and how she had flown away from him,
saying, 'An thou love me, come to me in Takni, the Castle of
Jewels;' at which the old man marvelled and said, 'By Allah, O my
son, I know it not, nor, by the virtue of our lord Solomon, have
I ever in my life heard its name!' Quoth Janshah, 'What shall I
do? I am dying of love and longing.' Quoth Shaykh Nasr, 'Take
patience until the coming of the birds, when we will enquire at
them of Takni, the Castle of Jewels; haply one of them shall wot
thereof.' So Janshah's heart was comforted and, entering the
Palace, he went straight to the chamber which gave upon the Lake
in which he had seen the three maidens. After this he abode with
Shaykh Nasr for a while and, one day as he was sitting with him,
the Shaykh said, 'O my son, rejoice for the time of the birds'
coming draweth nigh.' Janshah gladdened to hear the news; and
after a few days the birds began to come and Shaykh Nasr said to
him, 'O my son, learn these names[FN#560] and address thyself
with me to meet the birds.' Presently, the fowls came flying up
and saluted Shaykh Nasr, kind after kind, and he asked them of
Takni, the Castle of Jewels, but they all made answer, 'Never
heard we of such a place.' At these words Janshah wept and
lamented till he swooned away; whereupon Shaykh Nasr called a
huge volatile and said to him, 'Carry this youth to the land of
Kabul,' and described to him the country and the way thither.
Then he set Janshah on the bird's back, saying, 'Be careful to
sit straight and beware of leaning to either side, else thou wilt
be torn to pieces in the air; and stop thine ears from the wind,
lest thou be dazed by the noise of the revolving sphere and the
roaring of the seas.' Janshah resolved to do his bidding and the
bird took flight high in sky and flew with him a day and a night,
till he set him down by the King of the Beasts, whose name was
Shah Badri, and said to his rider, 'We have gone astray from the
way directed by Shaykh Nasr.' And he would have taken him up
again and flown on with him; but Janshah said, 'Go thy ways and
leave me here; till I die on this spot or I find Takni, the
Castle of Jewels, I will not return to my country.' So the fowl
left him with Shah Badri, King of the Beasts and flew away. The
King thereupon said to him, 'O my son, who art thou and whence
comest thou with yonder great bird?' So Janshah told him his
story from beginning to end, whereat Shah Badri marvelled and
said, 'By the virtue of the lord Solomon, I know not of this
castle; but if any one of the beasts my subjects know it, we will
reward him bountifully and send thee by him thither.' Hereat
Janshah wept bitterly but presently he took patience and abode
with Shah Badri, and after a short time the King of the Beasts
said to him, 'O my son, take these tablets and commit to memory
that which is therein; and when the beasts come, we will question
them of the Castle of Jewels.' "--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
King of the Beasts said to Janshah, 'Commit to memory what is in
these tablets; and whenas the beasts come, we will ask them anent
that castle.' He did as the King bade him, and before long, up
came the beasts, kind after kind, and saluted Shah Badri who
questioned them of Takni, the Castle of Jewels, but they all
replied, 'We know not this castle, nor ever heard we of it.' At
this Janshah wept and lamented for that he had not gone with the
bird that brought him from Shaykh Nasr's castle; but Shah Badri
said to him, 'Grieve not, O my son, for I have a brother, King
Shimakh highs, who is older than I; he was once a prisoner to
King Solomon, for that he rebelled against him; nor is there
among the Jinn one elder than he and Shaykh Nasr. Belike he
knoweth of this castle; at any rate he ruleth over all the Jinn
in this country side.' So saying he set Janshah on the back of a
beast and gave him a letter to his brother, commending him to his
care. The beast set off with the Prince forthwith and fared on
days and nights, till it came to King Shimakh's abiding place.
And when it caught sight of the King it stood still afar off,
whereupon Janshah alighted and walked on, till he found himself
in the presence. Then he kissed hands and presented his brother's
letter. The King read the missive and, having mastered the
meaning, welcomed the Prince, saying, 'By Allah, O my son, in all
my born days I never saw nor heard of this castle!' adding (as
Janshah burst into tears), 'but tell me thy story and who and
whence thou art and whither thou art bound.' So Janshah related
to him his history from beginning to end, at which Shimakh
marvelled and said, 'O my son, I do not believe that even the
lord Solomon ever saw this castle or heard thereof; but O my
son,[FN#561] I know a monk in the mountains, who is exceeding old
and whom all birds and beasts and Jann obey; for he ceased not
his conjurations against the Kings of the Jann, till they
submitted themselves to him in their own despite, by reason of
the might of his oaths and his magic; and now all the birds and
the beasts are his servants. I myself once rebelled against King
Solomon and he sent against me this monk, the only being who
could overcome me with his craft and his conjurations and his
gramarye; then he imprisoned me, and since that time I have been
his vassal. He hath travelled in all countries and quarters and
knoweth all ways and regions and places and castles and cities;
nor do I think there is any place hidden from his ken. So needs
must I send thee to him; haply he may direct thee to the Castle
of Jewels; and, if he cannot do this, none can; for all things
obey him, birds and beasts and the very mountains and come at his
beck and call, by reason of his skill in magic. Moreover, by the
might of his egromancy he hath made a staff, in three pieces, and
this he planteth in the earth and conjureth over it; whereupon
flesh and blood issue from the first piece, sweet milk from the
second and wheat and barley from the third; then he withdraweth
the staff and returneth to his place which is highs the Hermitage
of Diamonds. And this magical monk is a cunning inventor and
artificer of all manner strange works; and he is a crafty warlock
full of guiles and wiles, an arch deceiver of wondrous
wickedness, who hath mastered every kind of magic and witchcraft.
His name is Yaghmus and to him I must needs send thee on the back
of a big bird with four wings,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Shimakh
said to Janshah, 'I must needs send thee to the monk Yaghmus on
the back of a big bird with four wings, each measuring thirty
Hashimi[FN#562] cubits in length; and it hath feet like those of
an elephant, but it flieth only twice a year.' And there was with
King Shimakh an officer, by name Timshun, who used every day to
carry off two Bactrian[FN#563] camels from the land of Irak and
cut them up for the bird that it might eat them. So King Shimakh
bade the fowl take up Janshah and bear him to the cell of the
hermit Yaghmus; and it rose into the air and flew on days and
nights, till it came to the Mountain of the Citadels and the
Hermitage of Diamonds where Janshah alighted and going up to the
hermitage, found Yaghmus the Monk at his devotions. So he entered
the chapel and, kissing the ground stood respectfully before the
hermit. When Yaghmus saw him, he said, 'Welcome, O my son, O
parted from thy home and garred ferforth to roam! Tell me the
cause of thy coming hither.' So Janshah wept and acquainted him
with all that had befallen him from beginning to end and that he
was in quest of the Castle of Jewels. The Monk marvelled greatly
at his story and said, 'By Allah, O my son, never in my life
heard I of this castle, nor ever saw I one who had heard of it or
had seen it, for all I was alive in the days of Noah, Allah's
Prophet (on whom be peace!),[FN#564] and I have ruled the birds
and beasts and Jinn ever since his time; nor do I believe that
Solomon David son himself knew of it. But wait till the birds and
beasts and chiefs of the Jann come to do their homage to me and I
will question them of it; peradventure, some one of them may be
able to give us news of it and Allah Almighty shall make all
things easy to thee.' So Janshah homed with the hermit, until the
day of the assembly, when all the birds and beasts and Jann came
to swear fealty; and Yaghmus and his guest questioned them anent
Takni, the Castle of Jewels; but they all replied, 'We never saw
or heard of such a place.' At this, Janshah fell a weeping and
lamenting and humbled himself before the Most High; but, as he
was thus engaged, behold, there flew down from the heights of air
another bird, big of bulk and black of blee, which had tarried
behind the rest, and kissed the hermit's hands. Yaghmus asked it
of Takni, the Castle of Jewels, and it answered, saying 'O Monk,
when I and my brothers were small chicks we abode behind the
Mountain Kaf on a hill of crystal, in the midst of a great
desert; and our father and mother used to set out for it every
morning and in the evening come back with our food. They went out
early one day, and were absent from us a sennight and hunger was
sore upon us; but on the eighth day they returned, both weeping,
and we asked them the reason of their absence. Quoth they: 'A
Marid swooped down on us and carried us off in his claws to
Takni, the Castle of Jewels, and brought us before King Shahlan,
who would have slain us; but we told him that we had left behind
us a brood of fledgelings; so he spared our lives and let us go.
And were my parents yet in the bonds of life they would give thee
news of the castle.' When Janshah heard this, he wept bitter
tears and said to the hermit, 'Prithee bid the bird carry me to
his father and mother's nest on the crystal hill, behind the
Mountain Kaf.' So the hermit said, 'O bird, I desire thee to obey
this youth in whatsoever he may command thee.' 'I hear and obey
thy bidding,' replied the fowl; and, taking Janshah on its back,
flew with him days and nights without ceasing till it set him
down on the Hill of Crystal and there alighted. And having
delayed there a resting while, it again set him on its back and
flew off and ceased not flying for two whole days till it reached
the spot where the nest was."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the fowl
ceased not flying with Janshah two full days; till it reached the
spot where the nest was, and set him down there and said, 'O
Janshah, this is where our nest was.' He wept sore and replied,
'I pray thee bear me farther on to where thy parents used to
forage for food.' The bird consented; so it took him up again and
flew on with him seven nights and eight days, till it set him
down on the top of a high hill Karmus highs and left him there
saying, 'I know of no land behind this hill.' Then it flew away
and Janshah sat down on the hill-top and fell asleep. When he
awoke, he saw a something gleaming afar off as it were lightning
and filling the firmament with its flashings; and he wondered
what this sheen could be without wotting that it was the Castle
he sought. So he descended the mountain and made towards the
light, which came from Takni, the Castle of Jewels, distant two
months' journey from Karmus, the hill whereon he had alit, and
its foundations were fashioned of red rubies and its buildings of
yellow gold. Moreover, it had a thousand turrets builded of
precious metals, and stones of price studded and set in the
minerals brought from the Main of Murks, and on this account it
was named the Castle of Jewels, Takni. It was a vast great castle
and the name of its king was King Shahlan, the father of the lady
Shamsah and her sisters. Such was the case with Janshah; but as
regards Princess Shamsah, when she fled from Janshah, she made
straight for the Castle of Jewels and told her father and mother
all that had passed between the Prince and herself; how he had
wandered the world and seen its marvels and wonders and how
fondly he loved her and how dearly she loved him. Quoth they,
'Thou hast not dealt righteously with him, as Allah would have
thee deal.' Moreover King Shahlan repeated the story to his
guards and officers of the Marids of the Jinn and bade them bring
him every mortal they should see. For the lady Shamsah had said
to her parents, 'Janshah loveth me with passionate love and
forsure he will follow me; for when flying from his father's roof
I cried to him, 'An thou love me, seek me at Takni, the Castle of
Jewels!' Now when Janshah beheld that sheen and shine, he made
straight for it wishing to find out what it might be. And as
chance would have it, Shamsah had that very day despatched a
Marid on an occasion in the direction of the hill Karmus, and on
his way thither he caught sight of a man, a mortal; so he
hastened up to him and saluted him. Janshah was terrified at his
sight, but returned his salam, and the Marid asked, 'What is thy
name?' and he answered, 'My name is Janshah, and I have fallen
madly in love with a Jinniyah known as Princess Shamsah, who
captivated me by her beauty and loveliness; but despite my dear
love she fled from the palace wherein I placed her and behold, I
am here in quest of her.' Herewith he wept with bitter weeping.
The Marid looked at him and his heart burned with pity on hearing
the sad tale, and he said, 'Weep not, for surely thou art come to
thy desire. Know that she loveth thee fondly and hath told her
parents of thy love for her, and all in yonder castle love thee
for her sake; so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool of
tear.' Then he took him on his shoulders and made off with him to
the Castle of Jewels, Takni. Thereupon the bearers of fair
tidings hastened to report his coming and when the news reached
Shamsah and her father and mother, they all rejoiced with
exceeding joy, and King Shahlan took horse and rode out,
commanding all his guards and Ifrits and Marids honourably to
meet the Prince."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King
Shahlan commanded all his guards and Ifrits and Marids to meet
the Prince; and, as soon as he came up with him, he dismounted
and embraced him, and Janshah kissed his hand. Then Shahlan bade
put on him a robe of honour of many coloured silk, laced with
gold and set with jewels, and a coronet such as man never saw,
and, mounting him on a splendid mare of the steeds of the Kings
of the Jinn, took horse himself and, with an immense retinue
riding on the right hand and the left, brought him in great state
to the Castle. Janshah marvelled at the splendour of this
edifice, with its walls builded of rubies and other jewels and
its pavement of crystal and jasper and emerald, and fell a
weeping at the memory of his past miseries; but the King and
Queen, Shamsah's mother, wiped away his tears and said, 'Now no
more weeping and be of good cheer, for thou hast won to thy
will.' Then Shahlan carried him into the inner court of the
Castle, where he was received by a multitude of beautiful damsels
and pages and black Jinn-slaves, who seated him in the place of
honour and stood to do him service, whilst he was lost in
amazement at the goodliness of the place, and its walls all
edified of precious metals and jewels of price. Presently King
Shahlan repaired to his hall of audience, where he sat down on
his throne and, bidding the slave-girls and the pages introduce
the Prince, rose to receive him and seated him by his side on the
throne. Then he ordered the tables to be spread and they ate and
drank and washed their hands; after which in came the Queen
Shamsah's mother, and saluting Janshah, bade him welcome in these
words, 'Thou hast come to thy desire after weariness and thine
eyes shall now sleep after watching; so praised be Allah for thy
safety!' Thus saying, she went away and forthwith returned with
the Princess Shamsah, who saluted Janshah and kissed his hands,
hanging her head in shame and confusion before him and her
parents, after which as many of her sisters as were in the palace
came up to him and greeted him in like manner. Then quoth the
Queen to him, 'Welcome, O my son, our daughter Shamsah hath
indeed sinned against thee, but do thou pardon her misdeed for
our sakes.' When Janshah heard this, he cried out and fell down
fainting, whereat the King marvelled and they sprinkled on his
face rose water mingled with musk and civet, till he came to
himself and, looking at Princess Shamsah, said, 'Praised be Allah
who hath brought me to my desire and hath quenched the fire of my
heart!' Replied she, 'May He preserve thee from the Fire!, but
now tell me, O Janshah, what hath befallen thee since our parting
and how thou madest thy way to this place; seeing that few even
of the Jann ever heard of Takni, the Castle of Jewels; and we are
independent of all the Kings nor any wotteth the road hither.'
Thereupon he related to her every adventure and peril and
hardship he had suffered and how he had left his father at war
with King Kafid, ending with these words, 'And all for thy sake,
my lady Shamsah!' Quoth the Queen, 'Now hast thou thy heart's
desire, for the Princess is thy handmaid, and we give her in free
gift to thee.' Janshah joyed exceedingly at these words and the
Queen added, 'Next month, if it be the will of Almighty Allah, we
will have a brave wedding and celebrate the marriage festival and
after the knot is tied we will send you both back to thy native
land, with an escort of a thousand Marids of our body-guard, the
least of whom, an thou bid him slay King Kafid and his folk,
would surely destroy them to the last man in the twinkling of an
eye. Furthermore if it please thee we will send thee, year after
year, a company of which each and every can so do with all thy
foes.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
lady Shamsah's mother ended with saying, 'And if it so please
thee we will send thee, year after year, a company of which each
and every can destroy thy foes to the last man.' Then King
Shahlan sat down on his throne and, summoning his Grandees and
Officers of state, bade them make ready for the marriage-
festivities and decorate the city seven days and nights. 'We hear
and we obey,' answered they and busied themselves two months in
the preparations, after which they celebrated the marriage of the
Prince and Princess and held a mighty festival, never was there
its like. Then they brought Janshah in to his bride and he abode
with her in all solace of life and delight for two years, at the
end of which time he said to her, 'Thy father promised to send us
to my native land, that we might pass one year there and the next
here.' Answered she, I hear and obey,' and going in to King
Shahlan at nightfall told him what the Prince had said. Quoth he,
'I consent; but have patience with me till the first of the
month, that I may make ready for your departure.' She repeated
these words to her husband and they waited till the appointed
time, when the King bade his Marids bring out to them a great
litter of red gold, set with pearls and jewels and covered with a
canopy of green silk, purfled in a profusion of colours and
embroidered with precious stones, dazzling with its goodliness
the eyes of every beholder. He chose out four of his Marids to
carry the litter in whichever of the four quarters the riders
might choose. Moreover, he gave his daughter three hundred
beautiful damsels to wait upon her and bestowed on Janshah the
like number of white slaves of the sons of the Jinn. Then the
lady Shamsah took formal leave of her mother and sisters and all
her kith and kin; and her father fared forth with them. So the
four Marids took up the litter, each by one corner, and rising
under it like birds in air, flew onward with it between earth and
heaven till mid-day, when the King bade them set it down and all
alighted. Then they took leave of one another and King Shahlan
commended Shamsah to the Prince's care, and giving them in charge
to the Marids, returned to the Castle of Jewels, whilst the
Prince and Princess remounted the litter, and the Marids taking
it up, flew on for ten whole days, in each of which they
accomplished thirty months' journey, till they sighted the
capital of King Teghmus. Now one of them knew the land of Kabul;
so when he saw the city, he bade the others let down the litter
at that populous place which was the capital."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the Marid
guards let down the litter at the capital of King Teghmus who had
been routed and had fled from his foes into the city, where he
was in sore straits, King Kafid having laid close siege to him.
He sought to save himself by making peace with the King of Hind,
but his enemy would give him no quarter; so seeing himself
without resource or means of relief, he determined to strangle
himself and to die and be at rest from this trouble and misery.
Accordingly he bade his Wazirs and Emirs farewell and entered his
house to take leave of his Harim; and the whole realm was full of
weeping and wailing and lamentation and woe. And whilst this rout
and hurly-burly was enacting, behold, the Marids descended with
the litter upon the palace that was in the citadel, and Janshah
bade them set it down in the midst of the Divan. They did his
bidding and he alighted with his company of handmaids and
Mamelukes; and, seeing all the folk of the city in straits and
desolation and sore distress, said to the Princess, 'O love of my
heart and coolth of mine eyes, look in what a piteous plight is
my sire!' There upon she bade the Marid guard fall upon the
beleaguering host and slay them, saying, 'Kill ye all, even to
the last man;' and Janshah commanded one of them, by name
Karatash,[FN#565] who was exceeding strong and valiant, to bring
King Kafid to him in chains. So they set down the litter and
covered it with the canopy; then, having waited till midnight,
they attacked the enemy's camp one of them being a match for ten;
or at least for eight. And while these smote the foes with iron
maces, those mounted their magical elephants and soared high in
the lift, and then swooping down and snatching up their
opponents, tare them to pieces in mid air. But Karatash made
straight for Kafid's tent where he found him lying in a couch; so
he took him up, shrieking for fear, and flew with him to Janshah,
who bade the four Marids bind him on the litter and hang him high
in the air over his camp, that he might witness the slaughter of
his men. They did as the Prince commanded them and left Kafid,
who had swooned for fear, hanging between earth and air and
buffeting his face for grief. As for King Teghmus, when he saw
his son, he well-nigh died for excess of joy and, crying with a
loud cry, fell down in a swoon. They sprinkled rose-water on his
face, till he came to himself, when he and his son embraced and
wept with sore weeping; for he knew not that the Jinn guard were
battling with King Kafid's men. Then Princess Shamsah accosted
the King and kissing his hand, said to him, 'Sire, be pleased to
go up with me to the palace-roof and witness the slaughter of thy
foes by my father's Marids.' So he went up to the terrace-roof
and sitting down there with his daughter-in-law, enjoyed watching
the Marids do havoc among the besiegers and break a way through
the length and breadth of them. For one of them smote with his
iron mace upon the elephants and their riders and pounded them
till man was not to be distinguished from beast; whilst another
shouted in the faces of those who fled, so that they fell down
dead; and the third caught up a score of horsemen, beasts and
all; and, towering with them high in air, cast them down on
earth, so that they were torn in pieces. And this was high
enjoyment for Janshah and his father and the lady Shamsah."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King
Teghmus and his son and daughter-in-law went up to the terrace
roof and enjoyed a prospect of the Jinn-guards battling with the
beleaguering host. And King Kafid (still hanging between heaven
and earth) also saw the slaughter of his troops and wept sore and
buffeted his face; nor did the carnage cease among the army of
Hind for two whole days, till they were cut off even to the last
man. Then Janshah commanded a Marid, by name Shimwal, chain up
King Kafid with manacles and fetters, and imprison him in a tower
called the Black Bulwark. And when his bidding was done, King
Teghmus bade beat the drums and despatched messengers to announce
the glad news to Janshah's mother, informing her of his approach;
whereupon she mounted in great joy and she no sooner espied her
son than she clasped him in her arms and swooned away for stress
of gladness. They sprinkled rose-water on her face, till she came
to herself, when she embraced him again and again wept for excess
of joy. And when the lady Shamsah knew of her coming, she came to
her and saluted her; and they embraced each other and after
remaining embraced for an hour sat down to converse. Then King
Teghmus threw open the city gates and despatched couriers to all
parts of the kingdom, to spread the tidings of his happy
deliverance; whereupon all his princely Vassals and Emirs and the
Grandees of the realm flocked to salute him and give him joy of
his victory and of the safe return of his son; and they brought
him great store of rich offerings and curious presents. The
visits and oblations continued for some time, after which the
King made a second and a more splendid bride-feast for the
Princess Shamsah and bade decorate the city and held high
festival. Lastly they unveiled and paraded the bride before
Janshah, with apparel and ornaments of the utmost magnificence,
and when her bridegroom went in to her he presented her with an
hundred beautiful slave-girls to wait upon her. Some days after
this, the Princess repaired to the King and interceded with him
for Kafid, saying, 'Suffer him return to his own land, and if
henceforward he be minded to do thee a hurt, I will bid one of
the Jinn-guard snatch him up and bring him to thee.' Replied
Teghmus, 'I hear and I obey,' and bade Shimwal bring him the
prisoner, who came manacled and fettered and kissed earth between
his hands. Then he commanded to strike off his chains and,
mounting him on a lame mare, said to him, 'Verily Princess
Shamsah hath interceded for thee: so begone to thy kingdom, but
if thou fall again to thine old tricks, she will send one of the
Marids to seize thee and bring thee hither.' Thereupon King Kafid
set off home wards, in the sorriest of plights,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King Kafid
set off homewards in the sorriest of plights, whilst Janshah and
his wife abode in all solace and delight of life, making the most
of its joyance and happiness. All this recounted the youth
sitting between the tombs unto Bulukiya, ending with, 'And
behold, I am Janshah who witnessed all these things, O my
brother, O Bulukiya!' Then Bulukiya who was wandering the world
in his love for Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!) asked
Janshah, 'O my brother, what be these two sepulchres and why
sittest thou between them and what causeth thy weeping?' He
answered, 'Know, O Bulukiya, that we abode in all solace and
delight of life, passing one year at home and the next at Takni,
the Castle of Jewels, whither we betook not ourselves but in the
litter borne by the Marids and flying between heaven and earth.'
Quoth Bulukiya, 'O my brother, O Janshah, what was the distance
between the Castle and thy home?' Quoth he, 'Every day we
accomplished a journey of thirty months and the time we took was
ten days. We abode on this wise a many of years till, one year we
set out for the Castle of Jewels, as was our wont, and on the way
thither alighted from the litter in this island to rest and take
our pleasure therein. We sat down on the riverbank and ate and
drank; after which the Lady Shamsah, having a mind to bathe, put
off her clothes and plunged into the water. Her women did
likewise and they swam about awhile, whilst I walked on along the
bank of the stream leaving them to swim about and play with one
another. And behold, a huge shark of the monsters of the deep
seized the Princess by the leg, without touching any of the
girls; and she cried out and died forthright, whilst the damsels
fled out of the river to the pavilion, to escape from the shark.
But after awhile they returned and taking up her corpse carried
her to the litter. Now when I saw her dead, I fell down fainting
and they sprinkled water on my face, till I recovered and wept
over her. Then I despatched the Jinn-guards to her parents and
family, announcing what had befallen her; and in the shortest
time they came to the spot and washed her and shrouded her, after
which they buried her by the river-side and made mourning for
her. They would have carried me with them to their own country;
but I said to King Shahlan, 'I beseech thee to dig me a grave
beside her tomb, that, when I die, I may be buried by her side in
that grave.' Accordingly, the King commanded one of his Marids to
do as I wished, after which they departed and left me here to
weep and mourn for her till I die. And this is my story and the
cause of my sojourn between these two tombs.' And he repeated
these two couplets,[FN#566]

'The house, sweet heart, is now no home to me * Since thou art
     gone, nor neighbour neighbourly,
The friend whilom I took to heart, no more * Is friend, and
     brightest lights lose brilliancy.'

But when Bulukiya heard out Janshah's tale he marvelled,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Bulukiya heard out Janshah's tale he wondered and exclaimed, 'By
Allah, methought I had indeed wandered over the world and
compassed it about; but now I forget all I have seen after
listening to these adventures of thine!' He was silent a while
and then resumed, 'I beg thee, of thy favour and courtesy, to
direct me in the way of safety.' So Janshah directed him into the
right road, and Bulukiya farewelled him and went his ways." All
this the Serpent-queen related to Hasib Karim al-Din, and he
asked her, "But how knowest thou of these things?"; and she
answered, "O Hasib, thou must ken that I had occasion, some five-
and-twenty years ago, to send one of my largest serpents to Egypt
and gave her a letter for Bulukiya, saluting him. So she went
there willingly for she had a daughter in the land called Bint
Shumukh[FN#567]; and after asking anent Bulukiya she found him
and gave him my missive. He read it and replied to the messenger
snake, 'Thou comest from the Queen of the Serpents whom I am
minded to visit for I have an occasion to her.' She replied, 'I
hear and obey.' Then she bore him to her daughter of whom she
took leave and said to her companion, 'Close thine eyes.' So he
closed them and opening them again, behold, he found himself on
the mountain where I now am. Then his guide carried him to a
great serpent, whom he saluted; whereupon quoth she, 'Didst thou
deliver the missive to Bulukiya?'; and she replied, 'Even so; and
he hath accompanied me and here he standeth.' Presently Bulukiya
asked after me, the Serpent-queen, and the great serpent
answered, 'She hath gone to the mountain Kaf with all her host,
as is her wont in winter; but next summer she will come hither
again. As often as she goeth thither, she appointeth me to reign
in her room, during her absence; and if thou have any occasion to
her, I will accomplish it for thee.' Said he, 'I beg thee to
bring me the herb, which whoso crusheth and drinketh the juice
thereof, sickeneth not neither groweth grey nor dieth.' 'I will
not bring it,' said the serpent, 'till thou tell me what befell
thee since thou leftest the Queen of the Serpents, to go with
Affan in quest of King Solomon's tomb.' So he related to her all
his travels and adventures, together with the history of Janshah,
and said at last, 'Grant me my request, that I may return to mine
own country.' Replied the serpent, 'By the virtue of the lord
Solomon, I know not where is to be found the herb whereof thou
speakest.' Then she bade the serpent which had brought him
thither, carry him back to Egypt: so the messenger obeyed her and
said to him, 'Shut thine eyes!' He did so and, opening them
again, found himself on the mountain Mukattam.[FN#568] When I
returned from the mountain Kaf (added the Queen) the serpent, my
deputy, informed me of Bulukiya's visit and gave me his
salutations and repeated to me his story and his meeting with
Janshah. And this, O Hasib, is how I came to know the adventures
of Bulukiya and the history of Janshah." Thereupon Hasib said to
her, "O Queen, deign recount to me what befell Bulukiya as
regards his return to Egypt." She replied, "Know, O Hasib, that
when he parted from Janshah he fared on nights and days till he
came to a great sea; so he anointed his feet with the juice of
the magical herb and, walking over the face of the waters, sped
onwards till he came to an island abounding in trees and springs
and fruits, as it were the Garden of Eden. He landed and walked
about, till he saw an immense tree, with leaves as big as the
sails of a ship. So he went up to the tree and found under it a
table spread with all manner meats, whilst on a branch of the
branches sat a great bird, whose body was of pearls and leek-
green emeralds, its feet of silver, its beak of red carnelian and
its plumery of precious metals; and it was engaged in singing the
praises of Allah the Most High and blessing Mohammed (on whom be
benediction and peace!)"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Bulukiya landed and walked about the island he found therein many
marvels, especially a bird whose body was of pearls and leek
green emeralds and its plumery of precious metals; and it was
engaged in singing the praises of Allah the Most High and
blessing Mohammed (upon whom be benediction and peace!). Seeing
this he said, 'Who and what art thou?' Quoth the bird, 'I am one
of the birds of Eden and followed Adam when Allah Almighty cast
him out thence. And know, O my brother, that Allah also cast out
with him four leaves of the trees of the garden to cover his
nakedness withal, and they fell to the ground after awhile. One
of them was eaten by a worm, and of it came silk: the gazelles
ate the second and thence proceeded musk, the third was eaten by
bees and gave rise to honey, whilst the fourth fell in the land
of Hind and from it sprang all manner of spices. As for me, I
wandered over the face of earth till Allah deigned give me this
island for a dwelling-place, and I took up my abode here. And
every Friday from night till morning the Saints and
Princes[FN#569] of the Faith flock to this place and make pious
visitation and eat from this table spread by Allah Almighty; and
after they have eaten, the table is taken up again to Heaven: nor
doth the food ever waste or corrupt.' So Bulukiya ate his fill of
the meats and praised the Great Creator. And presently, behold,
there came up Al-Khizr[FN#570] (with whom be peace!), at sight of
whom Bulukiya rose and saluting him, was about to withdraw, when
t