he bird said to him, 'Sit, O Bulukiya, in the presence of
Al-Khizr, on whom be peace!' So he sat down again, and Al-Khizr
said to him, 'Let me know who thou art and tell me thy tale.'
Thereupon Bulukiya related to him all his adventures from
beginning to end and asked, 'O my lord, how far is it hence to
Cairo?' 'Five and ninety years' journey,' replied the Prophet;
whereupon Bulukiya burst into tears; then, falling at Al-Khizr's
feet, kissed them and said to him, 'I beseech thee deliver me
from this strangerhood and thy reward be with Allah, for that I
am nigh upon death and know not what to do.' Quoth Al-Khizr,
'Pray to Allah Almighty that He permit me to carry thee to Cairo,
ere thou perish.' So Bulukiya wept and humbled himself before
Allah who granted his prayer, and by inspiration bade Al-Khizr
bear him to his people. Then said the Prophet, 'Lift thy head,
for Allah hath heard thy prayer and hath inspired me to do what
thou desires; so take fast hold of me with both thy hands and
shut thine eyes.' The Prince did as he was bidden and Al-Khizr
stepped a single step forwards, then said to him, 'Open thine
eyes!' So Bulukiya opened his eyes and found himself at the door
of his palace at Cairo. He turned, to take leave of Al-Khizr, but
found no trace of him."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Bulukiya, standing at the gate of his palace, turned to take
leave of Al-Khizr, he found no trace of him and entered the
palace. When his mother saw him, she cried with a loud cry and
swooned away for excess of joy, and they sprinkled water upon her
face. After awhile she came to herself and embraced her son and
wept with sore weeping, whilst Bulukiya wept and laughed by
turns. Then all his friends and kindred came and gave him joy of
his safe return, and the news was noised abroad in the land and
there came to him presents from all parts. Moreover, they beat
the drums and blew the flutes and rejoiced mightily. Then
Bulukiya related to them his adventures ending with recounting
how Al-Khizr had set him down at his palace door, whereat they
marvelled exceedingly and wept, till all were a-weary of
weeping." Hasib wondered at the Queen's tale and shed many tears
over it; then he again besought her to let him return to his
family; but she said, "I fear me, O Hasib, that when thou gettest
back to thy country thou wilt fail of thy promise and prove
traitor to thine oath and enter the Hammam." But he swore to her
another solemn oath that he would never again enter the baths as
long as he lived; whereupon she called a serpent and bade her
carry him up to the surface of the earth. So the serpent took him
and led him from place to place, till she brought him out on the
platform-edge of an abandoned cistern and there left him. Upon
this he walked to the city and, coming to his house by the last
of the day, at the yellowing of the sun, knocked at the door. His
mother opened it and seeing her son screamed out and threw
herself upon him and wept for excess of joy. His wife heard her
mother-in-law weeping; so she came out to her and seeing her
husband, saluted him and kissed his hands; and each rejoiced in
other with exceeding joy of all three. Then they entered the
house and sat down to converse and presently Hasib asked his
mother of the woodcutters, who had left him to perish in the
cistern. Quoth she, "They came and told me that a wolf had eaten
thee in the Wady. As for them, they are become merchants and own
houses and shops, and the world is grown wide for them. But every
day they bring me meat and drink, and thus have they done until
the present time." Quoth Hasib, "To-morrow do thou go to them and
say, "My son Hasib Karim al-Din hath returned from his travels;
so come ye to meet him and salute him." Accordingly, when morning
dawned, she repaired to the woodcutters' houses and delivered to
them her son's message, which when they heard, they changed
colour, and saying, "We hear and obey," gave her each a suit of
silk, embroidered with gold, adding, "Present this to thy good
son[FN#571] and tell him that we will be with him to-morrow." She
assented and returning to Hasib gave him their presents and
message. Meanwhile, the woodcutters called together a number of
merchants and, acquainting them with all that had passed between
themselves and Hasib, took counsel with them what they should do.
Quoth the merchants, "It behoveth each one of you to give him
half his monies and Mamelukes." And they all agreed to do this;
so on the next day, each of them took half his wealth and, going
in to Hasib, saluted him and kissed his hands. Then they laid
before him what they had brought, saying, "This is of thy
bounties, and we are in thy hands." He accepted their peace-
offering and said, "What is past is past: that which befell us
was decreed of Allah, and destiny doeth away with dexterity."
Quoth they, "Come, let us walk about and take our solace in the
city and visit the Hammam." Quoth he, "Not so: I have taken an
oath never again to enter the baths, so long as I live." Rejoined
they, at least come to our homes that we may entertain thee." He
agreed to this, and went to their houses and each of them
entertained him for a night and a day; nor did they cease to do
thus for a whole sennight, being seven in number. And now Hasib
was master of monies and houses and shops, and the merchants of
the city foregathered with him and he told them all that had
befallen him. He became one of the chiefs of the guild and abode
on this wise awhile, till it happened one day, as he was walking
about the streets, that he passed the door of a Hammam, whose
keeper was one of his companions. When the bathman, who was
standing without, caught his eye he ran up to him and saluted him
and embraced him, saying, "Favour me by entering the bath and
there wash and be rubbed that I may show thee hospitality." Hasib
refused, alleging that he had taken a solemn oath never again to
enter the Hammam; but the bathman was instant with him, saying,
"Be my three wives triply divorced, can thou enter not and be
washed!" When Hasib heard him thus conjure him, he was confounded
and replied, "O my brother, hast thou a mind to ruin my house and
make my children orphans and lay a load of sin upon my neck?" But
his friend threw himself at his feet and kissed them, saying, "My
happiness dependeth upon thy entering, and be the sin on the neck
of me!" Then all the servants of the bath set upon Hasib and
dragging him in pulled off his clothes. But hardly had he sat
down against the wall and begun to pour water on his head when a
score of men accosted him, saying, "Rise, O man, and come with us
to the Sultan, for thou art his debtor." Then they despatched one
of them as messenger to the Sultan's Minister, who straightway
took horse and rode, attended by threescore Mamelukes, to the
baths, where he alighted and going in to Hasib, saluted him and
said, "Welcome to thee!" Then he gave the bathman an hundred
diners and, mounting Hasib on a horse he had brought with him,
returned with him and all his men to the Sultan's palace. Here he
bade them aid Hasib to dismount and, after seating him
comfortably, set food before him; and when they had eaten and
drunken and washed their hands, the Wazir clad him in two dresses
of honour each worth five thousand diners and said to him, "Know
that Allah hath been merciful to us in sending thee; for the
Sultan is nigh upon death by leprosy, and the books tell us that
his life is in thy hands. Then, accompanied by a host of
Grandees, he took him wondering withal and carried him through
the seven doorways of the palace, till they came to the King's
chamber. Now the name of this King was Karazdan, King of Persia
and of the Seven Countries, and under his sway were an hundred
sovereign princes sitting on chairs of red gold, and ten thousand
valiant captains, under each one's hand an hundred deputies and
as many headsmen armed with sword and axe. They found the King
lying on his bed with his face swathed in a napkin, and groaning
for excess of pain. When Hasib saw this ordinance, his wit was
dazed for awe of the King; so he kissed the ground before him,
and prayed a blessing on him. Then the Grand Wazir, whose name
was Shamhur, rose and welcoming Hasib, seated him on a high chair
at the King's right hand."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Shamhur rose to Hasib and seated him on a chair at the right hand
of King Karazdan; after which he called for food and the tables
were laid. And when they had eaten and drunken and washed their
hands, Shamhur stood up (while all present also stood to do him
honour) and, approaching Hasib said to him, "We are all thy
servants and will give thee whatsoever thou askest, even were it
one half the kingdom, so thou wilt but cure the King." Saying
this, he led him by the hand to the royal couch, and Hasib,
uncovering the King's face, saw that he was at last fatal stage
of the disease; so he wondered at their hoping for a cure. But
the Wazir kissed his hand and repeated his offers and ended with
saying, "All we want of thee is to heal our King:" so he said to
the Wazir, "True that I am the son of Allah's prophet, Daniel,
but I know nothing of his art: for they put me thirty days in the
school of medicine and I learnt nothing of the craft. I would
well I knew somewhat thereof and might heal the King." Hearing
this, the Grand Wazir said, "Do not multiply words upon us; for
though we should gather together to us physicians from the East
and from the West, none could cure the King save thou." Answered
Hasib, "How can I make him whole, seeing I know neither his case
nor its cure?" Quoth the Minister, "His healing is in thy hands,"
and quoth Hasib, "If I knew the remedy of his sickness, I would
heal him." Thereupon the Wazir rejoined, "Thou keenest a cure
right well; the remedy of his sickness is the Queen of the
Serpents, and thou knowest her abiding-place and hast been with
her." When Hasib heard this, he knew that all this came of his
entering the Baths, and repented whenas repentance availed him
naught; then said he, "What is the Queen of the Serpents? I know
her not nor ever in all my life heard I of this name." Retorted
the Wazir, "Deny not the knowledge of her, for I have proof that
thou knowest her and hast passed two years with her." Repeated
Hasib, "Verily, I never saw her nor even heard of her till this
moment;" upon which Shamhur opened a book and, after making
sundry calculations, raised his head and spake as follows. "The
Queen of the Serpents shall foregather with a man who shall abide
with her two years; then shall he return from her and come forth
to the surface of the earth, and when he entereth the Hammam bath
his belly will become black." Then said he, "Look at thy belly."
So Hasib looked at his own belly and behold, it was black: but he
persisted in his denial and said, "My belly was black from the
day my mother bare me." Said the Wazir, "I had stationed three
Mamelukes at the door of every Hammam, bidding them note all who
entered and let me know when they found one whose belly was
black: so, when thou enteredst, they looked at thy belly and,
finding it black, sent and told me, after we had well-nigh lost
hope of coming upon thee. All we want of thee is to show us the
place whence thou camest out and after go thy ways; for we have
those with us who will take the Queen of the Serpents and fetch
her to us." Then all the other Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees
flocked about Hasib who sorely repented of his misdeed; and they
conjured him, till they were weary, to show them the abode of the
Queen; but he ceased not saying, "I never saw nor heard of the
matter." Then the Grand Wazir called the hangman and bade him
strip Hasib and beat him a sore beating; and so they did till he
saw death face to face, for excess of pain, and the Wazir said,
"We have proof that thou knowest the abiding-place of the Queen
of the Serpents: why wilt thou persist in denial? Show us the
place whence thou camest out and go from us; we have with us one
who will take her, and no harm shall befall thee." Then he raised
him and bade give him a dress of honour of cloth of red gold,
embroidered with jewels, and spoke him fair till Hasib yielded
and said, "I will show you the place." At this the Wazir rejoiced
with great joy and took horse with all his many and rode, guided
by Hasib, and never drew rein till they came to the mountain
containing the cavern wherein he had found the cistern full of
honey. There all dismounted and followed him as he entered,
sighing and weeping, and showed them the well whence he had
issued; whereupon the Wazir sat down thereby and, sprinkling
perfumes upon a chafing-dish, began to mutter charms and
conjurations; for he was a crafty magician and diviner and
skilled in spiritual arts.  He repeated three several formulas of
conjuration and between each threw fresh incense upon the fire,
crying out and saying, "Come forth, O Queen of the Serpents!;"
when behold, the water of the well sank down and a great door
opened in the side, from which came a mighty noise of crying like
unto thunder, so terrible that they thought the well had caved in
and all present fell down fainting; nay, some even died for
fright. Presently, there issued from the well a serpent as big as
an elephant, casting out sparks, like red hot coals, from its
eyes and mouth and bearing on its back a charger of red gold, set
with pearls and jewels, in the midst whereof lay a serpent from
whose body issued such splendour that the place was illumined
thereby; and her face was fair and young and she spoke with most
eloquent tongue. The Serpent-queen turned right and left, till
her eyes fell upon Hasib, to whom said she "Where is the covenant
thou madest with me, and the oath thou swearest to me, that thou
wouldst never again enter the Hammam-bath? But there is no
fighting against Fate nor hath any ever fled from that which is
written on his forehead. Allah hath appointed the end of my life
for thy hand to hend, and it is His will that slain I be and King
Karazdan be healed of his malady." So saying, she wept with sore
weeping and Hasib wept to see her weep. As for the abominable
Wazir Shamhur; he put out his hand to lay hold of her; but she
said to him, "Hold thy hand, O accursed, or I will blow upon thee
and reduce thee to a heap of black ashes." Then she cried out to
Hasib, saying, "Draw near me and take me in thine hand and lay me
in the dish that is with you: then set it on thy head, for my
death was fore-ordained, from Eternity without beginning,[FN#572]
to be at thy hand, and thou hast no power to avert it." So he
took her and laid her in the dish, and put it on his head, when
the well returned to its former state. Then they set out on their
return to the city, Hasib carrying the dish on his head, and when
they were half-way behold, the Queen of the Serpents said to him
privily, "Hearken, O Hasib, to my friendly counsel, for all thou
hast broken faith with me and been false to thine oath, and hast
done this misdeed, but it was fore-ordained from all eternity."
He replied "To hear is to obey," and she continued, "It is this:
when thou comest to the Wazir's house, he will bid thee behead me
and cut me in three; but do thou refuse saying, 'I know not how
to slaughter[FN#473]' and leave him to do it with his own hand
and to work his wicked will. When he hath cut my throat and
divided my body into three pieces there will come a messenger, to
bid him to the King, so he will lay my flesh in a cauldron of
brass and set it upon a brasier before going to the presence and
he will say to thee, 'Keep up the fire under the cauldron till
the scum rise; then skim it off and pour it into a phial to cool.
Wait till it cool and then drink it, so shall naught of malady or
pain be left in all thy body. When the second scum riseth, skim
it off and pour it into a phial against my return from the King,
that I may drink it for an ailment I have in my loins.' Then will
he give thee the phials and go to the King, and when he is gone,
do thou light the fire and wait till the first scum rise and set
it in a phial; keep it by thee but beware of drinking it, or no
good will befall thee. When the second scum riseth, skim it off
and put it in a second phial and drink it down as soon as it
cools. When the Wazir returneth and asketh thee for the second
phial, give him the first and note what shall befall him;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Serpent-queen charged Hasib not to drink of the first scum and
carefully to keep the second, saying, "When the Wazir returneth
from the King and asketh for the second phial, give him the first
and note what shall befall him; then drink the contents of the
second phial and thy heart will become the home of wisdom. After
this take up the flesh and, laying it in a brazen platter, carry
it to the King and give him to eat thereof. When he hath eaten it
and it hath settled in his stomach, veil his face with a kerchief
and wait by him till noontide, when he will have digested the
meat. Then give him somewhat of wine to drink and, by the decree
of Allah Almighty, he will be healed of his unhealth and be made
whole as he was. And give thou ear to the charge wherewith I
charge thee; and keep it in thy memory with carefullest keeping."
They ceased not faring till they came to the Wazir's house, and
he said to Hasib, "Come in with me!" So he went in and the troops
dispersed and fared each his own way; whereupon Hasib set down
the platter and the Wazir bade him slay the Queen of the
Serpents; but he said, "I know not how to slaughter and never in
my born days killed I aught. An thou wilt have her throat cut, do
it with thine own hand." So the Minister Shamhur took the Queen
from the platter and slew her, seeing which Hasib wept bitter
tears and the Wazir laughed at him, saying, "O weak of wits, how
canst thou weep for the killing of a worm?" Then he cut her in
three and, laying the pieces in a brass cauldron, set it on the
fire and sat down to await the cooking of the flesh. And whilst
he was sitting, lo! there came a slave from the King, who said to
him, "The King calls for thee without stay or delay," and he
answered saying, "I hear and I obey." So he gave Hasib two phials
and bade him drink the first scum and keep the second against his
return,[FN#574] even as the Queen of the Serpents had foretold;
after which he went away with repeated charges and injunctions;
and Hasib tended the fire under the cauldron till the first scum
rose, when he skimmed it off and, setting it in one of the
phials, kept it by him. He then fed the fire till the second scum
rose; then he skimmed it off and, putting it in the other phial
kept it for himself. And when the meat was done, he took the
cauldron off the fire and sat awaiting the Wazir who asked him on
return, "What hast thou done?" and answered Hasib, "I did thy
bidding to the last word." Quoth the Wazir, "What hast thou done
with the first phial?" "I drank its contents but now," replied
Hasib, and Shamhur asked, "Thy body feeleth it no change?";
whereto Hasib answered, "Verily, I feel as I were on fire from
front to foot." The villain Wazir made no reply hiding the truth
but said, "Hand me the second phial, that I may drink what is
therein, so haply I may be made whole of this ailing in my
loins." So Hasib brought him the first phial and he drank it off,
thinking it contained the second scum; but hardly had he done
drinking when the phial fell from his hand and he swelled up and
dropped down dead; and thus was exemplified in him the saying;
"Whoso for his brother diggeth a pit, he shall be the first to
fall into it." Now when Hasib saw this, he wondered and feared to
drink of the second phial; but he remembered the Serpent-queen's
injunction and bethought him that the Wazir would not have
reserved the second scum for himself, had there been aught of
hurt therein. So he said, "I put my trust in Allah,'[FN#575] and
drank off the contents of the phial. No sooner had he done so,
than the Most Highest made the waters of wisdom to well up in his
heart and opened to him the fountains of knowledge, and joy and
gladness overcame him. Then he took the serpent's flesh from the
cauldron and, laying it on a platter of brass, went forth from
the Wazir's house. On his way to the palace he raised his eyes
and saw the seven Heavens and all that therein is, even to the
Lote-tree, beyond which there is no passing,[FN#576] and the
manner of the revolution of the spheres. Moreover, Allah
discovered to him the ordinance of the planets and the scheme of
their movements and the fixed stars; and he saw the contour of
the land and sea, whereby he became informed with geometry,
astrology and astronomy and mathematics and all that hangeth
thereby; and he understood the causes and consequences of
eclipses of the sun and moon. Then he looked at the earth and saw
all minerals and vegetables that are therein and thereon; and he
learned their properties, and their virtues, so that he became in
an instant versed in medicine and chemistry and natural magic and
the art of making gold and silver. And he ceased not carrying the
flesh till he came to the palace, when he went in to King
Karazdan, and kissing the ground before him, said, "May thy head
survive thy Wazir Shamhur!" The King was mightily angered at the
news of the Grand Wazir's death and wept for him, whilst his
Emirs and his Grandees and officers also wept. Then said
Karazdan, "He was with me but now, in all health, and went away
to fetch me the flesh of the Queen of the Serpents, if it should
be cooked; what befell him that he is now dead, and what accident
hath betided him?" So Hasib told him the whole truth how the
Minister had drunk the contents of the phial and had forthwith
swelled out and died. The King mourned for his loss with mourning
sore and said to Hasib, "What shall I do without Shamhur?" and
Hasib answered "Grieve not, O King of the age; for I will cure
thee within three days and leave no whit of disease in thy body."
At this the King's breast waxed broad and he said, "I wish to be
made whole of this affliction, though after a long term of
years." So Hasib set the platter before the King and made him eat
a slice of the flesh of the Serpent-queen. Then he covered him up
and, spreading a kerchief over his face, bade him sleep and sat
down by his side. He slept from noonday till sundown, while his
stomach digested the piece of flesh, and presently he awoke.
Hasib gave him somewhat of wine to drink and bade him sleep
again; so he slept till the morning and when dawn appeared, Hasib
repeated the treatment making him eat another piece of the flesh;
and thus he did with him three days following, till he had eaten
the whole, when his skin began to shrink and scale off and he
perspired, so that the sweat ran down from his head to his heels.
Therewith he became whole and there abode in him no trace of the
disease, which when Hasib saw, he said, "There is no help for it
but thou go to the Hammam." So he carried him to the bath and
washed his body; and when he came forth, it was like a wand of
silver and he was restored to health, nay, sounder than he was
before he fell ill. Thereupon he donned his richest robes and,
seating himself on his throne, deigned make Hasib sit beside him.
Then he bade the tables be spread and they ate and washed their
hands; after which he called for the service of wine and both
drank their fill. Upon this all his Wazirs and Emirs and Captains
and the Grandees of his realm and the notables of the lieges came
in to him and gave him joy of his recovery; and they beat the
drums and adorned the city in token of rejoicing. Then said the
King to the assembly, "O Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees, this is
Hasim Karim al-Din, who hath healed me of my sickness, and know
all here present that I make him my Chief Wazir in the stead of
the Wazir Shamhur."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth
King Karazdan to his Ministers and high lords, "He who healed me
of my sickness is none other than Hasib Karim al-Din here
present. Therefore I make him my Chief Wazir in the stead of the
Wazir Shamhur; and whoso loveth him loveth me, and whoso
honoureth him honoureth me, and he who obeyeth him obeyeth me."
"Hearkening and obedience," answered they and all rising flocked
to kiss Hasib's hand and salute him and give him joy of the
Wazirate. Then the King bestowed on him a splendid dress of gold
brocade, set with pearls and gems, the least of which was worth
five thousand gold pieces. Moreover, he presented to him three
hundred male white slaves and the like number of concubines, in
loveliness like moons, and three hundred Abyssinian[FN#577]
slave-girls, beside five hundred mules laden with treasure and
sheep and oxen and buffaloes and bulls and other cattle beyond
count; and he commanded all his Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees and
Notables and Mamelukes and his subjects in general to bring him
gifts. Presently Hasib took horse and rode, followed by the
Wazirs and Emirs and lords and all the troops, to the house which
the King had set apart for him, where he sat down on a chair; and
the Wazirs and Emirs came up to him and kissed hands and gave him
joy of his Ministership, vying with one another in suit and
service. When his mother and his household knew what had
happened, they rejoiced with exceeding joy and congratulated him
on his good fortune; and his quondam comrades the woodcutters
also came and gave him joy. Then he mounted again and, riding to
the house of the late Wazir Shamhur, laid hands on all that was
therein and transported it to his own abode. On this wise did
Hasib, from a dunsical know-nothing, unskilled to read writing,
become, by the decree of Allah Almighty, an adept in every
science and versed in all manner of knowledge, so that the fame
of his learning was blazed abroad over the land and he became
renowned as an ocean of lore and skill in medicine and astronomy
and geometry and astrology and alchemy and natural magic and the
Cabbala and Spiritualism and all other arts and sciences. One
day, he said to his mother, "My father Daniel was exceeding wise
and learned; tell me what he left by way of books or what not!"
So his mother brought him the chest and, taking out the five
leaves which had been saved when the library was lost, gave them
to him saying, "These five scrolls are all thy father left thee."
So he read them and said to her, "O my mother, these leaves are
part of a book: where is the rest?" Quoth she, "Thy father made a
voyage taking with him all his library and, when he was
shipwrecked, every book was lost save only these five leaves. And
when he was returned to me by Almighty Allah he found me with
child and said to me: 'Haply thou wilt bear a boy; so take these
scrolls and keep them by thee and whenas thy son shall grow up
and ask what his father left him, give these leaves to him and
say, 'Thy father left these as thine only heritance. And lo! here
they are.' " And Hasib, now the most learned of his age, abode in
all pleasure and solace, and delight of life, till there came to
him the Destroyer of delights and the Severer of
societies.[FN#578]  And yet, O King, is not this tale of Bulukiya
and Janshah more wondrous than the adventures of






End of Volume V.





                    Arabian Nights, Volume 5
                           Footnotes



[FN#1]  This tale (one of those translated by Galland) is best
and fullest in the Bresl. Edit. iii. 329.

[FN#2]  Europe has degraded this autumnal festival, the Sun-fete
Mihrgan (which balanced the vernal Nau-roz) into Michaelmas and
its goose-massacre. It was so called because it began on the 16th
of Mihr, the seventh month; and lasted six days, with feasts,
festivities and great rejoicings in honour of the Sun, who now
begins his southing-course to gladden the other half of the
world.

[FN#3]  "Hindi" is an Indian Moslem as opposed to "Hindu," a
pagan, or Gentoo.

[FN#4]  The orig. Persian word is "Shah-pur"=King's son: the
Greeks (who had no sh) (preferred      ); the Romans turned it
into Sapor and the Arabs (who lack the p) into Sabur. See p. x.
Hamzae ispahanensis Annalium Libri x.: Gottwaldt, Lipsiae
mdcccxlviii.

[FN#5]  The magic horse may have originated with the Hindu tale
of a wooden Garuda (the bird of Vishnu) built by a youth for the
purpose of a vehicle. It came with the "Moors" to Spain and
appears in "Le Cheval de Fust," a French poem of the thirteenth
Century. Thence it passed over to England as shown by Chaucer's
"Half-told tale of Cambuscan (Janghiz Khan?) bold," as

     "The wondrous steed of brass
     On which the Tartar King did ride;"

And Leland (Itinerary) derives "Rutlandshire" from "a man named
Rutter who rode round it on a wooden horse constructed by art
magic." Lane (ii. 548) quotes the parallel story of Cleomades and
Claremond which Mr. Keightley (Tales and Popular Fictions, chapt.
ii) dates from our thirteenth century. See Vol. i., p. 160.

[FN#6]  All Moslems, except those of the Maliki school, hold that
the maker of an image representing anything of life will be
commanded on the Judgment Day to animate it, and failing will be
duly sent to the Fire. This severity arose apparently from the
necessity of putting down idol-worship and, perhaps, for the same
reason the Greek Church admits pictures but not statues. Of
course the command has been honoured with extensive breaching:
for instance all the Sultans of Stambul have had their portraits
drawn and painted.

[FN#7]  This description of ugly old age is written with true
Arab verve.

[FN#8]  Arab. "Badinjan": Hind. Bengan: Pers. Badingan or
Badiljan; the Mala insana (Solanum pomiferum or S. Melongena) of
the Romans, well known in Southern Europe. It is of two kinds,
the red (Solanum lycopersicum) and the black (S. Melongena). The
Spaniards know it as "berengeria" and when Sancho Panza (Part ii.
chapt. 2) says, "The Moors are fond of egg-plants" he means more
than appears. The vegetable is held to be exceedingly heating and
thereby to breed melancholia and madness; hence one says to a man
that has done something eccentric, "Thou hast been eating
brinjalls."

[FN#9]  Again to be understood Hibernice "kilt."

[FN#10]  i.e. for fear of the evil eye injuring the palace and,
haply, himself.

[FN#11]  The "Sufrah" before explained acting provision-bag and
table-cloth.

[FN#12]  Eastern women in hot weather, lie mother-nude under a
sheet here represented by the hair. The Greeks and Romans also
slept stripped and in mediaeval England the most modest women saw
nothing indelicate in sleeping naked by their naked husbands. The
"night-cap" and the "night-gown" are comparatively modern
inventions.

[FN#13]  Hindu fable turns this simile into better poetry, "She
was like a second and a more wondrous moon made by the Creator."

[FN#14]  "Sun of the Day."

[FN#15]  Arab. "Shirk"=worshipping more than one God. A
theological term here most appropriately used.

[FN#16]  The Bul. Edit. as usual abridges (vol. i. 534). The
Prince lands on the palace-roof where he leaves his horse, and
finding no one in the building goes back to the terrace. Suddenly
he sees a beautiful girl approaching him with a party of her
women, suggesting to him these couplets,

     "She came without tryst in the darkest hour, *
          Like full moon lighting horizon's night: 
     Slim-formed, there is not in the world her like *
          For grace of form or for gifts of sprite: 
     'Praise him who made her from semen-drop,' *
          I cried, when her beauty first struck my sight: 
     I guard her from eyes, seeking refuge with *
          The Lord of mankind and of morning-light."

The two then made acquaintance and "follows what follows."

[FN#17]  Arab. "Akasirah," explained (vol. i., 75) as the plur.
of Kisra.

[FN#18]  The dearest ambition of a slave is not liberty but to
have a slave of his own. This was systematised by the servile
rulers known in history as the Mameluke Beys and to the Egyptians
as the Ghuzz. Each had his household of servile pages and
squires, who looked forward to filling the master's place as
knight or baron.

[FN#19]  The well-known capital of Al-Yaman, a true Arabia Felix,
a Paradise inhabited by demons in the shape of Turkish soldiery
and Arab caterans. According to Moslem writers Sana'a was founded
by Shem son of Noah who, wandering southward with his posterity
after his father's death, and finding the site delightful, dug a
well and founded the citadel, Ghamdan, which afterwards contained
a Mason Carree rivalling (or attempting to rival) the Meccan
Ka'abah. The builder was Surahbil who, says M.C. de Perceval
coloured its four faces red, white, golden and green; the central
quadrangle had seven stories (the planets) each forty cubits
high, and the lowest was a marble hall ceiling'd with a single
slab. At the four corners stood hollow lions through whose mouths
the winds roared. This palatial citadel-temple was destroyed by
order of Caliph Omar. The city's ancient name was Azal or Uzal
whom some identify with one of the thirteen sons of Joktan
(Genesis xi. 27): it took its present name from the Ethiopian
conquerors (they say) who, seeing it for the first time, cried
"Haza Sana'ah!" meaning in their tongue, this is commodious, etc.
I may note that the word is Kisawahili (Zanzibarian) e.g. "Yambo
sana--is the state good?" Sana'a was the capital of the Tababi'ah
or Tobba Kings who judaized; and the Abyssinians with their
Negush made it Christian while the Persians under Anushirwan
converted it to Guebrism. It is now easily visited but to little
purpose; excursions in the neighborhood being deadly dangerous.
Moreover the Turkish garrison would probably murder a stranger
who sympathised with the Arabs, and the Arabs kill one who took
part with their hated and hateful conquerors. The late Mr.
Shapira of Jerusalem declared that he had visited it and Jews
have great advantages in such travel. But his friends doubted
him.

[FN#20]  The Bresl. Edit. (iii. 347) prints three vile errors in
four lines.

[FN#21]  Alcove is a corruption of the Arab. Al-Kubbah (the dome)
through Span. and Port.

[FN#22]  Easterns as a rule sleep with head and body covered by a
sheet or in cold weather a blanket. The practice is doubtless
hygienic, defending the body from draughts when the pores are
open; but Europeans find it hard to adopt; it seems to stop their
breathing. Another excellent practice in the East, and indeed
amongst barbarians and savages generally, is training children to
sleep with mouths shut: in after life they never snore and in
malarious lands they do not require Outram's "fever-guard," a
swathe of muslin over the mouth. Mr. Catlin thought so highly of
the "shut mouth" that he made it the subject of a book.

[FN#23]  Arab. "Hanzal"=coloquintida, an article often mentioned
by Arabs in verse and prose; the bright coloured little gourd
attracts every eye by its golden glance when travelling through
the brown-yellow waste of sand and clay. A favourite purgative
(enough for a horse) is made by filling the inside with sour milk
which is drunks after a night's soaking: it is as active as the
croton-nut of the Gold Coast.

[FN#24]  The Bresl. Edit. iii. 354 sends him to the "land of Sin"
(China).

[FN#25]  Arab. "Ya Kisrawi!"=O subject of the Kisra or Chosroe;
the latter explained in vol.i.,75.[Volume 1, Footnote # 128] 
"Fars" is the origin of "Persia"; and there is a hit at the
prodigious lying of the modern race, whose forefathers were so
famous as truth-tellers. "I am a Persian, but I am not lying
now," is a phrase familiar to every traveller.

[FN#26]  There is no such name: perhaps it is a clerical error
for "Har jah"=(a man of) any place. I know an Englishman who in
Persian called himself "Mirza Abdullah-i-Hichmakani"=Master
Abdullah of Nowhere.

[FN#27]  The Bresl. Edit. (loc. cit.) gives a comical description
of the Prince assuming the dress of an astrologer-doctor,
clapping an old book under his arm, fumbling a rosary of beads,
enlarging his turband, lengthening his sleeves and blackening his
eyelids with antimony. Here, however, it would be out of place.
Very comical also is the way in which he pretends to cure the
maniac by "muttering unknown words, blowing in her face, biting
her ear," etc.

[FN#28]  Arab. "Sar'a"=falling sickness. Here again we have in
all its simplicity the old nursery idea of "possession" by evil
spirits.

[FN#29]  Arab. "Nafahat"=breathings, benefits, the Heb. Neshamah
opp. to Nephesh (soul) and Ruach (spirit). Healing by the breath
is a popular idea throughout the East and not unknown to Western
Magnetists and Mesmerists. The miraculous cures of the Messiah
were, according to Moslems, mostly performed by aspiration. They
hold that in the days of Isa, physic had reached its highest
development, and thus his miracles were mostly miracles of
medicine; whereas, in Mohammed's time, eloquence had attained its
climax and accordingly his miracles were those of eloquence, as
shown in the Koran and Ahadis.

[FN#30]  Lit. "The rose in the sleeves or calyces." I take my
English equivalent from Jeremy Taylor, "So I have seen a rose
newly springing from the clefts of its hood," etc.

[FN#31]  These lines are from the Bresl. Edit. (v. 35). The four
couplets in the Mac. Edit. are too irrelevant.

[FN#32]  Polo, which Lane calls "Goff."

[FN#33]  Arab. "Muffawak"=well-notched, as its value depends upon
the notch. At the end of the third hemistitch Lane's Shaykh very
properly reads "baghtatan" (suddenly) for "burhatan"=during a
long time.

[FN#34]  "Uns" (which the vulgar pronounce Anas) "al-
Wujud"=Delight of existing things, of being, of the world. Uns wa
jud is the normal pun=love-intimacy and liberality; and the
caranomasia (which cannot well be rendered in English) re-appears
again and again. The story is throughout one of love; hence the
quantity of verse.

[FN#35]  The allusion to a "written N" suggests the elongated not
the rounded form of the letter as in Night cccxxiv.

[FN#36]  The fourteenth Arabic letter in its medial form
resembling an eye.

[FN#37]  This is done by the man passing his fingers over the
brow as if to wipe off perspiration; the woman acknowledges it by
adjusting her head-veil with both hands. As a rule in the Moslem
East women make the first advances; and it is truly absurd to see
a great bearded fellow blushing at being ogled. During the
Crimean war the fair sex of Constantinople began by these
allurements but found them so readily accepted by the Giaours
that they were obliged to desist.

[FN#38]  The greatest of all explorers and discoverers of the
world will be he who finds a woman confessing inability to keep a
secret.

[FN#39]  The original is intensely prosaic and so am I.

[FN#40]  Arab. "Sunnat," the practice of the Prophet. For this
prayer and other silly and superstitious means of discovering the
"right direction" (which is often very wrongly directed) see
Lane, M.E. chapt. xi.

[FN#41]  Arab. "Bahr (sea or river) al-Kunuz": Lane (ii. 576)
ingeniously identifies the site with the Upper Nile whose tribes,
between Assouan (Syene) and Wady al-Subu'a are called the
"Kunuz" lit. meaning "treasures" or "hoards." Philae is still
known as the "Islet of Anas (for Uns) al-Wujud;" and the learned
and accurate Burckhardt (Travels in Nubia p. 5) records the local
legend that a mighty King called Al-Wujud built the Osirian
temples. I can give no information concerning Jabal al-Sakla
(Thakla), the Mount of the woman bereft of children, beyond the
legend contained in Night ccclxxix.

[FN#42]  A religious mendicant (lit. a pauper), of whom there are
two great divisions. The Shara'i acts according to the faith: the
others (La Shara'i, or irreligious) are bound by no such
prejudices and are pretty specimens of scoundrels. (Pilgrimage
i.22.)

[FN#43]  Meaning his lips and palate were so swollen by drought.

[FN#44]  It is a pious act in time of mortal danger to face the
Kiblah or Meccan temple, as if standing in prayer.

[FN#45]  Still the belief of the Badawi who tries to work upon
the beast's compassion: "O great King I am a poor man, with wife
and family, so spare me that Allah spare thee!" and so forth. If
not famished the lion will often stalk off looking behind him as
he goes; but the man will never return by the same path; "for,"
says he, "haply the Father of Roaring may repent him of a wasted
opportunity." These lion-tales are very common, witness that of
Androcles at Rome and a host of others. Una and her lion is
another phase. It remained for M. Jules Gerard, first the
chasseur and then the tueur, du lion, to assail the reputation of
the lion and the honour of the lioness.

[FN#46]  Abu Haris=Father of spoils: one of the lion's hundred
titles.

[FN#47]  "They" again for "she."

[FN#48]  Jaxartes and Oxus. The latter (Jayhun or Amu, Oxus or
Bactros) is famous for dividing Iran from Turan, Persia from
Tartaria. The lands to its north are known as Ma wara al-Nahr
(Mawerannahar) or "What is behind the stream,"=Transoxiana and
their capitals were successively Samarcand and Bokhara.

[FN#49]  Arab. "Dani was gharib"=friend and foe. The lines are
partly from the Mac. Edit. and partly from the Bresl. Edit., v.
55.

[FN#50]  Arab. "Wa Rahmata-hu!" a form now used only in books.

[FN#51]  Before noted. The relationship, like that of foster-
brother, has its rights, duties and privileges.

[FN#52]  Arab. "Istikharah," before explained as praying for
direction by omens of the rosary, opening the Koran and reading
the first verse sighted, etc., etc. At Al-Medinah it is called
Khirah and I have suggested (Pilgrimage, ii. 287) that it is a
relic of the Azlam or Kidah (divining arrows) of paganism. But
the superstition is not local: we have the Sortes Virgilianae
(Virgil being a magician) as well as Coranicae.

[FN#53]  Arab. "Wujud al-Habib," a pun, also meaning, "Wujud my
beloved."

[FN#54]  Arab. "Khilal," as an emblem of attenuation occurring in
Al-Hariri (Ass. of Alexandria, etc.); also thin as a spindle
(Maghzal), as a reed, and dry as a pair of shears. In the Ass. of
Barka'id the toothpick is described as a beautiful girl. The use
of this cleanly article was enjoined by Mohammed:--"Cleanse your
mouths with toothpicks; for your mouths are the abode of the
guardian angels; whose pens are the tongues, and whose ink is the
spittle of men; and to whom naught is more unbearable than
remains of food in the mouth." A mighty apparatus for a small
matter; but in very hot lands cleanliness must rank before
godliness.

[FN#55]  The sense is ambiguous. Lane renders the verse:--"Thou
resemblest it (rose) not of my portion" and gives two
explanations "because HE is of my portion," or, "because HIS
cheek cannot be rosy if MINE is not." Mr. Payne boldly
translates 

"If the rose ape his cheek, 'Now God forfend,' I say, 'That of my
portion aught to pilfer thou shouldst try'."

[FN#56]  Arab. "lif" (not "fibres which grow at the top of the
trunk," Lane ii. 577); but the fibre of the fronds worked like
the cocoa-nut fibre which forms the now well-known Indian "coir."
This "lif" is also called "filfil" or "fulfil" which Dr. Jonathan
Scott renders "pepper" (Lane i. 8) and it forms a clean
succedaneum for one of the uncleanest articles of civilisation,
the sponge. It is used in every Hammam and is (or should be)
thrown away after use.

[FN#57]  Arab. "Shinf;" a course sack, a "gunny-bag;" a net
compared with such article.

[FN#58]  The eunuch tells him that he is not a "Sandali"=one
whose penis and testes are removed; and consequently the highest
valued. There are many ways of making the castrato; in some (as
here) only the penis is removed, in other the testes are bruised
or cut off; but in all cases the animal passion remains, for in
man, unlike other animals, the fons veneris is the brain. The
story of Abelard proves this. Juvenal derided the idea of married
eunuchs and yet almost all of these neutrals have wives with whom
they practise the manifold plaisirs de la petite oie
(masturbation, tribadism, irrumation, tete-beche, feuille-de-
rose, etc.), till they induce the venereal orgasm. Such was the
account once given to me by a eunuch's wife; and I need hardly
say that she, like her confrerie, was to be pitied. At the
critical moment she held up a little pillow for her husband to
bite who otherwise would have torn her cheeks or breasts.

[FN#59]  In real life the eunuch, as a rule, avoids all allusion
to his misfortune, although the slave will often describe his
being sold merrily enough.

[FN#60]  The visits are in dreamland. The ringdove thanks the
Lord for her (his?) suffering in the holy martyrdom of love.

[FN#61]  Arab. "Hazar;" I have explained it as meaning "(the bird
of) a thousand (songs)." 

[FN#62]  The "Bulbul" had his day with us but he departed with
Tommy Moore. We usually English the word by "nightingale;" but it
is a kind of shrike or butcher-bird (Lanius Boulboul. Lath.).

[FN#63]  The "Hamam" is a lieu commun in Arabic poetry. I have
noticed the world-wide reverence for the pigeon and the
incarnation of the Third Person of the Hindu Triad (Shiva), as
Kapoteshwara (Kapota-ishwara)"=pigeon or dove-god (Pilgrimage
iii. 218).

[FN#64]  Arab. "Hamam al-Ayk." Mr. Payne's rendering is so happy
that we must either take it from him or do worse.

[FN#65]  All primitive peoples translate the songs of birds with
human language; but, as I have noticed, the versions differ
widely. The pigeon cries, "Allah! Allah!" the dove "Karim, Tawwa"
(Bountiful, Pardoner!) the Kata or sand-grouse "Man sakat salam"
(who is silent is safe) yet always betrays itself by its lay of
"Kat-ta" and lastly the cock "Uzkuru 'llah ya ghafilun"
(Remember, or take the name of Allah, ye careless!).

[FN#66]  "Nay," the Dervish's reed pipe, symbol of the sighing
absent lover (i.e. the soul parted from the Creator) so famed by
the Mullah-i-Rum and Sir William Jones.

[FN#67]  Ba'albak=Ba'al (the God)-city (bek in Coptic and ancient
Egyptian.) Such, at least, is the popular derivation which awaits
a better. No cloth has been made there since the Kurd tribe of
gallant robbers known as the "Harfush" (or blackguards) lorded it
over old "Heliopolis."

[FN#68]  Thinking her to be a Jinn or Ghul in the shape of a fair
woman. This Arab is a strange contrast to the English fisherman,
and yet he is drawn with truth.

[FN#69]  Arab. "Habbaza!" (good this!) or "Habba" (how good!): so
"Habba bihi," how dear he is to me.

[FN#70]  Arab. "Zind," and "Zindah" the names of the two sticks,
upper and lower, hard and soft, by which fire was kindled before
flint and steel were known. We find it in Al-Hariri (Ass. of Banu
Haram) "no one sought ire from my fire-stick (i.e. from me as a
fire-stick) and failed." See Night dccciii.

[FN#71]  Arab. "Nazih" i.e. travelled far and wide.

[FN#72]  "Rajab," lit.="worshipping:" it is the seventh lunar
month and still called "Shahr-i-Khuda" (God's month) by the
Persians because in pre-Islamitic times it formed with Muharram
(or in its stead Safar), Zu 'l-ka'adah and Zu-'l-Hijjah (Nos. 1
or 2; 7,11 and 12) the yearly peace, during which a man might not
kill his father's murderer. The idea must have taken deep root,
as Arab history records only six "impious (or sacrilegious)
wars," waged despite the law. Europeans compare it with the
Treuga Dei (truce of God) a seven-years peace established about
A.D. 1032, by a Bishop of Aquitaine; and followed in A.D. 1245 by
the Pax Regis (Royal Peace) under Louis VIII. of France. This
compelled the relations of a murdered man to keep the peace for
forty days after the offence was committed.

[FN#73]  His Majesty wrote sad doggrel. He is better at
finessing, and his message was a trick because Rose-in-Hood had
told him that at home there were special obstacles to the
marriage.

[FN#74]  Arab. "Majzub"=drawn, attracted (literally); the popular
term for one absorbed in the contemplation of the Deity. During
this process the soul is supposed to quit the body leaving the
latter irresponsible for its actions. I remember a scandal being
caused in a village near Tunis by one of these men who suddenly
started up from his seat in a dusty corner and, in presence of a
small crowd of people, had connection with a she-donkey. The
supporters of the holy man declared that the deed was proof
positive of his exceptional holiness; but there were lewd
fellows, Moslems Voltaireans, who had their doubts and held that
the reverend man had so acted "for the gallery." A similar story
is told with due reserve by the late Abbe Hamilton in his book on
the Cyrenaic. There are three grand divisions of the Sufis; (1)
Mukiman, the stationaries; (2) Salikan, the travellers, or
progressives, and (3) Wasilan, those who reach the desired end.
And No. 2 has two classes: the Salik-i-majzub, one progressing in
Divine Love; and the other, who has made greater progress, is the
Majzub-i-Salik (Dabistan iii. 251).

[FN#75]  Arab. "Sundus," a kind of brocade (low Lat. brocare to
figure cloth), silk worked in high relief with gold and silver.
The idea is figurative meaning it was hung outside and inside
with fine stuff, like the Ka'abah, the "Bride of Meccah." The
"lords" means simply the lost girl.

[FN#76]  Arab. "Ayn" lit. eye, also a fount, "the eye of the
landscape" (a noble simile); and here a helper, guard, assistant.

[FN#77]  "Lord" for lady, i.e. she.

[FN#78]  Arab. "Fi'l-khawafik"=in the four quarters or among the
flappers (standards) or amid palpitations of heart. The bride
alludes to a festal reception in a town, with burning incense,
drums, flags, etc., etc.

[FN#79]  In Egypt the shorter "honey-moon" lasts a week; and on
the seventh day (pop. called Al-Subu'a) bride and bridegroom
receive visits with all ceremony, of course in separate
apartments. The seventh day (like the fortieth, the end of six
months and the anniversary) is kept for births and deaths with
Khatmahs (perlections) of the Koran "Saylah" family gatherings
and so forth. The fortieth day ends the real honey-moon. See
Night dccxcii.

[FN#80]  I have noted the popular practice, amongst men as well
as women, of hiring the Hammam for private parties and picnicking
in it during the greater part of the day. In this tale the bath
would belong to the public and it was a mere freak of the bride
to bathe with her bridegroom. "Respectable" people do not.

[FN#81]  She speaks in the last line as the barber or the
bathman.

[FN#82]  Here the "Ana" begin; and they mostly date themselves. 
Of the following forty-nine, Lane (vol. Ii. P. 578 et seq.) gives
only twenty-two and transforms them to notes in chapt. xviii.  He
could hardly translate several of them in a work intended to be
popular.  Abu Nowas is a person carefully to be avoided; and all
but anthropological students are advised to "skip" over anecdotes
in which his name and abominations occur.

[FN#83]  Arab. "Ghilman," the counter part, I have said, of the
so-called "Houris."

[FN#84]  Mosul boasts of never having been polluted with
idolatrous worship, an exemption which it owes to being a
comparatively modern place.

[FN#85]  The Aleppines were once noted for debauchery; and the
saying is still "Halabi Shelebi" (for Chelebi)=the Aleppine is a
fellow fine.

[FN#86]  Mr. Payne omits the last line.  It refers to what
Persian boys call, in half-Turkish phrase, "Alish Takish," each
acting woman after he has acted man.  The best wine is still made
in monasteries and the co-called Sinai convent is world-famous
for its "Raki" distilled from raisins.

[FN#87]  i.e. what a difference there is between them!

[FN#88]  Arab. "Salli ala 'l-Nabi," a common phrase; meaning not
only praise hm to avert the evil eye; but also 