hs, where he forms the letters f and t, and
acts as a determinative in the shape of a Cobra di Capello
(Coluber Naja) with expanded hood.

[FN#512] In token that he was safe.

[FN#513] "Akhir al-Zaman." As old men praise past times, so
prophets prefer to represent themselves as the last. The early
Christians caused much scandal amongst the orderly law-loving
Romans by their wild and mistaken predictions of the end of the
world being at hand. The catastrophe is a fact for each man under
the form of death; but the world has endured for untold ages and
there is no apparent cause why it should not endure as many more.
The "latter days," as the religious dicta of most "revelations"
assure us, will be richer in sinners than in sanctity: hence "End
of Time" is a facetious Arab title for a villain of superior
quality. My Somali escort applied it to one thus distinguished:
in 1875, I heard at Aden that he ended life by the spear as we
had all predicted.

[FN#514] Jahannam and the other six Hells are personified as
feminine; and (woman-like) they are somewhat addicted to prolix
speechification.

[FN#515] These puerile exaggerations are fondly intended to act
as nurses frighten naughty children.

[FN#516] Alluding to an oft-quoted saying "Lau la-ka, etc.
Without thee (O Mohammed) We (Allah) had not created the
spheres," which may have been suggested by "Before Abraham was, I
am" (John viii. 58); and by Gate xci. of Zoroastrianism "O
Zardusht for thy sake I have created the world" (Dabistan i.
344). The sentiment is by no means "Shi'ah," as my learned friend
Prof. Aloys Springer supposes. In his Mohammed (p. 220) we find
an extract from a sectarian poet, "For thee we dispread the
earth; for thee we caused the waters to flow; for thee we vaulted
the heavens." As Baron Alfred von Kremer, another learned and
experienced Orientalist, reminds me, the "Shi'ahs" have always
shown a decided tendency to this kind of apotheosis and have
deified or quasi-deified Ali and the Imams. But the formula is
first found in the highly orthodox Burdah poem of Al-Busiri:--

     "But for him (Lau la-hu) the world had never come out of
     nothingness."

Hence it has been widely diffused. See Les Aventures de Kamrup
(pp. 146-7) and Les OEuvres de Wali (pp. 51-52), by M. Garcin de
Tassy and the Dabistan (vol. i. pp. 2-3).

[FN#517] Arab. "Simiya" from the Pers., a word apparently built
on the model of "Kamiya" = alchemy, and applied, I have said, to
fascination, minor miracles and white magic generally like the
Hindu "Indrajal." The common term for Alchemy is Ilm al-Kaf (the
K-science) because it is not safe to speak of it openly as
Alchemy.

[FN#518] Mare Tenebrarum = Sea of Darknesses; usually applied to
the "mournful and misty Atlantic."

[FN#519] Some Moslems hold that Solomon and David were buried in
Jerusalem, others on the shore of Lake Tiberias. Mohammed,
according to the history of Al-Tabari (p. 56 vol. i. Duleux's
"Chronique de Tabari") declares that the Jinni bore Solomon's
corpse to a palace hewn in the rock upon an island surrounded by
a branch of the "Great Sea" and set him on a throne, with his
ring still on his finger, under a guard of twelve Jinns. "None
hath looked upon the tomb save only two, Affan who took Bulukiya
as his companion: with extreme pains they arrived at the spot,
and Affan was about to carry off the ring when a thunderbolt
consumed him. So Bulukiya returned."

[FN#520] Koran xxxviii. 34, or, "art the liberal giver."

[FN#521] i.e. of the last trumpet blown by the Archangel Israfil:
an idea borrowed from the Christians. Hence the title of certain
churches--ad Tubam.

[FN#522] This may mean that the fruits were fresh and dried like
dates or tamarinds (a notable wonder), or soft and hard of skin
like grapes and pomegranates.

[FN#523] Arab. "Ai-lksir" meaning lit. an essence; also the
philosopher's stone.

[FN#524] Name of the Jinni whom Solomon imprisoned in Lake
Tiberias (See vol. i., 41).

[FN#525] Vulgarly pronounced "Jahannum." The second hell is
usually assigned to Christians. As there are seven Heavens (the
planetary orbits) so, to satisfy Moslem love of symmetry, there
must be as many earths and hells under the earth. The Egyptians
invented these grim abodes, and the marvellous Persian fancy
worked them into poem.

[FN#526] Arab. "Yajuj and Majuj," first named in Gen. x. 2, which
gives the ethnology of Asia Minor, circ. B.C. 800. "Gomer" is the
Gimri or Cymmerians; "Magog" the original Magi, a division of the
Medes, "Javan" the Ionian Greeks, "Meshesh" the Moschi; and
"Tires" the Turusha, or primitive Cymmerians. In subsequent
times, "Magog" was applied to the Scythians, and modern Moslems
determine from the Koran (chaps. xviii. and xxi.) that Yajuj and
Majuj are the Russians, whom they call Moska or Moskoff from the
Moskwa River,

[FN#527] I attempt to preserve the original pun; "Mukarrabin"
(those near Allah) being the Cherubim, and the Creator causing
Iblis to draw near Him (karraba).

[FN#528] A vulgar version of the Koran (chaps. vii.), which seems
to have borrowed from the Gospel of Barnabas. Hence Adam becomes
a manner of God-man.

[FN#529] These wild fables are caricatures of Rabbinical legends
which began with "Lilith," the Spirit-wife of Adam: Nature and
her counterpart, Physis and Antiphysis, supply a solid basis for
folk-lore. Amongst the Hindus we have Brahma (the Creator) and
Viswakarma, the anti-Creator: the former makes a horse and a bull
and the latter caricatures them with an ass and a buffalo, and so
forth.

[FN#530] This is the "Lauh al-Mahfuz," the Preserved Tablet, upon
which are written all Allah's decrees and the actions of mankind
good (white) and evil (black). This is the "perspicuous Book" of
the Koran, chaps. vi. 59. The idea again is Guebre.

[FN#531] i.e. the night before Friday which in Moslem parlance
would be Friday night.

[FN#532] Again Persian "Gaw-i-Zamin" = the Bull of the Earth.
"The cosmogony of the world," etc., as we read in the Vicar of
Wakefield.

[FN#533] The Calc. Edit. ii. 614. here reads by a clerical error
"bull."

[FN#534] i.e. Lakes and rivers.

[FN#535] Here some abridgement is necessary, for we have another
recital of what has been told more than once.

[FN#536] This name, "King of Life," is Persian: "Tegh" or "Tigh"
means a scimitar and "Bahrwan," is, I conceive, a mistake for
"Bihrun," the Persian name of Alexander the Great.

[FN#537] Arab. "Mulakat" or meeting the guest which, I have said,
is an essential part of Eastern ceremony, the distance from the
divan, room, house or town being proportioned to his rank or
consideration.

[FN#538] Arab. "Sifr": whistling is held by the Badawi to be the
speech of devils; and the excellent explorer Burckhardt got a bad
name by the ugly habit.

[FN#539] The Arabs call "Shikk" (split man) and the Persians
"Nimchahrah" (half-face) a kind of demon like a man divided
longitudinally: this gruesome creature runs with amazing speed
and is very cruel and dangerous. For the celebrated soothsayers
"Shikk" and "Satih" see Chenery's Al-Hariri, p. 371.

[FN#540] Arab. "Takht" (Persian) = a throne or a capital.

[FN#541] Arab. "Wady al-Naml"; a reminiscence of the Koranic Wady
(chaps. xxvii.), which some place in Syria and others in Taif.

[FN#542] This is the old, old fable of the River Sabbation which
Pliny ((xxx). 18) reports as "drying up every Sabbath-day"
(Saturday): and which Josephus reports as breaking the Sabbath by
flowing only on the Day of Rest.

[FN#543] They were keeping the Sabbath. When lodging with my
Israelite friends at Tiberias and Safet, I made a point of never
speaking to them (after the morning salutation) till the Saturday
was over.

[FN#544] Arab. "La'al" and "Yakut," the latter also applied to
the garnet and to a variety of inferior stones. The ruby is
supposed by Moslems to be a common mineral thoroughly "cooked" by
the sun, and produced only on the summits of mountains
inaccessible even to Alpinists. The idea may have originated from
exaggerated legends of the Badakhshan country (supposed to be the
home of the ruby) and its terrors of break-neck foot-paths,
jagged peaks and horrid ravines: hence our "balas-ruby" through
the Spanish corruption "Balaxe." Epiphanius, archbishop of
Salamis in Cyprus, who died A.D. 403, gives, m a little treatise
(De duodecim gemmis rationalis summi sacerdotis Hebraeorum Liber,
opera Fogginii, Romae, 1743, p. 30), a precisely similar
description of the mode of finding jacinths in Scythia. "In a
wilderness in the interior of Great Scythia," he writes, "there
is a valley begirt with stony mountains as with walls. It is
inaccessible to man, and so excessively deep that the bottom of
the valley is invisible from the top of the surrounding
mountains. So great is the darkness that it has the effect of a
kind of chaos. To this place certain criminals are condemned,
whose task it is to throw down into the valley slaughtered lambs,
from which the skin has been first taken off. The little stones
adhere to these pieces of flesh. Thereupon the eagles, which live
on the summits of the mountains, fly down following the scent of
the flesh, and carry away the lambs with the stones adhering to
them. They, then, who are condemned to this place watch until the
eagles have finished their meal, and run and take away the
stones." Epiphanius, who wrote this, is spoken of in terms of
great respect by many ecclesiastical writers, and St. Jerome
styles the treatise here quoted, "Egregium volumen, quod si
legere volueris, plenissimam scientiam consequeris ," and,
indeed, it is by no means improbable that it was from the account
of Epiphanius that this story was first translated into Arabic. A
similar account is given by Marco Polo and by Nicolo de Conti, as
of a usage which they had heard was practiced in India, and the
position ascribed to the mountain by Conti, namely, fifteen days'
journey north of Vijanagar, renders it highly probable that
Golconda was alluded to. He calls the mountain Albenigaras, and
says that it was infested with serpents. Marco Polo also speaks
of these serpents, and while his account agrees with that of
Sindbad, inasmuch as the serpents, which are the prey of
Sindbad's Rukh, are devoured by the Venetian's eagles, that of
Conti makes the vultures and eagles fly away with the meat to
places where they may be safe from the serpents. (Introd. p.
xiii., India in the Fifteenth Century, etc., R. H. Major, London,
Hakluyt Soc. MDCCCLVII.)

[FN#545] Elder Victory: "Nasr" is a favourite name with Moslems.

[FN#546] These are the "Swan-maidens" of whom Europe in late
years has heard more than enough. It appears to me that we go
much too far for an explanation of the legend; a high-bred girl
is so like a swan in many points that the idea readily suggests
itself. And it is also aided by the old Egyptian (and Platonic)
belief in pre-existence and by the Rabbinic and Buddhistic
doctrine of ante-natal sin, to say nothing of metempsychosis.
(Joseph Ant. xvii.. 153.)

[FN#547] The lines have occurred before. I quote Mr. Payne for
variety.

[FN#548] Arab. "Al-Khayal": it is a synonym of "al-Tayf' and the
nearest approach to our "ghost," as has been explained. In poetry
it is the figure of the beloved seen when dreaming.

[FN#549] He does not kiss her mouth because he intends to marry
her.

[FN#550] It should be "manifest" excellence. (Koran xxvii. 16.)

[FN#551] The phrase is Koranic used to describe Paradise, and
Damascus is a familiar specimen of a city under which a river,
the Baradah, passes, distributed into a multitude of canals.

[FN#552] It may be noted that rose-water is sprinkled on the
faces of the "nobility and gentry, " common water being good
enough for the commonalty. I have had to drink tea made in
compliment with rose-water and did not enjoy it.

[FN#553] The "Valley Flowery:" Zahran is the name of a place near
Al-Medinah.

[FN#554] The Proud or Petulant.

[FN#555] i.e. Lion, Son of ( ?).

[FN#556] i.e. Many were slain.

[FN#557] I venture to draw attention to this battle-picture which
is at once simple and highly effective.

[FN#558] Anglice a quibble, evidently evasive.

[FN#559] In text "Ana A'amil," etc., a true Egypto-Syrian
vulgarism.

[FN#560] i.e. magical formulae. The context is purposely left
vague.

[FN#561] The repetition is a condescension, a token of kindness.

[FN#562] This is the common cubic of 18 inches: the modern vary
from 22 to 26.

[FN#563] I have noticed the two-humped Bactrian camel which the
Syrians and Egyptians compare with an elephant. See p. 221 (the
neo-Syrian) Book of Kalilah and Dimnah.

[FN#564] The Noachian dispensation revived the Islam or true
religion first revealed to Adam and was itself revived and
reformed by Moses.

[FN#565] Probably a corruption of the Turkish "Kara Tash" = black
stone, in Arab. "Hajar Jahannam" (hell-stone), lava, basalt.

[FN#566] A variant of lines in Night xx., vol. i., 211.  

[FN#567] i.e. Daughter of Pride: the proud.

[FN#568] In the Calc. Edit. by misprint "Maktab." Jabal Mukattam
is the old sea-cliff where the Mediterranean once beat and upon
whose North-Western slopes Cairo is built.

[FN#569] Arab. "Kutb"; lie. an axle, a pole; next a prince; a
high order or doyen in Sainthood especially amongst the
Sufi-gnostics.

[FN#570] Lit. "The Green" (Prophet), a mysterious personage
confounded with Elijah, St. George and others. He was a Moslem,
i.e. a ewe believer in the Islam of his day and Wazir to
Kaykobad, founder of the Kayanian dynasty, sixth century B.C. We
have before seen him as a contemporary of Moses. My learned
friend Ch. Clermone-Ganneau traces him back, with a multitude of
his similars (Proteus, Perseus, etc.), to the son of Osiris (p.
45, Horus et Saint Georges).

[FN#571] Arab. "Waled," more ceremonious than "ibn." It is, by
the by, the origin of our "valet" in its sense of boy or servant
who is popularly addressed Ya waled. Hence I have seen in a
French book of travels "un petit Iavelet."

[FN#572] Arab. "Azal" = Eternity (without beginning); "Abad" =
Infinity (eternity without end).

[FN#573] The Moslem ritual for slaughtering (by cutting the
throat) is not so strict as that of the Jews; but it requires
some practice; and any failure in the conditions renders the meat
impure, mere carrion (fatis).

[FN#574] The Wazir repeats all the words spoken by the Queen--but
"in iteration there is no recreation."

[FN#575] A phrase always in the Moslem's mouth: the slang meaning
of "we put our trust in Allah" is "let's cut our stick."

[FN#576] Koran liii. 14. This "Sidrat al-Muntaha" (Zizyphus
lotus) stands m the seventh heaven on the right hand of Allah's
throne: and even the angels may not pass beyond it.

[FN#577] Arab. "Habash" the word means more than "Abyssinia" as
it includes the Dankali Country and the sea-board, a fact unknown
to the late Lord Stratford de Redcliffe when he disputed with the
Porte. I ventured to set him right and suffered accordingly.

[FN#578] Here ends vol. ii. of the Mac. Edit.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was scanned by JC Byers
(http://www/capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and proofread by
Nancy Bloomquist, JC Byers, Wanda Chapman, Diane Doerfler, Emma
Dudding, Jennifer Lee, Marilyn McCelland, Laura Shaffer, Charles
Wilson.





                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                          VOLUME FIVE
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                     To Doctor George Bird.
  
My Dear Bird,
     This is not a strictly medical work, although in places
treating of subjects which may modestly be called hygienic.  I
inscribe it to you because your knowledge of Egypt will enable
you to appreciate its finer touches; and for another and a yet
more cogent reason, namely, that you are one of my best and
oldest friends.

Ever yours sincerely,

Richard F. Burton

Athenæum Club, October 20, 1885.


                  Contents of the Fifth Volume

59.  The Ebony Horse
60.  Uns Al-Wujud and the Wazir's Daughter Al-Ward Fi'l-Akmam or
     Rose-In-Hood
61.  Abu Nowas With the Three Boys and the Caliph Harun Al-Rashid
62.  Abdallah Bin Ma'amar With the Man of Bassorah and His Slave
     Girl
63.  The Lovers of the Banu Ozrah
64.  The Wazir of Al-Yaman and His Younger Brother
65.  The Loves of the Boy and Girl at School
66.  Al-Mutalammis and His Wife Umaymah
67.  The Caliph Marun Al-Rashid and Queen Zubaydah in the Bath
68.  Harun Al-Rashid and the Three Poets
69.  Mus'ab Bin Al-Zubayr and Ayishah His Wife
70.  Abu Al-Aswad and His Slave-Girl
71.  Harun Al-Rashid and the Two Slave-Girls
72.  The Caliph Harun Al-Rashid and the Three Slave-Girls
73.  The Miller and His Wife
74.  The Simpleton and the Sharper
75.  The Kazi Abu Yusuf With Harum Al-Rashid and Queen Zubaydah
76.  The Caliph Al-Hakim and the Merchand
77.  King Kisra Anushirwan and the Village Damsel
78.  The Water-Carrier and the Goldsmith's Wife
79.  Khusrau and Shirin and the Fisherman
80.  Yahya Bin Khalid the Barmecide and the Poor Man
81.  Mohammed Al-Amin and the Slave-Girl
82.  The Sons of Yahya Bin Khalid and Sa'id Bin Salim Al-Bahili
83.  The Woman's Trick Against Her Husband
84.  The Devout Woman and the Two Wicked Elders
85.  Ja'afar the Barmecide and the Old Badawi
86.  The Caliph Omar Bin Al-Khattab and the Young Badawi
87.  The Caliph Al-Maamum and the Pyramids of Egypt
88.  The Thief and the Merchant
89.  Masrur the Eunuch and Ibn Al-Karibi
90.  The Devotee Prince
91.  The Unwise Schoolmaster Who Fell in Love by Report
92.  The Foolish Dominie
93.  The Illiterate Who Set Up For a Schoolmaster
94.  The King and the Virtuous Wife
95.  Abd Al-Rahman the Maghribi's Story of the Rukh
96.  Adi Bin Zayd and the Princess Hind
97.  Di'ibil Al-Khuza'i With the Lady and Muslim Bin Al-Walid
98.  Isaac of Mosul and the Merchant
99.  The Three Unfortunate Lovers
100. How Abu Hasan Brake Wind
101. The Lovers of the Banu Tayy
102. The Mad Lover
103. The Prior Who Became A Moslem
104. The Loves of Abu Isa and Jurrat Al-Ayn
105. Al-Amin Son of Al-Rashid and His Uncle Ibrahim Bin Al-Mahdi
106. Al-Fath Bin Khakan and Al-Mutawakkil
107. The Man's Dispute With the Learned Woman Concerning the
     Relative Excellence of Male and Female
108. Abu Suwayd and the Pretty Old Woman
109. The Emir ali Bin Tahir and the Girl Muunis
110. The Woman Who had a Boy and the Other Who had a Man to Lover
111. Ali the Cairene and the Haunted House in Baghdad
112. The Pilgrim Man and the Old Woman
113. Abu Alhusn and His Slave-Girl Tawaddud
114. The Angel of Death With the Proud King and the Devout Man
115. The Angel of Death and the Rich King
116. The Angel of Death and the King of the Children of Israel
117. Iskandar Zu Al-Karnayn and a Certain Tribe of Poor Folk
118. The Righteousness of King Anushirwan
119. The Jewish Kazi and His Pious Wife
120. The Shipwrecked Woman and Her Child
121. The Pious Black Slave
122. The Devout Tray-Maker and His Wife
123. Al-Jajjaj and the Pious Man
124. The Blacksmith Who Could Handle Fire Without Hurt
125. The Devotee To Whom Allah Gave a Cloud for Service and the
     Devout King
126. The Moslem Champion and the Christian Damsel
127. The Christian King's Daughter and the Moslem
128. The Prophet and the Justice of Providence
129. The Ferryman of the Nile and the Hermit
130. The Island King and the Pious Israelite
131. Abu Al-Hasan and Abu Ja'afar the Leper
132. The Queen of Serpents
     a.   The Adventures of Bulukiya
     b.   The Story of Jansha





                        The Book Of The
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                                
                                
                                
                     THE EBONY HORSE.[FN#1]



There was once in times of yore and ages long gone before, a
great and puissant King, of the Kings of the Persians, Sábúr by
name, who was the richest of all the Kings in store of wealth and
dominion and surpassed each and every in wit and wisdom. He was
generous, open handed and beneficent, and he gave to those who
sought him and repelled not those who resorted to him; and he
comforted the broken-hearted and honourably entreated those who
fled to him for refuge. Moreover, he loved the poor and was
hospitable to strangers and did the oppressed justice upon the
oppressor. He had three daughters, like full moons of shining
light or flower-gardens blooming bright; and a son as he were the
moon; and it was his wont to keep two festivals in the twelve-
month, those of the Nau-Roz, or New Year, and Mihrgán the
Autumnal Equinox,[FN#2] on which occasions he threw open his
palaces and gave largesse and made proclamation of safety and
security and promoted his chamberlains and viceroys; and the
people of his realm came in to him and saluted him and gave him
joy of the holy day, bringing him gifts and servants and eunuchs.
Now he loved science and geometry, and one festival-day as he sat
on his kingly throne there came in to him three wise men, cunning
artificers and past masters in all manner of craft and
inventions, skilled in making things curious and rare, such as
confound the wit; and versed in the knowledge of occult truths
and perfect in mysteries and subtleties. And they were of three
different tongues and countries, the first a Hindi or
Indian,[FN#3] the second a Roumi or Greek and the third a Farsi
or Persian. The Indian came forwards and, prostrating himself
before the King, wished him joy of the festival and laid before
him a present befitting his dignity; that is to say, a man of
gold, set with precious gems and jewels of price and hending in
hand a golden trumpet. When Sabur[FN#4] saw this, he asked, "O
sage, what is the virtue of this figure?"; and the Indian
answered, "O my lord, if this figure be set at the gate of thy
city, it will be a guardian over it; for, in an enemy enter the
place, it will blow this clarion against him and he will be
seized with a palsy and drop down dead." Much the King marvelled
at this and cried, "By Allah, O sage, an this thy word be true, I
will grant thee thy wish and thy desire." Then came forward the
Greek and, prostrating himself before the King, presented him
with a basin of silver, in whose midst was a peacock of gold,
surrounded by four-and-twenty chicks of the same metal. Sabur
looked at them and turning to the Greek, said to him, "O sage,
what is the virtue of this peacock?" "O my lord," answered he,
"as often as an hour of the day or night passeth, it pecketh one
of its young and crieth out and flappeth its wings, till the
four-and-twenty hours are accomplished; and when the month cometh
to an end, it will open its mouth and thou shalt see the crescent
therein." And the King said, "An thou speak sooth, I will bring
thee to thy wish and thy desire." Then came forward the Persian
sage and, prostrating himself before the King, presented him with
a horse[FN#5] of the blackest ebony-wood inlaid with gold and
jewels, and ready harnessed with saddle, bridle and stirrups such
as befit Kings; which when Sabur saw, he marvelled with exceeding
marvel and was confounded at the beauty of its form and the
ingenuity of its fashion. So he asked, "What is the use of this
horse of wood, and what is its virtue and what the secret of its
movement?"; and the Persian answered, "O my lord, the virtue of
this horse is that, if one mount him, it will carry him whither
he will and fare with its rider through the air and cover the
space of a year in a single day." The King marvelled and was
amazed at these three wonders, following thus hard upon one
another on the same day, and turning to the sage, said to him,
"By Allah the Omnipotent, and our Lord the Beneficent, who
created all creatures and feedeth them with meat and drink, an
thy speech be veritable and the virtue of thy contrivance appear,
I will assuredly give thee whatsoever thou lustest for and will
bring thee to thy desire and thy wish!"[FN#6] Then he entertained
the sages three days, that he might make trial of their gifts;
after which they brought the figures before him and each took the
creature he had wroughten and showed him the mystery of its
movement. The trumpeter blew the trump; the peacock pecked its
chicks and the Persian sage mounted the ebony house, whereupon it
soared with him high in air and descended again. When King Sabur
saw all this, he was amazed and perplexed and felt like to fly
for joy and said to the three sages, "Now I am certified of the
truth of your words and it behoveth me to quit me of my promise.
Ask ye, therefore, what ye will, and I will give you that same."
Now the report of the King's daughters had reached the sages, so
they answered, "If the King be content with us and accept of our
gifts and allow us to prefer a request to him, we crave of him
that he give us his three daughters in marriage, that we may be
his sons-in-law; for that the stability of Kings may not be
gainsaid." Quoth the King, "I grant you that which you wish and
you desire," and bade summon the Kazi forthright, that he might
marry each of the sages to one of his daughters. Now it fortuned
that the Princesses were behind a curtain, looking on; and when
they heard this, the youngest considered her husband to be and
behold, he was an old man,[FN#7] an hundred years of age, with
hair frosted, forehead drooping, eyebrows mangy, ears slitten,
beard and mustachios stained and dyed; eyes red and goggle;
cheeks bleached and hollow; flabby nose like a brinjall, or egg-
plant[FN#8]; face like a cobbler's apron, teeth overlapping and
lips like camel's kidneys, loose and pendulous; in brief a
terror, a horror, a monster, for he was of the folk of his time
the unsightliest and of his age the frightfullest; sundry of his
grinders had been knocked out and his eye-teeth were like the
tusks of the Jinni who frighteneth poultry in hen-houses. Now the
girl was the fairest and most graceful of her time, more elegant
than the gazelle however tender, than the gentlest zephyr blander
and brighter than the moon at her full; for amorous fray right
suitable; confounding in graceful sway the waving bough and
outdoing in swimming gait the pacing roe; in fine she was fairer
and sweeter by far than all her sisters. So, when she saw her
suitor, she went to her chamber and strewed dust on her head and
tore her clothes and fell to buffeting her face and weeping and
wailing. Now the Prince, her brother, Kamar al-Akmár, or the Moon
of Moons hight, was then newly returned from a journey and,
hearing her weeping and crying came in to her (for he loved her
with fond affection, more than his other sisters) and asked her,
"What aileth thee? What hath befallen thee? Tell me and conceal
naught from me." So she smote her breast and answered, "O my
brother and my dear one, I have nothing to hide. If the palace be
straitened upon thy father, I will go out; and if he be resolved
upon a foul thing, I will separate myself from him, though he
consent not to make provision for me; and my Lord will provide."
Quoth he, "Tell me what meaneth this talk and what hath
straitened thy breast and troubled thy temper." "O my brother and
my dear one," answered the Princess, "Know that my father hath
promised me in marriage to a wicked magician who brought him, as
a gift, a horse of black wood, and hath bewitched him with his
craft and his egromancy; but, as for me, I will none of him, and
would, because of him, I had never come into this world!" Her
brother soothed her and solaced her, then fared to his sire and
said, "What be this wizard to whom thou hast given my youngest
sister in marriage, and what is this present which he hath
brought thee, so that thou hast killed[FN#9] my sister with
chagrin? It is not right that this should be." Now the Persian
was standing by and, when he heard the Prince's words, he was
mortified and filled with fury and the King said, "O my son, an
thou sawest this horse, thy wit would be confounded and thou
wouldst be amated with amazement." Then he bade the slaves bring
the horse before him and they did so; and, when the Prince saw
it, it pleased him. So (being an accomplished cavalier) he
mounted it forthright and struck its sides with the shovel-shaped
stirrup-irons; but it stirred not and the King said to the Sage,
"Go show him its movement, that he also may help thee to win thy
wish." Now the Persian bore the Prince a grudge because he willed
not he should have his sister; so he showed him the pin of ascent
on the right side of the horse and saying to him, "Trill this,"
left him. Thereupon the Prince trilled the pin and lo! the horse
forthwith soared with him high in ether, as it were a bird, and
gave not overflying till it disappeared from men's espying,
whereat the King was troubled and perplexed about his case and
said to the Persian, "O sage, look how thou mayest make him
descend." But he replied, "O my lord, I can do nothing, and thou
wilt never see him again till Resurrection-day, for he, of his
ignorance and pride, asked me not of the pin of descent and I
forgot to acquaint him therewith." When the King heard this, he
was enraged with sore rage; and bade bastinado the sorcerer and
clap him in jail, whilst he himself cast the crown from his head
and beat his face and smote his breast. Moreover, he shut the
doors of his palaces and gave himself up to weeping and keening,
he and his wife and daughters and all the folk of the city; and
thus their joy was turned to annoy and their gladness changed
into sore affliction and sadness. Thus far concerning them; but
as regards the Prince, the horse gave not over soaring with him
till he drew near the sun, whereat he gave himself up for lost
and saw death in the skies, and was confounded at his case,
repenting him of having mounted the horse and saying to himself,
"Verily, this was a device of the Sage to destroy me on account
of my youngest sister; but there is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I am lost without
recourse; but I wonder, did not he who made the ascent-pin make
also a descent-pin?" Now he was a man of wit and knowledge and
intelligence; so he fell to feeling all the parts of the horse,
but saw nothing save a screw, like a cock's head, on its right
shoulder and the like on the left, when quoth he to himself, "I
see no sign save these things like buttons." Presently he turned
the right-hand pin, whereupon the horse flew heavenwards with
increased speed. So he left it and looking at the sinister
shoulder and finding another pin, he wound it up and immediately
the steed's upwards motion slowed and ceased and it began to
descend, little by little, towards the face of the earth, while
the rider became yet more cautious and careful of his life.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prince wound up the sinister screw, the steed's upward motion
slowed and ceased, and it began to descend, little by little,
towards the earth while the rider became yet more cautious and
careful of his life. And when he saw this and knew the uses of
the horse, his heart was filled with joy and gladness and he
thanked Almighty Allah for that He had deigned deliver him from
destruction. Then he began to turn the horse's head whithersoever
he would, making it rise and fall at pleasure, till he had gotten
complete mastery over its every movement. He ceased not to
descend the whole of that day, for that the steed's ascending
flight had borne him afar from the earth; and, as he descended,
he diverted himself with viewing the various cities and countries
over which he passed and which he knew not, never having seen
them in his life. Amongst the rest, he descried a city ordered
after the fairest fashion in the midst of a verdant and riant
land, rich in trees and streams, with gazelles pacing daintily
over the plains; whereat he fell a-musing and said to himself,
"Would I knew the name of yon town and in what land it is!" And
he took to circling about it and observing it right and left. By
this time, the day began to decline and the sun drew near to its
downing; and he said in his mind, "Verily I find no goodlier
place to night in than this city; so I will lodge here and early
on the morrow I will return to my kith and kin and my kingdom;
and tell my father and family what hath passed and acquaint him
with what mine eyes have seen." Then he addressed himself to
seeking a place wherein he might safely bestow himself and his
horse and where none should descry him, and presently behold, he
espied a-middlemost of the city a palace rising high in upper air
surrounded by a great wall with lofty crenelles and battlements,
guarded by forty black slaves, clad in complete mail and armed
with spears and swords, bows and arrows. Quoth he, "This is a
goodly place," and turned the descent-pin, whereupon the horse
sank down with him like a weary bird, and alighted gently on the
terrace-roof of the palace. So the Prince dismounted and
ejaculating "Alhamdolillah"--praise be to Allah[FN#10]--he began
to go round about the horse and examine it, saying, "By Allah, he
who fashioned thee with these perfections was a cunning
craftsman, and if the Almighty extend the term of my life and
restore me to my country and kinsfolk in safety and reunite me
with my father, I will assuredly bestow upon him all manner
bounties and benefit him with the utmost beneficence." By this
time night had overtaken him and he sat on the roof till he was
assured that all in the palace slept; and indeed hunger and
thirst were sore upon him, for that he had not tasted food nor
drunk water since he parted from his sire. So he said within
himself, "Surely the like of this palace will not lack of
victual;" and, leaving the horse above, went down in search of
somewhat to eat. Presently, he came to a staircase and descending
it to the bottom, found himself in a court paved with white
marble and alabaster, which shone in the light of the moon. He
marvelled at the place and the goodliness of its fashion, but
sensed no sound of speaker and saw no living soul and stood in
perplexed surprise, looking right and left and knowing not
whither he should wend. Then said he to himself, "I may not do
better than return to where I left my horse and pass the night by
it; and as soon as day shall dawn I will mount and ride away."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
king's son to himself, "I may not do better than pass the night
by my horse; and as soon as day shall dawn I will mount and ride
away." However, as he tarried talking to himself, he espied a
light within the palace, and making towards it, found that it
came from a candle that stood before a door of the Harim, at the
head of a sleeping eunuch, as he were one of the Ifrits of
Solomon or a tribesman of the Jinn, longer than lumber and
broader than a bench. He lay before the door, with the pommel of
his sword gleaming in the flame of the candle, and at his head
was a bag of leather[FN#11] hanging from a column of granite.
When the Prince saw this, he was affrighted and said, "I crave
help from Allah the Supreme! O mine Holy One, even as Thou hast
already delivered me from destruction, so vouchsafe me strength
to quit myself of the adventure of this palace!" So saying, he
put out his hand to the budget and taking it, carried it aside
and opened it and found in it food of the best. He ate his fill
and refreshed himself and drank water, after which he hung up the
provision-bag in its place and drawing the eunuch's sword from
its sheath, took it, whilst the slave slept on, knowing not
whence destiny should come to him. Then the Prince fared forwards
into the palace and ceased not till he came to a second door,
with a curtain drawn before it; so he raised the curtain and
behold, on entering he saw a couch of the whitest ivory, inlaid
with pearls and jacinths and jewels, and four slave-girls
sleeping about it. He went up to the couch, to see what was
thereon, and found a young lady lying asleep, chemised with her
hair[FN#12] as she were the full moon rising[FN#13] over the
Eastern horizon, with flower-white brow and shining hair-paring
and cheeks like blood-red anemones and dainty moles thereon. He
was amazed at her as she lay in her beauty and loveliness, her
symmetry and grace, and he recked no more of death. So he went up
to her, trembling in every nerve and, shuddering with pleasure,
kissed her on the right cheek; whereupon she awoke forthright and
opened her eyes, and seeing the Prince standing at her head, said
to him, "Who art thou and whence comest thou?" Quoth he, "I am
thy slave and thy lover." Asked she, "And who brought thee
hither?" and he answered, "My Lord and my fortune." Then said
Shams al-Nahár[FN#14] (for such was her name), "Haply thou art he
who demanded me yesterday of my father in marriage and he
rejected thee, pretending that thou wast foul of favour. By
Allah, my sire lied in his throat when he spoke this thing, for
thou art not other than beautiful." Now the son of the King of
Hind had sought her in marriage, but her father had rejected him,
for that he was ugly and uncouth, and she thought the Prince was
he. So, when she saw his beauty and grace (for indeed he was like
the radiant moon) the syntheism[FN#15] of love gat hold of her
heart as it were a flaming fire, and they fell to talk and
converse. Suddenly, her waiting-women awoke and, seeing the
Prince with their mistress, said to her, "Oh my lady, who is this
with thee?" Quoth she, "I know not; I found him sitting by me,
when I woke up: haply 'tis he who seeketh me in marriage of my
sire." Quoth they, "O my lady, by Allah the All-Father, this is
not he who seeketh thee in marriage, for he is hideous and this
man is handsome and of high degree. Indeed, the other is not fit
to be his servant."[FN#16] Then the handmaidens went out to the
eunuch, and finding him slumbering awoke him, and he started up
in alarm. Said they, "How happeth it that thou art on guard at
the palace and yet men come in to us, whilst we are asleep?" When
the black heard this, he sprang in haste to his sword, but found
it not; and fear took him and trembling. Then he went in,
confounded, to his mistress and seeing the Prince sitting at talk
with her, said to him, "O my lord, art thou man or Jinni?"
Replied the Prince, "Woe to thee, O unluckiest of slaves: how
darest thou even the sons of the royal Chosroes[FN#17] with one
of the unbelieving Satans?" And he was as a raging lion. Then he
took the sword in his hand and said to the slave, "I am the
King's son-in-law, and he hath married me to his daughter and
bidden me go in to her." And when the eunuch heard these words he
replied, "O my lord, if thou be indeed of kind a man as thou
avouchest, she is fit for none but for thee, and thou art
worthier of her than any other." Thereupon the eunuch ran to the
King, shrieking loud and rending his raiment and heaving dust
upon his head; and when the King heard his outcry, he said to
him, "What hath befallen thee?: speak quickly and be brief; for
thou hast fluttered my heart." Answered the eunuch, "O King, come
to thy daughter's succour; for a devil of the Jinn, in the
likeness of a King's son, hath got possession of her; so up and
at him!" When the King heard this, he thought to kill him and
said, "How camest thou to be careless of my daughter and let this
demon come at her?" Then he betook himself to the Princess's
palace, where he found her slave-women standing to await him and
asked them, "What is come to my daughter?" "O King," answered
they, "slumber overcame us and, when we awoke, we found a young
man sitting upon her couch in talk with her, as he were the full
moon; never saw we aught fairer of favour than he. So we
questioned him of his case and he declared that thou hadst given
him thy daughter in marriage. More than this we know not, nor do
we know if he be a man or a Jinni; but he is modest and well
bred, and doth nothing unseemly or which leadeth to disgrace."
Now when the King heard these words, his wrath cooled and he
raised the curtain little by little and looking in, saw sitting
at talk with his daughter a Prince of the goodliest with a face
like the full moon for sheen. At this sight he could not contain
himself, of his jealousy for his daughter's honour; and, putting
aside the curtain, rushed in upon them drawn sword in hand like a
furious Ghul. Now when the Prince saw him he asked the Princess,
"Is this thy sire?"; and she answered, "Yes."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Three Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Price saw the King rushing in upon them, drawn sword in hand,
like a furious Ghul he asked the Princess, "Is this thy sire?";
and she answered, "Yes." Whereupon he sprang to his feet and,
seizing his sword, cried out at the King with so terrible a cry
that he was confounded. Then the youth would have fallen on him
with the sword; but the King seeing that the Prince was doughtier
than he, sheathed his scymitar and stood till the young man came
up to him, when he accosted him courteously and said to him, "O
youth, art thou a man or a Jinni?" Quoth the Prince, "Did I not
respect thy right as mine host and thy daughter's honour, I would
spill thy blood! How darest thou fellow me with devils, me that
am a Prince of the sons of the royal Chosroes who, had they
wished to take thy kingdom, could shake thee like an earthquake
from thy glory and thy dominions and spoil thee of all thy
possessions?" Now when the King heard his words, he was
confounded with awe and bodily fear of him and rejoined, "If thou
indeed be of the sons of the Kings, as thou pretendest, how
cometh it that thou enterest my palace without my permission, and
smirchest mine honour, making thy way to my daughter and feigning
that thou art her husband and claiming that I have given her to
thee to wife, I that have slain Kings and Kings' sons, who sought
her of me in marriage? And now who shall save thee from my might
and majesty when, if I cried out to my slaves and servants and
bade them put thee to the vilest of deaths they would slay thee
forthright? Who shall deliver thee out of my hand?" When the
Prince heard this speech of the King he answered, "Verily, I
wonder at thee and at the shortness and denseness of thy wit! Say
me, canst covet for thy daughter a mate comelier than myself, and
hast ever seen a stouter hearted man or one better fitted for a
Sultan or a more glorious in rank and dominion than I?" Rejoined
the King, "Nay, by Allah! but I would have had thee, O youth, act
after the custom of Kings and demand her from me to wife before
witnesses, that I might have married her to thee publicly; and
now, even were I to marry her to thee privily, yet hast thou
dishonoured me in her person." Rejoined the Prince, "Thou sayest
sooth, O King, but if thou summon thy slaves and thy soldiers and
they fall upon me and slay me, as thou pretendest, thou wouldst
but publish thine own disgrace, and the folk would be divided
between belief in thee and disbelief in thee. Wherefore, O King,
thou wilt do well, meseemeth, to turn from this thought to that
which I shall counsel thee." Quoth the King, "Let me hear what
thou hast to advise;" and quoth the Prince, "What I have to
propose to thee is this: either do thou meet me in combat
singular, I and thou; and he who slayeth his adversary shall be
held the worthier and having a better title to the kingdom; or
else, let me be this night and, whenas dawns the morn, draw out
against me thy horsemen and footmen and servants; but first tell
me their number." Said the King, "They are forty thousand horse,
beside my own slaves and their followers,[FN#18] who are the like
of them in number." Thereupon said the Prince, "When the day
shall break, do thou array them against me and say to them"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth
the Prince, "When day shall break, do thou array them against me
and say to them: 'This man is a suitor to me for my daughter's
hand, on condition that he shall do battle single-handed against
you all; for he pretendeth that he will overcome you and put you
to the rout, and indeed that ye cannot prevail against him.'
After which, leave me to do battle with them: if they slay me,
then is thy secret surer guarded and thine honour the better
warded; and if I overcome them and see their backs, then is it
the like of me a King should covet to his son-in-law." So the
King approved of his opinion and accepted his proposition,
despite his awe at the boldness of his speech and amaze at the
pretensions of the Prince to meet in fight his whole host, such
as he had described to him, being at heart assured that he would
perish in the fray and so he should be quit of him and freed from
the fear of dishonour. Thereupon he called the eunuch and bade
him go to his Wazir without stay and delay and command him to
assemble the whole of the army and cause them don their arms and
armour and mount their steeds. So the eunuch carried the King's
order to the Minister, who straightaway summoned the Captains of
the host and the Lords of the realm and bade them don their
harness of derring-do and mount horse and sally forth in battle
array. Such was their case; but as regards the King, he sat a
long while conversing with the young Prince, being pleased with
his wise speech and good sense and fine breeding. And when it was
day-break he returned to his palace and, seating himself on his
throne, commanded his merry men to mount and bade them saddle one
of the best of the royal steeds with handsome selle and housings
and trappings and bring it to the Prince. But the youth said, "O
King, I will not mount horse, till I come in view of the troops
and review them." "Be it as thou wilt," replied the King. Then
the two repaired to the parade-ground, where the troops were
drawn up, and the young Prince looked upon them and noted their
great number; after which the King cried out to them, saying,
"Ho, all ye men, there is come to me a youth who seeketh my
daughter in marriage; and in very sooth never have I seen a
goodlier than he; no, nor a stouter of heart nor a doughtier of
arm, for he pretendeth that he can overcome you, single-handed,
and force you to flight and that, were ye an hundred thousand in
number, yet for him would ye be but few. Now when he chargeth
down on you, do ye receive him upon point of pike and sharp of
sabre; for, indeed, he hath undertaken a mighty matter." Then
quoth the King to the Prince, "Up, O my son, and do thy devoir on
them." Answered he, "O King, thou dealest not justly and fairly
by me: how shall I go forth against them, seeing that I am afoot
and the men be mounted?" The King retorted, "I bade thee mount,
and thou refusedst; but choose thou which of my horses thou
wilt." Then he said, "Not one of thy horses pleaseth me, and I
will ride none but that on which I came." Asked the King, "And
where is thy horse?" "Atop of thy palace." "In what part of my
palace?" "On the roof." Now when the King heard these words, he
cried, "Out on thee! this is the first sign thou hast given of
madness. How can the horse be on the roof? But we shall at once
see if thou speak the truth or lies." Then he turned to one of
his chief officers and said to him, "Go to my palace and bring me
what thou findest on the roof." So all the people marvelled at
the young Prince's words, saying one to other, "How can a horse
come down the steps from the roof? Verily this is a thing whose
like we never heard." In the meantime the King's messenger
repaired to the palace and mounting to the roof, found the horse
standing there and never had he looked on a handsomer; but when
he drew near and examined it, he saw that it was made of ebony
and ivory. Now the officer was accompanied by other high
officers, who also looked on and they laughed to one another,
saying, "Was it of the like of this horse that the youth spake?
We cannot deem him other than mad; however, we shall soon see the
truth of his case."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
high officials looked upon the horse, they laughed one to other
and said, "Was it of the like of his horse that the youth spake?
We cannot deem him other than mad; however, we shall soon see the
truth of his case. Peradventure herein is some mighty matter, and
he is a man of high degree." Then they lifted up the horse bodily
and, carrying it to the King, set it down before him, and all the
lieges flocked round to look at it, marvelling at the beauty of
its proportions and the richness of its saddle and bridle. The
King also admired it and wondered at it with extreme wonder; and
he asked the Prince, "O youth, is this thy horse?" He answered,
"Yes, O King, this is my horse, and thou shalt soon see the
marvel it showeth." Rejoined the King, "Then take and mount it,"
and the Prince retorted, "I will not mount till the troops
withdraw afar from it." So the King bade them retire a bowshot
from the horse; whereupon quoth its owner, "O King, see thou; I
am about to mount my horse and charge upon thy host and scatter
them right and left and split their hearts asunder." Said the
King, "Do as thou wilt; and spare not their lives, for they will
not spare thine." Then the Prince mounted, whilst the troops
ranged themselves in ranks before him, and one said to another,
"When the youth cometh between the ranks, we will take him on the
points of our pikes and the sharps of our sabres." Quoth another,
"By Allah, this a mere misfortune: how shall we slay a youth so
comely of face and shapely of form?" And a third continued, "Ye
will have hard work to get the better of him; for the youth had
not done this, but for what he knew of his own prowess and pre-
eminence of valour." Meanwhile, having settled himself in his
saddle, the Prince turned the pin of ascent; whilst all eyes were
strained to see what he would do, whereupon the horse began to
heave and rock and sway to and fro and make the strangest of
movements steed ever made, till its belly was filled with air and
it took flight with its rider and soared high into the sky. When
the King saw this, he cried out to his men, saying, "Woe to you!
catch him, catch him, ere he 'scape you!" But his Wazirs and
Viceroys said to him, "O King, can a man overtake the flying
bird? This is surely none but some mighty magician or Marid of
the Jinn or devil, and Allah save thee from him. So praise thou
the Almighty for deliverance of thee and of all thy host from his
hand." Then the King returned to his palace after seeing the feat
of the Prince and, going in to his daughter, acquainted her with
what had befallen them both on the parade-ground. He found her
grievously afflicted for the Prince and bewailing her separation
from him; wherefore she fell sick with violent sickness and took
to her pillow. Now when her father saw her on this wise, he
pressed her to his breast and kissing her between the eyes, said
to her, "O my daughter, praise Allah Almighty and thank Him for
that He hath delivered us from this crafty enchanter, this
villain, this low fellow, this t