hief who thought only of seducing
thee!" And he repeated to her the story of the Prince and how he
had disappeared in the firmament; and he abused him and cursed
him knowing not how dearly his daughter loved him. But she paid
no heed to his words and did but redouble in her tears and wails,
saying to herself, "By Allah, I will neither eat meat nor drain
drink, till Allah reunite me with him!" Her father was greatly
concerned for her case and mourned much over her plight; but, for
all he could do to soother her, love-longing only increased on
her.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
mourned much over his daughter's plight but, for all he could do
to soothe her, love-longing only increased on her. Thus far
concerning the King and Princess Shams al-Nahár; but as regards
Prince Kamar al-Akmar, when he had risen high in air, he turned
his horse's head towards his native land, and being alone mused
upon the beauty of the Princess and her loveliness. Now he had
enquired of the King's people the name of the city and of its
King and his daughter; and men had told him that it was the city
of Sana'á.[FN#19] So he journeyed with all speed, till he drew
near his father's capital and, making an airy circuit about the
city, alighted on the roof of the King's palace, where he left
his horse, whilst he descended into the palace and seeing its
threshold strewn with ashes, though that one of his family was
dead. Then he entered, as of wont, and found his father and
mother and sisters clad in mourning raiment of black, all pale of
faces and lean of frames. When his sire descried him and was
assured that it was indeed his son, he cried out with a great cry
and fell down in a fit, but after a time coming to himself, threw
himself upon him and embraced him, clipping him to his bosom and
rejoicing in him with exceeding joy and extreme gladness. His
mother and sisters heard this; so they came in and seeing the
Prince, fell upon him, kissing him and weeping, and joying with
exceeding joyance. Then they questioned him of his case; so he
told them all that had passed from first to last, and his father
said to him, "Praised be Allah for thy safety, O coolth of my
eyes and core of my heart!" Then the King bade hold high
festival, and the glad tidings flew through the city. So they
beat drums and cymbals and, doffing the weed of mourning, they
donned the gay garb of gladness and decorated the streets and
markets; whilst the folk vied with one another who should be the
first to give the King joy, and the King proclaimed a general
pardon and opening the prisons, released those who were therein
prisoned. Moreover, he made banquets for the people, with great
abundance of eating and drinking, for seven days and nights and
all creatures were gladsomest; and he took horse with his son and
rode out with him, that the folk might see him and rejoice. After
awhile the Prince asked about the maker of the horse, saying, "O
my father, what hath fortune done with him?"; and the King
answered, "Allah never bless him nor the hour wherein I set eyes
on him! For he was the cause of thy separation from us, O my son,
and he hath lain in gaol since the day of thy disappearance."
Then the King bade release him from prison and, sending for him,
invested him in a dress of satisfaction and entreated him with
the utmost favour and munificence, save that he would not give
him his daughter to wife; whereat the Sage raged with sore rage
and repented of that which he had done, knowing that the Prince
had secured the secret of the steed and the manner of its motion.
Moreover, the King said to his son, "I reck thou wilt do will not
to go near the horse henceforth and more especially not to mount
it after this day; for thou knowest not its properties, and
belike thou art in error about it." Not the Prince had told his
father of his adventure with the King of Sana'a and his daughter
and he said, "Had the King intended to kill thee, he had done so;
but thine hour was not yet come." When the rejoicings were at an
end, the people returned to their places and the King and his son
to the palace, where they sat down and fell to eating and
drinking and making merry. Now the King had a handsome handmaiden
who was skilled in playing the lute; so she took it and began to
sweep the strings and sing thereto before the King and his son of
separation of lovers, and she chanted the following verses:--

"Deem not that absence breeds in me aught of forgetfulness; *
     What should remember I did you fro' my remembrance wane?
Time dies but never dies the fondest love for you we bear; *
     And in your love I'll die and in your love I'll arise
     again."[FN#20]

When the Prince heard these verses, the fires of longing flamed
up in his heart and pine and passion redoubled upon him. Grief
and regret were sore upon him and his bowels yearned in him for
love of the King's daughter of Sana'a; so he rose forthright and,
escaping his father's notice, went forth the palace to the horse
and mounting it, turned the pin of ascent, whereupon bird-like it
flew with him high in air and soared towards the upper regions of
the sky. In early morning his father missed him and, going up to
the pinnacle of the palace, in great concern, saw his son rising
into the firmament; whereat he was sore afflicted and repented in
all penitence that he had not taken the horse and hidden it; and
he said to himself, "By Allah, if but my son return to me, I will
destroy the horse, that my heart may be at rest concerning my
son." And he fell again to weeping and bewailing himself.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
again fell to weeping and bewailing himself for his son. Such was
his case; but as regards the Prince, he ceased not flying on
through air till he came to the city of Sana'a and alighted on
the roof as before. Then he crept down stealthily and, finding
the eunuch asleep, as of wont, raised the curtain and went on
little by little, till he came to the door of the Princess's
alcove-[FN#21]chamber and stopped to listen; when lo! he heard
her shedding plenteous tears and reciting verses, whilst her
women slept round her. Presently, overhearing her weeping and
wailing quoth they, "O our mistress, why wilt thou mourn for one
who mourneth not for thee?" Quoth she, "O ye little of wit, is he
for whom I mourn of those who forget or who are forgotten?" And
she fell again to wailing and weeping, till sleep overcame her.
Hereat the Prince's heart melted for her and his gall-bladder was
like to burst, so he entered and, seeing her lying asleep without
covering,[FN#22] touched her with his hand; whereupon she opened
her eyes and espied him standing by her. Said he, "Why all this
crying and mourning?" And when she knew him, she threw herself
upon him, and took him around the neck and kissed him and
answered, "For thy sake and because of my separation from thee."
Said he, "O my lady, I have been made desolate by thee all this
long time!" But she replied, "'Tis thou who hast desolated me;
and hadst thou tarried longer, I had surely died!" Rejoined he,
"O my lady, what thinkest thou of my case with thy father and how
he dealt with me? Were it not for my love of thee, O temptation
and seduction of the Three Worlds, I had certainly slain him and
made him a warning to all beholders; but, even as I love thee, so
I love him for thy sake." Quoth she, "How couldst thou leave me:
can my life be sweet to me after thee?" Quoth he, "Let what hath
happened suffice: I am now hungry, and thirsty." So she bade her
maidens make ready meat and drink, and they sat eating and
drinking and conversing till night was well nigh ended; and when
day broke he rose to take leave of her and depart, ere the eunuch
should awake. Shams al-Nahar asked him, "Whither goest thou?";
and he answered, "To my father's house, and I plight thee my
troth that I will come to thee once in every week." But she wept
and said, "I conjure thee, by Allah the Almighty, take me with
thee whereso thou wendest and make me not taste anew the
bittergourd[FN#23] of separation from thee." Quoth he, "Wilt thou
indeed go with me?" and quoth she, "Yes." "Then," said he, "arise
that we depart." So she rose forthright and going to a chest,
arrayed herself in what was richest and dearest to her of her
trinkets of gold and jewels of price, and she fared forth, her
handmaids recking naught. So he carried her up to the roof of the
palace and, mounting the ebony horse, took her up behind him and
made her fast to himself, binding her with strong bonds; after
which he turned the shoulder-pin of ascent, and the horse rose
with him high in air. When her slave-women saw this, they
shrieked aloud and told her father and mother, who in hot haste
ran to the palace-roof and looking up, saw the magical horse
flying away with the Prince and Princess. At this the King was
troubled with ever-increasing trouble and cried out, saying, "O
King's son, I conjure thee, by Allah, have ruth on me and my wife
and bereave us not of our daughter!" The Prince made him no
reply; but, thinking in himself that the maiden repented of
leaving father and mother, asked her, "O ravishment of the age,
say me, wilt thou that I restore thee to thy mother and father?":
whereupon she answered, "By Allah, O my lord, that is not my
desire: my only wish is to be with thee, wherever thou art; for I
am distracted by the love of thee from all else, even from my
father and mother." Hearing these words the Prince joyed with
great joy, and made the horse fly and fare softly with them, so
as not to disquiet her; nor did they stay their flight till they
came in sight of a green meadow, wherein was a spring of running
water. Here they alighted and ate and drank; after which the
Prince took horse again and set her behind him, binding her in
his fear for her safety; after which they fared on till they came
in sight of his father's capital. At this, the Prince was filled
with joy and bethought himself to show his beloved the seat of
his dominion and his father's power and dignity and give her to
know that it was greater than that of her sire. So he set her
down in one of his father's gardens without the city where his
parent was wont to take his pleasure; and, carrying her into a
domed summer-house prepared there for the King, left the ebony
horse at the door and charged the damsel keep watch over it,
saying, "Sit here, till my messenger come to thee; for I go now
to my father, to make ready a palace for thee and show thee my
royal estate." She was delighted when she heard these words and
said to him, "Do as thou wilt;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the maiden
was delighted when she heard these words and said to him, "Do as
thou wilt;" for she thereby understood that she should not enter
the city but with due honour and worship, as became her rank.
Then the Prince left her and betook himself to the palace of the
King his father, who rejoiced in his return and met him and
welcomed him; and the Prince said to him, "Know that I have
brought with me the King's daughter of whom I told thee; and have
left her without the city in such a garden and come to tell thee,
that thou mayst make ready the procession of estate and go forth
to meet her and show her thy royal dignity and troops and
guards." Answered the King, "With joy and gladness"; and
straightaway bade decorate the town with the goodliest adornment.
Then he took horse and rode out in all magnificence and majesty,
he and his host, high officers and household, with drums and
kettle-drums, fifes and clarions and all manner instruments;
whilst the Prince drew forth of his treasuries jewellery and
apparel and what else of the things which Kings hoards and made a
rare display of wealth and splendour: moreover he got ready for
the Princess a canopied litter of brocades, green, red and
yellow, wherein he set Indian and Greek and Abyssinian slave-
girls. Then he left the litter and those who were therein and
preceded them to the pavilion where he had set her down; and
searched but found naught, neither Princess nor horse. When he
saw this, he beat his face, and rent his raiment and began to
wander round about the garden, as he had lost his wits; after
which he came to his senses and said to himself, "How could she
have come at the secret of this horse, seeing I told her nothing
of it? Maybe the Persian sage who made the horse hath chanced
upon her and stolen her away, in revenge for my father's
treatment of him." Then he sought the guardians of the garden and
asked them if they had seen any pass the precincts; and said,
"Hath any one come in here? Tell me the truth and the whole truth
or I will at once strike off your heads." They were terrified by
his threats; but they answered with one voice, "We have seen no
man enter save the Persian sage, who came to gather healing
herbs." So the Prince was certified that it was indeed he that
had taken away the maiden,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prince heard their answer, he was certified that the Sage had
taken away the maiden and abode confounded and perplexed
concerning his case. And he was abashed before the folk and,
turning to his sire, told him what had happened and said to him,
"Take the troops and march them back to the city. As for me, I
will never return till I have cleared up this affair." When the
King heard this, he wept and beat his breast and said to him, "O
my son, calm thy choler and master thy chagrin and come home with
us and look what King's daughter thou wouldst fain have, that I
may marry thee to her." But the Prince paid no heed to his words
and farewelling him departed, whilst the King returned to the
city and their joy was changed into sore annoy. Now, as Destiny
issued her decree, when the Prince left the Princess in the
garden-house and betook himself to his father's palace, for the
ordering of his affair, the Persian entered the garden to pluck
certain simples and, scenting the sweet savour of musk and
perfumes that exhaled from the Princess and impregnated the whole
place, followed it till he came to the pavilion and saw standing
at the door the horse which he had made with his own hands. His
heart was filled with joy and gladness, for he had bemourned its
loss much since it had gone out of his hand: so he went up to it
and, examining its every part, found it whole and sound;
whereupon he was about to mount and ride away, when he bethought
himself and said, "Needs must I first look what the Prince hath
brought and left here with the horse." So he entered the pavilion
and, seeing the Princess sitting there, as she were the sun
shining sheen in the sky serene, knew her at the first glance to
be some high-born lady and doubted not but the Prince had brought
her thither on the horse and left her in the pavilion, whilst he
went to the city, to make ready for her entry in state procession
with all splendor. Then he went up to her and kissed the earth
between her hands, whereupon she raised her eyes to him and,
finding him exceedingly foul of face and favour, asked, "Who art
thou?"; and he answered, "O my lady, I am a messenger sent by the
Prince who hath bidden me bring thee to another pleasance nearer
the city; for that my lady the Queen cannot walk so far and is
unwilling, of her joy in thee, that another should forestall her
with thee." Quoth she, "Where is the Prince?"; and quoth the
Persian, "He is in the city, with his sire and forthwith he shall
come for thee in great state." Said she, "O thou! say me, could
he find none handsomer to send to me?"; whereat loud laughed the
Sage and said, "Yea verily, he hath not a Mameluke as ugly as I
am; but, O my lady, let not the ill-favour of my face and the
foulness of my form deceive thee. Hadst thou profited of me as
hath the Prince, verily thou wouldst praise my affair. Indeed, he
chose me as his messenger to thee, because of my uncomeliness and
loathsomeness in his jealous love of thee; else hath he Mamelukes
and negro slaves, pages, eunuchs and attendants out of number,
each goodlier than other." Whenas she heard this, it commended
itself to her reason and she believed him; so she rose
forthright;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Persian sage acquainted the Princess with the case of the King's
son, she believed him; so she rose forthright; and, putting her
hand in his, said, "O my father, what hast thou brought me to
ride?" He replied, "O my lady, thou shalt ride the horse thou
camest on;" and she, "I cannot ride it by myself." Whereupon he
smiled and knew that he was her master and said, "I will ride
with thee myself." So he mounted and, taking her up behind him
bound her to himself with firm bonds, while she knew not what he
would with her. Then he turned the ascent-pin, whereupon the
belly of the horse became full of wind and it swayed to and fro
like a wave of the sea, and rose with them high in air nor
slackened in its flight, till it was out of sight of the city.
Now when Shams al-Nahir saw this, she asked him, "Ho thou! what
is become of that thou toldest me of my Prince, making me believe
that he sent thee to me?" Answered the Persian, "Allah damn the
Prince! he is a mean and skin-flint knave." She cried, "Woe to
thee! How darest thou disobey thy lord's commandment?" Whereto
the Persian replied, "He is no lord of mine: knowest thou who I
am?" Rejoined the Princess, "I know nothing of thee save what
thou toldest me;" and retorted he, "What I told thee was a trick
of mine against thee and the King's son: I have long lamented the
loss of this horse which is under us; for I constructed it and
made myself master of it. But now I have gotten firm hold of it
and of thee too, and I will burn his heart even as he hath burnt
mine; nor shall he ever have the horse again; no, never! So be of
good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear; for I can be of
more use to thee than he; and I am generous as I am wealthy; my
servants and slaves shall obey thee as their mistress; I will
robe thee in finest raiment and thine every wish shall be at thy
will." When she heard this, she buffeted her face and cried out,
saying, "Ah, well-away! I have not won my beloved and I have lost
my father and mother!" And she wept bitter tears over what had
befallen her, whilst the Sage fared on with her, without ceasing,
till he came to the land of the Greeks[FN#24] and alighted in a
verdant mead, abounding in streams and trees. Now this meadow lay
near a city wherein was a King of high puissance, and it chanced
that he went forth that day to hunt and divert himself. As he
passed by the meadow, he saw the Persian standing there, with the
damsel and the horse by his side; and, before the Sage was ware,
the King's slaves fell upon him and carried him and the lady and
the horse to their master who, noting the foulness of the man's
favour and his loathsomeness and the beauty of the girl and her
loveliness, said, "O my lady, what kin is this oldster to thee?"
The Persian made haste to reply, saying, "She is my wife and the
daughter of my father's brother." But the lady at once gave him
the lie and said, "O King, by Allah, I know him not, nor is he my
husband; nay, he is a wicked magician who hath stolen me away by
force and fraud." Thereupon the King bade bastinado the Persian
and they beat him till he was well-nigh dead; after which the
King commanded to carry him to the city and cast him into jail;
and, taking from him the damsel and the ebony horse (though he
knew not its properties nor the secret of its motion), set the
girl in his serraglio and the horse amongst his hoards. Such was
the case with the Sage and the lady; but as regards Prince Kamar
al-Akmar, he garbed himself in travelling gear and taking what he
needed of money, set out tracking their trail in very sorry
plight; and journeyed from country to country and city to city
seeking the Princess and enquiring after the ebony horse, whilst
all who heard him marvelled at him and deemed his talk
extravagant. Thus he continued doing a long while; but, for all
his enquiry and quest, he could hit on no new news of her. At
last he came to her father's city of Sana'a and there asked for
her, but could get no tidings of her and found her father
mourning her loss. So he turned back and made for the land of the
Greeks, continuing to enquire concerning the twain as he went,--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King's
son made for the land of the Greeks, continuing to enquire
concerning the two as he went along, till, as chance would have
it, he alighted at a certain Khan and saw a company of merchants
sitting at talk. So he sat down near them and heard one say, "O
my friends, I lately witnessed a wonder of wonders." They asked,
"What was that?" and he answered, "I was visiting such a district
in such a city (naming the city wherein was the Princess), and I
heard its people chatting of a strange thing which had lately
befallen. It was that their King went out one day hunting and
coursing with a company of his courtiers and the lords of his
realm; and, issuing from the city, they came to a green meadow
where they espied an old man standing, with a woman sitting hard
by a horse of ebony. The man was foulest-foul of face and loathly
of form, but the woman was a marvel of beauty and loveliness and
elegance and perfect grace; and as for the wooden horse, it was a
miracle, never saw eyes aught goodlier than it nor more gracious
than its make." Asked the others, "And what did the King with
them?"; and the merchant answered, "As for the man the King
seized him and questioned him of the damsel and he pretended that
she was his wife and the daughter of his paternal uncle; but she
gave him the lie forthright and declared that he was a sorcerer
and a villain. So the King took her from the old man and bade
beat him and cast him into the trunk-house. As for the ebony
horse, I know not what became of it." When the Prince heard these
words, he drew near to the merchant and began questioning him
discreetly and courteously touching the name of the city and of
its King; which when he knew, he passed the night full of joy.
And as soon as dawned the day he set out and travelled sans
surcease till he reached that city; but, when he would have
entered, the gate-keepers laid hands on him, that they might
bring him before the King to question him of his condition and
the craft in which he was skilled and the cause of his coming
thither-such being the usage and custom of their ruler. Now it
was supper-time when he entered the city, and it was then
impossible to go in to the King or take counsel with him
respecting the stranger. So the guards carried him to the jail,
thinking to lay him by the heels there for the night; but, when
the warders saw his beauty and loveliness, they could not find it
in their hearts to imprison him: they made him sit with them
without the walls; and, when food came to them, he ate with them
what sufficed him. As soon as they had made an end of eating,
they turned to the Prince and said, "What countryman art thou?"
"I come from Fars," answered he, "the land of the Chosroës." When
they heard this they laughed and one of them said, "O
Chosroan,[FN#25] I have heard the talk of men and their histories
and I have looked into their conditions; but never saw I or heard
I a bigger liar than the Chosroan which is with us in the jail."
Quoth another, "And never did I see aught fouler than his favour
or more hideous than his visnomy." Asked the Prince. "What have
ye seen of his lying?"; and they answered, "He pretendeth that he
is one of the wise! Now the King came upon him, as he went a-
hunting, and found with him a most beautiful woman and a horse of
the blackest ebony, never saw I a handsomer. As for the damsel,
she is with the King, who is enamoured of her and would fain
marry her; but she is mad, and were this man a leach as he
claimeth to be, he would have healed her, for the King doth his
utmost to discover a cure for her case and a remedy for her
disease, and this whole year past hath he spent treasure upon
physicians and astrologers, on her account; but none can avail to
cure her. As for the horse, it is in the royal hoard-house, and
the ugly man is here with us in prison; and as soon as night
falleth, he weepeth and bemoaneth himself and will not let us
sleep."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
warders had recounted the case of the Persian egromancer they
held in prison and his weeping and wailing, the Prince at once
devised a device whereby he might compass his desire; and
presently the guards of the gate, being minded to sleep, led him
into the jail and locked the door. So he overheard the Persian
weeping and bemoaning himself, in his own tongue, and saying,
"Alack, and alas for my sin, that I sinned against myself and
against the King's son, in that which I did with the damsel; for
I neither left her nor won my will of her! All this cometh of my
lack of sense, in that I sought for myself that which I deserved
not and which befitted not the like of me; for whoso seeketh what
suiteth him not at all, falleth with the like of my fall." Now
when the King's son heard this, he accosted him in Persian,
saying, "How long will this weeping and wailing last? Say me,
thinkest thou that hath befallen thee that which never befel
other than thou?" Now when the Persian heard this, he made
friends with him and began to complain to him of his case and
misfortunes. And as soon as the morning morrowed, the warders
took the Prince and carried him before their King, informing him
that he had entered the city on the previous night, at a time
when audience was impossible. Quoth the King to the Prince,
"Whence comest thou and what is thy name and trade and why hast
thou travelled hither?" He replied, "As to my name I am called in
Persian Harjah;[FN#26] as to my country I come from the land of
Fars; and I am of the men of art and especially of the art of
medicine and healing the sick and those whom the Jinns drive mad.
For this I go round about all countries and cities, to profit by
adding knowledge to my knowledge, and whenever I see a patient I
heal him and this is my craft."[FN#27] Now when the King heard
this, he rejoiced with exceeding joy and said, "O excellent Sage,
thou hast indeed come to us at a time when we need thee." Then he
acquainted him with the case of the Princess, adding, "If thou
cure her and recover her from her madness, thou shalt have of me
everything thou seekest." Replied the Prince, "Allah save and
favour the King: describe to me all thou hast seen of her
insanity and tell me how long it is since the access attacked
her; also how thou camest by her and the horse and the Sage." So
the King told him the whole story, from first to last, adding,
"The Sage is in goal." Quoth the Prince, "O auspicious King, and
what hast thou done with the horse?" Quoth the King, "O youth, it
is with me yet, laid up in one of my treasure-chambers,"
whereupon said the Prince within himself, "The best thing I can
do is first to see the horse and assure myself of its condition.
If it be whole and sound, all will be well and end well; but, if
its motor-works be destroyed, I must find some other way of
delivering my beloved." Thereupon he turned to the King and said
to him, "O King, I must see the horse in question: haply I may
find in it somewhat that will serve me for the recovery of the
damsel." "With all my heart," replied the King, and taking him by
the hand, showed him into the place where the horse was. The
Prince went round about it, examining its condition, and found it
whole and sound, whereat he rejoiced greatly and said to the
King, "Allah save and exalt the King! I would fain go in to the
damsel, that I may see how it is with her; for I hope in Allah to
heal her by my healing hand through means of the horse." Then he
bade them take care of the horse and the King carried him to the
Princess's apartment where her lover found her wringing her hands
and writhing and beating herself against the ground, and tearing
her garments to tatters as was her wont; but there was no madness
of Jinn in her, and she did this but that none might approach
her. When the Prince saw her thus, he said to her, "No harm shall
betide thee, O ravishment of the three worlds;" and went on to
soothe her and speak her fair, till he managed to whisper, "I am
Kamar al-Akmar;" whereupon she cried out with a loud cry and fell
down fainting for excess of joy; but the King thought this was
epilepsy[FN#28] brought on by her fear of him, and by her
suddenly being startled. Then the Prince put his mouth to her ear
and said to her, "O Shams al-Nahar, O seduction of the universe,
have a care for thy life and mine and be patient and constant;
for this our position needeth sufferance and skilful contrivance
to make shift for our delivery from the tyrannical King. My first
move will be now to go out to him and tell him that thou art
possessed of a Jinn and hence thy madness; but that I will engage
to heal thee and drive away the evil spirit, if he will at once
unbind thy bonds. So when he cometh in to thee, do thou speak him
smooth words, that he may think I have cured thee, and all will
be done for us as we desire." Quoth she, "Hearkening and
obedience;" and he went out to the King in joy and gladness, and
said to him, "O august King, I have, by thy good fortune,
discovered her disease and its remedy, and have cured her for
thee. So now do thou go in to her and speak her softly and treat
her kindly, and promise her what may please her; so shall all
thou desirest of her be accomplished to thee."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prince feigned himself a leach and went in to the damsel and made
himself known to her and told her how he purposed to deliver her,
she cried "Hearkening and obedience!" He then fared forth from
her and sought the King and said, "Go thou in to her and speak
her softly and promise her what may please her; so shall all thou
desirest of her be accomplished to thee." Thereupon the King went
in to her and when she saw him, she rose and kissing the ground
before him, bade him welcome and said, "I admire how thou hast
come to visit thy handmaid this day;" whereat he was ready to fly
for joy and bade the waiting-women and the eunuchs attend her and
carry her to the Hammam and make ready for her dresses and
adornment. So they went in to her and saluted her, and she
returned their salams with the goodliest language and after the
pleasantest fashion; whereupon they clad her in royal apparel
and, clasping a collar of jewels about her neck, carried her to
the bath and served her there. Then they brought her forth, as
she were the full moon; and, when she came into the King's
presence, she saluted him and kissed ground before him; whereupon
he joyed in her with joy exceeding and said to the Prince, "O
Sage, O philosopher, all this is of thy blessing. Allah increase
to us the benefit of thy healing breath!"[FN#29] The Prince
replied, "O King, for the completion of her cure it behoveth that
thou go forth, thou and all thy troops and guards, to the place
where thou foundest her, not forgetting the beast of black wood
which was with her; for therein is a devil; and, unless I
exorcise him, he will return to her and afflict her at the head
of every month." "With love and gladness," cried the King, "O
thou Prince of all philosophers and most learned of all who see
the light of day." Then he brought out the ebony horse to the
meadow in question and rode thither with all his troops and the
Princess, little weeting the purpose of the Prince. Now when they
came to the appointed place, the Prince, still habited as a
leach, bade them set the Princess and the steed as far as eye
could reach from the King and his troops, and said to him, "With
thy leave, and at thy word, I will now proceed to the fumigations
and conjurations, and here imprison the adversary of mankind,
that he may never more return to her. After this, I shall mount
this wooden horse which seemeth to be made of ebony, and take the
damsel up behind me; whereupon it will shake and sway to and fro
and fare forwards, till it come to thee, when the affair will be
at an end; and after this thou mayst do with her as thou wilt."
When the King heard his words, he rejoiced with extreme joy; so
the Prince mounted the horse and, taking the damsel up behind
him, whilst the King and his troops watched him, bound her fast
to him. Then he turned the ascending-pin and the horse took
flight and soared with them high in air, till they disappeared
from every eye. After this the King abode half the day, expecting
their return; but they returned not. So when he despaired of
them, repenting him greatly of that which he had done and
grieving sore for the loss of the damsel, he went back to the
city with his troops. He then sent for the Persian who was in
prison and said to him, "O thou traitor, O thou villian, why
didst thou hide from me the mystery of the ebony horse? And now a
sharper hath come to me and hath carried it off, together with a
slave-girl whose ornaments are worth a mint of money, and I shall
never see anyone or anything of them again!" So the Persian
related to him all his past, first and last, and the King was
seized with a fit of fury which well-nigh ended his life. He shut
himself up in his palace for a while, mourning and afflicted; but
at last his Wazirs came in to him and applied themselves to
comfort him, saying, "Verily, he who took the damsel is an
enchanter, and praised be Allah who hath delivered thee from his
craft and sorcery!" And they ceased not from him, till he was
comforted for her loss. Thus far concerning the King; but as for
the Prince, he continued his career towards his father's capital
in joy and cheer, and stayed not till he alighted on his own
palace, where he set the lady in safety; after which he went in
to his father and mother and saluted them and acquainted them
with her coming, whereat they were filled with solace and
gladness. Then he spread great banquets for the towns-folk,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King's
son spread great banquets for the towns-folk and they held high
festival a whole month, at the end of which time he went in to
the Princess and they took their joy of each other with exceeding
joy. But his father brake the ebony horse in pieces and destroyed
its mechanism for flight; moreover the Prince wrote a letter to
the Princess's father, advising him of all that had befallen her
and informing him how she was now married to him and in all
health and happiness, and sent it by a messenger, together with
costly presents and curious rarities. And when the messenger
arrived at the city which was Sana'a and delivered the letter and
the presents to the King, he read the missive and rejoiced
greatly thereat and accepted the presents, honouring and
rewarding the bearer handsomely. Moreover, he forwarded rich
gifts to his son-in-law by the same messenger, who returned to
his master and acquainted him with what had passed; whereat he
was much cheered. And after this the Prince wrote a letter every
year to his father-in-law and sent him presents till, in course
of time, his sire King Sabur deceased and he reigned in his
stead, ruling justly over his lieges and conducting himself well
and righteously towards them, so that the land submitted to him
and his subjects did him loyal service; and Kamar al-Akmar and
his wife Shams al-Nahar abode in the enjoyment of all
satisfaction and solace of life, till there came to them the
Destroyer of deligights and Sunderer of societies; the Plunderer
of palaces, the Caterer for cemeteries and the Garnerer of
graves. And now glory be to the Living One who dieth not and in
whose hand is the dominion of the worlds visible and invisible!
Moreover I have heard tell the tale of





           UNS AL-WUJUD AND THE WAZIR'S DAUGHTER AL-
            WARD FI'L-AKMAM OR ROSE-IN-HOOD.[FN#30]


There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, a King of great power and lord of glory and dominion
galore; who had a Wazir Ibrahim hight, and this Wazir's daughter
was a damsel of extraordinary beauty and loveliness, gifted with
passing brilliancy and the perfection of grace, possessed of
abundant wit, and in all good breeding complete. But she loved
wassail and wine and the human face divine and choice verses and
rare stories; and the delicacy of her inner gifts invited all
hearts to love, even as saith the poet, describing her,

     "Like moon she shines amid the starry sky, *
          Robing in tresses blackest ink outvie. 
     The morning-breezes give her boughs fair drink, *
          And like a branch she sways with supple ply: 
     She smiles in passing us. O thou that art *
          Fairest in yellow robed, or cramoisie, 
     Thou playest with my wit in love, as though *
          Sparrow in hand of playful boy were I."[FN#31]

Her name was Rose-in-Hood and she was so named for her young and
tender beauty and the freshness of her brilliancy; and the King
loved her in his cups because of her accomplishments and fine
manners. Now it was the King's custom yearly to gather together
all the nobles of his realm and play with the ball.[FN#32] So
when the day came round whereon the folk assembled for ballplay,
the Minister's daughter seated herself at her lattice, to divert
herself by looking on at the game; and, as they were at play, her
glance fell upon a youth among the guards than whom never was
seen a comelier face nor a goodlier form; for he was bright of
favour showing white teeth when he smiled, tall-statured and
broad-shouldered. She looked at him again and again and could not
take her fill of gazing; and presently said to her nurse, "What
is the name of yonder handsome young man among the troops?"
Replied the nurse, "O my daughter, the dear fellows are all
handsome. Which of them dost thou mean?" Said Rose-in-Hood, "Wait
till he come past and I will point him out to thee." So she took
an apple and as he rode by dropped it on him, whereupon he raised
his head, to see who did this, and espied the Wazir's daughter at
the window, as she were the moon of fullest light in the darkness
of the night; nor did he withdraw his eyes, till his heart was
utterly lost to her, and he recited these lines,

     "Was't archer shot me, or was't thine eyes *
          Ruined lover's heart that thy charms espies? 
     Was the notched shaft[FN#33] from a host outshot, *
          Or from latticed window in sudden guise?"

When the game was at an end, and all had left the ground, she
asked her nurse, "What is the name of that youth I showed thee?";
and the good woman answered, "His name is Uns al-Wujud;" whereat
Rose-in-Hood shook her head and lay down on her couch, with
thoughts a-fire for love. Then, sighing deeply, she improvised
these couplets,

     "He missed not who dubbed thee, 'World's delight,' *
          A world's love conjoining to bounty's light:[FN#34] 
     O thou, whose favour the full moon favours, *
          Whose charms make life and the living bright! 
     Thou hast none equal among mankind; *
          Sultan of Beauty, and proof I'll cite: 
     Thine eye-brows are likest a well-formed Nún,[FN#35] *
          And thine eyes a Sád,[FN#36] by His hand indite; 
     Thy shape is the soft, green bough that gives *
          When asked to all with all-gracious sprite: 
     Thou excellest knights of the world in stowre, *
          With delight and beauty and bounty dight."

When she had finished her verses, she wrote them on a sheet of
paper, which she folded in a piece of golf-embroidered silk and
placed under her pillow. Now one of her nurses had seen her; so
she came up to her and held her in talk till she slept, when she
stole the scroll from under her pillow; and, after reading it,
knew that she had fallen in love with Uns al-Wujud. Then she
returned the scroll to its place and when her mistress awoke, she
said to her, "O my lady, indeed I am to thee a true counsellor
and am tenderly anxious on thy account. Know that love is a
tyrant and the hiding it melteth iron and entaileth sickness and
unease; nor for whoso confesseth it is there aught of reproach."
Rejoined Rose-in-Hood, "And what is the medicine of passion, O
nurse mine?" Answered the nurse, "The medicine of passion is
enjoyment" Quoth she, "And how may one come by enjoyment?" Quoth
the other, "By letters and messages, my lady; by whispered words
of compliment and by greetings before the world;[FN#37] all this
bringeth lovers together and makes hard matters easy. So if thou
have aught at heart, mistress mine, I am the fittest to keep thy
secret and do thy desires and carry thy letters." Now when the
damsel heard this, her reason flew and fled for joy; but she
restrained herself from speech till she should see the issue of
the matter, saying within herself, "None knoweth this thing of
me, nor will I trust this one with my secret, till I have tried
her." Then said the woman, "O my lady, I saw in my sleep as
though a man came to me and said: 'Thy mistress and Uns al-Wujud
love each other; so do thou serve their case by carrying their
messages and doing their desires and keeping their secrets; and
much good shall befal thee.' So now I have told thee my vision
and it is thine to decide." Quoth Rose-in-Hood, after she heard
of the dream,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Rose-in-
Hood asked her nurse after hearing of the dream, "Tell me, canst
thou keep a secret, O my nurse?"; whereto she answered, "And how
should I not keep secrecy, I that am of the flower of the
free?"[FN#38] Then the maiden pulled out the scroll, whereon she
had written the verses and said, "Carry me this my letter to Uns
al-Wujud and bring me his reply." The nurse took the letter and,
repairing to Uns al-Wujud, kissed his hands and greeted him right
courteously, then gave him the paper; and he read it and,
comprehending the contents, wrote on the back these couplets,

     "I soothe my heart and my love repel; *
          But my state interprets my love too well: 
     When tears flow I tell them mine eyes are ill, *
          Lest the censor see and my case fortell, 
     I was fancy-free and unknew I Love; *
          But I fell in love and in madness fell. 
     I show you my case and complain of pain, *
          Pine and ecstasy that your ruth compel: 
     I write you with tears of eyes, so belike *
          They explain the love come my heart to quell; 
     Allah guard a face that is veiled with charms, *
          Whose thrall is Moon and the Stars as well: 
     In her beauty I never beheld the like; *
          From her sway the branches learn sway and swell: 
     I beg you, an 'tis not too much of pains, *
          To call;[FN#39] 'twere boon without parallel. 
     I give you a soul you will haply take. *
          To which Union is Heaven, Disunion Hell."

Then he folded the letter and kissing it, gave it to the go-
between and said to her, "O nurse, incline the lady's heart to
me." "To hear is to obey," answered she and carried the script to
her mistress, who kissed it and laid it on her head, then she
opened it and read it and understood it and wrote at the foot of
it these couplets,

     "O whose heart by our beauty is captive ta'en, *
          Have patience and all thou shalt haply gain! 
     When we knew that thy love was a true affect, *
          And what pained our heart to thy heart gave pain, 
     We had granted thee wished-for call and more; *
          But hindered so doing the chamberlain. 
     When the night grows dark, through our love's excess *
          Fire burns our vitals with might and main: 
     And sleep from our beds is driven afar, *
          And our bodies are tortured by passion-bane. 
     'Hide Love!' in Love's code is the first command; *
          And from raising his veil thy hand restrain: 
     I fell love-fulfilled by yon gazelle: *
          Would he never wander from where I dwell!"

Then she folded the letter and gave it to the nurse, who took it
and went out from her mistress to seek the young man; but, as she
would fare forth, the chamberlain met her and said to her,
"Whither away?" "To the bath," answered she; but in her fear and
confusion, she dropped the letter, without knowing it, and went
off unrecking what she had done; when one of the eunuchs, seeing
it lying in the way, picked it up. When the nurse came without
the door, she sought for it, but found it not, so turned back to
her mistress and told her of this and what had befallen her.
Meanwhile, the Wazir came out of the Harim and seated himself on
his couch; whereupon behold, the eunuch, who had picked up the
letter, came in to him, hending it in hand and said, "O my lord,
I found this paper lying upon the floor and picked it up." So the
Minister took it from his hand, folded as it was, and opening it,
read the verses as above set down. Then, after mastering the
meaning, he examined the writing and knew it for his daughter's
hand; whereupon he went to her mother, weeping so abundant tears
that his beard was wetted. His wife asked him, "What maketh thee
weep, O my lord?"; and he answered, "Take this letter and see
what is therein." So she took it and found it to be a love-letter
from her daughter Rose-in-Hood to Uns al-Wujud: whereupon the
ready drops sprang to her eyes; but she composed her mind, and,
gulping down her tears, said to her husband, "O my lord, there is
no profit in weeping: the right course is to cast about for a
means of keeping thine honour and concealing the affair of thy
daughter." And she went on to comfort him and lighten his
trouble; but he said, "I am fearful for my daughter by reason of
this new passion. Knowest thou not that the Sultan loveth Uns al-
Wujud with exceeding love? And my fear hath two causes. The first
concerneth myself; it is, that she is my daughter: the second is
on account of the King; for that Uns al-Wujud is a favourite with
the Sultan and peradventure great troubles shall come out of this
affair. What deemest thou should be done?"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir,
after recounting the affair of his daughter, asked his wife,
"What deemest thou should be done?" And she answered, "Have
patience whilst I pray the prayer for right direction." So she
prayed a two-bow prayer according to the prophetic[FN#40]
ordinance for seeking divine guidance; after which she said to
her husband, "In the midst of the Sea of Treasures[FN#41]
standeth a mountain named the Mount of the Bereaved Mother (the
cause of which being so called shall presently follow in its
place, Inshallah!); and thither can none have access, save with
pains and difficulty and distress: do thou make that same her
abiding-place." Accordingly the Minister and his wife agreed to
build on that mountain a virgin castle and lodge their daughter
therein with the necessary provision to be renewed year by year
and attendants to cheer and to serve her. Accordingly he
collected carpenters, builders and architects and despatched them
to the mountain, where they builded her an impregnable castle,
never saw eyes the like thereof. Then he made ready vivers and
carriage for the journey and, going in to his daughter by night,
bade her prepare to set out on a pleasure-excursion. Thereupon
her heart presaged the sorrows of separation and, when she went
forth and saw the preparations for the journey, she wept with
sore weeping and wrote that upon the door which might acquaint
her lover with what had passed and with the transports of passion
and grief that were upon her, transports such as would make the
flesh to shiver and hair to stare, and melt the hardest stone
with care, and tear from every eye a tear. And what she wrote
were these couplets,

   "By Allah, O thou house, if my beloved a morn go by, *
      And greet with signs and signals lover e'er is wont to fly, 
   I pray thee give him our salams in pure and fragrant guise, *
      For he indeed may never know where we this eve shall lie. 
   I wot not whither they have fared, thus bearing us afar *
      At speed, and lightly-quipt, the lighter from one love to
      fly: 
   When starkens night, the birds in brake or branches snugly
      perched * Wail for our sorrow and announce our hapless
      destiny: 
   The tongue of their condition saith, 'Alas, alas for woe, *
      And heavy brunt of parting-blow two lovers must aby': 
   When viewed I separation-cups were filled to the brim *
      And us with merest sorrow-wine Fate came so fast to ply, 
   I mixed them with becoming share of patience self to excuse, *
      But Patience for the loss of you her solace doth refuse."

Now when she ended her lines, she mounted and they set forward
with her, crossing and cutting over wold and wild and riant dale
and rugged hill, till they came to the shore of the Sea of
Treasures; here they pitched their tents and built her a great
ship, wherein they went down with her and her suite and carried
them over to the mountain. The Minister had ordered them, on
reaching the journey's end, to set her in the castle and to make
their way back to the shore, where they were to break up the
vessel. So they did his bidding and returned home, weeping over
what had befallen. Such was their case; but as regards Uns al-
Wujud, he arose from sleep and prayed the dawn-prayer, after
which he took horse and rode forth to attend upon the Sultan. On
his way, he passed by the Wazir's house, thinking perchance to
see some of his followers as of wont; but he saw no one and,
looking upon the door, he read written thereon the verses
aforesaid. At this sight, his senses failed him; fire was kindled
in his vitals and he returned to his lodging, where he passed the
day in trouble and transports of grief, without finding ease or
patience, till night darkened upon him, when his yearning and
love-longing redoubled. Thereupon, by way of concealment, he
disguised himself in the ragged garb of a Fakir,[FN#42] and set
out wandering at random through the glooms of night, distracted
and knowing not whither he went. So he wandered on all that night
and next day, till the heat of the sun waxed fierce and the
mountains flamed like fire and thirst was grievous upon him.
Presently, he espied a tree, by whose side was a thin thread of
running water; so he made towards it and sitting down in the
shade, on the bank of the rivulet, essayed to drink, but found
that the water had no taste in his mouth;[FN#43] and, indeed his
colour had changed and his face had yellowed, and his feet were
swollen with travel and travail. So he shed copious tears and
repeated these coup