t was the Three hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
Nowas beguiled the youths with his wishes, saying, "We hear and
obey;" and accompanied him to his lodging, where they found all
ready that he had set forth in his couplets.  They sat down and
ate and drank and made merry awhile, after which they appealed to
Abu Nowas to decide which of them was handsometh of face and
shapliest of form.  So he pointed to one of them and, having
kissed him twice over, recited the following verses,

     "I'll ransom that beauty-spot with my soup; *
          Where's it and where is a money-dole?[FN#87]
     Praise Him who hairless hath made that cheek *
          And bid Beauty bide in that mole, that mole!"

Then he pointed to another and, kissing his lips, repeated these
couplets,

     "And loveling weareth on his cheek a mole *
          Like musk, which virgin camphor ne'er lets off it:
     My peepers marvel such a contrast seeing; *
          And cried the Mole to me, 'Now bless the
          Prophet.'"[FN#88]

Then he pointed to the third and, after kissing him half a score
times repeated these couplets,

     "Melted pure gold in silvern bowl to drain *
          The youth, whose fingers wore a winey stain:
     He with the drawers[FN#89] served one cup of wine, *
          And served his wandering eyes the other twain.
     A loveling, of the sons of Turks,[FN#90] a fawn *
          Whose waist conjoins the double Mounts Honayn.[FN#91]
     Could Eve's corrupting daughers[FN#92] tempt my heart *
          Content with two-fold lure 'twould bear the bane.
     Unto Diyar-I-Bakr ('maid-land '[FN#93] this one lures; *
          That lures to two-mosqued cities of the plain."[FN#94]

Now each of the youths had drunk two cups, and when it came to
the turn of Abu Nowas, he took the goblet and repeated these
couplets,

"Drink not strong wine save at the slender dearling's hand; *
     Each like to other in all gifts the spirt grace:
For wine can never gladden toper's heart and soul, *
     Unless the cup-boy show a bright and sparkling face."

Then he drank off his cup and the bowl went round, and when it
came to Abu Nowas again, joyance got the mastery of him and he
repeated these couplets,

     "For cup-friends cup succeeding cup assign, *
          Brimming with grape-juice, brought in endliess line,
     By hand of brown-lipped[FN#95] Beauty who is sweet *
          At wake as apple or musk finest fine.[FN#96]
     Drink not the wine except from hand of fawn *
          Whose cheek to kiss is sweeter than the wine."

Presently the drink got into his noddle, drunkenness mastered him
and he knew not hand from head, so that he lolled from side to
side in joy and inclined to the youths one and all, anon kissing
them and anon embracing them leg overlying leg.  And he showed no
sense of sin or shame, but recited these couplets,

     "None wotteth best joyance but generous youth *
          When the pretty ones deign with him company keep:
     This sings to him, sings to him that, when he wants *
          A pick-me-up[FN#97] lying there all of a heap:
     And when of a loveling he needeth a kiss, *
          He takes from his lips or a draught or a nip;
     Heaven bless them!  How sweetly my day with them sped; *
          A wonderful harvest of pleasure I reap:
     Let us drink our good liquor both watered and pure, *
          And agree to swive all who dare slumber and sleep."

While they were in this deboshed state behold, there came a
knocking at the door; so they bade him who knocked enter, and
behold, it was the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid. 
When they saw him, they all rose and kissed ground before him;
and Abu Nowas threw off the fumes of the wine for awe of the
Caliph, who said to him, "Holla, Abu Nowas!"  He replied, "Adsum,
at thy service, O Commander of the Faithful, whom Allah
preserve!"  The Caliph asked, "What state is this?" and the poet
answered, "O Prince of True Believers, my state indubitably
dispenseth with questions."  Quoth the Caliph, "O Abu Nowas, I
have sought direction of Allah Almighty and have appointed thee
Kazi of pimps and panders."  Asked he, "Dost thou indeed invest
me with that high office, O Commander of the Faithful?"; and the
Caliph answered "I do;" whereupon Abu Nowas rejoined, "O
Commander of the Faithful, hast thou any suit to prefer to me?" 
Hereat the Caliph was wroth and presently turned away and left
them, full of rage, and passed the night sore an-angered against
Abu Nowas, who amid the party he had invited spent the merriest
of nights and the jolliest and joyousest.  And when day-break
dawned and the star of morn appeared in sheen and shone, he broke
up the sitting and, dismissing the youths, donned his court-dress
and leaving his house set out for the palace of the Caliph.  Now
it was the custom of the Commander of the Faithful, when the
Divan broke up, to withdraw to his sitting-saloon and summon
thither his poets and cup-companions and musicians, each having
his own place, which he might not overpass.  So it happened that
day, he retired to his saloom, and the friends and familiars came
and seated themselves, each in his rank and degree.  Presently,
in walked Abu Nowas and was about to take his usual seat, when
the Caliph cried to Masrur, the sworder, and bade him strip the
poet of his clothes and bind an ass's packsaddle on his back and
a halter about his head and a crupper under his rump and lead him
round to all the lodgings of the slave-girls, --And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
commanded Masrur, the sworder, to strip Abu Nowas of his
court-suit and bind an ass's packsaddle on his back and a halter
about his head, and a crupper under his rump and lead him round
to all the lodgings of the slave-girls, and the chambers of the
Harim, that the women might make mock of him; then cut off his
head and bring it to him.  "Hearkening and obedience," replied
Masrur and, doing with Abu Nowas as the Caliph had bidden him,
led him round all the chambers whose number equalled the days of
the year; but Abu Nowas was a funny fellow, so he made all the
girls laugh with his buffooneries and each gave him something
whereby he returned not save with a pocketful of money.  And
while this was going on behold, Ja'afar the Barmecide, who had
been absent on an important business for the Commander of the
Faithful, entered and recognising the poet, albeit in this
plight, said to him, "Holla, Abu Nowas!"  He said, "Here at thy
service, O our lord."  Ja'afar asked, "What offence hast thou
committed to bring this punishment on thee?"  Thereupon he
answered, "None whatsoever, except that I made our lord the
Caliph a present of the best of my poetry and he presented me, in
return, with the best of his raiment."  When the Prince of True
Believers head this, he laughed, from a heart full of
wrath,[FN#98] and pardoned Abu Nowas, and also gave him a myriad
of money.  And they also recount the tale of





              ABDALLAH BIN MA'AMAR WITH THE MAN OF
                  BASSORAH AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL.



A certain man of Bassorah once bought a slave-girl and reared and
educated her right well.  Moreover, he loved her very dearly and
spent all his substance in pleasuring and merry-making with her,
til he had naught left and extreme poverty was sore upon him.  So
she said to him, "O my master, sell me; for thou needest my price
and it maketh my heart ache to see thy sorry and want-full
plight.  If thou vend me and make use of my value, 'twill be
better for thee than keeping me by thee, and haply Almighty Allah
will ample thee and amend thy fortune."  He agreed to this for
the straitness of his case, and carried her to the bazar, where
the broker offered her for sale to the Governor of Bassorah, by
name Abdallah bin Ma'amar al-Taymi, and she pleased him.  So he
bought her, for five hundred dinars and paid the sum to her
master; but when he book the money and was about to go away, the
girl burst into tears and repeated these two couplets,

     "May coins though gainest joy in heart instil; *
          For me remaineth naught save saddest ill:
     I say unto my soul which sorely grieves, *
          'Thy friend departeth an thou will nor nill.'"

And when her master heard this, he groaned and replied in these
couplets,

     "Albeit this thy case lack all resource, *
          Nor findeth aught but death's doom, pardon still;
     Evening and morning, thoughts of thee will dole *
          Comfort to heart all woes and griefs full fill:
     Peace be upon thee! Meet we now no more *
          Nor pair except at Ibn Ma'amar's will."

Now when Abdullah bin Ma'amar heard these verses and saw their
affection, he exclaimed, "By Allah, I will not assist fate in
separating you; for it is evident to me that ye two indeed love
each other.  So take the money and the damsel, O man, and Allah
bless thee in both; for verily parting be grievous to lovers." 
So they kissed his hand and going away, ceased not to dwell
together, till death did them part; and glory be to Him whom
death over-taketh not!  And amonst stories is that of




              THE LOVERS OF THE BANU[FN#99] OZRAH



There was once, among the Banu Ozrah, a handsome and accomplished
man, who was never a single day out of love, and it chanced that
he became enamoured of a beauty of his own tribe and sent her
many messages; but she ceased not to entreat him with cruelty and
disdain; till, for stress of love and longing and desire and
distraction, he fell sick of a sore sickness and took to his
pillow and murdered sleep.  His malady redoubled on him and his
torments increased and he was well nigh dead when his case became
known among the folk and his passion notorious;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man
took to his pillow and murdered sleep.  So his case became known
and his passion notorious; and his infirmity grew upon him and
his pains redoubled until he was well nigh dead.  His family and
hers were urgent with her to visit him, but she refused, till he
was at the point of death when, being told of this, she relented
towards him and vouchsafed him a visit.  As soon as he saw her,
his eyes ran over with tears and he repeated from a broken heart,

     "An, by thy life, pass thee my funeral train, *
          A bier upborne upon the necks of four,
     Wilt thou not follow it, and greet the grave *
          Where shall my corpse be graved for evermore?"

Hearing this, she wept with sore weeping and said to him, "By
Allah, I suspected not that passion had come to such a pass with
thee, as to cast thee into the arms of death!  Had I wist of
this, I had been favourable to thy wish, and thou shouldst have
had thy will."  At this his tears streamed down even as the
clouds rail rain, and he repeated this verse,

     "She drew near whenas death was departing us, *
          And deigned union grant when ‘twas useless all."

Then he groaned one groan and died.  So she fell on him, kissing
him and weeping and ceased not weeping until she swooned away;
and when she came to herself, she charged her people to bury her
in his grave and with streaming eyes recited these two couplets,

     "We lived on earth a life of fair content; *
          And tribe and house and home of us were proud;
     But Time in whirling flight departed us, *
          To join us now in womb of earth and shroud.[FN#100]"

Then she fell again to weeping, nor gave over shedding tears and
lamenting till she fainted away; and she lay three days,
senseless.  Then she died and was buried in his grave.  This is
one of the strange chances of love.[FN#101]  And I have heard
related a tale of the





            WAZIR OF AL-YAMAN AND HIS YOUNG BROTHER
                                


It is said that Badr al-Din, Wazir of Al-Yaman, had a young
brother of singular beauty and kept strait watch over him; so he
applied himself to seek a tutor for him and, coming upon a Shaykh
of dignified and reverend aspect, chaste and religious, lodged
him in a house next his own.  This lasted a long time, and he
used to come daily from his dwelling to that of Sáhib[FN#102]
Badr al-Din and teach the young brother.  After a while, the old
man's heart was taken with love for the youth, and longing grew
upon him and his vitals were troubled, till one day, he bemoaned
his case to the boy, who said, "What can I do, seeing that I may
not leave my brother night or day? and thou thyself seest how
careful he is over me."  Quoth the Shaykh, "My lodging adjoineth
thine; so there will be no difficulty, when thy brother sleepeth,
to rise and, entering the privy, feign thyself asleep.  Then come
to the parapet[FN#103] of the terrace-roof and I will receive
thee on the other side of the wall; so shalt thou sit with me an
eye-twinkling and return without thy brother's knowledge."  "I
hear and obey," answered the lad; and the tutor began to prepare
gifts suitable to his degree.  Now when a while of the night was
past, he entered the water-closet and waited until his brother
lay down on his bed and took patience till he was drowned in
sleep, when he rose and going to the parapet of the terrace-roof,
found standing there to await him the old man, who gave him his
hand and carried him to the sitting-chamber, where he had made
ready various dainties for his entertainment, and they sat down
to carouse.  Now it was the night of the full moon and, as they
sat with the wine-cup going round, her rays shone upon them, and
the governor fell to singing.  But, whilst they were thus in joy
and jollity and mirth and merriment, such as confoundeth the wit
and the sight and defieth description, lo! the Wazir awoke and,
missing his brother, arose in affright and found the door open. 
So he went up to the roof and hearing a noise of talk, climbed
over the parapet to the adjoining terrace and saw a light shining
from the lodging.  He looked in from behind the wall, and espied
his brother and his tutor sitting at carouse; but the Shaykh
became aware of him and sang cup in hand, to a lively measure
these couplets,

     "He made me drain his wine of honeyed lips, *
          Toasting with cheeks which rose and myrtle smother:
     Then nighted in embrace, cheek to my cheek, *
          A loveling midst mankind without another.
     When the full moon arose on us and shone *
          Pray she traduce us not to the big brother."

And it proved the perfect politeness of the Wazir Badr al-Din
that, when he heard this, he said, "By Allah, I will not betray
you!"  And he went away and left them to their diversions.  They
also tell a tale concerning




            THE LOVES OF THE BOY AND GIRL AT SCHOOL



A free boy and a slave-girl once learnt together in school, and
the boy fell passionately in love with the girl.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lad
fell passionately in love with the slave-lass: so one day, when
the other boys were heedless, he took her tablet[FN#104] and
wrote on it these two couplets,

     "What sayest thou of him by sickness waste, *
          Until he's clean distraught for love of thee?
     Who in the transport of his pain complains, *
          Nor can bear load of heart in secrecy?"

Now when the girl took her tablet, she read the verses written
thereon and understanding them, wept for ruth of him; then she
wrote thereunder these two couplets,

     "An if we behold a lover love-fordone *
          Desiring us, our favours he shall see:
     Yea, what he wills of us he shall obtain, *
          And so befal us what befalling be."

Now it chanced that the teacher came in on them and taking the
tablet, unnoticed, read what was written thereon.  So he was
moved to pity of their case and wrote on the tablet beneath those
already written these two couplets addressed to the girl, 

     "Console thy lover, fear no consequence; *
          He is daft with loving lowe's insanity;
     But for the teacher fear not aught from him; *
          Love-pain he learned long before learnt ye."

Presently it so happened that the girl's owner entered the school
about the same time and, finding the tablet, read the above
verses indited by the boy, the girl and the schoolmaster; and
wrote under them these two couplets,

     "May Allah never make you parting dree *
          And be your censurer shamed wearily!
     But for the teacher ne'er, by Allah, eye *
          Of mine beheld a bigger pimp than he!"

Then he sent for the Kazi and witnesses and married them on the
spot.  Moreover, he made them a wedding-feast and treated them
with exceeding munificence; and they ceased not abiding together
in joy and happiness, till there came to them the Destroyer of
delights and the Severer of societies.  And equally pleasant is
the story of





               AL-MUTALAMMIS AND HIS WIFE UMAYMAH



It is related Al-Mutalammis[FN#105] once fled from Al-Nu'uman bin
Munzir[FN#106] and was absent so long that folk deemed him dead. 
Now he had a beautiful wife, Umaymah by name, and her family
urged her to marry again; but she refused, for that she loved her
husband Al-Mutalammis very dearly.  However, they were urgent
with her, because of the multitude of her suitors, and importuned
with her till at last she consented, albe reluctantly; and they
espoused her to a man of her own tribe.  Now on the night of the
wedding, Al-Mutalammis came back and, hearing in the camp a noise
of pipes and tabrets and seeing signs of a wedding festival,
asked some of the children what was the merry-making, to which
they replied, "They have married Umaymah wife of Al-Mutalammis,
to such an one, and he goes in to her this night."  When he heard
this, he planned to enter the house amongst the mob of women and
saw the twain seated on the bridal couch.[FN#107]  By and by, the
bridegroom came up to her, whereupon she sighed heavily and
weeping, recited this couplet,

"Would Heaven I knew (but many are the shifts of joy and woe) *
     In what far distant land thou art, my Mutalammis, oh!"

Now Al-Mutalammis was a renowned poet; so he answered her saying;

"Right near at hand, Umaymah mine! when'er the caravan *
     Halted, I never ceased for thee to pine, I would thou know."

When the bridegroom heard this, he guess how the case stood and
went forth from them in hast improvising,

"I was in bestest luck, but now my luck goes contrary: *
     A hospitable house and room contain your loves, you two!"

And he returned not but left the twain to their privacy.  So Al-
Mutalammis and his wife abode together in all comfort and solace
of life and in all its joys and jollities till death parted them. 
And glory be to Him at whose command the earth and the heavens
shall arise!  And among other tales is that of





              THE CALIPH HARUM AL-RASHID AND QUEEN
                      ZUBAYDAH IN THE BATH


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid loved the Lady Zubaydah with exceeding
love and laid out for her a pleasaunce, wherein he made a great
tank and set thereabouts a screen of trees and led thither water
from all sides; hence the trees grew and interlaced over the
basin so densely, that one could go in and wash, without being
seen of any, for the thickness of the leafage.  It chanced, one
day, that Queen Zubaydah entered the garden and, coming to the
swimming-bath,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night

She said, It hath reached me, "O auspicious King, that Queen
Zubaydah entered the garden one day and, coming to the swimming-
bath, gazed upon its goodliness; and the sheen of the water and
the overshading of the trees pleased her.  Now it was a day of
exceeding heat; so she doffed her clothes and, entering the tank,
which was not deep enough to cover the whole person, fell to
pouring the water over herself from an ewer of silver.  It also
happened that the Caliph heard she was in the pool; so he left
his palace and came down to spy upon her through the screen of
the foliage.  He stood behind the trees and espied her mother-
nude, showing everything that is kept hidden.  Presently, she
became aware of him and turning, saw him behind the trees and was
ashamed that he should see her naked.  So she laid her hands on
her parts, but the Mount of Venus escaped from between them, by
reason of its greatness and plumpness; and the Caliph at once
turned and went away, wondering and reciting this couplet,

     "I looked on her with loving eyne *
          And grew anew my old repine:"

But he knew not what to say next; so he sent for Abu Nowas and
said to him, "Make me a piece of verse commencing with this
line."  "I hear and obey," replied the poet and in an eye-
twinkling extemporised these couplets,

     "I looked on her with longing eyne *
          And grew anew my old repine
     For the gazelle, who captured me  *
          Where the two lotus-trees incline:
     There was the water poured on it *
          From ewer of the silvern mine;
     And seen me she had hidden it *
          But ‘twas too plump for fingers fine.
     Would Heaven that I were on it, *
          An hour, or better two hours, li'en."[FN#108]

Thereupon the Commander of the Faithful smiled and made him a
handsome present and he went away rejoicing.  And I have heard
another story of





              HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE POETS
                                


The Prince of True Believers, Caliph Harun al-Rashid, was
exceeding restless one night; so he rose and walked about his
palace, till he happened upon a handmaid overcome with wine.  Now
he was prodigiously enamoured of this damsel; so he played with
her and pulled her to him, whereupon her zone fell down and her
petticoat-trousers were loosed and he besought her of amorous
favour.  But she said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful wait
till to-morrow night, for I am unprepared for thee, knowing not
of thy coming."  So he left her and went away.  But, when the
morrow showed its light and the sun shone bright, he sent a page
to her saying, "The Commander of the Faithful is about to visit
thine apartment;" but she replied, "Day doth away with the
promise of night."  So he said to his courtiers, "Make me
somewhat of verse, introducing these words, ‘The Promise of Night
is effaced by Day.'" Answered they, "We hear and obey," and Al-
Rakáshi[FN#109] came forward and recited the following couplets,

     "By Allah, couldst thou but feel my pain, *
          Thy rest had turned and had fled away.  
     Hath left me in sorrow and love distraught, *
          Unseen and unseeing, that fairest may:
     She promised me grace, then jilted and said, *
          ‘The promise of night is effaced by day!'"

Then Abu Mus'ab came forward and recited these couplets,

     "When wilt thou be wise and love-heat allay *
          That from food and sleeping so leads astray?
     Suffices thee not ever weeping eye, *
          And vitals on fire when thy name they say?
     He must smile and laugh and in pride must cry *
          ‘The promise of Night is effaced by Day.'"

Last came Abu Nowas and recited the following couplets,

     "As love waxt longer less met we tway *
          And fell out, but ended the useless fray;
     One night in the palace I found her fou'; *
          Yet of modesty still there was some display:
     The veil from her shoulders had slipt; and showed *
          Her loosened trousers Love's seat and stay:
     And rattled the breezes her huge hind cheeks *
          And the branch where two little pomegranates lay:
     Quoth I, ‘Give me tryst;' whereto quoth she *
          To-morrow the fane shall wear best array:'
     Next day I asked her, ‘Thy word?'  Said she *
          ‘The promise of Night is effaced by Day.'"

The Caliph bade give a myriad of money each to Al-Rakashi and Abu
Mus'ab, but bade strike off the head of Abu Nowas, saying, "Thou
wast with us yesternight in the palace."  Said he, "By Allah, I
slept not but in my own house!  I was directed to what I said by
thine own words as to the subject of the verse; and indeed quoth
Almighty Allah (and He is the truest of all speakers): ‘As for
poets (devils pursue them!) dost thou not see that they rove as
bereft of their senses through every valley and that they say
that which they do not?'"[FN#110]  So the Caliph forgave him and
gave him two myriads of money.  And another tale is that of





           MUS'AB BIN AL-ZUBAYR AND AYISHAH HIS WIFE



It is told of Mus'ab bin al-Zubayr[FN#111] that he met in Al-
Medinah Izzah, who was one of the shrewdest of women, and said to
her, "I have a mind to marry Ayishah[FN#112] daughter of Talhah,
and I should like thee to go herwards and spy out for me how she
is made."  So she went away and returning to Mus'ab, said, "I
have seen her, and her face is fairer than health; she hath large
and well-opened eyes and under them a nose straight and smooth as
a cane; oval cheeks and a mouth like a cleft pomegranate, a neck
as a silver ewer and below it a bosom with two breasts like twin-
pomegranates and further down a slim waist and a slender stomach
with a navel therein as it were a casket of ivory, and back parts
like a hummock of sand; and plumply rounded thighs and calves
like columns of alabaster; but I saw her feet to be large, and
thou wilt fall short with her in time of need."  Upon this report
he married her,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-seventh Day

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Izzah
this wise reported of Ayishah bint Talhah, Mus'ab married her and
went in to her.  And presently Izzah invited Ayishah and the
women of the tribe Kuraysh to her house, when Ayishah sang these
two couplets with Mus'ab standing by,

     "And the lips of girls, that are perfume sweet; *
          So nice to kiss when with smiles they greet:
     Yet ne'er tasted I them, but in thought of him; *
          And by thought the Ruler rules worldly seat."

The night of Mus'ab's going in unto her, he departed not from
her, till after seven bouts; and on the morrow, a freewoman of
his met him and said to him, "May I be thy sacrifice!  Thou art
perfect, even in this."  And a certain woman said, "I was with
Ayishah, when her husband came in to her, and she lusted for him;
so he fell upon her and she snarked and snorted and made use of
all wonder of movements and marvellous new inventions, and I the
while within hearing.  So, when he came out from her, I said to
her, ‘How canst thou do thus with thy rank and nobility and
condition, and I in thy house?'  Quoth she, ‘Verily a woman
should bring her husband all of which she is mistress, by way of
excitement and rare buckings and wrigglings and
motitations.[FN#113]  What dislikest thou of this?'  And I
answered ‘I would have this by nights.'  Rejoined she, ‘Thus is
it by day and by night I do more than this; for when he seeth me,
desire stirreth him up and he falleth in heat; so he putteth it
out to me and I obey him, and it is as thou seest.'"  And there
also hath reached me an account of





                ABU AL-ASWAD AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL



Abu al-Aswad bought a native-born slave-girl, who was blind of an
eye, and she pleased him; but his people decried her to him;
whereat he wondered and, turning the palms of his hands
upwards,[FN#114] recited these two couplets,

     "They find me fault with her where I default ne'er find, *
          Save haply that a speck in either eye may show:
     But if her eyes have fault, of fault her form hath none, *
          Slim-built above the waist and heavily made below."

And this is also told of 






            HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE TWO SLAVE-GIRLS



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid lay one night between two slave-girls,
one from Al-Medinah and the other from Cufa and the Cufite rubbed
his hands, whilst the Medinite rubbed his feet and made his
concern[FN#115] stand up.  Quoth the Cufite, "I see thou wouldst
keep the whole of the stock-in-trade to thyself; give me my share
of it."  And the other answered, "I have been told by Málik, on
the authority of Hishám ibn Orwah,[FN#116] who had it of his
(grand) father, that the Prophet said, ‘Whoso quickeneth the
dead, the dead belongeth to him and is his.'  But the Cufite took
her unawares and, pushing her away, seized it all in her own hand
and said, "Al-A'amash telleth us, on the authority of Khaysamah,
who had it of Abdallah bin Mas'ud, that the Prophet declared,
‘Game belongeth to him who taketh it, not to him who raiseth
it.'"  And this is also related of





            THE CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE
                          SLAVE-GIRLS
                                


The Caliph Harun al-Rashid once slept with three slave-girls, a
Meccan, a Medinite and an Irakite.  The Medinah girl put her hand
to his yard and handled it, whereupon it rose and the Meccan
sprang up and drew it to herself.  Quoth the other, "What is this
unjust aggression?  A tradition was related to me by
Málik[FN#117] after Al-Zuhri, after Abdallah ibn Sálim, after
Sa'íd bin Zayd, that the Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless and
keep!) said:  ‘Whoso enquickeneth a dead land, it is his.'  And
the Meccan answered, "It is related to us by Sufyán, from Abu
Zanád, from Al-A'araj, from Abu Horayrah, that the Apostle of
Allah said: ‘The quarry is his who catcheth it, not his who
starteth it.'"  But the Irak girl pushed them both away and
taking it to herself, said, "This is mine, till your contention
be decided."  And they tell a tale of





                    THE MILLER AND HIS WIFE



There was a miller, who had an ass to turn his mill; and he was
married to a wicked wife, whom he loved, while she hated him
because she was sweet upon a neighbour, who misliked her and held
aloof from her.  One night, the miller saw, in his sleep, one who
said to him, "Dig in such a spot of the ass's round in the mill,
and thou shalt find a hoard."  When he awoke, he told his wife
the vision and bade her keep the secret; but she told her
neighbour,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three hundred and Eighty-eighth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
miller's wife told the secret to the neighbour whom she loved,
thinking to win his favour; and he agreed with her to come to her
by night.  So he came and they dug in the mill and found the
treasure and took it forth.  Then he asked her, "How shall we do
with this?" and she answered; "We will divide it into two halves
and will share it equally between us, and do thou leave thy wife
and I will cast about to rid me of my husband.  Then shalt thou
marry me and, when we are conjoined, we will join the two halves
of the treasure one to other, and all will be in our hands." 
Quoth he, "I fear lest Satan seduce thee and thou take some other
man other than myself; for gold in the house is like the sun in
the world.  I reck, therefore, it were right that the money be
all in my hands, so thou give thy whole mind to getting free of
thy husband and coming to me."  Quoth she, "I fear even as thou
fearest, nor will I yield up my part to thee; for it was I
directed thee to it."  When he heard this, greed of gain prompted
him to kill her; so he slew her and threw her body into the empty
hoard-hole; but day overtook him and hindered him from covering
it up; he therefore took the money and went his way.  Now after a
while the miller awoke and, missing his wife, went into the mill,
where he fastened the ass to the beam and shouted to it.  It went
on a little, then stopped; whereupon he beat it grievously; but
the more he bashed it, the more it drew back; for it was
affrighted at the dead woman and could not go forward.  Thereupon
the Miller, unknowing what hindered the donkey, took out a knife
and goaded it again and again, but still it would not budge. 
Then he was wroth with it, knowing not the cause of its
obstinacy, and drove the knife into its flanks, and it fell down
dead.  But when the sun rose, he saw his donkey lying dead and
likewise his wife in the place of the treasure, and great was his
rage and sore his wrath for the loss of his hoard and the death
of his wife and his ass.  All this came of his letting his wife
into his secret and not keeping it to himself.[FN#118]  And I
have heard this tale of





                 THE SIMPLETON AND THE SHARPER



A certain simpleton was once walking along, haling his ass after
him by the halter, when a pair of sharpers saw him and one said
to his fellow, "I will take that ass from yonder wight."  Asked
the other, "How wilt thou do that?"  "Follow me and I will show
thee how," answered the first.  So the cony-catcher went up to
the ass and, loosing it from the halter, gave the beast to his
fellow; then he haltered his own head and followed Tom Fool till
he knew the other had got clean off with the ass, when he stood
still.  The oaf haled at the halter, but the rascal stirred not;
so he turned and seeing the halter on a man's neck, said to him,
"What art thou?"  Quoth the sharper, "I am thine ass and my story
is a wonderous one and ‘tis this.  Know that I have a pious old
mother and come in to her one day, drunk; and she said to me: ‘O
my son, repent to the Almighty of these thy transgressions.'  But
I took my staff and beat her, whereupon she cursed me and Allah
changed me into an ass and caused me fall into thy hands, where I
have remained till this moment.  However, to-day, my mother
called me to mind and her heart yearned towards me; so she prayed
for me and the Lord restored me to my former shape amongst the
sons of Adam."  Cried the silly one, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!  Allah
upon thee, O my brother, acquit me of what I have done with thee
in the way of riding and so forth."  Then he let the cony-catcher
go and returned home, drunken with chagrin and concern as with
wine.  His wife asked him, "What aileth thee and where is the
donkey?"; and he answered, "Thou knowest not what was this ass;
but I will tell thee."  So he told her the story, and she
exclaimed, "Alack and alas for the punishment we shall receive
from Almighty Allah!  How could we have used a man as a beast of
burden, all this while?  And she gave alms by way of atonement
and prayed pardon of Heaven.[FN#119]  Then the man abode awhile
at home, idle and feckless, till she said to him, "How long wilt
thou sit at home doing naught?  Go to the market and buy us an
ass and ply thy work with it."  Accordingly, he went to the
market and stopped by the ass-stand, where behold, he saw his own
ass for sale.  So he went up to it and clapping his mouth to its
ear, said to it, "Woe to thee, thou ne'er-do-well!  Doubtless
thou hast been getting drunk again and beating thy mother!  But,
by Allah, I will never buy thee more."[FN#120]  and he left it
and went away.  And they tell a tale concerning





            THE KAZI ABU YUSUF WITH HARUN AL-RASHID
                       AND QUEEN ZUBAYDAH



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid went up one noon-tide to his couch, to
lie down; and mounting, found upon the bed-clothes semen freshly
emitted; whereat he was startled and troubled with sore trouble. 
So he called the Lady Zubaydah and said to her, "What is that
spilt on the bed?"  She looked at it and replied, "O Commander of
the Faithful, it is semen."  Quoth he, "Tell me truly what this
meaneth or I will lay violent hands on thee forthright."  Quoth
she, "By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, indeed I know not
how it came there and I am guiltless of that whereof you
suspectest me."  So he sent for the Kazi Abú Yúsuf and acquainted
him of the case.  The Judge raised his eyes to the ceiling and,
seeing a crack therein, said to the Caliph, "O Commander of the
Faithful, in very sooth the bat hath seed like that of a
man,[FN#121] and this is bat's semen."  Then he called for a
spear and thrust it into the crevice, whereupon down fell the
bat.  In this manner the Caliph's suspicions were dispelled,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Three hundred and Eighty-ninth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Kazi Abu Yusuf took the spear and thrust it into the crevice,
down fell the bat, and thus the Caliph's suspicions were
dispelled and the innocence of Zubaydah was made manifest;
whereat she gave loud and liberal vent to her joy and promised
Abu Yusuf a magnificent reward.  Now there were with her certain
delicious fruits, out of their season, and she knew of others in
the garden; so she asked Abu Yusuf, "O Imam of the Faith, which
wouldst thou rather have of the two kinds of fruits, those that
are here or those that are not here?"  And he answered, "Our code
forbiddeth us to pronounce judgement on the absent; whenas they
are present, we will give our decision."  So she let bring the
two kinds of fruits before him; and he ate of both.  Quoth she,
"What is the difference between them?" and quoth he, "As often as
I think to praise one kind, the adversary putteth in its claim." 
The Caliph laughed at his answer[FN#122] and made him a rich
present; and Zubaydah also gave him what she had promised him,
and he went away, rejoicing.  See, then the virtues of this Imám
and how his hands were manifest the truth and the innocence of
the Lady Zubaydah.  And amongst other stories is that of





          THE CALIPH AL-HAKIM[FN#123] AND THE MERCHANT



The Caliph Al-Hákim bi-Amri'llah was riding out in state
procession one day, when he passed along a garden, wherein he saw
a man, surrounded by negro-slaves and eunuchs.  He asked him for
a draught of water, and the man gave him to drink, saying,
"Belike, the Commander of the Faithful will honour me by
alighting in this my garden."  So the Caliph dismounted and with
his suite entered the garden; whereupon the said man brought out
to them an hundred rugs and an hundred leather mats and an
hundred cushions; and set before them an hundred dishes of
fruits, an hundred bowls of sweetmeats and an hundred jars of
sugared sherbets; at which the Caliph marvelled with much amaze
and said to his host, "O man, verily this thy case is wondrous:
didst thou know of our coming and make this preparation for us?" 
He replied, "No by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I knew not
of thy coming and I am a merchant of the rest of thy subjects;
but I have an hundred concubines; so, when the Commander of the
Faithful honoured me by alighting with me, I sent to each of
them, bidding her send me her morning-meal in the garden.  So
they sent me each of her furniture and the surplus of her meat
and drink: and every day each sendeth me a dish of meat and
another of cooling marinades, also a platter of fruits and a bowl
of sweetmeats and a jar of sherbet.  This is my noon-day dinner,
nor have I added aught thereto for thee."  Then the Commander of
the Faithful, Al-Hakim bi-Amri'llah prostrated himself in
thanksgiving to the Almighty (extolled and exalted be His name!)
and said, "Praise be Allah, who hath been so bountiful to one of
our lieges, that he entertaineth the Caliph and his host, without
making ready for them; nay, he feedeth them with the surplusage
of his day's provision!"  Then he sent for all the dirhams in the
treasury, that had been struck that year (and they were in number
three thousand and seven hundred thousand); nor did he mount
until the money came, when he gave it to the merchant, saying,
"Use this as thy state may require; and thy generosity deserveth
more than this."  Then he took horse and rode away.  And I have
heard a story concerning





             KING KISRA ANUSHIRWAN[FN#124] AND THE
                         VILLAGE DAMSEL



The Just King, Kisrá Anúshirwán, one day rode forth to the chase
and, in pursuit of a deer, became separated from his suite. 
Presently, he caught sight of a hamlet near hand and being sore
athirst, he made for it and presenting himself at the door of a
house that lay by the wayside, asked for a draught of water.  So
a damsel came out and looked at him; then, going back into the
house, pressed the juice from a single sugar-cane into a bowl and
mixed it with water; after which she strewed on the top some
scented stuff, as it were dust, and carried it tot he King. 
Thereupon he seeing in it what resembled dust, drank it, little
by little, till he came to the end; when said he to her, "O
damsel, the drink is good, and how sweet it had been but for this
dust in it that troubleth it."  Answered she, "O guest, I put in
that powder for a purpose;" and he asked, "And why didst thou
thus?"; so she replied, "I saw thee exceedingly thirsty and
feared that thou wouldst drain the whole at one draught and that
this would thee mischief; and but for this dust that troubled the
drink so hadst thou done."  The Just King wondered at her words,
knowing that they came of her wit and good sense, and said to
her, "From how many sugar canes didst thou express this draught?" 
"One," answered she; whereat Anushirwan marvelled and, calling
for the register of the village taxes, saw that its assessment
was but little and bethought him to increase it, on his return to
his palace, saying in himself, "A village where they get this
much juice out of one sugar-cane, why is it so lightly taxed?" 
He then left the village and pursued his chase; and, as he came
back at the end of the day, he passed alone by the same door and
called again for drink; whereupon the same damsel came out and,
knowing him at a look, went in to fetch him water.  It was some
time before she returned and Anushirwan wondered thereat and said
to her, "Why hast thou tarried?"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Three hundred and Ninetieth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Anushirwan hurried the damsel and asked her, "Why hast thou
tarried?" she answered, "Because a single sugar-cane gave not
enough for thy need; so I pressed three; but they yielded not to
much as one did before."  Rejoined he, "What is the cause of
that?"; and she replied, "The cause of it is that when the
Sultan's[FN#125] mind is changed against a folk, their prosperity
ceaseth and their good waxeth less."  So Anushirwan laughed and
dismissed from his mind that which he had purposed against the
villagers.  Moreover, he took the damsel to wife then and there,
being pleased with her much wit and acuteness and the excellence
of her speech.  And they tell another tale of the





           WATER-CARRIER[FN#126] AND THE GOLDSMITH'S
                              WIFE
                                
                                

There was once, in the city of Bokhara, a water-carrier, who used
to carry water to the house of a goldsmith and had done this
thirty years.  Now that goldsmith had a wife of exceeding beauty
and loveliness, brilliancy and perfect grace; and she was withal
renowned for piety, chastity and modesty.  One day the water-
carrier came, as of custom, and poured the water into the
cisterns.  Now the woman was standing in the midst of the court;
so he went close up to her and taking her hand, stroked it and
pressed it, then went away and left her.  When her husband came
home from the bazar, she said to him, "I would have thee tell me
what thing thou hast done in the market this day, to anger
Almighty Allah." Quoth he, "I have done nothing to offend the
Lord."  "Nay," rejoined she, "but, by Allah, thou hast indeed
done something to anger Him; and unless thou tell me the whole
truth, I will not abide in thy house, and thou shalt not see me,
nor will I see thee."  So he confessed, "I will tell thee the
truth of what I did this day.  It so chanced that, as I was
sitting in my shop, as of wont, a woman came up to me and bade me
make her a bracelet of gold.  Then she went away and I wrought
her a bracelet and laid it aside.  But when she returned and I
brought her out the bracelet, she put forth her hand and I
clasped the bracelet on her wrist; and I wondered at the
whiteness of her hand and the beauty of her wrist, which would
captivate any beholder; and I recalled what the poet saith,

     ‘Her fore-arms, dight with their bangles, show *
          Like fire ablaze on the waves a-flow;
     As by purest gold were the water girt, *
          And belted around by a living lowe.'

So I took her hand and pressed it and squeezed it."  Said the
woman, "Great God!  Why didst thou this ill thing?  Know that the
water-carrier, who hath come to our house these thirty years, nor
sawst thou ever any treason in him took my hand this day and
pressed and squeezed it."  Said her husband, "O woman, let us
crave pardon of Allah!  Verily, I repent of what I did, and do
thou ask forgiveness of the Lord for me."  She cried, "Allah
pardon me and thee, and receive us into his holy keeping."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Three hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
goldsmith's wife cried out, "Allah pardon me and thee, and
receive us into his holy keeping!"  And on the next day, the
water-carrier came in to the jeweller's wife and, throwing
himself at her feet, grovelled in the dust and besought pardon of
her, saying, "O my lady, acquit me of that which Satan deluded me
to do; for it was he that seduced me and led me astray."  She
answered, "Go thy ways, the sin was not in thee, but in my
husband, for that he did what he did in his shop, and Allah hath
retaliated upon him in this world."  And it related that the
goldsmith, when his wife told him how the water-carrier had used
her, said, "Tit for tat, and blow for blow!; had I done more the
water-carrier had done more";--which became a current byword
among the folk.  Therefore it behoveth a wife to be both outward
and inward with her husband; contenting herself with little from
him, if he cannot give her much, and taking pattern by Ayishah
the Truthful and Fatimah the virgin mother (Allah Almighty accept
of them the twain!), that she may be of the company of the
righteous ancestry.[FN#127]  And I have heard the following tale
of




              KHUSRAU AND SHIRIN AND THE FISHERMAN



King Khusrau[FN#128] Shahinshah of Persia loved fish; and one
day, as he sat in his saloon, he and Shirin his wife, there came
a fisherman, with a great fish, and he laid it before the King,
who was pleased and ordered the man four thousand
dirhams.[FN#129]  Thereupon Shirin said to the King, "Thou hast
done ill."  Asked he, "And why?", and she answered, "Because if,
after this, though give one of thy courtiers a like sum, he will
disdain it and say, ‘He hath but given me the like of what he
gave the fisherman.'  And if thou give him less, the same will
say, ‘He despiseth me and giveth me less than he gave the
fisherman.'"  Rejoined Khusrau, "Thou art right, but it would
dishonour a king to go back on his gift; and the thing is done." 
Quoth Shirin, "If thou wilt, I will contrive thee a means to get
it back from him."  Quoth he, "How so?"; and she said, "Call
back, if thou so please, the fisherman and ask him if the fish be
male or female.  If he say, ‘Male,' say thou, ‘We want a female,'
and if he say, ‘Female,' say, ‘We want a male.'"  So the King
sent for the fisherman, who was a man of wit and astuteness, and
said to him, "Is this fish male or female?" whereupon the
fisherman kissed the ground and answered, "This fish is an
hermaphrodite,[FN#130] neither male nor female."  Khusrau laughed
at his clever reply and ordered him other four thousand dirhams. 
So the fisherman went to the treasurer and, taking his eight
thousand dirhams, put them in a sack he had with him.  Then,
throwing it over his shoulder, he was going away, when he dropped
a dirham; so he laid the bag off his back and stooped down to
pick it up.  Now the King and Shirin were looking on, and the
Queen said, "O King, didst thou note the meanness of the man, in
that he must needs stoop down to pick up the one dirham, and
could not bring himself to leave it for any of the King's
servants?"  When the King heard these words, he was exceeding
wroth with the fisherman and said, "Thou art right, O Shirin!" 
So he called the man back and said to him, "Thou low-minded
carle!  Thou art no man!  How couldst thou put the bag with all
this money off thy back and bend thee groundwards to pick up the
one dirham and grudge to leave it where it fell?"  Thereupon the
fisherman kissed the earth before him and answered, "May Allah
prolong the King's life!  Indeed, I did not pick up the dirham
off the ground because of its value in my eyes; but I raised it
off the earth because on one of its faces is the likeness of the
King and on the other his name; and I feared lest any should
unwittingly set foot upon it, thus dishonouring the name and
presentment of the King, and I be blamed for this offence."  The
King wondered at his words and approved of his wit and
shrewdness, and ordered him yet another four thousand dirhams. 
Moreover, he bade cry abroad in his kingdom, saying, "It behoveth
none to be guided by women's counsel; for whoso followeth their
advice, loseth, with his one dirham, other twain."[FN#131]  And
here is the tale they tell of





             YAHYA BIN KHALID THE BARMECIDE AND THE
                            POOR MAN



Yahya bin Khálid the Barmecide was returning home, one day, from
the Caliph's palace, when he saw, at the gate of his mansion, a
man who rose as he drew near and saluted him, saying, "O Yahya, I
am in sore need of that which is in they hand, and I make Allah
my intermediary with thee."  So Yahya caused a place to be set
aside for him in his house and bade his treasurer carry him a
thousand dirhams every day and ordered that his diet be of the
choicest of his own meat.  The man abode in this case a whole
month, at the end of which time, having received in all thirty
thousand dirhams and fearing lest Yahya should take the money
from him, because of the greatness of the sum, he departed by
stealth.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man,
taking with him the money, departed by stealth.  But when they
told Yahya of this, he said, "By Allah, though he had tarried
with me to the end of his days, yet had I not stinted him of my
largesse nor cut off from him the bounties of my hospitality!" 
For, indeed, the excellences of the Barmecides were past count
nor can their virtues be committed to description, especially
those of Yahya bin Khalid, for he was an ocean[FN#132] of noble
qualities, even as saith the poet of him,

     "I asked of Bounty, ‘Art thou free?'  Quoth she, *
          ‘No, I am slave to Yahyá Khálid-son!'
     ‘Boughten?' asked I.  ‘Allah forfend,' quoth she, *
          ‘By heirship, sire to sire's transmission!'"

And the following is related of





              MOHAMMED AL-AMIN AND THE SLAVE-GIRL
                                


Ja'afar bin Musá al-Hádi[FN#133] once had a slave-girl, a lutist,
called Al-Badr al-Kabír, than whom there was not in her time a
fairer of face nor shapelier of shape nor a more elegant of
manners nor a more accomplished in the art of singing and
striking the strings; she was indeed perfect in beauty and
extreme in every charm.  Now Mohammed al-Amín,[FN#134] son of
Zubaydah, heard of her and was urgent with Ja'afar to sell her to
him; but he replied, "Thou knowest it beseemeth not one of my
rank to sell slave-girls nor set prices on concubines; but were
she not a rearling I wo