uld send her to thee, as a gift, not
grudge her to thee."  And Mohammed al-Amin, some days after this
went to Ja'afar's house, to make merry; and the host set before
him that which it behoveth to set before true friends and bade
the damsel Al-Badr al-Kabir sing to him and gladden him.  So she
tuned the lute and sang with a ravishing melody; whilst Mohammed
al-Amin fell to drinking and jollity and bade the cupbearers ply
Ja'afar with much wine, till they made him drunken, when he took
the damsel and carried her to his own house, but laid not a
finger on her.  And when the morrow dawned he bade invite
Ja'afar; and when he came, he set wine before him and made the
girl sing to him, from behind the curtain.  Ja'afar knew her
voice and was angered at this, but, of the nobleness of his
nature and the magnanimity of his mind he showed no change.  Now
when the carousal was at an end, Al-Amin commanded one of his
servants to fill the boat, wherein Ja'afar had come, with dirhams
and dinars and all manner of jewels and jacinths and rich raiment
and goods galore.  So he laid therein a thousand myriads of money
and a thousand fine pearls, each worth twenty thousand dirhams;
nor did he give over loading the barge with all manner of things
precious and rare, till the boatmen cried out for help, saying,
"The boat can't hold any more;" whereupon he bade them carry all
this to Ja'afar's palace.  Such are the exploits of the
magnanimous, Allah have mercy on them!  And a tale is related of





           THE SONS OF YAHYA BIN KHALID AND SA'ID BIN
                        SALIM AL-BAHILI



Quoth Sa'íd bin Sálim al'Báhilí,[FN#135] I was once in very
narrow case, during the days of Harun al-Rashid, and debts
accumulated upon me, burdening my back, and these I had no means
of discharging.  I was at my wits' end what to do, for my doors
were blocking up with creditors and I was without cease
importuned for payment by claimants, who dunned me in crowds till
at last I was sore perplexed and troubled.  So I betook myself to
Abdallah bin Málik al-Khuza'í[FN#136] and besought him to extend
the hand of aid with his judgement and direct me of his good
counsel to the door of relief; and he said, ‘None can save thee
from this thy strait and sorrowful state save the Barmecides.' 
Quoth I, ‘Who can brook their pride and put up patiently with
their arrogant pretensions?' and quoth he, ‘Thou wilt put up with
all this for the bettering of thy case.'"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-third Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdallah
ibn Malik al-Khuza'i said to Sa'id bin Salim, "Thou wilt put up
with all this for the bettering of thy case."  "So I left him
suddenly (continued Sa'id) and went straight to Al-Fazl and
Ja'afar, sons of Yahyá bin Khálid, to whom I related my
circumstances; whereto they replied, ‘Allah give thee His aid,
and render thee by His bounties independent of His creatures and
vouchsafe thee abundant weal and bestow on thee what shall
suffice thee, without the need of any but Himself; for whatso He
willeth that He can, and He is gracious with His servants and
knoweth their wants.'  So I went out from the twain and returned
to Abdallah, with straitened breast and mind perplexed and heavy
of heart, and repeated to him what they had said.  Quoth he,
‘Thou wouldst do well to abide with us this day, that we may see
what Allah Almighty will decree.'  So I sat with him awhile, when
lo! up came my servant, who said to me, ‘O my lord, there are at
our door many laden mules and with them a man, who says he is the
agent of Al-Fazl and Ja'afar bin Yahya.'  Quoth Abdallah, ‘I
trust that relief is come to thee: rise up and go see what is the
matter.'  So I left him and, hastening to my house, found at the
door a man who gave me a note wherein was written the following:
‘After thou hadst been with us and we heard thy case, we betook
ourselves to the Caliph and informed him that ill condition had
reduced thee to the humiliation of begging; where upon he ordered
us to supply thee with a thousand thousand dirhams from the
Treasury.  We represented to him: ‘The debtor will spend this
money in paying off creditors and wiping off debt; whence then
shall he provide for his subsistence?  So he ordered thee other
three hundred thousand, and each of us hath also sent thee, of
his proper wealth, a thousand thousand dirhams: so that thou hast
now three thousand thousand and three hundred thousand dirhams
wherewithal to order and amend thine estate.'"  See, then, the
munificence of these magnificos: Almighty Allah have mercy on
them!  And a tale is told of





             THE WOMAN'S TRICK AGAINST HER HUSBAND



A man brought his wife a fish one Friday and, bidding her to cook
it against the end of the congregational prayers, went out to his
craft and business.  Meanwhile in came her friend who bade her to
a wedding at his house; so she agreed and, laying the fish in a
jar of water, went off with him and was absent a whole week till
the Friday following;[FN#137] whilst her husband sought her from
house to house and enquired after her; but none could give him
any tidings of her.  Now on the next Friday she came home and he
fell foul of her; but she brought out to him the fish alive from
the jar and assembled the folk against him and told them her
tale.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman
brought out the fish alive from the water-jar and assembled the
folk against her husband, and told them her tale.  He also told
his; but they credited him not and said, "It cannot be that the
fish should have remained alive all this while."  So they proved
him mad and imprisoned him and mocked at him, where upon he shed
tears in floods and recited these two couplets,

     "Old hag, of high degree in filthy life, *
          Whose face her monstrous lewdness witnesses.
     When menstuous she bawds; when clean she whores; *
          And all her time bawd or adulteress is."

And a tale is related of the





              THE DEVOUT WOMAN AND THE TWO WICKED
                         ELDERS[FN#138]



There was in times of yore and in ages long gone before, a
virtuous woman among the children of Israel, who was pious and
devout and used every day to go out to the place of prayer, first
entering a garden, which adjoined thereto, and there making the
minor ablution.  Now there were in this garden two old men, its
keepers, and both Shaykhs fell in love with her and sought her
favours; but she refused, whereupon said they, "Unless thou yield
thy body to us, we will bear witness against thee of
fornication."  Quoth she, "Allah will preserve me from your
frowardness!"  Then they opened the garden-gate and cried out,
and the folk came to them from all places, saying "What aileth
you?"  Quoth they, "We found this damsel in company with a youth
who was doing lewdness with her; but he escaped from our hands." 
Now it was the wont of the people in those days to expose
adulterer and adulteress to public reproach for three days, and
after stone them.  So they cried her name in the public streets
for three days, while the two elders came up to her daily and,
laying their hands on her head, said, "Praised be Allah who hath
sent down on thee His righteous indignation!"  Now on the fourth
day, when they bore her away to stone her, they were followed by
a lad named Daniel, who was then only twelve years old, and this
was to be the first of his miracles (upon our Prophet and upon
him the blessing and peace!).  And he ceased not following them
to the place of execution, till he came up with them and said to
them, "Hasten not to stone her, till I judge between them."  So
they set him a chair and he sat down and summoned the old men
separately.  (Now he was the first ever separated witnesses.) 
Then said he to the first, "What sawest thou?"[FN#139]  So he
repeated to him his story, and Daniel asked, "In what part of the
garden did this befal?" and he answered, "On the eastern side,
under a pear-tree."  Then he called the other old man and asked
him the same question, and he replied, "On the western side of
the garden, under an apple-tree."  Meanwhile the damsel stood by,
with her hands and eyes raised heavenwards, imploring the Lord
for deliverance.  Then Allah Almighty sent down His blasting
leven-fire upon the elders and consumed them, and on this wise
the Lord made manifest the innocence of the damsel.  Such was the
first of the miracles of the Prophet Daniel, on whom be blessing
and peace!  And they relate a tale of





            JA'AFAR THE BARMECIDE AND THE OLD BADAWL



The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, went out one day,
with Abu Ya'Kúb the cup-companion[FN#140] and Ja'afar the
Barmecide and Abu Nowas, into the desert, where they fell in with
an old man, propt against his ass.  The Caliph bade Ja'afar learn
of him whence he came; so he asked him, "Whence comest thou?" and
he answered, "From Bassorah."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Ja'afar asked the man, "Whence comest thou?"; he answered "From
Bassorah."  Quoth Ja'afar, "And whither goest thou?"  Quoth the
other, "To Baghdad."  Then Ja'afar enquired "And what wilt thou
do there?" and the old man replied, "I go to seek medicine for my
eye."  Said the Caliph, "O Ja'afar, make thou sport with him,"
and answered Ja'afar, "I shall hear what I shall exceedingly
mislike."[FN#141]  But Al-Rashid rejoined, "I charge thee on my
authority, jest with him."  Thereupon Ja'afar said to the Badawi,
"If I prescribe thee a medicine that shall profit thee, what wilt
thou give me in return?"  Quoth the other, "Allah Almighty will
requite the kindness with what is better for thee than any
requital of mine."  Continued Ja'afar, "Now lend me an ear and I
will give thee a prescription, which I have given to none but
thee."  "What is that?" asked the Badawi; and Ja'afar answered,
"Take three ounces of wind-breaths and the like of sunbeams and
the same of moonshine and as much of lamp-light; mix them well
together and let them lie in the wind three months.  Then place
them three months in a mortar without a bottom and pound them to
a fine powder and after trituration set them in a cleft platter,
and let it stand in the wind other three months; after which use
of this medicine three drachms every night in thy sleep, and,
Inshallah! thou shalt be healed and whole."  Now when the Badawi
heard this, he stretched himself out to full length on the
donkey's back and let fly a terrible loud fart[FN#142] and said
to Ja'afar, "Take this fart in payment of thy prescription.  When
I have followed it, if Allah grant me recovery, I will give thee
a slave-girl, who shall serve thee in they lifetime a service,
wherewith Allah shall cut short thy term; and when thou diest and
the Lord hurrieth thy soul to hell-fire, she shall blacken thy
face with her skite, of her mourning for thee, and shall keen and
beat her face, saying ‘O frosty-beard, what a fool thou
wast?'"[FN#143]  thereupon Harun al-Rashid laughed till he fell
backward, and ordered the Badawi three thousand silver pieces. 
And a tale is told of 





             THE CALIPH OMAR BIN AL-KHATTAB AND THE
                          YOUNG BADAWI



The Sharif Husayn bin Rayyán relateth that the Caliph Omar bin
Al-Khattáb was sitting one day judging the folk and doing justice
between his subjects, attended by the best and wisest of his
counsellors, when there came up to him a youth comely and cleanly
attired, upon whom two very handsome youths had laid hold and
were haling by the collar till they set him in the presence. 
Whereupon the Commander of the Faithful, Omar, looked at him and
them and bade them loose him; then, calling him near to himself,
asked the twain, "What is your case with him?"  They answered, "O
Prince of True Believers, we are two brothers by one mother and
as followers of verity known are we.  We had a father, a very old
man of good counsel, honoured by the tribes, sound of baseness
renowned for goodliness, who reared us tenderly in childhood, and
loaded us with favours in manhood;"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two
youths said to the Commander of the Faithful, Omar son of Al-
Khattab, "Our father was a man honoured by the tribes, sound of
baseness and renowned for goodliness, who reared us delicately in
childhood and loaded us with favours in manhood; in fine, a sea
of noble and illustrious qualities, worthy of the poet's praise,

     ‘Is Aub's-Sakr of Shaybán[FN#144]?' they asked; *
          Quoth I, ‘Nay, by my life, of him's Shaybán:
     How many a sire rose high by a noble son, *
          As Allah's prophet glorified Adnan!'[FN#145]

Now he went forth this day to his garden, to refresh himself
amongst its trees and pluck the ripe fruits, when this young man
slew him wrongously and swerved from the road of righteousness;
wherefore we demand of thee the retribution of his crime and call
upon thee to pass judgement upon him, according to the
commandment of Allah."  Then Omar cast a terrible look at the
accused youth and said to him, "Verily thou hearest the complaint
these two young men prefer; what hast thou in reply to aver?" 
But he was brave of heart and bold of speech, having doffed the
robe of pusillanimity and put off the garb of cowardry; so he
smiled and spake in the most eloquent and elegant words; and,
after paying the usual ceremonial compliments to the Caliph,
said, ""By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I have indeed
given ear to their complaint, and they have told the truth in
that which they tell, so far as they have set out what befel; and
the commandment of Allah is a decreed decree.[FN#146]  but I will
forthright state my case between they hands, and it is for thee
to give commands.  Know then, O Prince of the Faithful, that I am
a very Arab of the Arabies,[FN#147] the noblest of those that are
beneath the skies.  I grew up in the dwellings of the wold and
fell, till evil times my tribe befel, when I came to the
outskirts of this town, with my family and whatso goods I own:
and, as I went along one of the paths leading to its gardens,
orchards and garths, with my she-camels highly esteemed and by me
most precious deemed, and midst them a stallion of noble blood
and shape right good, a plenteous getter of brood, by whom the
females abundantly bore and who walked among them as though a
kingly crown he wore, one of the she-camels broke away; and,
running to the garden of these young men's father, where the
trees showed above the wall, put forth her lips and began to feed
as in stall.  I ran to her, to drive her away, when behold, there
appeared, at a breach of the wall, an old man and grey, whose
eyes sparkled with angry ray, holding in his right a stone to
throw and swaying to and fro, with a swing like a lion ready for
a spring.  He cast the stone at my stallion, and it killed him
for it struck a vital part.  When I saw the stallion drop dead
beside me, I felt live coals of anger kindled in my heart; so I
took up the very same stone and throwing it at the old man, it
was the cause of his bane and ban: thus his own wrongful act
returned to him anew, and the man was slain of that wherewith he
slew.  When the stone struck him, he cried out with a great cry
and shrieked out a terrible shriek, whereupon I hastened from the
spot; but these two young men hurried after me and laid hands on
me and before thee carried me."  Quoth Omar (Almighty Allah
accept of him!), "Thou hast confessed what thou committedest, and
of acquittal there is no possible occasion; for urgent is the law
of retaliation and they cried for mercy but it was not a time to
escape."[FN#148]  the youth answered, "I hear and obey the
judgement of the Imam, and I consent to all required by the law
of Al-Islam; but I have a young brother, whose old father, before
his decease, appointed to him wealth in great store and gold
galore, and committed his affair to me before Allah, saying: ‘I
give this into thy hand for thy brother; keep it for him with all
thy might.'  So I took the money and buried it; nor doth any know
of it but I.  Now, if thou adjudge me to be justiced forthright,
the money will lost and thou shalt be the cause of its loss;
wherefore the child will sue thee for his due on the day when the
Creator shall judge between His creatures.  But, if thou wilt
grant me three days' delay, I will appoint some guardian to
administer the affairs of the boy and return to answer my debt;
and I have one who will be my surety for the fulfillment of this
my promise."  So the Commander of the Faithful bowed his head
awhile, then raised it and looking round upon those present,
said, "Who will stand surety by me for his return to this place?" 
And the youth looked at the faces of those who were in company
and pointing to Abu Zarr,[FN#149] in preference to all present,
said, "This man shall answer for me and be my bail."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
youth pointed to Abu Zarr and said, "This man shall answer for me
and be my bail," Omar (Allah accept of him!) said, O Abu Zarr,
dost thou hear these words and wilt thou be surety to me for the
return of this youth?"  He answered, "Yes, O Commander of the
Faithful, I will be surety for him for three days."  So the
Caliph accepted his guarantee and let the young man go.  Now when
the appointed time passed and the days of grace were nearly or
quite at end yet the youth came not, the Caliph took seat in his
council, with the Companions surrounding him, like the
constellations about the moon, Abu Zarr and the plaintiffs being
also present; and the avengers said, "Where is the defendant, O
Abu Zarr, and how shall he return, having once fled?   But we
will not stir from our places till thou bring him to us, that we
may take of him our blood revenge."  Replied Abu Zarr, "By the
truth of the All-Wise King, if the three days of grace expire and
the young man returneth not, I will fulfill my warranty and
surrender my person to the Imam;" and added Omar (whom Allah
accept!), "By the Lord, if the young man appear not, I will
assuredly execute on Abu Zarr that which is prescribed by the law
of Al-Islam!"[FN#150]  thereupon the eyes of the bystanders ran
over with tears; those who looked on groaned aloud and great was
the clamour.  Then the chiefs of the Companions urged the
plaintiffs to accept the blood-wit and deserve the thanks of the
folk; but they both refused and would accept nothing save the
talion.  However, as the folk were swaying to and fro like waves
and loudly bemoaning Abu Zarr, behold, up came the young Badawi;
and, standing before the Imam, saluted him right courteously
(with sweat-beaded face and shining with the crescent's grace)
and said to him, "I have given the lad in charge to his mother's
brothers and have made them acquainted with all that pertaineth
to his affairs and let them into the secrets of his monies; after
which I braved the heats of noon and have kept my word as a free-
born man."  Thereupon the folk marvelled, seeing his good faith
and loyalty and his offering himself to death with so stout a
heart; and one said to him, "How noble a youth art thou and how
loyal to thy word of honour and thy devoir!"  Rejoined he, "Are
ye not convinced that when death presenteth itself, none can
escape from it?  And indeed, I have kept my word, that it be not
said, ‘Good faith is gone from among mankind.' " Said Abu Zarr,
"By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I became warrant for this
young man, without knowing to what tribe he belonged, nor had I
seen him before that day; but, when he turned away from all who
were present and singled me out, saying, ‘This man shall answer
for me and be my bail,' I thought it not right to refuse him, and
generosity forbade to disappoint his desire, there being no harm
in compliance therewith, that it be not bruited abroad,
Benevolence is gone from among mankind."  Then said the two young
men, "O Commander of the Faithful, we forgive this youth our
father's blood, seeing that he hath changed desolation into
cheerfulness; that it be not said, Humanity is gone from among
mankind."  So the Caliph rejoiced in the acquittance of the youth
and his truth and good faith; moreover, he magnified the
generosity of Abu Zarr, extolling it over all his companions, and
approved the resolve of the two young men for its benevolence,
giving them praise with thanks and applying to their case the
saying of the poet, 

     "Who doth kindness to men shall be paid again; *
          Ne'er is kindness lost betwixt God and men."

Then he offered to pay them, from the Treasury, the blood-wit for
their father; but they refused, saying, "We forgave him only of
our desire unto Allah,[FN#151] the Bountiful, the Exalted; and he
who is thus intentioned followeth not his benefits with reproach
or with mischief."[FN#152]  and amongst the tales they relate is
that of





                  THE CALIPH AL-MAAMUN AND THE
                   PYRAMIDS[FN#153] OF EGYPT



It is told that the Caliph Al-Maamun, son of Harun al-Rashid,
when he entered the God-guarded city of Cairo, was minded to pull
down the Pyramids, that he might take what was therein; but, when
he went about to do this, he could not succeed, albeit his best
was done.  He expended a mint of money in the attempt,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Three Hundred Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-Maamun
attempting to pull down the Pyramids, expended his mint of money,
but succeeded only in opening up a small tunnel in one of them,
where in it is said he found treasure to the exact amount of the
monies he had spent in the works, neither more nor less; whereat
he marvelled and taking what he found there, desisted from his
determination.  Now the Pyramids are three, and they are one of
the Wonders of the World; nor is there on the face of earth aught
like them for height and fashion and mysteries[FN#154]; for they
are built of huge rocks, and the builders proceeded by piercing
one block of stone and setting therein upright rods of
iron[FN#155]; after which they pierced a second block of stone
and lowered it upon the first.  Then they poured melted lead upon
the clamps and set the blocks in geometrical order, till the
building was complete.  Now the height of each pyramid was an
hundred cubits, of the normal measure of the day, and it had four
faces, each three hundred cubits long from the base and thence
battering upwards to a point.  The ancients say that, in the
western Pyramid, are thirty chambers of parti-coloured syenite,
full of precious gems and treasures galore and rare images and
utensils and costly weapons which are anointed with egromantic
unguents, so that they may not rust until the day of
Resurrection.[FN#156]  Therein, also, are vessels of glass which
bend and break not, containing various kinds of compound drugs
and sympathetic waters.  In the second Pyramid are the records of
the priests, written on tablets of syenite, to each priest his
tablet, whereon are engraved the wonders of his craft and his
feats; and on the walls are the human figures like idols, working
with their hands at all manner of mechanism and seated on stepped
thrones.  Moreover, to each Pyramid there is a guardian treasurer
who keepeth watch over it and wardeth it, to all eternity,
against the ravages of time and the shifts of events; and indeed
the marvels of these Pyramids astound all who have sight and
insight.  Many are the poems that describe them, thou shalt
thereby profit no small matter, and among the rest, quoth one of
them,

     "If Kings would see their high emprize preserved, *
          ‘Twill be by tongues of monuments they laid:
     Seest not the Pyramids?  These two endure *
          Despite what change Time and Change have made."

And quoth another,

     "Look on the Pyramids, and hear the twain *
          Recount their annals of the long-gone Past:
     Could they but speak, high marvels had they told *
          Of what Time did to man from first to last."

And quoth a third,

     "My friend I prithee tell me, 'neath the sky *
          Is aught with Egypt's Pyramids can compare?
     Buildings which frighten Time, albe what dwells *
          On back of earth in fear of Time must fare:
     If on their marvels rest my sight no more, *
          Yet these I ever shall in memory bear."

And quoth a fourth,

     "Where is the man who built the Pyramids? *
          What was his tribe, what day and where his tomb?
     The monuments survive the men who built *
          Awhile, till overthrown by touch of Doom."

And men also tell a tale of





                   THE THIEF AND THE MERCHANT



There was once a thief who repented to Almighty Allah with
sincere penitence; so he opened himself a shop for the sale of
stuffs, where he continued to trade awhile. It so chanced one day
that he locked his shop and went home, and in the night there
came to the bazar an artful thief disguised in the habit of the
merchant, and pulling out keys from his sleeve, said to the
watchman of the market, "Light me this wax-candle."  The watchman
took the taper and went to light it,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
watchman took the taper and went to light it, whilst the thief
opened the shop and lit another candle he had by him.  When the
watchman came back, he found him seated in the shop, account-
books inhand, and reckoning with his fingers; nor did he cease to
do thus till point of day, when he said to the man, "Fetch me a
camel-driver and his camel, to carry some goods for me."  So the
man fetched him a camel, and the thief took four bales[FN#157] of
stuffs and gave them to the cameleer, who loaded them on his
beast.  Then he gave the watchman two dirhams and went away after
the camel-driver, leaving the watchman believing him to be the
owner of the shop.  Now when the morning dawned and day broke the
merchant came and the watchman began greeting him with blessings,
because of the two dirhams; but the shop-keeper wondered at his
words as one not knowing what he meant.  When he opened his shop,
he saw the droppings of the wax and the account-book lying on the
floor, and looking round, found four bales of stuffs missing.  So
he asked the watchman what had happened and he told him what has
passed in the night and what had been said to the cameleer,
whereupon the merchant bade him fetch the man and asked him,
"Whither didst thou carry the stuffs this morning?"  Answered the
driver, "To such a landing-place, and I stowed them on board such
a vessel."  Said the merchant, "Come with me thither;" so the
camel-driver carried him to the landing-place and said to him,
"This be the barque and this be her owner."  Quoth the merchant
to the seaman, "Whither didst thou carry the merchant and the
stuff?"  Answered the boat-master, "To such a place, where he
fetched a camel-driver and, setting the bales on the camel, went
his ways I know not whither."  "Fetch me the cameleer who carried
the goods," said the merchant; so he fetched him and the merchant
said to him, "Whither didst thou carry the bales of goods from
the ship?"  "To such a Khan," answered he; and the merchant
rejoined, "Come thither with me and show it to me."  So the
camel-man went with him to a place far distant from the shore and
showed him the Khan where he had set down the stuffs, and at the
same time the false merchant's magazine, which he opened and
found therein his four bales bound up as they had been packed. 
The thief had laid his cloak over them; so the merchant took the
cloak as well as the bales and delivered them to the camel-
driver, who laid them on his camel; after which he locked the
magazine and went away with the cameleer.  On the way, he was
confronted with the thief who followed him, till he had shipped
the bales, when he said to him, "O my brother (Allah have thee in
His holy keeping!), thou hast indeed recovered thy goods and
naught of them is lost; so give me back my cloak."  The merchant
laughed and, giving him back his cloak, let him go unhindered;
whereupon both went their ways.  And they tell a tale of





              MASRUR THE EUNUCH AND IBN AL-KARIBI



The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, was exceedingly
restless one night; so he said to his Wazir Ja'afar, "I am
sleepless to-night and my breast is straitened and I know not
what to do."  Now his castrato Masrúr was standing before him,
and he laughed: whereupon the Caliph said "At whom laughest thou?
Is it to make mock of me or hath madness seized thee?"  Answered
Masrur, "Nay, by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

             When it was the Four Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Harun al-
Rashid said to Masrur the Sworder, "Dost thou laugh to make mock
of me or hath madness seized thee?"  Answered Masrur, "Nay, by
Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I swear by thy kinship to the
Prince of Apostles, I did it not of my free will; but I went out
yesterday to walk within sight of the palace and, coming to the
bank of the Tigris, saw there the folk collected; so I stopped
and found a man, Ibn al-Káribí hight, who was making them laugh;
but just now I recalled what he said, and laughter got the better
of me; and I crave pardon of thee, O Commander of the Faithful!" 
Quoth the Caliph, "Bring him to me forthright;" so Masrur
repaired in all haste to Ibn al-Karibi and said to him, "Answer
the summons of the Commander of the Faithful," whereto he
replied, "I hear and obey."  "But on condition," added Masrur,
"that, if he give thee aught, thou shalt have a quarter and the
rest shall be mine."  Replied the droll, "Nay, thou shalt have
half and I half."  Rejoined Masrur, "Not so, I will have three-
quarters."  Lastly said Ibn al-Karibi, "Thou shalt have two-
thirds and I the other third;" to which Masrur agreed, after much
higgling and haggling, and they returned to the palace together. 
Now when Ibn al-Karibi came into the Caliph's presence he saluted
him as men greet the Caliphate, and stood before him; whereupon
said Al-Rashid to him, "If thou do not make me laugh, I will give
thee three blows with this bag."  Quoth Ibn al-Karibi in his
mind, "And a small matter were blows with that bag, seeing that
beating with whips hurteth me not;" for he thought the bag was
empty.  Then he began to deal out his drolleries, such as would
make the dismallest jemmy guffaw, and gave vent to all manner of
buffooneries; but the Caliph laughed not neither smiled, whereat
Ibn al-Karibi marvelled and was chagrined and affrighted.  Then
said the Commander of the Faithful, "Now hast thou earned the
beating," and gave him a blow with the bag, wherein were four
pebbles each two rotols in weight.  The blow fell on his neck and
he gave a great cry, then calling to mind his compact with
Masrur, said, "Pardon, O Commander of the Faithful!  Hear two
words from me."  Quoth the Caliph, "Say on," and quoth Ibn al-
Karibi, "Masrur made it a condition with me and I a covenant with
him, that whatsoever largesse might come to me of the bounties of
the Commander of the Faithful, one-third thereof should be mine
and the rest his; nor did he agree to leave me so much as one-
third, save after much higgling and haggling.  I have had my
share and here standeth he, ready to receive his portion; so pay
him the two other blows."  Now when the Caliph heard this, he
laughed until he fell on his back; then calling Masrur, he gave
him a blow, whereat he cried out and said, "O Commander of the
Faithful, the one-third sufficeth me: give him the two-thirds."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Masrur
cried out, "O Commander of the Faithful! The one-third sufficeth
me; give him the two-thirds."  So the Caliph laughed at them and
ordered them a thousand dinars each, and they went away,
rejoicing at the largesse.  And of the tales they tell is one of





                       THE DEVOTEE PRINCE



The Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, had a son who,
from the time he attained the age of sixteen, renounced the world
and walked in the way[FN#158] of ascetics and devotees.  He was
wont to go out to the graveyards and say, "Ye once ruled the
world, but that saved you not from death, and now are ye come to
your sepulchres!  Would Heaven I knew what ye said and what is
said to you!"[FN#159]  and he wept as one weepeth who is troubled
with fear and apprehension, and repeated the worlds of the poet, 

     "Affright me funerals at every time; *
          And wailing women grieve me to the soul!"

Now it chanced one day, as he sat among the tombs, according to
his custom, his father passed by in all his state, surrounded by
his Wazirs and Lords of the realm and the Officers of his
household, who seeing the Caliph's son with a gown of woollen
stuff on his body and a twist of wool on his head by way of
turband, said to one another, "Verily this youth dishonoureth the
Commander of the Faithful among Kings: but, if he reproved him,
he would leave his present way of life."   The Caliph heard these
words; so quoth he to his son, "O my dear child, of a truth thou
disgracest me by thy present way of life."  The young man looked
at him and made no reply: then he beckoned to a bird perched on
the battlements of the palace, and said to it, "O thou bird, I
conjure thee by Him who created thee, alight upon my hand."
Whereupon straightway it swooped down and perched on his finger. 
Then quoth he, "Return to thy place;" and it did so.  Presently
he said, "Alight on the hand of the Commander of the Faithful;"
but it refused there to perch, and he cried to his father, "It is
thou that disgracest me amongst the Holy[FN#160] Ones, by the
love of the world; and now I am resolved to part from thee, never
to return to thee, save in the world to come."  Then he went down
to Bassorah, where he took to working with those which wrought in
clay,[FN#161] receiving, as his day's hire, but a dirham and a
danik;[FN#162] and with the danik he fed himself and gave alms of
the dirham.  (Quoth Abú Amir of Bassorah) "There fell down a wall
in my house; so I went forth to the station of the artisans to
find a man who should repair it for me, and my eyes fell on a
handsome youth of a radiant countenance.  So I saluted him and
asked him, ‘O my friend, dost thou seek work?' ‘Yes,' answered
he; and I said, ‘Come with me and build a wall.'  He replied, ‘On
certain conditions I will make with thee.'  Quoth I ‘What are
they, O my friend?'; and quoth he, ‘My wage must be a dirham and
a danik, and again when the Mu'ezzin calleth to prayer, thou
shalt let me go pray with the congregation.'  ‘It is well,'
answered I and carried him to my lace, where he fell to work,
such work as I never saw the like of.  Presented I named to him
the morning-meal; but he said, ‘No;' and I knew that he was
fasting.[FN#163]  When he heard the call to prayer, he said to
me, ‘Thou knowest the condition?'  ‘Yes,' answered i.  So he
loosed his girdle and, applying himself to the lesser ablution,
made it after a fashion than which I never saw a fairer;[FN#164]
then he went to the mosque and prayed with the congregation and
returned to his work.  He did the same upon the call to mid-
afternoon prayer, and when I saw him fall to work again
thereafterward, I said to him, ‘O my friend, verily the hours of
labour are over; a workman's day is but till the time of
afternoon-prayer.'  But he replied, ‘Praise to the Lord, my
service is till the night.'  And he ceased not to work till
nightfall, when I gave him two dirhams; whereupon he asked ‘What
is this!'; and I answered, ‘By Allah, this is but part of thy
wage, because of thy diligence in my service.'  But he threw them
back to me saying, ‘I will have no more than was agreed upon
between us twain.'  I urged him to take them, but could not
prevail upon him; so I gave him the dirham and the danik, and he
went away.  And when morning dawned, I went to the station but
found him not; so I enquired for him and was told, ‘He cometh
thither only on Sabbaths.'  Accordingly, when Saturday came, I
betook me to the market and finding him there, said to him,
‘Bismillah, do me the favour to come and work for me.'  Said he,
‘Upon the conditions thou wottest;' and I answered ‘Yes!'  Then
carrying him to my house I stood to watch him where he could not
see me; and he took a handful of puddled clay and laid it on the
wall, when, behold, the stones ranged themselves one upon other;
and I said, ‘On this wise are Allah's holy ones.' he worked out
his day and did even more than before; and when it was night, I
gave him his hire, and he took it and walked away.  Now when the
third Saturday came round, I went to the place of standing, but
found him not; so I asked after him and they told me, ‘He is sick
and lying in the shanty of such a woman.'  Now this was an old
wife, renowned for piety, who had a hovel of reeds in the burial-
ground.  So I fared thither and found him stretched on the floor
which was bare, with a brick for a pillow and his face beaming
like the new moon with light.  I saluted him and he returned my
salam; and I sat down at his head weeping over his fair young
years and absence from home and submission to the will of his
Lord.  Then said I to him, ‘Hast thou any need?'  ‘Yes,' answered
he; and I said, ‘What is it?'  He replied, ‘Come hither to-morrow
in the forenoon and thou wilt find me dead.  Wash me and dig my
grave and tell none thereof: but shroud me in this my gown, after
thou hast unsewn it and taken out what thou shalt find in the
bosom-pocket, which keep with thee.  Then, when thou hast prayed
over me and laid me in the dust, go to Baghdad and watch for the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid, till he come forth, when do thou give him
what thou shalt find in the breast of my gown and bear him my
salutation.'  Then he ejaculated the profession of the Faith and
glorified his God in the most eloquent of words, reciting these
couplets,

     ‘Carry the trust of him whom death awaits *
          To Al-Rashid and God reward thy care!
     And say ‘An exile who desired thy sight *
          Long loving, from afar sends greeting fair.
     Nor hate nor irk (No!) him from thee withdrew, *
          Kissing thy right to Heaven brought him near.[FN#165]
     But what estranged his soul, O sire, from thee *
          Is that thy worldly joys it would not share!'

Then he betook himself to prayer, asking pardon of Allah'--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
then betook himself to asking pardon of Allah and to invoking
prayer and praise upon the Apostle and the Lord of the Just and
repeating verses of the Koran; after which he recited these
couplets,

     "O sire, be not deceived by worldly joys; *
          For life must pass, and joy must learn to mourn;
     When thou art told of folk in evil plight, *
          Think thou must answer for all hearts forlorn;
     And when thou bear thy dead towards the tombs, *
          Know thou wilt likewise on that way be bourne."

Continued Abu the Basri, "Now when the youth had ended his charge
and his verses I left him and went home.  On the morrow, I
returned, at the appointed hour, and found him indeed dead, the
mercy of Allah be upon him!  So I washed him and, unsewing his
gown, found in the bosom a ruby worth thousands of gold pieces
and said to myself, ‘By Allah, this youth was indeed weaned from
worldly things!'  After I had buried him, I made my way to
Baghdad and, going to the Caliph's palace, waited till he came
forth, when I addressed him in one of the streets and gave him
the ruby, which when he saw, he knew and fell down in a fainting-
fit.  His attendants laid hands on me, but he revived and said to
them, ‘Release him and bring him courteously to the palace.' 
They did his bidding, and when he returned, he sent for me and
carrying me into his chamber said to me, ‘How doth the owner of
this ruby?'  Quoth I, ‘Verily, he is dead;' and told him what had
passed; whereupon he fell a-weeping and said, ‘The son hath
gained; but the sire hath lost.'  Then he called out, saying,
‘Ho, such an one!'; and behold there came out to him a lady who,
when she saw me, would have withdrawn; but he cried to her,
‘Come, and mind him not.'  So she entered and saluted, and he
threw her the ruby, which when she saw and she knew, she shrieked
a great shriek and fell down in a swoon.  As soon as she came to
herself, she said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful, what hath Allah
done with my son?'; and he said to me, ‘Do thou tell her his
case' (as he could not speak for weeping).  Accordingly, I
repeated the story to her, and she began to shed tears and say in
a faint and wailing voice, ‘How I have longed for thy sight, O
solace of mine eyes![FN#166] Would I might have given thee to
drink, when thou hadst none to slake thy thirst!  Would I might
have cheered thee, whenas thou foundest never a cheerer!'  And
she poured forth tears and recited these couplets,

     ‘I weep for one whose lot a lonely death befel; *
          Without a friend to whom he might complain and moan:
     And after glory and glad union with his friends, *
          He woke to desolation, friendless, lorn and lone;
     What Fortune hides a while she soon to all men shall show; *
          Death never spared a man; no, not a single one:
     O absent one, my Lord decreed thee strangerhood, *
          Far from thy nearest friends and to long exile gone:
     Though Death forbid my hope of meeting here again, *
          On Doom-day's morrow we shall meet again, my
son![FN#167]

Quoth I, ‘O Commander of the Faithful, was he indeed thy son?' 
Quoth he, ‘Yes, and indeed, before I succeeded to this office, he
was wont to visit the learned and company with the devout; but,
when I became Caliph, he grew estranged from me and withdrew
himself apart.[FN#168]  Then said I to his mother, ‘Verily this
thy son hath cut the world and devoted his life to Almighty
Allah, and it may be that hard times shall befal him and he be
smitten with trial of evil chance; wherefore do thou given him
this ruby, which he may find useful in hour of need.'  So she
gave it him, conjuring him to take it, and he obeyed her bidding. 
Then he left to us the things of our world and removed himself
from us; nor did he cease to be absent from us, till he went to
the presence of Allah (to whom be Honour and Glory!), pious and
pure.'  Then said he, ‘Come, show me his grave.'  So, I travelled
with him to Bassorah and showed him his son's grave; and when he
saw it, he wept and lamented, till he fell down in a swoon; after
which he recovered and asked pardon of the Lord, saying, ‘We are
Allah's and unto Him we are returning!'; and involved blessings
on the dead.  Then he asked me to become his companion, but I
said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful, verily, in thy son's
case is for me the most momentous of admonitions!'  And I recited
these couplets,

     "‘Tis I am the stranger, visited by none; *
          I am the stranger though in town my own:
     ‘Tis I am the stranger! Lacking kith and son, *
          And friend to whom I mote for aidance run.
     I house in mosques which are my only home; *
          My heart there wones and shall for ever wone:
     Then laud ye Allah, Lord of Worlds, as long *
          As soul and body dwell in union!'"

And a famous tale is told of





            THE UNWISE SCHOOLMASTER WHO FELL IN LOVE
                           BY REPORT
                                


Quoth one of the learned, "I passed once by a school, wherein a
schoolmaster was teaching children; so I entered, finding him a
good-looking man and a well-dressed; when he rose to me and made
me sit with him.  Then I examined him in the Koran and in syntax
and prosody and lexicography; and behold, he was perfect in all
required of him, so I said to him, ‘Allah strengthen thy purpose! 
Thou art indeed versed in all that is requisite,' thereafter I
frequented him a while, discovering daily some new excellence in
him, and quoth I to myself, ‘This is indeed a wonder in any
dominie; for the wise are agreed upon a lack of wit in children's
teachers.'  Then I separated myself from him and sought him and
visited him only every few days, till coming to see him one day
as of wont, I found the school shut and made enquiry of his
neighbors, who replied, ‘Some one is dead in his house.'  So I
said in my mind, ‘It behoveth me to pay him a visit of
condolence,' and going to his house, knocked at the door, when a
slave-girl came out to me and asked, ‘What dost thou want?' and I
answered, ‘I want thy master.'  She replied, ‘He is sitting
alone, mourning;' and I rejoined, ‘Tell him that his friend so
and so seeketh to console him.'  She went in and told him; and he
said, ‘Admit him.'  So she brought me in to him, and I found him
seated alone and his head bound with mourning fillets.  So I said
to him, ‘Allah requite thee amply! this is a path all must
perforce tread, and it behoveth thee to take patience;' adding,
‘But who is dead unto thee?'  He answered, ‘One who was dearest
of the folk to me, and best beloved.' ‘Perhaps thy father?' ‘No!' 
‘Thy brother?'  "No!'  "One of thy kindred?'  ‘No!'  Then asked
I, ‘What relation was the dead to thee?'; and he answered, ‘My
lover.'  Quoth I to myself, ‘This is the first proof to swear by
his lack of wit.'  So I said to him, ‘Assuredly there be others
than she and fairer;' and he made answer, ‘I never saw her, that
I might judge whether or no there be others fairer than she.' 
Quoth I to myself, ‘This is another proof positive.'  Then I said
to him, ‘And how couldst thou fall in love with one thou hast
never seen?'  He replied ‘Know that I was sitting one day at the
window, when lo! there passed by a man, singing the following
distich,

     ‘Umm Amr',[FN#169] thy boons Allah repay! *
          Give back my heart be't where it may!'"

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Four Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
schoolmaster continued, " ‘When I heard the man humming these
words as he passed along the street, I said to myself ‘Except
this Umm Amru were without equal in the world, the poets had not
celebrated her in ode and canzon.'  So I fell in love with her;
but, two days after, the same man passed, singing the following
couplet,

     ‘Ass and Umm Amr' went their way; *
          Nor she, nor ass returned for aye.'

Thereupon I knew she was dead and mourned for her.  This was
three days ago, and I have been mourning ever since.  So I left
him, (concluded the learned one) and fared forth, having assured
myself of the weakness of the gerund-grinder's wit."   And they
tell another and a similar tale of





                  THE FOOLISH DOMINIE[FN#170]



Once upon a time, a schoolmaster was visited by a man of letters
who entered a school and, sitting down by the host's side,
entered into discourse with him and found him an accomplished
theologian, poet grammarian, philologist and poet; intelligent,
well bred and pleasant spoken; whereat he wondered, saying in
himself, "It cannot be that a man who teacheth children in a
school, should have a perfect wit."  Now when he was about to go
away, the pedant said to him, "Thou are my guest to-night;" and
he consented to receive hospitality and accompanied him to his
house, where he made much of him and set food before him.  They
ate and drank and sat talking, till a third part of the night was
past when the host spread his guest a bed and went up to his
Harim.  The stranger lay down and addressed himself to sleep,
when, behold, there arose a great clamour in the women's rooms. 
He asked what was the matter and they said, "A terrible thing
hath befallen the Shaykh and he is at the last gasp."  Said he,
"Take me up to him"; so they took him up to the pedagogue whom he
found lying insensible, with his blood streaming down.  He
sprinkled water on his face and when he revived, he asked him,
"What hath betided thee?  When thou leftest me, thou wast in all
good cheer and whole of body," and he answered, "O my brother,
after I left thee, I sat meditating on the creative works of
Almighty Allah, and said to myself: ‘In every thing the Lord hath
created for man, there is an use; for He (to Whom be glory!) made
the hands to seize, the feet to walk, the eyes to see, the ears
to hear and the penis to increase and multiply; and so on with
all the members of the body, except these two ballocks; there is
no use in them.'  So I took a razor I had by me and cut them off;
and there befel me what thou seest."  So the guest left him and
went away, saying, "He was in the right who said, ‘Verily no
schoolmaster who teacheth children can have a perfect wit, though
he know all the sciences.'"  And they tell a pleasant tale of the 





            ILLITERATE WHO SET UP FOR A SCHOOLMASTER



There was once, among the menials[FN#171] of a certain mosque, a
man who knew not how to write or even to read and who gained his
bread by gulling folk.  One day, it occurred to him to open a
school and teach children; so he got together writing-tablets and
written papers and hung them up in a high place.  Then he
greatened his turband[FN#172] and sat down at the door of the
school; and when the people, who passed by, saw his huge head-
gear and tablets and scrolls, they thought he must be a very
learned pedagogue; so they brought him their children; and he
would say to this, "Write," and to that "Read"; and thus the
little ones taught each other.  Now one day, as he sat as of
wont, at the door of the school, behold, up came a woman letter
in hand, and he said in his mind, "This woman doubtless seeketh
me, that I may read her the missive she hath in her hand: how
shall I do with her, seeing I cannot read writing?"  And he would
fain have gone down and fled from her; but, before he could do
this, she overtook him and said to him, "Whither away?"  Quoth
he, "I purpose to pray the noon-prayer and return."  Quoth she,
"Noon is yet distant, so read me this letter."  He took the
letter and turning it upside down, fell to looking at it, now
shaking his head till his turband quivered, then dancing his
eyebrows and anon showing anger and concern.  Now the letter came
from the woman's husband, who was absent; and when she saw the
dominie do on this wise, she said to herself, "Doubtless my
husband is dead, and this learned doctor of law and religion is
ashamed to tell me so."  So she said to him, "O my lord, if he be
dead, tell me;" but he shook his head and held his peace.  Then
said she, "Shall I rend my raiment?"  "Rend!" replied he.  "Shall
I beat my face?" asked she; and he answered, "Beat!"  So she took
the letter from his hand and returned home fell a-weeping, she
and her children.  Presently, one of her neighbours heard her
sobbing and asking what aileth her, was answered, "Of a truth she
hath gotten a letter, telling her that her husband is dead." 
Quoth the man, "This is a falsehood; for I had a letter from 