descry:
     Till sudden hapt I on a delicate maid *
          Like desert-doe that fails her fawns to espy."

Quoth the Caliph, "Thou hast done well, O damsel! whose are these
lines?" She answered, "Written by Amru bin Ma'di Karib al
-Zubaydi,[FN#216] and the air is Ma'abid's."[FN#217] Then the
Caliph and Abu Isa and Ali drank and the damsels went away and
were succeeded by other ten, all clad in flowered silk of
Al-Yaman, brocaded with gold, who sat down on the chairs and sang
various songs. The Caliph looked at one of the concubines, who
was like a wild heifer of the waste, and said to her, "What is
thy name, O damsel?" She replied, "My name is Zabiyah,[FN#218] 0
Commander of the Faithful;" and he, "Sing to us Zabiyah;" so she
warbled like a bird with many a trill and sang these two
couplets,

     "Houris, and highborn Dames who feel no fear of men, *
          Like Meccan game forbidden man to slam:[FN#219]
     Their soft sweet voices make you deem them whores, *
          But bars them from all whoring Al-Islam."

When she had finished, al-Maamun cried, "favoured of Allah art
thou!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
slave girl finished her song, al-Maamun cried, "Favoured of Allah
art thou! Whose is this verse?" and she answered,
"Jarír's[FN#220] and the air is By Ibn Surayj." Then the Caliph
and his company drank, whilst the girls went away and there came
forth yet other ten, as they were rubies, robed in red brocade
inwoven with gold and purfled with pearls and jewels whilst all
their heads were bare. They sat down on the stools and sang
various airs; so the Caliph looked at one of them, who was like
the sun of the day, and asked her, "What is thy name, O damsel?";
and she answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, my name is
Fátin." "Sing to us, O Fatin," quoth he; whereat she played a
lively measure and sang these couplets,

     "Deign grant thy favours; since 'tis time I were engraced; *
          Tnough of severance hath it been my lot to taste.
     Thou'rt he whose face cloth every gift and charm unite, *
          Yet is my patience spent for that 'twas sore misplaced:
     I've wasted life in loving thee; and would high Heaven *
          Grant me one meeting hour for all this wilful waste."

"Well sung, O Fatin!'' exclaimed the Caliph; "whose verse is
this?" And she answered, "Adi bin Zayd's, and the air is
antique." Then all three drank, whilst the damsels retired and
were succeeded by other ten maidens, as they were sparkling
stars, clad in flowered silk embroidered with red gold and girt
with jewelled zones. They sat down and sang various motives; and
the Caliph asked one of them, who was like a wand of willow,
"What is thy name, O damsel?"; and she answered, "My name is
Rashaa,[FN#221] 0 Commander of the Faithful." "Sing to us, O
Rashaa," quoth he; so she played a lively measure and sang these
couplets,

     "And wand-like Houri, who can passion heal *
          Like young gazelle that paceth o'er the plain:
     I drain this wine cup on the toast, her cheek, *
          Each cup disputing till she bends in twain
     Then sleeps the night with me, the while I cry *
          'This is the only gain my Soul would gain!' "

Said the Caliph, "Well done, O damsel! Sing us something more."
So she rose and kissing the ground before him, sang the following
distich,

     "She came out to gaze on the bridal at ease *
          In a shift that reeked of ambergris."

The Caliph was highly pleased with this couplet and, when the
slave girl saw how much it delighted him, she repeated it several
times. Then said al-Maamun, "Bring up 'the Flyer,'" being minded
to embark and depart: but Ali bin Hisham said to him, "O
Commander of the Faithful, I have a slave girl, whom I bought for
ten thousand diners; she hath taken my heart in whole and part,
and I would fain display her to the Commander of the Faithful. If
she please him and he will accept of her, she is his: and if not,
let him hear something from her." Said the Caliph, "Bring her to
me;" and forth came a damsel, as she were a branchlet of willow,
with seducing eyes and eyebrows set like twin bows; and on her
head she wore a crown of red gold crusted with pearls and
jewelled, under which was a fillet bearing this couplet wrought
in letters of chrysolite,

     "A Jinniyah this, with her Jinn, to show *
          How to pierce man's heart with a stringless bow!"

The handmaiden walked, with the gait of a gazelle in flight and
fit to damn a devotee, till she came to a chair, whereon she
seated herself.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the hand
maiden walked with the gait of a gazelle in flight, fit to damn a
devotee, till she came to a chair whereon she seated herself. And
Al-Maamun marvelled at her beauty and loveliness; but, when Abu
Isa saw her, his heart throbbed with pain, his colour changed to
pale and wan and he was in evil case. Asked the Caliph, "O Abu
Isa, what aileth thee to change thus?"; and he answered, "O
Commander of the Faithful, it is because of a twitch that seizeth
me betimes." Quoth the Caliph, "Hast thou known yonder damsel
before to day?" Quoth he, "Yes, O Commander of the Faithful, can
the moon be concealed?" Then said al-Maamun to her, "What is thy
name, O damsel?"; and she replied, "My name is Kurrat al-Ayn. O
Commander of the Faithful," and he rejoined, "Sing to us, O
Kurrat al-Ayn." So she sang these two couplets,

     "The loved ones left thee in middle night, *
          And fared with the pilgrims when dawn shone bright:
     The tents of pride round the domes they pitched, *
          And with broidered curtains were veiled fro' sight."

Quoth the Caliph, "Favoured of Heaven art thou, O Kurrat al-Ayn!
Whose song is that?"; whereto she answered "The words are by
Di'ibil al-Khuza'i, and the air by Zurzúr al-Saghír." Abu Isa
looked at her and his tears choked him; so that the company
marvelled at him. Then she turned to al-Maamun and said to him,
"O Commander of the Faithful, wilt thou give me leave to change
the words?" Said he, "Sing what thou wilt;" so she played a merry
measure and carolled these couplets,

     "If thou should please a friend who pleaseth thee *
          Frankly, in public practise secrecy.
     And spurn the slanderer's tale, who seldom[FN#222] *
          seeks Except the severance of true love to see.
     They say, when lover's near, he tires of love, *
          And absence is for love best remedy:
     Both cures we tried and yet we are not cured, *
          Withal we judge that nearness easier be:
     Yet nearness is of no avail when he *
          Thou lovest lends thee love unwillingly."

But when she had finished, Abu Isa said, "O Commander of the
Faithful," --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kurrat
al-Ayn had finished her verse, Abu Isa said, "O Commander of the
Faithful, though we endure disgrace, we shall be at ease.[FN#223]
Dost thou give me leave to reply to her?" Quoth the Caliph, "Yes,
say what thou wilt to her." So he swallowed his tears and sang
these two distichs,

     "Silent I woned and never owned my love; *
          But from my heart I hid love's blissful boon;
     Yet, if my eyes should manifest my love, *
          'Tis for my nearness to the shining moon."

Then Kurrat al-Ayn took the lute and played a lively tune and
rejoined with these couplets,

     "An what thou claimest were the real truth, *
          With only Hope content thou hadst not been
     Nor couldest patient live without the girl *
          So rare of inner grace and outward mien.
     But there is nothing in the claim of thee *
          At all, save tongue and talk that little mean."

When Abu Isa heard this he fell to weeping and wailing and
evidencing his trouble and anguish. Then he raised his eyes to
her and sighing, repeated these couplets,

     "Under my raiment a waste body lies, *
          And in my spirit all comprising prize.
     I have a heart, whose pain shall aye endure, *
          And tears like torrents pour these woeful eyes.
     Whene'er a wise man spies me, straight he chides *
          Love, that misleads me thus in ways unwise:
     O Lord, I lack the power this dole to bear: *
          Come sudden Death or joy in bestest guise!"

When he had ended, Ali bin Hisham sprang up and kissing his feet,
said, "O my lord, Allah hearing thy secret hath answered thy
prayer and consenteth to thy taking her with all she hath of
things rare and fair, so the Commander of the Faithful have no
mind to her." Quoth Al Maamun, "Had we a mind to her, we would
prefer Abu Isa before ourselves and help him to his desire." So
saying, he rose and embarking, went away, whilst Abu Isa tarried
for Kurrat al-Ayn, whom he took and carried to his own house, his
breast swelling with joy. See then the generosity of Ali son of
Hisham! And they tell a tale of





             AL-AMIN SON OF AL-RASHID AND HIS UNCLE
                     IBRAHIM BIN AL-MAHDI.



Al-Amin,[FN#224] brother of al-Maamun, once entered the house of
his uncle Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi, where he saw a slave girl playing
upon the lute; and, she being one of the fairest of women, his
heart inclined to her. Ibrahim, seeing how it was with him, sent
the girl to him, with rich raiment and precious ornaments. When
he saw her, he thought that his uncle had lain with her; so he
was loath to have to do with her, because of that, and accepting
what came with her sent her back to Ibrahim. His uncle learnt the
cause of this from one of al-Amin's eunuchs; so he took a shift
of watered silk and worked upon its skirt, in letters of gold,
these two couplets,

     "No! I declare by Him to whom all bow, *
          Of nothing 'neath her petticoat I trow:
     Nor meddle with her mouth; nor aught did I *
          But see and hear her, and it was enow!"

Then he clad her in the shift and, giving her a lute, sent her
back again to his nephew. When she came into al-Amin's presence,
she kissed ground before him and tuning the lute, sang thereto
these two couplets,

     "Thy breast thou baredst sending back the gift; *
          Showing unlove for me withouten shift:
     An thou bear spite of Past, the Past forgive, *
          And for the Caliphate cast the Past adrift."

When she had made an end of her verse, Al-Amin looked at her and,
seeing what was upon her skirt, could no longer control him self,
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Al-Amin looked at the damsel and saw what was upon her skirt, he
could no longer control himself, but drew near unto her and
kissed her and appointed her a separate lodging in his palace.
Moreover, he thanked his uncle for this and bestowed on him the
government of Rayy. And a tale is told of





               AL-FATH BIN KHAKAN AND THE CALIPH
                         AL-MUTAWAKKIL.



Al-Mutawakkil[FN#225] was once taking medicine, and folk sent him
by way of solace all sorts of presents and rarities and things
costly and precious. Amongst others, al-Fath bin Khákán[FN#226]
sent him a virgin slave, high breasted, of the fairest among
women of her time, and with her a vase of crystal, containing
ruddy wine, and a goblet of red gold, whereon were graven in
black these couplets,

     "Since our Imam came forth from medicine, *
          Which made him health and heartiness rewin,
     There is no healing draught more sovereign *
          Than well boiled wine this golden goblet in:
     Then let him break the seal for him secured; *
          'Tis best prescription after medicine[FN#227]

Now when the damsel entered, the physician Yohanná[FN#228] was
with the Caliph, and as he read the couplets, he smiled and said,
"By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, Fath is better versed
than I in the art of healing: so let not the Prince of True
Believers gainsay his prescription." Accordingly, the Caliph
followed the recipe contained in the poetry and was made whole by
the blessing of Allah and won his every wish. And among tales
they tell is one of





            THE MAN'S DISPUTE WITH THE LEARNED WOMAN
             CONCERNING THE RELATIVE EXCELLENCE OF
                        MALE AND FEMALE.



Quoth a certain man of learning, "I never saw amongst woman kind
one wittier, and wiser, better read and by nature more generously
bred; and in manners and morals more perfected than a preacher of
the people of Baghdad, by name Sitt al-Mashá'ikh.[FN#229] It
chanced that she came to Hamah city in the year of the Flight
five hundred and sixty and one[FN#230]; and there delivered
salutary exhortations to the folk from the professorial chair.
Now there used to visit her house a number of students of
divinity and persons of learning and polite letters, who would
discuss with her questions of theology and dispute with her on
controversial points. I went to her one day, with a friend of
mine, a man of years and education; and when we had taken our
seats, she set before us a dish of fruit and seated herself
behind a curtain. Now she had a brother, a handsome youth, who
stood behind us, to serve us. And when we had eaten we fell to
disputing upon points of divinity, and I propounded to her a
theological question bearing upon a difference between the Imams,
the Founders of the Four Schools. She proceeded to speak in
answer, whilst I listened; but all the while my friend fell to
looking upon her brother's face and admiring his beauties without
paying any heed to what she discoursed. Now as she was watching
him from behind the curtain; when she had made an end of her
speech, she turned to him and said, 'Methinks thou be of those
who give men the preference over women!' He replied, 'Assuredly,'
and she asked, 'And why so?'; whereto he answered, 'For that
Allah hath made the masculine worthier than the feminine,'" --And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
replied, " 'For that Allah hath made the masculine worthier than
the feminine; and I like the excelling and mislike the excelled.'
She laughed and presently said, 'Wilt thou deal fairly with me in
debate, if I battle the matter with thee?' and he rejoined,
'Yes.' Then quoth she, 'What is the evidence of the superiority
of the male to the female?' Quoth he, 'It is of two kinds,
traditional and reasonable. The authoritative part deriveth from
the Koran and the Traditions of the Apostle. As for the first we
have the very words of Almighty Allah, 'Men shall have the
pre-eminence above women because of those advantages wherein
Allah hath caused the one of them to excel the other;[FN#231] and
again, 'If there be not two men, let there be one man and two
women;'[FN#232] and again, when treating of inheritance, 'If
there be brothers and sisters let a male have as much as the
portion of two females.'[FN#233] Thus Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) hath in these places preferred the male over the female
and teacheth that a woman is as the half of a man, for that he is
worthier than she. As for the Sunnah traditions, is it not
reported of the Prophet (whom Allah save and assain!) that he
appointed the blood money for a woman to be half that of a man.
And as for the evidence of reason, the male is the agent and
active and the female the patient and passive.'[FN#234] Rejoined
she, 'Thou hast said well, O my lord, but, by Allah, thou hast
proved my contention with thine own lips and hast advanced
evidence which telleth against thee, and not for thee. And thus
it is: Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) preferred the male
above the female solely because of the inherent condition and
essential quality of masculinity; and in this there is no dispute
between us. Now this quality of male-hood is common to the child,
the boy, the youth, the adult and the old man; nor is there any
distinction between them in this. If, then, the superior
excellence of male masculant belong to him solely by virtue of
manhood, it behoveth that thy heart incline and thy sole delight
in the graybeard, equally with the boy; seeing that there is no
distinction between them, in point of male-hood. But the
difference between thee and me turneth upon the accident of
qualities that are sought as constituting the pleasure of
intercourse and its enjoyment; and thou hast adduced no proof of
the superiority of the youth over the young girl in this matter
of non-essentials.' He made answer, 'O reverend lady, knowest
thou not that which is peculiar to the youth of limber shape and
rosy cheeks and pleasant smile and sweetness of speech? Youths
are, in these respects superior to women; and the proof of this
is what they traditionally report of the Prophet (whom Allah
bless and preserve!) that he said, 'Stay not thy gaze upon the
beardless, for in them is a momentary eye glance at the black
eyed girls of Paradise.' Nor indeed is the superiority of the lad
over the lass hidden to any of mankind, and how well saith Abu
Nowas,[FN#235]

     'The least of him is the being free *
          From monthly courses and pregnancy.'

And the saying of another poet,

     'Quoth our Imam, Abu Nowas, who was *
          For mad debauch and waggishness renowned: 
     'O tribe that loves the cheeks of boys, take fill *
          Of joys in Paradise shall ne'er be found!'

So if any one enlarge in praise of a slave girl and wish to
enhance her value by the mention of her beauties, he likeneth her
to a youth,'" --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
continued, "'So if any one enlarge in praise of a slave girl and
wish to enhance her value by the mention of her beauties, he
likeneth her to a youth, because of the illustrious qualities
that belong to the male, even as saith the poet,

     'Boy like of backside, in the deed of kind, *
          She sways, as sways the wand like boughs a-wind.'

An youths, then, were not better and fairer than girls, why
should these be likened to them? And know also (Almighty Allah
preserve thee!) that a youth is easy to be led, adapting himself
to every rede, pleasant of converse and manners, inclining to
assent rather than dissent, especially when his side face is
newly down'd and his upper lip is first embrowned, and the purple
lights of youth on his cheeks abound, so that he is like the full
moon sound; and how goodly is the saying of Abu Tammám[FN#236],

     'The slanderers said 'There's hair upon his cheeks'; *
          Quoth I, 'Exceed not, that's no blemish there.'
     When he could bear that haling of his hips *
          And pearl-beads shaded by mustachio hair;[FN#237]
     And Rose swore solemn, holiest oath that is, *
          From that fair cheek she nevermore would fare
     I spoke with eyelids without need of speech, *
          And they who answered me his eyebrows were.
     He's even fairer than thou knewest him, *
          And cheek down guards from all would overdare.
     Brighter and sweeter now are grown his charms, *
          Since down robes lip and cheek before were bare.
     And those who blame me for my love of him, *
          When him they mention say of him, 'Thy Fair'!'

And quoth al-Hariri[FN#238] and quoth excellently well,

     'My censors say, 'What means this pine for him? *
          Seest not the flowing hair on cheeks a flowing?'
     I say, 'By Allah, an ye deem I dote, *
          Look at the truth in those fine eyes a-showing!
     But for the down that veils his cheek and chin, *
          His brow had dazed all eyes no sight allowing:
     And whoso sojourns in a growthless land, *
          How shall he move from land fair growths a-growing?'

And quoth another,

     'My blamers say of me, 'He is consoled,' And lie! *
          No consolation comes to those who pine and sigh.
     I had no solace when Rose bloomed alone on cheek, *
          Now Basil blooms thereon and now consoled am I.'

And again,

     'Slim waisted one, whose looks with down of cheek *
          In slaughtering mankind each other hurtle
     With the Narcissus blade he sheddeth blood, *
          The baldrick of whose sheath is freshest
          myrtle.'[FN#239]

And again,

     'Not with his must I'm drunk, but verily *
          Those curls turn manly heads like newest wine[FN#240]
     Each of his beauties envies each, and all *
          Would be the silky down on side face li'en.'

Such are the excellencies of the youth which women do not own,
and they more than suffice to give those the preference over
these.' She replied, 'Allah give thee health! verily, thou hast
imposed the debate upon thyself; and thou hast spoken and hast
not stinted and hast brought proofs to support every assertion.
But, 'Now is the truth become manifest;'[FN#241] so swerve thou
not from the path thereof; and, if thou be not content with a
summary of evidence, I will set it before thee in fullest detail.
Allah upon thee, where is the youth beside the girl and who shall
compare kid and wild cow? The girl is soft of speech, fair of
form, like a branchlet of basil, with teeth like chamomile-petals
and hair like halters wherefrom to hang hearts. Her cheeks are
like blood-red anemones and her face like a pippin: she hath lips
like wine and breasts like pomegranates twain and a shape supple
as a rattan-cane. Her body is well formed and with sloping
shoulders dight; she hath a nose like the edge of a sword shining
bright and a forehead brilliant white and eyebrows which unite
and eyes stained by Nature's hand black as night. If she speak,
fresh young pearls are scattered from her mouth forthright and
all hearts are ravished by the daintiness of her sprite; when she
smileth thou wouldst ween the moon shone out her lips between and
when she eyes thee, sword blades flash from the babes of her
eyes. In her all beauties to conclusion come, and she is the
centre of attraction to traveller and stay-at-home. She hath two
lips of cramoisy, than cream smoother and of taste than honey
sweeter,'" --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
preacher woman thus pursued her theme in the praise of fair
maids, "'She hath two lips of cramoisy, than cream smoother and
than honey sweeter;' adding, 'And she hath a bosom, as it were a
way two hills between which are a pair of breasts like globes of
ivory sheen; likewise, a stomach right smooth, flanks soft as the
palm-spathe and creased with folds and dimples which overlap one
another, and liberal thighs, which like columns of pearl arise,
and back parts which billow and beat together like seas of glass
or mountains of glance, and two feet and hands of gracious mould
like unto ingots of virgin gold. So, O miserable! where are
mortal men beside the Jinn? Knowest thou not that puissant
princes and potent Kings before women ever humbly bend and on
them for delight depend? Verily, they may say, 'We rule over
necks and rob hearts.' These women! how many a rich man have they
not paupered, how many a powerful man have they not prostrated
and how many a superior man have they not enslaved! Indeed, they
seduce the sage and send the saint to shame and bring the wealthy
to want and plunge the fortune favoured into penury. Yet for all
this, the wise but redouble in affection of them and honour; nor
do they count this oppression or dishonour. How many a man for
them hath offended his Maker and called down on him self the
wrath of his father and mother! And all this because of the
conquest of their love over hearts. Knowest thou not, O wretched
one, that for them are built pavilions, and slave girls are for
sale;[FN#242] that for them tear floods rail and for them are
collected jewels of price and ambergris and musk odoriferous; and
armies are arrayed and pleasaunces made and wealth heaped up and
smitten off is many a head? And indeed he spoke sooth in the
words, 'Whoso saith the world meaneth woman.' Now as for thy
citation from the Holy Traditions, it is an argument against thee
and not for thee in that the Prophet (whom Allah bless and
preserve!) compareth the beardless with the black eyed girls of
Paradise. Now, doubtless, the subject of comparison is worthier
than the object there with compared; so, unless women be the
worthier and the goodlier, wherefore should other than they be
likened to them? As for thy saying that girls are likened to
boys, the case is not so, but the contrary: boys are likened to
girls; for folk say, Yonder boy is like a girl. As for what proof
thou quotest from the poets, the verses were the product of a
complexion unnatural in this respect; and as for the habitual
sodomites and catamites, offenders against religion, Almighty
Allah hath condemned them in His Holy Book,[FN#243] herein He
denounceth their filthy practices, saying, 'Do ye approach unto
the males among mankind[FN#244] and leave your wives which your
Lord hath created for you? Surely ye are a people who
transgress!' These it is that liken girls to boys, of their
exceeding profligacy and ungraciousness and inclination to follow
the fiend and own lusts, so that they say, 'She is apt for two
tricks,'[FN#245] and these are all wanderers from the way of
right and the righteous. Quoth their chief Abu Nowas,

     'Slim waist and boyish wits delight *
          Wencher, as well as Sodomite,'[FN#246]

As for what thou sayest of a youth's first hair on cheek and lips
and how they add to his beauty and loveliness, by Allah, thou
strayest from the straight path of sooth and sayest that which is
other than the truth; for whiskers change the charms of the
comely into ugliness (quoting these couplets),

     'That sprouting hair upon his face took wreak *
          For lovers' vengeance, all did vainly seek.
     I see not on his face a sign fuli- *
          genous, except his curls are hue of reek.
     If so his paper[FN#247] mostly be begrimed *
          Where deemest thou the reed shall draw a streak?
     If any raise him other fairs above, *
          This only proves the judge of wits is weak.'

And when she ended her verse she resumed, 'Laud be to Allah
Almighty,'" --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
preacher woman ended her verse she resumed, addressing the man, "
'Laud to Allah Almighty! how can it be hid from thee that the
perfect pleasure is in women and that abiding blessings are not
to be found but with them, seeing that Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) hath promised His prophets and saints black eyed
damsels in Paradise and hath appointed these for a recompense of
their godly works. And had the Almighty known that the joy
supreme was in the possession of other than women, He had
rewarded them therewith and promised it to them. And quoth he
(whom Allah bless and preserve!), 'The things I hold dearest of
the things of your world are three: women and perfume and the
solace of my eyes in prayer.' Verily Allah hath appointed boys to
serve his prophets and saints in Paradise, because Paradise is
the abode of joy and delight, which could not be complete without
the service of youths; but, as to the use of them for aught but
service, it is Hell's putridity[FN#248] and corruption and
turpitude. How well saith the poet,

    'Men's turning unto bums of boys is bumptious; *
          Whoso love noble women show their own noblesse.
    How many goodly wights have slept the night, enjoying *
          Buttocks of boys, and woke at morn in foulest mess
    Their garments stained by safflower, which is yellow merde; *
          Their shame proclaiming, showing colour of distress.
    Who can deny the charge, when so bewrayed are they *
          That e'en by day light shows the dung upon their dress?
    What contrast wi' the man, who slept a gladsome night *
          By Houri maid for glance a mere enchanteress,
    He rises off her borrowing wholesome bonny scent; *
          That fills the house with whiffs of perfumed
          goodliness.
    No boy deserved place by side of her to hold; *
          Canst even aloes wood with what fills pool of
          cess!'[FN#249]

Then said she, 'O folk ye have made me to break the bounds of
modesty and the circle of free born women and indulge in idle
talk of chambering and wantonness, which beseemeth not people of
learning. But the breasts of free-borns are the sepulchres of
secrets' and such conversations are in confidence. Moreover,
actions are according to intentions,[FN#250] and I crave pardon
of Allah for myself and you and all Moslems, seeing that He is
the Pardoner and the Compassionate.' Then she held her peace and
thereafter would answer us of naught; so we went our way,
rejoicing in that we had profited by her contention and yet
sorrowing to part from her." And among the tales they tell is one
of




              ABU SUWAYD AND THE PRETTY OLD WOMAN.



Quoth Abu Suwayd, "I and a company of my friends, entered a
garden one day to buy somewhat of fruit; and we saw in a corner
an old woman, who was bright of face, but her head-hair was
white, and she was combing it with an ivory comb. We stopped
before her, yet she paid no heed to us neither veiled her face:
so I said to her, 'O old woman,[FN#251] wert thou to dye thy hair
black, thou wouldst be handsomer than a girl: what hindereth thee
from this?' She raised her head towards me"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu Suwayd
continued: "When I spake these words to the ancient dame she
raised her head towards me and, opening wide her eyes, recited
these two couplets, 

     'I dyed what years have dyed, but this my staining *
          Lasts not, while that of days is aye remaining: 
     Days when beclad in gear of youth I fared, *
          Raked fore and aft by men with joy unfeigning.' 

I cried, 'By Allah, favoured art thou for an old woman! How
sincere art thou in thine after-pine for forbidden pleasures and
how false is thy pretence of repentance from frowardness!'" And
another tale is that of





          THE EMIR ALI BIN TAHIR AND THE GIRL MUUNIS.



Once on a time was displayed for sale to Ali bin Mohammed bin
Abdallah bin Táhir[FN#252] a slave-girl called Muunis who was
superior to her fellows in beauty and breeding, and to boot an
accomplished poetess; and he asked her of her name. Replied she,
"Allah advance the Emir, my name is Muunis."[FN#253] Now he knew
this before; so he bowed his head awhile, then raising his eyes
to her, recited this verse, 

     "What sayest of one by a sickness caught *
          For the love of thy love till he waxed distraught?"

Answered she, "Allah exalt the Emir!" and recited this verse in
reply, 

     "If we saw a lover who pains as he ought, *
          Wi' love we would grant him all favours he sought." 

She pleased him: so he bought her for seventy thousand dirhams
and begat on her Obayd' Allah bin Mohammed, afterwards minister
of Police.[FN#254] And we are told by Abu al-Ayná[FN#255] a tale
of




             THE WOMAN WHO HAD A BOY AND THE OTHER
                    WHO HAD A MAN TO LOVER.



Quoth Abu al-Ayná, "There were in our street two women, one of
whom had for lover a man and the other a beardless youth, and
they foregathered one night on the terrace-roof of a house
adjoining mine, knowing not that I was near. Quoth the boy's
lover to the other, 'O my sister, how canst thou bear with
patience the harshness of thy lover's beard as it falleth on thy
breast, when he busseth thee and his mustachios rub thy cheek and
lips?' Replied the other, 'Silly that thou art, what decketh the
tree save its leaves and the cucumber but its warts?[FN#256]
Didst ever see in the world aught uglier than a scald-head bald
of his beard? Knowest thou not that the beard is to men as the
sidelocks to women; and what is the difference between chin and
cheek?[FN#257] Knowest thou not that Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) hath created an angel in Heaven, who saith: 'Glory be to
Him who ornamenteth men with beards and women with long hair?'
So, were not the beard even as the tresses in comeliness, it had
not been coupled with them, O silly! How shall I spread-eagle
myself under a boy, who will emit long before I can go off and
forestall me in limpness of penis and clitoris; and leave a man
who, when he taketh breath clippeth close and when he entereth
goeth leisurely, and when he hath done, repeateth, and when he
pusheth poketh hard, and as often as he withdraweth, returneth?'
The boy's leman was edified by her speech and said, 'I forswear
my lover by the lord of the Ka'abah!'" And amongst tales is one
of





            ALI THE CAIRENE AND THE HAUNTED HOUSE IN
                            BAGHDAD.



There lived once, in the city of Cairo, a merchant who had great
store of monies and bullion, gems and jewels, and lands and
houses beyond count, and his name was Hasan the Jeweller, the
Baghdad man. Furthermore Allah had blessed him with a son of
perfect beauty and brilliancy; rosy-cheeked, fair of face and
well-figured, whom he named Ali of Cairo, and had taught the
Koran and science and elocution and the other branches of polite
education, till he became proficient in all manner of knowledge.
He was under his father's hand in trade but, after a while, Hasan
fell sick and his sickness grew upon him, till he made sure of
death; so he called his son to him,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Jeweller, the Baghdadi, fell sick and made sure of death, he
called to him his son, named Ali of Cairo, and said, "O my son,
verily this world passeth away; but the next world endureth for
aye. Every soul shall taste of death;[FN#258] and now, O my son,
my decease is at hand and I desire to charge thee with a charge,
which if thou observe, thou shalt abide in safety and prosperity,
till thou meet Almighty Allah; but if thou follow it not, there
shall befal thee much weariness and thou wilt repent of having
transgressed mine injunctions." Replied Ali, "O my father, how
shall I do other than hearken to thy words and act according to
thy charge, seeing that I am bounden by the law of the Faith to
obey thee and give ear to thy command?" Rejoined his father, "O
my son, I leave thee lands and houses and goods and wealth past
count; so that wert thou each day to spend thereof five hundred
dinars, thou wouldst miss naught of it. But, O my son, look that
thou live in the fear of Allah and follow His Chosen One,
Mustafa, (whom may He bless and preserve!) in whatso he is
reported to have bidden and forbidden in his traditional
law.[FN#259] Be thou constant in alms-deeds and the practice of
beneficence and in consorting with men of worth and piety and
learning; and look that thou have a care for the poor and needy
and shun avarice and meanness and the conversation of the wicked
or those of suspicious character. Look thou kindly upon thy
servants and family, and also upon thy wife, for she is of the
daughters of the great and is big with child by thee; haply Allah
will vouchsafe thee virtuous issue by her." And he ceased not to
exhort him thus, weeping and saying, "O my son, I beseech Allah
the Bountiful, the Lord of the glorious Empyrean[FN#260] to
deliver thee from all straits that may encompass thee and grant
thee His ready relief!" Thereupon his son wept with sore weeping
and said, "O my father, I am melted by thy words, for these are
as the words of one that saith farewell." Replied the merchant,
"Yes, O my son, I am aware of my condition: forget thou not my
charge." Then he fell to repeating the two professions of the
Faith and to reciting verses of the Koran, until the appointed
hour arrived, when he said, "Draw near unto me, O my son." So Ali
drew near and he kissed him; then he sighed and his soul departed
his body and he went to the mercy of Almighty Allah.[FN#261]
Therewith great grief fell upon Ali; the clamour of keening arose
in his house and his father's friends flocked to him. Then he
betook himself to preparing the body for burial and made him a
splendid funeral. They bore his bier to the place of prayer and
prayed over him, then to the cemetery, where they buried him and
recited over him what suited of the sublime Koran; after which
they returned to the house and condoled with the dead man's son
and wended each his own way. Moreover, Ali prayed the Friday
prayer for his father and had perlections of the Koran every day
for the normal forty, during which time he abode in the house and
went not forth, save to the place of prayer; and every Friday he
visited his father's tomb. So he ceased not from his praying and
reciting for some time, until his fellows of the sons of the
merchants came in to him one day and saluting him, said, "How
long this thy mourning and neglecting thy business and the
company of thy friends? Verily, this is a fashion which will
bring thee weariness, and thy body will suffer for it
exceedingly." Now when they came in to him, Iblis the Accursed
was with them, prompting them; and they went on to recommend him
to accompany them to the bazar, whilst Iblis tempted him to
consent to them, till he yielded,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
sons of the merchants went in to Ali the Cairene, son of Hasan
the Jeweller, they recommended him to accompany them to the
bazar, till he yielded, that the will of Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) might be fulfilled; and he left the house of
mourning with them. Presently they said, "Mount thy she-mule and
ride with us to such a garden, that we may solace us there and
that thy grief and despondency may depart from thee." So he
mounted and taking his slave, went with them to the garden in
question; and when they entered one of them went and making ready
the morning-meal, brought it to them there. So they ate and were
merry and sat in talk, till the end of the day, when they mounted
and returned each to his own lodging, where they passed the
night. As soon as the morrow dawned, they again visited Ali and
said, "Come with us." Asked he, "Whither?"; and they answered,
"To such a garden; for it is finer than the first and more
pleasurable." So he went with them to the garden, and one of
them, going away, made ready the morning-meal and brought it to
them, together with strong heady wine; and after eating, they
brought out the wine, when quoth Ali, "What is this? and quoth
they, "This is what dispelleth sadness and brighteneth gladness.
And they ceased not to commend it to him, till they prevailed
upon him and he drank with them. Then they sat, drinking and
talking, till the end of the day, when each returned home. But as
for Ali, the Cairene, he was giddy with wine and in this plight
went in to his wife, who said to him, "What aileth thee that thou
art so changed?" He said, "We were making merry to-day, when one
of my companions brought us liquor; so my friends drank and I
with them, and this giddiness came upon me." And she replied, "O
my lord, say me, hast thou forgotten thy father's injunction and
done that from which he forbade thee, in consorting with doubtful
folk?" Answered he, "These be of the sons of the merchants; they
are no suspicious folk, only lovers of mirth and good cheer." And
he continued to lead this life with his friends, day after day,
going from place to place and feasting with them and drinking,
till they said to him, "Our turns are ended, and now it is thy
turn." "Well come, and welcome and fair cheer!" cried he; so on
the morrow, he made ready all that the case called for of meat
and drink, two-fold what they had provided, and taking cooks and
tent-pitchers and coffee-makers,[FN#262] repaired with the others
to Al-Rauzah[FN#263] and the Nilometer, where they abode a whole
month, eating and drinking and hearing music and making merry. At
the end of the month, Ali found that he had spent a great sum of
money; but Iblis the Accursed deluded him and said to him,
"Though thou shouldst spend every day a like sum yet wouldst thou
not miss aught of it." So he took no account of money expenses
and continued this way of life for three years, whilst his wife
remonstrated with him and reminded him of his father's charge;
but he hearkened not to her words, till he had spent all the
ready monies he had, when he fell to selling his jewels and
spending their price, until they also were all gone. Then he sold
his houses, fields, farms and gardens, one after other, till they
likewise were all gone and he had nothing left but the tenement
wherein he lived. So he tore out the marble and wood-work and
sold it and spent of its price, till he had made an end of all
this also, when he took thought with himself and, finding that he
had nothing left to expend, sold the house itself and spent the
purchase-money. After that, the man who had bought the house came
to him and said "Seek out for thyself a lodging, as I have need
of my house." So he bethought himself and, finding that he had no
want of a house, except for his wife, who had borne him a son and
daughter (he had not a servant left), he hired a large room in
one of the mean courts[FN#264] and there took up his abode, after
having lived in honour and luxury, with many eunuchs and much
wealth; and he soon came to want one day's bread. Quoth his wife,
"Of this I warned thee and exhorted thee to obey thy father's
charge, and thou wouldst not hearken to me; but there is no
Majesty and there is no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great! Whence shall the little ones eat? Arise then, go round to
thy friends, the sons of the merchants: belike they will give
thee somewhat on which we may live this day." So he arose and
went to his friends one by one; but they all hid their faces from
him and gave him injurious words revolting to hear, but naught
else; and he returned to his wife and said to her, "They have
given me nothing." Thereupon she went forth to beg of her
neighbours the wherewithal to keep themselves alive,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the wife of
Ali the Cairene, seeing her husband return empty-handed, went
forth to beg of her neighbours the wherewithal to keep themselves
alive and repaired to a woman, whom she had known in former days.
When she came in to her and she saw her case, she rose and
receiving her kindly, wept and said, "What hath befallen you?" So
she told her all that her husband had done, and the other
replied, "Well come and welcome and fair cheer!; whatever thou
needest, Seek it of me, without price." Quoth she, "Allah requite
thee abundantly!"[FN#265] Then her friend gave her as much
provision as would suffice herself and her family a whole month,
and she took it and returned to her lodging. When her husband saw
her, he wept and asked, "Whence hadst thou that?"; and she
answered, "I got it of such a woman; for, when I told her what
had befallen us, she failed me not in aught, but said, 'Seek of
me all thou needest.'" Whereupon her husband rejoined, "Since
thou hast this much I will betake myself to a place I have in my
mind; peradventure Allah Almighty will bring us relief."[FN#266]
With these words he took leave of her and kissed his children and
went out, not knowing whither he should go, and he continued
walking on till he came to Bulák, where he saw a ship about to
sail for Damietta.[FN#267] Here he met a man, between whom and
his father there had been friendship, and he saluted him and said
to him, "Whither now?" Replied Ali, "To Damietta: I have friends
there, whom I would enquire after and visit them and then
return." The man took him home and treated him honourably; then,
furnishing him with vivers for the voyage and giving him some
gold pieces, embarked him on board the vessel bound for Damietta.
When they reached it, Ali landed, not knowing whither to go; but
as he was walking along, a merchant saw him and had pity on him,
and carried him to his house. Here he abode awhile, after which
he said in himself, "How long this sojourning in other folk's
homes?" Then he left the merchant's place and walked to the wharf
where, after enquiry, he found a ship ready to sail for Syria.
His hospitable host provided him with provision and embarked him
in the ship; and it set sail and Ali reached in due season the
Syrian shores where he disembarked and journeyed till he entered
Damascus. As he walked about the great thoroughfare behold, a
kindly man saw him and took him to his house, where he tarried
for a time till, one day, going abroad, he saw a caravan about to
start for Baghdad and bethought himself to journey thither with
it. Thereupon he returned to his host and taking leave of him,
set out with the Cafilah. Now Allah (extolled and exalted be He!)
inclined to him the heart of one of the merchants, so that he
took him with him, and Ali ate and drank with him, till they came
within one day's journey of Baghdad. Here, however, a company of
highwaymen fell upon the caravan and took all they had and but
few of the merchants escaped. These made each for a separate
place of refuge; but as for Ali the Cairene he fared for Baghdad,
where he arrived at sundown, as the gatekeepers were about to
shut the gates, and said to them, "Let me in with you." They
admitted him and asked him, "Whence come, and whither wending?"
and he answered, "I am a man from Cairo-city and have with me
mules laden with merchandise and slaves and servants. I forewent
them, to look me out a place wherein to deposit my goods: but, as
I rode along on my she-mule, there fell upon me a company of
banditti, who took my mule and gear; nor did I escape from them
but at my last gasp." The gate-guard entreated him honourably and
bade him be of good cheer, saying, "Abide with us this night, and
in the morning we will look thee out a place befitting thee."
Then he sought in his breast-pocket and, finding a dinar of those
given to him by the merchant at Bulak, handed it to one of the
gatekeepers, saying, "Take this and change it and bring us
something to eat." The man took it and went to the market, where
he changed it, and brought Ali bread and cooked meat: so he ate,
he and the gate-guards, and he lay the night with them. Now on
the morrow, one of the warders carried him to a certain of the
merchants of Baghdad, to whom he told the same story, and he
believed him, deeming that he was a merchant and had with him
loads of merchandise. Then he took him up into his shop and
entreated him with honour; moreover, he sent to his house for a
splendid suit of his own apparel for him and carried him to the
Hammam. "So," quoth Ali of Cairo: "I went with him to the bath,
and when we came out, he took me and brought me to his house,
where he set the morning-meal before us, and we ate and made
merry. Then said he to one of his black slaves, 'Ho Mas'dd, take
this thy lord: show him the two houses standing in such a place,
and whichever pleaseth him, give him the key of it and come
back.' So I went with the slave, till we came to a street-road
where stood three houses side by side, newly built and yet shut
up. He opened the first and I looked at it; and we did the same
to the second; after which he said to me 'Of which shall I give
thee the key?' 'To whom doth the big house belong?' 'To us!'
'Open it, that I may view it.' 'Thou hast no business there.'
'Wherefore?' 'Because it is haunted, and none nighteth there but
in the morning he is a dead man; nor do we use to open the door,
when removing the corpse, but mount the terrace-roof of one of
the other two houses and take it up thence. For this reason my
master hath abandoned the house and saith: 'I will never again
give it to any one.' 'Open it,' I cried, 'that I may view it;'
and I said in my mind, 'This is what I seek; I will pass the
night there and in the morning be a dead man and be at peace from
this my case.' So he opened it and I entered and found it a
splendid house, without its like; and I said to the slave, 'I
will have none other than this house; give me its key.' But he
rejoined, 'I will not give thee this key till I consult my
master,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the negro
(continued Ali of Cairo) "rejoined, 'I will not give thee its key
till I consult my master,'" and going to him, reported, "'The
Egyptian trader saith, 'I will lodge in none but the big house.'"
Now when the merchant heard this, he rose and coming to Ali,
spake thus to him, "O my lord, thou hast no need of this house."
But he answered, "I will lodge in none other than this; for I
care naught for this silly saying." Quoth the other, "Write me an
acknowledgment that, if aught happen to thee, I am not
responsible." Quoth Ali, "So be it;" whereupon the merchant
fetched an assessor from the Kazi's court and, taking the
prescribed acknowledgment, delivered to him the key wherewith he
entered the house. The merchant sent him bedding by a blackamoor
who spread it for him on the built bench behind the door[FN#268]
and walked away. Presently Ali went about and, seeing in the
inner court a well with a bucket, let this down and drew water,
wherewith he made the lesser ablution and prayed the obligatory
prayers. Then he sat awhile, till the slave brought him the
evening meal from his master's house, together with a lamp, a
candle and candlestick, a basin and ewer and a gugglet[FN#269];
after which he left him and returned home. Ali lighted the
candle, supped at his ease and prayed the night-prayer; and
presently he said to himself, "Come, take the bedding and go
upstairs and sleep there; 'twill be better than here." So he took
the bed and carried it upstairs, where he found a splendid
saloon, with gilded ceiling and floor and walls cased with
coloured marbles. He spread his bed there and sitting down, began
to recite somewhat of the Sublime Koran, when (ere he was ware)
he heard one calling to him and asking, "O Ali, O son of Hasan,
say me, shall I send thee down the gold?" And he answered, "Where
be the gold thou hast to send?" But hardly had he spoken, when
gold pieces began to rain down on him, like stones from a
catapult, nor ceased till the saloon was full. Then, after the
golden shower, said the Voice, "Set me free, that I may go my
way; for I have made an end of my service and have delivered unto
thee that which was entrusted to me for thee." Quoth Ali, "I
adjure thee, by Allah the Almighty, to tell me the cause of this
gold-rain." Replied the Voice, "This is a treasure that was
talisman'd to thee of old time, and to every one who entered the
house, we used to come and say: 'O Ali, O son of Hasan, shall we
send thee down the gold?' Whereat he would be affrighted and cry
out, and we would come down to him and break his neck and go
away. But, when thou camest and we accosted thee by thy name and
that of thy father, saying, 'Shall we send thee down 