the gold?'
and thou madest answer to us, 'And where be the gold?' we knew
thee for the owner of it and sent it down. Moreover, there is yet
another hoard for thee in the land of Al-Yaman and thou wouldst
do well to journey thither and fetch it. And now I would fain
have thee set me free, that I may go my way." Said Ali, "By
Allah, I will not set thee free, till thou bring me hither the
treasure from the land of Al-Yaman!" Said the Voice, "An I bring
it to thee, wilt thou release me and eke the servant of the other
hoard?" "Yes," replied Ali, and the Voice cried, "Swear to me."
So he swore to him, and he was about to go away, when Ali said to
him, "I have one other need to ask of thee;" and he, "What is
that?" Quoth Ali, "I have a wife and children at Cairo in such a
place; thou needs must fetch them to me, at their ease and
without their unease." Quoth he, "I will bring them to thee in a
mule-litter[FN#270] and much state, with a train of eunuchs and
servants, together with the treasure from Al-Yaman,
Inshallah!"[FN#271] Then he took of him leave of absence for
three days, when all this should be with him, and vanished. As
soon as it was morning Ali went round about the saloon, seeking a
place wherein to store the gold, and saw on the edge of the dais
a marble slab with a turning-pin; so he turned the pin and the
slab sank and showed a door which he opened and entering, found a
great closet, full of bags of coarse stuff carefully sewn. So he
began taking out the bags and fell to filling them with gold and
storing them in the closet, till he had transported thither all
the hoarded gold, whereupon he shut the door and turning the pin,
the slab returned to its place. Then he went down and seated
himself on the bench behind the door; and presently there came a
knock; so he opened and found the merchant's slave who, seeing
him comfortably sitting, returned in haste to his master,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
house-owner's black slave returned and knocked at the door, Ali
the Cairene, son of the merchant Hasan, opened it to him and the
negro, seeing him comfortably sitting, returned in haste to his
master with the good tidings, saying, "O my Lord, the merchant,
who is lodged in the house inhabited by the Jinn,[FN#272] is
alive and well and sitteth on the bench behind the door." Then
the merchant rose joyfully and went to the house, taking
breakfast with him; and, when he saw Ali, he embraced him and
kissed him between the eyes, asking, "How hath Allah dealt with
thee?"; and Ali answered, "Right well, I slept upstairs in the
marble saloon." Quoth the merchant, "Did aught come to thee or
didst thou see any thing?" and quoth Ali "No, I recited some
little of the Sublime Koran and slept till morning, when I arose
and, after making the minor ablution and praying, seated myself
on the bench behind the door." "Praised be Allah for safety!"
exclaimed the merchant, then left him and presently sent him
black slaves and white Mamelukes and handmaidens with household
gear. They swept the house from top to bottom and furnished it
with magnificent furniture; after which three white slaves and
three blacks and four slave-girls remained with him, to serve
him, while the rest returned to their master's house. Now when
the merchants heard of him, they sent him presents of all manner
things of price, even to food and drink and clothes, and took him
with them to the market, asking, "When will thy baggage arrive?"
And he answered, "After three days it will surely come." When the
term had elapsed, the servant of the first hoard, the golden
rain, came to him and said, "Go forth and meet the treasure I
have brought thee from Al-Yaman together with thy Harim; for I
bring part of the wealth in the semblance of costly merchandise;
but the eunuchs and Mamelukes and the mules and horses and camels
are all of the Jann." Now the Jinni, when he betook himself to
Cairo, found Ali's wife and children in sore misery, naked and
hungry; so he carried them out of the city in a travelling-litter
and clad them in sumptuous raiment of the stuffs which were in
the treasure of Al-Yaman. So when Ali heard this, he arose and
repairing to the merchants, said to them, "Rise and go forth with
us from the city, to meet the caravan bringing my merchandise,
and honour us with the presence of your Harims, to meet my
Harim." "Hearkening and obedience," answered they and, sending
for their Harims, went forth all together and took seat in one of
the city-gardens; and as they sat talking, behold, a dust-cloud
arose out of the heart of the desert, and they flocked forth to
see what it was. Presently it lifted and discovered mules and
muleteers, tent-pitchers and linkmen, who came on, singing and
dancing, till they reached the garden, when the chief of the
muleteers walked up to Ali and kissing his hand, said to him, "O
my master, we have been long on the way, for we purposed entering
yesterday; but we were in fear of the bandits, so abode in our
station four days, till Almighty Allah rid us of them." Thereupon
the merchants mounted their mules and rode forward with the
caravan, the Harims waiting behind, till Ali's wife and children
mounted with them; and they all entered in splendid train. The
merchants marvelled at the number of mules laden with chests,
whilst the women of the merchants wondered at the richness of the
apparel of his wife and the fine raiment of her children; and
kept saying each to other, "Verily, the King of Baghdad hath no
such gear; no, nor any other of the kings or lords or merchants!"
So they ceased not to fare forwards in high great state, the men
with Ali of Cairo and the Harims with his Harim, till they came
to the mansion,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they ceased
not to fare forwards in high state, the men with Ali's men and
the women with his wife, till they came to the mansion, where
they alighted and brought the mules and their burdens into the
midst of the courtyard. Then they unloaded them and warehoused
the goods whilst the merchants' wives went up with Ali's family
to the saloon, which they found as it were a luxuriant garden,
spread with magnificent furniture. They sat in mirth and good
cheer till noon, when they brought them up the midday meal, all
manner meats and sweetmeats of the very best; and they ate and
drank costly sherbets and perfumed themselves thereafter with
rose-water and scented woods. Then they took leave and went home,
men and women; and, when the merchants returned to their places,
they sent presents to the husband according to their conditions;
and their wives likewise sent presents to the wife, so that there
came to them great store of handmaids and negroes and Mamelukes;
and all kinds of goods, such as grain, sugar and so forth, in
abundance beyond account. As for the Baghdad merchant, the
landlord of the house, he abode with Ali and quitted him not, but
said to him, "Let the black slaves and servants take the mules
and the common cattle into one of my other houses, to rest."
Quoth Ali, "They set out again to-night for such a place." Then
he gave them leave to go forth and camp outside the city, that
they might start on their journey at night-come; whereupon,
hardly believing that they were dismissed, they took leave of him
and departing to the outliers of the city, flew off through the
air to their several abodes. So Ali and his house-owner sat
together till a third of the night was past, when their colloquy
ended and the merchant returned to his own house and Ali went up
to his wife and children and after saluting them, said, "What
hath befallen you in my absence all this time?" So she told him
what they had suffered of hunger and nakedness and travail, and
he said, "Praised be Allah for safety! How did ye come?" Answered
she, "O my lord, I was asleep with my children yesternight, when
suddenly and unexpectedly one raised us from the ground and flew
with us through the firmament without doing us any hurt, nor did
he leave flying with us, till he set us down in a place as it
were an Arab camping-ground, where we saw laden mules and a
travelling litter borne upon two great mules, and around it
servants, all boys and men. So I asked them, 'Who are ye and what
are these loads and where are we?;' and they answered, 'We are
the servants of the merchant Ali of Cairo, son of the merchant-
jeweller, who hath sent us to fetch you to him at Baghdad.' Quoth
I, 'Tell me, is it far or near, hence to Baghdad?' They replied,
'Near: there lieth between us and the city but the darkness of
the night.' Then they mounted us in the litter and, when the
morrow dawned, we found ourselves with thee, without having
suffered any hurt whatever." Quoth he, "Who gave you these
dresses?;" and quoth she, "The chief of the caravan opened one of
the boxes on the mules and taking out thereof these clothes, clad
me and thy children each in a suit; after which he locked the
case and gave me the key, saying, 'Take care of it, till thou
give it to thy husband.' And here it is safe by me." So saying,
she gave him the key, and he said, "Dost thou know the chest?"
Said she, "Yes, I know it." So he took her down to the magazine
and showed her the boxes, when she cried, "This is the one whence
the dresses were taken;" upon which he put the key in the lock
and opened the chest, wherein he found much raiment and the keys
of all the other cases. So he took them and fell to opening them,
one after another, and feasting his eyes upon the gems and
precious ores they contained, whose like was not found with any
of the kings; after which he locked them again, took the keys,
and returned to the saloon, saying to his wife, "This is of the
bounty of Almighty Allah!" Then bringing her to the secret slab
he turned the pin and opened the door of the closet, into which
he entered with her and showed her the gold he had laid up
therein. Quoth she, "Whence came all this to thee?" "It came to
me by the grace of my Lord," answered he:--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali's
wife had looked upon the gold she said to him, "Whence came all
this to thee?" "It came to me by the grace of my Lord," answered
he: "When I left thee in my trouble, I shipped at Bulak for
Damietta and met a friend there who forwarded me to Damascus": in
brief he told her all that had befallen him, from first to last.
Said she, "O my lord, all this cometh by boon of thy father's
blessing and orisons when he prayed for thee, before his death,
saying, 'I beseech Allah to cast thee into no straits except He
grant thee ready relief!' So praised be Allah Almighty for that
He hath brought thee deliverance and hath requited thee with more
than went from thee! But Allah upon thee, O my lord, return not
to thy practice of associating with doubtful folk; but look thou
fear Allah (whose name be exalted!) both in private and in
public." And as she went on to admonish him, he said, "I accept
thine admonition and beg the Almighty to remove the froward from
amongst us and stablish us in His obedience and in the observance
of the law and practice of His Prophet, on whom be blessings and
peace!" After that Ali and his wife and children were in all
solace of life and gladness; and he opened him a shop in the
merchants' bazar and, stocking it with a somewhat of jewels and
bullion, sat therein with his children and white servants.
Presently he became the most considerable of the merchants of
Baghdad, and his report reached the King of that city,[FN#273]
who sent a messenger to command his attendance, saying, "Answer
the summons of the King who requireth thee." He replied, "I hear
and obey," and straightway prepared his present and he took four
trays of red gold and, filling them with jewels and precious
metals, such as no King possessed, went up to the palace and
presenting himself before the presence, kissed the ground between
his hands and wished him endurance of goods and glory in the
finest language he could command. Said the King, "O merchant,
thou cheerest our city with thy presence!" and Ali rejoined, "O
King of the age, thy slave hath brought thee a gift and hopeth
for acceptance thereof from thy favour." Then he laid the four
trays before the King, who uncovered them and seeing that they
contained gems, whose fellows he possessed not and whose worth
equalled treasuries of money, said, "Thy present is accepted, O
merchant, and Inshallah! we will requite thee with its like." And
Ali kissed his hands and went away; whereupon the King called his
grandees and said to them, "How many of the Kings have sought my
daughter in marriage?" "Many," answered they; and he asked, "Hath
any of them given me the like of this gift?"; whereto they
replied, "Not one, for that none of them hath its like;" and he
said, "I have consulted Allah Almighty by lot as to marrying my
daughter to this merchant. What say ye?" "Be it as thou reckest,"
answered they. Then he bade the eunuch carry the four trays into
his serraglio and going in to his wife, laid them before her. She
uncovered them and seeing therein that whose like she possessed
not; no, nor a fraction thereof, said to him, "From which of the
Kings hadst thou these?: perchance of one of the royalties that
seek thy daughter in marriage?" Said he, "Not so, I had them of
an Egyptian merchant, who is lately come to this our city. Now
when I heard of his coming I sent to command him to us, thinking
to make his acquaintance, so haply we might find with him
somewhat of jewels and buy them of him for our daughter's
trousseau. He obeyed our summons and brought us these four trays,
as a present, and I saw him to be a handsome youth of dignified
aspect and intelligent as elegant, almost such as should be the
sons of Kings. Wherefore my heart inclined to him at sight, and
my heart rejoiced in him and I thought good to marry my daughter
to him. So I showed the gift to my grandees, who agreed with me
that none of the Kings hath the like of these and I told them my
project. But what sayst thou?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
King of Baghdad, after showing the presents to his wife and
highly praising Ali, the merchant-jeweller, and informing her of
the proposed marriage, asked, "But what sayst thou?" She replied,
"O King of the age, the ordering this affair is in Allah's hand,
and thine, and whatso Allah willeth shall come to pass." Rejoined
the King, "If it be His will, I will marry her to none other than
this young man." He slept on this resolve and on the morrow, he
went out to his Divan and summoned Ali and the rest of the
merchants of Baghdad, and when all came bade them be seated. Then
said he, "Bring me the Kazi of the Divan" and they brought him;
whereupon the King said to him, "O Kazi, write the contract of
marriage between my daughter and the merchant Ali the Cairene."
But Ali said, "Thy pardon, O our lord the Sultan! It befitteth
not that a trader such as I, be the King's son-in-law." Quoth the
King, "It is my will to bestow this favour upon thee, as well as
the Wazirate;" and he invested him forthwith in the Wazir's
office and ministerial robes. Then Ali sat down in the chair of
the Wazirate and said, "O King of the age, thou hast bestowed on
me this; and indeed I am honoured by thy bounties; but hear one
word I have to say to thee!" He replied, "Say on, and fear not."
Quoth Ali, "Since it is thine august resolution to marry thy
daughter, thou wouldst do better to marry her to my son. Quoth
the King, "Hast thou then a son?"; and Ali replied, "Yes." "Send
for him forthwith," said the King. Thereupon answered Ali
"Hearkening and obedience!", and despatched a servant to fetch
his son, who came and kissing the ground before the King, stood
in an attitude of respect. The King looked at him and seeing him
to be yet comelier than his daughter and goodlier than she in
stature and proportion and brightness and perfection, said to
him, "What is thy name, O my son?" "My name is Hasan, O our lord
the Sultan," replied the young man, who was then fourteen years
old. Then the Sultan said to the Kazi, "Write the contract of
marriage between my daughter Husn al-Wujdd and Hasan, son of the
merchant Ali the Cairene." So he wrote the marriage-contract
between them, and the affair was ended in the goodliest fashion;
after which all in the Divan went their ways and the merchants
followed the Wazir Ali, escorting him to his house, where they
gave him joy of his advancement and departed. Then he went in to
his wife, who seeing him clad in the Wazir's habit, exclaimed,
"What is this?"; when he told her all that had passed from first
to last and she joyed therein with exceeding joy. So sped the
night and on the morrow, he went up to the Divan, where the King
received him with especial favour and seating him close by his
side, said, "O Wazir, we purpose to begin the wedding festivities
and bring thy son in to our daughter." Replied Ali, "O our lord
the Sultan, whatso thou deemest good is good." So the Sultan gave
orders to celebrate the festivities, and they decorated the city
and held high festival for thirty days, in all joy and gladness;
at the end of which time, Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali, went in to
the Princess and enjoyed her beauty and loveliness. When the
Queen saw her daughter's husband, she conceived a warm affection
for him, and in like manner she rejoiced greatly in his mother.
Then the King bade build for his son-in-law Hasan Ali-son a
palace beside his own; so they built him with all speed a
splendid palace in which he took up his abode; and his mother
used to tarry with him some days and then go down to her own
house. After awhile the Queen said to her husband, "O King of the
age, Hasan's lady-mother cannot take up her abode with her son
and leave the Wazir; neither can she tarry with the Wazir and
leave her son." "Thou sayest sooth," replied the King, and bade
edify a third palace beside that of Hasan, which being done in a
few days he caused remove thither the goods of the Wazir, and the
Minister and his wife took up their abode there. Now the three
palaces communicated with one another, so that when the King had
a mind to speak with the Wazir by night, he would go to him or
send to fetch him; and so with Hasan and his father and mother.
On this wise they dwelt in all solace and in the greatest
happiness--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
and the Wazir and his son ceased not to dwell in all solace and
in the greatest happiness awhile, till the King fell ill and his
sickness grew on him. So he summoned the lords of his realm and
said to them, "There is come upon me a sore malady, peradventure
a mortal; and I have therefore summoned you to consult you
respecting a certain matter, on which I would have you counsel me
as you deem well." They asked, "What is the matter of which thou
wouldst take counsel with us, O King?"; and he answered, "I am
old and sickly and I fear for the realm after me from its
enemies; so I would have you all agree upon some one, that I may
proclaim him King in my lifetime and so ye may be at ease."
Whereupon quoth they with one voice, "We all approve of thy
daughter's husband Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali; for we have seen
his wit and perfect understanding, and he knoweth the place of
all, great and small." Asked the King, "Are ye indeed agreed upon
this?" and they answered, "Yes." Rejoined he "Peradventure ye all
say this to my face, of respect for me; but behind my back ye
will say otherwise." However, they all replied, "By Allah, our
word is one and the same in public and in private, and we accept
him frankly and with heartiness of heart and breadth of breast."
Quoth he, "Since the case is thus, bring the Kazi of the Holy Law
and all the Chamberlains and Viceroys and Officers of state
before me to-morrow, and we will order the affair after the
goodliest fashion." "We hear and we obey," answered they and
withdrawing, notified all the Olema,[FN#274] the doctors of the
law and the chief personages among the Emirs. So when the morrow
dawned, they came up to the Divan and, having craved and obtained
permission to enter, they saluted the King, saying, "Here are we
all in thy presence." Whereto he made reply, "O Emirs of Baghdad,
whom will ye have to be King over you after me, that I may
inaugurate him during my lifetime, before the presence of you
all?" Quoth they with one voice, "We are agreed upon thy
daughter's husband Hasan, son of the Wazir Ali." Quoth he, "If it
be so, go all of you and bring him before me." So they all arose
and, repairing to Hasan's palace, said to him, "Rise, come with
us to the King." "Wherefore?" asked he, and they answered, "For a
thing that will benefit both us and thee." So he went in with
them to the King and kissed the ground before his father-in-law
who said to him, "Be seated, O my son!" He sat down and the King
continued, "O Hasan, all the Emirs have approved of thee and
agreed to make thee King over them after me; and it is my purpose
to proclaim thee, whilst I yet live, and so make an end of the
business." But Hasan stood up and, kissing the ground once more
before the King, said to him, "O our lord the King, among the
Emirs there be many who are older than I and greater of worth;
acquit me therefore of this thing." But all the Emirs cried out
saying, "We consent not but that thou be King over us." Then said
Hasan, "My father is older than I, and I and he are one thing;
and it befits not to advance me over him." But Ali said, "I will
consent to nothing save whatso contenteth my brethren; and they
have all chosen and agreed upon thee; wherefore gainsay thou not
the King's commandment and that of thy brethren." And Hasan hung
his head abashed before the King and his father. Then said the
King to the Emirs, "Do ye all accept of him?" "We do," answered
they and recited thereupon seven Fátihahs.[FN#275] So the King
said, "O Kazi, draw up a legal instrument testifying of these
Emirs that they are agreed to make King over them my daughter's
husband Hasan." The Kazi wrote the act and made it binding on all
men,[FN#276] after they had sworn in a body the oath of fealty to
Hasan. Then the King did likewise and bade him take his seat on
the throne of kingship; whereupon they all arose and kissed King
Hasan's hands and did homage to him, and swore lealty to him. And
the new King dispensed justice among the people that day in
fashion right royal, and invested the grandees of the realm in
splendid robes of honour. When the Divan broke up, he went in to
and kissed the hands of his father-in-law who spake thus to him,
"O my son, look thou rule the lieges in the fear of Allah;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Hasan was quit of the Divan, he went in to and kissed the hands
of his wife's father, who spake thus to him, "O my son, look thou
rule the lieges in the fear of Allah;" whereto he replied, "O my
father, through thy prayers for me, the grace and guidance of
Allah will come to me." Then he entered his own palace and was
met by his wife and her mother and their attendants, who kissed
his hands and gave him joy of his advancement, saying, "Be this
day blessed!" Next he went in to his father and mother, who joyed
with exceeding joy in that which Allah had vouchsafed him of his
advancement to the kingship, and his father charged him to fear
Allah and to deal mercifully with his subjects. He passed the
night in glee and gladness, and on the morrow, having prayed the
obligatory prayers ending with the usual short chapters[FN#277]
of the Koran, he went up to the Divan, whither came all his
officers and dignitaries. He passed the day in dispensing justice
among the folk, bidding to graciousness and forbidding
ungraciousness and appointing to place and displacing, till day-
end, when the Divan broke up, after the goodliest fashion, and
all the troops withdrew and each went his own way. Then he arose
and repaired to the palace, where he found his father-in-law's
sickness grown heavy upon him and said to him, "May no ill befal
thee!" At this the old King opened his eyes and said, "O Hasan!"
and he replied, "At thy service, O my lord." Quoth the old King
"Mine appointed hour is at hand: be thou careful of thy wife and
her mother, and look thou fear Allah and honour thy parents; and
bide in awe of the majesty of the Requiting King and bear in mind
that He commandeth justice and good works." And King Hasan
replied, "I hear and obey." Now after this the old King lingered
three days and then departed into the mercy of Almighty Allah. So
they laid him out and shrouded and buried him and held over him
readings and perlections of the Koran, to the end of the
customary forty days. And King Hasan, son of the Wazir, reigned
in his stead, and his subjects joyed in him and all his days were
gladness; moreover, his father ceased not to be his chief Wazir
on his right hand, and he took to himself another Wazir, to be at
his left hand. His reign was a prosperous and well ordered, and
he lived a long life as King of Baghdad; and Allah blessed him,
by the old King's daughter, with three sons who inherited the
kingdom after him; and they abode in the solace of life and its
pleasures till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and
the Severer of societies. And the glory be to Him who is eternal
and in whose hand are annulling and confirming. And of the tales
they tell is one of




               THE PILGRIM MAN AND THE OLD WOMAN.



A man of the pilgrims once slept a long sleep and awaking, found
no trace of the caravan. So he rose up and walked on, but lost
his way and presently came to a tent, where he saw an old woman
standing at the entrance and by her side a dog asleep. He went up
to the tent and, saluting the old woman, sought of her food, when
she replied, "Go to yonder Wady and catch thy sufficiency of
serpents, that I may broil of them for thee and give thee to
eat." Rejoined the pilgrim, "I dare not catch serpents nor did I
ever eat them." Quoth the old woman, "I will go with thee and
catch some; fear not." So she went with him, followed by the dog,
to the valley and, catching a sufficient number of serpents,
proceeded to broil them. He saw nothing for it (saith the story
teller) but to eat, in fear of hunger and exhaustion; so he ate
of the serpents.[FN#278] Then he was athirst and asked for water
to drink; and she answered, "Go to the spring and drink."
Accordingly, he went to the spring and found the water thereof
bitter; yet needs must he drink of it despite its bitterness,
because of the violence of his thirst. Presently he returned to
the old woman and said to her, "I marvel, O ancient dame, at thy
choosing to sojourn in this place"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
palmer-man drank the bitter draught for stress of thirst, he
returned and said "I marvel, O ancient dame, at thy choosing to
sojourn in this place and thy putting up with such meat and
drink!" She asked, "And how is it then in thy country?"; whereto
he answered, "In my country are houses wide and spacious and
fruits ripe and delicious and waters sweet and viands savorous
and of goodly use and meats fat and full of juice and flocks
innumerous and all things pleasant and all the goods of life, the
like whereof are not, save in the Paradise which Allah the
Omnipotent hath promised to His servants pious." Replied she,
"All this have I heard: but tell me, have ye a Sultan who ruleth
over you and is tyrannical in his rule and under whose hand you
are; one who, if any of you commit an offence, taketh his goods
and ruineth him and who, whenas he will, turneth you out of house
and home and uprooteth you, stock and branch?" Replied the man,
"Indeed that may be;" and she rejoined, "If so, by Allah, these
your delicious food and life of daintyhood and gifts however
good, with tyranny and oppression, are but a searching poison,
while our coarse meat which in freedom and safety we eat is a
healthful medicine. Hast thou not heard that the best of boons,
after Al-Islam, the true Faith, are sanity and security?"[FN#279]
"Now such boons (quoth he who telleth the tale) may be by the
just rule of the Sultan, Vice-regent of Allah on His earth, and
the goodness of his polity. The Sultan of time past needed but
little awfulness, for when the lieges saw him, they feared him;
but the Sultan of these days hath need of the most accomplished
polity and the utmost majesty, because men are not as men of
by-gone time and this our age is one of folk opprobrious, and is
greatly calamitous, noted for folly and hardness of heart and
inclined to hate and enmity. If, therefore, the Sultan (which
Almighty Allah forfend!) be weak or wanting in polity and
majesty, this will be the assured cause of his country's ruin.
Quoth the proverb, 'An hundred years of the Sultan's tyranny, but
not one year of the people's tyranny one over other.' When the
lieges oppress one another, Allah setteth over them a tyrannical
Sultan and a terrible King. Thus it is told in history that one
day there was sent to Al-Hajjáj bin Yúsuf a slip of paper,
whereon was written, 'Fear Allah and oppress not His servants
with all manner of oppression.' When he read this, he mounted the
pulpit (for he was eloquent and ever ready of speech), and said,
'O folk, Allah Almighty hath made me ruler over you, by reason of
your frowardness;'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hajjaj
Yousuf-son read the paper he mounted the pulpit and said, "O
folk, Allah Almighty hath made me ruler over you by reason of
your frowardness; and indeed, though I die yet will ye not be
delivered from oppression, with these your ill deeds; for the
Almighty hath created like unto me many an one. If it be not I,
'twill be one more mischievous than I and a mightier in
oppression and a more merciless in his majesty; even as saith the
poet:[FN#280]--

          'For not a deed the hand can try
          Save 'neath the hand of God on high,
          Nor tyrant harsh work tyranny
          Uncrushed by tyrant harsh as he.'

Tyranny is feared: but justice is the best of all things. We beg
Allah to better our case!" And among tales is that of




                 ABU AL-HUSN AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL
                       TAWADDUD.[FN#281]



There was once in Baghdad a man of consequence and rich in monies
and immoveables, who was one of the chiefs of the merchants; and
Allah had largely endowed him with worldly goods, but had not
vouchsafed him what he longed for of offspring; and there passed
over him a long space of time, without his being blessed with
issue, male or female. His years waxed great; his bones became
wasted and his back bent; weakness and weariness grew upon him,
and he feared the loss of his wealth and possessions, seeing he
had no child whom he might make his heir and by whom his name
should be remembered. So he betook himself with supplication to
Almighty Allah, fasting by day and praying through the night.
Moreover, he vowed many vows to the Living, the Eternal; and
visited the pious and was constant in supplication to the Most
Highest, till He gave ear to him and accepted his prayer and took
pity on his straining and complaining; so that, before many days
were past, he knew carnally one of his women and she conceived by
him the same night. In due time she finished her months and,
casting her burden, bore a male child as he were a slice of the
moon; whereupon the merchant fulfilled his vows in his gratitude
to Allah, (to whom be honour and glory!) and gave alms and
clothed the widow and the orphan. On the seventh night after the
boy's birth, he named him Abu al-Husn,[FN#282] and the wet-nurses
suckled him and the dry-nurses dandled him and the servants and
the slaves carried him and handled him, till he shot up and grew
tall and throve greatly and learnt the Sublime Koran and the
ordinances of Al-Islam and the Canons of the True Faith; and
calligraphy and poetry and mathematics and archery. On this wise
he became the union-pearl of his age and the goodliest of the
folk of his time and his day; fair of face and of tongue fluent,
carrying himself with a light and graceful gait and glorying in
his stature proportionate and amorous graces which were to many a
bait: and his cheeks were red and flower-white was his forehead
and his side face waxed brown with tender down, even as saith
one, describing him,

"The spring of the down on cheeks right clearly shows: * And how
     when the Spring is gone shall last the rose?
Dost thou not see that the growth upon his cheek * Is violet-
     bloom that from its leaves outgrows."

He abode awhile in ease and happiness with his father, who
rejoiced and delighted in him, till he came to man's estate, when
the merchant one day made him sit down before him and said, "O my
son, the appointed term draweth near; my hour of death is at hand
and it remaineth but to meet Allah (to whom belong Majesty and
Might!). I leave thee what shall suffice thee, even to thy son's
son, of monies and mansions, farms and gardens; wherefore, fear
thou Almighty Allah, O my son, in dealing with that which I
bequeath to thee and follow none but those who will help thee to
the Divine favour." Not long after, he sickened and died; so his
son ordered his funeral,[FN#283] after the goodliest wise, and
burying him, returned to his house and sat mourning for him many
days and nights. But behold, certain of his friends came in to
him and said to him, "Whoso leaveth a son like thee is not dead;
indeed, what is past is past and fled and mourning beseemeth none
but the young maid and the wife cloistered." And they ceased not
from him till they wrought on him to enter the Hammam and break
off his mourning.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
al-Husn was visited by his friends and taken to the Hamman and
persuaded to break off his mourning, he presently forgot his
father's charge, and his head was turned by his riches; he
thought fortune would always wone with him as it was, and that
wealth would ever wax and never wane. So he ate and drank and
made merry and took his pleasure and gave gifts of gear and coin
and was profuse with gold and addrest himself up to eating fowls
and breaking the seals of wine-flasks and listening to the giggle
of the daughter of the vine, as she gurgled from the flagon and
enjoying the jingle of the singing-girls; nor did he give over
this way of life, till his wealth was wasted and the case
worsened and all his goods went from him and he bit his
hands[FN#284] in bitter penitence. For of a truth he had nothing
left, after that which he had squandered, but a concubine, a
slave-girl whom his father had bequeathed to him with the rest of
his estate: and she had no equal in beauty and loveliness and
brightness and liveliness and symmetric stature and perfect
grace. She was past mistress in every manner of arts and
accomplishments and endowed with many excellences, surpassing all
the folk of her age and time. She was grown more notorious than a
way-mark,[FN#285] for her seductive genius, and outdid the fair
both in theory and practice, and she was noted for her swimming
gait, flexile and delicate, albeit she was full five feet in
height and by all the boons of fortune deckt and dight, with
strait arched brows twain, as they were the crescent moon of
Sha'abán,[FN#286] and eyes like gazelles' eyne; and nose like the
edge of scymitar fine and cheeks like anemones of blood-red
shine; and mouth like Solomon's seal and sign and teeth like
necklaces of pearls in line; and navel holding an ounce of oil of
benzoin and waist more slender than his body whom love hath
wasted and whom concealment hath made sick with pine and hind
parts heavier than two hills of sand; briefly she was a volume of
charms after his saying who saith, 

"Her fair shape ravisheth, if face to face she did appear, * And
     if she turn, for severance from her she slayeth sheer.
Sun-like, full-moon-like, sapling-like, unto her character *
     Estrangement no wise appertains nor cruelty austere.
Under the bosom of her shift the garths of Eden are * And the
     full-moon revolveth still upon her neck-rings'
     sphere."[FN#287]

She seemed a full moon rising and a gazelle browsing, a girl of
nine plus five[FN#288] shaming the moon and sun, even as saith of
her the sayer eloquent and ingenious,

"Semblance of full-moon Heaven bore, * When five and five are
     conjoined by four;
'Tis not my sin if she made of me * Its like when it riseth
     horizon o'er."[FN#289]

Clean of skin, odoriferous of breath, it seemed as if she were of
fire fashioned and of crystal moulded; rose-red was the cheek of
her and perfect the shape and form of her; even as one saith of
her, describing her,

"Scented with sandal[FN#290] and musk, right proudly doth she go,
     * With gold and silver and rose and saffron-colour aglow.
A flower in a garden she is, a pearl in an ouch of gold * Or an
     image in chapel[FN#291] set for worship of high and low.
Slender and shapely she is; vivacity bids her arise, * But the
     weight of her hips says, 'Sit, or softly and slowly go.'
Whenas her favours I seek and sue for my heart's desire, * 'Be
     gracious,' her beauty says; but her coquetry answers, 'No.'
Glory to Him who made beauty her portion, and that * Of her lover
     to be the prate of the censurers, heigho!"[FN#292]

She captivated all who saw her, with the excellence of her beauty
and the sweetness of her smile,[FN#293] and shot them down with
the shafts she launched from her eyes; and withal she was
eloquent of speech and excellently skilled in verse. Now when Abu
al-Husn had squandered all his gold, and his ill-plight all could
behold, and there remained to him naught save this slave-girl, he
abode three days without tasting meat or taking rest in sleep,
and the handmaid said to him, "O my lord, carry me to the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
slave-girl to her master, "O my lord, carry me to Harun
al-Rashid, fifth of the sons of Abbas, and seek of him to my
price ten thousand dinars. If he deem me dear, say to him: 'O
Prince of True Believers, my handmaid is worth more than this: do
but prove her, and her value will be magnified in thine eyes; for
this slave-girl hath not her equal, and she were unfit to any but
thou.'" And she added, "Beware, O my lord, of selling me at less
than the sum I have named; indeed 'tis but little for the like of
me." Now her owner knew not her worth nor that she had no equal
in her day; but he carried her to the Caliph and set her in the
presence and repeated what she had bidden him say. The Caliph
asked her, "What is thy name?"; to which she answered, "My name
is Tawaddud."[FN#294] He then enquired, "O Tawaddud, in what
branches of knowledge dost thou excel?"; and she replied, "O my
lord, I am versed in syntax and poetry and jurisprudence and
exegesis and philosophy; and I am skilled in music and the
knowledge of the Divine ordinances and in arithmetic and geodesy
and geometry and the fables of the ancients. I know the Sublime
Koran by heart and have read it according to the seven, the ten
and the fourteen modes. I know the number of its chapters and
versets and sections and words; and its halves and fourths and
eighths and tenths; the number of prostrations which occur in it
and the sum total of its letters; and I know what there is in it
of abrogating and abrogated[FN#295]; also what parts of it were
revealed at Al-Medinah and what at Meccah and the cause of the
different revelations. I know the Holy Traditions of the
Apostle's sayings, historical and legendary, the established and
those whose ascription is doubtful; and I have studied the exact
sciences, geometry and philosophy and medicine and logic and
rhetoric and composition; and I have learnt many things by rote
and am passionately fond of poetry. I can play the lute and know
its gamut and notes and notation and the crescendo and
diminuendo. If I sing and dance, I seduce, and if I dress and
scent myself, I slay. In fine, I have reached a pitch of
perfection such as can be estimated only by those of them who are
firmly rooted in knowledge."[FN#296] Now when the Caliph heard
these words spoken by one so young, he wondered at her eloquence,
and turning to Abu al-Husn, said, "I will summon those who shall
discuss with her all she claimeth to know; if she answer
correctly, I will give thee the price thou askest for her and
more; and if not, thou art fitter to have her than I." "With
gladness and goodly gree, O Commander of the Faithful," replied
Abu al-Husn. So the Caliph wrote to the Viceroy of Bassorah, to
send him Ibrahim bin Siyyár the prosodist, who was the first man
of his day in argument and eloquence and poetry and logic, and
bade him bring with him readers of the Koran and learned doctors
of the law and physicians and astrologers and scientists and
mathematicians and philosophers; and Ibrahim was more learned
than all. In a little while they arrived at the palace of the
Caliphate, knowing not what was to do, and the Caliph sent for
them to his sitting-chamber and ordered them to be seated. So
they sat down and he bade bring the damsel Tawaddud who came and
unveiling, showed herself, as she were a sparkling star.[FN#297]
The Caliph set her a stool of gold; and she saluted, and speaking
with an eloquent tongue, said, "O Commander of the Faithful, bid
the Olema and the doctors of law and leaches and astrologers and
scientists and mathematicians and all here present contend with
me in argument." So he said to them, "I desire of you that ye
dispute with this damsel on the things of her faith, and stultify
her argument in all she advanceth;" and they answered, saying,
"We hear and we obey Allah and thee, O Commander of the
Faithful." Upon this Tawaddud bowed her head and said, "Which of
you is the doctor of the law, the scholar, versed in the readings
of the Koran and in the Traditions?" Quoth one of them, "I am the
man thou seekest." Quoth she, "Then ask me of what thou wilt."
Said the doctor, "Hast thou read the precious book of Allah and
dost thou know its cancelling and cancelled parts and hast thou
meditated its versets and its letters?" "Yes," answered she.
"Then," said he, "I will proceed to question thee of the
obligations and the immutable ordinances: so tell me of these, O
damsel, and who is thy Lord, who thy prophet, who thy Guide, what
is thy point of fronting in prayer, and who be thy brethren? Also
what thy spiritual path and what thy highway?" Whereto she
replied, "Allah is my Lord, and Mohammed (whom Allah save and
assain!) my prophet, and the Koran is my guide and the Ka'abah my
fronting; and the True-believers are my brethren. The practice of
good is my path and the Sunnah my highway." The Caliph again
marvelled at her words so eloquently spoken by one so young; and
the doctor pursued, "O damsel, with what do we know Almighty
Allah?" Said she, "With the understanding." Said he, "And what is
the understanding?" Quoth she, "It is of two kinds, natural and
acquired."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
continued, "The understanding is of two kinds, natural and
acquired. The natural is that which Allah (to whom be honour and
glory!) created for the right direction of His servants after His
will; and the acquired is that which men accomplish by dint of
study and fair knowledge." He rejoined, "Thou hast answered
well." Q "Where is the seat of the understanding?"--"Allah
casteth it in the heart whence its lustrous beams ascend to the
brain and there become fixed." Q "How knowest thou the Prophet of
Allah?" "By the reading of Allah's Holy Book and by signs and
proofs and portents and miracles!" Q "What are the obligations
and the immutable ordinances?" "The obligations are five. (1)
Testification that there is no iláh[FN#298] but Allah, no god but
the God alone and One, which for partner hath none, and that
Mohammed is His servant and His apostle. (2) The standing in
prayers.[FN#299] (3) The payment of the poor-rate. (4) Fasting
Ramazan. (5) The Pilgrimage to Allah's Holy House for all to whom
the journey is possible. The immutable ordinances are four; to
wit, night and day and sun and moon, the which build up life and
hope; nor any son of Adam wotteth if they will be destroyed on
the Day of Judgment." Q "What are the obligatory observances of
the Faith?" "They are five, prayer, almsgiving, fasting,
pilgrimage, fighting for the Faith and abstinence from the
forbidden." Q "Why dost thou stand up to pray?" "To express the
devout intent of the slave acknowledging the Deity." Q "What are
the obligatory conditions which precede standing in prayer?"
"Purification, covering the shame, avoidance of soiled clothes,
standing on a clean place, fronting the Ka'abah, an upright
posture, the intent[FN#300] and the pronouncing 'Allaho Akbar' of
prohibition."[FN#301] Q "With what shouldest thou go forth from
thy house to pray?" "With the intent of worship mentally
pronounced." Q "With what intent shouldest thou enter the
mosque?" "With an intent of service." Q "Why do we front the
Kiblah[FN#302]?" "In obedience to three Divine orders and one
Traditional ordinance." Q "What are the beginning, the
consecration and the end of prayer?" "Purification beginneth
prayer, saying the Allaho Akbar of prohibition consecrateth, and
the salutation endeth prayer." Q "What deserveth he who
neglecteth prayer?" "It is reported, among the authentic
Traditions of the Prophet, that he said, 'Whoso neglecteth prayer
wilfully and purposely hath no part in Al-Islam.'"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Four Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
damsel had repeated the words of that Holy Tradition the doctor
cried, "Thou hast replied aright: now say me, what is prayer?"
"Prayer is communion between the slave and his lord, and in it
are ten virtues: (1) it illumineth the heart; (2) it maketh the
face shine; (3) it pleaseth the Compassionate One; (4) it
angereth Satan; (5) it conjureth calamity; (6) it wardeth off the
mischief of enemies; (7) it multiplieth mercy; (8) it forfendeth
vengeance and punishment; (9) it bringeth the slave nigh unto his
lord; and (10) it restraineth from lewdness and frowardness.
Hence it is one of the absolute requisites and obligatory
ordinances and the pillar of the Faith." Q "What is the key of
prayer?" "Wuzd or the lesser ablution."[FN#303] Q "What is the
key to the lesser ablution?" "Intention and naming the Almighty."
Q "What is the key of naming the Almighty?" "Assured faith." Q
"What is the key of faith?" "Trust in the Lord." Q "What is the
key of trust in the Lord?" "Hope." Q "What is the key of hope?"
"Obedience." Q "What is the key of obedience?" "The confession of
the Unity and the acknowledgment of the divinity of Allah." Q
"What are the Divine ordinances of Wuzu, the minor ablution?"
"They are six, according to the canon of the Imam al-Sháfi'í
Mohammed bin Idris (of whom Allah accept!): (1) intent while
washing the face; (2) washing the face; (3) washing the hands and
forearms; (4) wiping part of the head; (5) washing the feet and
heels; and (6) observing due order.[FN#304] And the traditional
statutes are ten: (1) nomination; (2) and washing the hands
before putting them into the water-pot; (3) and mouth-rinsing;
(4) and snuffing;[FN#305] (5) and wiping the whole head; (6) and
wetting the ears within and without with fresh water; (7) and
separating a thick beard; (8) and separating the fingers and
toes;[FN#306] (9) and washing the right foot before the left and
(10) doing each of these thrice and all in unbroken order. When
the minor ablution is ended, the worshipper should say, I testify
that there is no god but the God, the One, which for partner hath
none, and I testify that Mohammed is His servant and His apostle.
O my Allah, make me of those who repent and in purity are
permanent! Glory to Thee, O my God, and in Thy praise I bear
witness, that there is no god save Thou! I crave pardon of Thee
and I repent to Thee! For it is reported, in the Holy Traditions,
that the Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!) said of this
prayer, 'Whoso endeth every ablution with this prayer, the eight
gates of Paradise are open to him; he shall enter at which he
pleaseth.'" Q "When a man purposeth ablution, what betideth him
from the angels and the devils?" "When a man prepareth for
ablution, the angels come and stand on his right and the devils
on his left hand.[FN#307] If he name Almighty Allah at the
beginning of the ablution, the devils flee from him and the
angels hover over him with a pavilion of light, having four
ropes, to each an angel glorifying Allah and craving pardon for
him, so long as he remaineth silent or calleth upon the name of
Allah. But if he omit to begin washing with naming Allah (to whom
belong might and majesty!), neither remain silent, the devils
take command of him; and the angels depart from him and Satan
whispereth evil thoughts unto him, till he fall into doubt and
come short in his ablution. For (quoth he on whom be blessing and
peace!), 'A perfect ablution driveth away Satan and assureth
against the tyranny of the Sultan'; and again quoth he, 'If
calamity befal one who is not pure by ablution; verily and
assuredly let him blame none but himself.'" Q "What should a man
do when he awaketh from sleep?" "He should wash his hands thrice,
before putting them into the water vessel." Q "What are the
Koranic and traditional orders anent Ghusl, the complete
ablution[FN#308]?" "The divine ordinances are intent and
'crowning'[FN#309] the whole body with water, that is, the liquid
shall come at every part of the hair and skin. Now the
traditional ordinances are the minor ablution as preliminary;
rubbing the body; separating the hair and deferring in
words[FN#310] the washing of the feet till the end of the
ablution."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had recounted to the doctor what were the divine and
traditional orders anent Ghusl or total ablution, quoth he, "Thou
hast replied aright: now tell me what are the occasions for
Tayammum, or making the ablution with sand and dust; and what are
the ordinances thereof, divine and human?" "The reasons are
seven, viz.: want of water; fear lest water lack; need thereto;
going astray on a march; sickness; having broken bones in splints
and having open wounds.[FN#311] As for its ordinances, the divine
number four, viz., intent, dust, clapping 