it to the face and
clapping it upon the hands; and the human number two, nomination
and preferring the right before the left hand." Q "What are the
conditions, the pillars or essentials, and the traditional
statutes of prayer?" "The conditions are five: (1) purification
of the members; (2) covering of the privy parts; (3) observing
the proper hours, either of certainty or to the best of one's
belief; (4) fronting the Kiblah; and (5) standing on a clean
place. The pillars or essentials number twelve: (1) intent; (2)
the Takbír or magnification of prohibition; (3) standing when
able to stand[FN#312]; (4) repeating the Fatihah or opening
chapter of the Koran and saying, 'In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate!' with a verse thereof
according to the canon of the Imam Al-Shafi'i; (5) bowing the
body and keeping it bowed; (6) returning to the upright posture
and so remaining for the time requisite; (7) prostration and
permanence therein; (8) sitting between two prostrations and
permanence therein; (9) repeating the latter profession of the
Faith and sitting up therefor; (10) invoking benediction on the
Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!) (11) the first
Salutation,[FN#313] and (12) the intent of making an end of
prayer expressed in words. But the traditional statutes are the
call to prayer; the standing posture; raising the hands (to
either side of the face) whilst pronouncing the prohibition;
uttering the magnification before reciting the Fatihah; seeking
refuge with Allah[FN#314]; saying, 'Amen'; repeating the chapter
of the Koran after the Fatihah, repeating the magnifications
during change of posture; saying, 'May Allah hear him who
praiseth Him! and O our Lord, to Thee be the praise!'; praying
aloud in the proper place[FN#315] and praying under the breath
prayers so prescribed; the first profession of unity and sitting
up thereto; blessing the Prophet therein; blessing his family in
the latter profession and the second Salutation." Q "On what is
the Zakát or obligatory poor-rate taxable?" "On gold and silver
and camels and oxen and sheep and wheat and barley and holcus and
millet and beans and vetches and rice and raisins and dates." Q
"What is the Zakát or poor-rate on gold?" "Below twenty miskals
or dinars, nothing; but on that amount half a dinar for every
score and so on proportionally.[FN#316]" Q "On silver?" "Under
two hundred dirhams nothing, then five dirhams on every two
hundred and so forth." Q "On camels?" "For every five, an ewe, or
for every twenty-five a pregnant camel." Q "On sheep?" "An ewe
for every forty head," Q "What are the ordinances of the Ramazan
Fast?" "The Koranic are intent; abstinence from eating, drinking
and carnal copulation, and the stoppage of vomiting. It is
incumbent on all who submit to the Law, save women in their
courses and forty days after childbirth; and it becomes
obligatory on sight of the new moon or on news of its appearance,
brought by a trustworthy person and commending itself as truth to
the hearer's heart; and among its requisites is that the intent
be pronounced at nightfall. The traditional ordinances of fasting
are, hastening to break the fast at sundown; deferring the
fore-dawn meal,[FN#317] and abstaining from speech, save for good
works and for calling on the name of Allah and reciting the
Koran." Q "What things vitiate not the fast?" "The use of
unguents and eye-powders and the dust of the road and the
undesigned swallowing of saliva and the emission of seed in
nocturnal pollution or at the sight of a strange woman and
blooding and cupping; none of these things vitiates the fast." Q
"What are the prayers of the two great annual Festivals?" "Two
one-bow prayers, which be a traditional ordinance, without call
to prayer or standing up to pronounce the call;[FN#318] but let
the Moslem say, 'Prayer is a collector of all folk!'[FN#319] and
pronounce 'Allaho Akbar' seven times in the first prayer, besides
the Takbir of prohibition; and, in the second, five times,
besides the magnification of rising up (according to the doctrine
of the Imam Al-Shafi'i, on whom Allah have mercy!) and make the
profession of the Faith."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had answered the doctor anent the Festival-prayers, quoth
he, "Thou hast replied aright: now tell me what are the prayers
prescribed on the occasion of an eclipse of the sun or moon?"
"Two one-bow prayers without call to prayer or standing thereto
by the worshipper, who shall make in each two-bow prayer double
standing up and double inclinations and two-fold prostrations,
then sit and testify and salute." Q "What is the ritual of prayer
for rain?" "Two one-bow prayers without call to prayer or
standing thereto; then shall the Moslem make the profession and
salute. Moreover the Imam shall deliver an exhortation and ask
pardon of Allah, in place of the magnification, as in the two
sermons of the Festivals and turn his mantle upper edge downwards
and pray and supplicate." Q "What are the Witr, the additional or
occasional prayers?" "The least is a one-bow prayer and the most
eleven." Q "What is the forenoon prayer?" "At least, two one-bow
prayers and at most, twelve." Q "What hast thou to say of the
I'itikáf or retreat[FN#320]?" "It is a matter of traditional
ordinance." Q "What are its conditions?" "(1) intent; (2) not
leaving the mosque save of necessity; (3) not having to do with a
woman; (4) fasting; and (5) abstaining from speech." Q "Under
what conditions is the Hajj or Pilgrimage[FN#321] obligatory?"
"Manhood, and understanding and being a Moslem and
practicability; in which case it is obligatory on all, once
before death." Q "What are the Koranic statutes of the
Pilgrimage?" "(1) The Ihrám or pilgrim's habit; (2) the standing
at Arafat; (3) circumambulating the Ka'abah; (4) running between
Safá and Marwah[FN#322]; and (5) shaving or clipping the hair." Q
"What are the Koranic statutes of the 'Umrah[FN#323] or lesser
pilgrimage?" "Assuming the pilgrim's habit and compassing and
running." Q "What are the Koranic ordinances of the assumption of
the pilgrim's habit?"[FN#324] "Doffing sewn garments, forswearing
perfume and ceasing to shave the head or pare the nails, and
avoiding the killing of game, and eschewing carnal copulation." Q
"What are the traditional statutes of the pilgrimage?" "(1) The
crying out 'Labbay'ka, Adsum, Here am I, O our Lord, here am
I!'[FN#325]4 (2) the Ka'abah-circuitings[FN#326] of arrival and
departure; (3) the passing the night at the Mosque of Muzdalifah
and in the valley of Mina, and (4) the lapidation.[FN#327]" Q
"What is the Jihád or Holy War and its essentials?" "Its
essentials are: (1) the descent of the Infidels upon us; (2) the
presence of the Imam; (3) a state of preparation; and (4)
firmness in meeting the foe. Its traditional ordinance is incital
to battle, in that the Most High hath said, 'O thou my Prophet,
incite the faithful to fight!'[FN#328]" Q "What are the
ordinances of buying and selling?" "The Koranic are: (1) offer
and acceptance and (2) if the thing sold be a white slave, by
whom one profiteth, all possible endeavour to convert him to
Al-Islam; and (3) to abstain from usury; the traditional are:
making void[FN#329] and option before not after separating,
according to his saying (whom Allah bless and preserve!), 'The
parties to a sale shall have the option of cancelling or altering
terms whilst they are yet unseparated.'", Q "What is it forbidden
to sell for what?" "On this point I mind me of an authentic
tradition, reported by Náf'i[FN#330] of the Apostle of Allah,
that he forbade the barter of dried dates for fresh and fresh
figs for dry and jerked for fresh meat and cream for clarified
butter; in fine, all eatables of one and the same kind, it is
unlawful to buy or barter some for other some.[FN#331]" Now when
the doctor of law heard her words and knew that she was wit-keen,
penetrative, ingenious and learned in jurisprudence and the
Traditions and the interpretation of the Koran and what not else,
he said in his mind, "Needs must I manoeuvre with her, that I may
overcome her in the assembly of the Commander of the Faithful."
So he said to her, "O damsel, what is the lexicographical meaning
of Wuzu?" And she answered, "Philologically it signifieth
cleanliness and freedom from impurities." Q "And of Salát or
prayer?" "An invocation of good" Q "And of Ghusl?"
"Purification." Q "And of Saum or fasting?" "Abstention." Q "And
of Zakát?" "Increase. Q "And of Hajj or pilgrimage?"
"Visitation." Q "And of Jihád?" "Repelling." With this the
doctor's arguments were cut off,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
doctor's arguments were cut off, he rose to his feet and said,
"Bear witness against me, O Commander of the Faithful, that this
damsel is more learned in the Law than I am." Quoth she, "I will
ask thee somewhat, which do thou answer me speedily, an thou be
indeed a learned man." Quoth he, "Say on;" and she said, "What
are the arrows of the Faith?" Answered he, "They number ten: (1)
Testification, that is, religion; (2) Prayer, that is, the
covenant; (3) Alms, that is, purification; (4) Fasting, that is,
defensive armour; (5) Pilgrimage, that is, the Law; (6) Fighting
for the Faith, that is, a general duty; (7) Bidding to
beneficence and (8) Forbidding from frowardness, both of which
are a man's honour; (9) Commune,[FN#332] that is, sociableness of
the Faithful; and (10) Seeking knowledge, that is, the
praiseworthy path." She rejoined, "Thou hast replied aright and
now remaineth but one question, 'What be the roots or
fundamentals of Al-Islam?'" He said "They are four: sincerity of
belief, truth of intent, observance of the lawful limit and
keeping the covenant." Then said she, "I have one more question
to ask thee, which if thou answer, it is well; else, I will take
thy clothes." Quoth he, "Speak, O damsel;" and she said, "What
are the branches or superstructure of Al-Islam?" But he was
silent awhile and made no reply: so she cried "Doff thy clothes
and I will expound them to thee." Quoth the Caliph "Expound them,
and I will make him put off his clothes for thee." She said,
"There are two-and-twenty branches: (1) holding fast to the Book
of Allah the Most Highest; (2) taking example by His Apostle
(whom Allah bless and preserve!); (3) abstaining from evil doing;
(4) eating what is lawful and (5) avoiding what is unlawful; (6)
restitution of things wrongfully taken; (7) repentance; (8)
knowledge of the Law; (9) love of the Friend,[FN#333] (10) and of
the followers of the true Revelation; (11) belief in the apostles
of Al-Islam; (12) fear of apostacy; (13) preparation for
departing this life; (14) force of conviction; (15) mercy on all
possible occasions; (16) strength in time of weakness; (17)
patience under trials; (18) knowledge of Allah Almighty and (19)
of what His Prophet hath made known to us; (20) thwarting Iblis
the accursed; (21) striving earnestly against the lusts of the
soul and warring them down, and (22) devotion to the one God."
Now when the Commander of the Faithful heard her words, he bade
the professor put off his clothes and hooded turband; and so did
that doctor and went forth, beaten and confounded, from the
Caliph's presence. Thereupon another man stood up and said to
her, "O damsel, hear a few questions from me." Quoth she, "Say
on;' and he asked, "What are the conditions of purchase by
advance?" whereto she answered, "That the price be fixed, the
kind be fixed and the period of delivery be fixed and known." Q
"What are the Koranic and the traditional canons of eating?" "The
confession that Allah Almighty provideth the eater and giveth him
meat and drink, with thanksgiving to Him therefor." Q "What is
thanksgiving?" "The use by the creature of that which the Creator
vouchsafeth to him, according as it was created for the
creature." Q "What are the traditional canons of eating?" "The
Bismillah[FN#334] and washing both hands; sitting on the left of
the hind part; eating with three fingers, and eating of that
which hath been duly masticated.[FN#335]" Q "What are good
manners in eating?" "Taking small mouthfuls and looking little at
one's table-companion."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had answered concerning good manners in eating, the doctor
who was trying her, rejoined, "Thou hast replied aright. Now tell
me what are the stays of the heart and their supports?"[FN#336]
"The stays and supports both number three: (1) holding fast to
the Faith, the support whereof is the shunning of infidelity; (2)
holding fast to the Traditional Law, and its support the shunning
of innovation; and (3) holding fast to obedience, and its support
the shunning of disobedience." Q "What are the conditions of
Wuzu?" "(1) being a Moslem; (2) discernment of good and evil; (3)
purity of the water, and (4) absence of material or religious
impediments." Q "What is belief?" "It is divided into nine parts:
(1) belief in the One worshipped; (2) belief in the condition of
slavery of the worshipper; (3) belief in the personality of the
Deity; (4) belief in the Two Handfuls;[FN#337] (5) belief in
Providence which allotteth to man his lot; (6) belief in the
Abrogating and (7) in the Abrogated; (8) belief in Allah, His
angels and apostles; and (9) in fore-ordained Fate, general and
individual, its good and ill, its sweet and bitter." Q "What
three things do away other three?" "It is told of Sufyán
al-Saurí[FN#338] that he said, 'Three things do away with other
three. Making light of the pious doth away the future life;
making light of Kings doth away this life; and, making light of
expenditure doth away wealth.'" Q "What are the keys of the
heavens, and how many gates have they.?" "Quoth Almighty Allah,
'And the heaven shall be opened and be full of portals;'[FN#339]
and quoth he whom Allah bless and preserve!, 'None knoweth the
number of the gates of heavens, save He who created the heavens,
and there is no son of Adam but hath two gates allotted to him in
the heavens, one whereby his daily bread descendeth and another
wherethrough his works ascend. The first gate is not closed, save
when his term of life cometh to an end, nor the gate of works,
good and evil, till his soul ascend for judgment.'" Q "Tell me of
a thing and a half thing and a no-thing." "The thing is the
Moslem; the half thing the hypocrite,[FN#340] and the no-thing
the miscreant." Q "Tell me of various kinds of hearts." "There is
the whole heart, the sick heart, the contrite heart, the vowed
heart and the enlightened heart. Now the whole heart is that of
Abraham, the Friend of Allah; the sick heart is that of the
Unbeliever in Al-Islam; the contrite heart is that of the pious
who fear the Lord; the vowed heart is that of our Lord Mohammed
(whom Allah bless and keep!) and the illuminated heart is that of
his followers. Furthermore, the hearts of learned Olema are of
three kinds, the heart which is in love with this world; the
heart which loveth the next world, and the heart which loveth its
Lord; and it is said that hearts are three, the suspended, that
of the infidel; the non-existent, that of the hypocrite; and the
constant, that of the True-believer. Moreover, it is said that
the firm heart is of three kinds, viz., the heart dilated with
light and faith, the heart wounded with fear of estrangement, and
the heart which feareth to be forsaken of its Supreme
Friend."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
second doctor declared. "Thou hast said well," quoth she to the
Caliph, "O Commander of the Faithful, he hath questioned me, till
he is weary, and now I will ask of him two questions. If he
answer them both, it is well; and if not, I will take his clothes
and he shall wend in peace." Quoth the doctor, "Ask me what thou
wilt," and she said, "What sayest thou religion is?" Answered he,
"Religion is confession of Faith with the tongue and conviction
with the heart and correspondent action with the members. He
(upon whom be blessings and peace!) hath said, 'The believer is
not perfect in belief, except he perfect himself in five
qualities, namely: trust in Allah,[FN#341] committal of his
affair to Allah, submission to the commands of Allah,
acquiescence in the decrees of Allah; and that all he doth be
done for sake of Allah; so is he of those who are acceptable to
the Deity, and who give to Him and withhold for Him; and such man
is perfect in belief.'" Then said she, "What is the Divine
ordinance of ordinances and the ordinance which is the initiator
of all ordinances and that of which all others stand in need and
that which comprehendeth all others; and what is the traditional
ordinance that entereth into the Koranic, and the prophetic
practice whereby the Divine is completed?" But he was silent and
made no reply; whereupon the Caliph bade her expound and ordered
him to doff his clothes and give them to her. Said she, "O
doctor, the Koranic ordinance of ordinances is the knowledge of
Allah Almighty; that, which is the initiative of all others, is
the testifying there is no god but the God and Mohammed is the
Apostle of God; that, of which all others have need, is the
Wuzu-ablution; that, which compriseth all others, is the
Ghusl-ablution from defilement[FN#342]; the Traditional ordinance
that entereth into the Koranic, is the separation of the fingers
and the thick beard;[FN#343] and that, wherewith all Koranic
ordinances are completed, is circumcision."[FN#344] Therewith was
made manifest the defeat of the doctor, who rose to his feet and
said, "I call Allah to witness, O Commander of the Faithful, that
this damsel is more learned than I in theology and what
pertaineth to the Law." So saying, he put off his clothes and
went away ignominiously worsted. Then she turned to the rest of
the learned men present and said, "O masters, which of you is the
Koranist, the reader and reciter of the Koran, versed in the
seven readings and in syntax and in lexicography?" Thereupon a
professor arose and, seating himself before her, said "Hast thou
read the Book of Almighty Allah and made thyself thoroughly
acquainted with its signs, that is its verses, and its abrogating
parts and abrogated portions, its unequivocal commands and its
ambiguous; and the difference of its revelations, Meccan and
Medinan? Dost thou understand its interpretation and hast thou
studied it, according to the various traditions and origins?"
"Yes," answered she; and he said, "What then is the number of its
chapters, how many are the decades and versets, how many words
and how many letters and how many acts of prostration and how
many prophets and how many chapters are Medinan and how many are
Meccan and how many birds are mentioned in it?" Replied she, "O
my lord, its chapters are an hundred and fourteen, whereof
seventy were revealed at Meccah and forty-four at Al-Medinah; and
it containeth six hundred and twenty-one decades; six thousand
three hundred and thirty-six versets;[FN#345] seventy-nine
thousand four hundred and thirty-nine words and three hundred and
twenty-three thousand and six hundred and seventy letters; and to
the reader thereof, for every letter, are given ten benefits. The
acts of prostration it compriseth are fourteen."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
professor of Koranic exegesis questioned the damsel, she
continued, "As regards the Prophets named in the Book there be
five-and-twenty, to wit, Adam, Noah,[FN#346] Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Lot, Elisha, Jonah, Salih,[FN#347] or
Heber, Húd,[FN#348] Shua'yb or Jethro,[FN#349] David, Solomon,
Zú'l-kafl or Joshua, Idrís, Elias, Yahyá or John the Baptist,
Zacharias, Job, Moses, Aaron, Jesus and Mohammed,[FN#350] the
peace of Allah and His blessing be on them all! Moreover, nine
flying things are mentioned in the Koran, namely, the gnat, the
bee, the fly, the ant, the hoopoe, the crow, the locust, the
swallow and the bird of Jesus[FN#351] (on whom be peace!), to
wit, the bat." Q "Which is the most excellent chapter of the
Koran?" "That of The Cow.[FN#352]" Q "Which is the most
magnificent verse?" "That of the Throne; it hath fifty words,
bearing in each fifty blessings." Q "What sign or verse hath in
it nine signs or wonders?" "That in which quoth Allah Almighty,
'Verily, in the creation of the Heaven and the Earth: and in the
vicissitude of night, and day; and in the ship which saileth
through the sea laden with what is profitable for mankind; and in
the rain-water which God sendeth down from Heaven, quickening
thereby the dead ground and replenishing the same with all sorts
of cattle; and in the change of winds and in the clouds that are
compelled to do service between the Heaven and the
Earth;[FN#353]--are signs to people of understanding.'" Q "Which
verse is the most just?" "That in which Allah saith, 'Verily,
Allah enjoineth justice and the doing of good, and the giving
unto kindred what shall be necessary; and He forbiddeth
wickedness and iniquity and oppression'"[FN#354] Q "Which is the
most greedy?" "That in which quoth Allah, 'Is it that every man
of them greedeth to enter the Garden of Delight?'"[FN#355] Q
"Which is the most hopeful?" "That in which quoth Almighty Allah,
'Say: O my servants who have transgressed against your own souls,
despair not of the mercy of Allah; seeing, that Allah forgiveth
all sins; aye Gracious, Merciful is He.'"[FN#356] Q "By what
school of intonation dost thou read?" "By that of the people of
Paradise, to wit, the version of Náf'i." Q "In which verse doth
Allah make prophets lie?"[FN#357] "In that wherein He saith,
'They (the brothers of Joseph) brought his inner garment stained
with false blood.'"[FN#358] Q "In which doth He make unbelievers
speak the truth?" "In that wherein He saith, 'The Jews say, 'The
Christians are grounded on nothing,' and the Christians say, 'The
Jews are grounded on nothing'; and yet they both read the
Scriptures;'[FN#359] and, so saying, all say sooth." Q "In which
doth God speak in his own person?" "In that in which he saith, 'I
have not created Genii and men for any other end than that they
should serve me.'"[FN#360] Q "In which verse do the angels
speak?" "In that which saith, 'But we celebrate Thy praise and
extol Thy holiness.'"[FN#361] Q "What sayest thou of the
formula:--I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned?" "It is
obligatory by commandment of Allah on all before reading the
Koran, as appeareth by His saying, 'When thou readest the Koran,
seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned.'"[FN#362] Q "What
signify the words 'seeking refuge'[FN#363] and what are the
variants of the formula?" "Some say, 'I take refuge with Allah
the All-hearing and All-knowing,' and others, 'With Allah the
Strong;' but the best is that whereof the Sublime Koran speaketh
and the Traditions perpetuate. And he (whom Allah bless and
keep!) was used to ejaculate, 'I seek refuge with Allah from
Satan the Stoned.' And quoth a Tradition, reported by Naf'i on
the authority of his adopted father, 'The apostle of Allah, was
wont when he rose in the night to pray, to say aloud, 'Allaho
Akbar'; God is Most Great, with all Majesty! Praise be to Allah
abundantly! Glory to Allah morn and even be!' Then would he say,
'I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned and from the
delusions of the Devils and their evil suggestions.' And it is
told of Ibn Abbas[FN#364] (of whom Allah accept!) that he said,
'The first time Gabriel came down to the Prophet with revelation
he taught him the 'seeking refuge,' saying, 'O Mohammed, say, I
seek refuge with Allah the All-hearing and All-knowing;' then
say, 'In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the
Compassionate!' Read, in the name of thy Lord who
created;--created man of blood-clots."[FN#365] Now when the
Koranist heard her words he marvelled at her expressions, her
eloquence, her learning, her excellence, and said, "O damsel,
what sayst thou of the verse 'In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate'? Is it one of the verses of
the Koran?" "Yes; it is a verset of 'The Ant'[FN#366] occurring
also at the head of the first and between every two following
chapters; and there is much difference of opinion, respecting
this, among the learned."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had told the professor concerning the difference of
opinion among the learned touching the "Basmalah," he said, "Thou
hast replied aright: now tell me why is not the formula written
at the head of the chapter of Immunity[FN#367]?"; and she
answered, "When this chapter was revealed from on high for the
dissolution of the alliance between the Prophet and the
idolaters, He (whom Allah bless and preserve!) sent Ali[FN#368]
ibn Abí Tálib (whose face Allah honour!) therewith, and he read
the chapter to them, but did not read the Basmalah."[FN#369] Q
"What of the excellence of the formula and its blessing?" "It is
told of the Prophet that he said, 'Never is the Basmalah
pronounced over aught, but there is a blessing in it;' and it is
reported, on authority of Him (whom Allah bless and preserve!)
that the Lord of Glory swore by His glory that never should the
Basmalah be pronounced over a sick person, but he should be
healed of his sickness. Moreover, it is said that, when Allah
created the empyrean, it was agitated with an exceeding
agitation; but He wrote on it, 'Bismillah' and its agitation
subsided. When the formula first descended from heaven to the
Prophet, he said, 'I am safe from three things, earthquake and
metamorphosis and drowning; and indeed its boons are great and
its blessings too many to enumerate. It is told of Allah's
Apostle that he said, 'There will be brought on the Judgment-day
a man with whom He shall reckon and finding no good deed to his
account, shall order him to the Fire; but the man will cry, 'O my
God, Thou hast not dealt justly by me!' Then shall Allah (to whom
be honour and glory!) say, 'How so?' and the man shall answer, O
Lord, for that Thou callest Thyself the Compassionating, the
Compassionate, yet wilt Thou punish me with the Fire!' And Allah
(magnified be His Majesty!) shall reply, 'I did indeed name
myself the Compassionating, the Compassionate. Carry My servant
to Paradise, of My mercy, for I am the most Merciful of the
mercifuls!'" Q "What was the origin of the use of the Basmalah?"
"When Allah sent down from Heaven the Koran, they wrote, 'In Thy
name, O my God!'; when Allah revealed the words, 'Say: Call upon
Allah, or call upon the Compassionating, what days ye pray, for
hath He the most excellent names,'[FN#370] they wrote, 'In the
name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate; and, when
He revealed the words, 'Your God is one God, there is no God but
He, the Compassionating, the Compassionate,'[FN#371] they wrote,
'In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate!'"
Now when the Koranist heard her reply, he hung down his head and
said to himself, "This be a marvel of marvels! How hath this
slave-girl expounded the origin of the Basmalah? But, by Allah,
needs must I go a bout with her and haply defeat her." So he
asked, "Did Allah reveal the Koran all at once or at times
manifold?" She answered, "Gabriel the Faithful (on whom be
peace!) descended with it from the Lord of the Worlds upon His
Prophet Mohammed, Prince of the Apostles and Seal of the
Prophets, by detached versets: bidding and forbidding,
covenanting and comminating, and containing advices and instances
in the course of twenty years as occasion called for it." Q
"Which chapter was first revealed?" "According to Ibn Abbas, that
entituled 'Congealed Blood':[FN#372] and, according to Jábir bin
Abdillah,[FN#373] that called 'The Covered' which preceded all
others.[FN#374]" Q "Which verset was the last revealed?" "That of
'Usury',[FN#375] and it is also said, the verse, 'When there
cometh Allah's succour and victory.'"[FN#376]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel told the Koranist which was the last verse he said, "Thou
hast replied aright; now tell me the names of the Companions who
collected the Koran, in the lifetime of the Apostle of Allah."
And she answered "They were four, Ubay ibn Ka'ab, Zayd ibn Sábit,
Abú Obaydah 'Aamir bin Jarráh, and Othmán bin Affán[FN#377]
(Allah accept of them one and all!)" Q "Who are the readers, from
whom the accepted reading of the Koran is taken?" "They number
four, Abdallah bin Mas'úd, Ubay bin Ka'ab, Ma'az bin Jabal and
Sálim bin Abdillah." Q "What sayest thou of the words of the Most
High, 'That which is sacrificed to stones'"?[FN#378] "The stones
are idols, which are set up and worshipped, instead of Allah the
Most High, and from this we seek refuge with Allah." Q "What
sayest thou of the words of the Most High 'Thou knowest what is
in my soul, and I know not what is in Thy soul'"?[FN#379] "They
mean, 'Thou knowest the truth of me and what is in me, and I know
not what is in Thee;' and the proof of this are His
words,[FN#380] 'Thou art He who wottest the hidden things'; and
it is said, also, 'Thou knowest my essence, but I know not Thine
essence.'" Q "What sayst thou of the words of the Most High, 'O
true believers, forbid not yourselves the good things which Allah
hath allowed you?'"[FN#381] "My Shaykh (on whom Allah have
mercy!) told me that the Companion Al-Zahhák related: 'There was
a people of the True-believers who said, 'We will dock our
members masculine and don sackcloth;' whereupon this verse was
revealed. But Al-Kutádah declareth that it was revealed on
account of sundry Companions of the Apostle of Allah, namely, Ali
ibn Abí Tálib and Othmán bin Musa'ab and others, who said, 'We
will geld ourselves and don hair cloth and make us monks.'" Q
"What sayest thou of the words of the Most Highest, 'And Allah
took Abraham for His friend'"?[FN#382] "The friend of Allah is
the needy, the poor, and (according to another saying) he is the
lover, he who is detached from the world in the love of Allah
Almighty and in whose attachment there is no falling away." Now
when the Koranist[FN#383] saw her pass on in speech with the
passage of the clouds and that she stayed not in reply, he rose
to his feet and said, "I take Allah to witness, O Commander of
the Faithful, that this damsel is more learned than I in Koranic
exegesis and what pertaineth thereto." Then said she, "I will ask
thee one question, which if thou answer it is well; but if thou
answer not, I will strip off thy clothes." Quoth the Commander of
the Faithful, "Ask on," and she enquired, "Which verset of the
Koran hath in it three-and-twenty Káfs, which sixteen Míms, which
an hundred and forty 'Ayns[FN#384] and which section[FN#385]
lacketh the formula, 'To Whom belong glory and glorification and
majesty[FN#386]?'" The Koranist could not reply, and she said to
him, "Put off thy clothes." So he doffed them, and she continued,
"O Commander of the Faithful, the verset of the sixteen Mims is
in the chapter Húd and is the saying of the Most High, 'It was
said, O Noah, go down in peace from us, and blessing upon
thee!'[FN#387] that of the three-and-twenty Kafs is the verse
called of the Faith, in the chapter of The Cow; that of the
hundred and forty Ayns is in the chapter of Al-A'aráf,[FN#388]
where the Lord saith, 'And Moses chose seventy men of his tribe
to attend our appointed time;[FN#389] to each man a pair of
eyes.'[FN#390] And the lesson, which lacketh the formula, 'To
Whom be glory and glorification,' is that which comprises the
chapters, The Hour draweth nigh and the Moon shall be cloven in
twain[FN#391]; The Compassionate and The Event."[FN#392]
Thereupon the professor departed in confusion.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel defeated the Koranist and took off his clothes and sent
him away confused, then came forward the skilled physician and
said to her, "We are free of theology and come now to physiology.
Tell me, therefore, how is man made; how many veins, bones and
vertebrae are there in his body; which is the first and chief
vein and why Adam was named Adam?" She replied, "Adam was called
Adam, because of his udmah, that is, the wheaten colour of his
complexion and also (it is said) because he was created of the
adim of the earth, that is to say, of the surface-soil. His
breast was made of the earth of the Ka'abah, his head of earth
from the East and his legs of earth from the West. There were
created for him seven doors in his head, viz., the eyes, the
ears, the nostrils and the mouth, and two passages, before and
behind. The eyes were made the seat of the sight-sense, the ears
the seat of the hearing-sense, the nostrils the seat of the
smell-sense, the mouth the seat of the taste-sense and the tongue
to utter what is in the heart of man.[FN#393] Now Adam was made
of a compound of the four elements, which be water, earth, fire
and air. The yellow bile is the humour of fire, being hot-dry;
the black bile that of earth, being cold-dry; the phlegm that of
water, being cold-moist, and the blood that of air, being
hot-moist.[FN#394] There were made in man three hundred and sixty
veins, two hundred and forty-nine bones, and three souls[FN#395]
or spirits, the animal, the rational and the natural, to each of
which is allotted its proper function. Moreover, Allah made him a
heart and spleen and lungs and six intestines and a liver and two
kidneys and buttocks and brain and bones and skin and five
senses; hearing, seeing, smell, taste, touch. The heart He set on
the left side of the breast and made the stomach the guide and
governor thereof. He appointed the lungs for a fan to the heart
and stablished the liver on the right side, opposite thereto.
Moreover, He made, besides this, the diaphragm and the viscera
and set up the bones of the breast and latticed them with the
ribs." Q "How many ventricles are there in a man's head?" "Three,
which contain five faculties, styled the intrinsic senses, to
wit, common sense, imagination, the thinking faculty, perception
and memory." Q "Describe to me the configuration of the
bones."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

        When it was the Four Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
physicist said to her, "Describe to me the configuration of the
bones," she replied, "Man's frame consists of two hundred and
forty bones, which are divided into three parts, the head, the
trunk and the extremities. The head is divided into calvarium and
face. The skull is constructed of eight bones, and to it are
attached the four osselets of the ear. The face is furnished with
an upper jaw of eleven bones and a lower jaw of one; and to these
are added the teeth two-and-thirty in number, and the os
hyoides.[FN#396] The trunk is divided into spinal column, breast
and basin. The spinal column is made up of four-and-twenty bones,
called Fikár or vertebræ; the breast, of the breastbone and the
ribs, which are four-and-twenty in number, twelve on each side;
and the basin of the hips, the sacrum[FN#397] and os coccygis.
The extremities divided into upper and lower, arms and legs. The
arms are again divided: firstly into shoulder, comprising
shoulder blades and collar bone; secondly into the upper arm
which is one bone; thirdly into fore-arm, composed of two bones,
the radius and the ulna; and fourthly into the hand, consisting
of the wrist, the metacarpus of five and the fingers, which
number five, of three bones each, called the phalanges, except
the thumb, which hath but two. The lower extremities are divided:
firstly into thigh, which is one bone; secondly into leg,
composed of three bones, the tibia, the fibula and the patella;
and thirdly into the foot, divided, like the hand, into tarsus,
metatarsus and toes; and is composed of seven bones, ranged in
two rows, two in one and five in the other; and the metatarsus is
composed of five bones and the toes number five, each of three
phalanges except the big toe which hath only two." Q "Which is
the root of the veins?" "The aorta, from which they ramify, and
they are many, none knoweth the tale of them save He who created
them; but I repeat, it is said that they number three hundred and
sixty.[FN#398] Moreover, Allah hath appointed the tongue as
interpreter for the thought, the eyes to serve as lanterns, the
nostrils to smell with, and the hands for prehensors. The liver
is the seat of pity, the spleen of laughter[FN#399] and the
kidneys of craft; the lungs are ventilators, the stomach the
store-house, and the heart the prop and pillar of the body. When
the heart is sound, the whole body is sound, and when the heart
is corrupt, the whole body is corrupt." Q "What are the outward
signs and symptoms evidencing disease in the members of the body,
both external and internal?" "A physician, who is a man of
understanding, looketh into the state of the body and is guided
by the feel of the hands,[FN#400] according as they are firm or
flabby, hot or cool, moist or dry. Internal disorders are also
indicated by external symptoms, such as yellowness of the white
of the eyes, which denoteth jaundice, and bending of the back,
which denoteth disease of the lungs." And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had described to the doctor the outer signs and symptoms
quoth he, "Thou hast replied aright! now what are the internal
symptoms of disease?" "The science of the diagnosis of disease by
internal symptoms is founded upon six canons: (1) the patient's
actions; (2) what is evacuated from his body; (3) the nature of
the pain; and (4) the site thereof; (5) swelling; and (6) the
effluvia given off his person." Q "How cometh hurt to the head?"
"By the ingestion of food upon food, before the first be
digested, and by fullness upon fullness; this it is that wasteth
peoples. He who would live long, let him be early with the
morning-meal and not late with the evening-meal; let him be
sparing of commerce with women and chary of such depletory
measures as cupping and blood-letting; and let him make of his
belly three parts, one for food, one for drink and the third for
air; for that a man's intestines are eighteen spans in length and
it befitteth that he appoint six for meat, six for drink, and six
for breath. If he walk, let him go gently; it will be wholesomer
for him and better for his body and more in accordance with the
saying of the Almighty, 'Walk not proudly on the earth.'"[FN#401]
Q "What are the symptoms of yellow bile and what is to be feared
therefrom?" "The symptoms are sallow complexion and bitter taste
in the mouth with dryness; failure of the appetite, venereal and
other, and rapid pulse; and the patient hath to fear high fever
and delirium and eruptions and jaundice and tumour and ulcers of
the bowels and excessive thirst." Q "What are the symptoms of
black bile and what hath the patient to fear from it, an it get
the mastery of the body?" "The symptoms are false appetite and
great mental disquiet and cark and care; and it behoveth that it
be evacuated, else it will generate melancholia[FN#402] and
leprosy and cancer and disease of the spleen and ulceration of
the bowels." Q "Into how many branches is the art of medicine
divided?" "Into two: the art of diagnosing diseases, and that of
restoring the diseased body to health." Q "When is the drinking
of medicine more efficacious than otherwhen?" "When the sap runs
in the wood and the grape thickens in the cluster and the two
auspicious planets, Jupiter and Venus, are in the ascendant; then
setteth in the proper season for drinking of drugs and doing away
of disease." Q "What time is it, when, if a man drink water from
a new vessel, the drink is sweeter and lighter or more digestible
to him than at another time, and there ascendeth to him a
pleasant fragrance and a penetrating?" "When he waiteth awhile
after eating, as quoth the poet,

'Drink not upon thy food in haste but wait awhile; * Else thou
     with halter shalt thy frame to sickness lead:
And patient bear a little thirst from food, then drink; * And
     thus, O brother, haply thou shalt win thy need.[FN#403]'"

Q "What food is it that giveth not rise to ailments?" "That which
is not eaten but after hunger, and when it is eaten, the ribs are
not filled with it, even as saith Jálínús or Galen the physician,
'Whoso will take in food, let him go slowly and he shall not go
wrongly.' And to conclude with His saying (on whom be blessing
and peace!), 'The stomach is the house of disease, and diet is
the head of healing; for the origin of all sickness is
indigestion, that is to say, corruption of the meat'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the damsel said to the doctor, "'The stomach is the house of
disease and diet is the head of healing; for the origin of all
sickness is indigestion, that is to say, corruption of the meat
in the stomach;'" he rejoined, "Thou hast replied aright! what
sayest thou of the Hammam?" "Let not the full man enter it. Quoth
the Prophet, 'The bath is the blessing of the house, for that it
cleanseth the body and calleth to mind the Fire.'" Q "What
Hammams are best for bathing in?" "Those whose waters are sweet
and whose space is ample and which are kept well aired; their
atmosphere representing the four seasons--autumn and summer and
winter and spring." Q "What kind of food is the most profitable?"
"That which women make and which hath not cost overmuch trouble
and which is readily digested. The most excellent of food is
brewis[FN#404] or bread sopped in broth; according to the saying
of the Prophet, 'Brewis excelleth other food, even as Ayishah
excelleth other women.'" Q "What kind of kitchen, or seasoning,
is most profitable?" "'Flesh meat' (quoth the Prophet) 'is the
most excellent of kitchen; for that it is the delight of this
world and the next world.'" Q "What kind of meat is the most
profitable?" "Mutton; but jerked meat is to be avoided, for there
is no profit in it." Q "What of fruits?" "Eat them in their prime
and quit them when their season is past." Q "What sayest thou of
drinking water?" "Drink it not in large quantities nor swallow it
by gulps, or it will give thee head-ache and cause divers kinds
of harm; neither drink it immediately after leaving the Hammam
nor after carnal copulation or eating (except it be after the
lapse of fifteen minutes for a young man and forty for an old
man), nor after waking from sleep." Q "What of drinking fermented
liquors?" "Doth not the prohibition suffice thee in the Book of
Almighty Allah, where He saith, 'Verily, wine and lots and
images, and the divining arrows are an abomination, of Satan's
work; therefore avoid them, that ye may prosper'?[FN#405] And
again, 'They will ask thee concerning wine and lots': Answer, 'In
both there is great sin and also some things of use unto men: but
their sinfulness is greater than their use.'[FN#406] Hence quoth
the poet, 

'O bibber of liquor, art not ashamed * To drink what Allah
     forbade thee drain?
Put it far from thee and approach it not; * It holds what Allah
     forbade as bane.'

And quoth another to the same purport,

'I drank the sin till my reason fled: * Ill drink that reason to
     loss misled!'

As for the advantages that be therein, it disperseth stone and
gravel from the kidneys and strengtheneth the viscera and
banisheth care, and moveth to generosity and preserveth health
and digestion; it conserveth the body, expelleth disease from the
joints, purifieth the frame of corrupt humours, engendereth
cheerfulness, gladdeneth the heart of man and keepeth up the
natural heat: it contracteth the bladder, enforceth the liver and
removeth obstructions, reddeneth the cheeks, cleareth away
maggots from the brain and deferreth grey hairs. In short, had
not Allah (to whom be honour and glory!) forbidden it,[FN#407]
there were not on the face of the earth aught fit to stand in its
stead. As for gambling by lots, it is a game of hazard such as
diceing, not of skill." Q "What wine is best?" "That which is
pressed from white grapes and kept eighty days or more after
fermentation: it resembleth not water and indeed there is nothing
on the surface of the earth like unto it." Q "What sayest thou of
cupping?" "It is for him who is over full of blood and who hath
no defect therein; and whoso would be cupped, let it be during
the wane of the moon, on a day without cloud, wind or rain and on
the seventeenth of the month. If it fall on a Tuesday, it will be
the more efficacious, and nothing is more salutary for the brain
and eyes and for clearing the intellect than cupping."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel enumerated the benefits of cupping, quoth the doctor,
"What is the best time for cupping?" "One should be cupped 'on
the spittle,' that is, in the morning before eating, for this
fortifieth the wit and the memory. It is reported of the Prophet
that, when anyone complained to him of a pain in the head or
legs, he would bid him be cupped and after cupping not eat salt
food, fasting, for it engendereth scurvy; neither eat sour things
as curded milk[FN#408] immediately after cupping." Q "When is
cupping to be avoided?" "On Sabbaths or Saturdays and Wednesdays;
and let him who is cupped on these days blame none but himself.
Moreover, one should not be cupped in very hot weather nor in
very cold weather; and the best season for cupping is
springtide." Quoth the doctor, "Now tell me of carnal
copulation." Hereupon Tawaddud hung her head, for shame and
confusion before the Caliph's majesty; then said, "By Allah, O
Commander of the Faithful, it is not that I am at fault, but that
I am ashamed; though, indeed, the answer is on the edge of my
tongue." Said the Caliph; "Speak, O damsel," whereupon said she,
"Copulation hath in it many and exceeding virtues and
praiseworthy qualities, amongst which are, that it lighteneth a
body full of black bile and calmeth the heat of love and induceth
affection and dilateth the heart and dispelleth the sadness of
solitude; and the excess of it is more harmful in summer and
autumn than in spring and winter." Q "What are its good effects?"
"It banisheth trouble and disquiet, calmeth love and wrath and is
good for ulcers, especially in a cold and dry humour; on the
other hand excess of it weakeneth the sight and engendereth pains
in the legs and head and back: and beware, beware of carnal
connection with old women, for they are deadly. Quoth the Iman
Ali[FN#409] (whose face Allah honour!), 'Four things kill and
ruin the body: entering the Hammam on a full stomach; eating salt
food; copulation on a plethora of blood and lying with an ailing
woman; for she will weaken thy strength and infect thy frame with
sickness; and an old woman is deadly poison.' And quoth one of
them, 'Beware of taking an old woman to wife, though she be
richer in hoards than Kárún'"[FN#410] Q "What is the best
copulation?" "If the woman be tender of years, comely of shape,
fair of face, swelling of breast and of noble race, she will add
to thee strength and health of body; and let her be even as saith
a certain poet describing her,

'Seeing thy looks wots she what thou desir'st, * By inspiration;
     wants nor word nor sign;
And, when thou dost behold her rarest grace, * The charms of
     every garden canst decline.'

Q "At what time is copulation good?" "If by night, after food
digested and if by day, after the morning meal." Q "What are the
most excellent fruits?" "Pomegranate and citron." Q "Which is the
most excellent of vegetables?" "Endive.[FN#411]" Q "Which of
sweet-scented flowers?" "Rose and Violet." Q "How is the seed of
man secreted?" "There is in man a vein which feedeth all the
other veins. Now water is collected from the three hundred and
sixty veins and, in the form of red blood, entereth the left
testicle, where it is decocted, by the heat of temperament
inherent in the son of Adam, into a thick, white liquid, whose
odour is as that of the palm-spathe." Q "What flying thing is it
that emitteth seed and menstruateth?" "The flitter-mouse,[FN#412]
that is the bat." Q "What is that which, when confined and shut
out from the air liveth, and when let out to smell the air
dieth?" "The fish." Q "What serpent layeth eggs?" "The Su'ban or
dragon.[FN#413]" With this the physician waxed weary with much
questioning, and held his peace, when Tawaddud said to the
Caliph, "O Commander of the Faithful, he hath questioned me till
he is tired out and now I will ask him one question, which if he
answer not, I will take his clothes as lawful prize."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the damsel said to the Commander of the Faithful, "Verily he hath
questioned me till he is tired out, and now I will ask him one
question, which if he answer not I will take his clothes as
lawful prize," the Caliph cried, "Ask on." So quoth she to the
physician, "What is that thing which resembleth the earth in
roundness, whose resting-place and whose spine are hidden from
men's eyes; little of price and estimation; narrow of chest and
shackled as to throat though it be nor runaway slave nor
pestilent thief; thrust through and through, though not in fray,
and wounded, though not in fight: time eateth its vigour and
water wasteth it away; now it is beaten without blemish, and then
made to serve without stint; united after separation; submissive,
but not to him who caresseth it; pregnant without child in belly;
drooping, yet not leaning on its side; becoming dirty yet
purifying itself; cleaving to its fere, yet changing; copulating
without a yard, wrestling without arms: resting and taking its
ease; bitten, yet not crying out: now more complaisant than a
cup-companion and then more troublesome than summer-heat; leaving
its mate by night and embracing her by day and having its abode
in the corners of the mansions of the noble?" The physician was
silent awhile in perplexity and his colour changed and he bowed
his head and made no reply; whereupon she said to him, "Ho, sir
doctor, speak or doff thy dress." At this, he rose and said, "O
Commander of the Faithful, bear witness against me that this
damsel is more learned than I in medicine and what else, and that
I cannot cope with her." And he put off his clothes and fled
forth. Quoth the Caliph to Tawaddud, "Ree us thy riddle," and she
replied, "O Commander of the Faithful, it is the button and the
button-loop.[FN#414]"--Then she undertook the astronomers and
said, "Let him of you who is an astronomer rise and come
forward." So the astronomer advanced and sat down before her;
and, when she saw him, she laug