hed and said, "Art thou the
astronomer, the mathematician, the scribe?" "Yes," answered he.
Quoth she, "Ask of what thou wilt; success resteth with Allah."
So he said, "Tell me of the sun and its rising and setting." And
she replied: "Know that the sun riseth from the shadows in the
Eastern hemisphere and setteth in the shadows of the Western, and
each hemisphere compriseth one hundred and eighty degrees. Quoth
Allah Almighty, 'I swear by the Lord of the East and of the
West.'[FN#415] And again, 'He it is who hath ordained the sun to
shine by day, and the moon for a light by night; and hath
appointed her station that ye might know the number of years and
the computation of time.'[FN#416] The moon is Sultan of the night
and the sun Sultan of the day, and they vie with each other in
their courses and follow without overtaking each other. Quoth
Almighty Allah, 'It is not expedient that the sun overtake the
moon in her course; neither doth the night outstrip the day, but
each of these luminaries moveth in a peculiar orbit.'"[FN#417] Q
"When the day cometh, what becometh of the night; and what of the
day, when the night cometh?" "He causeth the night to enter in
upon the day, and He causeth the day to enter in upon the
night."[FN#418] Q "Enumerate to me the mansions of the
moon?"[FN#419] "They number eight-and-twenty, to wit, Sharatán,
Butayn, Surayá, Dabarán, Hak'ah, Han'ah, Zirá'a, Nasrah, Tarf,
Jabhah, Zubrah, Sarfah, 'Awwá, Simák, Ghafar, Zubání, Iklíl,
Kalb, Shaulah, Na'am, Baldah, Sa'ad al-Zábih, Sa'ad al-Bul'a,
Sa'ad al-Su'úd, Sa'ad al-Akhbiyah, Fargh the Former and Fargh the
Latter; and Risháa. They are disposed in the order of the letters
of the Abjad-hawwaz or older alphabet,[FN#420] according to their
numerical power, and in them are secret virtues which none
knoweth save Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) and the
stablished in science. They are divided among the twelve Signs of
the Zodiac, two Mansions and a third of a Mansion to each Sign.
Thus Sharatan, Butayn and one-third of Suráyá, belong to Aries,
the other two-thirds of Suráyá, Dabaran and two-thirds of Hak'ah
to Taurus, the other third of Hak'ah, Han'ah and Zira'a to
Gemini; Nasrah, Tarf and a third of Jabhah to Cancer, the other
two-thirds of Jabhah, Zubrah and two-thirds of Sarfah to Leo; the
other third of Sarfah, 'Awwá and Simák to Virgo; Ghafar, Zubáni
and one-third of Iklíl to Libra; the other two-thirds of Iklil,
Kalb and two-thirds of Shaulah to Scorpio; the other third of
Shaulah, Na'áim and Baldah to Sagittarius; Sa'ad al-Zábih, Sa'ad
al-Bul'a and one-third of Sa'ad al-Su'ud to Capricorn, the other
two-thirds of Sa'ad al-Su'dd, Sa'ad al-Akhbiyah and two-thirds of
Fargh the Former to Aquarius, the other third of Fargh the
Former, Fargh the Latter and Risháa to Pisces."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel enumerated the Mansions and distributed them into their
Signs, the astronomer said, "Thou hast replied aright; now tell
me of the planets and their natures, also of their sojourn in the
Zodiacal Signs, their aspects, auspicious and sinister, their
houses, ascendants and descendants. She answered, "The sitting is
narrow for so large a matter, but I will say as much as I can.
Now the planets number seven; which are, the Sun, the Moon,
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. The Sun, hot-dry, sinister
in conjunction, favourable in opposition, abideth thirty days in
each Sign. The Moon, cold-moist and favourable of aspect,
tarrieth in each Sign two days and a third of another day.
Mercury is of a mixed nature, favourable in conjunction with the
favourable, and sinister in conjunction with the sinister
aspects, and abideth in each sign seventeen days and a half day.
Venus, temperate and favourable, abideth in each sign
five-and-twenty days. Mars is sinister and woneth in each sign
ten months. Jupiter is auspicious and abideth in each sign a
year. Saturn, cold-dry and sinister, tarrieth in each sign thirty
months. The house of the Sun is Leo, her ascendant is Aries, and
her descendant Aquarius. The Moon's house is Cancer, his
ascendant Taurus, his descendant Scorpio and his sinister aspect
Capricorn. Saturn's house is Capricorn-Aquarius, his ascendant
Libra, his descendant Aries and his sinister aspects Cancer and
Leo. Jupiter's house is Pisces-Sagittarius, his ascendant Cancer,
his descendant Capricorn and his sinister aspects Gemini and Leo.
Venus's house is Taurus, her ascendant Pisces, her descendant
Libra, and her sinister aspects Aries and Scorpio. Mercury's
house is Gemini-Virgo, his ascendant Virgo, his descendant
Pisces, and his sinister aspect Taurus. Mars' house is
Aries-Scorpio, his ascendant Capricorn, his descendant Cancer and
his sinister aspect Libra." Now when the astronomer saw her
acuteness and comprehensive learning and heard her fair answers,
he bethought him for a sleight to confound her before the
Commander of the Faithful, and said to her, "O damsel, tell me,
will rain fall this month?" At this she bowed her head and
pondered so long, that the Caliph thought her at a loss for an
answer and the astronomer said to her, "Why dost thou not speak?"
Quoth she, "I will not speak except the Commander of the Faithful
give me leave." So the Caliph laughed and said, "How so?" Cried
she "I would have thee give me a sword, that I may strike off his
head, for he is an Infidel, an Agnostic, an Atheist.[FN#421]" At
this, loud laughed the Caliph and those about him laughed, and
she continued "O astronomer, there are five things that none
knoweth save Allah Almighty;" and she repeated the verset; "'Aye!
Allah!--with Him is the knowledge of the hour and He causeth the
rain to descend at His own appointed time --and He knoweth what
is in the wombs of females--but no soul knoweth what it shall
have gotten on the morrow; neither wotteth any soul in what land
it shall die: Verily Allah is knowing, informed of all.'"[FN#422]
Quoth the astronomer, "Thou hast said well, and I, by Allah,
thought only to try thee." Rejoined she, "Know that the
almanack-makers have certain signs and tokens, referring to the
planets and constellations relative to the coming in of the year;
and folk have learned something by experience." Q "What be that?"
"Each day hath a planet that ruleth it: so if the first day in
the year fall on First Day (Sunday) that day is the Sun's and
this portendeth (though Allah alone is All-knowing!) oppression
of kings and sultans and governors and much miasma and lack of
rain; and that people will be in great tumult and the grain-crop
will be good, except lentils, which will perish, and the vines
will rot and flax will be dear and wheat cheap from the beginning
of Túbah to the end of Barmahát.[FN#423] And, in this year there
will be much fighting among kings, and there shall be great
plenty of good in this year, but Allah is All-knowing!" Q "What
if the first day fall on Second Day (Monday)?" "That day
belongeth to the Moon and portendeth righteousness in
administrators and officials and that it will be a year of much
rain and grain-crops will be good, but linseed will decay and
wheat will be cheap in the month Kiyáhk;[FN#424] also the plague
will rage and the sheep and goats will die, grapes will be
plentiful and honey scarce and cotton cheap; and Allah is
omniscient!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel ended her notice of Second Day the astronomer said to her
"Now tell me what will occur if New Year's day fall on Third Day
(Tuesday)." She replied, "That is Mars' day and portendeth death
of great men and much destruction and deluge of blood and
dearness of grain; lack of rain and scarcity of fish, which will
anon be in excess and anon fail. Lentils and honey in this year
will be cheap and linseed dear and only barley will thrive, to
the exception of all other cereals: great will be the fighting
among kings and death will be in the blood and there will be much
mortality among asses." Q "What if it fall on Fourth Day?" "That
is Mercury's day and portendeth great tumult among the folk and
much enmity and, though rains be moderate, rotting of some of the
green crops; also that there will be sore mortality among cattle
and young children and much fighting by sea; that wheat will be
dear from Barmúdah to Misra[FN#425] and other grains cheap;
thunder and lightning will abound and honey will be dear, palm-
trees will thrive and bear abundantly and flax and cotton will be
plentiful, while radishes and onions will be dear; but Allah is
All-knowing!" Q "What if it fall on Fifth Day?" "That is
Jupiter's day and portendeth equity in Wazirs and righteousness
in Kazis and Fakirs and the Ministers of religion; and that good
will be plentiful: rains and fruit and trees and grain will
abound, and flax, cotton, honey, grapes and fish be cheap; and
Allah is Omniscient!" Q "What if it fall on Meeting Day or
Friday?" "That day appertaineth to Venus and portendeth
oppression in the chiefs of the Jinn and talk of forgery and
back-biting; there will be much dew; the autumn crops will be
good in the land and there will be cheapness in one town and not
in another: ungraciousness will be rife by land and sea; linseed
will be dear, also wheat, in Hátúr, but cheap in Amshír; honey
will be dear and grapes and water-melons will rot; and Allah is
Omniscient!" Q "What if it fall on the Sabbath (Saturday)?" "That
is Saturn's day and portendeth the preferment of slaves and
Greeks and those in whom there is no good, neither in their
neighbourhood; there will be great drought and dearth; clouds
will abound and death will be rife among the sons of Adam and woe
to the people of Egypt and Syria from the oppression of the
Sultan and failure of blessing upon the green crops and rotting
of grain; and Allah is All-knowing!"[FN#426] Now with this, the
astronomer hung his head very low, and she said to him, "O
astronomer, I will ask thee one question, which if thou answer
not, I will take thy clothes." "Ask," replied he. Quoth she,
"Where is Saturn's dwelling-place?"; and he answered, "In the
seventh heaven." Q "And that of Jupiter?" "In the sixth heaven."
Q "And that of Mars?" "In the fifth heaven." Q "And that of the
Sun?" "In the fourth heaven." Q "And that of Venus?" "In the
third heaven." Q "And that of Mercury?" "In the second heaven." Q
"And that of the Moon?" "In the first heaven." Quoth she, "Well
answered; but I have one more question to ask thee;" and quoth
he, "Ask!" Accordingly she said, "Now tell me concerning the
stars, into how many parts are they divided." But he was silent
and answered nothing; and she cried to him, "Put off thy
clothes." So he doffed them and she took them; after which the
Caliph said to her, "Tell us the answer to thy question." She
replied: "O Commander of the Faithful, the stars are divided into
three parts, whereof one-third is hung in the sky of the
earth,[FN#427] as it were lamps, to give light to the earth, and
a part is used to shoot the demons withal, when they draw near by
stealth to listen to the talk in heaven. Quoth Allah Almighty,
'Verily, we have dight the sky of the earth with the adornment of
the stars; and have appointed them for projectiles against every
rebellious Satan.'[FN#428] And the third part is hung in air to
illuminate the seas and give light to what is therein." Quoth the
astronomer, "I have one more question to ask, which if she
answer, I will avow myself beaten." "Say on," answered she.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
astronomer said, "Now tell me what four contraries are based upon
other four contraries?" Replied she, "The four qualities of
Caloric and Frigoric, Humidity and Siccity; for of heat Allah
created fire, whose nature is hot-dry; of dryness, earth, which
is cold-dry; of cold, water which is cold-wet; of moisture, air,
which is hot-wet. Moreover, He created twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces; and
appointed them of the four humours; three fiery, Aries, Leo, and
Sagittarius; three earthly, Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; three
airy, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius; and three watery, Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces." Hereupon the astronomer rose, and saying,
"Bear witness against me that she is more learned than I," away
he went beaten. Then quoth the Caliph, "Where is the
philosopher[FN#429]?"; at which one rose hastily and came forward
and said to Tawaddud, "What is Time and what be its limits, and
its days, and what things bringeth it?" Replied she, "Time is a
term applied to the hours of the night and day, which are but the
measures of the courses of the sun and moon in their several
heavens, even as Allah Almighty telleth us when he saith, 'A sign
to them also is the Night, from which we strip off the day, and
lo! they are plunged in darkness, and the Sun runneth to her
place of rest; this is the ordinance of the Sublime, the
All-knowing.'"[FN#430] Q "How cometh unbelief to the son of
Adam?" "It is reported of the Apostle (whom Allah bless and
preserve!) that he said, 'Unbelief in a man runneth as the blood
runneth in his veins, when he revileth the world and Time and
night and the Hour.' And again, 'Let none of you revile Time, for
Time is God; neither revile the world, for she saith, 'May Allah
not aid him who revileth me!;' neither revile the hour, for, 'The
Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt thereof';[FN#431]
neither revile the earth, for it is a portent, according to the
saying of the Most High, 'Out of the ground have we created you,
and into the same will we cause you to return, and we will bring
you forth yet thence another time.'"[FN#432] Q "What are the five
that ate and drank, yet came not out of loins nor womb?" "Adam
and Simeon[FN#433] and Salih's she-camel[FN#434] and Ishmael's
ram and the bird that Abu Bakr the Truth-teller saw in the
cave.[FN#435]" Q "Tell me of five that are in Paradise and are
neither humans, Jinns nor angels?" "Jacob's wolf and the Seven
Sleepers' dog and Esdras's ass and Salih's camel and Duldul the
mule of the Prophet (upon whom be blessings and peace!)." Q "What
man prayed a prayer neither on earth nor in heaven?" "Solomon,
when he prayed on his carpet, borne by the wind." Q "Ree me this
riddle:--A man once looked at a handmaid during dawn-prayer, and
she was unlawful to him; but, at noonday she became lawful to
him: by mid-afternoon,, she was again unlawful, but at sundown,
she was lawful to him: at supper time she was a third time
unlawful, but by daybreak, she became once more lawful to him."
"This was a man who looked at another's slave-girl in the
morning, and she was then unlawful to him; but at midday he
bought her, and she became lawful to him: at mid-afternoon he
freed her, and she became unlawful to him; but at sundown he
married her and she was again lawful to him. At nightfall he
divorced her and she was then a third time unlawful to him; but,
next morning at daybreak, he took her back, and she became once
more lawful to him." Q "Tell me what tomb went about with him
that lay buried therein?" "Jonah's whale, when it had swallowed
him." Q "What spot of lowland is it, upon which the sun shone
once, but will never again shine till Judgment-Day?" "The bottom
of the Red Sea, when Moses smote it with his staff, and the sea
clave asunder in twelve places, according to the number of the
tribes;[FN#436] then the sun shone on the bottom and will do so
nevermore until Judgment-Day." And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
philosopher then addressed the damsel saying, "What was the first
skirt that trailed over the face of the earth?" She replied,
"That of Hagar, out of shame before Sarah; and it became a custom
among the Arabs." Q "What is that which breatheth without life?"
"Quoth Almighty Allah, 'By the morning when it
breatheth!'"[FN#437] Q "Ree me this riddle:--A number of pigeons
came to a high tree and lighted, some on the tree and others
under it. Said those on the tree to those on the ground, 'If one
of you come up to us, ye will be a third part of us all in
number; and if one of us descend to you, we shall be like unto
you in number,' How many pigeons were there in all?" "Twelve:
seven alighted on the tree and five beneath; and, if one go up,
those above would be eight to four; and, if one go down, both
would be six and Allah is all-knowing."[FN#438] With this the
philosopher put off his clothes and fled: whereupon the next
contest took place, for she turned to the Olema present and said,
"Which of you is the rhetorician that can discourse of all arts
and sciences?" There came forward a sage hight Ibrahim bin Siyyár
and said to her, "Think me not like the rest." Quoth she, "It is
the more assured to me that thou wilt be beaten, for that thou
art a boaster; and Allah will help me to victory over thee, that
I may strip thee of thy clothes. So, if thou sentest one to fetch
thee wherewithal to cover thyself, 'twould be well for thee."
Cried he, "By Allah, I will assuredly conquer thee and make thee
a byword among the peoples, generation after generation!"
Rejoined she, "Do penance in advance for thy broken oath." Then
he asked, "What five things did Allah create before he made
man?"; and she answered, "Water and earth and light and darkness
and the fruits of the earth." Q "What did Allah create with the
hand of omnipotence?" "The 'Arsh, throne of God or the empyreal
heaven and the tree Túbá[FN#439] and Adam and the garden of Eden;
these Allah created with the hand of His omnipotence; but to all
other created things He said, 'Be,'--and they were." Q "Who is
thy father in Al-Islam?" "Mohammed, whom Allah bless and
preserve!" Q "Who was the father in Al-Islam of Mohammed?"
"Abraham, the Friend of God." Q "What is the Faith of Al-Islam?"
"The professing that there is no god but the God and that
Mohammed is the apostle of God." Q "What is thy first and thy
last?" "My first is man's seed in the shape of foul water and my
last filthy carrion: the first of me is dust and the last of me
is dust. Quoth the poet,

'Of dust was I created, and man did I become, * In question ever
     ready and aye fluent in reply,
Then, I unto the dust return'd, became of it again, * For that,
     in very deed, of dust at first create was I.'"

He continued, "What thing was it, whose first state was wood and
its last life?" "Moses' staff,[FN#440] when he cast it on the
valley-ground and it became, by permission of Allah, a writhing
serpent." Q "What is the meaning of the word of the Lord, 'And I
have other occasion for it?'"[FN#441] "He, Moses, was wont to
plant his staff in the ground, and it would flower and fruit and
shade him from the heat and from the cold. Moreover, it would
carry him when he was weary, and whilst he slept, guard his sheep
from lions and wild beasts." Q "What woman was born of a man
alone and what man of a woman alone?" "Eve of Adam and Jesus of
Mary.[FN#442]" Q "Tell me of the four fires, what fire eateth and
drinketh; what fire eateth but drinketh not; what fire drinketh
but eateth not and what other neither eateth nor drinketh?" "The
fire of the world eateth but drinketh not; the fire which eateth
and drinketh is Hell-fire; the fire of the sun drinketh but
eateth not, and the fire of the moon neither eateth nor
drinketh." Q "Which is the open door and which the shut?" "The
Traditional Ordinances are the open door, the Koranic the shut
door." Q "Of what doth the poet speak, when he saith,

'And dweller in the tomb whose food is at his head, * When he
     eateth of that meat, of words he waxeth fain: 
He riseth and he walketh and he talketh without tongue; * And
     returneth to the tomb where his kith and kin are lain.
No living wight is he, yet, in honour he abides; * Nor dead yet
     he deserveth that Allah him assain.'"

She replied, "The reed-pen."[FN#443] Quoth he "What doth the poet
refer to in these verses,

'Two vests in one; blood flowing easiest wise; * Rosy red ears
     and mouth wide open lies;
It hath a cock-like form, its belly pecks * And, if you price it,
     half a dirham buys.'"

She replied, "The ink-case." Quoth he, "And in these,

'Ho say to men of wisdom, wit and lore * To sapient, reverend,
     clever counsellor:
Tell me what was't you saw that bird bring forth * When wandering
     Arab-land and Ajam o'er?
No flesh it beareth and it hath no blood, * Nor down nor any
     feathers e'er it wore.
'Tis eaten cooked and eke 'tis eaten cold; * 'Tis eaten buried
     'neath the flames that roar:
It showeth twofold colours, silver white * And yellow brighter
     than pure golden ore:
'Tis not seen living or we count it dead: * So ree my riddle rich
     in marvel-store!'"

She replied, "Thou makest longsome the questioning anent an egg
worth a mite." Q "And this?,

'I waved to and fro and he waved to and fro, * With a motion so
     pleasant, now fast and now slow;
And at last he sunk down on my bosom of snow; * 'Your lover
     friend?'"

"No friend, my fan;"[FN#444] said she. Q "How many words did
Allah speak to Moses?" "It is related of the Apostle that he
said, 'God spoke to Moses fifteen hundred and fifteen words.'" Q
"Tell me of fourteen things that speak to the Lord of the
Worlds?" "The seven heavens and the seven earths, when they say,
'We come obedient to Thy command.'"[FN#445]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel made the answer, the philosopher continued, "Tell me of
Adam and how he was first created?" and she said, "Allah created
Adam of clay: the clay He made of foam and the foam of the sea,
the sea of darkness, darkness of light, light of a fish, the fish
of a rock, the rock of a ruby, the ruby of water, and the water
He created by His Omnipotence according to His saying (exalted be
His name!), 'His commandment when He willeth aught, is but to
say, BE,--and IT IS.'"[FN#446] Q "What is meant by the poet in
these verses,

'And eater lacking mouth and even maw; * Yet trees and beasts to
     it are daily bread:
Well fed it thrives and shows a lively life, * But give it water
     and you do it dead?'"

"This," quoth she, "is Fire." "And in these;" he asked,

"Two lovers barred from every joy and bliss, * Who through the
     livelong night embracing lie:
They guard the folk from all calamities, * But with the rising
     sun apart they fly?"

She answered, "The leaves of a door." Quoth he, "Tell me of the
gates of Gehenna?" Quoth she, "They are seven in number and their
names are comprised in these two couplets,

'Jahannam, next Lazá, and third Hatím; * Then count Sa'ír and
     Sakar eke, five-fold,
Sixth comes Jahím and Háwiyah the seventh; * Here are seven Hells
     in four lines briefly told.'"

Quoth he "To what doth the poet refer when he saith,

'She wears a pair of ringlets long let down * Behind her, as she
     comes and goes at speed,
And eye that never tastes of sleep nor sheds * A tear, for ne'er
     a drop it hath at need;
That never all its life wore stitch of clothes; * Yet robes
     mankind in every-mode of weed?'"

Quoth she, "A needle." Q "What is the length and what the breadth
of the bridge Al-Sirát?" "Its length is three thousand years'
journey, a thousand in descent and a thousand in ascent and a
thousand level: it is sharper than a sword and finer than a
hair."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

        When it was the Four Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had described to him Al-Sirat, the philosopher said,
"Inform me how many intercessions with Allah hath the Prophet for
each soul?"[FN#447] "Three." Q "Was Abu Bakr the first who
embraced Al-Islam?" "Yes." Q "Yet Ali became a Moslem before
him?" "Ali came to the Prophet, when he was a boy of seven years
old, for Allah vouchsafed him knowledge of the way of salvation
in his tender youth, so that he never prostrated himself to
idols." Quoth he, "Tell me which is the more excellent, Ali or
Abbás?" Now she knew that, in propounding this question, Ibrahim
was laying a trap for her; for if she said, "Ali is more
excellent than Abbas," she would lack excuse with the Caliph for
undervaluing his ancestor; so she bowed her head awhile, now
reddening, then paling, and lastly said, "Thou askest me of two
excellent men, each having his own excellence. Let us return to
what we were about." When the Caliph Harun al-Rashid heard her,
he stood up and said, "Thou hast spoken well, by the Lord of the
Ka'abah, O Tawaddud!" Then quoth Ibrahim the rhetorician, "What
meaneth the poet when he saith,

'Slim-wasted one, whose taste is sweetest-sweet, * Likest a lance
     whereon no head we scan:
And all the lieges find it work them weal, * Eaten of afternoon
     in Ramazan.'"

She answered, "The sugar-cane;" and he said, "Tell me of many
things." Asked she, "What are they?" and he said, "What is
sweeter than honey; what is sharper than the sword; what is
swifter than poison; what is the delight of a moment and what the
contentment of three days; what is the pleasantest of days; what
is the joy of a week; what is that debt the worst debtor denieth
not; what is the prison of the tomb; what is the joy of the
heart; what is the snare of the soul; what is death-in-life; what
is the disease that may not be healed; what is the shame that may
not be wiped off; what is the beast that woneth not in cultivated
fields, but lodgeth in waste places and hateth the sons of Adam
and hath in him somewhat of the make of seven strong and violent
beasts?" Quoth she, "Hear what I shall say in reply; then put off
thy clothes, that I may explain to thee;" and the Caliph said,
"Expound, and he shall doff his clothes." So she said, "Now that,
which is sweeter than honey, is the love of pious children to
their two parents; that, which is sharper than the sword, is the
tongue; that, which is swifter than poison, is the Envier's eye;
the delight of a moment is carnal copulation and the contentment
of three days is the depilatory for women; the pleasantest of
days is that of profit on merchandise; the joy of a week is the
bride; the debt, which the worst debtor denieth not, is death;
the prison of the tomb is a bad son; the joy of the heart is a
woman obedient to her husband (and it is said also that, when
fleshmeat descendeth upon the heart, it rejoiceth therein); the
snare of the soul is a disobedient slave; death-in-life is
poverty; the disease that may not be healed is an ill-nature, and
the shame that may not be wiped away is an ill daughter; lastly,
the beast that woneth not in cultivated fields, but lodgeth in
waste places and hateth the sons of Adam and hath in him somewhat
of the make of seven strong and violent beasts, is the locust,
whose head is as the head of a horse, its neck as the neck of the
bull, its wings as the wings of the vulture, its feet as the feet
of the camel, its tail as the tail of the serpent, its belly as
the belly of the scorpion and its horns as the horns of the
gazelle." The Caliph was astounded at her quickness and
understanding, and said to the rhetorician, "Doff thy clothes."
So he rose up and cried, "I call all who are present in this
assembly to witness that she is more learned than I and every
other learned man." And he put off his clothes and gave them to
her, saying, "Take them and may Allah not bless them to thee!" So
the Caliph ordered him fresh clothes and said, "O Tawaddud, there
is one thing left of that for which thou didst engage, namely,
chess." And he sent for experts of chess and cards[FN#448] and
trictrac. The chess-player sat down before her, and they set the
pieces, and he moved and she moved; but, every move he made she
speedily countered,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel was playing chess with the expert in presence of the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, whatever move he made
was speedily countered by her, till she beat him and he found
himself checkmated. Quoth he, "I did but lead thee on, that thou
mightest think thyself skilful: but set up again, and thou shalt
see." So they placed the pieces a second time, when he said in
himself, "Open thine eyes or she will beat thee." And he fell to
moving no piece, save after calculation, and ceased not to play,
till she said, "Thy King is dead!--Checkmate." When he saw this
he was confounded at her quickness and understanding; but she
laughed and said, "O professor, I will make a wager with thee on
this third game. I will give thee the queen and the right-hand
castle and the left-hand knight; if thou beat me, take my
clothes, and if I beat thee, I will take thy clothes." Replied
he, "I agree to this;" and they replaced the pieces, she removing
queen, castle and knight.[FN#449] Then said she, "Move, O
master." So he moved, saying to himself, "I cannot but beat her,
with such odds," and planned a combination; but, behold, she
moved on, little by little, till she made one of her
pawns[FN#450] a queen and pushing up to him pawns and other
pieces, to take off his attention, set one in his way and tempted
him to take it. Accordingly, he took it and she said to him, "The
measure is meted and the loads equally balanced.[FN#451] Eat till
thou are over-full; naught shall be thy ruin, O son of Adam, save
thy greed. Knowest thou not that I did but tempt thee, that I
might finesse thee? See: this is check-mate!" adding, "So doff
off thy clothes." Quoth he, "Leave me my bag-trousers, so Allah
repay thee;" and he swore by Allah that he would contend with
none, so long as Tawaddud abode in the realm of Baghdad. Then he
stripped off his clothes and gave them to her and went away.
Thereupon came the backgammon-player, and she said to him, "If I
beat thee, this day, what wilt thou give me?" Quoth he, "I will
give thee ten suits of brocade of Constantinople, figured with
gold, and ten suits of velvet and a thousand gold pieces; and if
I beat thee, I ask nothing but that thou write me an
acknowledgment of my victory." Quoth she, "To it, then, and do
thy best." So they played, and he lost and went away, chattering
in Frankish jargon and saying, "By the bounty of the Commander of
the Faithful, there is not her like in all the regions of the
world!" Then the Caliph summoned players on instruments of music
and asked her, "Dost thou know aught of music?"; when she
answered, "Even so!" He bade bring a worn lute, polished by use,
whose owner forlorn and lone was by parting trodden down; and of
which quoth one, describing it

"Allah watered a land, and upsprang a tree * Struck root deep
     down, and raised head a-sky:
The birds o'ersang it when green its wood; * And the Fair
     o'ersing now the wood is dry."

So they brought the lute in a bag of red satin, with tassels of
saffron-coloured silk: and she opened the bag, and took it out
and behold on it was graven,

"Oft hath a tender bough made lute for maid, * whose swift sweet
     lays at feast men's hearts invade:
She sings; it follows on her song, as though * The
     Bulbuls[FN#452] taught her all the modes she played."

She laid her lute in her lap and with bosom inclining over it,
bent to it with the bending of a mother who suckleth her child;
then she preluded in twelve different modes, till the whole
assembly was agitated with delight, like a waving sea, and she
sang the following,

"Cut short this strangeness, leave unruth of you; * My heart
     shall love you aye, by youth of you!
Have ruth on one who sighs and weeps and moans, * Pining and
     yearning for the troth of you."

The Caliph was ravished and exclaimed, "Allah bless thee and be
merciful to him who taught thee!": whereupon she rose and kissed
the ground before him. Then he sent for money and paid her master
Abu al-Husn an hundred thousand gold pieces to her price; after
which he said to her, "O Tawaddud, ask a boon of me!" Replied
she, "I ask of thee that thou restore me to my lord who sold me."
"'Tis well," answered the Caliph and restored her to her master
and gave her five thousand dinars for herself. Moreover, he
appointed Abu al-Husn one of his cup-companions for a
permanence,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
gave the damsel five thousand dinars for herself and restored her
to her master whom he appointed one of his cup-companions for a
permanence and assigned him a monthly stipend of a thousand
dinars so long as he should live; and he abode with the damsel
Tawaddud in all solace and delight of life. Marvel then, O King,
at the eloquence of this damsel and the hugeness of her learning
and understanding and her perfect excellence in all branches of
art and science; and consider the generosity of the Commander of
the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, in that he gave her master this
money and said to her, "Ask a boon of me;" and she besought him
to restore her to her lord. So he restored her to him and gave
her five thousand dinars for herself and made him one of his
boon-companions. Where is such generosity to be found after the
Abbaside Caliphs?--May Allah Almighty have mercy upon them, one
and all! And they tell a tale of




             THE ANGEL OF DEATH WITH THE PROUD KING
                      AND THE DEVOUT MAN.



It is related, O auspicious King, that one of the olden monarchs
was once minded to ride out in state with the Officers of his
realm and the Grandees of his retinue and display to the folk the
marvels of his magnificence. So he ordered his Lords and Emirs
equip them therefor and commanded his keeper of the wardrobe to
bring him of the richest of raiment, such as befitted the King in
his state; and he bade them bring his steeds[FN#453] of the
finest breeds and pedigrees every man heeds; which being done, he
chose out of the raiment what rejoiced him most and of the horses
that which he deemed best; and, donning the clothes, together
with a collar set with margarites and rubies and all manner
jewels, mounted and set forth in state, making his destrier
prance and curvet among his troops and glorying in his pride and
despotic power. And Iblis came to him and, laying his hand upon
his nose, blew into his nostrils the breath of hauteur and
conceit, so that he magnified and glorified himself and said in
his heart, "Who among men is like unto me?" And he became so
puffed up with arrogance and self-sufficiency, and so taken up
with the thought of his own splendour and magnificence, that he
would not vouchsafe a glance to any man. Presently, there stood
before him one clad in tattered clothes and saluted him, but he
returned not his salam; whereupon the stranger laid hold of his
horse's bridle. "Lift thy hand," cried the King, "thou knowest
not whose bridle-rein it is whereof thou takest hold." Quoth the
other, I have a need of thee." Quoth the King, "Wait till I
alight and then name thy need." Rejoined the stranger, "It is a
secret and I will not tell it but in thine ear." So the King
bowed his head to him and he said, "I am the Angel of Death and I
purpose to take thy soul." Replied the King, "Have patience with
me a little, whilst I return to my house and take leave of my
people and children and neighbours and wife." "By no means so,"
answered the Angel; "thou shalt never return nor look on them
again, for the fated term of thy life is past." So saying, he
took the soul of the King (who fell off his horse's back dead)
and departed thence. Presently the Death Angel met a devout man,
of whom Almighty Allah had accepted, and saluted him. He returned
the salute, and the Angel said to him, "O pious man, I have a
need of thee which must be kept secret." "Tell it in my ear,"
quoth the devotee; and quoth the other, "I am the Angel of
Death." Replied the man, "Welcome to thee! and praised be Allah
for thy coming! I am aweary of awaiting thine arrival; for indeed
long hath been thine absence from the lover which longeth for
thee." Said the Angel, "If thou have any business, make an end of
it;" but the other answered, saying, "There is nothing so urgent
to me as the meeting with my Lord, to whom be honour and glory!"
And the Angel said "How wouldst thou fain have me take thy soul?
I am bidden to take it as thou willest and choosest." He replied,
"Tarry till I make the Wuzu-ablution and pray; and, when I
prostrate myself, then take my soul while my body is on the
ground."[FN#454] Quoth the Angel, "Verily, my Lord (be He
extolled and exalted!) commanded me not to take thy soul but with
thy consent and as thou shouldst wish; so I will do thy will."
Then the devout man made the minor ablution[FN#455] and prayed:
and the Angel of Death took his soul in the act of prostration
and Almighty Allah transported it to the place of mercy and
acceptance and forgiveness. And they tell another tale of




             THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE RICH KING.



A certain King had heaped up coin beyond count and gathered store
of all precious things, which Allah the Most Highest hath
created. So, in order that he might take his pleasure whenas he
should find leisure to enjoy all this abounding wealth he had
collected, he built him a palace wide and lofty such as befitteth
and beseemeth Kings; and set thereto strong doors and appointed,
for its service and its guard, servants and soldiers and
doorkeepers to watch and ward. One day, he bade the cooks dress
him somewhat of the goodliest of food and assembled his household
and retainers and boon-companions and servants to eat with him,
and partake of his bounty. Then he sat down upon the sofa of his
kingship and dominion; and, propping his elbow upon the cushion,
addressed himself, saying, "O soul, thou hast gathered together
all the wealth of the world; so now take thy leisure therein and
eat of this good at thine ease, in long life and prosperity ever
rife!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that hardly had
the King made an end of saying to himself, "Eat of this weal at
thine ease, in long life and prosperity ever rife!" when a man
clad in tattered raiment, with an asker's wallet hanging at his
neck, as he were one who came to beg food, knocked with the
door-ring a knock so loud and terrible that the whole palace
shook as with quake of earth and the King's throne trembled. The
servants were affrighted and rushed to the door, and when they
saw the man who had knocked they cried out at him, saying, "Woe
to thee! what manner of unmannerly fashion be this? Wait till the
King eateth and we will then give thee of what is left." Quoth
he, "Tell your lord to come out and speak with me, for I have of
him a pressing need and a matter to heed." They cried, "Away,
fool! who art thou that we should bid our lord come forth to
thee?" But he said, "Tell him of this." So they went in and told
the King, who said, "Did ye not rebuke him and draw upon him and
threaten him!" Now as he spoke, behold, there came another knock
at the gate, louder than the first knock, whereupon the servants
sprang at the stranger with staves and weapons, to fall upon him
and slay him; but he shouted at them, saying, "Bide in your
steads, for I am the Angel of Death." Hereat their hearts quaked
and their wits forsook them; their understandings were in
confusion, their side-muscles quivered in perturbation and their
limbs lost the power of motion. Then said the King to them, "Tell
him to take a substitute[FN#456] in my place and one to relieve
me in this case." But the Angel answered, saying, "I will take no
substitute, and I come not but on thine account, to cause
separation between thee and the goods thou hast gathered together
and the riches thou hast heaped up and entreasured." When the
King heard this, he wept and groaned, saying, "Allah curse the
treasure which hath deluded and undone me and diverted me from
the service of my Lord! I deemed it would profit me, but to-day
it is a regret for me and a calamity to me, and behold, I go
forth, empty-handed of it, and leave it to my foes." Thereupon
Allah caused the Treasure to speak out and it said, "Wherefore
cursest thou me?[FN#457] Curse thyself, for Allah created both me
and eke thyself of the dust and appointed me to be in thine hand,
that thou mightest provide thee with me a viaticum for the next
world and give alms with me to the poor and the needy and the
sick; and build mosques and hospices and bridges and aqueducts,
so might I be an aidance unto thee in the world to come. But thou
didst garner me and hoard me up and on thine own vanities
bestowedst me, neither gavest thou thanks for me, as was due, but
wast ungrateful to me; and now thou must leave me to thy foes and
thou hast naught save thy regretting and thy repenting. But what
is my sin, that thou shouldest revile me?" Then the Angel of
Death took the King's soul as he sat on his throne before he ate
of the food, and he fell down dead. Quoth Allah Almighty, "While
they were rejoicing for that which had been given them, we
suddenly laid hold on them; and, behold, they were seized with
despair."[FN#458] And they tell another tale of




             THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE KING OF THE
                      CHILDREN OF ISRAEL.



There was a puissant despot among the Kings of the Banú Isráíl,
who sat one day upon the throne of his kingship, when he saw come
in to him, by the gate of the hall, a man of forbidding aspect
and horrible presence. The King was affrighted at his sudden
intrusion and his look terrified him; so he sprang up before him
and said, "Who art thou, O man? Who gave thee leave to come in to
me and who invited thee to enter my house?" Quoth the stranger,
"Verily the Lord of the House sent me to thee, nor can any
doorkeeper exclude me, nor need I leave to come in to Kings; for
I reck not of a Sultan's majesty neither of the multitude of his
guards. I am he from whom no tyrant is at rest, nor can any man
escape from my grasp: I am the Destroyer of delights and the
Sunderer of societies." Now when the King heard this a palsy
crept over him[FN#459] and he fell on his face in a swoon; but
presently coming to himself, he asked, "Art thou then the Angel
of Death?"; and the stranger answered, "Yes." "I conjure thee, by
Allah," quoth the King, "grant me one single day's respite, that
I may pray pardon of my sins and ask absolution of my Lord and
restore to their rightful owners the monies which are in my
treasures, so I may not be burdened with the woe of a reckoning
nor with the misery of punishment therefor." Replied the Angel,
"Well-away! well-away! this may be in no way."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
Death-messenger to the King, "Well-away, well-away! this may be
in no way. How can I grant thee a reprieve when the days of thy
life are counted and thy breaths numbered and thy moments fixed
and written?" "Grant me an hour," asked the King; but the Angel
answered saying, "The hour was in the account and hath sped, and
thou unheeding aught; and hath fled, and thou taking no thought:
and now thy breathings are accomplished, and there remaineth to
thee but one breath." Quoth the King, "Who will be with me when I
am transported to my tomb?" Quoth the Angel, "Naught will be with
thee but thy works good or evil." "I have no works," said the
King; and the Angel, "Doubtless thy long home will be in
hell-fire and thy doom the wrath of the Almighty." Then he seized
the soul of the King, and he fell off his throne and dropped on
the earth dead. And there arose a mighty weeping and wailing and
clamour of keening for him among the people of his court, and had
they known that to which he went of the wrath of his Lord, their
weeping for him had been sorer and their wailing louder and more
abounding. And a story is told of




              ISKANDAR ZU AL-KARNAYN[FN#460] AND A
                  CERTAIN TRIBE OF POOR FOLK.



It is related that Iskandar Zu al-Karnayn[FN#461] once came, in
his journeyings, upon a tribe of small folk, who owned naught of
the weals of the world and who dug their graves over against the
doors of their houses and were wont at all times to visit them
and sweep the earth from them and keep them clean and pray at
them and worship Almighty Allah at them; and they had no meat
save grasses and the growth of the ground. So Iskandar sent a man
to summon their King, but he refused to come, saying, "I have no
need of him." Thereupon Iskandar went to him and said, "How is it
with you and what manner of men are ye?; for I see with you
forsooth naught of gold or silver, nor find I with you aught of
the weals of the world." Answered the King, "None hath his fill
of the weals of the world." Iskandar then asked "Why do you dig
your graves before your house-doors?"; and the King answered,
"That they may be the prospective of our eye-glances; so we may
look on them and ever renew talk and thought of death, neither
forget the world to come; and on this wise the love of the world
be banished from our hearts and we be not thereby distracted from
the service of our Lord, the Almighty." Quoth Iskandar, "Why do
ye eat grasses?"; and the other replied, "Because we abhor to
make our bellies the tombs of animals and because the pleasure of
eating outstrippeth not the gullet." Then putting forth his hand
he brought out a skull of a son of Adam and, laying it before
Iskandar, said, "O Zu al-Karnayn, Lord of the Two Horns, knowest
thou who owned this skull?" Quoth he, "Nay;" and quoth the other,
"He who owned this skull was a King of the Kings of the world,
who dealt tyrannously with his subjects, specially wronging the
weak and wasting his time in heaping up the rubbish of this
world, till Allah took his sprite and made the fire his
abiding-site; and this is his head." He then put forth his hand
and produced another skull and, laying it before Iskandar, said
to him, "Knowest thou this?" "No," answered the conqueror; and
the other rejoined, "This is the skull of another King, who dealt
justly by his lieges and was kindly solicitous for the folk of
his realm and his dominions, till Allah took his soul and lodged
him in His Garden and made high his degree in Heaven." Then
laying his hands on Iskandar's head he said, "Would I knew which
of these two art thou." Whereupon Iskandar wept with sore weeping
and straining the King to his bosom cried, "If thou be minded to
company with me, I will commit to thee as Wazir the government of
my affairs and share with thee my kingdom." Cried the other,
"Well-away, well-away! I have no mind to this." "And why so?"
asked Iskandar, and the King answered, "Because all men are thy
foes by reason of the wealth and the worlds thou hast won: while
all men are my true friends, because of my contentment and
pauperdom, for that I possess nothing, neither covet aught of the
goods of life; I have no desire to them nor wish for them,
neither reck I aught save contentment." So Iskandar pressed him
to his breast and kissed him between the eyes and went his
way.[FN#462] And among the tales they tell is one concerning




                   THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF KING
                      ANUSHIRWAN.[FN#463] 



It is told of Anushirwan, the Just King, that once upon a time he
feigned himself sick, and bade his stewards and intendants go
round about the provinces of his empire and the quarters of his
dominion and seek him out a mud-brick thrown away from some
ruined village, that he might use it as medicine, informing his
intimates that the leaches had prescribed this to him. So they
went the round of the provinces of his reign and of all the lands
under his sway and said to him on return, "In all the realm we
have found nor ruined site nor castaway mud-brick." At this
Anushirwan rejoiced and rendered thanks to the Lord, saying, "I
was but minded to try my kingdom and prove mine empire, that I
might know if any place therein remained ruined and deserted, so
I might rebuild and repeople it; but, since there be no place in
it but is inhabited, the affairs of the reign are
best-conditioned and its ordinance is excellent; and its
populousness[FN#464] hath reached the pitch of perfection."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
high officials returned and reported, "We have found in the
empire nor ruined site nor rotten brick," the Just King thanked
his God and said, "Verily the affairs of the realm are
best-conditioned and its ordinance is excellent and its
populousness hath reached the pink of perfection." And ken thou,
O King, continued Shahrazad, that these olden Kings strave not
and toiled not for the peopling of their possessions, but because
they knew that the more populous a country is, the more abundant
is that which is desired therein; and because they wist the
saying of the wise and the learned to be true without other view,
namely, "Religion dependeth on the King, the King on the troops,
the troops on the treasury, the treasury on the populousness of
the country and its prosperity on the justice done to the
lieges." Wherefore they upheld no one in tyranny or oppression;
neither suffered their dependants and suite to work injustice,
knowing that kingdoms are not established upon tyranny, but that
cities and places fall into ruin when oppressors are set as
rulers over them, and their inhabitants disperse and flee to
other governments; whereby ruin falleth upon the realm, the
imports fail, the treasuries become empty and the pleasant lives
of the subjects are perturbed; for that they love not a tyrant
and cease not to offer up successive prayers against him; so that
the King hath no ease of his kingdom, and the vicissitudes of
fortune speedily bring him to destruction. And they tell a tale
concerning




              THE JEWISH KAZI AND HIS PIOUS WIFE. 



Among the Children of Israel one of the Kazis had a wife of
surpassing beauty, constant in fasting and abounding in patience
and long-suffering; and he, being minded to make the pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, appointed his own brother Kazi in his stead, during
his absence, and commended his wife to his charge. Now this
brother had heard of her beauty and loveliness and had taken a
fancy to her. So no sooner was his brother gone than he went to
her and sought her love-favours; but she denied him and held fast
to her chastity. The more she repelled him, the more he pressed
his suit upon her; till, despairing of her and fearing lest she
should acquaint his brother with his misconduct whenas he should
return, he suborned false witnesses to testify against her of
adultery; and cited her and carried her before the King of the
time who adjudged her to be stoned. So they dug a pit, and
seating her therein stoned her, till she was covered with stones,
and the man said, "Be this hole her grave!" But when it was dark
a passer-by, making for a neighbouring hamlet, heard her groaning
in sore pain; and, pulling her out of the pit, carried her home
to his wife, whom he bade dress her wounds. The peasant woman
tended her till she recovered and presently gave her her child to
be nursed; and she used to lodge wit