h the child in another house
by night. Now a certain thief saw her and lusted after her. So he
sent to her seeking her love-favours, but she denied herself to
him; wherefore he resolved to slay her and, making his way into
her lodging by night (and she sleeping), thought to strike at her
with a knife; but it smote the little one and killed it. Now when
he knew his misdeed, fear overtook him and he went forth the
house and Allah preserved from him her chastity. But as she awoke
in the morning, she found the child by her side with throat cut;
and presently the mother came and seeing her boy dead, said to
the nurse, "Twas thou didst murther him." Therewith she beat her
a grievous beating and purposed to put her to death; but her
husband interposed and delivered the woman, saying, "By Allah,
thou shalt not do on this wise." So the woman, who had somewhat
of money with her, fled forth for her life, knowing not whither
she should wend. Presently, she came to a village, where she saw
a crowd of people about a man crucified to a tree-stump, but
still in the chains of life. "What hath he done?" she asked, and
they answered, "He hath committed a crime, which nothing can
expiate but death or the payment of such a fine by way of alms."
So she said to them, "Take the money and let him go;" and, when
they did so, he repented at her hands and vowed to serve her, for
the love of Almighty Allah till death should release him. Then he
built her a cell and lodged her therein; after which he betook
himself to woodcutting and brought her daily her bread. As for
her, she was constant in worship, so that there came no sick man
or demoniac to her, but she prayed for him and he was straightway
healed.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
woman's cell was visited by folk (and she constant in worship),
it befel by decree of the Almighty that He sent down upon her
husband's brother (the same who had caused her to be stoned), a
cancer in the face, and smote the villager's wife (the same who
had beaten her) with leprosy, and afflicted the thief (the same
who had murthered the child) with palsy. Now when the Kazi
returned from his pilgrimage, he asked his brother of his wife,
and he told him that she was dead, whereat he mourned sore and
accounted her with her Maker. After awhile, very many folk heard
of the pious recluse and flocked to her cell from all parts of
the length and breadth of the earth; whereupon said the Kazi to
his brother, "O my brother, wilt thou not seek out yonder pious
woman? Haply Allah shall decree thee healing at her hands!" and
he replied, "O my brother, carry me to her" Moreover, the husband
of the leprous woman heard of the pious devotee and carried his
wife to her, as did also the people of the paralytic thief; and
they all met at the door of the hermitage. Now she had a place
wherefrom she could look out upon those who came to her, without
their seeing her; and they waited till her servant came, when
they begged admittance and obtained permission. Presently she saw
them all and recognized them; so she veiled and cloaked face and
body and went out and stood in the door, looking at her husband
and his brother and the thief and the peasant-woman; but they
could not recognize her. Then said she to them, "Ho folk, ye
shall not be relieved of what is with you till ye confess your
sins; for, when the creature confesseth his sins the Creator
relenteth towards him and granteth him that wherefore he
resorteth to him." Quoth the Kazi to his brother, "O my brother,
repent to Allah and persist not in thy frowardness, for it will
be more helpful to thy relief." And the tongue of the case spake
this speech, 

"This day oppressor and oppressed meet, * And Allah sheweth
     secrets we secrete:
This is a place where sinners low are brought; * And Allah
     raiseth saint to highest seat.
Our Lord and Master shows the truth right clear, * Though sinner
     froward be or own defeat:
Alas[FN#465] for those who rouse the Lord to wrath, * As though
     of Allah's wrath they nothing weet!
O whoso seekest honours, know they are * From Allah, and His fear
     with love entreat."

(Saith the relator), Then quoth the brother, "Now I will tell the
truth: I did thus and thus with thy wife;" and he confessed the
whole matter, adding, "And this is my offence." Quoth the leprous
woman, "As for me, I had a woman with me and imputed to her that
of which I knew her to be guiltless, and beat her grievously; and
this is my offence." And quoth the paralytic, "And I went in to a
woman to kill her, after I had tempted her to commit adultery and
she had refused; and I slew a child that lay by her side; and
this is my offence." Then said the pious woman, "O my God, even
as Thou hast made them feel the misery of revolt, so show them
now the excellence of submission, for Thou over all things art
Omnipotent!" And Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!) made
them whole. Then the Kazi fell to looking on her and considering
her straitly, till she asked him why he looked so hard and he
said, "I had a wife and were she not dead, I had said thou art
she." Hereupon, she made herself known to him and both began
praising Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!) for that which
He had vouchsafed them of the reunion of their loves; but the
brother and the thief and the villager's wife joined in imploring
her forgiveness. So she forgave them one and all, and they
worshipped Allah in that place and rendered her due service, till
Death parted them. And one of the Sayyids[FN#466] hath related
this tale of




              THE SHIPWRECKED WOMAN AND HER CHILD.



"I was circuiting the Ka'abah one dark night, when I heard a
plaintive voice, speaking from a contrite heart and saying, 'O
Bountiful One, Thy past boon! Indeed, by my heart shall Thy
covenant never be undone.' Hearing this voice, my heart fluttered
so that I was like to die; but I followed the sound and behold,
it came from a woman, to whom I said, 'Peace be with thee, O
handmaid of Allah;' whereto she replied, 'And with thee be peace,
and the mercy of Allah and His blessings!' Quoth I, 'I conjure
thee, by Allah the Most Great, tell me what is the covenant to
which thy heart is constant.' Quoth she, 'But that thou adjurest
me by the Omnipotent, I would not tell thee my secrets. See what
is before me.' So I looked and lo! there was a child lying asleep
before her and breathing heavily in his slumber. Said she, "Know,
that I set forth, being big with this boy, to make the pilgrimage
to this House and took passage in a ship; but the waves rose
against us and the winds blew contrary and the vessel broke up. I
saved myself on a plank; and, on that bit of wood, I gave birth
to this child; and while he lay on my bosom and the waves beating
upon me,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the woman
continued, "'Now while the boy lay on my bosom and the waves beat
upon me, there swam up to me one of the sailors, who climbed on
the plank and said, 'By Allah, I desired thee whilst thou wast
yet in the ship, and now I have come at thee: so yield thy body
to me, or I will throw thee into the sea.' Said I, 'Out on thee!
hast thou no memory of that which thou hast seen and is it no
warning to thee?' Quoth he, 'I have seen the like of this many a
time and come off safe and care not.' Quoth I, 'O fellow, we are
now in a calamity, whence we hope to be delivered by obedience to
Allah and not by disobedience.' But he persisted with me, and I
feared him and thought to put him off; so I said to him, 'Wait
till this babe shall sleep'; but he took the child off my lap and
threw him into the sea. Now when I saw this desperate deed, my
heart sank and sorrow was sore upon me; so I raised my eyes
heavenwards and said, 'O Thou that interposest between a man and
his heart, intervene between me and this leonine brute; for Thou
over all things art Omnipotent!' And by Allah, hardly had I
spoken when a beast rose out of the sea and snatched him off the
plank. When I saw myself alone my sorrows redoubled and my grief
and longing for my child, and I recited,

'My coolth of eyes, the darling child of me * Is lost, and racked
     my heart with agony;
My body wrecked, and red-hot coals of love * Burning my liver
     with sore pangs, I see.
In this my sorrow shows no gleam of joy; * Save Thy high grace
     and my expectancy:
Hast seen, O Lord, what unto me befel; * My son aye lost and
     parting pangs I dree:
Take ruth on us and make us meet again; * For now my stay and
     only hope's in Thee!'

I abode in this condition a day and a night; and, when morning
dawned, I caught sight of the sails of a vessel shining afar off,
nor did the waves cease to drive me and the winds to waft me on,
till I reached the ship, whose sails I had sighted. The sailors
took me up and I looked and behold, my babe was amongst them: so
I threw myself upon him and said, 'O folk, this is my child: how
and whence came ye by him?' Quoth they, 'Whilst we were sailing
along the seas the ship suddenly stood still and lo! that which
stayed us was a beast, as it were a great city, and this babe on
its back, sucking his thumbs. So we took him up.' Now when I
heard this, I told them my tale and all that had betided me and
returned thanks to my Lord for His goodness, and vowed to Him
that never, whilst I lived, would I stir from His House nor
swerve from His service; and since then I have never asked of Him
aught but He hath given it me.' Now when she had made an end of
her story (quoth the Sayyid), I put my hand to my alms-pouch and
would have given to her, but she exclaimed, "Away from me, thou
idle man! Have I not told thee of His mercies and the
graciousness of His dealings and shall I take an alms from other
than His hand?" And I could not prevail with her to accept aught
of me: so I left her and went away, reciting these couplets

'How many boons conceals the Deity, * Eluding human sight in
     mystery:
How many graces come on heels of stresses, * And fill the burning
     heart with jubilee:
How many a sorrow in the morn appears, * And turns at night-tide
     into gladdest gree:
If things go hard with thee some day, yet trust * Th' Eterne, th'
     Almighty God of Unity:
And pray the Prophet that he intercede; * Through intercession
     every wish shalt see.'

And she left not the service of her Lord, cleaving unto His
House, till death came to her." And a tale is also told by Málik
bin Dínár[FN#467] (Allah have mercy on him!) of




                    THE PIOUS BLACK SLAVE. 



"We were once afflicted with drought at Bassorah and went forth
sundry times to pray for rain, but saw no sign of our prayers
being accepted. So I went, I and 'Itaa al-Salamí and Sábit
al-Banáni and Naja al-Bakáa and Mohammed bin Wási'a and Ayyúb
al-Sukhtiyáni and Habíb al-Farsi and Hassán bin Abi Sinán and
'Otbah al-Ghulám and Sálih al-Muzani,[FN#468] till we reached the
oratory,[FN#469] when the boys came out of the schools and we
prayed for rain, but saw no sign of acceptance. So about mid-day
the people went away and I and Sabit al-Banani tarried in the
place of prayer till nightfall, when we saw a black of comely
face, slender of shank[FN#470] and big of belly, approach us,
clad in a pair of woollen drawers; if all he wore had been
priced, it would not have fetched a couple of dirhams. He brought
water and made the minor ablution, then, going up to the
prayer-niche, prayed two inclinations deftly, his standing and
bowing and prostration being exactly similar in both. Then he
raised his glance heavenwards, and said, 'O my God and my Lord
and Master, how long wilt Thou reject Thy servants in that which
offereth no hurt to Thy sovereignty? Is that which is with Thee
wasted or are the treasuries of Thy Kingdom annihilated? I
conjure Thee, by Thy love to me forthwith to pour out upon us Thy
rain-clouds of grace!' He spake and hardly had he made an end of
speaking, when the heavens clouded over and there came a rain, as
if the mouths of waterskins had been opened; and when we left the
oratory, we were knee-deep in water,"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

     When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "hardly had
he spoken when the heavens clouded over and there came a rain, as
if the mouths of waterskins had been opened. And when we left the
oratory we were knee-deep in water, and we were lost in wonder at
the black. So I accosted him and said to him, 'Woe to thee, O
black, art thou not ashamed of what thou saidst?' He turned to me
and asked, 'What said I?'; and I, 'Thy saying to Allah, 'By Thy
love of me;' and what giveth thee to know that He loveth thee?'
Replied he, 'Away from me, O thou distracted by the world from
the care of thine own soul. Where was I, when He gave me strength
to profess the unity of the Godhead and vouchsafed unto me the
knowledge of Him? How deemest thou that He aided me thus except
of His love to me?' adding, 'Verily, His love to me is after the
measure of my love to Him.' Quoth I, 'Tarry awhile with me, so
may Allah have mercy on thee!' But he said, 'I am a chattel and
the Book enjoineth me to obey my lesser master.' So we followed
him afar off, till we saw him enter the house of a slave-broker.
Now the first half of the night was past and the last half was
longsome upon us, so we went away; but next morning, we repaired
to the slave-dealer and said to him, 'Hast thou a lad to sell us
for service?' He answered, 'Yes, I have an hundred lads or so and
they are all for sale.' Then he showed us slave after slave; till
he had shown us some seventy; but my friend was not amongst them,
and the dealer said, 'These are all I have.' But, as we were
going out from him we saw a ruinous hut behind his house and
going in behold, we found the black standing there. I cried,
''Tis he, by the Lord of the Ka'abah!' and turning to the dealer,
said to him, 'Sell me yonder slave.' Replied he, 'O Abu Yahya,
this is a pestilent unprofitable fellow, who hath no concern by
night but weeping and by day but repentance.' I rejoined, 'It is
for that I want him.' So the dealer called him, and he came out,
showing drowsiness. Quoth his master, 'Take him at thine own
price, so thou hold me free of all his faults.' I bought him for
twenty dinars and asked 'What is his name?' and the dealer
answered 'Maymun, the monkey;' and I took him by the hand and
went out with him, intending to go home; but he turned to me and
said, 'O my lesser lord, why and wherefore didst thou buy me? By
Allah, I am not fit for the service of God's creatures!' Replied
I, 'I bought thee that I might serve thee myself; and on my head
be it.' Asked he, 'Why so?' and I answered, 'Wast thou not in
company with us yesterday in the place of prayer?' Quoth he, 'And
didst thou hear me?'; and quoth I, 'It was I accosted thee
yesterday and spoke with thee.' Thereupon he advanced till we
came to a mosque, where he entered and prayed a two-bow prayer;
after which he said, 'O my God and my Lord and Master, the secret
that was between me and Thee Thou hast discovered unto Thy
creatures and hast brought me to shame before the worldling. How
then shall life be sweet to me, now that other than Thou hath
happened upon that which is between Thee and me? I conjure Thee
to take my soul to Thee forthright.[FN#471] So saying, he
prostrated himself, and I awaited awhile without seeing him raise
his head; so I shook him and behold, he was indeed dead, the
mercy of Almighty Allah be upon him! I laid him out stretching
his arms and legs and looked at him, and lo! he was smiling.
Moreover, whiteness had got the better of blackness on his brow,
and his face was radiant with light like a young moon. As we
wondered at his case, the door opened and a young man came in to
us and said, 'Peace be with you! May Allah make great our reward
and yours for our brother Maymun! Here is his shroud: wrap him in
it.' So saying, he gave us two robes, never had we seen the like
of them, and we shrouded him therein. And now his tomb is a place
whither men resort to pray for rain and ask their requirements of
Allah (be He extolled and exalted!); and how excellently well
saith the poet on this theme,

     'The heart of Gnostic[FN#472] homed in heavenly Garth * 
          Heaven decks, and Allah's porters aid afford.
     Lo! here they drink old wine commingled with * 
          Tasním,[FN#473] the wine of union with the Lord.
     Safe is the secret 'twixt the Friend and them; * 
          Safe from all hearts but from that Heart adored.'"

And they recount another anecdote of




              THE DEVOUT TRAY-MAKER AND HIS WIFE.



There was once, among the Children of Israel, a man of the
worthiest, who was strenuous in the service of his Lord and
abstained from things worldly and drave them away from his heart.
He had a wife who was a helpmate meet for him and who was at all
times obedient to him. They earned their living by making
trays[FN#474] and fans, whereat they wrought all through the
light hours; and, at nightfall, the man went out into the streets
and highways seeking a buyer for what they had made. They were
wont to fast continually by day[FN#475] and one morning they
arose, fasting, and worked at their craft till the light failed
them, when the man went forth, according to custom, to find
purchasers for his wares, and fared on till he came to the door
of the house of a certain man of wealth, one of the sons of this
world, high in rank and dignity. Now the tray-maker was fair of
face and comely of form, and the wife of the master of the house
saw him and fell in love with him and her heart inclined to him
with exceeding inclination; so, her husband being absent, she
called her handmaid and said to her, "Contrive to bring yonder
man to us." Accordingly the maid went out to him and and called
him and stopped him as though she would buy what he held in
hand.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
maid-servant went out to the man and asked him, "Come in; my lady
hath a mind to buy some of thy wares, after she hath tried them
and looked at them." The man thought she spoke truly and, seeing
no harm in this, entered and sat down as she bade him; and she
shut the door upon him. Whereupon her mistress came out of her
room and, taking him by the gaberdine,[FN#476] drew him within
and said, "How long shall I seek union of thee? Verily my
patience is at an end on thine account. See now, the place is
perfumed and provision prepared and the householder is absent
this night, and I give to thee my person without reserve, I whose
favours kings and captains and men of fortune have sought this
long while, but I have regarded none of them." And she went on
talking thus to him, whilst he raised not his eyes from the
ground, for shame before Allah Almighty and fear of the pains and
penalties of His punishment; even as saith the poet,

"'Twixt me and riding many a noble dame, * Was naught but shame
     which kept me chaste and pure:
My shame was cure to her; but haply were * Shame to depart, she
     ne'er had known a cure."

The man strove to free himself from her, but could not; so he
said to her, "I want one thing of thee." She asked, "What is
that?": and he answered, "I wish for pure water that I may carry
it to the highest place of thy house and do somewhat therewith
and cleanse myself of an impurity, which I may not disclose to
thee." Quoth she, "The house is large and hath closets and
corners and privies at command." But he replied, "I want nothing
but to be at a height." So she said to her slave-girl, "Carry him
up to the belvedere on the house-terrace." Accordingly the maid
took him up to the very top and, giving him a vessel of water,
went down and left him. Then he made the ablution and prayed a
two-bow prayer; after which he looked at the ground, thinking to
throw himself down, but seeing it afar off, feared to be dashed
to pieces by the fall.[FN#477] Then he bethought him of his
disobedience to Allah, and the consequences of his sin; so it
became a light matter to him to offer up his life and shed his
blood; and he said, "O my God and my Lord, Thou seest that which
is fallen on me; neither is my case hidden from Thee. Thou indeed
over all things art Omnipotent and the tongue of my case reciteth
and saith, 

'I show my heart and thoughts to Thee, and Thou * Alone my
     secret's secrecy canst know.
If I address Thee fain I cry aloud; * Or, if I'm mute, my signs
     for speech I show.
O Thou to whom no second be conjoined! * A wretched lover seeks
     Thee in his woe.
I have a hope my thoughts as true confirm; * And heart that
     fainteth as right well canst trow.
To lavish life is hardest thing that be, * Yet easy an Thou bid
     me life forego;
But, an it be Thy will to save from stowre, * Thou, O my Hope, to
     work this work hast power!'"

Then the man cast himself down from the belvedere; but Allah sent
an angel who bore him up on his wings and brought him down to the
ground, whole and without hurt or harm. Now when he found himself
safe on the ground, he thanked and praised Allah (to whom belong
Majesty and Might!) for His merciful protection of his person and
his chastity; and he went straight to his wife who had long
expected him, and he empty-handed. Then seeing him, she asked him
why he had tarried and what was come of that he had taken with
him and why he returned empty-handed; whereupon he told her of
the temptation which had befallen him, and she said,
"Alhamdolillah--praised be God-for delivering thee from seduction
and intervening between thee and such calamity!" Then she added,
"O man, the neighbours use to see us light our oven every night;
and, if they see us fireless this night, they will know that we
are destitute. Now it behoveth in gratitude  to Allah, that we
hide our destitution and conjoin the fast of this night to that
of the past and continue it for the sake of Allah Almighty." So
she rose and, filling the oven with wood, lighted it, to baffle
the curiosity of her woman-neighbours, reciting these couplets, 

"Now I indeed will hide desire and all repine; * And light up
     this my fire that neighbours see no sign:
Accept I what befals by order of my Lord; * Haply He too accept
     this humble act of mine."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Seventieth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
goodwife had lit the fire to baffle the curiosity of her
women-neighbours, she and her husband made the Wuzu-ablution and
stood up to pray, when behold, one of the neighbours' wives came
and asked leave to take a fire-brand from the oven. "Do what thou
wilt with the oven," answered they; but, when she came to the
fire, she cried out, saying, "Ho, such an one (to the
tray-maker's wife) take up thy bread ere it burn!" Quoth the wife
to her husband, "Hearest thou what she saith?" Quoth he, "Go and
look." So she went up to the oven, and behold, it was full of
fine bread and white. She took up the scones and carried them to
her husband, thanking Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!)
for His abounding good and great bounty; and they ate of the
bread and drank water and praised the Almighty. Then said the
woman to her husband, "Come let us pray to Allah the Most
Highest, so haply He may vouchsafe us what shall enable us to
dispense with the weariness of working for daily bread and devote
ourselves wholly to worshipping and obeying Him." The man rose in
assent and prayed, whilst his wife said, "Amen," to his prayer,
when the roof clove in sunder and down fell a ruby, which lit the
house with its light. Hereat, they redoubled in praise and
thanksgiving to Allah praying what the Almighty willed,[FN#478]
and rejoiced at the ruby with great joy. And the night being far
spent, they lay down to sleep and the woman dreamt that she
entered Paradise and saw therein many chairs ranged and stools
set in rows. She asked what the seats were and it was answered
her, "These are the chairs of the prophets and those are the
stools of the righteous and the pious." Quoth she, "Which is the
stool of my husband such an one?"; and it was said to her, "It is
this." So she looked and seeing a hole in its side asked, "What
may be this hole?"; and the reply came, "It is the place of the
ruby that dropped upon you from your house-roof." Thereupon she
awoke, weeping and bemoaning the defect in her husband's stool
among the seats of the Righteous; so she told him the dream and
said to him, "Pray Allah, O man, that this ruby return to its
place; for endurance of hunger and poverty during our few days
here were easier than a hole in thy chair among the just in
Paradise."[FN#479] Accordingly, he prayed to his Lord, and lo!
the ruby flew up to the roof and away whilst they looked at it.
And they ceased not from their poverty and their piety, till they
went to the presence of Allah, to whom be Honour and Glory! And
they also tell a tale of




                 AL-HAJJAJ AND THE PIOUS MAN. 



Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf al-Sakafi had been long in pursuit of a
certain man of the notables, and when at last he was brought
before him, he said, "O enemy of Allah, He hath delivered thee
over to me;" and cried, "Hale him to prison and lay him by the
heels in heavy fetters and build a closet over him, that he may
not come forth of it nor any go into him." So they bore him to
jail and summoned the blacksmith with the irons; and every time
the smith gave a stroke with his hammer, the prisoner raised his
eyes to heaven and said, "Is not the whole Creation and the
Empire thereof His?"[FN#480] Then the gaolers built the
cage[FN#481] over him and left him therein, lorn and lone,
whereupon longing and consternation entered into him and the
tongue of his case recited in extempore verse, 

"O, Wish of wistful men, for Thee I yearn; * My heart seeks grace
     of one no heart shall spurn.
Unhidden from thy sight is this my case; * And for one glance of
     thee I pine and burn.
They jailed and tortured me with sorest pains: * Alas for lone
     one can no aid discern!
But, albe lone, I find Thy name befriends * And cheers, though
     sleep to eyes shall ne'er return:
An thou accept of me, I care for naught; * And only Thou what's
     in my heart canst learn!"

Now when night fell dark, the gaoler left his watchmen to guard
him and went to his house; and on the morrow, when he came to the
prison, he found the fetters lying on the ground and the prisoner
gone; whereat he was affrighted and made sure of death. So he
returned to his place and bade his family farewell, after which
he took in his sleeve his shroud and the sweet herbs for his
corpse, and went in to Al-Hajjaj. And as he stood before the
presence, the Governor smelt the perfumes and asked, "What is
that?" when the gaoler answered, "O my lord, it is I who have
brought it." "And what moved thee to that?" enquired the
Governor; whereupon he told him his case,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-first Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
gaoler told his case to Al-Hajjaj, the Governor cried, "Woe to
thee! Didst thou hear him say aught?" Answered the gaoler, "Yes!
whilst the blacksmith was hammering his irons, he ceased not to
look up heavenwards and say, 'Is not the whole Creation and the
Empire thereof His?'" Rejoined Al-Hajjaj, "Dost thou not know
that He, on whom he called in thy presence, delivered him in
thine absence?" And the tongue of the case recited on this theme, 

"O Lord, how many a grief from me hast driven * Nor can I sit or
     stand without Thy hold:
How many many things I cannot count, * Thou sav'st from many many
     and manifold!"

And they also tell a tale of




              THE BLACKSMITH WHO COULD HANDLE FIRE
                         WITHOUT HURT.



It reached the ears of a certain pious man that there abode in
such a town a blacksmith, who could put his hand into the fire
and pull out the iron red-hot, without the flames doing him aught
of hurt.[FN#482] So he set out for the town in question and asked
for the blacksmith; and, when the man was shown to him, he
watched him at work and saw him do as had been reported to him.
He waited till he had made and end of his day's work; then, going
up to him, saluted him with the salam and said, "I would be thy
guest this night." Replied the smith, "With gladness and goodly
gree!" and carried him to his place, where they supped together
and lay down to sleep. The guest watched, but saw no sign in his
host of praying through the night or of special devoutness and
said in his mind, "Haply he hideth himself from me." So he lodged
with him a second and a third night, but found that he did not
exceed the devotions prescribed by the law and custom of the
Prophet and rose but little in the dark hours to pray. At last he
said to him, "O my brother, I have heard of the gift with which
Allah hath favoured thee and have seen the truth of it with mine
eyes. Moreover, I have taken note of thine assiduity in religious
exercises, but find in thee no such piety as distinguisheth those
who work saintly miracles: whence, then, cometh this to thee?" "I
will tell thee," answered the smith, "Know that I was once
passionately enamoured of a slave-girl and ofttimes sued her for
love-liesse, but could not prevail upon her, because she still
held fast by her chastity. Presently there came a year of drought
and hunger and hardship; food failed and there befel a sore
famine. As I was sitting one day at home, somebody knocked at the
door; so I went out and behold, she was standing there; and she
said to me, 'O my brother, I am sorely an-hungered and I lift
mine eyes to thee, beseeching thee to feed me for Allah's sake!'
Quoth I, 'Wottest thou not how I love thee and what I have
suffered for thy sake? Now I will not give thee one bittock of
bread except thou yield thy person to me.' Quoth she, 'Death, but
not disobedience to the Lord!' Then she went away and returned
after two days with the same prayer for food as before. I made
her a like answer, and she entered and sat down in my house being
nigh upon death. I set food before her, whereupon her eyes
brimmed with tears and she cried, 'Give me meat for the love of
Allah, to whom belong Honour and Glory!' But I answered, 'Not so,
by Allah, except thou yield thyself to me.' Quoth she, 'Better is
death to me than the wrath and wreak of Allah the Most Highest;'
and she rose and left the food untouched"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-second Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
man set food before her, the woman said, "Give me meat for the
love of Allah to whom be Honour and Glory!' But I answered, 'Not
so, by Allah, except thou yield to me thy person.' Quoth she,
'Better is death than the wrath and wreak of Allah;' and she rose
and left the food untouched and went away repeating these
couplets, 

'O Thou, the One, whose grace doth all the world embrace; * Thine
     ears have heard, Thine eyes have seen my case!
Privation and distress have dealt me heavy blows; * The woes that
     weary me no utterance can trace.
I am like one athirst who eyes the landscape's eye, * Yet may not
     drink a draught of streams that rail and race.
My flesh would tempt me by the sight of savoury food * Whose joys
     shall pass away and pangs maintain their place.'

She then disappeared for two days, when she again came and
knocked at the door; so I went out to her, and lo! hunger had
taken away her voice; but, after a rest she said, 'O my brother,
I am worn out with want and know not what to do, for I cannot
show my face to any man but to thee. Say, wilt thou feed me for
the love of Allah Almighty?' But I answered, 'Not so, except thou
yield to me thy person.' And she entered my house and sat down.
Now I had no food ready; but, when the meat was dressed and I
laid it in a saucer, behold, the grace of Almighty Allah entered
into me and I said to myself, 'Out on thee! This woman, weak of
wit and faith, hath refrained from food till she can no longer,
for stress of hunger; and, while she refuseth time after time,
thou canst not forbear from disobedience to the Lord!' And I
said, 'O my God, I repent to Thee of that which my flesh
purposed!' Then I took the food and carrying it to her, said,
'Eat, for no harm shall betide thee: this is for the love of
Allah, to whom belong Honour and Glory!' Then she raised her eyes
to heaven and said, 'O my God, if this man say sooth, I pray Thee
forbid fire to harm him in this world and the next, for Thou over
all things art Omnipotent and Prevalent in answering the prayer
of the penitent!' Then I left her and went to put out the fire in
the brasier.[FN#483] Now the season was winter and the weather
cold, and a live coal fell on my body: but by the decree of Allah
(to whom be Honour and Glory!) I felt no pain and it became my
conviction that her prayer had been answered. So I took the coal
in my hand, and it burnt me not; and going in to her, I said, 'Be
of good cheer, for Allah hath granted thy prayer!'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. 

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-third Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
blacksmith continued: "So I went in to her and said, 'Be of good
cheer, for Allah hath granted thy prayer!' Then she dropped the
morsel from her hand and said, 'O my God, now that Thou hast
shown me my desire of him and hast granted me my prayer for him,
take Thou my soul, for Thou over all things art Almighty!' And
straightway He took her soul to Him, the mercy of Allah be upon
her!" And the tongue of the case extemporised and spake on this
theme, 

"She prayed: the Lord of grace her prayer obeyed; * And spared
     the sinner, who for sin had prayed:
He showed her all she prayed Him to grant; * And Death (as prayed
     she) her portion made:
Unto his door she came and prayed for food, * And sued his ruth
     for what her misery made:
He leant to error following his lusts, * And hoped to enjoy her
     as her wants persuade;
But he knew little of what Allah willed; * Nor was Repentance,
     though unsought, denayed.
Fate comes to him who flies from Fate, O Lord, * And lot and
     daily bread by Thee are weighed."

And they also tell of



             THE DEVOTEE TO WHOM ALLAH GAVE A CLOUD
               FOR SERVICE AND THE DEVOUT KING. 



There was once, among the children of Israel, a man of the
devout, for piety acclaimed and for continence and asceticism
enfamed, whose prayers were ever granted and who by supplication
obtained whatso he wanted; and he was a wanderer in the mountains
and was used to pass the night in worship. Now Almighty Allah had
subjected to him a cloud which travelled with him wherever he
went, and poured on him its water-treasures in abundance that he
might make his ablutions and drink. After a long time when things
were thus, his fervour somewhat abated, whereupon Allah took the
cloud away from him and ceased to answer his prayers. On this
account, great was his grief and long was his woe, and he ceased
not to regret the time of grace and the miracle vouchsafed to him
and to lament and bewail and bemoan himself, till he saw in a
dream one who said to him, "An thou wouldest have Allah restore
to thee thy cloud, seek out a certain King, in such a town, and
beg him to pray for thee: so will Allah (be He extolled and
exalted!) give thee back thy cloud and bespread it over thee by
virtue of his pious prayers." And he began repeating these
couplets, 

"Wend to that pious prayerful Emir, * Who can with gladness thy
     condition cheer;
An he pray Allah, thou shalt win thy wish; * And heavy rain shall
     drop from welkin clear.
He stands all Kings above in potent worth; * Nor to compare with
     him doth aught appear:
Near him thou soon shalt hap upon thy want, * And see all joy and
     gladness draw thee near:
Then cut the wolds and wilds unfounted till * The goal thou goest
     for anigh shalt speer!"

So the hermit set out for the town named to him in the dream;
and, coming thither after long travel, enquired for the King's
palace which was duly shown to him. And behold, at the gate he
found a slave-officer sitting on a great chair and clad in
gorgeous gear; so he stood to him and saluted him; and he
returned his salam and asked him, "What is thy business?"
Answered the devotee, "I am a wronged man, and come to submit my
case to the King." Quoth the officer, "Thou hast no access to him
this day; for he hath appointed unto petitioners and enquirers
one day in every seven" (naming the day), "on which they may go
in to him; so wend thy ways in welfare till then." The hermit was
vexed with the King for thus veiling himself from the folk and
said in thought, "How shall this man be a saint of the saints of
Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!) and he on this wise?"
Then he went away and awaited the appointed day. "Now" (quoth
he)"when it came, I repaired to the palace, where I found a great
number of folk at the gate, expecting admission; and I stood with
them, till there came out a Wazir robed in gorgeous raiment and
attended by guards and slaves, who said, 'Let those, who have
petitions to present, enter.' So I entered with the rest and
found the King seated facing his officers and grandees who were
ranged according to their several ranks and degrees. The Wazir
took up his post and brought forward the petitioners, one by one,
till it came to my turn, when the King looked on me and said,
'Welcome to the 'Lord of the Cloud'! Sit thee down till I make
leisure for thee.' I was confounded at his words and confessed
his dignity and superiority; and, when the King had answered the
petitioners and had made an end with them, he rose and dismissed
his Wazirs and Grandees; then, taking my hand he led me to the
door of the private palace, where we found a black slave,
splendidly arrayed, with helm on head, and on his right hand and
his left, bows and coats of mail. He rose to the King; and,
hastening to obey his orders and forestall his wishes, opened the
door. We went in, hand in hand, till we came to a low wicket,
which the King himself opened and led me into a ruinous place of
frightful desolation and thence passed into a chamber, wherein
was naught but a prayer-carpet, an ewer for ablution and some
mats of palm-leaves. Here the King doffed his royal robes and
donned a coarse gown of white wool and a conical bonnet of felt.
Then he sat down and making me sit, called out to his wife, 'Ho,
such an one!' and she answered from within saying, 'Here am I.'
Quoth he, 'Knowest thou who is our guest to-day?' Replied she,
'Yes, it is the Lord of the Cloud.' The King said, 'Come forth:
it mattereth not for him.' And behold, there entered a woman, as
she were a vision, with a face that beamed like the new moon; and
she wore a gown and veil of wool."-And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

    When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that 'when the
King called to his wife, she came forth from the inner room; and
her face beamed like the new moon; and she wore a gown and a veil
of wool. Then said the King, 'O my brother, dost thou desire to
hear our story or that we should pray for thee and dismiss thee?'
Answered the hermit; 'Nay, I wish to hear the tale of you twain,
for that to me were preferable.' Said the King, 'My forefathers
handed down the throne, one to the other, and it descended from
great one to great one, in unbroken succession, till the last
died and it came to me. Now Allah had made this hateful to me,
for I would fain have gone awandering over earth and left the
folk to their own affairs; but I feared lest they should fall
into confusion and anarchy and misgovernment so as to swerve from
divine law, and the union of the Faith be broken up. Wherefore,
abandoning my own plans, I took the kingship and appointed to
every head of them a regular stipend; and donned the royal robes;
and posted slave-officers at the doors, as a terror to the
dishonest and for the defence of honest folk and the maintenance
of law and limitations. Now when free of this, I entered this
place and, doffing my royal habit, donned these clothes thou
seest; and this my cousin, the daughter of my father's brother,
hath agreed with me to renounce the world and helpeth me to serve
the Lord. So we are wont to weave these palm-leaves and earn,
during the day, a wherewithal to break our fast at nightfall; and
we have lived on this wise nigh upon forty years. Abide thou with
us (so Allah have mercy on thee!) till we sell our mats; and thou
shalt sup and sleep with us this night and on the morrow wend thy
ways with that thou wishest, Inshallah!' So he tarried with them
till the end of the day, when there came a boy five years old who
took the mats they had made and carrying them to the market, sold
them for a carat;[FN#484] and with this bought bread and beans
and returned with them to the King. The hermit broke his fast and
lay down to sleep with them; but in the middle of the night they
both arose and fell to praying and weeping. When daybreak was
near, the King said, "O my God, this Thy servant beseecheth Thee
to return him his cloud; and to do this Thou art able; so, O my
God, let him see his prayer granted and restore him his cloud."
The Queen amen'd to his orisons and behold, the cloud grew up in
the sky; whereupon the King gave the hermit joy and the man took
leave of them and went away, the cloud companying him as of old.
And whatsoever he required of Allah after this, in the names of
the pious King and Queen, He granted it without fail and the man
made thereon these couplets,

"My Lord hath servants fain of piety; * Hearts in the Wisdom-
    garden ranging free:
Their bodies' lusts at peace, and motionless * For breasts that
     bide in purest secresy.
Thou seest all silent, awesome of their Lord, * For hidden things
     unseen and seen they see."

And they tell a tale of




             THE MOSLEM CHAMPION AND THE CHRISTIAN
                            DAMSEL. 

The Commander of the Faithful, Omar bin al-Khattáb (whom Allah
accept!), once levied for holy war an army of Moslems, to
encounter the foe before Damascus, and they laid close siege to
one of the Christians' strongholds. Now there were amongst the
Moslems two men, brothers, whom Allah had gifted with fire and
bold daring against the enemy; so that the commander of the 
besieged fortress said to his chiefs and braves, "Were but yonder
two Moslems ta'en or slain, I would warrant you against the rest
of their strain." Wherefore they left not to set for them all
manner of toils and snares and ceased not to manoeuvre and lie in
wait and ambush for them, till they took one of them prisoner and
slew the other, who died a martyr. They carried the captive to
the Captain of the fort, who looked at him and said, "Verily, to
kill this man were indeed a pity; but his return to the Moslem
would be a calamity."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
enemy carried their Moslem captive before the Captain of the
fort, the Christian looked at him and said, "Verily to kill this
man were a pity indeed; but his return to the Moslem would be a
calamity. Oh that he might be brought to embrace the Nazarene
Faith and be to us an aid and an arm!" Quoth one of his Patrician
Knights, "O Emir, I will tempt him to abjure his faith, and on
this wise: we know that the Arabs are much addicted to women, and
I have a daughter, a perfect beauty, whom when he sees, he will
be seduced by her." Quoth the Captain, "I give him into thy
charge." So he carried him to his place and clad his daughter in
raiment, such as added to her beauty and loveliness. Then he
brought the Moslem into the room and set before him food and made
the fair girl stand in his presence, as she were a handmaid
obedient to her lord and awaiting his orders that she might do
his bidding. When the Moslem saw the evil sent down upon him, he
commended himself to Allah Almighty and closing his eyes, applied
himself to worship and to reciting the Koran. Now he had a
pleasant voice and a piercing wit; and the Nazarene damsel
presently loved him with passionate love and pined for him with
extreme repine. This lasted seven days, at the end of which she
said to herself, "Would to Heaven he would admit me into the
Faith of Al-Islam!" And the tongue of her case recited these
couplets, 

"Wilt turn thy face from heart that's all thine own, * This heart
     thy ransom and this soul thy wone?
I'm ready home and kin to quit for aye, * And every Faith for
     that of sword[FN#485] disown:
I testify that Allah hath no mate: * This proof is stablished and
     this truth is known.
Haply shall deign He union grant with one * Averse, and hearten
     heart love-overthrown;
For ofttimes door erst shut, is opened wide, * And after evil
     case all good is shown."

At last her patience failed her and her breast was straitened and
she threw herself on the ground before him, saying, "I conjure
thee by thy Faith, that thou give ear to my words!" Asked he,
"What are they?" and she answered, "Expound unto me Al-Islam." So
he expounded to her the tenets of the Faith, and she became a
Moslemah, after which she was circumcised[FN#486] and he taught
her to pray. Then said she to him, "O my brother, I did but
embrace Al-Islam for thy sake and to win thy favours." Quoth he,
"The law of Al-Islam forbiddeth sexual commerce save after a
marriage before two legal witnesses, and a dowry and a guardian
are also requisite. Now I know not where to find witnesses or
friend or parapherne; but, an thou can contrive to bring us out
of this place, I may hope to make the land of Al-Islam, and
pledge myself to thee that none other than thou in all Al-Islam
shall be wife to me." Answered she, "I will manage that"; and,
calling her father and mother, said to them, "Indeed this
Moslem's heart is softened and he longeth to enter the faith, so
I will grant him that which he desireth of my person; but he
saith: 'It befitteth me not to do this in a town where my brother
was slain. Could I but get outside it my heart would be solaced
and I would do that which is wanted of me.' Now there is no harm
in letting me go forth with him to another town, and I will be a
surety to you both and to the Emir for that which ye wish of
him." Therefore her father went to their Captain and told him
this, whereat he joyed with exceeding joy and bade him carry them
forth to a village that she named. So they went out and made the
village where they abode the rest of their day, and when night
fell, they got ready for the march and went their way, even as
saith the poet,

"'The time of parting,' cry they, 'draweth nigh': * 'How oft this
     parting-threat?' I but reply:
I've naught to do but cross the wild and wold * And, mile by
     mile, o'er fountless wastes to fly,
If the beloved seek another land * Sons of the road, whereso they
     wend, wend I.
I make desire direct me to their side, * The guide to show me
     where the way doth lie."

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
prisoner and the lady abode in the village the rest of their day
and, when night fell, made ready for the march and went upon
their way; and travelled all night without stay or delay. The
young Moslem, mounting a swift blood-horse and taking up the
maiden behind him, ceased not devouring the ground till it was
bright morning, when he turned aside with her from the highway
and, alighting, they made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed the
dawn-prayer. Now as they were thus engaged behold, they heard the
clank of swords and clink of bridles and men's voices and tramp
of horse; whereupon he said to her, "Ho, such an one, the
Nazarenes are after us! What shall we do?: the horse is so jaded
and broken down that he cannot stir another step." Exclaimed she,
"Woe to thee! art thou then afraid and affrighted?" "Yes,"
answered he; and she said, "What didst thou tell me of the power
of thy Lord and His readiness to succour those who succour seek?
Come, let us humble ourselves before Him and beseech Him: haply
He shall grant us His succour and endue us with His grace,
extolled and exalted be He!" Quoth he, "By Allah, thou sayest
well!" So they began humbling themselves and supplicating
Almighty Allah and he recited these couplets, 

"Indeed I hourly need thy choicest aid, * And should, though
     crown were placed upon my head:
Thou art my chiefest want, and if my hand * Won what it wisheth,
     all my wants were sped.
Thou hast not anything withholdest Thou; * Like pouring rain Thy
     grace is showered:
I'm shut therefrom by sins of me, yet Thou, * O Clement, deignest
     pardon-light to shed.
O Care-Dispeller, deign dispel my grief! * None can, save Thou,
     dispel a grief so dread."

Whilst he was praying and she was saying, "Amen," and the thunder
of horse-tramp nearing them, lo! the brave heard the voice of his
dead brother, the martyr, speaking and saying, "O my brother,
fear not, nor grieve! for the host whose approach thou hearest is
the host of Allah and His Angels, whom He hath sent to serve as
witnesses to your marriage. Of a truth Allah hath made His Angels
glorify you and He bestoweth on you the meed of the meritorious
and the martyrs; and He hath rolled up the earth for you as it
were a rug so that, by morning, you will be in the mountains of
Al-Medinah. And thou, when thou foregatherest with Omar bin
al-Khattab (of whom Allah accept!) give him my salutation and say
to him: 'Allah abundantly requite thee for Al-Islam, because thou
hast counselled faithfully and hast striven diligently.'"
Thereupon the Angels lifted up their voices in salutation to him
and his bride, saying, "Verily, Almighty Allah appointed her in
marriage to thee two thousand years before the creation of your
father Adam (with whom be peace evermore!)." Then joy and
gladness and peace and happiness came upon the twain; confidence
was confirmed and established was the guidance of the pious pair.
So when dawn appeared, they prayed the accustomed prayer and
fared forward. Now it was the wont of Omar, son of Al-Khattab
(Allah accept him!),  to rise for morning-prayer in the darkness
before dawn and at times he would stand in the prayer-niche with
two men behind him, and begin reciting the Chapter entitled
"Cattle"[FN#487] or that entitled "Women,"[FN#488] whereupon the
sleeper awoke and he who was making his Wuzu-ablution
accomplished it and he who was afar came to prayer; nor had he
made an end of the first bow, ere the mosque was full of folk;
then he would pray his second bow quickly, repeating a short
chapter. But, on that morning he hurried over both first and
second inclinations, repeating in each a short chapter; then,
after the concluding salutation, turning to his companions, he
said to them, "Come, let us fare forth to meet the bride and
bridegroom"; at which they wondered, not understanding his words.
But he went out and they followed him, till they came to the gate
of the city, where they met the young Moslem who, when the day
broke and the standards of Al-Medinah appeared to him, had pushed
forward for the gate closely followed by