 his bride. There he was
met by Omar who bade make a marriage feast; and the Moslems came
and ate. Then the young Moslem went in unto his bride and
Almighty Allah vouchsafed him children,--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Omar (on
whom be peace!) bade make a marriage-feast; and the Moslems came
and ate. Then the young Moslem went in unto his bride and
Almighty Allah vouchsafed him children, who fought in the Lord's
way and preserved genealogies, for they gloried therein. And how
excellent is what is said on such theme, 

"I saw thee weep before the gates and 'plain, * Whilst only
     curious wight reply would deign:
Hath eye bewitcht thee, or hath evil lot * 'Twixt thee and door
     of friend set bar of bane?
Wake up this day, O wretch, persist in prayer, * Repent as wont
     repent departed men.
Haply shall wash thy sins Forgiveness-showers; * And on thine
     erring head some ruth shall rain:
And prisoner shall escape despite his bonds; * And slave from
     thraldom freedom shall attain."

And they ceased not to be in all solace and delight of life, till
there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of
societies. And a tale is told by Sídi Ibrahim bin
Al-Khawwás[FN#489](on whom be the mercy of Allah!) concerning
himself and




             THE CHRISTIAN KING'S DAUGHTER AND THE
                            MOSLEM.



"My spirit urged me, once upon a time, to go forth into the
country of the Infidels; and I strove with it and struggled to
put away from me this inclination; but it would not be rejected.
So I fared forth and journeyed about the land of the Unbelievers
and traversed it in all its parts; for divine grace enveloped me
and heavenly protection encompassed me, so that I met not a
single Nazarene but he turned away his eyes and drew off from me,
till I came to a certain great city at whose gate I found a
gathering of black slaves, clad in armour and bearing iron maces
in their hands. When they saw me, they rose to their feet and
asked me, 'Art thou a leach?'; and I answered, 'Yes.' Quoth they,
'Come speak to our King,' and carried me before their ruler, who
was a handsome personage of majestic presence. When I stood
before him, he looked at me and said, 'Art a physician, thou?'
'Yes,' quoth I; and quoth he to his officers, 'Carry him to her,
and acquaint him with the condition before he enter.' So they
took me out and said to me, 'Know that the King hath a daughter,
and she is stricken with a sore disease, which no doctor hath
been able to cure: and no leach goeth in to her and treateth,
without healing her, but the King putteth him to death. So
bethink thee what thou seest fitting to do.' I replied, 'The King
drove me to her; so carry me to her.' Thereupon they brought me
to her door and knocked; and behold, I heard her cry out from
within, saying, 'Admit to me the physician, lord of the wondrous
secret!' And she began reciting, 

'Open the door! the leach now draweth near; * And in my soul a
     wondrous secret speer:
How many of the near far distant are![FN#490] * How many distant
     far are nearest near!
I was in strangerhood amidst you all: * But willed the
     Truth[FN#491] my solace should appear.
Joined us the potent bonds of Faith and Creed; * We met as
     dearest fere greets dearest fere:
He sued for interview whenas pursued * The spy, and blamed us
     envy's jibe and jeer:
Then leave your chiding and from blame desist, * For fie upon
     you! not a word I'll hear.
I care for naught that disappears and fleets; * My care's for
     Things nor fleet nor disappear.'

And lo! a Shaykh, a very old man, opened the door in haste and
said to me, 'Enter.' So I entered and found myself in a chamber
strewn with sweet-scented herbs and with a curtain drawn across
one corner, from behind which came a sound of groaning and grame,
weak as from an emaciated frame. I sat down before the curtain
and was about to offer my salam when I bethought me of his words
(whom Allah save and assain!), 'Accost not a Jew nor a Christian
with the salam salutation;[FN#492] and, when ye meet them in the
way, constrain them to the straitest part thereof.' So I withheld
my salutation, but she cried out from behind the curtain, saying,
'Where is the salutation of Unity and Indivisibility, O Khawwas?'
I was astonished at her speech and asked, 'How knowest thou me?';
whereto she answered, 'When the heart and thoughts are whole, the
tongue speaketh eloquently from the secret recesses of the soul.
I begged Him yesterday to send me one of His saints, at whose
hands I might have deliverance, and behold, it was cried to me
from the dark places of my house, 'Grieve not; for we soon will
send thee Ibrahim the Basket-maker.' Then I asked her, 'What of
thee?' and she answered, 'It is now four years since there
appeared to me the Manifest Truth, and He is the Relator and the
Ally, and the Uniter and the Sitter-by; whereupon my folk looked
askance upon me with an evil eye and taxed me with insanity and
suspected me of depravity, and there came not in to me doctor but
terrified me, nor visitor but confounded me.' Quoth I, 'And who
led thee to the knowledge of what thou wottest?' Quoth she, 'The
manifest signs and visible portents of Allah; and, when the path
is patent to thee, thou espiest with thine own eyes both proof
and prover.' Now whilst we were talking, behold, in came the old
man appointed to guard her and said, 'What doth thy doctor?'; and
she replied, 'He knoweth the hurt and hath hit upon the
healing.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

    When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when the
Shaykh, her guardian, went in to her he said, 'What doth thy
doctor?'; and she replied, 'He knoweth the hurt and hath hit upon
the healing.' Hereupon he manifested joy and gladness and
accosted me with a cheerful countenance, then went and told the
King, who enjoined to treat me with all honour and regard. So I
visited her daily for seven days, at the end of which time she
said to me, 'O Abu Ishak, when shall be our flight to the land of
Al-Islam?' 'How canst thou go forth,' replied I, 'and who would
dare to aid thee?' Rejoined she, 'He who sent thee to me, driving
thee as it were;' and I observed, 'Thou sayest sooth.' So when
the morrow dawned, we fared forth by the city-gate and all eyes
were veiled from us, by commandment of Him who when He desireth
aught, saith to it, 'Be,' and it becometh;[FN#493] so that I
journeyed with her in safety to Meccah, where she made a home
hard by the Holy House of Allah and lived seven years; till the
appointed day of her death. The earth of Meccah was her tomb, and
never saw I any more steadfast in prayer and fasting than she;
Allah send down upon her His mercies and have compassion on him
who saith, 

'When they to me had brought the leach (and surely showed *
     The signs of flowing tears and pining malady),
The face-veil he withdrew from me, and 'neath it naught *
     Save breath of one unsouled, unbodied, could he see.
Quoth he, 'This be a sickness Love alone shall cure; *
     Love hath a secret from all guess of man wide free.'
Quoth they, 'An folk ignore what here there be with him *
     Nature of ill and eke its symptomology,
How then shall medicine work a cure?' At this quoth I *
     'Leave me alone; I have no guessing specialty.'"

And they tell a tale of




           THE PROPHET AND THE JUSTICE OF PROVIDENCE.



A certain Prophet[FN#494] made his home for worship on a lofty
mountain, at whose foot was a spring of running water, and he was
wont to sit by day on the summit, that no man might see him,
calling upon the name of Allah the Most Highest and watching
those who frequented the spring. One day, as he sat looking upon
the fountain, behold, he espied a horseman who came up and
dismounted thereby and taking a bag from his neck, set it down
beside him, after which he drank of the water and rested awhile,
then he rode away, leaving behind him the bag which contained
gold pieces. Presently up came another man to drink of the
spring, who saw the bag and finding it full of money took it up;
then, after satisfying his thirst, he made off with it in safety.
A little after came a woodcutter wight with a heavy load of fuel
on his back, and sat down by the spring to drink, when lo! back
came the first horseman in great trouble and asked him, "Where is
the bag which was here?" and when he answered, "I know nothing of
it," the rider drew his sword and smote him and slew him. Then he
searched his clothes, but found naught; so he left him and wended
his ways. Now when the Prophet saw this, he said, "O Lord, one
man hath taken a thousand dinars and another man hath been slain
unjustly." But Allah answered him, saying, "Busy thyself with thy
devotions, for the ordinance of the universe is none of thine
affair. The father of this horseman had violently despoiled of a
thousand dinars the father of the second horseman; so I gave the
son possession of his sire's money. As for the woodcutter, he had
slain the horseman's father, wherefore I enabled the son to
obtain retribution for himself." Then cried the Prophet, "There
is none other god than Thou! Glory be to Thee only! Verily, Thou
art the Knower of Secrets."[FN#495]--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prophet was bidden by inspiration of Allah to busy himself with
his devotions and learned the truth of the case, he cried, "There
is none other god but Thou! Glory be to Thee only! Verily, Thou
and Thou alone wottest hidden things." Furthermore, one of the
poets hath made these verses on the matter, 

"The Prophet saw whatever eyes could see, * And fain of other
     things enquired he;
And, when his eyes saw things misunderstood, * Quoth he, 'O Lord,
     this slain from sin was free.
This one hath won him wealth withouten work; * Albe appeared he
     garbed in penury.
And that in joy of life was slain, although * O man's Creator
     free of sin he be.'
God answered ''Twas his father's good thou saw'st * Him take; by
     heirship not by roguery;
Yon woodman too that horseman's sire had slain; * Whose son
     avenged him with just victory:
Put off, O slave of Me, this thought for I * In men have set
     mysterious secrecy!
Bow to Our Law and humble thee, and learn * For good and evil
     issues Our decree.'"[FN#496]

And a certain pious man hath told us the tale of




            THE FERRYMAN OF THE NILE AND THE HERMIT.



"I was once a ferryman on the Nile and used to ply between the
eastern and the western banks. Now one day, as I sat in my boat,
there came up to me an old man of a bright and beaming
countenance, who saluted me and I returned his greeting; and he
said to me, 'Wilt thou ferry me over for the love of Allah
Almighty?' I answered, 'Yes,' and he continued, 'Wilt thou
moreover give me food for Allah's sake?'; to which again I
answered, 'With all my heart.' So he entered the boat and I rowed
him over to the eastern side, remarking that he was clad in a
patched gown and carried a gourd-bottle and a staff. When he was
about to land, he said to me, 'I desire to lay on thee a heavy
trust.' Quoth I, 'What is it?' Quoth he, 'It hath been revealed
to me that my end is nearhand and that to-morrow about noon thou
wilt come and find me dead under yonder tree. Wash me and wrap me
in the shroud thou wilt see under my head and after thou hast
prayed over me, bury me in this sandy ground and take my gown and
gourd and staff, which do thou deliver to one who shall come and
demand them of thee.' I marvelled at his words, and I slept
there. On the morrow I awaited till noon the event he had
announced, and then I forgot what he had said till near the hour
of afternoon-prayer, when I remembered it and hastening to the
appointed place, found him under the tree, dead, with a new
shroud under his head, exhaling a fragrance of musk. So I washed
him and shrouded him and prayed over him, then dug a hole in the
sand and buried him, after I had taken his ragged gown and bottle
and staff, with which I crossed the Nile to the western side and
there nighted. As soon as morning dawned and the city gate
opened, I sighted a young man known to me as a loose fellow, clad
in fine clothes and his hands stained with Henna, who said to me,
'Art thou not such an one?' 'Yes,' answered I; and he said, 'Give
me the trust.' Quoth I, 'What is that?' Quoth he, 'The gown, the
gourd and the staff.' I asked him, 'Who told thee of them?' and
he answered, 'I know nothing save that I spent yesternight at the
wedding of one of my friends singing and carousing till daylight,
when I lay me down to sleep and take my rest; and behold, there
stood by me a personage who said, 'Verily Allah Almighty hath
taken such a saint to Himself and hath appointed thee to fill his
place; so go thou to a certain person (naming the ferryman), and
take of him the dead man's gown and bottle and staff, for he left
them with him for thee.' So I brought them out and gave them to
him; whereupon he doffed his clothes and, donning the gown, went
his way and left me.[FN#497] And when the glooms closed around
me, I fell a-weeping; but, that night, while sleeping I saw the
Lord of Holiness (glorified and exalted be He!) in a dream
saying, 'O my servant, is it grievous to thee that I have granted
to one of My servants to return to Me? Indeed, this is of My
bounty, that I vouchsafe to whom I will, for I over all things am
Almighty.' So I repeated these couplets, 

'Lover with loved[FN#498] loseth will and aim! * All choice (an
     couldst thou know) were sinful shame.
Or grant He favour and with union grace, * Or from thee turn
     away, He hath no blame.
An from such turning thou no joy enjoy * Depart! the place for
     thee no place became.
Or canst His near discern not from His far? * Then Love's in vain
     and thou'rt a-rear and lame.
If pine for Thee afflict my sprite, or men * Hale me to death,
     the rein Thy hand shall claim!
So turn Thee to or fro, to me 'tis one; * What Thou ordainest
     none shall dare defame:
My love hath naught of aim but Thine approof * And if Thou say we
     part I say the same.'"

And of the tales they tell is one concerning




            THE ISLAND KING AND THE PIOUS ISRAELITE.



There was once a notable of the Children of Israel, a man of
wealth who had a pious and blessed son. When his last hour drew
nigh, his son sat down at his head and said to him, "O my lord,
give me an injunction." Quoth the father, "O dear son, I charge
thee, swear not by Allah or truly or falsely." Then he died and
certain lewd fellows of the Children of Israel heard of the
charge he had laid on his son and began coming to the latter and
saying, "Thy father had such and such monies of mine, and thou
knowest it; so give me what was entrusted to him or else make
oath that there was no trust." The good son would not disobey his
sire's injunction, so gave them all they claimed; and they ceased
not to deal thus with him, till his wealth was spent and he fell
into straitest predicament. Now the young man had a pious and
blessed wife, who had borne him two little sons; so he said to
her, "The folk have multiplied their demands on me and, while I
had the wherewithal to free myself of debt, I rendered it freely;
but naught is now left us, and if others make demands upon me, we
shall be in absolute distress, I and thou; our best way were to
save ourselves by fleeing to some place, where none knoweth us,
and earn our bread among the lower of the folk." Accordingly, he
took ship with her and his two children, knowing not whither he
should wend; but, "When Allah judgeth, there is none to reverse
His judgment;"[FN#499] and quoth the tongue of the case, 

"O flier from thy home when foes affright! * Whom led to weal and
     happiness such flight,
Grudge not this exile when he flees abroad * Where he on wealth
     and welfare may alight.
An pearls for ever did abide in shell, * The kingly crown they
     ne'er had deckt and dight."

The ship was wrecked, yet the man saved himself on a plank and
his wife and children also saved themselves, but on other planks.
The waves separated them and the wife was cast up in one country
and one of the boys in another. The second son was picked up by a
ship, and the surges threw the father on a desert island, where
he landed and made the Wuzu-ablution. Then he called the
prayer-call,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Four Hundred and Eightieth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
man landed upon the island, he made the Wuzu-ablution to free
himself from the impurities of the sea and called the call to
prayer and stood up to his devotions, when, behold, there came
forth of the sea, creatures of various kinds and prayed with him.
When he had finished, he went up to a tree and stayed his hunger
with its fruits; after which he found a spring of water and drank
thereof and praised Allah, to whom be honour and glory! He abode
thus three days and whenever he stood up to pray, the
sea-creatures came out and prayed in the same manner as he
prayed. Now after the third day, he heard a voice crying aloud
and saying, "O thou just man, and pious, who didst so honour thy
father and revere the decrees of thy Lord, grieve not, for Allah
(be He extolled and exalted!) shall restore to thee all which
left thy hand. In this isle are hoards and monies and things of
price which the Almighty willeth thou shalt inherit, and they are
in such a part of this place. So bring thou them to light; and
verily, we will send ships unto thee; and do thou bestow charity
on the folk and bid them to thee." So he sought out that place,
and the Lord discovered to him the treasures in question. Then
ships began resorting to him, and he gave abundant largesse to
the crews, saying to them, "Be sure ye direct the folk unto me
and I will give them such and such a thing and appoint to them
this and that." Accordingly, there came folk from all parts and
places, nor had ten years passed over him ere the island was
peopled and the man became its King.[FN#500] No one came to him
but he entreated him with munificence, and his name was noised
abroad, through the length and breadth of the earth. Now his
elder son had fallen into the hands of a man who reared him and
taught him polite accomplishments; and, in like manner, the
younger was adopted by one who gave him a good education and
brought him up in the ways of merchants. The wife also happened
upon a trader who entrusted to her his property and made a
covenant with her that he would not deal dishonestly by her, but
would aid her to obey Allah (to whom belong Majesty and Might!);
and he used to make her the companion of his voyages and his
travels. Now the elder son heard the report of the King and
resolved to visit him, without knowing who he was; so he went to
him and was well received by the King, who made him his
secretary. Presently the other son heard of the King's piety and
justice and was also taken into his service as a steward. Then
the brothers abode awhile, neither knowing the other, till it
chanced that the merchant, in whose home was their mother, also
hearing of the King's righteous and generous dealing with the
lieges, freighted a ship with rich stuffs and other excellent
produce of the land, and taking the woman with him, set sail for
the island. He made it in due course and landing, presented
himself with his gift before the King; who rejoiced therein with
exceeding joy and ordered him a splendid return-present. Now,
there were, among the gifts, certain aromatic roots of which he
would have the merchant acquaint him with the names and uses; so
he said to him, "Abide with us this night."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-first Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
King said, "Abide with us this night," the merchant replied, "We
have in the ship one to whom I have promised to entrust the care
of her to none save myself; and the same is a holy woman whose
prayers have brought me weal and I have felt the blessing of her
counsels." Rejoined the King, "I will send her some trusty men,
who shall pass the night in the ship and guard her and all that
is with her." The merchant agreed to this and abode with the
King, who called his secretary and steward and said to them, "Go
and pass the night in this man's ship and keep it safe,
Inshallah!" So they went up into the ship and seating themselves,
this on the poop and that on the bow, passed a part of the night
in repeating the names of Allah (to whom belong Majesty and
Might!). Then quoth one to the other, "Ho, such an one! The King
bade us keep watch and I fear lest sleep overtake us; so, come,
let us discourse of stories of fortune and of the good we have
seen and the trials of life." Quoth the other, "O my brother, as
for my trials Fate parted me from my mother and a brother of
mine, whose name was even as thine; and the cause of our parting
was this. My father took ship with us from such a place, and the
winds rose against us and were contrary, so that the ship was
wrecked and Allah broke our fair companionship." Hearing this the
first asked, "What was the name of thy mother, O my brother?";
and the second answered, "So and so." Thereat brother threw
himself upon brother saying, "By Allah, thou art my very
brother!" And each fell to telling the other what had befallen
him in his youth, whilst the mother heard all they said, but held
her peace and in patience possessed her soul. Now when it was
morning, one said to the other, "Come, brother, let us go to my
lodging and talk there;" and the other said, "'Tis well." So they
went away and presently, the merchant came back and finding the
woman in great trouble, said to her, "What hath befallen thee and
why this concern?" Quoth she, "Thou sentest to me yesternight men
who tempted me to evil, and I have been in sore annoy with them."
At this, he was wroth and, repairing to the King, reported the
conduct of his two trusty wights. The King summoned the twain
forthwith, as he loved them for their fidelity and piety; and,
sending for the woman, that he might hear from her own lips what
she had to say against them, thus bespake her, "O woman, what
hath betided thee from these two men in whom I trust?" She
replied, "O King, I conjure thee by the Almighty, the Bountiful
One, the Lord of the Empyrean, bid them repeat the words they
spoke yesternight." So he said to them, "Say what ye said and
conceal naught thereof." Accordingly, they repeated their talk,
and lo! the King rising from his throne, gave a great cry and
threw himself upon them, embracing them and saying, "By Allah, ye
are my very sons!" Therewith the woman unveiled her face and
said, "And by Allah, I am their very mother." So they were united
and abode in all solace of life and its delight till death parted
them; and so glory be to Him who delivereth His servant when he
restoreth to Him, and disappointeth not his hope in Him and his
trust! And how well saith the poet on the subject,

"Each thing of things hath his appointed tide * When 'tis, O
     brother, granted or denied.
Repine not an affliction hit thee hard; * For woe and welfare aye
     conjoint abide:
How oft shall woman see all griefs surround * Yet feel a joyance
     thrill what lies inside!
How many a wretch, on whom the eyes of folk * Look down, shall
     grace exalt to pomp and pride!
This man is one long suffering grief and woe; * Whom change and
     chance of Time hath sorely tried:
The World divided from what held he dearest, * After long union
     scattered far and wide;
But deigned his Lord unite them all again, * And in the Lord is
     every good descried.
Glory to Him whose Providence rules all * Living, as surest
     proofs for us decide.
Near is the Near One; but no wisdom clearer * Shows him, nor
     distant wayfare brings Him nearer."

And this tale is told of




                ABU AL-HASAN AND ABU JA'AFAR THE
                         LEPER.[FN#501]



"I had been many times to Meccah (Allah increase its honour!) and
the folk used to follow me for my knowledge of the road and
remembrance of the water-stations. It happened one year that I
was minded to make the pilgrimage to the Holy House and
visitation of the Tomb of His Prophet (on whom be blessing and
peace!) and I said in myself, 'I well know the way and will fare
alone.' So I set out and journeyed till I came to
Al-Kadisíyah[FN#502] and, entering the mosque there, saw a man
suffering from black leprosy seated in the prayer-niche. Quoth he
on seeing me, 'O Abu al-Hasan, I crave thy company to Meccah.'
Quoth I to myself, 'I fled from all my companions, and how shall
I company with lepers?' So I said to him, 'I will bear no man
company'; and he was silent at my words. Next day I walked on
alone, till I came to Al-Akabah,[FN#503] where I entered the
mosque and found the leper seated in the prayer-niche. So I said
to myself, 'Glory be to Allah! how hath this fellow preceded me
hither?' But he raised his head to me and said with a smile, 'O
Abu al-Hasan, He doth for the weak that which surpriseth the
strong!' I passed that night confounded at what I had seen; and,
as soon as morning dawned, set out again by myself; but when I
came to Arafat[FN#504] and entered the mosque, behold, there was
the leper seated in the niche! So I threw myself upon him and
kissing his feet said, 'O my lord, I crave thy company.' But he
answered, 'This may in no way be.' Then I began weeping and
wailing at the loss of his converse, when he said, 'Spare thy
tears which will avail thee naught!'"-And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-second Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
al-Hasan continued: "Now when I saw the leper-man seated in the
prayer-niche, I threw myself upon him and said, 'O my lord, I
crave thy company;' and fell to kissing his feet. But he
answered, 'This may in no way be!' Then I began weeping and
wailing at the loss of his company when he said, 'Spare thy tears
which will avail thee naught!'; and he recited these couplets, 

'Why dost thou weep when I depart and thou didst parting claim; *
     And cravest union when we ne'er shall reunite the same?
Thou lookedest on nothing save my weakness and disease; * And
     saidst 'Nor goes nor comes, or night or day, this sickly
     frame.
Seest not how Allah (glorified His glory ever be!) * Deigneth to
     grant His slave's petition wherewithal he came.
If I, to eyes of men be that and only that they see, * And this
     my body show itself so full of grief and grame,
And have I naught of food that shall supply me to the place *
     Where crowds unto my Lord resort impelled by single aim,
I have a high Creating Lord whose mercies aye are hid; * A Lord
     who hath none equal and no fear is known to Him.
So fare thee safe and leave me lone in strangerhood to wone * For
     He, the only One, consoles my loneliness so lone.'

Accordingly, I left him; but every station I came to, I found he
had foregone me, till I reached Al-Medinah, where I lost sight of
him and could hear no tidings of him. Here I met Abu Yazíd
al-Bustámi and Abu Bakr al-Shibli and a number of other Shaykhs
and learned men, to whom with many complaints, I told my case and
they said, 'Heaven forbid that thou shouldst gain his company
after this! He was Abu Ja'afar the leper, in whose name folk at
all times pray for rain and by whose blessing-prayers their end
attain.' When I heard their words, my desire for his company
redoubled and I implored the Almighty to reunite me with him.
Whilst I was standing on Arafat,[FN#505] one pulled me from
behind, so I turned and behold, it was my man. At this sight I
cried out with a loud cry and fell down in a fainting fit; but,
when I came to myself he had disappeared from my sight. This
increased my yearning for him and the ceremonies were tedious to
me and I prayed Almighty Allah to give me sight of him; nor was
it but a few days after, when lo! one pulled me from behind, and
I turned and it was he again. Thereupon he said, 'Come, I conjure
thee and ask thy want of me.' So I begged him to pray for me
three prayers; first, that Allah would make me love poverty;
secondly, that I might never lie down at night upon provision
assured to me; and thirdly, that He would vouchsafe me to look
upon His bountiful Face. So he prayed for me as I wished, and
departed from me. And indeed Allah hath granted me what the
devotee asked in prayer: to begin with He hath made me so love
poverty that, by the Almighty! there is naught in the world
dearer to me than it, and secondly since such a year, I have
never lain down to sleep upon assured provision; withal hath He
never let me lack aught. As for the third prayer, I trust that He
will vouchsafe me that also, even as He hath granted the two
precedent, for right Bountiful and Beneficent is His Godhead, and
Allah have mercy on him who said:[FN#506]-

Garb of Fakir, renouncement, lowliness;
His robe of tatters and of rags his dress;

And pallor ornamenting brow as though
'Twere wanness such as waning crescents show.

Wasted him prayer a-through the long-lived night,
And flooding tears ne'er cease to dim his sight.

Memory of Him shall cheer his lonely room:
Th' Almighty nearest is in nightly gloom.

The Refuge helpeth such Fakir in need;
Help e'en the cattle and the winged breed:

Allah for sake of him of wrath is fain,
And for the grace of him shall fall the rain;

And if he pray one day for plague to stay,
'Twill stay, and 'bate man's wrong and tyrants slay.

While folk are sad, afflicted one and each,
He in his mercy's rich, the generous leach:

Bright shines his brow; an thou regard his face
Thy heart illumined shines by light of grace.

O thou who shunnest souls of worth innate
Departs thee (woe to thee!) of sins the weight.

Thou thinkest to overtake them, while thou bearest
Follies, which slay thee whatso way thou farest.

Didst wot their worth thou hadst all honour showed,
And tears in streamlets from thine eyes had flowed.

To catarrh-troubled men flowers lack their smell;
And brokers ken for how much clothes can sell;

So haste and with thy Lord reunion sue,
And haply Fate shall lend thee aidance due,

Rest from rejection and estrangement-stress,
And Joy thy wish and will shall choicely bless.

His court wide open for the suer is dight:--
One, very God, the Lord, th' Almighty might.'"

And they also tell a tale of




               THE QUEEN OF THE SERPENTS.[FN#507]



There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, a Grecian sage called Daniel, who had disciples and
scholars and the wise men of Greece were obedient to his bidding
and relied upon his learning. Withal had Allah denied him a man
child. One night, as he lay musing and weeping over the lack of a
son who might inherit his lore, he bethought him that Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!) heareth the prayer of those who
resort to Him and that there is no doorkeeper at the door of His
bounties and that He favoureth whom He will without compt and
sendeth no supplicant empty away; nay He filleth their hands with
favours and benefits. So he besought the Almighty, the Bountiful,
to vouchsafe him a son to succeed him, and to endow him
abundantly with His beneficence. Then he returned home and
carnally knew his wife who conceived by him the same night.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Grecian
sage returned home and knew his wife who conceived by him the
same night. A few days after this he took ship for a certain
place, but the ship was wrecked and he saved himself on one of
her planks, while only five leaves remained to him of all the
books he had. When he returned home, he laid the five leaves in a
box and locking it, gave the key to his wife (who then showed big
with child), and said to her, "Know that my decease is at hand
and that the time draweth nigh for my translation from this abode
temporal to the home which is eternal. Now thou art with child
and after my death wilt haply bear a son: if this be so, name him
Hásib Karím al-Dín[FN#508] and rear him with the best of rearing.
When the boy shall grow up and shall say to thee, 'What
inheritance did my father leave me?'' give him these five leaves,
which when he shall have read and understood, he will be the most
learned man of his time." Then he farewelled her and heaving one
sigh, departed the world and all that is therein--the mercy of
Allah the Most Highest be upon Him! His family and friends wept
over him and washed him and bore him forth in great state and
buried him; after which they wended their ways home. But few days
passed ere his widow bare a handsome boy and named him Hasib
Karim al-Din, as her husband charged her; and immediately after
his birth she summoned the astrologers, who calculated his
ascendants and drawing his horoscope, said to her, "Know, O
woman! that this birth will live many a year; but that will be
after a great peril in the early part of his life, wherefrom can
he escape, he will be given the knowledge of all the exact
sciences." So saying they went their ways. She suckled him two
years,[FN#509] then weaned him, and when he was five years old,
she placed him in a school to learn his book, but he would read
nothing. So she took him from school and set him to learn a
trade; but he would not master any craft and there came no work
from his hands. The mother wept over this and the folk said to
her, "Marry him: haply he will take heart for his wife and learn
him a trade." So she sought out a girl and married him to her;
but, despite marriage and the lapse of time, he remained idle as
before, and would do nothing. One day, some neighbours of hers,
who were woodcutters, came to her and said, "Buy thy son an ass
and cords and an axe and let him go with us to the mountain and
we will all of us cut wood for fuel. The price of the wood shall
be his and ours, and he shall provide thee and his wife with his
share." When she heard this, she joyed with exceeding joy and
bought her son an ass and cords and hatchet; then, carrying him
to the woodcutters, delivered him into their hands and solemnly
committed him to their care. Said they, "Have no concern for the
boy, our Lord will provide for him: he is the son of our Shaykh."
So they carried him to the mountain, where they cut firewood and
loaded their asses therewith; then returned to the city and,
selling what they had cut, spent the monies on their families.
This they did on the next day and the third and ceased not for
some time, till it chanced one day, a violent storm of rain broke
over them, and they took refuge in a great cave till the downfall
should pass away. Now Hasib Karim al-Din went apart from the rest
into a corner of the cavern and sitting down, fell to smiting the
floor with his axe. Presently he noted that the ground sounded
hollow under the hatchet; so he dug there awhile and came to a
round flagstone with a ring in it. When he saw this, he was glad
and called his comrades the woodcutters,--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasib
Karim al-Din saw the flagstone with the ring, he was glad and
called his comrades the woodcutters, who came to him and, finding
it was fact, soon pulled up the stone and discovered under it a
trap-door, which, being opened, showed a cistern full of bees'
honey.[FN#510] Then said they to one another, "This is a large
store and we have nothing for it but to return to the city and
fetch vessels wherein to carry away the honey, and sell it and
divide the price, whilst one of us stands by the cistern, to
guard it from outsiders." Quoth Hasib, "I will stay and keep
watch over it till you bring your pots and pans." So they left
him on guard there and, repairing to the city, fetched vessels,
which they filled with honey and loading their asses therewith,
carried them to the streets and sold the contents. They returned
on the morrow and thus they did several days in succession,
sleeping in the town by night and drawing off the stuff by day,
whilst Hasib abode on guard by it till but little remained, when
they said one to other, "It was Hasib Karim al-Din found the
honey, and tomorrow he will come down to the city and complain
against us and claim the price of it, saying, Twas I found it;'
nor is there escape for us but that we let him down into the
cistern, to bale out the rest of the honey, and leave him there;
so will he die of hunger, and none shall know of him." They all
fell in with this plot as they were making for the place; and,
when they reached it, one said to him, "O Hasib, go down into the
pit and bale out for us the rest of the honey." So he went down
and passed up to them what remained of the honey, after which he
said to them, "Draw me up, for there is nothing left." They made
him no answer; but, loading their asses, went off to the city and
left him alone in the cistern. Thereupon he fell to weeping and
crying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great!" Such was his case; but as regards his
comrades, when they reached the city and sold the honey, they
repaired to Hasib's mother, weeping, and said to her, "May thy
head outlive thy son Hasib!" She asked, "What brought about his
death?" and they answered, "We were cutting wood on the mountain-
top, when there fell on us a heavy downfall of rain and we took
shelter from it in a cavern; and suddenly thy son's ass broke
loose and fled into the valley, and he ran after it, to turn it
back, when there came out upon them a great wolf, who tore thy
son in pieces and ravined the ass." When the mother heard this,
she beat her face and strewed dust on her head and fell to
mourning for her son; and she kept life and soul together only by
the meat and drink which they brought her every day. As for the
woodcutters they opened them shops and became merchants and spent
their lives in eating and drinking and laughing and frolicking.
Meanwhile Hasib Karim al-Din, who ceased not to weep and call for
help, sat down upon the cistern edge when behold, a great
scorpion fell down on him; so he rose and killed it. Then he took
thought and said, "The cistern was full of honey; how came this
scorpion here?" Accordingly he got up and examined the well right
and left, till he found a crevice from which the scorpion had
fallen and saw the light of day shining through it. So he took
out his woodman's knife and enlarged the hole, till it was big as
a window, then he crept through it and, after walking for some
time, came to a vast gallery, which led him to a huge door of
black iron bearing a padlock of silver wherein was a key of gold.
He stole up to the door and, looking through the chink, saw a
great light shining within; so he took the key and, opening the
door, went on for some time, till he came to a large artificial
lake, wherein he caught sight of something that shimmered like
silver. He walked up to it and at last he saw, hard by a hillock
of green jasper and on the hill top, a golden throne studded with
all manner gems,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Hasib
reached the hillock he found it of green jasper surmounted by a
golden throne studded with all manner gems, round which were set
many stools, some of gold, some of silver and others of leek
green emerald. He clomb the hillock and, counting the stools,
found them twelve thousand in number; then he mounted the throne
which was set on the centre and, seating himself thereon, fell to
wondering at the lake and the stools, and he marvelled till
drowsiness overcame him and he drops asleep. Presently, he was
aroused by a loud snorting and hissing and rustling, so he opened
his eyes; and, sitting up, saw each stool occupied by a huge
serpent, an hundred cubits in length. At this sight, great fear
get hold of him; his spittle dried up for the excess of his dread
and he despaired of life, as all their eyes were blazing like
live coals. Then he turned towards the lake and saw that what he
had taken for shimmering water was a multitude of small snakes,
none knoweth their compt save Allah the Most High. After awhile,
there came up to him a serpent as big as a mule, bearing on its
back a tray of gold, wherein lay another serpent which shone like
crystal and whose face was as that of a woman[FN#511] and who
spake with human speech. And as soon as she was brought up to
Hasib, she saluted him and he returned the salutation. There
upon, one of the serpents seated on the stools came up and,
lifting her off the tray, set her on one of the seats and she
cried out to the other serpents in their language, whereupon they
all fell down from their stools and did her homage. But she
signed to them to sit and they did so. Then she addressed Hasib,
saying, "Have no fear of us, O youth; for I am the Queen of the
Serpents and their Sultánah." When he heard her speak on this
wise, he took heart and she bade the serpents bring him somewhat
of food.[FN#512] So they brought apples and grapes and
pomegranates and pistachio-nuts and filberts and walnuts and
almonds and bananas and set them before him, and the
Queen-serpent said, "Welcome, O youth! What is thy name?"
Answered he, "Hasib Karim al-Din;" and she rejoined, "O Hasib,
eat of these fruits, for we have no other meat and fear thou have
nothing from us at all." Hearing this, he ate his fill and
praised Allah Almighty; and presently they took away the trays
from before him, and the Queen said, "Tell me, O Hasib, whence
thou art and how camest thou hither and what hath befallen thee."
So he told her his story from first to last, the death of his
father; his birth; his being sent to school where he learnt
nothing; his becoming a wood cutter; his finding the honey-
cistern; his being abandoned therein; his killing the scorpion;
his widening the crevice; his finding the iron door and his
coming upon the Queen, and he ended his long tale with saying,
"These be my adventures from beginning to end and only Allah
wotteth what will betide me after all this!" Quoth the Queen,
after listening to his words, "Nothing save good shall betide
thee:"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Serpent-queen had heard his story she said, "Nothing save good
shall betide thee: but I would have thee, O Hasib, abide with me
some time, that I may tell thee my history and acquaint thee with
the wondrous adventures which have happened to me." "I hear and
obey thy hest," answered he; and she began to tell in these
words,




The Adventures of Bulukiya.



"Know thou, O Hasib, there was once in the city of Cairo a King
of the Banu Isra'íl, a wise and a pious, who was bent double by
poring over books of learning, and he had a son named Bulúkiyá.
When he grew old and weak and was nigh upon death, his Grandees
and Officers of state came up to salute him, and he said to them,
'O folk, know that at hand is the hour of my march from this
world to the next, and I have no charge to lay on you, save to
commend to your care my son Bulukiya.' Then said he, 'I testify
that there is no god save the God;' and, heaving one sigh,
departed the world the mercy of Allah be upon him! They laid him
out and washed him and buried him with a procession of great
state. Then they made his son Bulukiya Sultan in his stead; and
he ruled the kingdom justly and the people had peace in his time.
Now it befell one day that he entered his father's treasuries, to
look about him, and coming upon an inner compartment and finding
the semblance of a door, opened it and passed in. And lo! he
found himself in a little closet, wherein stood a column of white
marble, on the top of which was a casket of ebony; he opened this
also and saw therein another casket of gold, containing a book.
He read the book and found in it an account of our lord Mohammed
(whom Allah bless and preserve!) and how he should be sent in the
latter days[FN#513] and be the lord of the first Prophets and the
last. On seeing the personal description Bulukiya's heart was
taken with love of him, so he at once assembled all the notables
of the Children of Israel, the Cohens or diviners, the scribes
and the priests, and acquainted them with the book, reading
portions of it to them and, adding, 'O folk, needs must I bring
my father out of his grave and burn him.' The lieges asked, 'Why
wilt thou burn him?'; and he answered, 'Because he hid this book
from me and imparted it not to me.' Now the old King had
excerpted it from the Torah or Pentateuch and the Books of
Abraham; and had set it in one of his treasuries and concealed it
from all living. Rejoined they, 'O King, thy father is dead; his
body is in the dust and his affair is in the hands of his Lord;
thou shalt not take him forth of his tomb.' So he knew that they
would not suffer him to do this thing by his sire and leaving
them he repaired to his mother, to whom said he, 'O my mother, I
have found, in one of my father's treasuries, a book containing a
description of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!), a prophet
who shall be sent in the latter days; and my heart is captivated
with love of him. Wherefore am I resolved to wander over the
earth, till I foregather with him; else I shall die of longing
for his love.' Then he doffed his clothes and donned an Aba gown
of goat's hair and coarse sandals, saying, 'O my mother, forget
me not in thy prayers.' She wept over him and said, 'What will
become of us after thee?'; but Bulukiya answered, 'I can endure
no longer, and I commit my affair and thine to Allah who is
Almighty.' Then he set out on foot Syria wards without the
knowledge of any of his folk, and coming to the sea board found a
vessel whereon he shipped as one of the crew. They sailed till he
made an island, where Bulukiya landed with the crew, but straying
away from the rest he sat down under a tree and sleep got the
better of him. When he awoke, he sought the ship but found that
she had set sail without him, and in that island he saw serpents
as big as camels and palm trees, which repeated the names of
Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) and blessed Mohammed (whom
the Lord assain and save!), proclaiming the Unity and glorifying
the Glorious; whereat he wondered."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Bulukiya saw the serpents glorifying God and proclaiming the
Unity, he wondered with extreme wonder. When they saw him, they
flocked to him and one of them said to him, 'Who and whence art
thou and whither goest thou. and what is thy name?' Quoth he, 'My
name is Bulukiya; I am of the Children of Israel and, being
distracted for love of Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!), I
come in quest of him. But who are ye, O noble creatures?'
Answered they, 'We are of the dwellers in the Jahannam-hell; and
Almighty Allah created us for the punishment of Kafirs.' 'And how
came ye hither?' asked he, and the Serpents answered, 'Know, O
Bulukiya, that Hell[FN#514] of the greatness of her boiling,
breatheth twice a year, expiring in the summer and inspiring in
the winter, and hence the summer heat and winter cold. When she
exhaleth, she casteth us forth of her maw, and we are drawn in
again with her inhaled breath.' Quoth Bulukiya, 'Say me, are
there greater serpents than you in Hell?'; and they said, 'Of a
truth we are cast out with the expired breath but by reason of
our smallness; for in Hell every serpent is so great, that were
the biggest of us to pass over its nose it would not feel
us.[FN#515]' Asked Bulukiya, 'Ye sing the praises of Allah and
invoke blessings on Mohammed, whom the Almighty assain and save!
Whence wot ye of Mohammed?'; and they answered, 'O Bulukiya,
verily his name is written on the gates of Paradise; and, but for
him, Allah had not created the worlds[FN#516] nor Paradise, nor
heaven nor hell nor earth, for He made all things that be, solely
on his account, and hath conjoined his name with His own in every
place; wherefore we love Mohammed, whom Allah bless and
preserve!' Now hearing the serpents' converse did but inflame
Bulukiya's love for Mohammed and yearning for his sight; so he
took leave of them; and, making his way to the sea-shore, found
there a ship made fast to the beach; he embarked therein as a
seaman and sailed nor ceased sailing till he came to another
island. Here he landed and walking about awhile found serpents
great and small, none knoweth their number save Almighty Allah,
and amongst them a white Serpent, clearer than crystal, seated in
a golden tray borne on the back of another serpent as big as an
elephant. Now this, O Hasib, was the Serpent-queen, none other
than myself." Quoth Hasib, "And what answer didst thou make him?"
Quoth she, "Know, O Hasib, that when I saw Bulukiya, I saluted
him with the salam, and he returned my salutation, and I said to
him, 'Who and what art thou and what is thine errand and whence
comest thou and whither goest thou?' Answered he, 'I am of the
Children of Israel; my name is Bulukiya, and I am a wanderer for
the love of Mohammed, whose description I have read in the
revealed scriptures, and of whom I go in search. But what art
thou and what are these serpents about thee?' Quoth I, 'O
Bulukiya, I am the Queen of the Serpents; and when thou shalt
foregather with Mohammed (whom Allah assain and save!) bear him
my salutation.' Then Bulukiya took leave of me and journeyed till
he came to the Holy City which is Jerusalem. Now there was in
that stead a man who was deeply versed in all sciences, more
especially in geometry and astronomy and mathematics, as well as
in white magic[FN#517] and Spiritualism; and he had studied the
Pentateuch and the Evangel and the Psalms and the Books of
Abraham. His name was Affan; and he had found in certain of his
books, that whoso should wear the seal ring of our lord Solomon,
men and Jinn and birds and beasts and all created things would be
bound to obey him. Moreover, he had discovered that our lord
Solomon had been buried in a coffin which was miraculously
transported beyond the Seven Seas to the place of burial;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Affan had
found in certain books that none, mortal or spirit, could pluck
the seal ring from the lord Solomon's finger; and that no
navigator could sail his ship upon the Seven Seas over which the
coffin had been carried. Moreover, he had found out by reading
that there was a herb of herbs and that if one express its juice
and anoint therewith his feet, he should walk upon the surface of
any sea that Allah Almighty had created without wetting his
soles, but none could obtain this herb, without he had with him
the Serpent-queen. When Bulukiya arrived at the Holy City, he at
once sat down to do his devotions and worship the Lord; and,
whilst he was so doing, Affan came up and saluted him as a True
Believer. Then seeing him reading the Pentateuch and adoring the
Almighty, he accosted him 