his daughter for the
journey and gave her all manner of presents and rarities and
precious metals, such as none may describe; and Ayn Zar departed
with the Princess to his own country. When the news of their
approach reached King Teghmus, he bade celebrate the wedding
festivities and adorn the city; after which he went in unto the
Princess and abated her maidenhead; nor was it long before she
conceived by him and, accomplishing her months, bare a man-child
like the moon on the night of its full. When King Teghmus knew
that his wife had given birth to a goodly son, he rejoiced with
exceeding joy and, summoning the sages and astrologers and
mathematicians, said to them, 'I would that ye draw the horoscope
of the newborn child with his ascendant and its aspects and
acquaint me what shall befall him in his lifetime.' So they made
their calculations and found them favourable; but, that he would,
in his fifteenth year, be exposed to perils and hardships, and
that if he survived, he would be happy and fortunate and become a
greater king than his father and a more powerful. The King
rejoiced greatly in this prediction and named the boy Janshah.
Then he delivered him to the nurses, wet and dry, who reared him
excellently well till he reached his fifth year, when his father
taught him to read the Evangel and instructed him in the art of
arms and lunge of lance and sway of sword, so that in less than
seven years he was wont to ride a-hunting, and a-chasing; he
became a doughty champion, perfect in all the science of the
cavalarice and his father was delighted to hear of his knightly
prowess. It chanced one day that King Teghmus and his son
accompanied by the troops rode out for sport into the woods and
wilds and hunted till mid afternoon of the third day, when the
Prince started a gazelle of a rare colour, which fled before him.
So he gave chase to it, followed by seven of King Teghmus's white
slaves all mounted on swift steeds, and rode at speed after the
gazelle, which fled before them till she brought them to the sea
shore. They all ran at her to take her as their quarry, but she
escaped from them and, throwing herself into the waves,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Janshah and the Mamelukes ran at the gazelle, to take her as
their quarry, she escaped from them and, throwing herself into
the waves, swam out to a fishing bark, that was moored near the
shore, and sprang on board. Janshah and his followers dismounted
and, boarding the boat, made prize of the gazelle and were minded
to return to shore with her, when the Prince espied a great
island in the offing and said to his merry men, 'I have a longing
to visit yonder island.' They answered, 'We hear and obey,' and
sailed on till they came to the island, where they landed and
amused themselves with exploring the place. Then they again
embarked and taking with them the gazelle, set out to return
homeward, but the murk of evening overtook them and they missed
their way on the main. Moreover a strong wind arose and crave the
boat into mid-ocean, so that when they awoke in the morning, they
found themselves lost at sea. Such was their case; but as regards
King Teghmus, when he missed his son, he commanded his troops to
make search for him in separate bodies; so they dispersed on all
sides and a company of them, coming to the sea shore, found there
the Prince's white slave whom he had left in charge of the
horses. They asked him what was become of his master and the
other six, and he told them what had passed whereupon they took
him with them and returned to the King and acquainted him with
what they had learnt. When Teghmus heard their report, he wept
with sore weeping and cast the crown from his head, biting his
hands for vexation. Then he rose forthright and wrote letters and
despatched them to all the islands of the sea. Moreover he got
together an hundred ships and filling them with troops, sent them
to sail about in quest of Janshah, while he himself withdrew with
his troops to his capital, where he abode in sore concern. As for
Janshah's mother, when she heard of his loss she buffeted her
face and began the mourning ceremonies for her son making sure
that he was dead. Meanwhile, Janshah and his men ceased not
driving before the wind and those in search of them cruised about
for ten days till, finding no trace they returned and reported
failure to the King. But a stiff gale caught the Prince's craft
which went spooning till they made a second island, where they
landed and walked about. Presently they came upon a spring of
running water in the midst of the island and saw from afar a man
sitting hard by it. So they went up to him and saluted him, and
he returned their salam, speaking in a voice like the
whistle[FN#538] of birds. Whilst Janshah stood marvelling at the
man's speech he looked right and left and suddenly split himself
in twain, and each half went a different way.[FN#539] Then there
came down from the hills a multitude of men of all kinds, beyond
count and reckoning; and they no sooner reached the spring, than
each one divided into two halves and rushed on Janshah and his
Mamelukes to eat them. When the voyagers saw this, they turned
and fled seawards; but the cannibals pursued them and caught and
ate three of the slaves, leaving only three slaves who with
Janshah reached the boat in safety; then launching her made for
the water and sailed nights and days without knowing whither
their ship went. They killed the gazelle, and lived on her flesh,
till the winds drove them to a third island which was full of
trees and waters and flower-gardens and orchards laden with all
fashion of fruits: and streams strayed under the tree shade:
brief, the place was a Garden of Eden. The island pleased the
Prince and he said to his companions, 'Which of you will land and
explore?' Then said one of the slaves, 'That will I do'; but he
replied, 'This thing may not be; you must all land and explore
the place while I abide in the boat.' So he set them ashore,"--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the Prince
set them ashore, and they searched the island, East and West, but
found no one; then they fared on inland to the heart thereof,
till they came to a Castle compassed about with ramparts of white
marble, within which was a palace of the clearest crystal and,
set in its centre a garden containing all manner fruits beyond
description, both fresh and dry, and flowers of grateful odour
and trees and birds singing upon the boughs. Amiddlemost the
garden was a vast basin of water, and beside it a great open hall
with a raised dais whereon stood a number of stools surrounding a
throne of red gold, studded with all kinds of jewels and
especially rubies and seeing the beauty of the Castle and of the
Garden they entered and explored in all directions, but found no
one there, so after rummaging the Castle they returned to Janshah
and told him what they had seen. When he heard their report, he
cried, 'Needs must I solace myself with a sight of it;' so he
landed and accompanied them to the palace, which he entered
marvelling at the goodliness of the place. They then visited
every part of the gardens and ate of the fruits and continued
walking till it waxed dark, when they returned to the estrade and
sat down, Janshah on the throne in the centre and the three
others on the stools ranged to the right and left. Then the
Prince, there seated, called to mind his separation from his
father's throne-city[FN#540] and country and friends and
kinsfolk; and fell a-weeping and lamenting over their loss whilst
his men wept around him. And as they were thus sorrowing behold,
they heard a mighty clamour, that came from seaward and looking
in the direction of the clamour saw a multitude of apes, as they
were swarming locusts. Now the castle and the island belonged to
these apes, who, finding the strangers' boat moored to the
strand, had scuttled it and after repaired to the palace, where
they came upon Janshah and his men seated." Here the Serpent-
queen again broke off her recital saying, "All this, O Hasib, was
told to Bulukiya by the young man sitting between the two tombs."
Quoth Hasib, "And what did Janshah do with the apes?"; so the
Queen resumed her tale: "He and his men were sore affrighted at
the appearance of the apes, but a company of them came up to the
throne whereon he sat and, kissing the earth before him, stood
awhile in his presence with their paws upon their breasts in
posture of respect. Then another troop brought to the castle
gazelles which they slaughtered and skinned; and roasting pieces
of the flesh till fit for food they laid them on platters of gold
and silver and spreading the table, made signs to Janshah and his
men to eat. The Prince and his followers came down from their
seats and ate, and the apes ate with them, till they were
satisfied, when the apes took away the meat and set on fruits of
which they partook and praised Allah the most Highest. Then
Janshah asked the apes by signs what they were and to whom the
palace belonged, and they answered him by signals, 'Know ye that
this island belonged of yore to our lord Solomon, son of David
(on both of whom be peace!), and he used to come hither once
every year for his solace,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Janshah asked the apes by signs to whom the palace belonged, they
answered him by signals, "'Of a truth this place belonged of yore
to our lord Solomon, son of David (on both of whom be peace!),
who used to come hither once every year for his solace, and then
wend his ways.' Presently the apes continued, 'And know, O King,
that thou art become our Sultan and we are thy servants; so eat
and drink, and whatso thou ever bid us, that will we do.' So
saying, they severally kissed the earth between the hands of
Janshah and all took their departure. The Prince slept that night
on the throne and his men on the stools about him, and on the
morrow, at daybreak, the four Wazirs or Captains of the apes
presented themselves before him, attended by their troops, who
ranged themselves about him, rank after rank, until the place was
crowded. Then the Wazirs approached and exhorted him by signs to
do justice amongst them and rule them righteously; after which
the apes cried out to one another and went away, all save a small
party which remained in presence to serve him. After awhile,
there came up a company of apes with huge dogs in the semblance
of horses, each wearing about his head a massive chain; and
signed to Janshah and his three followers to mount and go with
them. So they mounted, marvelling at the greatness of the dogs,
and rode forth, attended by the four Wazirs and a host of apes
like swarming locusts, some riding on dogs and others afoot till
they came to the sea-shore. Janshah looked for the boat which
brought him and finding it scuttled turned to the Wazirs and
asked how this had happened to it; whereto they answered, 'Know,
O King, that, when thou camest to our island, we kenned that thou
wouldst be Sultan over us and we feared lest ye all flee from us,
in our absence; and embark in the boat, so we sank it.' When
Janshah heard this, he turned to his Mamelukes and said to them,
'We have no means of escaping from these apes, and we must
patiently await the ordinance of the Almighty.' Then they fared
on inland and ceased not faring till they came to the banks of a
river, on whose other side rose a high mountain, whereon Janshah
saw a multitude of Ghuls. So he turned to the apes and asked
them, 'What are these Ghuls?' and they answered, 'Know, O King,
that these Ghuls are our mortal foes and we come hither to do
battle with them.' Janshah marvelled to see them riding horses,
and was startled at the vastness of their bulk and the
strangeness of their semblance; for some of them had heads like
bulls and others like camels. As soon as the Ghuls espied the
army of the apes, they charged down to the river bank and
standing there, fell to pelting them with stones as big as maces;
and between them there befell a sore fight. Presently, Janshah,
seeing that the Ghuls were getting the better of the apes, cried
out to his men, saying, 'Unease your bows and arrows and shoot at
them your best shafts and keep them off from us.' They did so and
slew of the Ghuls much people, when there fell upon them sore
dismay and they turned to flee; but the apes, seeing Janshah's
prowess, forded the river and headed by their Sultan chased the
Ghuls, killing many of them in the pursuit, till they reached the
high mountain where they disappeared. And while exploring the
said mountain Janshah found a tablet of alabaster, whereon was
written, 'O thou who enterest this land, know that thou wilt
become Sultan over these apes and that from them there is no
escape for thee, except by the passes that run east and west
through the mountains. If thou take the eastern pass, thou wilt
fare through a country swarming with Ghuls and wild beasts,
Marids and Ifrits, and thou wilt come, after three months'
journeying, to the ocean which encompasseth the earth; but, if
thou travel by the western pass, it will bring thee, after four
months' journeying, to the head of the Wady of Emmets.[FN#541]
When thou hast followed the road, that leads through this
mountain, ten days,' "--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Janshah
read this much upon the tablet and found, at the end of the
inscription, "'Then thou wilt come to a great river, whose
current is so swift that it blindeth the eyes. Now this river
drieth up every Sabbath,[FN#542] and on the opposite bank lies a
city wholly inhabited by Jews, who the faith of Mohammed refuse;
there is not a Moslem among the band nor is there other than this
city in the land. Better therefore lord it over the apes, for so
long as thou shalt tarry amongst them they will be victorious
over the Ghuls. And know also that he who wrote this tablet was
the lord Solomon, son of David (on both be peace!).' When Janshah
read these words, he wept sore and repeated them to his men. Then
they mounted again and, surrounded by the army of the apes who
were rejoicing in their victory, returned to the castle. Here
Janshah abode, Sultaning over them, for a year and a half. And at
the end of this time, he one day commanded the ape-army to mount
and go forth a hunting with him, and they rode out into the woods
and wilds, and fared on from place to place, till they approached
the Wady of Emmets, which Janshah knew by the description of it
upon the alabaster tablet. Here he bade them dismount and they
all abode there, eating and drinking a space of ten days, after
which Janshah took his men apart one night and said, 'I purpose
we flee through the Valley of Emmets and make for the town of the
Jews; it may be Allah will deliver us from these apes and we will
go God's ways.' They replied, 'We hear and we obey:' so he waited
till some little of the night was spent then, donning his armour
and girding his sword and dagger and such like weapons, and his
men doing likewise, they set out and fared on westwards till
morning. When the apes awoke and missed Janshah and his men, they
knew that they had fled. So they mounted and pursued them, some
taking the eastern pass and others that which led to the Wady of
Emmets, nor was it long before the apes came in sight of the
fugitives, as they were about to enter the valley, and hastened
after them. When Janshah and his men saw them, they fled into the
Emmet-valley; but the apes soon overtook them and would have
slain them, when behold, there rose out of the earth a multitude
of ants like swarming locusts, as big as dogs, and charged home
upon the apes. They devoured many of their foes, and these also
slew many of the ants; but help came to the emmets: now an ant
would go up to an ape and smite him and cut him in twain, whilst
ten apes could hardly master one ant and bear him away and tear
him in sunder. The sore battle lasted till the evening but the
emmets were victorious. In the gloaming Janshah and his men took
to flight and fled along the sole of the Wady."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "in the
gloaming Janshah and his men took to flight and fled along the
sole of the Wady till the morning. With the break of day, the
apes were up and at them, which when the Prince saw, he shouted
to his men, 'Smite with your swords.' So they bared their blades
and laid on load right and left, till there ran at them an ape,
with tusks like an elephant, and smote one of the Mamelukes and
cut him in sunder. Then the apes redoubled upon Janshah and he
fled with his followers into the lower levels of the valley,
where he saw a vast river and by its side a mighty army of ants.
When the emmets espied Janshah they pushed on and surrounded him,
and one of the slaves fell to smiting them with his sword and
cutting them in twain; whereupon the whole host set upon him and
slew him. At this pass, behold, up came the apes from over the
mountain and fell in numbers upon Janshah; but he tore off his
clothes and, plunging into the river, with his remaining servant,
struck out for the middle of the stream. Presently, he caught
sight of a tree on the other bank; so he swam up to it and laying
hold of one of its branches, hung to it and swung himself ashore,
but as for the last Mameluke the current carried him away and
dashed him to pieces against the mountain. Thereupon Janshah fell
to wringing his clothes and spreading them in the sun to dry,
what while there befell a fierce fight between the apes and the
ants, until the apes gave up the pursuit and returned to their
own land. Meanwhile, Janshah, who abode alone on the river-bank,
could do naught but shed tears till nightfall, when he took
refuge in a cavern and there passed the dark hours, in great fear
and feeling desolate for the loss of his slaves. At daybreak
awaking from his sleep he set out again and fared on nights and
days, eating of the herbs of the earth, till he came to the
mountain which burnt like fire, and thence he made the river
which dried up every Sabbath. Now it was a mighty stream and on
the opposite bank stood a great city, which was the capital of
the Jews mentioned in the tablet. Here he abode till the next
Sabbath, when the river dried up and he walked over to the other
side and entered the Jew city, but saw none in the streets. So he
wandered about till he came to the door of a homestead, which he
opened and entering, espied within the people of the house
sitting in silence and speaking not a syllable. Quoth he, 'I am a
stranger and anhungered;' and they signed to him, as to say, 'Eat
and drink, but speak not.'[FN#543] So he ate and drank and slept
that night and, when morning dawned, the master of the house
greeted him and bade him welcome and asked him, 'Whence comest
thou and whither art thou bound?' At these words Janshah wept
sore and told him all that had befallen him and how his father
was King of Kabul; whereat the Jew marvelled and said, 'Never
heard we of that city, but we have heard from the merchants of
the caravans that in that direction lieth a land called
Al-Yaman.' 'How far is that land from this place?' asked Janshah,
and the Jew answered, 'The Cafilah merchants pretend that it is a
two years and three months' march from their land hither.' Quoth
Janshah, 'And when doth the caravan come?' Quoth the Jew, 'Next
year 'twill come.' "--And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Jew was questioned anent the coming of the caravan, he replied,
"'Next year 'twill come.' At these words the Prince wept sore and
fell a-sorrowing for himself and his Mamelukes; and lamenting his
separation from his mother and father and all which had befallen
him in his wanderings. Then said the Jew, 'O young man, do not
weep, but sojourn with us till the caravan shall come, when we
will send thee with it to thine own country.' So he tarried with
the Jew two whole months and every day he went out walking in the
streets for his solace and diversion. Now it chanced one day,
whilst he paced about the main thoroughfares, as of wont, and was
bending his steps right and left, he heard a crier crying aloud
and saying, 'Who will earn a thousand gold pieces and a slave-
girl of surpassing beauty and loveliness by working for me
between morning and noontide?' But no one answered him and
Janshah said in his mind, 'Were not this work dangerous and
difficult, he would not offer a thousand diners and a fair girl
for half a day's labour.' Then he accosted the crier and said, 'I
will do the work;' so the man carried him to a lofty mansion
where they found one who was a Jew and a merchant, seated on an
ebony chair, to whom quoth the crier, standing respectfully
before him, 'O merchant, I have cried every day these three
months, and none hath answered, save this young man.' Hearing his
speech the Jew welcomed Janshah, led him into a magnificent
sitting-room and signalled to bring food. So the servants spread
the table and set thereon all manner meats, of which the merchant
and Janshah ate, and washed their hands. Then wine was served up
and they drank; after which the Jew rose and bringing Janshah a
purse of a thousand diners and a slave-girl of rare beauty, said
to him, 'Take maid and money to thy hire.' Janshah took them and
seated the girl by his side when the trader resumed, 'To-morrow
to the work!'; and so saying he withdrew and Janshah slept with
the damsel that night. As soon as it was morning, the merchant
bade his slaves clothe him in a costly suit of silk whenas he
came out of the Hammam-Bath. So they did as he bade them and
brought him back to the house, whereupon the merchant called for
harp and lute and wine and they drank and played and made merry
till the half of the night was past, when the Jew retired to his
Harim and Janshah lay with his slave-girl till the dawn. Then he
went to the bath and on his return, the merchant came to him and
said, 'Now I wish thee to do the work for me.' 'I hear and obey,'
replied Janshah. So the merchant bade his slaves bring two she-
mules and set Janshah on one, mounting the other himself. Then
they rode forth from the city and fared on from morn till noon,
when they made a lofty mountain, to whose height was no limit.
Here the Jew dismounted, ordering Janshah to do the same; and
when he obeyed the merchant gave him a knife and a cord, saying,
'I desire that thou slaughter this mule.' So Janshah tucked up
his sleeves and skirts and going up to the mule, bound her legs
with the cord, then threw her and cut her throat; after which he
skinned her and lopped off her head and legs and she became a
mere heap of flesh. Then said the Jew, 'Slit open the mule's
belly and enter it and I will sew it up on thee. There must thou
abide awhile and whatsoever thou seest in her belly, acquaint me
therewith.' So Janshah slit the mule's belly and crept into it,
whereupon the merchant sewed it up on him and withdrew to a
distance,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
merchant sewed up the mule's belly on Janshah and, withdrawing to
a distance, hid himself in the skirts of the mountain. After a
while a huge bird swooped down on the dead mule and snatching it
up, flew up with it to the top of the mountain, where it set down
the quarry and would have eaten it; but Janshah, feeling the bird
begin to feed, slit the mule's belly and came forth. When the
bird saw him, it took fright at him and flew right away;
whereupon he stood up and looking right and left, saw nothing but
the carcasses of dead men, mummied by the sun, and exclaimed,
'There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!' Then he looked down the precipice and
espied the merchant standing at the mountain-foot, looking for
him. As soon as the Jew caught sight of him, he called out to
him, 'Throw me down of the stones which are about thee, that I
may direct thee to a way whereby thou mayst descend.' So Janshah
threw him down some two hundred of the stones, which were all
rubies,[FN#544] chrysolites and other gems of price; after which
he called out to him, saying, 'Show me the way down and I will
throw thee as many more.' But the Jew gathered up the stones and,
binding them on the back of the mule, went his way without
answering a word and left Janshah alone on the mountain-top. When
the Prince found himself deserted, he began to weep and implore
help of Heaven, and thus he abode three days; after which he rose
and fared on over the mountainous ground two month's space,
feeding upon hill-herbs; and he ceased not faring till he came to
its skirts and espied afar off a Wady full of fruitful trees and
birds harmonious, singing the praises of Allah, the One, the
Victorious. At this sight he joyed with great joy and stayed not
his steps till, after an hour or so, he came to a ravine in the
rocks, through which the rain torrents fell into the valley. He
made his way down the cleft till he reached the Wady which he had
seen from the mountain-top and walked on therein, gazing right
and left, nor ceased so doing until he came in sight of a great
castle, towering high in air. As he drew near the gates he saw an
old man of comely aspect and face shining with light standing
thereat with a staff of carnelian in his hand, and going up to
him, saluted him. The Shaykh returned his salam and bade him
welcome, saying, 'Sit down, O my son.' So he sat down at the door
of the castle and the old man said to him, 'How camest thou to
this land, untrodden by son of Adam before thee, and whither art
thou bound?' When Janshah heard his words he wept bitterly at the
thought of all the hardships he had suffered and his tears choked
his speech. Quoth the Shaykh, 'O my son, leave weeping; for
indeed thou makest my heart ache.' So saying, he rose and set
somewhat of food before him and said to him, 'Eat.' He ate and
praised Allah Almighty; after which the old man besought him
saying, 'O my son, I would have thee tell me thy tale and
acquaint me with thine adventures.' So Janshah related to him all
that had befallen him, from first to last, whereat the Shaykh
marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then said the Prince, 'Prithee
inform me who is the lord of this valley and to whom doth this
great castle belong?' Answered the old man, 'Know, O my son, this
valley and all that is therein and this castle with all it
containeth belong to the lord Solomon, son of David (on both be
peace!). As for me, my name is Shaykh Nasr,[FN#545] King of the
Birds; for thou must know that the lord Solomon committed this
castle to my charge,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Shaykh
Nasr pursued, 'Thou must know that the lord Solomon com misted
this castle to my charge and taught me the language of birds and
made me ruler over all the fowls which be in the world; wherefore
each and every come hither once in the twelvemonth, and I pass
them in review: then they depart; and this is why I dwell here.'
When Janshah heard this, he wept sore and said to the Shaykh, 'O
my father, how shall I do to get back to my native land?' Replied
the old man, 'Know, O my son, that thou art near to the mountain
Kaf, and there is no departing for thee from this place till the
birds come, when I will give thee in charge to one of them, and
he will bear thee to thy native country. Meanwhile tarry with me
here and eat and drink and divert thyself with viewing the
apartments of this castle.' So Janshah abode with Shaykh Nasr,
taking his pleasure in the Wady and eating of its fruits and
laughing and making merry with the old man, and leading a right
joyous life till the day appointed for the birds to pay their
annual visit to the Governor. Thereupon the Shaykh said to him,
'O Janshah, take the keys of the castle and solace thyself with
exploring all its apartments and viewing whatever be therein, but
as regards such a room, beware and again beware of opening its
door; and if thou gainsay me and open it and enter there, through
nevermore shalt thou know fair fortune.' He repeated this charge
again and again with much instance; then he went forth to meet
the birds, which came up, kind by kind, and kissed his hands.
Such was his case; but as regards Janshah, he went round about
the castle, opening the various doors and viewing the apartments
into which they led, till he came to the room which Shaykh Nasr
had warned him not to open or enter. He looked at the door and
its fashion pleased him, for it had on it a padlock of gold, and
he said to himself, 'This room must be goodlier than all the
others; would Heaven I wist what is within it, that Shaykh Nasr
should forbid me to open its door! There is no help but that I
enter and see what is in this apartment; for whatso is decreed
unto the creature perforce he must fulfil.' So he put out his
hand and unlocked the door and entering, found himself before a
great basin; and hard by it stood a little pavilion, builded all
of gold and silver and crystal, with lattice-windows of jacinth.
The floor was paved with green beryl and balas rubies and
emeralds and other jewels, set in the ground-work mosaic-fashion,
and in the midmost of the pavilion was a jetting fountain in a
golden basin, full of water and girt about with figures of beasts
and birds, cunningly wrought of gold and silver and casting water
from their mouths. When the zephyr blew on them, it entered their
ears and therewith the figures sang out with birdlike song, each
in its own tongue. Beside the fountain was a great open saloon
with a high dais whereon stood a vast throne of carnelian, inlaid
with pearls and jewels, over which was spread a tent of green
silk fifty cubits in width and embroidered with gems fit for seal
rings and purfled with precious metals. Within this tent was a
closet containing the carpet of the lord Solomon (on whom be
peace!); and the pavilion was compassed about with a vast garden
full of fruit trees and streams; while near the palace were beds
of roses and basil and eglantine and all manner sweet-smelling
herbs and flowers. And the trees bore on the same boughs fruits
fresh and dry and the branches swayed gracefully to the wooing of
the wind. All this was in that one apartment and Janshah wondered
thereat till he was weary of wonderment; and he set out to solace
himself in the palace and the garden and to divert himself with
the quaint and curious things they contained. And first looking
at the basin he saw that the gravels of its bed were gems and
jewels and noble metals; and many other strange things were in
that apartment."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Janshah
saw many strange things and admirable in that apartment. Then he
entered the pavilion and mounting the throne, fell asleep under
the tent set up thereover. He slept for a time and, presently
awaking, walked forth and sat down on a stool before the door. As
he sat, marvelling at the goodliness of that place, there flew up
from mid sky three birds, in dove-form but big as eagles, and
lighted on the brink of the basin, where they sported awhile.
Then they put off their feathers and became three
maidens,[FN#546] as they were moons, that had not their like in
the whole world. They plunged into the basin and swam about and
disported themselves and laughed, while Janshah marvelled at
their beauty and loveliness and the grace and symmetry of their
shapes. Presently, they came up out of the water and began
walking about and taking their solace in the garden; and Janshah
seeing them land was like to lose his wits. He rose and followed
them, and when he overtook them, he saluted them and they
returned his salam; after which quoth he, 'Who are ye, O
illustrious Princesses, and whence come ye?' Replied the youngest
damsel, 'We are from the invisible world of Almighty Allah and we
come hither to divert ourselves.' He marvelled at their beauty
and said to the youngest, 'Have ruth on me and deign kindness to
me and take pity on my case and on all that hath befallen me in
my life.' Rejoined she, 'Leave this talk and wend thy ways';
whereat the tears streamed from his eyes, and he sighed heavily
and repeated these couplets,

'She shone out in the garden in garments all of green, * With
     open vest and collars and flowing hair beseen:
'What is thy name?' I asked her, and she replied, 'I'm she * Who
     roasts the hearts of lovers on coals of love and teen.'
Of passion and its anguish to her made my moan; * 'Upon a rock,'
     she answered, 'thy plaints are wasted clean.'
'Even if thy heart,' I told her, 'be rock in very deed, * Yet
     hath God made fair water well from the rock, I
     ween.'[FN#547]

When the maidens heard his verses, they laughed and played and
sang and made merry. Then he brought them somewhat of fruit, and
they ate and drank and slept with him till the morning, when they
donned their feather-suits, and resuming dove shape flew off and
went their way. But as he saw them disappearing from sight, his
reason well nigh fled with them, and he gave a great cry and fell
down in a fainting fit and lay a-swooning all that day. While he
was in this case Shaykh Nasr returned from the Parliament of the
Fowls and sought for Janshah, that he might send him with them to
his native land, but found him not and knew that he had entered
the forbidden room. Now he had already said to the birds, 'With
me is a young man, a mere youth, whom destiny brought hither from
a distant land; and I desire of you that ye take him up and carry
him to his own country.' And all answered, 'We hear and we obey.'
So he ceased not searching for Janshah till he came to the
forbidden door and seeing it open he entered and found the Prince
lying a-swoon under a tree. He fetched scented waters and
sprinkled them on his face, whereupon he revived and turned."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when
Shaykh Nasr saw Janshah lying a-swoon under the tree he fetched
him somewhat of scented waters and sprinkled them on his face.
Thereupon he revived and turned right and left, but seeing none
by him save the Shaykh, sighed heavily and repeated these
couplets,

'Like fullest moon she shines on happiest night, * Soft sided
     fair, with slender shape bedight.
Her eye-babes charm the world with gramarye; * Her lips remind of
     rose and ruby light.
Her jetty locks make night upon her hips; * Ware, lovers, ware ye
     of that curl's despight!
Yea, soft her sides are, but in love her heart * Outhardens
     flint, surpasses syenite:
And bows of eyebrows shower glancey shafts * Despite the distance
     never fail to smite.
Then, ah, her beauty! all the fair it passes; * Nor any rival her
     who see the light.'

When Shaykh Nasr heard these verses, he said, 'O my son, did I
not warn thee not to open that door and enter that room? But now,
O my son, tell me what thou sawest therein and acquaint me with
all that betided thee.' So Janshah related to him all that had
passed between him and the three maidens, and Shaykh Nasr, who
sat listening in silence said, 'Know, O my son, that these three
maidens are of the daughters of the Jann and come hither every
year for a day, to divert themselves and make merry until mid
afternoon, when they return to their own country.' Janshah asked,
'And where is their country?'; and the old man answered, 'By
Allah, O my son, I wot not:' presently adding, 'but now take
heart and put away this love from thee and come with me, that I
may send thee to thine own land with the birds.' When Janshah
heard this, he gave a great cry and fell down in a trance; and
presently he came to himself, and said, 'O my father indeed I
care not to return to my native land: all I want is to foregather
with these maidens and know, O my father, that I will never again
name my people, though I die before thee.' Then he wept and
cried, 'Enough for me that I look upon the face of her I love,
although it be only once in the year!' And he sighed deeply and
repeated these couplets,

'Would Heaven the Phantom[FN#548] spared the friend at night *
     And would this love for man were ever dight!
Were not my heart afire for love of you, * Tears ne'er had
     stained my cheeks nor dimmed my sight.
By night and day, I bid my heart to bear * Its griefs, while
     fires of love my body blight.'

Then he fell at Shaykh Nasr's feet and kissed them and wept sore,
crying, 'Have pity on me, so Allah take pity on thee and aid me
in my strait so Allah aid thee!' Replied the old man, 'By Allah O
my son, I know nothing of these maidens nor where may be their
country; but, O my son, if thy heart be indeed set on one of
them, tarry with me till this time next year for they will
assuredly reappear; and, when the day of their coming draweth
near, hide thyself under a tree in the garden. As soon as they
have alighted and doffed their feather-robes and plunged into the
lake and are swimming about at a distance from their clothes,
seize the vest of her whom thy soul desireth. When they see thee,
they will come a bank and she, whose coat thou hast taken, will
accost thee and say to thee with the sweetest of speech and the
most witching of smiles, 'Give me my dress, O my brother, that I
may don it and veil my nakedness withal.' But if thou yield to
her prayer and give her back the vest thou wilt never win thy
wish: nay, she will don it and fly away to her folk and thou wilt
nevermore see her again Now when thou hast gained the vest, clap
it under thine armpit and hold it fast, till I return from the
Parliament of the Fowls, when I will make accord between thee and
her and send thee back to thy native land, and the maiden with
thee. And this, O my son, is all I can do for thee, nothing
more.' "--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "quoth
Shaykh Nasr to Janshah, 'Hold fast the feather-robe of her thy
soul desireth and give it not back to her till I return from the
Parliament of the Fowls. And this, O my son, is all I can do for
thee, nothing more.' When Janshah heard this, his heart was
solaced and he abode with Shaykh Nasr yet another year, counting
the days as they passed until the day of the coming of the birds.
And when at last the appointed time arrived the old man said to
him, 'Do as I enjoined thee and charged thee with the maidens in
the matter of the feather-dress, for I go to meet the birds;' and
Janshah replied, 'I hear and I obey, O my father.' Then the
Shaykh departed whilst the Prince walked into the garden and hid
himself under a tree, where none could see him. Here he abode a
first day and a second and a third, but the maidens came not;
whereat he was sore troubled and wept and sighed from a heart
hard tried; and he ceased not weeping and wailing till he fainted
away. When he came to himself, he fell to looking now at the
basin and now at the welkin, and anon at the earth and anon at
the open country, whilst his heart grieved for stress of
love-longing. As he was in this case, behold, the three doves
appeared in the firmament, eagle-sized as before, and flew till
they reached the garden and lighted down beside the basin. They
turned right and left; but saw no one, man or Jann; so they
doffed their feather-suits and became three maidens. Then they
plunged into the basin and swam about, laughing and frolicking;
and all were mother-naked and fair as bars of virgin silver.
Quoth the eldest, 'O my sister, I fear lest there be some one
lying ambushed for us in the pavilion. Answered the second, 'O
sister, since the days of King Solomon none hath entered the
pavilion, be he man or Jann;' and the youngest added, laughing,
'By Allah, O my sisters, if there be any hidden there, he will
assuredly take none but me.' Then they continued sporting and
laughing and Janshah's heart kept fluttering for stress of
passion: but he hid behind the tree so that he saw without being
seen. Presently they swam out to the middle of the basin leaving
their clothes on the bank. Hereupon he sprang to his feet, and
running like the darting levee to the basin's brink, snatched up
the feather-vest of the youngest damsel, her on whom his heart
was set and whose name was Shamsah the Sun-maiden. At this the
girls turned and seeing him, were affrighted and veiled their
shame from him in the water. Then they swam near the shore and
looking on his favour saw that he was bright faced as the moon on
the night of fullness and asked him, 'Who art thou and how camest
thou hither and why hast thou taken the clothes of the lady
Shamsah?'; and he answered, 'Come hither to me and I will tell
you my tale.' Quoth Shamsah, 'What deed is this, and why hast
thou taken my clothes, rather than those of my sisters?' Quoth
he, 'O light of mine eyes, come forth of the water, and I will
recount thee my case and acquaint thee why I chose thee out.'
Quoth she, 'O my lord and coolth of my eyes and fruit of my
heart, give me my clothes, that I may put them on and cover my
nakedness withal; then will I come forth to thee.' But he
replied, 'O Princess of beautiful ones, how can I give thee back
thy clothes and slay myself for love longing? Verily, I will not
give them to thee, till Shaykh Nasr, the king of the birds, shall
return.' Quoth she, 'If thou wilt not give me my clothes withdraw
a little apart from us, that my sisters may land and dress
themselves and lend me somewhat wherewithal to cover my shame.'
'I hear and obey,' answered he, and walked away from them into
the pavilion, whereupon the three Princesses came out and the two
elder, donning their dress, gave Shamsah somewhat thereof, not
enough to fly withal, and she put it on and came forth of the
water, and stood before him, as she were the rising full moon or
a browsing gazelle. Then Shamsah entered the pavilion, where
Janshah was still sitting on the throne; so she saluted him and
taking seat near him, said, 'O fair of face, thou hast undone
thyself and me; but tell us thy adventures that we may ken how it
is with thee.' At these words he wept till he drenched his dress
with his tears; and when she saw that he was distracted for love
of her, she rose and taking him by the hand, made him sit by her
side and wiped away the drops with her sleeve; and said she, 'O
fair of face, leave this weeping and tell us thy tale.' So he
related to her all that had befallen him and described to her all
he had seen,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
lady Shamsah said to Janshah, 'Tell us thy tale;' so he related
to her all that had befallen him; and, after she had lent
attentive ear she sighed and said, 'O my lord, since thou art so
fondly in love with me, give me my dress, that I may fly to my
folk, I and my sisters, and tell them what affection thou hast
conceived for me, and after I will come back to thee and carry
thee to thine own country.' When he heard this, he wept sore and
replied, 'Is it lawful to thee before Allah to slay me
wrongfully?' She asked, 'O my lord, why should I do such wrongous
deed?'; and he answered, 'If I give thee thy gear thou wilt fly
away from me, and I shall die forthright.' Princess Shamsah
laughed at this and so did her sisters; then said she to him, 'Be
of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for I must
needs marry thee.' So saying, she bent down to him and embraced
him and pressing him to her breast kissed him between the eyes
and on his cheeks. They clipped and clasped each other awhile,
after which they drew apart and sat down on the throne. Then the
eldest Princess went out into the garden and, plucking somewhat
of fruits and flowers, brought them into the pavilion; and they
ate and drank and laughed and sported and made merry. Now Janshah
was singular in beauty and loveliness and slender shape and
symmetry and grace, and the Princess Shamsah said to him, 'O my
beloved, by Allah, I love thee with exceeding love and will never
leave thee!' When he heard her words, his breast broadened and he
laughed for joy till he showed his teeth; and they abode thus
awhile in mirth and gladness and frolic. And when they were at
the height of their pleasure and joyance, behold, Shaykh Nasr
returned from the Parliament of the Fowls and came in to them;
whereupon they all rose to him and saluted him and kissed his
hands. He gave them welcome and bade them be seated. So they sat
down and he said to Princess Shamsah, 'Verily this youth loveth
thee with exceeding love; Allah upon thee, deal kindly with him,
for he is of the great ones of mankind and of the sons of the
kings, and his father ruleth over the land of Kabul and his reign
compasseth a mighty empire.' Quoth she, 'I hear and I obey thy
behest'; and, kissing the Shaykh's hands stood before him in
respect. Quoth he, 'If thou say sooth, swear to me by Allah that
thou wilt never betray him, what while thou abidest in the bonds
of life.' So she swore a great oath that she would never betray
Janshah, but would assuredly marry him, and added, 'Know, O
Shaykh Nasr, that I never will forsake him.' The Shaykh believed
in her oath and said to Janshah, 'Thanks be to Allah, who hath
made you arrive at this understanding!' Hereupon the Prince
rejoiced with exceeding joy, and he and Shamsah abode three
months with Shaykh Nasr, feasting and toying and making merry."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that, "Janshah
and the lady Shamsah abode three months with Shaykh Nasr,
feasting and toying and making merry. And at the end of that time
she said to Janshah, 'I wish to go with thee to thy mother land,
where thou shalt marry me and we will abide there.' 'To hear is
to obey,' answered he and took counsel with Shaykh Nasr who said
to him, 'Go thou home, I commend her to thy care.' Then said she,
'O Shaykh Nasr, bid him render me my feather-suit.' So the Shaykh
bade Janshah give it to her, and he went straightways into the
pavilion and brought it out for her. There upon she donned it and
said to him, 'Mount my back and shut thine eyes and stop thine
ears, so thou mayst not hear the roar of the revolving sphere;
and keep fast hold of my feathers, lest thou fall off.' He did as
she bade him and, as she stretched her wings to fly, Shaykh Nasr
said, 'Wait a while till I describe to thee the land Kabul, lest
you twain miss your way.' So she delayed till he had said his say
and had bidden them farewell, commending the Prince to her care.
She took leave of her sisters and bade them return to her folk
and tell them what had befallen her with Janshah; then, rising
into the air without stay or delay she flew off, like the wafts
of the wind or the ramping leven. Her sisters also took flight
and returning home delivered her message to their people. And she
stayed not her course from the forenoon till the hour of mid-
afternoon prayer (Janshah being still on her back), when she
espied afar off a Wady abounding in trees and streams and she
said to Janshah, 'I am thinking to alight in this valley, that we
may solace ourselves amongst its trees and herbage and here rest
for the night.' Quoth he, "Do what seemeth meet to thee!' So she
swooped down from the lift and alighted in the Wady, when Janshah
dismounted and kissing her between the eyes,[FN#549] sat with her
awhile on the bank of a river there; then they rose and wandered
about the valley, taking their pleasure therein and eating of the
fruits of the trees, until nightfall, when they lay down under a
tree and slept till the morning dawned. As soon as it was day,
the Princess arose and, bidding Janshah mount, flew on with him
till noon, when she perceived by the appearance of the buildings
which Shaykh Nasr had described to her, that they were nearing
the city Kabul. So she swooped down from the welkin and alighted
in a wide plain, a blooming champaign, wherein were gazelles
straying and springs playing and rivers flowing and ripe fruits
growing. So Janshah dismounted and kissed her between the eyes;
and she asked him, 'O my beloved and coolth of mine eyes, knowest
thou how many days' journey we have come since yesterday?'; and
he answered, 'No,' when she said, 'We have come thirty months'
journey.' Quoth he, 'Praised be Allah for safety!' Then they sat
down side by side and ate and drank and toyed and laughed. And
whilst they were thus pleasantly engaged, behold, there came up
to them two of the King's Mamelukes of those who had been of the
Prince's company, one of them was he whom he had left with the
horses, when he embarked in the fishing-boat and the other had
been of his escort in the chase. As soon as they saw Janshah,
both knew him and saluted him; then said they, 'With thy leave,
we will go to thy sire and bear him the glad tidings of thy
coming.' Replied the Prince, 'Go ye to my father and acquaint him
with my case, and fetch us tents, for we will tarry here seven
days to rest ourselves till he make ready his retinue to meet us,
that we may enter in stateliest state.'"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
"Janshah said to the two Mamelukes, 'Go ye to my sire and
acquaint him with my case and fetch us tents, for we will abide
here seven days to rest ourselves, till he make ready his retinue
to meet us that we may enter in the stateliest state.' So the
officers hastened back to King Teghmus and said to him, 'Good
news, O King of the age!' Asked he, 'What good tidings bring ye:
is my son Janshah come back?'; and they answered, 'Yes, thy son
Janshah hath returned from his strangerhood and is now near at
hand in the Kirn mead.' Now when the King heard this, he joyed
with great joy and fell down in a swoon for excess of gladness;
then, coming to himself, he bade his Wazir give each of the
Mamelukes a splendid suit of honour and a sum of money. The
minister replied, 'I hear and obey,' and forthright did his
bidding and said to them, 'Take this in turn for the good tidings
ye bring, whether ye lie or say sooth.' They replied, 'Indeed we
lie not, for but now we sat with him and saluted him and kissed
his hands and he bade us fetch him tents, for that he would
sojourn in the meadow seven days, till such time as the Wazirs
and Emirs and Grandees should come out to meet him.' Quoth the
King, 'How is it with my son?' and quoth they, 'He hath with him
a Houri, as he had brought her out of Paradise.' At this, King
Teghmus bade beat the kettledrums and sound the trumpets for
gladness, and despatched messengers to announce the good news to
Janshah's mother and to the wives of the Emirs and Wazirs and
Lords of th