e realm: so the criers spread themselves about the
city and acquainted the people with the coming of Prince Janshah.
Then the King made ready, and, setting out for the Kirani meadow
with his horsemen and footmen, came upon Janshah who was sitting
at rest with the lady Shamsah beside him and, behold, all
suddenly drew in sight. The Prince rose to his feet and walked
forward to meet them; and the troops knew him and dismounted, to
salute him and kiss his hands: after which he set out preceded by
the men in single file till he came to his sire, who, at sight of
his son threw himself from his horse's back and clasped him to
his bosom and wept flooding tears of joy. Then they took horse
again with the retinue riding to the right and left and fared
forward till they came to the river banks; when the troops
alighted and pitched their tents and pavilions and standards to
the blare of trump and the piping of fife and the dub-a-dub of
drum and tom-tom. Moreover the King bade the tent pitchers set up
a pavilion of red silk for the Princess Shamsah, who put off her
scanty raiment of feathers for fine robes and, entering the
pavilion, there took seat. And as she sat in her beauty, behold,
the King and his son Janshah came in to her, and when she saw
Teghmus, she rose and kissed the ground before him. The King sat
down and seating Janshah on his right hand and Princess Shamsah
on his left, bade her welcome and said to his son, 'Tell me all
that hath befallen thee in this thy long strangerhood.' So
Janshah related to him the whole of his adventures from first to
last, whereat he marvelled with exceeding marvel and turning to
the Princess, said, 'Laud to Allah for that He hath caused thee
to reunite me with my son! Verily this is of His exceeding
bounty!'"[FN#550]--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King
Teghmus said to the lady Shamsah, 'Laud to Allah for that He hath
caused thee to reunite me with my son! Verily this is of His
exceeding bounty.' And now I would have thee ask of me what thou
wilt, that I may do it in thine honour.' Quoth she, 'I ask of
thee that thou build me a palace in the midst of a flower garden,
with water running under it.' And the King answered, 'I hear and
obey.' And behold, up came Janshah's mother, attended by all the
wives of the Wazirs and Emirs and nobles and city notables. When
her son had sight of her, he rose and leaving the tent, went
forth to meet her and they embraced a long while, whilst the
Queen wept for excess of joy and with tears trickling from her
eyes repeated the following verses,

'Joy so o'ercometh me, for stress of joy * In that which
     gladdeneth me I fain shed tears: 
Tears are become your nature, O my eyes, * Who weep for joyance
     as for griefs and fears.'

And they complained to each other of all their hearts had
suffered from the long separation. Then the King departed to his
pavilion and Janshah carried his mother to his own tent, where
they sat talking till there came up some of the lady Shamsah's
attendants who said, The Princess is now walking hither in order
to salute thee. When the Queen heard this, she rose and going to
meet Shamsah, saluted her and seated her awhile by her side.
Presently the Queen and her retinue of noble women, the spouses
of the Emirs and Grandees, returned with Princess Shamsah to the
tent occupied by her daughter-in-law and sat there. Meanwhile,
King Teghmus gave great largesse to his levies and liege and
rejoiced in his son with exceeding joy, and they tarried there
ten days, feasting and merry making and living a most joyous
life. At the end of this time, the King commanded a march and
they all returned to the capital, so he took horse surrounded by
all the troops with the Wazirs and Chamberlains to his right and
left nor ceased they faring till they entered the city, which was
decorated after the goodliest fashion; for the folk had adorned
the houses with precious stuffs and jewellery and spread costly
bro cedes under the hoofs of the horses. The drums beat for glad
tidings and the Grandees of the kingdom rejoiced and brought rich
gifts and the lookers-on were filled with amazement. Furthermore,
they fed the mendicants and Fakirs and held high festival for the
space of ten days, and the lady Shamsah joyed with exceeding joy
whenas she saw this. Then King Teghmus summoned architects and
builders and men of art and bade them build a palace in that
garden. So they straightway proceeded to do his bidding; and,
when Janshah knew of his sire's command he caused the artificers
to fetch a block of white marble and carve it and hollow it in
the semblance of a chest; which being done he took the feather-
vest of Princess Shamsah wherewith she had flown with him through
the air: then, sealing the cover with melted lead, he ordered
them to bury the box in the foundations and build over it the
arches whereon the palace was to rest. They did as he bade them,
nor was it long before the palace was finished: then they
furnished it and it was a magnificent edifice, standing in the
midst of the garden, with streams flowing under its
walls.[FN#551] Upon this the King caused Janshah's wedding to be
celebrated with the greatest splendour and they brought the bride
to the castle in state procession and went their ways. When the
lady Shamsah entered, she smelt the scent of her feather-gear."--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "when the
lady Shamsah entered the new palace, she smelt the scent of her
flying feather-gear and knew where it was and determined to take
it. So she waited till midnight, when Janshah was drowned in
sleep; then she rose and going straight to the place where the
marble coffer was buried under the arches she hollowed the ground
alongside till she came upon it; when she removed the lead where
with it was soldered and, taking out the feather-suit, put it on.
Then she flew high in air and perching on the pinnacle of the
palace, cried out to those who were therein, saying, 'I pray you
fetch me Janshah, that I may bid him farewell.' So they told him
and he came out and, seeing her on the terrace roof of the
palace, clad in her feather-raiment, asked her, 'Why hast thou
done this deed?'; and she answered 'O my beloved and coolth of
mine eyes and fruit of my heart, by Allah, I love thee passing
dear and I rejoice with exceeding joy in that I have restored
thee to thy friends and country and thou hast seen thy mother and
father. And now, if thou love me as I love thee, come to me at
Takni, the Castle of Jewels.' So saying, she flew away forthright
to find her family and friends, and Janshah fell down fainting,
being well-nigh dead for despair. They carried the news to King
Teghmus, who mounted at once and riding to the palace, found his
son lying senseless on the ground; whereat he wept knowing that
the swoon was caused by the loss of his love, and sprinkled rose-
water on his face.[FN#552] When the Prince came to himself and
saw his sire sitting at his head, he wept at the thought of
losing his wife and the King asked what had befallen him. So he
replied, 'Know, O my father, that the lady Shamsah is of the
daughters of the Jann and she hath done such and such' (telling
him all that had happened); and the King said, 'O my son, be not
troubled and thus concerned, for I will assemble all the
merchants and wayfarers in the land and enquire of them anent
that castle. If we can find out where it is, we will journey
thither and demand the Princess Shamsah of her people, and we
hope in Allah the Almighty that He will give her back to thee and
thou shalt consummate thy marriage.' Then he went out and,
calling his four Wazirs without stay or delay, bade them assemble
all the merchants and voyagers in the city and question them of
Takni, the Castle of Jewels, adding, 'Whoso knoweth it and can
guide us thither, I will surely give him fifty thousand gold
pieces.' The Wazirs accordingly went forth at once and did as the
King bade them, but neither trader nor traveller could give them
news of Takni, the Castle of Jewels; so they returned and told
the King. Thereupon he bade bring beautiful slave-girls and
concubines and singers and players upon instruments of music,
whose like are not found but with the Kings: and sent them to
Janshah, so haply they might divert him from the love of the lady
Shamsah. Moreover, he despatched couriers and spies to all the
lands and islands and climes, to enquire for Takni, the Castle of
Jewels, and they made quest for it two months long, but none
could give them news thereof. So they returned and told the King,
whereupon he wept bitter tears and going in to his son found
Janshah sitting amidst the concubines and singers and players on
harp and zither and so forth, not one of whom could console him
for the lady Shamsah. Quoth Teghmus, O my son, I can find none
who knoweth this Castle of Jewels; but I will bring thee a fairer
one than she.' When Janshah heard this his eyes ran over with
tears and he recited these two couplets,

'Patience hath fled, but passion fareth not; * And all my frame
     with pine is fever-hot:
When will the days my lot with Shamsah join? * Lo, all my bones
     with passion-lowe go rot!'

Now there was a deadly feud between King Teghmus and a certain
King of Hind, by name Kafíd, who had great plenty of troops and
warriors and champions; and under his hand were a thousand
puissant chieftains, each ruling over a thousand tribes whereof
every one could muster four thousand cavaliers. He reigned over a
thousand cities each guarded by a thousand forts and he had four
Wazirs and under him ruled Emirs, Princes and Sovereigns; and
indeed he was a King of great might and prowess whose armies
filled the whole earth. Now King Teghmus had made war upon him
and ravaged his reign and slain his men and of his treasures had
made gain. But when it came to King Kafid's knowledge that King
Teghmus was occupied with the love of his son, so that he
neglected the affairs of the state and his troops were grown few
and weak by reason of his care and concern for his son's state,
he summoned his Wazirs and Emirs and said to them, 'Ye all know
that whilom King Teghmus invaded our dominions and plundered our
possessions and slew my father and brethren, nor indeed is there
one of you, but he hath harried his lands and carried off his
goods and made prize of his wives and slain some kinsmen of his.
Now I have heard this day that he is absorbed in the love of his
son Janshah, and that his troops are grown few and weak; and this
is the time to take our blood revenge on him. So make ready for
the march and don ye your harness of battle; and let nothing stay
or delay you, and we will go to him and fall upon him and slay
him and his son, and possess ourselves of his reign.'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
"Kafid, King of Hind, commanded his troops and armies to mount
and make for the dominions of King Teghmus, saying, 'Get ye ready
for the march and don ye your harness of war; and let nothing
stay or delay you; so we will go to him and fall upon him and
slay him and his son and possess ourselves of his reign.' They
all answered with one voice, saying, 'We hear and obey,' and fell
at once to equipping themselves and levying troops; and they
ceased not their preparations for three months and, when all was
in readiness, they beat the drums and sounded the trumps and flew
the flags and banners: then King Kafid set out at the head of his
host and they fared on till they reached the frontiers of the
land of Kabul, the dominions of King Teghmus, where they began to
harry the land and do havoc among the folk, slaughtering the old
and taking the young prisoners. When the news reached King
Teghmus, he was wroth with exceeding wrath and assembling his
Grandees and officers of state, said to them 'Know that Kafid
hath come to our land and hath entered the realm we command and
is resolved to fight us hand to hand, and he leadeth troops and
champions and warriors, whose number none knoweth save Allah
Almighty; what deme deem ye?' Replied they, 'O King of the age,
let us go out to him and give him battle and drive him forth of
our country; and thus deem we.' So he bade them prepare for
battle and brought forth to them hauberks and cuirasses and
helmets and swords and all manner of warlike gear, such as lay
low warriors and do to death the champions of mankind. So the
troops and braves and champions flocked together and they set up
the standards and beat the drums and sounded the trumpets and
clashed the cymbals and piped on the pipes; and King Teghmus
marched out at the head of his army, to meet the hosts of Hind.
And when he drew near the foe, he called a halt, and encamping
with his host in the Zahrán Valley,[FN#553] hard by the frontier
of Kabul despatched to King Kafid by messenger the following
letter: 'Know that what thou hast done is of the doings of the
villain rabble and wert thou indeed a King, the son of a King,
thou hadst not done thus, nor hadst thou invaded my kingdom and
slain my subjects and plundered their property and wrought
upright upon them. Knowest thou not that all this is the fashion
of a tyrant! Verily, had I known that thou durst harry my
dominions, I had come to thee before thy coming and had prevented
thee this long while since. Yet, even now, if thou wilt retire
and leave mischief between us and thee, well and good; but if
thou return not, meet me in the listed field and measure thyself
with me in cut and thrust.' Lastly he sealed his letter and
committed to an officer of his army and sent with him spies to
spy him out news. The messenger fared forth with the missive and,
drawing near the enemy's camp, he descried a multitude of tents
of silk and satin, with pennons of blue sendal, and amongst them
a great pavilion of red satin, surrounded by a host of guards. He
ceased not to advance till he made this tent and found on asking
that it was that of King Kafid, whom he saw seated on a chair set
with jewels, in the midst of his Wazirs and Emirs and Grandees.
So he brought out the letter and straightway there came up to him
a company of guards, who took it from him and carried it to the
King; and Kafid read it and wrote a reply to this purport: 'After
the usual invocations, We let King Teghmus know that we mean to
take our blood-revenge on thee and wash out our stain and waste
thy reign and rend the curtain in twain and slay the old men and
enslave the young men. But to-morrow, come thou forth to combat
in the open plain, and to show thee thrust and fight will I
deign.' Then he sealed the letter and delivered it to the
messenger, who carried it to King Teghmus."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King Kafid
delivered the answering letter to the messenger who carried it to
King Teghmus and delivered it, after kissing the ground between
his hands. Then he reported all that he had seen, saying, 'O King
of the age, I espied warriors and horsemen and footmen beyond
count nor can I assist thee to the amount.' When Teghmus read the
reply and comprehended its contents, he was with furious rage
enraged and bade his Wazir Ayn Zar take horse and fall upon the
army of Kafid with a thousand cavaliers, in the middle watch of
the night when they would easily ride home and slay all before
them. Ayn Zar replied, 'I hear and I obey,' and at once went
forth to do his bidding. Now King Kafid had a Wazir,
Ghatrafán[FN#554] by name, whom he bade take five thousand horse
and attack the host of King Teghmus in like manner. So Ghatrafan
did his bidding and set out on his enterprise marching till
midnight. Thus the two parties met halfway and the Wazir
Ghatrafan fell upon the Wazir, Ayn Zar. Then man cried out
against man and there befell sore battle between them till break
of day, when Kafid's men were routed and fled back to their King
in confusion. As Kafid saw this, he was wroth beyond measure and
said to the fugitives, 'Woe to you! What hath befallen you, that
ye have lost your captains?' and they replied, 'O King of the
age, as the Wazir Ghatrafan rode forth to fall upon King Teghmus,
there appeared to us halfway and when night was half over, the
Wazir, Ayn Zar, with cavaliers and champions, and we met on the
slopes of Wady Zahran; but ere we were where we found ourselves
in the enemy's midst, eye meeting eye; and we fought a fierce
fight with them from midnight till morning, many on either side
being slain. Then the Wazir and his men fell to shouting and
smiting the elephants on the face till they took fright at their
furious blows, and turning tail to flee, trampled down the
horsemen, whilst none could see other for the clouds of dust. The
blood ran like a rain torrent and had we not fled, we had all
been cut off to the last man.' When King Kafid heard this, he
exclaimed, 'May the sun not bless you and may he be wroth with
you and sore be his wrath!' Meanwhile Ayn Zar, the Wazir,
returned to King Teghmus and told him what had happened. The King
gave him joy of his safety and rejoiced greatly and bade beat the
drums and sound the trumpets, in honour of the victory; after
which he called the roll of his troops and behold, two hundred of
his stoutest champions had fallen. Then King Kafid marched his
army into the field and drew them out ordered for battle in
fifteen lines of ten thousand horses each, under the command of
three hundred captains, mounted on elephants and chosen from
amongst the doughtiest of his warriors and his champions. So he
set up his standards and banners and beat the drums and blew the
trumpets whilst the braves sallied forth, offering battle. As for
King Teghmus, he drew out his troops line after line and lo!
there were ten of ten thousand horses each, and with him were an
hundred champions, riding on his right hand and on his left. Then
fared forward to the fight each renowned knight, and the hosts
clashed together in their might, whilst the earth for all its
wideness was straitened because of the multitude of the cavaliers
and ears were deafened by drums and cymbals beating and pipes and
hautboys sounding and trumpets blaring and by the thunder of
horse-tramp and the shouting of men. The dust arched in canopy
over their heads and they fought a sore fight from the first of
the day till the fall of darkness, when they separated and each
army drew off to its own camp."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "each army
drew off to its own camp. Then King Kafid called the roll of his
troops and, finding that he had lost five thousand men, raged
with great rage; and King Teghmus mustered his men and seeing
that of them were slain three thousand riders, the bravest of his
braves, was wroth with exceeding wrath. On the morrow King Kafid
again pushed into the plain and did duty as before, while each
man strove his best to snatch victory for himself; and Kafid
cried out to his men, saying, 'Is there any of you will sally
forth into the field and open us the chapter of fray and fight?'
And behold came out from the ranks a warrior named Barkayk, a
mighty man of war who, when he reached the King, alighted from
his elephant and kissing the earth before him, sought of him
leave to challenge the foe to combat singular. Then he mounted
his elephant and driving into mid-field, cried out, 'Who is for
duello, who is for derring do, who is for knightly devoir?' When
King Teghmus heard this, he said to his troops, 'Which of you
will do single battle with this sworder?' And behold, a cavalier
came out from the ranks, mounted on a charger, mighty of make,
and driving up to the King kissed the earth before him and craved
his permission to engage Barkayk. Then he mounted again and
charged at Barkayk, who said to him, 'Who art thou and what art
thou called, that thou makest mock of me by coming out against me
and challenging me, alone?' 'My name is Ghazanfar[FN#555] son of
Kamkhíl,' replied the Kabul champion; and the other, 'I have
heard tell of thee in my own country; so up and do battle between
the ranks of the braves!' Hearing these words Ghazanfar drew a
mace of iron from under his thigh and Barkayk took his good sword
in hand, and they laid on load till Barkayk smote Ghazanfar on
the head with his blade, but the morion turned the blow and no
hurt befell him therefrom; whereupon Ghazanfar, in his turn,
dealt Barkayk so terrible a stroke on the head with his mace,
that he levelled him down to his elephant's back and slew him.
With this out sallied another and crying to Ghazanfar, 'Who be
thou that thou shouldst slay my brother?'; hurled a javelin at
him with such force that it pierced his thigh and nailed his coat
of mail to his flesh. Then Ghazanfar, feeling his hurt, hent his
sword in hand and smote at Barkayk's brother and cut him in
sunder, and he fell to the earth, wallowing in his life blood,
whilst the challenger of Kabul galloped back to King Teghmus. Now
when Kafid saw the death of his champions, he cried out to his
troops, saying, 'Down with you to the plain and strike with might
and main!' as also did King Teghmus, and the two armies fought
the fiercest of fights. Horse neighed against horse and man cried
out upon man and brands were bared, whilst the drums beat and the
trumpets blared; and horseman charged upon horseman and every
brave of renown pushed forward, whilst the faint of heart fled
from the lunge of lance and men heard nought but slogan-cry and
the clash and clang of armoury. Slain were the warriors that were
slain[FN#556] and they stayed not from the mellay till the
decline of the sun in the heavenly dome, when the Kings drew off
their armies and returned each to its own camp.[FN#557] Then King
Teghmus took tally of his men and found that he had lost five
thousand, and four standards had been broken to bits, whereat he
was sore an-angered; whilst King Kafid in like manner counted his
troops and found that he had lost six hundred, the bravest of his
braves, and nine standards were wanting to the full tale. The two
armies ceased joining battle and rested on their arms three days'
space, after which Kafid wrote a letter and sent it by messenger
to a King called Fakun al-Kalb (with whom he claimed kinship by
the spindle side): and this kinsman forthwith mustered his men
and marched to meet the King of Hind."--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King Fakun
mustered his men and marched to meet the King of Hind: and
whileas King Teghmus was sitting at his pleasance, there came one
in to him and said, 'I see from afar a cloud of dust spireing
high in air and overspreading the lift.' So he commanded a
company to fare forth and learn the meaning of this; and, crying,
'To hear is to obey,' they sallied out and presently returned and
said to him, 'O King, when we drew near the cloud of dust, the
wind rent it and it lifted and showed seven standards and under
each standard three thousand horse, making for King Kafid's
camp.' Then King Fakun joined himself to the King of Hind and
saluting him, asked, 'How is it with thee, and what be this war
in which thou arrest?'; and Kafid answered, 'Knowest thou not
that King Teghmus is my enemy and the murtherer of my father and
brothers? Wherefore I am come forth to do battle with him and
take my brood wreak on him.' Quoth Fakun, 'The blessing of the
sun be upon thee!'; and the King of Hind carried King Fakun
al-Kalb to his tent and rejoiced in him with exceeding joy. Such
was the case of the two hostile Kings; but as regards King
Janshah, he abode two months shut up in his palace, without
seeing his father or allowing one of the damsels in his service
to come in to him; at the end of which time he grew troubled and
restless and said to his attendants, 'What aileth my father that
he cometh not to visit me?' They told him that he had gone forth
to do battle with King Kafid, whereupon quoth Janshah, 'Bring me
my steed, that I may go to my sire.' They replied, 'We hear and
obey,' and brought his horse; but he said in himself, 'I am taken
up with the thought of myself and my love and I deem well to
mount and ride for the city of the Jews, where haply Allah shall
grant me the boon to meet the merchant who hired me for the ruby
business and may be he will deal with me as he dealt before, for
none knoweth whence good cometh.' So he took with him a thousand
horse and set out, the folk saying, 'At last Janshah hath fared
forth to join his father in the field, and to fight by his side;'
and they stinted not pushing on till dusk, when they halted for
the night in a vast meadow. As soon as he knew that all his men
were asleep, the Prince rose privily and girding his waist,
mounted his horse and rode away intending to make Baghdad,
because he had heard from the Jews that a caravan came thence to
their city once in every two years and he made up his mind to
journey thither with the next cafilah. When his men awoke and
missed the Prince and his horse, they mounted and sought him
right and left but, finding no trace of him, rejoined his father
and told him what his son had done; whereat he was wroth beyond
measure and cast the crown from his head, whilst the sparks were
like to fly from his mouth, and he said 'There is no Majesty and
there is no Might but in Allah! Verily I have lost my son, and
the enemy is still before me.' But his Wazirs and vassals said to
him, 'Patience, O King of the age! Patience bringeth weal in
wake.' Meanwhile Janshah, parted from his lover and pained for
his father, was in sore sorrow and dismay, with heart seared and
eyes tear-bleared and unable to sleep night or day. But when his
father heard the loss his host had endured, he declined battle,
and fled before King Kafid, and retiring to his city, closed the
gates and strengthened the walls. Thereupon King Kafid followed
him and sat down before the town; offering battle seven nights
and eight days, after which he withdrew to his tents, to tend his
wounded while the citizens defended themselves as they best
could, fortifying the place and setting up mangonels and other
engines on the walls. Such was the condition of the two Kings,
and war raged between them for a space of seven years."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Kings
Teghmus and Kafid continued in this condition for seven years;
but, as regards Janshah, he rode through wild and wold and when
ever he came to a town he asked anent Takni, the Castle of
Jewels, but none knew of it and all answered, 'Of a truth we
never heard of such place, not even by name.' At last he happened
to enquire concerning the city of the Jews from a merchant who
told him that it was situated in the extreme Orient, adding, 'A
caravan will start this very month for the city of Mizrakán in
Hind; whither do thou accompany us and we will fare on to
Khorasan and thence to the city of Shima'ún and Khwárazm, from
which latter place the City of the Jews is distant a year and
three months' journey.' So Janshah waited till the departure of
the caravan, when he joined himself thereto and journeyed, till
he reached the city of Mizrakan whence, after vainly asking for
Takni, the Castle of Jewels, he set out and enduring on the way
great hardships and perils galore and the extreme of hunger and
thirst, he arrived at the town of Shima'un. Here he made enquiry
for the City of the Jews, and they directed him to the road
thither. So he fared forth and journeyed days and nights till he
came to the place where he had given the apes the slip, and
continued his journey thence to the river, on the opposite bank
of which stood the City of the Jews. He sat down on the shore and
waited till the Sabbath came round and the river dried up by
decree of Allah Almighty, when he crossed over to the opposite
bank and, entering the city, betook himself to the house wherein
he had lodged on his former journey. The Jew and his family
saluted him and rejoiced in his return and, setting meat and
drink before him, asked, 'Where hast thou been during thine
absence?'; and he answered, 'In the kingdom of Almighty
Allah!'[FN#558] He lay with them that night and on the morrow he
went out to solace himself with a walk about the city and
presently heard a crier crying aloud and saying, 'O folk, who
will earn a thousand gold pieces and a fair slave-girl and do
half a day's work for us?' So Janshah went up to him and said, 'I
will do this work.'[FN#559] Quoth the crier, 'Follow me,' and
carrying him to the house of the Jew merchant, where he had been
afore time, said, 'This young man will do thy need.' The merchant
not recognising him gave him welcome and carried him into the
Harim, where he set meat and drink before him, and he ate and
drank. Then he brought him the money and formally made over to
him the handsome slave-girl with whom he lay that night. As soon
as morning dawned, he took the diners and the damsel and,
committing them to his Jew host with whom he had lodged afore
time, returned to the merchant, who mounted and rode out with
him, till they came to the foot of the tall and towering
mountain, where the merchant, bringing out a knife and cords,
said to Janshah, 'Throw the mare.' So he threw her and bound her
four legs with the cords and slaughtered her and cut off her head
and four limbs and slit her belly, as ordered by the Jew;
whereupon quoth he, 'Enter her belly, till I sew it up on thee;
and whatsoever thou seest therein, tell me of it, for this is the
work whose wage thou hast taken.' So Janshah entered the mare's
belly and the merchant sewed it up on him; then, withdrawing to a
fair distance, hid himself. And after an hour a great bird
swooped down from the lift and, snatching up the carcass in his
pounces soared high toward the sky. Then he perched upon the
mountain peak and would have eaten the prey, but Janshah sensing
his intent took out his knife and slit the mare's belly and came
forth. The bird was scared at his sight and flew away, and
Janshah went up to a place whence he could see below, and looking
down, espied the merchant standing at the foot of the mountain,
as he were a sparrow. So he cried out to him, 'What is thy will,
O merchant?' Replied the Jew, 'Throw me down of the stones that
lie about thee, that I may direct thee in the way down.' Quoth
Janshah, 'Thou art he who didst with me thus and thus five years
ago, and through thee I suffered hunger and thirst and sore toil
and much trouble; and now thou hast brought me hither once more
and thinkest to destroy me. By Allah, I will not throw thee
aught!' So saying, he turned from him and set out for where lived
Shaykh Nasr, the King of the Birds."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Janshah
took the way for where lived Shaykh Nasr, the King of the Birds.
And he ceased not faring on many days and nights, tearful-eyed
and heavy-hearted; eating, when he was anhungered, of the growth
of the ground and drinking, when he thirsted, of its streams,
till he came in sight of the Castle of the lord Solomon and saw
Shaykh Nasr sitting at the gate. So he hastened up to him and
kissed his hands; and the Shaykh saluted him and bade him welcome
and said to him, 'O my son, what aileth thee that thou returnest
to this place, after I sent thee home with the Princess Shamsah,
cool of eyes and broad of breast?' Janshah wept and told him all
that had befallen him and how she had flown away from him,
saying, 'An thou love me, come to me in Takni, the Castle of
Jewels;' at which the old man marvelled and said, 'By Allah, O my
son, I know it not, nor, by the virtue of our lord Solomon, have
I ever in my life heard its name!' Quoth Janshah, 'What shall I
do? I am dying of love and longing.' Quoth Shaykh Nasr, 'Take
patience until the coming of the birds, when we will enquire at
them of Takni, the Castle of Jewels; haply one of them shall wot
thereof.' So Janshah's heart was comforted and, entering the
Palace, he went straight to the chamber which gave upon the Lake
in which he had seen the three maidens. After this he abode with
Shaykh Nasr for a while and, one day as he was sitting with him,
the Shaykh said, 'O my son, rejoice for the time of the birds'
coming draweth nigh.' Janshah gladdened to hear the news; and
after a few days the birds began to come and Shaykh Nasr said to
him, 'O my son, learn these names[FN#560] and address thyself
with me to meet the birds.' Presently, the fowls came flying up
and saluted Shaykh Nasr, kind after kind, and he asked them of
Takni, the Castle of Jewels, but they all made answer, 'Never
heard we of such a place.' At these words Janshah wept and
lamented till he swooned away; whereupon Shaykh Nasr called a
huge volatile and said to him, 'Carry this youth to the land of
Kabul,' and described to him the country and the way thither.
Then he set Janshah on the bird's back, saying, 'Be careful to
sit straight and beware of leaning to either side, else thou wilt
be torn to pieces in the air; and stop thine ears from the wind,
lest thou be dazed by the noise of the revolving sphere and the
roaring of the seas.' Janshah resolved to do his bidding and the
bird took flight high in sky and flew with him a day and a night,
till he set him down by the King of the Beasts, whose name was
Sháh Badrí, and said to his rider, 'We have gone astray from the
way directed by Shaykh Nasr.' And he would have taken him up
again and flown on with him; but Janshah said, 'Go thy ways and
leave me here; till I die on this spot or I find Takni, the
Castle of Jewels, I will not return to my country.' So the fowl
left him with Shah Badri, King of the Beasts and flew away. The
King thereupon said to him, 'O my son, who art thou and whence
comest thou with yonder great bird?' So Janshah told him his
story from beginning to end, whereat Shah Badri marvelled and
said, 'By the virtue of the lord Solomon, I know not of this
castle; but if any one of the beasts my subjects know it, we will
reward him bountifully and send thee by him thither.' Hereat
Janshah wept bitterly but presently he took patience and abode
with Shah Badri, and after a short time the King of the Beasts
said to him, 'O my son, take these tablets and commit to memory
that which is therein; and when the beasts come, we will question
them of the Castle of Jewels.' "--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
King of the Beasts said to Janshah, 'Commit to memory what is in
these tablets; and whenas the beasts come, we will ask them anent
that castle.' He did as the King bade him, and before long, up
came the beasts, kind after kind, and saluted Shah Badri who
questioned them of Takni, the Castle of Jewels, but they all
replied, 'We know not this castle, nor ever heard we of it.' At
this Janshah wept and lamented for that he had not gone with the
bird that brought him from Shaykh Nasr's castle; but Shah Badri
said to him, 'Grieve not, O my son, for I have a brother, King
Shimákh highs, who is older than I; he was once a prisoner to
King Solomon, for that he rebelled against him; nor is there
among the Jinn one elder than he and Shaykh Nasr. Belike he
knoweth of this castle; at any rate he ruleth over all the Jinn
in this country side.' So saying he set Janshah on the back of a
beast and gave him a letter to his brother, commending him to his
care. The beast set off with the Prince forthwith and fared on
days and nights, till it came to King Shimakh's abiding place.
And when it caught sight of the King it stood still afar off,
whereupon Janshah alighted and walked on, till he found himself
in the presence. Then he kissed hands and presented his brother's
letter. The King read the missive and, having mastered the
meaning, welcomed the Prince, saying, 'By Allah, O my son, in all
my born days I never saw nor heard of this castle!' adding (as
Janshah burst into tears), 'but tell me thy story and who and
whence thou art and whither thou art bound.' So Janshah related
to him his history from beginning to end, at which Shimakh
marvelled and said, 'O my son, I do not believe that even the
lord Solomon ever saw this castle or heard thereof; but O my
son,[FN#561] I know a monk in the mountains, who is exceeding old
and whom all birds and beasts and Jann obey; for he ceased not
his conjurations against the Kings of the Jann, till they
submitted themselves to him in their own despite, by reason of
the might of his oaths and his magic; and now all the birds and
the beasts are his servants. I myself once rebelled against King
Solomon and he sent against me this monk, the only being who
could overcome me with his craft and his conjurations and his
gramarye; then he imprisoned me, and since that time I have been
his vassal. He hath travelled in all countries and quarters and
knoweth all ways and regions and places and castles and cities;
nor do I think there is any place hidden from his ken. So needs
must I send thee to him; haply he may direct thee to the Castle
of Jewels; and, if he cannot do this, none can; for all things
obey him, birds and beasts and the very mountains and come at his
beck and call, by reason of his skill in magic. Moreover, by the
might of his egromancy he hath made a staff, in three pieces, and
this he planteth in the earth and conjureth over it; whereupon
flesh and blood issue from the first piece, sweet milk from the
second and wheat and barley from the third; then he withdraweth
the staff and returneth to his place which is highs the Hermitage
of Diamonds. And this magical monk is a cunning inventor and
artificer of all manner strange works; and he is a crafty warlock
full of guiles and wiles, an arch deceiver of wondrous
wickedness, who hath mastered every kind of magic and witchcraft.
His name is Yaghmús and to him I must needs send thee on the back
of a big bird with four wings,'"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "Shimakh
said to Janshah, 'I must needs send thee to the monk Yaghmus on
the back of a big bird with four wings, each measuring thirty
Háshimi[FN#562] cubits in length; and it hath feet like those of
an elephant, but it flieth only twice a year.' And there was with
King Shimakh an officer, by name Timshun, who used every day to
carry off two Bactrian[FN#563] camels from the land of Irak and
cut them up for the bird that it might eat them. So King Shimakh
bade the fowl take up Janshah and bear him to the cell of the
hermit Yaghmus; and it rose into the air and flew on days and
nights, till it came to the Mountain of the Citadels and the
Hermitage of Diamonds where Janshah alighted and going up to the
hermitage, found Yaghmus the Monk at his devotions. So he entered
the chapel and, kissing the ground stood respectfully before the
hermit. When Yaghmus saw him, he said, 'Welcome, O my son, O
parted from thy home and garred ferforth to roam! Tell me the
cause of thy coming hither.' So Janshah wept and acquainted him
with all that had befallen him from beginning to end and that he
was in quest of the Castle of Jewels. The Monk marvelled greatly
at his story and said, 'By Allah, O my son, never in my life
heard I of this castle, nor ever saw I one who had heard of it or
had seen it, for all I was alive in the days of Noah, Allah's
Prophet (on whom be peace!),[FN#564] and I have ruled the birds
and beasts and Jinn ever since his time; nor do I believe that
Solomon David son himself knew of it. But wait till the birds and
beasts and chiefs of the Jann come to do their homage to me and I
will question them of it; peradventure, some one of them may be
able to give us news of it and Allah Almighty shall make all
things easy to thee.' So Janshah homed with the hermit, until the
day of the assembly, when all the birds and beasts and Jann came
to swear fealty; and Yaghmus and his guest questioned them anent
Takni, the Castle of Jewels; but they all replied, 'We never saw
or heard of such a place.' At this, Janshah fell a weeping and
lamenting and humbled himself before the Most High; but, as he
was thus engaged, behold, there flew down from the heights of air
another bird, big of bulk and black of blee, which had tarried
behind the rest, and kissed the hermit's hands. Yaghmus asked it
of Takni, the Castle of Jewels, and it answered, saying 'O Monk,
when I and my brothers were small chicks we abode behind the
Mountain Kaf on a hill of crystal, in the midst of a great
desert; and our father and mother used to set out for it every
morning and in the evening come back with our food. They went out
early one day, and were absent from us a sennight and hunger was
sore upon us; but on the eighth day they returned, both weeping,
and we asked them the reason of their absence. Quoth they: 'A
Marid swooped down on us and carried us off in his claws to
Takni, the Castle of Jewels, and brought us before King Shahlan,
who would have slain us; but we told him that we had left behind
us a brood of fledgelings; so he spared our lives and let us go.
And were my parents yet in the bonds of life they would give thee
news of the castle.' When Janshah heard this, he wept bitter
tears and said to the hermit, 'Prithee bid the bird carry me to
his father and mother's nest on the crystal hill, behind the
Mountain Kaf.' So the hermit said, 'O bird, I desire thee to obey
this youth in whatsoever he may command thee.' 'I hear and obey
thy bidding,' replied the fowl; and, taking Janshah on its back,
flew with him days and nights without ceasing till it set him
down on the Hill of Crystal and there alighted. And having
delayed there a resting while, it again set him on its back and
flew off and ceased not flying for two whole days till it reached
the spot where the nest was."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the fowl
ceased not flying with Janshah two full days; till it reached the
spot where the nest was, and set him down there and said, 'O
Janshah, this is where our nest was.' He wept sore and replied,
'I pray thee bear me farther on to where thy parents used to
forage for food.' The bird consented; so it took him up again and
flew on with him seven nights and eight days, till it set him
down on the top of a high hill Karmus highs and left him there
saying, 'I know of no land behind this hill.' Then it flew away
and Janshah sat down on the hill-top and fell asleep. When he
awoke, he saw a something gleaming afar off as it were lightning
and filling the firmament with its flashings; and he wondered
what this sheen could be without wotting that it was the Castle
he sought. So he descended the mountain and made towards the
light, which came from Takni, the Castle of Jewels, distant two
months' journey from Karmús, the hill whereon he had alit, and
its foundations were fashioned of red rubies and its buildings of
yellow gold. Moreover, it had a thousand turrets builded of
precious metals, and stones of price studded and set in the
minerals brought from the Main of Murks, and on this account it
was named the Castle of Jewels, Takni. It was a vast great castle
and the name of its king was King Shahlan, the father of the lady
Shamsah and her sisters. Such was the case with Janshah; but as
regards Princess Shamsah, when she fled from Janshah, she made
straight for the Castle of Jewels and told her father and mother
all that had passed between the Prince and herself; how he had
wandered the world and seen its marvels and wonders and how
fondly he loved her and how dearly she loved him. Quoth they,
'Thou hast not dealt righteously with him, as Allah would have
thee deal.' Moreover King Shahlan repeated the story to his
guards and officers of the Marids of the Jinn and bade them bring
him every mortal they should see. For the lady Shamsah had said
to her parents, 'Janshah loveth me with passionate love and
forsure he will follow me; for when flying from his father's roof
I cried to him, 'An thou love me, seek me at Takni, the Castle of
Jewels!' Now when Janshah beheld that sheen and shine, he made
straight for it wishing to find out what it might be. And as
chance would have it, Shamsah had that very day despatched a
Marid on an occasion in the direction of the hill Karmus, and on
his way thither he caught sight of a man, a mortal; so he
hastened up to him and saluted him. Janshah was terrified at his
sight, but returned his salam, and the Marid asked, 'What is thy
name?' and he answered, 'My name is Janshah, and I have fallen
madly in love with a Jinniyah known as Princess Shamsah, who
captivated me by her beauty and loveliness; but despite my dear
love she fled from the palace wherein I placed her and behold, I
am here in quest of her.' Herewith he wept with bitter weeping.
The Marid looked at him and his heart burned with pity on hearing
the sad tale, and he said, 'Weep not, for surely thou art come to
thy desire. Know that she loveth thee fondly and hath told her
parents of thy love for her, and all in yonder castle love thee
for her sake; so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool of
tear.' Then he took him on his shoulders and made off with him to
the Castle of Jewels, Takni. Thereupon the bearers of fair
tidings hastened to report his coming and when the news reached
Shamsah and her father and mother, they all rejoiced with
exceeding joy, and King Shahlan took horse and rode out,
commanding all his guards and Ifrits and Marids honourably to
meet the Prince."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "King
Shahlan commanded all his guards and Ifrits and Marids to meet
the Prince; and, as soon as he came up with him, he dismounted
and embraced him, and Janshah kissed his hand. Then Shahlan bade
put on him a robe of honour of many coloured silk, laced with
gold and set with jewels, and a coronet such as man never saw,
and, mounting him on a splendid mare of the steeds of the Kings
of the Jinn, took horse himself and, with an immense retinue
riding on the right hand and the left, brought him in great state
to the Castle. Janshah marvelled at the splendour of this
edifice, with its walls builded of rubies and other jewels and
its pavement of crystal and jasper and emerald, and fell a
weeping at the memory of his past miseries; but the King and
Queen, Shamsah's mother, wiped away his tears and said, 'Now no
more weeping and be of good cheer, for thou hast won to thy
will.' Then Shahlan carried him into the inner court of the
Castle, where he was received by a multitude of beautiful damsels
and pages and black Jinn-slaves, who seated him in the place of
honour and stood to do him service, whilst he was lost in
amazement at the goodliness of the place, and its walls all
edified of precious metals and jewels of price. Presently King
Shahlan repaired to his hall of audience, where he sat down on
his throne and, bidding the slave-girls and the pages introduce
the Prince, rose to receive him and seated him by his side on the
throne. Then he ordered the tables to be spread and they ate and
drank and washed their hands; after which in came the Queen
Shamsah's mother, and saluting Janshah, bade him welcome in these
words, 'Thou hast come to thy desire after weariness and thine
eyes shall now sleep after watching; so praised be Allah for thy
safety!' Thus saying, she went away and forthwith returned with
the Princess Shamsah, who saluted Janshah and kissed his hands,
hanging her head in shame and confusion before him and her
parents, after which as many of her sisters as were in the palace
came up to him and greeted him in like manner. Then quoth the
Queen to him, 'Welcome, O my son, our daughter Shamsah hath
indeed sinned against thee, but do thou pardon her misdeed for
our sakes.' When Janshah heard this, he cried out and fell down
fainting, whereat the King marvelled and they sprinkled on his
face rose water mingled with musk and civet, till he came to
himself and, looking at Princess Shamsah, said, 'Praised be Allah
who hath brought me to my desire and hath quenched the fire of my
heart!' Replied she, 'May He preserve thee from the Fire!, but
now tell me, O Janshah, what hath befallen thee since our parting
and how thou madest thy way to this place; seeing that few even
of the Jann ever heard of Takni, the Castle of Jewels; and we are
independent of all the Kings nor any wotteth the road hither.'
Thereupon he related to her every adventure and peril and
hardship he had suffered and how he had left his father at war
with King Kafid, ending with these words, 'And all for thy sake,
my lady Shamsah!' Quoth the Queen, 'Now hast thou thy heart's
desire, for the Princess is thy handmaid, and we give her in free
gift to thee.' Janshah joyed exceedingly at these words and the
Queen added, 'Next month, if it be the will of Almighty Allah, we
will have a brave wedding and celebrate the marriage festival and
after the knot is tied we will send you both back to thy native
land, with an escort of a thousand Marids of our body-guard, the
least of whom, an thou bid him slay King Kafid and his folk,
would surely destroy them to the last man in the twinkling of an
eye. Furthermore if it please thee we will send thee, year after
year, a company of which each and every can so do with all thy
foes.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that "the
lady Shamsah's mother ended with saying, 'And if it so please
thee we will send thee, year after year, a company of which each
and every can destroy thy foes to the last man.' Then King
Shahlan sat down on his throne and, summoning his Grandees and
Officers of state, bade them make ready for the marriage-
festivities and decorate the city seven days and nights. 'We hear
and we obey,' answered they and busied themselves two months in
the preparations, after which they celebrated the marriage of the
Prince and Princess and held a mighty festival, never was there
its like. Then they brought Janshah in to his bride and he abode
with her in all solace of life and delight for two years, at the
end of which time he said to her, 'Thy father promised to send us
to my native land, that we might pass one year there and the next
here.' Answered she, I hear and obey,' and going in to King
Shahlan at nightfall told him what the Prince had said. Quoth he,
'I consent; but have patience with me till the first of the
month, that I may make ready for your departure.' She repeated
these words to her husband and they waited till the appointed
time, when the King bade his Marids bring out to them a great
litter of red gold, set with pearls and jewels and covered with a
canopy of green silk, purfled in a profusion of colours and
embroidered with precious stones, dazzling with its goodliness
the eyes of every beholder. He chose out four of his Marids to