im and facilitated his conquests. At the end of
Persia, where he was invited by the people, on account of the
cruelty of his half brother Darab II., he came upon two huge
mountains on the same line, behind which dwelt a host of
abominable pygmies, two spans high, with curious eyes, ears which
served as mattresses and coverlets, huge fanged mouths, lions'
claws and hairy hind quarters. They ate men, destroyed
everything, copulated in public and had swarms of children. These
were Yájúj and Májúj (Gog and Magog) descendants of Japhet.
Sikandar built against them the famous wall with stones cemented
and riveted by iron and copper. The "Great Wall" of China, the
famous bulwark against the Tartars, dates from B.C. 320
(Alexander of Macedon died B.C. 324); and as the Arabs knew
Canton well before Mohammed's day, they may have built their
romance upon it. The Guebres consigned Sikandar to hell for
burning the Nusks or sections of the Zendavesta.

[FN#462] These terrific preachments to Eastern despots (who
utterly ignore them) are a staple produce of Oriental
tale-literature and form the chiaro-oscuro, as it were, of a
picture whose lights are brilliant touches of profanity and
indelicate humour. It certainly has the charm of contrast. Much
of the above is taken from the Sikandar-nameh (Alexander Book) of
the great Persian poet, Nizámi, who flourished A.H. 515-597,
between the days of Firdausi (ob. A.D.1021) and Sa'adi (ob. A.D.
1291). In that romance Sikandar builds, "where the sun goes
down," a castle of glittering stone which kills men by causing
excessive laughter and surrounds it with yellow earth like gold.
Hence the City of Brass. He also converts, instead of being
converted by, the savages of the text. He finds a stone of
special excellence which he calls Almás (diamond); and he obtains
it from the Valley of Serpents by throwing down flesh to the
eagles. Lastly he is accompanied by "Bilínas" or "Bilínus," who
is apparently Apollonius of Tyana.

[FN#463] I have explained the beautiful name in Night cclxxxix:
He is stil famous for having introduced into Persia the fables of
Pilpay (Bidyapati, the lord of lore) and a game which the genius
of Persia developed into chess. 

[FN#464] Here we find an eternal truth, of which Malthusians ever
want reminding; that the power of a nation simply consists in its
numbers of fighting men and in their brute bodily force. The
conquering race is that which raises most foot-pounds: hence the
North conquers the South in the Northern hemisphere and visa
versa.

[FN#465] Arab. "Wayha," not so strong as "Woe to," etc. Al-Hariri
often uses it as a formula of affectionate remonstrance.

[FN#466] As a rule (much disputed) the Sayyid is a descendant
from Mohammed through his grandchild Hasan, and is a man of the
pen; whereas the Sharif derives from Husayn and is a man of the
sword. The Najíb al-taraf is the son of a common Moslemah by a
Sayyid, as opposed to the "Najib al-tarafayn," when both parents
are of Apostolic blood. The distinction is not noticed in Lane's
"Modern Egyptians". The Sharif is a fanatic and often dangerous,
as I have instanced in Pilgrimage iii. 132.

[FN#467] A theologian of Bassorah (eighth century): surnamed Abú
Yahyá. The prayer for mercy denotes that he was dead when the
tale was written.

[FN#468] A theologian of Bassorah (eighth century).

[FN#469] Arab. "Musallá"; lit. a place of prayer; an oratory, a
chapel, opp. to "Jámi'" = a (cathedral) mosque.

[FN#470] According to all races familiar with the negro, a calf
like a shut fist planted close under the ham is, like the
"cucumber shin" and "lark heel", a good sign in a slave. Shapely
calves and well-made legs denote the idle and the ne'er-do-well.
I have often found this true although the rule is utterly
empirical. Possibly it was suggested by the contrast of the
nervous and lymphatic temperaments.

[FN#471] These devotees address Allah as a lover would his
beloved. The curious reader will consult for instances the
Dabistan on Tasawwuf (ii. 221; i.,iii. end, and passim).

[FN#472] Arab. "Ma'rifat," Pers. Dánish; the knowledge of the
Truth. The seven steps are (1) Sharí'at, external law like night;
(2) Taríkat, religious rule like the stars; (3) Hakíkat, reality,
truth like the moon; (4) Ma'arifat like the sun; (5) Kurbat,
proximity to Allah; (6) Wasílat, union with Allah, and (7)
Suknat, dwelling in Allah. (Dabistan iii.29.)

[FN#473] Name of a fountain of Paradise: See Night xlix., vol.
ii., p.100.

[FN#474] Arab. "Atbák"; these trays are made of rushes, and the
fans of palm-leaves or tail-feathers. 

[FN#475] Except on the two great Festivals when fasting is
forbidden. The only religion which has shown common sense in this
matter is that of the Guebres or Parsis: they consider fasting
neither meritorious nor lawful; and they honour Hormuzd by good
living "because it keeps the soul stronger." Yet even they have
their food superstitions, e.g. in Gate No. xxiv.: "Beware of sin
specially on the day thou eatest flesh, for flesh is the diet of
Ahriman." And in India the Guebres have copied the Hindus in not
slaughtering horned cattle for the table.

[FN#476] Arab. "Jallábiyah," a large-sleeved robe of coarse stuff
worn by the poor.

[FN#477] His fear was that his body might be mutilated by the
fall.

[FN#478] The phrase means "offering up many and many a prayer."

[FN#479] A saying of Mohammed is recorded "Al-fakru fakhrí"
(poverty is my pride!), intelligible in a man who never wanted
for anything. Here he is diametrically opposed to Ali who
honestly abused poverty; and the Prophet seems to have borrowed
from Christendom, whose "Lazarus and Dives" shows a man sent to
Hell because he enjoyed a very modified Heaven in this life and
which suggested that one of the man's greatest miseries is an
ecclesiastical virtue--"Holy Poverty"--represented in the Church
as a bride young and lovely. If a "rich man can hardly enter the
kingdom" what must it be with a poor man whose conditions are far
more unfavourable? Going to the other extreme we may say that
Poverty is the root of all evil and the more so as it curtails
man's power of benefiting others. Practically I observe that
those who preach and praise it the most, practise it the least
willingly: the ecclesiastic has always some special reasons, a
church or a school is wanted; but not the less he wishes for more
money. In Syria this Holy Poverty leads to strange abuses. At
Bayrut I recognised in most impudent beggers well-to-do peasants
from the Kasrawán district, and presently found out that whilst
their fields were under snow they came down to the coast, enjoyed
a genial climate and lived on alms. When I asked them if they
were not ashamed to beg, they asked me if I was ashamed of
following in the footsteps of the Saviour and Apostles. How much
wiser was Zoroaster who found in the Supreme Paradise
(Minuwán-minu) "many persons, rich in gold and silver who had
worshipped the Lord and had been grateful to Him." (Dabistan i.
265.)

[FN#480] Koran vii. 52.

[FN#481] Arab. "Al-bayt" = the house. The Arabs had probably
learned this pleasant mode of confinement from the Chinese whose
Kea or Cangue is well known. The Arabian form of it is "Ghull,"
or portable pillory, which reprobates will wear on Judgment Day.

[FN#482] This commonest conjuring trick in the West becomes a
miracle in the credulous East.

[FN#483] Arab. "Kánún"; the usual term is Mankal (pron. Mangal) a
pan of copper or brass. Some of these "chafing-dishes" stand four
feet high and are works of art. Lane (M.E. chapt. iv) gives an
illustration of the simpler kind, together with the "Azikí," a
smaller pan for heating coffee. See Night dxxxviii.

[FN#484] See vol. iii., p.239. The system is that of the Roman As
and Unciae. Here it would be the twenty-fourth part of a dinar or
miskal; something under 5d. I have already noted that all Moslem
rulers are religiously bound to some handicraft, if it be only
making toothpicks. Mohammed abolished kingship proper as well as
priestcraft.

[FN#485] Al-Islam, where salvation is found under the shade of
the swords.

[FN#486] Moslems like the Classics (Aristotle and others) hold
the clitoris (Zambúr) to be the sedes et scaturigo veneris which,
says Sonnini, is mere profanity. In the babe it protrudes beyond
the labiæ and snipping off the head forms female circumcision.
This rite is supposed by Moslems to have been invented by Sarah
who so mutilated Hagar for jealousy and was afterwards ordered by
Allah to have herself circumcised at the same time as Abraham. It
is now (or should be) universal in Al-Islam and no Arab would
marry a girl "unpurified" by it. Son of an "uncircumcised" mother
(Ibn al-bazrá) is a sore insult. As regards the popular idea that
Jewish women were circumcised till the days of Rabbi Gershom
(A.D.1000) who denounced it as a scandal to the Gentiles, the
learned Prof. H. Graetz informs me, with some indignation, that
the rite was never practised and that the great Rabbi contended
only against polygamy. Female circumcision, however, is I believe
the rule amongst some outlying tribes of Jews. The rite is the
proper complement of male circumcision, evening the sensitiveness
of the genitories by reducing it equally in both sexes: an
uncircumcised woman has the venereal orgasm much sooner and
oftener than a circumcised man, and frequent coitus would injure
her health; hence I believe, despite the learned historian, that
it is practised by some Eastern Jews. "Excision" is universal
amongst the negroids of the Upper Nile (Werne), the Somál and
other adjacent tribes. The operator, an old woman, takes up the
instrument, a knife or razor-blade fixed into a wooden handle,
and with three sweeps cuts off the labia and the head of the
clitoris. The parts are then sewn up with a packneedle and a
thread of sheepskin; and in Dar-For a tin tube is inserted for
the passage of urine. Before marriage the bridegroom trains
himself for a month on beef, honey and milk; and, if he can open
his bride with the natural weapon, he is a sworder to whom no
woman in the tribe can deny herself. If he fails, he tries
penetration with his fingers and by way of last resort whips out
his whittle and cuts the parts open. The sufferings of the first
few nights must be severe. The few Somáli prostitutes who
practised at Aden always had the labiæ and clitoris excised and
the skin showing the scars of coarse sewing. The moral effect of
female circumcision is peculiar. While it diminishes the heat of
passion it increases licentiousness, and breeds a debauchery of
mind far worse than bodily unchastity, because accompanied by a
peculiar cold cruelty and a taste for artificial stimulants to
"luxury." It is the sexlessness of a spayed canine imitated by
the suggestive brain of humanity.

[FN#487] Koran vi. So called because certain superstitions about
Cattle are therein mentioned.

[FN#488] Koran iv. So called because it treats of marriages,
divorces, etc. 

[FN#489] Sídi (contracted from Sayyidí = my lord) is a title
still applied to holy men in Marocco and the Maghrib; on the East
African coast it is assumed by negro and negroid Moslems, e.g.
Sidi Mubárak Bombay; and "Seedy boy" is the Anglo-Indian term for
a Zanzibar-man. "Khawwás" is one who weaves palm-leaves (Khos)
into baskets, mats, etc.: here, however, it may be an inherited
name.

[FN#490] i.e. in spirit; the "strangers yet" of poor dear Richard
Monckton Milnes, Lord Houghton.

[FN#491] Al-Hakk = the Truth, one of the ninety-nine names of
Allah.

[FN#492] The Moslem is still unwilling to address Salám (Peace be
with you) to the Christian, as it is obligatory (Farz) to a
Moslem (Koran, chapt. iv. and lxviii.). He usually evades the
difficulty by saluting the nearest Moslem or by a change of words
Allah Yahdí-k (Allah direct thee to the right way) or "Peace be
upon us and the righteous worshipers of Allah" (not you) or
Al-Samm (for Salam) alayka = poison to thee. The idea is old:
Alexander of Alexandria in his circular letter describes the
Arian heretics as "men whom it is not lawful to salute or to bid
God-speed."

[FN#493] Koran xxxvi. 82. I have before noted that this famous
phrase was borrowed from the Hebrews, who borrowed it from the
Egyptians.

[FN#494] The story of Moses and Khizr has been noticed before.
See Koran chapt. xviii. 64 et seq. It is also related, says Lane
(ii. 642), by Al-Kazwíni in the Ajáib al-Makhlúkát. This must be
"The Angel and the Hermit" in the Gesta Romanorum, Tale lxxx.
which possibly gave rise to Parnell's Hermit; and Tale cxxvii.
"Of Justice and Equity." The Editor says it "contains a beautiful
lesson:" I can find only excellent excuses for "doing evil that
good may come of it."

[FN#495] Koran chapt. v.108. 

[FN#496] The doggrel is phenomenal.

[FN#497] He went in wonder and softened heart to see the miracle
of saintly affection.

[FN#498]  In Sufistical parlance, the creature is the lover and
the Creator the Beloved: worldly existence is Disunion, parting,
severance; and the life to come is Reunion. The basis of the idea
is the human soul being a divinæ particula auræ, a disjoined
molecule from the Great Spirit, imprisoned in a jail of flesh;
and it is so far valuable that it has produced a grand and
pathetic poetry; but Common Sense asks, Where is the proof? And
Reason wants to know, What does it all mean?

[FN#499] Koran xiii. 41.

[FN#500] Robinson Crusoe, with a touch of Arab prayerfulness.
Also the story of the Knight Placidus in the Gesta (cx.),
Boccaccio, etc.

[FN#501] Arabs note two kinds of leprosy, "Bahak" or "Baras" the
common or white, and "Juzam" the black leprosy; the leprosy of
the joints, mal rouge. Both are attributed to undue diet as
eating fish and drinking milk; and both are treated with tonics,
especially arsenic. Leprosy is regarded by Moslems as a
Scriptural malady on account of its prevalence amongst the
Israelites who, as Manetho tells us, were expelled from Egypt
because they infected and polluted the population. In mediæval
Christendom an idea prevailed that the Saviour was a leper; hence
the term "morbus sacer"; the honours paid to the sufferers by
certain Saints and the Papal address (Clement III. A.D.1189)
dilectis filiis leprosis. (Farrar's Life of Christ, i.149.) For
the "disgusting and impetuous lust" caused by leprosy, see
Sonnini (p.560) who visited the lepers at Canea in Candia. He is
one of many who describes this symptom; but in the Brazil, where
the foul malady still prevails, I never heard of it.

[FN#502] A city in Irak; famous for the three days' battle which
caused the death of Yezdegird, last Sassanian king.

[FN#503] A mountain pass near Meccah famous for the "First Fealty
of the Steep" (Pilgrimage ii. 126). The mosque was built to
commemorate the event.

[FN#504] To my surprise I read in Mr. Redhouse's "Mesnevi"
(Trubner, 1881), "Arafat, the mount where the victims are
slaughtered by the pilgrims." (p.60). This ignorance is
phenomenal. Did Mr. Redhouse never read Burckhardt or Burton?

[FN#505] i.e. listening to the sermon. 

[FN#506] It is sad doggrel. 

[FN#507] This long story, containing sundry episodes and
occupying fifty-three Nights, is wholly omitted by Lane (ii. 643)
because "it is a compound of the most extravagant absurdities."
He should have enabled his readers to form their own judgment.

[FN#508] Called Jamasp (brother and minister of the ancient
Persian King Gushtasp) in the translations of Trebutien and
others from Von Hammer.

[FN#509] The usual term of lactation in the East, prolonged to
two years and a-half, which is considered the rule laid down by
the Shara' or precepts of the Prophet. But it is not unusual to
see children of three and even four years hanging to their
mothers' breasts. During this period the mother does not cohabit
with her husband; the separation beginning with her pregnancy.
Such is the habit, not only of the "lower animals," but of all
ancient peoples, the Egyptians (from whom the Hebrews borrowed
it), the Assyrians and the Chinese. I have discussed its bearing
upon pregnancy in my "City of the Saints": the Mormons insist
upon this law of purity being observed; and the beauty, strength
and good health of the younger generation are proofs of their
wisdom.

[FN#510] Thus distinguishing it from "Asal-kasab," cane honey or
sugar. See vol. i., 271.

[FN#511] The student of Hinduism will remember the Nága-Kings and
Queens (Melusines and Echidnæ) who guard the earth-treasures in
Naga-land. The first appearance of the snake in literature is in
Egyptian hieroglyphs, where he forms the letters f and t, and
acts as a determinative in the shape of a Cobra di Capello
(Coluber Naja) with expanded hood.

[FN#512] In token that he was safe.

[FN#513] "Akhir al-Zamán." As old men praise past times, so
prophets prefer to represent themselves as the last. The early
Christians caused much scandal amongst the orderly law-loving
Romans by their wild and mistaken predictions of the end of the
world being at hand. The catastrophe is a fact for each man under
the form of death; but the world has endured for untold ages and
there is no apparent cause why it should not endure as many more.
The "latter days," as the religious dicta of most "revelations"
assure us, will be richer in sinners than in sanctity: hence "End
of Time" is a facetious Arab title for a villain of superior
quality. My Somali escort applied it to one thus distinguished:
in 1875, I heard at Aden that he ended life by the spear as we
had all predicted.

[FN#514] Jahannam and the other six Hells are personified as
feminine; and (woman-like) they are somewhat addicted to prolix
speechification.

[FN#515] These puerile exaggerations are fondly intended to act
as nurses frighten naughty children.

[FN#516] Alluding to an oft-quoted saying "Lau lá-ka, etc.
Without thee (O Mohammed) We (Allah) had not created the
spheres," which may have been suggested by "Before Abraham was, I
am" (John viii. 58); and by Gate xci. of Zoroastrianism "O
Zardusht for thy sake I have created the world" (Dabistan i.
344). The sentiment is by no means "Shi'ah," as my learned friend
Prof. Aloys Springer supposes. In his Mohammed (p. 220) we find
an extract from a sectarian poet, "For thee we dispread the
earth; for thee we caused the waters to flow; for thee we vaulted
the heavens." As Baron Alfred von Kremer, another learned and
experienced Orientalist, reminds me, the "Shi'ahs" have always
shown a decided tendency to this kind of apotheosis and have
deified or quasi-deified Ali and the Imams. But the formula is
first found in the highly orthodox Burdah poem of Al-Busiri:--

     "But for him (Lau lá-hu) the world had never come out of
     nothingness."

Hence it has been widely diffused. See Les Aventures de Kamrup
(pp. 146-7) and Les Œuvres de Wali (pp. 51-52), by M. Garcin de
Tassy and the Dabistan (vol. i. pp. 2-3).

[FN#517] Arab. "Símiyá" from the Pers., a word apparently built
on the model of "Kámiyá" = alchemy, and applied, I have said, to
fascination, minor miracles and white magic generally like the
Hindu "Indrajal." The common term for Alchemy is Ilm al-Káf (the
K-science) because it is not safe to speak of it openly as
Alchemy.

[FN#518] Mare Tenebrarum = Sea of Darknesses; usually applied to
the "mournful and misty Atlantic."

[FN#519] Some Moslems hold that Solomon and David were buried in
Jerusalem, others on the shore of Lake Tiberias. Mohammed,
according to the history of Al-Tabari (p. 56 vol. i. Duleux's
"Chronique de Tabari") declares that the Jinni bore Solomon's
corpse to a palace hewn in the rock upon an island surrounded by
a branch of the "Great Sea" and set him on a throne, with his
ring still on his finger, under a guard of twelve Jinns. "None
hath looked upon the tomb save only two, Affan who took Bulukiya
as his companion: with extreme pains they arrived at the spot,
and Affan was about to carry off the ring when a thunderbolt
consumed him. So Bulukiya returned."

[FN#520] Koran xxxviii. 34, or, "art the liberal giver."

[FN#521] i.e. of the last trumpet blown by the Archangel Israfil:
an idea borrowed from the Christians. Hence the title of certain
churches--ad Tubam.

[FN#522] This may mean that the fruits were fresh and dried like
dates or tamarinds (a notable wonder), or soft and hard of skin
like grapes and pomegranates.

[FN#523] Arab. "Ai-lksír" meaning lit. an essence; also the
philosopher's stone.

[FN#524] Name of the Jinni whom Solomon imprisoned in Lake
Tiberias (See vol. i., 41).

[FN#525] Vulgarly pronounced "Jahannum." The second hell is
usually assigned to Christians. As there are seven Heavens (the
planetary orbits) so, to satisfy Moslem love of symmetry, there
must be as many earths and hells under the earth. The Egyptians
invented these grim abodes, and the marvellous Persian fancy
worked them into poem.

[FN#526] Arab. "Yájúj and Majuj," first named in Gen. x. 2, which
gives the ethnology of Asia Minor, circ. B.C. 800. "Gomer" is the
Gimri or Cymmerians; "Magog" the original Magi, a division of the
Medes, "Javan" the Ionian Greeks, "Meshesh" the Moschi; and
"Tires" the Turusha, or primitive Cymmerians. In subsequent
times, "Magog" was applied to the Scythians, and modern Moslems
determine from the Koran (chaps. xviii. and xxi.) that Yajuj and
Majuj are the Russians, whom they call Moska or Moskoff from the
Moskwa River,

[FN#527] I attempt to preserve the original pun; "Mukarrabin"
(those near Allah) being the Cherubim, and the Creator causing
Iblis to draw near Him (karraba).

[FN#528] A vulgar version of the Koran (chaps. vii.), which seems
to have borrowed from the Gospel of Barnabas. Hence Adam becomes
a manner of God-man.

[FN#529] These wild fables are caricatures of Rabbinical legends
which began with "Lilith," the Spirit-wife of Adam: Nature and
her counterpart, Physis and Antiphysis, supply a solid basis for
folk-lore. Amongst the Hindus we have Brahma (the Creator) and
Viswakarmá, the anti-Creator: the former makes a horse and a bull
and the latter caricatures them with an ass and a buffalo, and so
forth.

[FN#530] This is the "Lauh al-Mahfúz," the Preserved Tablet, upon
which are written all Allah's decrees and the actions of mankind
good (white) and evil (black). This is the "perspicuous Book" of
the Koran, chaps. vi. 59. The idea again is Guebre.

[FN#531] i.e. the night before Friday which in Moslem parlance
would be Friday night.

[FN#532] Again Persian "Gáw-i-Zamín" = the Bull of the Earth.
"The cosmogony of the world," etc., as we read in the Vicar of
Wakefield.

[FN#533] The Calc. Edit. ii. 614. here reads by a clerical error
"bull."

[FN#534] i.e. Lakes and rivers.

[FN#535] Here some abridgement is necessary, for we have another
recital of what has been told more than once.

[FN#536] This name, "King of Life," is Persian: "Tegh" or "Tigh"
means a scimitar and "Bahrwán," is, I conceive, a mistake for
"Bihrún," the Persian name of Alexander the Great.

[FN#537] Arab. "Mulákát" or meeting the guest which, I have said,
is an essential part of Eastern ceremony, the distance from the
divan, room, house or town being proportioned to his rank or
consideration.

[FN#538] Arab. "Sifr": whistling is held by the Badawi to be the
speech of devils; and the excellent explorer Burckhardt got a bad
name by the ugly habit.

[FN#539] The Arabs call "Shikk" (split man) and the Persians
"Nímchahrah" (half-face) a kind of demon like a man divided
longitudinally: this gruesome creature runs with amazing speed
and is very cruel and dangerous. For the celebrated soothsayers
"Shikk" and "Sátih" see Chenery's Al-Hariri, p. 371.

[FN#540] Arab. "Takht" (Persian) = a throne or a capital.

[FN#541] Arab. "Wady al-Naml"; a reminiscence of the Koranic Wady
(chaps. xxvii.), which some place in Syria and others in Táif.

[FN#542] This is the old, old fable of the River Sabbation which
Pliny ((xxx). 18) reports as "drying up every Sabbath-day"
(Saturday): and which Josephus reports as breaking the Sabbath by
flowing only on the Day of Rest.

[FN#543] They were keeping the Sabbath. When lodging with my
Israelite friends at Tiberias and Safet, I made a point of never
speaking to them (after the morning salutation) till the Saturday
was over.

[FN#544] Arab. "La'al" and "Yákút," the latter also applied to
the garnet and to a variety of inferior stones. The ruby is
supposed by Moslems to be a common mineral thoroughly "cooked" by
the sun, and produced only on the summits of mountains
inaccessible even to Alpinists. The idea may have originated from
exaggerated legends of the Badakhshán country (supposed to be the
home of the ruby) and its terrors of break-neck foot-paths,
jagged peaks and horrid ravines: hence our "balas-ruby" through
the Spanish corruption "Balaxe." Epiphanius, archbishop of
Salamis in Cyprus, who died A.D. 403, gives, m a little treatise
(De duodecim gemmis rationalis summi sacerdotis Hebræorum Liber,
opera Fogginii, Romae, 1743, p. 30), a precisely similar
description of the mode of finding jacinths in Scythia. "In a
wilderness in the interior of Great Scythia," he writes, "there
is a valley begirt with stony mountains as with walls. It is
inaccessible to man, and so excessively deep that the bottom of
the valley is invisible from the top of the surrounding
mountains. So great is the darkness that it has the effect of a
kind of chaos. To this place certain criminals are condemned,
whose task it is to throw down into the valley slaughtered lambs,
from which the skin has been first taken off. The little stones
adhere to these pieces of flesh. Thereupon the eagles, which live
on the summits of the mountains, fly down following the scent of
the flesh, and carry away the lambs with the stones adhering to
them. They, then, who are condemned to this place watch until the
eagles have finished their meal, and run and take away the
stones." Epiphanius, who wrote this, is spoken of in terms of
great respect by many ecclesiastical writers, and St. Jerome
styles the treatise here quoted, "Egregium volumen, quod si
legere volueris, plenissimam scientiam consequeris ," and,
indeed, it is by no means improbable that it was from the account
of Epiphanius that this story was first translated into Arabic. A
similar account is given by Marco Polo and by Nicolò de Conti, as
of a usage which they had heard was practiced in India, and the
position ascribed to the mountain by Conti, namely, fifteen days'
journey north of Vijanagar, renders it highly probable that
Golconda was alluded to. He calls the mountain Albenigaras, and
says that it was infested with serpents. Marco Polo also speaks
of these serpents, and while his account agrees with that of
Sindbad, inasmuch as the serpents, which are the prey of
Sindbad's Rukh, are devoured by the Venetian's eagles, that of
Conti makes the vultures and eagles fly away with the meat to
places where they may be safe from the serpents. (Introd. p.
xiii., India in the Fifteenth Century, etc., R. H. Major, London,
Hakluyt Soc. MDCCCLVII.)

[FN#545] Elder Victory: "Nasr" is a favourite name with Moslems.

[FN#546] These are the "Swan-maidens" of whom Europe in late
years has heard more than enough. It appears to me that we go
much too far for an explanation of the legend; a high-bred girl
is so like a swan in many points that the idea readily suggests
itself. And it is also aided by the old Egyptian (and Platonic)
belief in pre-existence and by the Rabbinic and Buddhistic
doctrine of ante-natal sin, to say nothing of metempsychosis.
(Joseph Ant. xvii.. 153.)

[FN#547] The lines have occurred before. I quote Mr. Payne for
variety.

[FN#548] Arab. "Al-Khayál": it is a synonym of "al-Tayf' and the
nearest approach to our "ghost," as has been explained. In poetry
it is the figure of the beloved seen when dreaming.

[FN#549] He does not kiss her mouth because he intends to marry
her.

[FN#550] It should be "manifest" excellence. (Koran xxvii. 16.)

[FN#551] The phrase is Koranic used to describe Paradise, and
Damascus is a familiar specimen of a city under which a river,
the Baradah, passes, distributed into a multitude of canals.

[FN#552] It may be noted that rose-water is sprinkled on the
faces of the "nobility and gentry, " common water being good
enough for the commonalty. I have had to drink tea made in
compliment with rose-water and did not enjoy it.

[FN#553] The "Valley Flowery:" Zahrán is the name of a place near
Al-Medinah.

[FN#554] The Proud or Petulant.

[FN#555] i.e. Lion, Son of ( ?).

[FN#556] i.e. Many were slain.

[FN#557] I venture to draw attention to this battle-picture which
is at once simple and highly effective.

[FN#558] Anglicè a quibble, evidently evasive.

[FN#559] In text "Aná A'amil," etc., a true Egypto-Syrian
vulgarism.

[FN#560] i.e. magical formulæ. The context is purposely left
vague.

[FN#561] The repetition is a condescension, a token of kindness.

[FN#562] This is the common cubic of 18 inches: the modern vary
from 22 to 26.

[FN#563] I have noticed the two-humped Bactrian camel which the
Syrians and Egyptians compare with an elephant. See p. 221 (the
neo-Syrian) Book of Kalilah and Dimnah.

[FN#564] The Noachian dispensation revived the Islam or true
religion first revealed to Adam and was itself revived and
reformed by Moses.

[FN#565] Probably a corruption of the Turkish "Kara Tásh" = black
stone, in Arab. "Hájar Jahannam" (hell-stone), lava, basalt.

[FN#566] A variant of lines in Night xx., vol. i., 211.  

[FN#567] i.e. Daughter of Pride: the proud.

[FN#568] In the Calc. Edit. by misprint "Maktab." Jabal Mukattam
is the old sea-cliff where the Mediterranean once beat and upon
whose North-Western slopes Cairo is built.

[FN#569] Arab. "Kutb"; lie. an axle, a pole; next a prince; a
high order or doyen in Sainthood especially amongst the
Sufi-gnostics.

[FN#570] Lit. "The Green" (Prophet), a mysterious personage
confounded with Elijah, St. George and others. He was a Moslem,
i.e. a ewe believer in the Islam of his day and Wazir to
Kaykobad, founder of the Kayanian dynasty, sixth century B.C. We
have before seen him as a contemporary of Moses. My learned
friend Ch. Clermone-Ganneau traces him back, with a multitude of
his similars (Proteus, Perseus, etc.), to the son of Osiris (p.
45, Horus et Saint Georges).

[FN#571] Arab. "Waled," more ceremonious than "ibn." It is, by
the by, the origin of our "valet" in its sense of boy or servant
who is popularly addressed Yá waled. Hence I have seen in a
French book of travels "un petit Iavelet."

[FN#572] Arab. "Azal" = Eternity (without beginning); "Abad" =
Infinity (eternity without end).

[FN#573] The Moslem ritual for slaughtering (by cutting the
throat) is not so strict as that of the Jews; but it requires
some practice; and any failure in the conditions renders the meat
impure, mere carrion (fatís).

[FN#574] The Wazir repeats all the words spoken by the Queen--but
"in iteration there is no recreation."

[FN#575] A phrase always in the Moslem's mouth: the slang meaning
of "we put our trust in Allah" is "let's cut our stick."

[FN#576] Koran liii. 14. This "Sidrat al-Muntahá" (Zizyphus
lotus) stands m the seventh heaven on the right hand of Allah's
throne: and even the angels may not pass beyond it.

[FN#577] Arab. "Habash" the word means more than "Abyssinia" as
it includes the Dankali Country and the sea-board, a fact unknown
to the late Lord Stratford de Redcliffe when he disputed with the
Porte. I ventured to set him right and suffered accordingly.

[FN#578] Here ends vol. ii. of the Mac. Edit.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael Hart]





This etext was produced by anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteers





The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Complete Works of
Artemus Ward (Charles Farrar Browne) Part 5

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF ARTEMUS WARD PART 5, THE LONDON PUNCH
LETTERS

(CHARLES FARRAR BROWNE)

With a biographical sketch by Melville D. Landon, "Eli Perkins"

PART V.

The London Punch Letters.

5.1.  Arrival in London.

5.2.  Personal Recollections.

5.3.  The Green Lion and Oliver Cromwell.

5.4.  At the Tomb of Shakespeare.

5.5.  Introduction to the Club.

5.6.  The Tower of London.

5.7.  Science and Natural History.

5.8.  A Visit to the British Museum.

PART V.  THE LONDON PUNCH LETTERS.

P.S.--June 16th.--Artemus Ward really arrived in London yesterday.
He has come to England at last, though, like "La Belle Helene at
the Adelphi Theatre, he "has been some time in preparation."

JOHN CAMDEN HOTTEN, Piccadilly, W.  Jan. 30, 1865.

5.1.  ARRIVAL IN LONDON.

MR. PUNCH:  My dear Sir,--You prob'ly didn't meet my uncle Wilyim
when he was on these shores.  I jedge so from the fack that his
pursoots wasn't litrary.  Commerce, which it has been trooly
observed by a statesman, or somebody, is the foundation stone
onto which a nation's greatness rests, glorious Commerce was
Uncle Wilyim's fort.  He sold soap.  It smelt pretty, and redily
commanded two pents a cake.  I'm the only litrary man in our
fam'ly.  It is troo, I once had a dear cuzzun who wrote 22 verses
onto "A Child who nearly Died of the Measles, O!" but as he
injoodiciously introjudiced a chorious at the end of each stansy,
the parrents didn't like it at all.  The father in particler wept
afresh, assaulted my cuzzun, and said he never felt so ridicklus
in his intire life.  The onhappy result was that my cuzzun
abandined poetry forever, and went back to shoemakin, a shattered
man.

My Uncle Wilyim disposed of his soap, and returned to his nativ
land with a very exolted opinyon of the British public.  "It is a
edycated community," said he; "they're a intellectooal peple.  In
one small village alone I sold 50 cakes of soap, incloodin
barronial halls, where they offered me a ducal coronet, but I
said no--give it to the poor."  This was the way Uncle Wilyim
went on.  He told us, however, some stories that was rather too
much to be easily swallerd.  In fack, my Uncle Wilyim was not a
emblem of trooth.  He retired some years ago on a hansum
comptency derived from the insurance-money he received on a
rather shaky skooner he owned, and which turned up while lyin at
a wharf one night, the cargo havin fortnitly been removed the day
afore the disastriss calamty occurd.  Uncle Wilyim said it was
one of the most sing'ler things he ever heard of; and, after
collectin the insurance money, he bust into a flood of tears, and
retired to his farm in Pennsylvany.  He was my uncle by marriage
only.  I do not say that he wasn't a honest man.  I simply say
that if you have a uncle, and bitter experunce tells you it is
more profitable in a pecoonery pint of view to put pewter spoons
instid of silver ones onto the table when that uncle dines with
you in a frenly way--I simply say, there is sumthun wrong in our
social sistim, which calls loudly for reform.

I 'rived on these shores at Liverpool, and proceeded at once to
London.  I stopt at the Washington Hotel in Liverpool, because it
was named after a countryman of mine who didn't get his living by
makin' mistakes, and whose mem'ry is dear to civilized peple all
over the world, because he was gentle and good as well as trooly
great.  We read in Histry of any number of great individooals,
but how few of 'em, alars! should we want to take home to supper
with us!  Among others, I would call your attention to Alexander
the Great, who conkerd the world, and wept because he couldn't do
it sum more, and then took to gin-and-seltzer, gettin' tight
every day afore dinner with the most disgustin' reg'larity,
causin' his parunts to regret they hadn't 'prenticed him in his
early youth to a biskit-baker, or some other occupation of a
peaceful and quiet character.  I say, therefore, to the great men
now livin; (you could put 'em all into Hyde Park, by the way, and
still leave room for a large and respectable concourse of
rioters)--be good.  I say to that gifted but bald-heded Prooshun,
Bismarck, be good and gentle in your hour of triump.  _I_ always
am.  I admit that our lines is different, Bismarck's and mine;
but the same glo'rus principle is involved, I am a exhibiter of
startlin' curiositys, wax works, snaix, etsetry ("either of
whom," as a American statesman whose name I ain't at liberty to
mention for perlitical resins, as he expecks to be a candidate
for a prom'nent offiss, and hence doesn't wish to excite the rage
and jelisy of other showmen--"either of whom is wuth dubble the
price of admission"); I say I am an exhibiter of startlin
curiositys, and I also have my hours of triump, but I try to be
good in 'em.  If you say, "Ah, yes, but also your hours of grief
and misfortin;" I answer, it is troo, and you prob'ly refer to
the circumstans of my hirin' a young man of dissypated habits to
fix hisself up as A real Cannibal from New Zeelan, and when I was
simply tellin the audience that he was the most feroshos Cannibal
of his tribe, and that, alone and unassisted, he had et sev'ril
of our fellow countrymen, and that he had at one time even
contemplated eatin his Uncle Thomas on his mother's side, as well
as other near and dear relatives,--when I was makin' these simple
statements the mis'ble young man said I was a lyer, and knockt me
off the platform.  Not quite satisfied with this, he cum and trod
hevly on me, and as he was a very muscular person and wore
remarkable thick boots, I knew at once that a canary bird wasn't
walkin' over me.

I admit that my ambition overlept herself in this instuns, and
I've been very careful ever since to deal square with the public.
If I was the public I should insist on squareness, tho' I
shouldn't do as a portion of my audience did on the occasion jest
mentioned, which they was employed in sum naberin' coal mines.

"As you hain't got no more Cannybals to show us, old man," said
one of 'em, who seemed to be a kind of leader among 'em--a tall
dis'greeble skoundril--"as you seem to be out of Cannybals, we'll
sorter look round here and fix things.  Them wax figgers of yours
want washin'.  There's Napoleon Bonyparte and Julius Caesar--they
must have a bath," with which coarse and brutal remark he
imitated the shrill war-hoop of the western savige, and, assisted
by his infamus coal-heavin companyins, he threw all my wax-work
into the river, and let my wild bears loose to pray on a peaceful
and inoffensive agricultooral community.

Leavin Liverpool (I'm goin' back there, tho--I want to see the
Docks, which I heard spoken of at least once while I was there) I
cum to London in a 1st class car, passin' the time very agreeable
in discussin, with a countryman of mine, the celebrated
Schleswig-Holstein question.  We took that int'resting question
up and carefully traced it from the time it commenced being so,
down to the present day, when my countryman, at the close of a
four hours' annymated debate, said he didn't know anything about
it himself, and he wanted to know if I did.  I told him that I
did not.  He's at Ramsgate now, and I am to write him when I feel
like givin him two days in which to discuss the question of negro
slavery in America.  But now I do not feel like it.

London at last, and I'm stoppin at the Greenlion tavern.  I like
the lan'lord very much indeed.  He had fallen into a few triflin
errers in regard to America--he was under the impression, for
instance, that we et hay over there, and had horns growin out of
the back part of our heads--but his chops and beer is ekal to any
I ever pertook.  You must cum and see me and bring the boys.  I'm
told that Garrick used to cum here, but I'm growin skeptycal
about Garrick's favorit taverns.  I've had over 500 public-houses
pinted out to me where Garrick went.  I was indooced one night,
by a seleck comp'ny of Britons, to visit sum 25 public-houses,
and they confidentially told me that Garrick used to go to each
one of 'em.  Also, Dr. Johnson.  This won't do, you know.

May be I've rambled a bit in this communycation.  I'll try and be
more collected in my next, and meanwhile, b'lieve me,

                                   Trooly Yours,
                                                Artemus Ward.

5.2.  PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS.

You'll be glad to learn that I've made a good impression onto the
mind of the lan'lord of the Green Lion tavern.  He made a speech
about me last night.  Risin' in the bar he spoke as follers,
there bein over 20 individooals present:

"This North American has been a inmate of my 'ouse over two
weeks, yit he hasn't made no attempt to scalp any member of my
fam'ly.  He hasn't broke no cups or sassers, or furnitur of any
kind.  ("Hear, hear.")  I find I can trust him with lited
candles.  He eats his wittles with a knife and a fork.  People of
this kind should be encurridged.  I purpose 'is 'elth!"  ("Loud
'plaws.")

What could I do but modestly get up and express a fervint hope
that the Atlantic Cable would bind the two countries still more
closely together?  The lan'lord said my speech was full of
orig'nality, but his idee was the old stage coach was more safer,
and he tho't peple would indors that opinyin in doo time.

I'm gettin' on exceedin' well in London.  I see now, however,
that I made a mistake in orderin' my close afore I left home.
The trooth is the taler in our little villige owed me for a pig
and I didn't see any other way of gettin' my pay.  Ten years ago
these close would no doubt have been fash'n'ble, and perhaps they
would be ekally sim'lar ten years hens.  But now they're
diff'rently.  The taler said he know'd they was all right,
because he had a brother in Wales who kept him informed about
London fashins reg'lar.  This was a infamus falsehood.  But as
the ballud says (which I heard a gen'l'man in a new soot of black
close and white kid gloves sing t'other night), Never don't let
us Despise a Man because he wears a Raggid Coat!  I don't know as
we do, by the way, tho' we gen'rally get out of his way pretty
rapid; prob'ly on account of the pity which tears our boosums for
his onhappy condition.

This last remark is a sirkastic and witherin' thrust at them
blotid peple who live in gilded saloons.  I tho't I'd explain my
meanin' to you.  I frekently have to explain the meanin' of my
remarks.  I know one man--and he's a man of varid 'complishments
--who often reads my articles over 20 times afore he can make
anything of 'em at all.  Our skoolmaster to home says this is a
pecoolerarity of geneyus.  My wife says it is a pecoolerarity of
infernal nonsens.  She's a exceedin' practycal woman.  I luv her
muchly, however, and humer her little ways.  It's a recklis
falshood that she henpecks me, and the young man in our
neighborhood who said to me one evenin', as I was mistenin' my
diafram with a gentle cocktail at the villige tavun--who said to
me in these very langwidge, "Go home, old man, onless you desires
to have another teapot throwd at you by B.J.," probly regrets
havin said so.

I said, "Betsy Jane is my wife's front name, gentle yooth, and I
permits no person to alood to her as B.J. outside of the family
circle, of which I am it principally myself.  Your other
observations I scorn and disgust, and I must pollish you off."

He was a able-bodied young man, and, remoovin his coat, he
enquired if I wanted to be ground to powder?  I said, Yes:  if
there was a Powder-grindist handy, nothin would 'ford me greater
pleasure, when he struck me a painful blow into my right eye,
causin' me to make a rapid retreat into the fireplace.  I hadn't
no idee that the enemy was so well organized.  But I rallied and
went for him, in a rayther vigris style for my time of life.  His
parunts lived near by, and I will simply state 15 minits had only
elapst after the first act when he was carried home on a shutter.
His mama met the sollum procession at the door, and after
keerfully looking her orfspring over, she said:

"My son, I see how it is distinctually.  You've been foolin'
round a Trashin Masheen.  You went in at the place where they put
the grain in, cum out with the straw, and you got up into the
thingamyjig, and let the horses tred on you, didn't you, my son?"

The pen of no liven Orthur could describe that disfortnit young
man's sittywation more clearer.  But I was sorry for him, and I
went and nussed him till he got well.  His reg'lar original
father being absent to the war, I told him I'd be a father to him
myself.  He smilt a sickly smile, and said I'd already been wus
than two fathers to him.

I will here obsarve that fitin orter be allus avided, excep in
extreem cases.  My principle is, if a man smites me on the right
cheek I'll turn my left to him, prob'ly; but if he insinooates
that my gran'mother wasn't all right, I'll punch his hed.  But
fitin is mis'ble bisniss, gen'rally speakin, and whenever any
enterprisin countryman of mine cums over here to scoop up a
Briton in the prize ring I'm allus excessively tickled when he
gets scooped hisself, which it is a sad fack has thus far been
the case--my only sorrer bein' that t'other feller wasn't scooped
likewise.  It's diff'rently with scullin boats, which is a manly
sport, and I can only explain Mr. Hamil's resunt defeat in this
country on the grounds that he wasn't used to British water.  I
hope this explanation will be entirely satisfact'ry to all.

As I remarked afore, I'm gettin' on well.  I'm aware that I'm in
the great metrop'lis of the world, and it doesn't make me onhappy
to admit the fack. A man is a ass who dispoots it.  That's all
that ails HIM.  I know there is sum peple who cum over here and
snap and snarl 'bout this and that:  I know one man who says it
is a shame and a disgrace that St. Paul's Church isn't a older
edifiss; he says it should be years and even ages older than it
is; but I decline to hold myself responsible for the conduck of
this idyit simply because he's my countryman.  I spose every
civ'lised land is endowed with its full share of gibberin'
idyits, and it can't be helpt--leastways I can't think of any
effectooal plan of helpin' it.

I'm a little sorry you've got politics over here, but I shall not
diskuss 'em with nobody.  Tear me to pieces with wild omnibus
hosses, and I won't diskuss 'em.  I've had quite enuff of 'em at
home, thank you.  I was at Birmingham t'other night, and went to
the great meetin' for a few minits.  I hadn't been in the hall
long when a stern-lookin' artisan said to me:

"You ar from Wales!"

No, I told him I didn't think I was.  A hidgyis tho't flasht over
me.  It was of that onprincipled taler, and I said, "Has my
clothin' a Welchy appearance?"

"Not by no means," he answered, and then he said, "And what is
your opinyin of the present crisis?"

I said, "I don't zackly know.  Have you got it very bad?"

He replied, "Sir, it is sweepin' England like the Cymoon of the
Desert!"

"Wall," I said, "let it sweep!"

He ceased me by the arm and said, "Let us glance at hist'ry.  It
is now some two thousand years--"

"Is it, indeed?" I replied.

"Listin!" he fiercely cried; "it is only a little over two
thousand years since--"

"Oh, bother!" I remarkt, "let us go out and git some beer."

"No, Sir.  I want no gross and sensual beer.  I'll not move from
this spot till I can vote.  Who ar you?"

I handed him my card, which in addition to my name, contains a
elabrit description of my show.  "Now, Sir," I proudly said, "you
know me?"

"I sollumly swear," he sternly replied, "that I never heard of
you, or your show, in my life!"

"And this man," I cried bitterly, "calls hisself a intelligent
man, and thinks he orter be allowed to vote!  What a holler
mockery!"

I've no objection to ev'ry intelligent man votin' if he wants to.
It's a pleasant amoosement, no doubt; but there is those whose
igrance is so dense and loathsum that they shouldn't be trustid
with a ballit any more'n one of my trained serpunts should be
trusted with a child to play with.

I went to the station with a view of returnin' to town on the
cars.

"This way, Sir," said the guard; "here you ar," and he pinted to
a first-class carriage, the sole ockepant of which was a rayther
prepossessin' female of about 30 summers.

"No, I thank you," I earnestly replied, "I prefer to walk."

I am, dear Sir,
                    Very respectivly yours,
                                            Artemus WArd.

5.3.  THE GREEN LION AND OLIVER CROMWELL.

MR. PUNCH:  My Dear Sir,--It is now two weeks since a rayther
strange lookin man engaged 'partments at the Green Lion.  He
stated he was from the celebrated United States, but beyond this
he said nothin.  He seem'd to prefer sollytood.  He remained
mostly in his room, and whenever he did show hisself he walkt in
a moody and morose manner in the garding, with his hed bowed down
and his arms foldid across his brest.  He reminded me sumwhat of
the celebrated but onhappy "Mr. Haller," in the cheerful play of
"The Stranger."  This man puzzled me.  I'd been puzzled afore
several times, but never so severally as now.  Mine Ost of the
Greenlion said I must interregate this strange bein, who claimed
to be my countryman.

"He hasn't called for a drop of beer since he's been in this ere
Ouse," said the landlord.  "I look to you," he added, "to clear
up this dark, this orful mistry!"

I wringed the lan'lord's honest hand, and told him to consider
the mistry cleared up.

I gained axes to the misterus bein's room, and by talkin sweet to
him for a few minits, I found out who he was.  Then returnin to
the lan'lord, who was nervisly pacin up and down the bar, I said,

"Sweet ROLANDO, don't tremble no more!  I've torn the marsk from
the hawty stranger's face, and dived into the recesses of his
inmost sole!  He's a Trans-Mejim."

I'd been to the Beefanham theatre the previs evenin, and probly
the drammer I saw affected me, because I'm not in the habit of
goin on as per above.  I like the Beefanham theatre very much
indeed, because there a enthoosiastic lover of the theatre like
myself can unite the legitermit drammer with fish.  Thus, while
your enrapterd soul drinks in the lorfty and noble sentences of
the gifted artists, you can eat a biled mack'ril jest as
comfor'bly as in your own house.  I felt constrained, however, to
tell a fond mother who sot immegitly behind me, and who was
accompanied by a gin bottle, and a young infant--I felt
constrained to tell that mother, when her infant playfully
mingled a rayther oily mack'ril with the little hair which is
left on my vener'ble hed, that I had a bottle of scented hair oil
at home, which on the whole I tho't I preferred to that which her
orfspring was greasin me with.  This riled the excellent feamale,
and she said:

"Git out!  You never was a infank yourself, I spose!  Oh no!  You
was too good to be a infank, you was!  You slid into the world
all ready grow'd, didn't you?  Git out!"

"No, Madam," I replied, "I too was once a infant!  I was a luvly
child.  People used to come in large and enthoosiastic crowds
from all parts of the country to see me, I was such a sweet and
intel'gent infant.  The excitement was so intens, in fack, that a
extra hotel was startid in the town to accomodate the peple who
thronged to my cradle."  Havin finished these troothful
statemints, I smilt sweetly on the worthy female.  She said:

"Drat you, what do you come a-chaffin me for?" and the estymible
woman was really gettin furis, when I mollyfied her by praisin
her child, and by axin pardin for all I'd said.

"This little gal," I observed, "this surprisingly lively gal
when--" the mother said,

"It's t'other sect is he, Sir:  it's a boy."

"Wall," I said, "then this little boy, whose eye is like a eagle
a-soaring proudly in the azure sky, will some day be a man, if he
don't choke hisself to death in childhood's sunny hours with a
smelt or a bloater, or some other drefful calamity.  How surblime
the tho't, my dear Madam, that this infant as you fondle on your
knee on this night, may grow up into a free and independent
citizen, whose vote will be worth from ten to fifteen pounds,
accordin as suffrage may range at that joyous perid!"

Let us now return, jentle reader, to the lan'lord of the Green
Lion, who we left in the bar in a state of anxiety and perspire.
Rubbin his hot face with a red handkercher, he said, "Is the
strange bein a American?"

"He is."

"A Gen'ral?"

"No."

"A Colonial?"

"No."

"A Majer?"

"Not a Majer."

"A Capting?"

"He is not."

"A leftenant?"

"Not even that."

"Then," said the lan'lord of the Green Lion, "you ar deceeved!
He is no countryman