
heights; yet never saw I here any living thing save wild beasts
and birds." I repeated to him the story I had told the
sailors,[FN#54] but acquainted him with nothing of that which had
befallen me in the city and the cavern, lest there should be any
of the islandry in the ship. Then I took out some of the best
pearls I had with me and offered them to the captain, saying, "O
my lord, thou hast been the means of saving me off this mountain.
I have no ready money; but take this from me in requital of thy
kindness and good offices." But he refused to accept it of me,
saying, "When we find a shipwrecked man on the sea-shore or on an
island, we take him up and give him meat and drink, and if he be
naked we clothe him; nor take we aught from him; nay, when we
reach a port of safety, we set him ashore with a present of our
own money and entreat him kindly and charitably, for the love of
Allah the Most High." So I prayed that his life be long in the
land and rejoiced in my escape, trusting to be delivered from my
stress and to forget my past mishaps; for every time I remembered
being let down into the cave with my dead wife I shuddered in
horror. Then we pursued our voyage and sailed from island to
island and sea to sea, till we arrived at the Island of the Bell,
which containeth a city two days' journey in extent, whence after
a six days' run we reached the Island Kala, hard by the land of
Hind.[FN#55] This place is governed by a potent and puissant King
and it produceth excellent camphor and an abundance of the Indian
rattan: here also is a lead mine. At last by the decree of Allah,
we arrived in safety at Bassorah-town where I tarried a few days,
then went on to Baghdad-city, and, finding my quarter, entered my
house with lively pleasure. There I foregathered with my family
and friends, who rejoiced in my happy return and gave my joy of
my safety. I laid up in my storehouses all the goods I had
brought with me, and gave alms and largesse to Fakirs and beggars
and clothed the widow and the orphan. Then I gave myself up to
pleasure and enjoyment, returning to my old merry mode of life.
"Such, then, be the most marvellous adventures of my fourth
voyage, but to-morrow if you will kindly come to me, I will tell
you that which befel me in my fifth voyage, which was yet rarer
and more marvellous than those which forewent it. And thou, O my
brother Sindbad the Landsman, shalt sup with me as thou art
wont." (Saith he who telleth the tale), When Sindbad the Seaman
had made an end of his story, he called for supper; so they
spread the table and the guests ate the evening meal; after which
he gave the Porter an hundred dinars as usual, and he and the
rest of the company went their ways, glad at heart and marvelling
at the tales they had heard, for that each story was more
extraordinary than that which forewent it. The porter Sindbad
passed the night in his own house, in all joy and cheer and
wonderment; and, as soon as morning came with its sheen and
shone, he prayed the dawn-prayer and repaired to the house of
Sindbad the Seaman, who welcomed him and bade him sit with him
till the rest of the company arrived, when they ate and drank and
made merry and the talk went round amongst them. Presently, their
host began the narrative of the fifth voyage,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the host
began in these words the narrative of



The Fifth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.



Know, O my brothers, that when I had been awhile on shore after
my fourth voyage; and when, in my comfort and pleasures and
merry-makings and in my rejoicing over my large gains and
profits, I had forgotten all I had endured of perils and
sufferings, the carnal man was again seized with the longing to
travel and to see foreign countries and islands.[FN#56]
Accordingly I bought costly merchandise suited to my purpose and,
making it up into bales, repaired to Bassorah, where I walked
about the river-quay till I found a fine tall ship, newly builded
with gear unused and fitted ready for sea. She pleased me; so I
bought her and, embarking my goods in her, hired a master and
crew, over whom I set certain of my slaves and servants as
inspectors. A number of merchants also brought their outfits and
paid me freight and passage-money; then, after reciting the
Fatihah we set sail over Allah's pool in all joy and cheer,
promising ourselves a prosperous voyage and much profit. We
sailed from city to city and from island to island and from sea
to sea viewing the cities and countries by which we passed, and
selling and buying in not a few till one day we came to a great
uninhabited island, deserted and desolate, whereon was a white
dome of biggest bulk half buried in the sands. The merchants
landed to examine this dome, leaving me in the ship; and when
they drew near, behold, it was a huge Rukh's egg. They fell a-
beating it with stones, knowing not what it was, and presently
broke it open, whereupon much water ran out of it and the young
Rukh appeared within. So they pulled it forth of the shell and
cut its throat and took of it great store of meat. Now I was in
the ship and knew not what they did; but presently one of the
passengers came up to me and said, "O my lord, come and look at
the egg we thought to be a dome." So I looked and seeing the
merchants beating it with stones, called out to them, "Stop,
stop! do not meddle with that egg, or the bird Rukh will come out
and break our ship and destroy us."[FN#57] But they paid no heed
to me and gave not over smiting upon the egg, when behold, the
day grew dark and dun and the sun was hidden from us, as if some
great cloud had passed over the firmament.[FN#58] So we raised
our eyes and saw that what we took for a cloud was the Rukh
poised between us and the sun, and it was his wings that darkened
the day. When he came and saw his egg broken, he cried a loud
cry, whereupon his mate came flying up and they both began
circling about the ship, crying out at us with voices louder than
thunder. I called to the Rais and crew, "Put out to sea and seek
safety in flight, before we be all destroyed." So the merchants
came on board and we cast off and made haste from the island to
gain the open sea. When the Rukhs saw this, they flew off and we
crowded all sail on the ship, thinking to get out of their
country; but presently the two re-appeared and flew after us and
stood over us, each carrying in its claws a huge boulder which it
had brought from the mountains. As soon as the he-Rukh came up
with us, he let fall upon us the rock he held in his pounces; but
the master put about ship, so that the rock missed her by some
small matter and plunged into the waves with such violence, that
the ship pitched high and then sank into the trough of the sea
and the bottom of the ocean appeared to us. Then the she-Rukh let
fall her rock, which was bigger than that of her mate, and as
Destiny had decreed, it fell on the poop of the ship and crushed
it, the rudder flying into twenty pieces; whereupon the vessel
foundered and all and everything on board were cast into the
main.[FN#59] As for me I struggled for sweet life, till Almighty
Allah threw in my way one of the planks of the ship, to which I
clung and bestriding it, fell a-paddling with my feet. Now the
ship had gone down hard by an island in the midst of the main and
the winds and waves bore me on till, by permission of the Most
High, they cast me up on the shore of the island, at the last
gasp for toil and distress and half dead with hunger and thirst.
So I landed more like a corpse than a live man and throwing
myself down on the beach, lay there awhile, till I began to
revive and recover spirits, when I walked about the island and
found it as it were one of the garths and gardens of Paradise.
Its trees, in abundance dight, bore ripe-yellow fruit for
freight; its streams ran clear and bright; its flowers were fair
to scent and to sight and its birds warbled with delight the
praises of Him to whom belong permanence and all-might. So I ate
my fill of the fruits and slaked my thirst with the water of the
streams till I could no more and I returned thanks to the Most
High and glorified Him;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--So when I escaped drowning and reached the
island which afforded me fruit to eat and water to drink, I
returned thanks to the Most High and glorified Him; after which I
sat till nightfall, hearing no voice and seeing none inhabitant.
Then I lay down, well-nigh dead for travail and trouble and
terror, and slept without surcease till morning, when I arose and
walked about under the trees, till I came to the channel of a
draw-well fed by a spring of running water, by which well sat an
old man of venerable aspect, girt about with a waist-cloth[FN#60]
made of the fibre of palm-fronds.[FN#61] Quoth I to myself,
"Haply this Shaykh is one of those who were wrecked in the ship
and hath made his way to this island." So I drew near to him and
saluted him, and he returned my salam by signs, but spoke not;
and I said to him, "O nuncle mine, what causeth thee to sit
here?" He shook his head and moaned and signed to me with his
hands as who should say, "Take me on thy shoulders and carry me
to the other side of the well-channel." And quoth I in my mind,
"I will deal kindly with him and do what he desireth; it may be I
shall win me a reward in Heaven for he may be a paralytic." So I
took him on my back and carrying him to the place whereat he
pointed, said to him, "Dismount at thy leisure." But he would not
get off my back and wound his legs about my neck. I looked at
them and seeing that they were like a buffalo's hide for
blackness and roughness,[FN#62] was affrighted and would have
cast him off; but he clung to me and gripped my neck with his
legs, till I was well-nigh choked, the world grew black in my
sight and I fell senseless to the ground like one dead. But he
still kept his seat and raising his legs drummed with his heels
and beat harder than palm-rods my back and shoulders, till he
forced me to rise for excess of pain. Then he signed to me with
his hand to carry him hither and thither among the trees which
bore the best fruits; and if ever I refused to do his bidding or
loitered or took my leisure he beat me with his feet more
grievously than if I had been beaten with whips. He ceased not to
signal with his hand wherever he was minded to go; so I carried
him about the island, like a captive slave, and he bepissed and
conskited my shoulders and back, dismounting not night nor day;
and whenas he wished to sleep he wound his legs about my neck and
leaned back and slept awhile, then arose and beat me; whereupon I
sprang up in haste, unable to gainsay him because of the pain he
inflicted on me. And indeed I blamed myself and sore repented me
of having taken compassion on him and continued in this
condition, suffering fatigue not to be described, till I said to
myself, "I wrought him a weal and he requited me with my ill; by
Allah, never more will I do any man a service so long as I live!"
And again and again I besought the Most High that I might die,
for stress of weariness and misery; and thus I abode a long while
till, one day, I came with him to a place wherein was abundance
of gourds, many of them dry. So I took a great dry gourd and,
cutting open the head, scooped out the inside and cleaned it;
after which I gathered grapes from a vine which grew hard by and
squeezed them into the gourd, till it was full of the juice. Then
I stopped up the mouth and set it in the sun, where I left it for
some days, until it became strong wine; and every day I used to
drink of it, to comfort and sustain me under my fatigues with
that froward and obstinate fiend; and as often as I drank myself
drunk, I forgot my troubles and took new heart. One day he saw me
drinking and signed to me with his hand, as who should say, "What
is that?" Quoth I, "It is an excellent cordial, which cheereth
the heart and reviveth the spirits." Then, being heated with
wine, I ran and danced with him among the trees, clapping my
hands and singing and making merry; and I staggered under him by
design. When he saw this, he signed to me to give him the gourd
that he might drink, and I feared him and gave it him. So he took
it and, draining it to the dregs, cast it on the ground,
whereupon he grew frolicsome and began to clap hands and jig to
and fro on my shoulders and he made water upon me so copiously
that all my dress was drenched. But presently the fumes of the
wine rising to his head, he became helplessly drunk and his side-
muscles and limbs relaxed and he swayed to and fro on my back.
When I saw that he had lost his senses for drunkenness, I put my
hand to his legs and, loosing them from my neck, stooped down
well-nigh to the ground and threw him at full length,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--So I threw the devil off my shoulders, hardly
crediting my deliverance from him and fearing lest he should
shake off his drunkenness and do me a mischief. Then I took up a
great stone from among the trees and coming up to him smote him
therewith on the head with all my might and crushed in his skull
as he lay dead drunk. Thereupon his flesh and fat and blood being
in a pulp, he died and went to his deserts, The Fire, no mercy of
Allah be upon him! I then returned, with a heart at ease, to my
former station on the sea-shore and abode in that island many
days, eating of its fruits and drinking of its waters and keeping
a look-out for passing ships; till one day, as I sat on the
beach, recalling all that had befallen me and saying, "I wonder
if Allah will save me alive and restore me to my home and family
and friends!" behold, a ship was making for the island through
the dashing sea and clashing waves. Presently, it cast anchor and
the passengers landed; so I made for them, and when they saw me
all hastened up to me and gathering round me questioned me of my
case and how I came thither. I told them all that had betided me,
whereat they marvelled with exceeding marvel and said, "He who
rode on thy shoulder is called the 'Shaykh al-Bahr' or Old Man of
the Sea,[FN#63] and none ever felt his legs on neck and came off
alive but thou; and those who die under him he eateth: so praised
be Allah for thy safety!" Then they set somewhat of food before
me, whereof I ate my fill, and gave me somewhat of clothes
wherewith I clad myself anew and covered my nakedness; after
which they took me up into the ship, and we sailed days and
nights, till fate brought us to a place called the City of Apes,
builded with lofty houses, all of which gave upon the sea and it
had a single gate studded and strengthened with iron nails. Now
every night, as soon as it is dusk the dwellers in this city use
to come forth of the gates and, putting out to sea in boats and
ships, pass the night upon the waters in their fear lest the apes
should come down on them from the mountains. Hearing this I was
sore troubled remembering what I had before suffered from the
ape-kind. Presently I landed to solace myself in the city, but
meanwhile the ship set sail without me and I repented of having
gone ashore, and calling to mind my companions and what had
befallen me with the apes, first and after, sat down and fell a-
weeping and lamenting. Presently one of the townsfolk accosted me
and said to me, "O my lord, meseemeth thou art a stranger to
these parts?" "Yes," answered I, "I am indeed a stranger and a
poor one, who came hither in a ship which cast anchor here, and I
landed to visit the town; but when I would have gone on board
again, I found they had sailed without me." Quoth he, "Come and
embark with us, for if thou lie the night in the city, the apes
will destroy thee." "Hearkening and obedience," replied I, and
rising, straightway embarked with him in one of the boats,
whereupon they pushed off from shore and anchoring a mile or so
from the land, there passed the night. At daybreak, they rowed
back to the city and landing, went each about his business. Thus
they did every night, for if any tarried in the town by night the
apes came down on him and slew him. As soon as it was day, the
apes left the place and ate of the fruits of the gardens, then
went back to the mountains and slept there till nightfall, when
they again came down upon the city.[FN#64] Now this place was in
the farthest part of the country of the blacks, and one of the
strangest things that befel me during my sojourn in the city was
on this wise. One of the company with whom I passed the night in
the boat, asked me, "O my lord, thou art apparently a stranger in
these parts; hast thou any craft whereat thou canst work?"; and I
answered, "By Allah, O my brother, I have no trade nor know I any
handicraft, for I was a merchant and a man of money and substance
and had a ship of my own, laden with great store of goods and
merchandise; but it foundered at sea and all were drowned
excepting me who saved myself on a piece of plank which Allah
vouchsafed to me of His favour." Upon this he brought me a cotton
bag and giving it to me, said, "Take this bag and fill it with
pebbles from the beach and go forth with a company of the
townsfolk to whom I will give a charge respecting thee. Do as
they do and belike thou shalt gain what may further thy return
voyage to thy native land." Then he carried me to the beach,
where I filled my bag with pebbles large and small, and presently
we saw a company of folk issue from the town, each bearing a bag
like mine, filled with pebbles. To these he committed me,
commending me to their care, and saying, "This man is a stranger,
so take him with you and teach him how to gather, that he may get
his daily bread, and you will earn your reward and recompense in
Heaven." "On our head and eyes be it!" answered they and bidding
me welcome, fared on with me till we came to a spacious Wady,
full of lofty trees with trunks so smooth that none might climb
them. Now sleeping under these trees were many apes, which when
they saw us rose and fled from us and swarmed up among the
branches; whereupon my companions began to pelt them with what
they had in their bags, and the apes fell to plucking of the
fruit of the trees and casting them at the folk. I looked at the
fruits they cast at us and found them to be Indian[FN#65] or
cocoa-nuts; so I chose out a great tree, full of apes, and going
up to it, began to pelt them with stones, and they in return
pelted me with nuts, which I collected, as did the rest; so that
even before I had made an end of my bagful of pebbles, I had
gotten great plenty of nuts; and as soon as my companions had in
like manner gotten as many nuts as they could carry, we returned
to the city, where we arrived at the fag-end of day. Then I went
in to the kindly man who had brought me in company with the nut-
gatherers and gave him all I had gotten, thanking him for his
kindness; but he would not accept them, saying, "Sell them and
make profit by the price; and presently he added (giving me the
key of a closet in his house) "Store thy nuts in this safe place
and go thou forth every morning and gather them as thou hast done
to-day, and choose out the worst for sale and supplying thyself;
but lay up the rest here, so haply thou mayst collect enough to
serve thee for thy return home." "Allah requite thee!" answered I
and did as he advised me, going out daily with the cocoa-nut
gatherers, who commended me to one another and showed me the
best-stocked trees.[FN#66] Thus did I for some time, till I had
laid up great store of excellent nuts, besides a large sum of
money, the price of those I had sold. I became thus at my ease
and bought all I saw and had a mind to, and passed my time
pleasantly greatly enjoying my stay in the city, till, as I stood
on the beach, one day, a great ship steering through the heart of
the sea presently cast anchor by the shore and landed a company
of merchants, who proceeded to sell and buy and barter their
goods for cocoa-nuts and other commodities. Then I went to my
friend and told him of the coming of the ship and how I had a
mind to return to my own country; and he said, "'Tis for thee to
decide." So I thanked him for his bounties and took leave of him;
then, going to the captain of the ship, I agreed with him for my
passage and embarked my cocoa-nuts and what else I possessed. We
weighed anchor,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--So I left the City of the Apes and embarked my
cocoa-nuts and what else I possessed. We weighed anchor the same
day and sailed from island to island and sea to sea; and whenever
we stopped, I sold and traded with my cocoa-nuts, and the Lord
requited me more than I erst had and lost. Amongst other places,
we came to an island abounding in cloves[FN#67] and cinnamon and
pepper; and the country people told me that by the side of each
pepper-bunch groweth a great leaf which shadeth it from the sun
and casteth the water off it in the wet season; but, when the
rain ceaseth the leaf turneth over and droopeth down by the side
of the bunch.[FN#68] Here I took in great store of pepper and
cloves and cinnamon, in exchange for cocoa-nuts, and we passed
thence to the Island of Al-Usirat,[FN#69] whence cometh the
Comorin aloes-wood and thence to another island, five days'
journey in length, where grows the Chinese lign-aloes, which is
better than the Comorin; but the people of this island[FN#70] are
fouler of condition and religion than those of the other, for
that they love fornication and wine-bibbing, and know not prayer
nor call to prayer. Thence we came to the pearl-fisheries, and I
gave the divers some of my cocoa-nuts and said to them, "Dive for
my luck and lot!" They did so and brought up from the deep
bight[FN#71] great store of large and priceless pearls; and they
said to me, "By Allah, O my master, thy luck is a lucky!" Then we
sailed on, with the blessing of Allah (whose name be exalted!);
and ceased not sailing till we arrived safely at Bassorah. There
I abode a little and then went on to Baghdad, where I entered my
quarter and found my house and foregathered with my family and
saluted my friends who gave me joy of my safe return, and I laid
up all my goods and valuables in my storehouses. Then I
distributed alms and largesse and clothed the widow and the
orphan and made presents to my relations and comrades; for the
Lord had requited me fourfold that I had lost. After which I
returned to my old merry way of life and forgot all I had
suffered in the great profit and gain I had made. "Such, then, is
the history of my fifth voyage and its wonderments, and now to
supper; and to-morrow, come again and I will tell you what befel
me in my sixth voyage; for it was still more wonderful than
this." (Saith he who telleth the tale), Then he called for food;
and the servants spread the table, and when they had eaten the
evening-meal, he bade give Sindbad the porter an hundred golden
dinars and the Landsman returned home and lay him down to sleep,
much marvelling at all he had heard. Next morning, as soon as it
was light, he prayed the dawn-prayer; and, after blessing
Mohammed the Cream of all creatures, betook himself to the house
of Sindbad the Seaman and wished him a good day. The merchant
bade him sit and talked with him, till the rest of the company
arrived. Then the servants spread the table and when they had
well eaten and drunken and were mirthful and merry, Sindbad the
Seaman began in these words the narrative of




The Sixth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.



Know, O my brothers and friends and companions all, that I abode
some time, after my return from my fifth voyage, in great solace
and satisfaction and mirth and merriment, joyance and enjoyment;
and I forgot what I had suffered, seeing the great gain and
profit I had made till, one day, as I sat making merry and
enjoying myself with my friends, there came in to me a company of
merchants whose case told tales of travel, and talked with me of
voyage and adventure and greatness of pelf and lucre. Hereupon I
remembered the days of my return from abroad, and my joy at once
more seeing my native land and foregathering with my family and
friends; and my soul yearned for travel and traffic. So compelled
by Fate and Fortune I resolved to undertake another voyage; and,
buying me fine and costly merchandise meet for foreign trade,
made it up into bales, with which I journeyed from Baghdad to
Bassorah. Here I found a great ship ready for sea and full of
merchants and notables, who had with them goods of price; so I
embarked my bales therein. And we left Bassorah in safety and
good spirits under the safeguard of the King, the Preserver.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--And after embarking my bales and leaving
Bassorah in safety and good spirits, we continued our voyage from
place to place and from city to city, buying and selling and
profiting and diverting ourselves with the sight of countries
where strange folk dwell. And Fortune and the voyage smiled upon
us, till one day, as we went along, behold, the captain suddenly
cried with a great cry and cast his turband on the deck. Then he
buffeted his face like a woman and plucked out his beard and fell
down in the waist of the ship will nigh fainting for stress of
grief and rage, and crying, "Oh and alas for the ruin of my house
and the orphanship of my poor children!" So all the merchant and
sailors came round about him and asked him, "O master, what is
the matter?"; for the light had become night before their sight.
And he answered, saying, "Know, O folk, that we have wandered
from our course and left the sea whose ways we wot, and come into
a sea whose ways I know not; and unless Allah vouchsafe us a
means of escape, we are all dead men; wherefore pray ye to the
Most High, that He deliver us from this strait. Haply amongst you
is one righteous whose prayers the Lord will accept." Then he
arose and clomb the mast to see an there were any escape from
that strait; and he would have loosed the sails; but the wind
redoubled upon the ship and whirled her round thrice and drave
her backwards; whereupon her rudder brake and she fell off
towards a high mountain. With this the captain came down from the
mast, saying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great; nor can man prevent that which is
fore-ordained of fate! By Allah, we are fallen on a place of sure
destruction, and there is no way of escape for us, nor can any of
us be saved!" Then we all fell a-weeping over ourselves and
bidding one another farewell for that our days were come to an
end, and we had lost all hopes of life. Presently the ship struck
the mountain and broke up, and all and everything on board of her
were plunged into the sea. Some of the merchants were drowned and
others made shift to reach the shore and save themselves upon the
mountain; I amongst the number, and when we got ashore, we found
a great island, or rather peninsula[FN#72] whose base was strewn
with wreckage of crafts and goods and gear cast up by the sea
from broken ships whose passengers had been drowned; and the
quantity confounded compt and calculation. So I climbed the
cliffs into the inward of the isle and walked on inland, till I
came to a stream of sweet water, that welled up at the nearest
foot of the mountains and disappeared in the earth under the
range of hills on the opposite side. But all the other passengers
went over the mountains to the inner tracts; and, dispersing
hither and thither, were confounded at what they saw and became
like madmen at the sight of the wealth and treasures wherewith
the shores were strewn. As for me I looked into the bed of the
stream aforesaid and saw therein great plenty of rubies, and
great royal pearls[FN#73] and all kinds of jewels and precious
stones which were as gravel in the bed of the rivulets that ran
through the fields, and the sands sparkled and glittered with
gems and precious ores. Moreover we found in the island abundance
of the finest lign-aloes, both Chinese and Comorin; and there
also is a spring of crude ambergris[FN#74] which floweth like wax
or gum over the stream-banks, for the great heat of the sun, and
runneth down to the sea-shore, where the monsters of the deep
come up and swallowing it, return into the sea. But it burneth in
their bellies; so they cast it up again and it congealeth on the
surface of the water, whereby its color and quantities are
changed; and at last, the waves cast it ashore, and the
travellers and merchants who know it, collect it and sell it. But
as to the raw ambergris which is not swallowed, it floweth over
the channel and congealeth on the banks and when the sun shineth
on it, it melteth and scenteth the whole valley with a musk-like
fragrance: then, when the sun ceaseth from it, it congealeth
again. But none can get to this place where is the crude
ambergris, because of the mountains which enclose the island on
all sides and which foot of man cannot ascend.[FN#75] We
continued thus to explore the island, marvelling at the wonderful
works of Allah and the riches we found there, but sore troubled
for our own case, and dismayed at our prospects. Now we had
picked up on the beach some small matter of victual from the
wreck and husbanded it carefully, eating but once every day or
two, in our fear lest it should fail us and we die miserably of
famine or affright. Moreover, we were weak for colic brought on
by sea-sickness and low diet, and my companions deceased, one
after other, till there was but a small company of us left. Each
that died we washed and shrouded in some of the clothes and linen
cast ashore by the tides; and after a little, the rest of my
fellows perished, one by one, till I had buried the last of the
party and abode alone on the island, with but a little provision
left, I who was wont to have so much. And I wept over myself,
saying, "Would Heaven I had died before my companions and they
had washed and buried me! It had been better than I should perish
and none wash me and shroud me and bury me. But there is Majesty
and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued in these words:--Now after I had buried the last
of my party and abode alone on the island, I arose and dug me a
deep grave on the sea-shore, saying to myself, "Whenas I grow
weak and know that death cometh to me, I will cast myself into
the grave and die there, so the wind may drift the sand over me
and cover me and I be buried therein."[FN#76] Then I fell to
reproaching myself for my little wit in leaving my native land
and betaking me again to travel, after all I had suffered during
my first five voyages, and when I had not made a single one
without suffering more horrible perils and more terrible
hardships than in its forerunner and having no hope of escape
from my present stress; and I repented me of my folly and
bemoaned myself, especially as I had no need of money, seeing
that I had enough and more than enough and could not spend what I
had, no, nor a half of it in all my life. However, after a while
Allah sent me a thought and I said to myself, "By God, needs must
this stream have an end as well as a beginning; ergo an issue
somewhere, and belike its course may lead to some inhabited
place; so my best plan is to make me a little boat[FN#77] big
enough to sit in, and carry it and launching it on the river,
embark therein and drop down the stream. If I escape, I escape,
by God's leave; and if I perish, better die in the river than
here." Then, sighing for myself, I set to work collecting a
number of pieces of Chinese and Comorin aloes-wood and I bound
them together with ropes from the wreckage; then I chose out from
the broken-up ships straight planks of even size and fixed them
firmly upon the aloes-wood, making me a boat-raft a little
narrower than the channel of the stream; and I tied it tightly
and firmly as though it were nailed. Then I loaded it with the
goods, precious ores and jewels: and the union pearls which were
like gravel and the best of the ambergris crude and pure,
together with what I had collected on the island and what was
left me of victual and wild herbs. Lastly I lashed a piece of
wood on either side, to serve me as oars; and launched it, and
embarking, did according to the saying of the poet,

"Fly, fly with life whenas evils threat; * Leave the house to
     tell of its builder's fate!
Land after land shalt thou seek and find * But no other life on
     thy wish shall wait:
Fret not thy soul in thy thoughts o' night; * All woes shall end
     or sooner or late.
Whoso is born in one land to die, * There and only there shall
     gang his gait:
Nor trust great things to another wight, * Soul hath only soul
     for confederate."[FN#78]

My boat-raft drifted with the stream, I pondering the issue of my
affair; and the drifting ceased not till I came to the place
where it disappeared beneath the mountain. I rowed my conveyance
into the place which was intensely dark; and the current carried
the raft with it down the underground channel.[FN#79] The thin
stream bore me on through a narrow tunnel where the raft touched
either side and my head rubbed against the roof, return therefrom
being impossible. Then I blamed myself for having thus risked my
life, and said, "If this passage grow any straiter, the raft will
hardly pass, and I cannot turn back; so I shall inevitably perish
miserably in this place." And I threw myself down upon my face on
the raft, by reason of the narrowness of the channel, whilst the
stream ceased not to carry me along, knowing not night from day,
for the excess of the gloom which encompassed me about and my
terror and concern for myself lest I should perish. And in such
condition my course continued down the channel which now grew
wide and then straiter till, sore aweary by reason of the
darkness which could be felt, I fell asleep, as I lay prone on
the raft, and I slept knowing not an the time were long or short.
When I awoke at last, I found myself in the light of Heaven and
opening my eyes I saw myself in a broad stream and the raft
moored to an island in the midst of a number of Indians and
Abyssinians. As soon as these blackamoors[FN#80] saw that I was
awake, they came up to me and bespoke me in their speech; but I
understood not what they said and thought that this was a dream
and a vision which had betided me for stress of concern and
chagrin. But I was delighted at my escape from the river. When
they saw I understood them not and made them no answer, one of
them came forward and said to me in Arabic, "Peace be with thee,
O my brother! Who art thou and whence faredst thou thither? How
camest thou into this river and what manner of land lies behind
yonder mountains, for never knew we any one make his way thence
to us?" Quoth I, "And upon thee be peace and the ruth of Allah
and his blessing! Who are ye and what country is this?" "O my
brother," answered he, "we are husbandmen and tillers of the
soil, who came out to water our fields and plantations; and,
finding thee asleep on this raft, laid hold of it and made it
fast by us, against thou shouldst awake at thy leisure. So tell
us how thou camest hither?" I answered, "For Allah's sake, O my
lord, ere I speak give me somewhat to eat, for I am starving, and
after ask me what thou wilt." So he hastened to fetch me food and
I ate my fill, till I was refreshed and my fear was calmed by a
good belly-full and my life returned to me. Then I rendered
thanks to the Most High for mercies great and small, glad to be
out of the river and rejoicing to be amongst them, and I told
them all my adventures from first to last, especially my troubles
in the narrow channel.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--When I landed and found myself amongst the
Indians and Abyssinians and had taken some rest, they consulted
among themselves and said to one another, "There is no help for
it but we carry him with us and present him to our King, that he
may acquaint him with his adventures." So they took me, together
with the raft-boat and its lading of monies and merchandise;
jewels, minerals and golden gear, and brought me to their King,
who was King of Sarandib,[FN#81] telling him what had happened;
whereupon he saluted me and bade me welcome. Then he questioned
me of my condition and adventures through the man who had spoken
Arabic and I repeated to him my story from beginning to end,
whereat he marvelled exceedingly and gave me joy of my
deliverance; after which I arose and fetched from the raft great
store of precious ores and jewels and ambergris and lign-aloes
and presented them to the King, who accepted them and entreated
me with the utmost honour, appointing me a lodging in his own
palace. So I consorted with the chief of the islanders, and they
paid me the utmost respect. And I quitted not the royal palace.
Now the Island Sarandib lieth under the equinoctial line, its
night and day both numbering twelve house. It measureth eighty
leagues long by a breadth of thirty and its wideth is bounded by
a lofty mountain[FN#82] and a deep valley, The mountain is
conspicuous from a distance of three days and it containeth many
kinds of rubies and other minerals, and spice-trees of all sorts.
The surface is covered with emery wherewith gems are cut and
fashioned; diamonds are in its rivers and pearls are in its
valleys. I ascended that mountain and solaced myself with a view
of its marvels which are indescribable and afterwards I returned
to the King.[FN#83] Thereupon, all the travellers and merchants
who came to the place questioned me of the affairs of my native
land and of the Caliph Harun al-Rashid and his rule and I told
them of him and of that wherefor he was renowned, and they
praised him because of this; whilst I in turn questioned them of
the manners and customers of their own countries and got the
knowledge I desired. One day, the King himself asked me of the
fashions and form of government of my country, and I acquainted
him with the circumstance of the Caliph's sway in the city of
Baghdad and the justice of his rule. The King marvelled at my
account of his appointments and said, "By Allah, the Caliph's
ordinances are indeed wise and his fashions of praiseworthy guise
and thou hast made me love him by what thou tellest me; wherefore
I have a mind to make him a present and send it by thee." Quoth
I, "Hearkening and obedience, O my lord; I will bear thy gift to
him and inform him that thou art his sincere lover and true
friend." Then I abode with the King in great honour and regard
and consideration for a long while till, one day, as I sat in his
palace, I heard news of a company of merchants, that were fitting
out a ship for Bassorah, and said to myself, "I cannot do better
than voyage with these men." So I rose without stay or delay and
kissed the King's hand and acquainted him with my longing to set
out with the merchants, for that I pined after my people and mine
own land. Quoth he, "Thou art thine own master; yet, if it be thy
will to abide with us, on our head and eyes be it, for thou
gladdenest us with thy company." "By Allah, O my lord," answered
I, "thou hast indeed overwhelmed me with thy favours and well-
doings; but I weary for a sight of my friends and family and
native country." When he heard this, he summoned the merchants in
question and commended me to their care, paying my freight and
passage-money. Then he bestowed on me great riches from his
treasuries and charged me with a magnificent present for the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid. Moreover he gave me a sealed letter,
saying, "Carry this with thine own hand to the Commander of the
Faithful and give him many salutations from us!" "Hearing and
obedience," I replied. The missive was written on the skin of the
Khawi[FN#84] (which is finer than lamb-parchment and of yellow
colour), with ink of ultramarine and the contents were as
follows. "Peace be with thee from the King of Al-Hind, before
whom are a thousand elephants and upon whose palace-crenelles are
a thousand jewels. But after (laud to the Lord and praises to His
Prophet!): we send thee a trifling gift which be thou pleased to
accept. Thou art to us a brother and a sincere friend; and great
is the love we bear for thee in heart; favour us therefore with a
reply. The gift besitteth not thy dignity: but we beg of thee, O
our brother, graciously to accept it and peace be with thee." And
the present was a cup of ruby a span high[FN#85] the inside of
which was adorned with precious pearls; and a bed covered with
the skin of the serpent which swalloweth the elephant, which skin
hath spots each like a dinar and whoso sitteth upon it never
sickeneth;[FN#86] and an hundred thousand miskals of Indian lign-
aloes and a slave-girl like a shining moon. Then I took leave of
him and of all my intimates and acquaintances in the island and
embarked with the merchants aforesaid. We sailed with a fair
wind, committing ourselves to the care of Allah (be He extolled
and exalted!) and by His permission arrived at Bassorah, where I
passed a few days and nights equipping myself and packing up my
bales. Then I went on to Baghdad-city, the House of Peace, where
I sought an audience of the Caliph and laid the King's presents
before him. He asked me whence they came and I said to him, "By
Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I know not the name of the
city nor the way thither!" He then asked me, "O Sindbad, is this
true which the King writeth?"; and I answered, after kissing the
ground, "O my lord, I saw in his kingdom much more than he hath
written in his letter. For state processions a throne is set for
him upon a huge elephant, eleven cubits high: and upon this he
sitteth having his great lords and officers and guests standing
in two ranks, on his right hand and on his left. At his head is a
man hending in hand a golden javelin and behind him another with
a great mace of gold whose head is an emerald[FN#87] a span long
and as thick as a man's thumb. And when he mounteth horse there
mount with him a thousand horsemen clad in gold brocade and silk;
and as the King proceedeth a man precedeth him, crying, 'This is
the King of great dignity, of high authority!' And he continueth
to repeat his praises in words I remember not, saying at the end
of his panegyric, 'This is the King owning the crown whose like
nor Solomon nor the Mihraj[FN#88] ever possessed.' Then he is
silent and one behind him proclaimeth, saying, 'He will die!
Again I say he will die!;' and the other addeth, 'Extolled be the
perfection of the Living who dieth not!'[FN#89] Moreover by
reason of his justice and ordinance and intelligence, there is no
Kazi in his city, and all his lieges distinguish between Truth
and Falsehood." Quoth the Caliph, "How great is this King! His
letter hath shown me this; and as for the mightiness of his
dominion thou hast told us what thou hast eye-witnessed. By
Allah, he hath been endowed with wisdom as with wide rule." Then
I related to the Commander of the Faithful all that had befallen
me in my last voyage; at which he wondered exceedingly and bade
his historians record my story and store it up in his treasuries,
for the edification of all who might see it. Then he conferred on
me exceeding great favours, and I repaired to my quarter and
entered my home, where I warehoused all my goods and possessions.
Presently, my friends came to me and I distributed presents among
my family and gave alms and largesse; after which I yielded
myself to joyance and enjoyment, mirth and merry-making, and
forgot all that I had suffered. "Such, then, O my brothers, is
the history of what befel me in my sixth voyage, and to-morrow,
Inshallah! I will tell you the story of my seventh and last
voyage, which is still more wondrous and marvellous than that of
the first six." (Saith he who telleth the tale), Then he bade lay
the table, and the company supped with him; after which he gave
the Porter an hundred dinars, as of wont, and they all went their
ways, marvelling beyond measure at that which they had heard.--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sindbad the Seaman had related the history of what befel him in
his sixth voyage, and all the company had dispersed, Sindbad the
Landsman went home and slept as of wont. Next day he rose and
prayed the dawn-prayer and repaired to his namesake's house
where, after the company was all assembled, the host began to
relate



The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.



Know, O company, that after my return from my sixth voyage, which
brought me abundant profit, I resumed my former life in all
possible joyance and enjoyment and mirth and making merry day and
night; and I tarried some time in this solace and satisfaction
till my soul began once more to long to sail the seas and see
foreign countries and company with merchants and hear new things.
So having made up my mind, I packed up in bales a quantity of
precious stuffs suited for sea-trade and repaired with them from
Baghdad-city to Bassorah-town, where I found a ship ready for
sea, and in her a company of considerable merchants. I shipped
with them and becoming friends, we set forth on our venture, in
health and safety; and sailed with a fair wind, till we came to a
city called Madinat-al-Sin; but after we had left it, as we fared
on in all cheer and confidence, devising of traffic and travel,
behold, there sprang up a violent head-wind and a tempest of rain
fell on us and drenched us and our goods. So we covered the bales
with our cloaks and garments and drugget and canvas, lest they be
spoiled by the rain, and betook ourselves to prayer and
supplication to Almighty Allah and humbled ourselves before Him
for deliverance from the peril that was upon us. But the captain
arose and tightening his girdle tucked up his skirts and, after
taking refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned, clomb to the
mast-head, whence he looked out right and left and gazing at the
passengers and crew fell to buffeting his face and plucking out
his beard. So we cried to him, "O Rais, what is the matter?"; and
he replied saying, "Seek ye deliverance of the Most High from the
strait into which we have fallen and bemoan yourselves and take
leave of one another; for know that the wind hath gotten the
mastery of us and hath driven us into the uttermost of the seas
of the world." Then he came down from the mast-head and opening
his sea-chest, pulled out a bag of blue cotton, from which he
took a powder like ashes. This he set in a saucer wetted with a
little water and, after waiting a short time, smelt and tasted
it; and then he took out of the chest a booklet, wherein he read
awhile and said weeping, "Know, O ye passengers, that in this
book is a marvellous matter, denoting that whoso cometh hither
shall surely die, without hope of escape; for that this ocean is
called the Sea of the Clime of the King, wherein is the sepulchre
of our lord Solomon, son of David (on both be peace!) and therein
are serpents of vast bulk and fearsome aspect: and what ship
soever cometh to these climes there riseth to her a great
fish[FN#90] out of the sea and swalloweth her up with all and
everything on board her." Hearing these words from the captain
great was our wonder, but hardly had he made an end of speaking,
when the ship was lifted out of the water and let fall again and
we applied to praying the death-prayer[FN#91] and committing our
souls to Allah. Presently we heard a terrible great cry like the
loud-pealing thunder, whereat we were terror-struck and became as
dead men, giving ourselves up for lost. Then behold, there came
up to us a huge fish, as big as a tall mountain, at whose sight
we became wild for affight and, weeping sore, made ready for
death, marvelling at its vast size and gruesome semblance; when
lo! a second fish made its appearance than which we had seen
naught more monstrous. So we bemoaned ourselves of our lives and
farewelled one another; but suddenly up came a third fish bigger
than the two first; whereupon we lost the power of thought and
reason and were stupefied for the excess of our fear and horror.
Then the three fish began circling round about the ship and the
third and biggest opened his mouth to swallow it, and we looked
into its mouth and behold, it was wider than the gate of a city
and its throat was like a long valley. So we besought the
Almighty and called for succour upon His Apostle (on whom be
blessing and peace!), when suddenly a violent squall of wind
arose and smote the ship, which rose out of the water and settled
upon a great reef, the haunt of sea-monsters, where it broke up
and fell asunder into planks and all and everything on board were
plunged into the sea. As for me, I tore off all my clothes but my
gown and swam a little way, till I happened upon one of the
ship's planks whereto I clung and bestrode it like a horse,
whilst the winds and the waters sported with me and the waves
carried me up and cast me down; and I was in most piteous plight
for fear and distress and hunger and thirst. Then I reproached
myself for what I had done and my soul was weary after a life of
ease and comfort; and I said to myself, "O Sindbad, O Seaman,
thou repentest not and yet thou art ever suffering hardships and
travails; yet wilt thou not renounce sea-travel; or, an thou say,
'I renounce,' thou liest in thy renouncement. Endure then with
patience that which thou sufferest, for verily thou deservest all
that betideth thee!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--But when I had bestridden the plank, quoth I
to myself, "Thou deservest all that betideth thee. All this is
decreed to me of Allah (whose name be exalted!), to turn me from
my greed of gain, whence ariseth all that I endure, for I have
wealth galore." Then I returned to my senses and said, "In very
sooth, this time I repent to the Most High, with a sincere
repentance, of my lust for gain and venture; and never will I
again name travel with tongue nor in thought." And I ceased not
to humble myself before Almighty Allah and weep and bewail
myself, recalling my former estate of solace and satisfaction and
mirth and merriment and joyance; and thus I abode two days, at
the end of which time I came to a great island abounding in trees
and streams. There I landed and ate of the fruits of the island
and drank of its waters, till I was refreshed and my life
returned to me and my strength and spirits were restored and I
recited,

"Oft when thy case shows knotty and tangled skein, * Fate downs
     from Heaven and straightens every ply:
In patience keep thy soul till clear thy lot * For He who ties
     the knot can eke untie."

Then I walked about, till I found on the further side, a great
river of sweet water, running with a strong current; whereupon I
called to mind the boat-raft I had made aforetime and said to
m