 Juddah=a plain lacking water.

[FN#331] The First Adites, I have said, did not all perish: a few
believers retired with the prophet Hud (Heber ?) to Hazramaut.
The Second Adites, who had Marib of the Dam for capital and
Lukman for king, were dispersed by the Flood of Al-Yaman. Their
dynasty lasted a thousand years, the exodus taking place
according to De Sacy in A.D. 150-170 or shortly after A.D. 100
(C. de Perceval), and was overthrown by Ya'arub bin Kahtan, the
first Arabist; see Night dcxxv.

[FN#332] This title has been noticed: it suggests the "Saint
Abraham" of our medaeval travellers. Every great prophet has his
agnomen: Adam the Pure (or Elect) of Allah, Noah the Najiy (or
saved) of Allah; Moses (Kalim) the Speaker with Allah; Jesus the
Ruh (Spirit breath) or Kalam (the word) of Allah. For Mohammed's
see Al-Busiri's Mantle-poem vv. 31-58. 

[FN#333] Koran (chaps. iii. 17), "Verily the true religion in the
sight of Allah is Islam" i.e. resigning or devoting myself to the
Lord, with a suspicion of "Salvation" conveyed by the root
Salima, he was safe.

[FN#334] Arab. "Sa'ikah," which is supposed to be a stone. The
allusion is to Antar's sword, "Dhami," made of a stone, black,
brilliant and hard as a rock (an aerolite), which had struck a
camel on the right side and had come out by the left. The
blacksmith made it into a blade three feet long by two spans
broad, a kind of falchion or chopper, cased it with gold and
called it Dhami (the "Trenchant") from its sharpness. But he said
to the owner:--
    
     The sword is trenchant, O son of the Ghalib clan, 
     Trenchant in sooth, but where is the sworder-man?

Whereupon the owner struck off the maker's head, a most
satisfactory answer to all but one.

[FN#335] Arab. "Kuta'ah": lit. a bit cut off, fragment, nail-
paring, and here un diminutif. I have described this scene in
Pilgrimage iii. 68. Latro often says, "Thy gear is wanted by the
daughter of my paternal uncle" (wife), and thus parades his
politeness by asking in a lady's name.

[FN#336] As will appear the two brothers were joined by a party
of horsemen.

[FN#337] "Four" says the Mac. Edit. forgetting Falhun with
characteristic inconsequence. 

[FN#338] Muhammad (the deserving great praise) is the name used
by men; Ahmad (more laudable) by angels, and Mahmud (praised) by
devils. For a similar play upon the name, "Allah Allah Muhammad
ast" (God is God the praisworthy) see Dabistan ii. 416. 

[FN#339] The Mac. Edit. here gives "Sas," but elsewhere "Sasa,"
which is the correct form 

[FN#340] Sapor the Second (A.D. 310-330) was compelled to attack
the powerful Arab hordes of Oman, most of whom, like the Tayy,
Aus and Khazraj, the Banu Nabhan and the Hinawi left Al-Yaman
A.D. 100-170, and settled in the north and north-east of Al-Najd
This great exodus and dispersion of the tribes was caused, as has
been said, by the bursting of the Dam of Marib originally built
by Abd al-Shams Saba, father of Himyar. These Yamanian races were
plunged into poverty and roamed northwards, planting themselves
amongst the Arabs of Ma'add son of Adnan. Hence the kingdom of
Ghassan in Syria whose phylarchs under the Romans (i.e. Greek
Emperors of Constantinople) controlled Palestine Tertia, the
Arabs of Syria and Palestine, and the kingdom of Harah, whose
Lakhmite Princes, dependent upon Persia, managed the Arabs of the
Euphrates, Oman and Al-Bahrayn. The Ma'addites still continued to
occupy the central plateau of Arabia, a feature analogous with
India "above the Ghauts." 

[FN#341] I have described (Pilgrimage i. 370) the grisly spot
which a Badawi will dignify by the name of Wady al-Ward=Vale of
Roses. 

[FN#342] Koran xiii. 3, "Of every fruit two different kinds "
i.e. large and small, black and white, sweet and sour. 

[FN#343] A graft upon an almond tree, which makes its kernel
s..veet and gives it an especial delicacy of favour. See
Russell's (excellent) Natural History of Aleppo, p. 21. 

[FN#344] So called from the flavour of the kernel it is well-
known at Damascus where a favourite fruit is the dried apricot
with an almond by way of kernel. There are many preparations of
apricots, especially the "Mare's skin" (Jild al-fares or Kamar
al-din) a paste folded into sheets and exactly resembling the
article from which it takes a name. When wanted it is dissolved
in water and eaten as a relish with bread or biscuit (Pilgrimage
i. 289).

[FN#345] "Ante Kama takul"=the vulgarest Cairene.

[FN#346] This may be Ctesiphon, the ancient capital of the
Chosroes, on the Tigris below Baghdad; and spoken of elsewhere in
The Nights; especially as, in Night dclxvii., it is called
Isbanir Al-Madain; Madain Kisra (the cities of Chosroes) being
the Arabic name of the old dual city.

[FN#347] Koran vi. 103. The translation is Sale's which I have
generally preferred, despite many imperfections: Lane renders
this sentence, "The eyes see not Him, but He seeth the eyes ;"
and Mr. Rodwell, "No vision taketh in Him ( ?), but He taketh in
all vision ," and (better) "No eyesight reacheth to Him." 

[FN#348] Sale (sect. 1.) tells us all that was then known of
these three which with Ya'uk and Nasr and the three "daughters of
God," Goddesses or Energies (the Hindu Saktis) Allat Al-Uzza and
Manat mentioned in the Koran were the chiefs of the pre-lslamitic
Pantheon. I cannot but suspect that all will be connected with
old Babylonian worship. Al-Baydawi (in Kor. Ixxi. 22) says of
Wadd, Suwa'a, Yaghus, Ya'uk and Nasr that they were names of
pious men between Adam and Noah, afterwards deified: Yaghus was
the giant idol of the Mazhaj tribe at Akamah of Al-Yaman and
afterwards at Najran Al-Uzza was widely worshipped: her idol (of
the tree Semurat) belonging to Ghatafan was destroyed after the
Prophet's order by Khalid bin Walid. Allat or Al-Lat is written
by Pocock (spec. 110) "Ilahat" i.e. deities in general. But
Herodotus evidently refers to one god when he makes the Arabs
worship Dionysus as {Greek letters} and Urania as {Greek letters}
and the "tashdid" in Allat would, to a Greek ear, introduce
another syllable (Alilat). This was the goddess of the Kuraysh
and Thakif whose temple at Taif was circuited like the Ka'abah
before Mohammed destroyed it.

[FN#349] Shays (Shayth) is Ab Seth (Father Seth,) of the Hebrews,
a name containing the initial and terminal letters of the Egypto-
Phoenico-Hebrew Alphabet and the "Abjad" of the Arabs. Those
curious about its connection with the name of Allah (El), the
Zodiacal signs and with the constellations, visions but not
wholly uninteresting, will consult "Unexplored Syria" (vol. i.
33).

[FN#350] The exclamation of an honest Fellah. 

[FN#351] This is Antar with the Chosroe who "kissed the Absian
hero between the eyes and bade him adieu, giving him as a last
token a rich robe." The coarser hand of the story-teller
exaggerates everything till he makes it ridiculous.

[FN#352] The context suggests thee this is a royal form of
"throwing the handkerchief;" but it does not occur elsewhere. In
face, the European idea seems to have arisen from the oriental
practice of sending presents in napkins or kerchiefs.

[FN#353] i.e. if the disappointed suitor attack me.

[FN#354] i.e. if ever I he tempted to deny it.

[FN#355] Arab. "Musafahah,ù' the Arab fashion of shaking hands.
The right palms are applied flat to each other; then the fingers
are squeezed and the hand is raised to the forehead (Pilgrimage
ii. 332). 

[FN#356] A city and province of Khuzistan the old Susiana. Dasht
may be either the town in Khorasan or the "forests" (dasht)
belonging to Ahwaz (Ahuaz in D'Herbelot).

[FN#357] This is the contest between "Antar and the Satrap
Khosrewan at the Court of Monzer." but without its tragical
finish.

[FN#358] Elliptical "he rode out in great state, that is to say
if greatness can truly be attributed to man," for, etc.

[FN#359] According to D'Herbelot (s.v. Rostac) it is a name given
to the villages of Khorasan as "Souad" (Sawad) to those of Irak
and Makhlaf to those of Al-Yaman: there is, how ever, a well-
known Al-Rustak (which like Al-Bahrayn always takes the article)
in the Province of Oman West of Maskat, and as it rhymes with
"Irak" it does well enough. Mr. Badger calls this ancient capital
of the Ya'arubah Imams "er-Rastak" (Imams of Oman).

[FN#360] i.e. a furious knight.

[FN#361] In the Mac. Edit. "Hassan," which may rhyme with Nabhan,
but it is a mere blunder. 

[FN#362] In Classical Arabic Irak (like Yaman, Bahrayn and
Rustak) always takes the article.

[FN#363] The story-teller goes back from Kufah founded in Omar's
day to the times of Abraham.

[FN#364] This manoeuvre has often been practiced; especially by
the first Crusaders under Bohemond (Gibbon) and in late years by
the Arab slavers in Eastern Intertropical Africa. After their
skirmishes with the natives they quartered and "bristled" the
dead like game, roasted and boiled the choice pieces and
pretended to eat the flesh. The enemy, who was not afraid of
death, was struck with terror by the idea of being devoured, and
this seems instinctive to the undeveloped mind.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was scanned by J.C. Byers
(http://www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and proofread by
J.C. Byers, Sergio Camarena, Muhammad Hozien, P.J. LaBrocca,
Laura Shaffer, Charles Wilson.






                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                           VOLUME SIX
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                     I Inscribe This Volume
              To My Old And Valued Correspondent,
                    I Whose Debt I Am Deep,
                                
                    Professor Aloys Sprenger
                        (of Heidelberg),
                                
                Arabist, Philosopher and Friend.
                                

                                             Richard F. Burton.


                  Contents of the Sixth Volume

133. Sindbad the Seaman and Sinbad the Landsman
     a.   The First Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
     b.   The Second Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
     c.   The Third Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
     d.   The Fourth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
     e.   The Fifth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
     f.   The Sixth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
     g.   The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
          The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman (according to
          the Calcutta Edition)
134. The City of Brass
135. The Craft and Malice of Woman
     a.   The King and His Wazir's Wife
     b.   The Confectioner, His Wife and the Parrot
     c.   The Fuller and His Son
     d.   The Rake's Trick Against the Chaste Wife
     e.   The Miser and the Loaves of Bread
     f.   The Lady and Her Two Lovers
     g.   The King's Son and the Ogeress
     h.   The Drop of Honey
     i.   The Woman Who Made Her Husband Sift Dust
     j.   The Enchanted Spring
     k.   The Wazir's Son and the Hamman-Keeper's Wife
     l.   The Wife's Device to Cheat her Husband
     m.   The Goldsmith and the Cashmere Singing-Girl
     n.   The Man who Never Laughed Duing the Rest of His Days
     o.   The King's Son and the Merchant's Wife
     p.   The Page Who Feigned to Know the Speech of Birds
     q.   The Lady and Her Five Suitors
     r.   The Three Wishes, or the Man Who Longed to see the
          Night of Power
     s.   The Stolen Necklace
     t.   The Two Pigeons
     u.   Prince Behram and the Princess Al-Datma
     v.   The House With the Belvedere
     w.   The King's Son and the Ifrit's Mistress
     x.   The Sandal-Wood Merchant and the Sharpers
     y.   The Debauchee and the Three-Year-Old Child
     z.   The Stolen Purse
     aa.  The Fox and the Folk
136. Judar and His Brethren
137. The History of Gharib and His Brother Ajib




                        The Book Of The
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                                
                                
                                
       Sindbad The Seaman[FN#1] and Sindbad The Landsman.



There lived in the city of Baghdad, during the reign of the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, a man named Sindbád
the Hammál,[FN#2] one in poor case who bore burdens on his head
for hire. It happened to him one day of great heat that whilst he
was carrying a heavy load, he became exceeding weary and sweated
profusely, the heat and the weight alike oppressing him.
Presently, as he was passing the gate of a merchant's house,
before which the ground was swept and watered, and there the air
was temperate, he sighted a broad bench beside the door; so he
set his load thereon, to take rest and smell the air,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Hammal set his load upon the bench to take rest and smell the
air, there came out upon him from the court-door a pleasant
breeze and a delicious fragrance. He sat down on the edge of the
bench, and at once heard from within the melodious sound of lutes
and other stringed instruments, and mirth-exciting voices singing
and reciting, together with the song of birds warbling and
glorifying Almighty Allah in various tunes and tongues; turtles,
mocking-birds, merles, nightingales, cushats and stone-
curlews,[FN#3] whereat he marvelled in himself and was moved to
mighty joy and solace. Then he went up to the gate and saw within
a great flower-garden wherein were pages and black slaves and
such a train of servants and attendants and so forth as is found
only with Kings and Sultans; and his nostrils were greeted with
the savoury odours of all manner meats rich and delicate, and
delicious and generous wines. So he raised his eyes heavenwards
and said, "Glory to Thee, O Lord, O Creator and Provider, who
providest whomso Thou wilt without count or stint! O mine Holy
One, I cry Thee pardon for all sins and turn to Thee repenting of
all offences! O Lord, there is no gainsaying Thee in Thine
ordinance and Thy dominion, neither wilt Thou be questioned of
that Thou dost, for Thou indeed over all things art Almighty!
Extolled be Thy perfection: whom Thou wilt Thou makest poor and
whom Thou wilt Thou makest rich! Whom Thou wilt Thou exaltest and
whom Thou wilt Thou abasest and there is no god but Thou! How
mighty is Thy majesty and how enduring Thy dominion and how
excellent Thy government! Verily, Thou favourest whom Thou wilt
of Thy servants, whereby the owner of this place abideth in all
joyance of life and delighteth himself with pleasant scents and
delicious meats and exquisite wines of all kinds. For indeed Thou
appointest unto Thy creatures that which Thou wilt and that which
Thou hast foreordained unto them; wherefore are some weary and
others are at rest and some enjoy fair fortune and affluence,
whilst others suffer the extreme of travail and misery, even as I
do." And he fell to reciting,

"How many by my labours, that evermore endure, * All goods of
     life enjoy and in cooly shade recline?
Each morn that dawns I wake in travail and in woe, * And strange
     is my condition and my burden gars me pine:
Many others are in luck and from miseries are free, * And Fortune
     never loads them with loads the like o' mine:
They live their happy days in all solace and delight; * Eat,
     drink and dwell in honour 'mid the noble and the digne:
All living things were made of a little drop of sperm, * Thine
     origin is mine and my provenance is thine;
Yet the difference and distance 'twixt the twain of us are far *
     As the difference of savour 'twixt vinegar and wine:
But at Thee, O God All-wise! I venture not to rail * Whose
     ordinance is just and whose justice cannot fail."

When Sindbad the Porter had made an end of reciting his verses,
he bore up his burden and was about to fare on, when there came
forth to him from the gate a little foot-page, fair of face and
shapely of shape and dainty of dress who caught him by the hand
saying, "Come in and speak with my lord, for he calleth for
thee." The Porter would have excused himself to the page but the
lad would take no refusal; so he left his load with the
doorkeeper in the vestibule and followed the boy into the house,
which he found to be a goodly mansion, radiant and full of
majesty, till he brought him to a grand sitting-room wherein he
saw a company of nobles and great lords, seated at tables
garnished with all manner of flowers and sweet-scented herbs,
besides great plenty of dainty viands and fruits dried and fresh
and confections and wines of the choicest vintages. There also
were instruments of music and mirth and lovely slave-girls
playing and singing. All the company was ranged according to
rank; and in the highest place sat a man of worshipful and noble
aspect whose beard-sides hoariness had stricken; and he was
stately of stature and fair of favour, agreeable of aspect and
full of gravity and dignity and majesty. So Sindbad the Porter
was confounded at that which he beheld and said in himself, "By
Allah, this must be either a piece of Paradise or some King's
palace!" Then he saluted the company with much respect praying
for their prosperity, and kissing the ground before them, stood
with his head bowed down in humble attitude.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Porter, after kissing ground between their hands stood with his
head bowed down in humble attitude. The master of the house bade
him draw near and be seated and bespoke him kindly, bidding him
welcome. Then he set before him various kinds of viands, rich and
delicate and delicious, and the Porter, after saying his
Bismillah, fell to and ate his fill, after which he exclaimed,
"Praised be Allah whatso be our case![FN#4]" and, washing his
hands, returned thanks to the company for his entertainment.
Quoth the host, "Thou art welcome and thy day is a blessed. But
what is thy name and calling?" Quoth the other, "O my lord, my
name is Sindbad the Hammal, and I carry folk's goods on my head
for hire." The house-master smiled and rejoined, "Know, O Porter
that thy name is even as mine, for I am Sindbad the Seaman; and
now, O Porter, I would have thee let me hear the couplets thou
recitedst at the gate anon." The Porter was abashed and replied,
"Allah upon thee! Excuse me, for toil and travail and lack of
luck when the hand is empty, teach a man ill manners and boorish
ways." Said the host, "Be not ashamed; thou art become my
brother; but repeat to me the verses, for they pleased me whenas
I heard thee recite them at the gate. Hereupon the Porter
repeated the couplets and they delighted the merchant, who said
to him, "Know, O Hammal, that my story is a wonderful one, and
thou shalt hear all that befel me and all I underwent ere I rose
to this state of prosperity and became the lord of this place
wherein thou seest me; for I came not to this high estate save
after travail sore and perils galore, and how much toil and
trouble have I not suffered in days of yore! I have made seven
voyages, by each of which hangeth a marvellous tale, such as
confoundeth the reason, and all this came to pass by doom of
fortune and fate; for from what destiny doth write there is
neither refuge nor flight. Know, then, good my lords (continued
he) that I am about to relate the



First Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman."[FN#5]



My father was a merchant, one of the notables of my native place,
a monied man and ample of means, who died whilst I was yet a
child, leaving me much wealth in money and lands and farmhouses.
When I grew up, I laid hands on the whole and ate of the best and
drank freely and wore rich clothes and lived lavishly,
companioning and consorting with youths of my own age, and
considering that this course of life would continue for ever and
ken no change. Thus did I for a long time, but at last I awoke
from my heedlessness and, returning to my senses, I found my
wealth had become unwealth and my condition ill-conditioned and
all I once hent had left my hand. And recovering my reason I was
stricken with dismay and confusion and bethought me of a saying
of our lord Solomon, son of David (on whom be peace!), which I
had heard aforetime from my father, "Three things are better than
other three; the day of death is better than the day of birth, a
live dog is better than a dead lion and the grave is better than
want."[FN#6] Then I got together my remains of estates and
property and sold all, even my clothes, for three thousand
dirhams, with which I resolved to travel to foreign parts,
remembering the saying of the poet, 

"By means of toil man shall scale the height; * Who to fame
     aspires mustn't sleep o' night:
Who seeketh pearl in the deep must dive, * Winning weal and
     wealth by his main and might:
And who seeketh Fame without toil and strife * Th' impossible
     seeketh and wasteth life."

So taking heart I bought me goods, merchandise and all needed for
a voyage and, impatient to be at sea, I embarked, with a company
of merchants, on board a ship bound for Bassorah. There we again
embarked and sailed many days and nights, and we passed from isle
to isle and sea to sea and shore to shore, buying and selling and
bartering everywhere the ship touched, and continued our course
till we came to an island as it were a garth of the gardens of
Paradise. Here the captain cast anchor and making fast to the
shore, put out the landing planks. So all on board landed and
made furnaces[FN#7] and lighting fires therein, busied themselves
in various ways, some cooking and some washing, whilst other some
walked about the island for solace, and the crew fell to eating
and drinking and playing and sporting. I was one of the walkers
but, as we were thus engaged, behold the master who was standing
on the gunwale cried out to us at the top of his voice, saying,
"Ho there! passengers, run for your lives and hasten back to the
ship and leave your gear and save yourselves from destruction,
Allah preserve you! For this island whereon ye stand is no true
island, but a great fish stationary a-middlemost of the sea,
whereon the sand hath settled and trees have sprung up of old
time, so that it is become like unto an island;[FN#8] but, when
ye lighted fires on it, it felt the heat and moved; and in a
moment it will sink with you into the sea and ye will all be
drowned. So leave your gear and seek your safety ere ye die!"--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
ship-master cried to the passengers, "Leave your gear and seek
safety, ere ye die;" all who heard him left gear and goods,
clothes washed and unwashed, fire pots and brass cooking-pots,
and fled back to the ship for their lives, and some reached it
while others (amongst whom was I) did not, for suddenly the
island shook and sank into the abysses of the deep, with all that
were thereon, and the dashing sea surged over it with clashing
waves. I sank with the others down, down into the deep, but
Almighty Allah preserved me from drowning and threw in my way a
great wooden tub of those that had served the ship's company for
tubbing. I gripped it for the sweetness of life and, bestriding
it like one riding, paddled with my feet like oars, whilst the
waves tossed me as in sport right and left. Meanwhile the captain
made sail and departed with those who had reached the ship,
regardless of the drowning and the drowned; and I ceased not
following the vessel with my eyes, till she was hid from sight
and I made sure of death. Darkness closed in upon me while in
this plight and the winds and waves bore me on all that night and
the next day, till the tub brought to with me under the lee of a
lofty island, with trees overhanging the tide. I caught hold of a
branch and by its aid clambered up on to the land, after coming
nigh upon death; but when I reached the shore, I found my legs
cramped and numbed and my feet bore traces of the nibbling of
fish upon their soles; withal I had felt nothing for excess of
anguish and fatigue. I threw myself down on the island ground,
like a dead man, and drowned in desolation swooned away, nor did
I return to my senses till next morning, when the sun rose and
revived me. But I found my feet swollen, so made shift to move by
shuffling on my breech and crawling on my knees, for in that
island were found store of fruits and springs of sweet water. I
ate of the fruits which strengthened me; and thus I abode days
and nights, till my life seemed to return and my spirits began to
revive and I was better able to move about. So, after due
consideration, I fell to exploring the island and diverting
myself with gazing upon all things that Allah Almighty had
created there; and rested under the trees from one of which I cut
me a staff to lean upon. One day as I walked along the marge, I
caught sight of some object in the distance and thought it a wild
beast or one of the monster-creatures of the sea; but, as I drew
near it, looking hard the while, I saw that it was a noble mare,
tethered on the beach. Presently I went up to her, but she cried
out against me with a great cry, so that I trembled for fear and
turned to go away, when there came forth a man from under the
earth and followed me, crying out and saying, "Who and whence art
thou, and what caused thee to come hither?" "O my lord," answered
I, "I am in very sooth, a waif, a stranger, and was left to drown
with sundry others by the ship we voyaged in;[FN#9] but Allah
graciously sent me a wooden tub; so I saved myself thereon and it
floated with me, till the waves cast me up on this island." When
he heard this, he took my hand and saying, "Come with me,"
carried me into a great Sardab, or underground chamber, which was
spacious as a saloon. He made me sit down at its upper end; then
he brought me somewhat of food and, being anhungered, I ate till
I was satisfied and refreshed; and when he had put me at mine
ease he questioned me of myself, and I told him all that had
befallen me from first to last; and, as he wondered at my
adventure, I said, "By Allah, O my lord, excuse me; I have told
thee the truth of my case and the accident which betided me; and
now I desire that thou tell me who thou art and why thou abidest
here under the earth and why thou hast tethered yonder mare on
the brink of the sea." Answered he, "Know, that I am one of the
several who are stationed in different parts of this island, and
we are of the grooms of King Mihrjan[FN#10] and under our hand
are all his horses. Every month, about new-moon tide we bring
hither our best mares which have never been covered, and picket
them on the sea-shore and hide ourselves in this place under the
ground, so that none may espy us. Presently, the stallions of the
sea scent the mares and come up out of the water and seeing no
one, leap the mares and do their will of them. When they have
covered them, they try to drag them away with them, but cannot,
by reason of the leg-ropes; so they cry out at them and butt at
them and kick them, which we hearing, know that the stallions
have dismounted; so we run out and shout at them, whereupon they
are startled and return in fear to the sea. Then the mares
conceive by them and bear colts and fillies worth a mint of
money, nor is their like to be found on earth's face. This is the
time of the coming forth of the sea-stallions; and Inshallah! I
will bear thee to King Mihrjan"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Syce[FN#11] said to Sindbad the Seaman, "I will bear thee to King
Mihrjan and show thee our country. And know that hadst thou not
happened on us thou hadst perished miserably and none had known
of thee: but I will be the means of the saving of thy life and of
thy return to thine own land." I called down blessings on him and
thanked him for his kindness and courtesy; and, while we were yet
talking, behold, the stallion came up out of the sea; and, giving
a great cry, sprang upon the mare and covered her. When he had
done his will of her, he dismounted and would have carried her
away with him, but could not by reason of the tether. She kicked
and cried out at him, whereupon the groom took a sword and
target[FN#12] and ran out of the underground saloon, smiting the
buckler with the blade and calling to his company, who came up
shouting and brandishing spears; and the stallion took fright at
them and plunging into the sea, like a buffalo, disappeared under
the waves.[FN#13] After this we sat awhile, till the rest of the
grooms came up, each leading a mare, and seeing me with their
fellow-Syce, questioned me of my case and I repeated my story to
them. Thereupon they drew near me and spreading the table, ate
and invited me to eat; so I ate with them, after which they took
horse and mounting me on one of the mares, set out with me and
fared on without ceasing, till we came to the capital city of
King Mihrjan, and going in to him acquainted him with my story.
Then he sent for me, and when they set me before him and salams
had been exchanged, he gave me a cordial welcome and wishing me
long life bade me tell him my tale. So I related to him all that
I had seen and all that had befallen me from first to last,
whereat he marvelled and said to me, "By Allah, O my son, thou
hast indeed been miraculously preserved! Were not the term of thy
life a long one, thou hadst not escaped from these straits; but
praised by Allah for safety!" Then he spoke cheerily to me and
entreated me with kindness and consideration: moreover, he made
me his agent for the port and registrar of all ships that entered
the harbour. I attended him regularly, to receive his
commandments, and he favoured me and did me all manner of
kindness and invested me with costly and splendid robes. Indeed,
I was high in credit with him, as an intercessor for the folk and
an intermediary between them and him, when they wanted aught of
him. I abode thus a great while and, as often as I passed through
the city to the port, I questioned the merchants and travellers
and sailors of the city of Baghdad; so haply I might hear of an
occasion to return to my native land, but could find none who
knew it or knew any who resorted thither. At this I was
chagrined, for I was weary of long strangerhood; and my
disappointment endured for a time till one day, going in to King
Mihrjan, I found him with a company of Indians. I saluted them
and they returned my salam; and politely welcomed me and asked me
of my country.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Sindbad the Seaman said:--When they asked me of my country I
questioned them of theirs and they told me that they were of
various castes, some being called Shakiriyah[FN#14] who are the
noblest of their castes and neither oppress nor offer violence to
any, and others Brahmans, a folk who abstain from wine, but live
in delight and solace and merriment and own camels and horses and
cattle. Moreover, they told me that the people of India are
divided into two-and-seventy castes, and I marvelled at this with
exceeding marvel. Amongst other things that I saw in King
Mihrjan's dominions was an island called Kásil,[FN#15] wherin all
night is heard the beating of drums and tabrets; but we were told
by the neighbouring islanders and by travellers that the
inhabitants are people of diligence and judgment.[FN#16] In this
sea I saw also a fish two hundred cubits long and the fishermen
fear it; so they strike together pieces of wood and put it to
flight.[FN#17] I also saw another fish, with a head like that of
an owl, besides many other wonders and rarities, which it would
be tedious to recount. I occupied myself thus in visiting the
islands till, one day, as I stood in the port, with a staff in my
hand, according to my custom, behold, a great ship, wherein were
many merchants, came sailing for the harbour. When it reached the
small inner port where ships anchor under the city, the master
furled his sails and making fast to the shore, put out the
landing-planks, whereupon the crew fell to breaking bulk and
landing cargo whilst I stood by, taking written note of them.
They were long in bringing the goods ashore so I asked the
master, "Is there aught left in thy ship?"; and he answered, "O
my lord, there are divers bales of merchandise in the hold, whose
owner was drowned from amongst us at one of the islands on our
course; so his goods remained in our charge by way of trust and
we purpose to sell them and note their price, that we may convey
it to his people in the city of Baghdad, the Home of Peace."
"What was the merchant's name?" quoth I, and quoth he, "Sindbad
the Seaman;" whereupon I straitly considered him and knowing him,
cried out to him with a great cry, saying, "O captain, I am that
Sindbad the Seaman who travelled with other merchants; and when
the fish heaved and thou calledst to us some saved themselves and
others sank, I being one of them. But Allah Almighty threw in my
way a great tub of wood, of those the crew had used to wash
withal, and the winds and waves carried me to this island, where
by Allah's grace, I fell in with King Mihrjan's grooms and they
brought me hither to the King their master. When I told him my
story, he entreated me with favour and made me his harbour-
master, and I have prospered in his service and found acceptance
with him. These bales, therefore are mine, the goods which God
hath given me."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sindbad the Seaman said to the captain, "These bales are mine,
the goods which Allah hath given me," the other exclaimed, "There
is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great! Verily, there is neither conscience nor good faith
left among men!" said I, "O Rais,[FN#18] what mean these words,
seeing that I have told thee my case?" And he answered, "Because
thou heardest me say that I had with me goods whose owner was
drowned, thou thinkest to take them without right; but this is
forbidden by law to thee, for we saw him drown before our eyes,
together with many other passengers, nor was one of them saved.
So how canst thou pretend that thou art the owner of the goods?"
"O captain," said I, "listen to my story and give heed to my
words, and my truth will be manifest to thee; for lying and
leasing are the letter-marks of the hypocrites." Then I recounted
to him all that had befallen me since I sailed from Baghdad with
him to the time when we came to the fish-island where we were
nearly drowned; and I reminded him of certain matters which had
passed between us; whereupon both he and the merchants were
certified at the truth of my story and recognized me and gave me
joy of my deliverance, saying, "By Allah, we thought not that
thou hadst escaped drowning! But the Lord hath granted thee new
life." Then they delivered my bales to me, and I found my name
written thereon, nor was aught thereof lacking. So I opened them
and making up a present for King Mihrjan of the finest and
costliest of the contents, caused the sailors carry it up to the
palace, where I went in to the King and laid my present at his
feet, acquainting him with what had happened, especially
concerning the ship and my goods; whereat he wondered with
exceeding wonder and the truth of all that I had told him was
made manifest to him. His affection for me redoubled after that
and he showed me exceeding honour and bestowed on me a great
present in return for mine. Then I sold my bales and what other
matters I owned making a great profit on them, and bought me
other goods and gear of the growth and fashion of the island-
city. When the merchants were about to start on their homeward
voyage, I embarked on board the ship all that I possessed, and
going in to the King, thanked him for all his favours and
friendship and craved his leave to return to my own land and
friends. He farewelled me and bestowed on me great store of the
country-stuffs and produce; and I took leave of him and embarked.
Then we set sail and fared on nights and days, by the permission
of Allah Almighty; and Fortune served us and Fate favoured us, so
that we arrived in safety at Bassorah-city where I landed
rejoiced at my safe return to my natal soil. After a short stay,
I set out for Baghdad, the House of Peace, with store of goods
and commodities of great price. Reaching the city in due time, I
went straight to my own quarter and entered my house where all my
friends and kinsfolk came to greet me. Then I bought me eunuchs
and concubines, servants and negro slaves till I had a large
establishment, and I bought me houses, and lands and gardens,
till I was richer and in better case than before, and returned to
enjoy the society of my friends and familiars more assiduously
than ever, forgetting all I had suffered of fatigue and hardship
and strangerhood and every peril of travel; and I applied myself
to all manner joys and solaces and delights, eating the dantiest
viands and drinking the deliciousest wines; and my wealth allowed
this state of things to endure. "This, then, is the story of my
first voyage, and to-morrow, Inshallah! I will tell you the tale
of the second of my seven voyages." (Saith he who telleth the
tale), Then Sindbad the Seaman made Sindbad the Landsman sup with
him and bade give him an hundred gold pieces, saying, "Thou hast
cheered us with thy company this day."[FN#19] The Porter thanked
him and, taking the gift, went his way, pondering that which he
had heard and marvelling mightily at what things betide mankind.
He passed the night in his own place and with early morning
repaired to the abode of Sindbad the Seaman, who received him
with honour and seated him by his side. As soon as the rest of
the company was assembled, he set meat and drink before them and,
when they had well eaten and drunken and were merry and in
cheerful case, he took up his discourse and recounted to them in
these words the narrative of



The Second Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.



Know, O my brother, that I was living a most comfortable and
enjoyable life, in all solace and delight, as I told you
yesterday,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sindbad the Seaman's guests were all gathered together he thus
bespake them:--I was living a most enjoyable life until one day
my mind became possessed with the thought of travelling about the
world of men and seeing their cities and islands; and a longing
seized me to traffic and to make money by trade. Upon this
resolve I took a great store of cash and, buying goods and gear
fit for travel, bound them up in bales. Then I went down to the
river-bank, where I found a noble ship and brand-new about to
sail, equipped with sails of fine cloth and well manned and
provided; so I took passage in her, with a number of other
merchants, and after embarking our goods we weighed anchor the
same day. Right fair was our voyage and we sailed from place to
place and from isle to isle; and whenever we anchored we met a
crowd of merchants and notables and customers, and we took to
buying and selling and bartering. At last Destiny brought us to
an island, fair and verdant, in trees abundant, with yellow-ripe
fruits luxuriant, and flowers fragrant and birds warbling soft
descant; and streams crystalline and radiant; but no sign of man
showed to the descrier, no, not a blower of the fire.[FN#20] The
captain made fast with us to this island, and the merchants and
sailors landed and walked about, enjoying the shade of the trees
and the song of the birds, that chanted the praises of the One,
the Victorious, and marvelling at the works of the Omnipotent
King.[FN#21] I landed with the rest; and, sitting down by a
spring of sweet water that welled up among the trees, took out
some vivers I had with me and ate of that which Allah Almighty
had allotted unto me. And so sweet was the zephyr and so fragrant
were the flowers, that presently I waxed drowsy and, lying down
in that place, was soon drowned in sleep. When I awoke, I found
myself alone, for the ship had sailed and left me behind, nor had
one of the merchants or sailors bethought himself of me. I seared
the island right and left, but found neither man nor Jinn,
whereat I was beyond measure troubled and my gall was like to
burst for stress of chagrin and anguish and concern, because I
was left quite alone, without aught of wordly gear or meat or
drink, weary and heart-broken. So I gave myself up for lost and
said, "Not always doth the crock escape the shock. I was saved
the first time by finding one who brought me from the desert
island to an inhabited place, but now there is no hope for me."
Then I fell to weeping and wailing and gave myself up to an
access of rage, blaming myself for having again ventured upon the
perils and hardships of voyage, whenas I was at my ease in mine
own house in mine own land, taking my pleasure with good meat and
good drink and good clothes and lacking nothing, neither money
nor goods. And I repented me of having left Baghdad, and this the
more after all the travails and dangers I had undergone in my
first voyage, wherein I had so narrowly escaped destruction, and
exclaimed "Verily we are Allah's and unto Him we are returning!"
I was indeed even as one mad and Jinn-struck and presently I rose
and walked about the island, right and left and every whither,
unable for trouble to sit or tarry in any one place. Then I
climbed a tall tree and looked in all directions, but saw nothing
save sky and sea and trees and birds and isles and sands.
However, after a while my eager glances fell upon some great
white thing, afar off in the interior of the island; so I came
down from the tree and made for that which I had seen; and
behold, it was a huge white dome rising high in air and of vast
compass. I walked all around it, but found no door thereto, nor
could I muster strength or nimbleness by reason of its exceeding
smoothness and slipperiness. So I marked the spot where I stood
and went round about the dome to measure its circumference which
I found fifty good paces. And as I stood, casting about how to
gain an entrance the day being near its fall and the sun being
near the horizon, behold, the sun was suddenly hidden from me and
the air became dull and dark. Methought a cloud had come over the
sun, but it was the season of summer; so I marvelled at this and
lifting my head looked steadfastly at the sky, when I saw that
the cloud was none other than an enormous bird, of gigantic girth
and inordinately wide of wing which, as it flew through the air,
veiled the sun and hid it from the island. At this sight my
wonder redoubled and I remembered a story,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued in these words:--My wonder redoubled and I
remembered a story I had heard aforetime of pilgrims and
travellers, how in a certain island dwelleth a huge bird, called
the "Rukh"[FN#22] which feedeth its young on elephants; and I was
certified that the dome which caught my sight was none other than
a Rukh's egg. As I looked and wondered at the marvellous works of
the Almighty, the bird alighted on the dome and brooded over it
with its wings covering it and its legs stretched out behind it
on the ground, and in this posture it fell asleep, glory be to
Him who sleepeth not! When I saw this, I arose and, unwinding my
turband from my head, doubled it and twisted it into a rope, with
which I girt my middle and bound my waist fast to the legs of the
Rukh, saying in myself, "Peradventure, this bird may carry me to
a land of cities and inhabitants, and that will be better than
abiding in this desert island." I passed the night watching and
fearing to sleep, lest the bird should fly away with me unawares;
and, as soon as the dawn broke and morn shone, the Rukh rose off
its egg and spreading its wings with a great cry flew up into the
air dragging me with it; nor ceased it to soar and to tower till
I thought it had reached the limit of the firmament; after which
it descended, earthwards, little by little, till it lighted on
the top of a high hill. As soon as I found myself on the hard
ground, I made haste to unbind myself, quaking for fear of the
bird, though it took no heed of me nor even felt me; and, loosing
my turband from its feet, I made off with my best speed.
Presently, I saw it catch up in its huge claws something from the
earth and rise with it high in air, and observing it narrowly I
saw it to be a serpent big of bulk and gigantic of girth,
wherewith it flew away clean out of sight. I marvelled at this
and faring forwards found myself on a peak overlooking a valley,
exceeding great and wide and deep, and bounded by vast mountains
that spired high in air: none could descry their summits, for the
excess of their height, nor was any able to climb up thereto.
When I saw this, I blamed myself for that which I had done and
said, "Would Heaven I had tarried in the island! It was better
than this wild desert; for there I had at least fruits to eat and
water to drink, and here are neither trees nor fruits nor
streams. But there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great! Verily, as often as I am quit of
one peril, I fall into a worse danger and a more grievous."
However, I took courage and walking along the Wady found that its
soil was of diamond, the stone wherewith they pierce minerals and
precious stones and porcelain and the onyx, for that it is a
dense stone and a dure, whereon neither iron nor hardhead hath
effect, neither can we cut off aught therefrom nor break it, save
by means of leadstone.[FN#23] Moreover, the valley swarmed with
snakes and vipers, each big as a palm tree, that would have made
but one gulp of an elephant; and they came out by night, hiding
during the day, lest the Rukhs and eagles pounce on them and tear
them to pieces, as was their wont, why I wot not. And I repented
of what I had done and said, "By Allah, I have made haste to
bring destruction upon myself!" The day began to wane as I went
along and I looked about for a place where I might pass the
night, being in fear of the serpents; and I took no thought of
meat and drink in my concern for my life. Presently, I caught
sight of a cave nearhand, with a narrow doorway; so I entered and
seeing a great stone close to the mouth, I rolled it up and
stopped the entrance, saying to myself, "I am safe here for the
night; and as soon as it is day, I will go forth and see what
destiny will do." Then I looked within the cave and saw to the
upper end a great serpent brooding on her eggs, at which my flesh
quaked and my hair stood on end; but I raised my eyes to Heaven
and, committing my case to fate and lot, abode all that night
without sleep till daybreak, when I rolled back the stone from
the mouth of the cave and went forth, staggering like a drunken
man and giddy with watching and fear and hunger. As in this sore
case I walked along the valley, behold, there fell down before me
a slaughtered beast; but I saw no one, whereat I marvelled with
great marvel and presently remembered a story I had heard
aforetime of traders and pilgrims and travellers; how the
mountains where are the diamonds are full of perils and terrors,
nor can any fare through them; but the merchants who traffic in
diamonds have a device by which they obtain them, that is to say,
they take a sheep and slaughter and skin it and cut it in pieces
and cast them down from the mountain-tops into the valley-sole,
where the meat being fresh and sticky with blood, some of the
gems cleave to it. There they leave it till mid-day, when the
eagles and vultures swoop down upon it and carry it in their
claws to the mountain-summits, whereupon the merchants come and
shout at them and scare them away from the meat. Then they come
and, taking the diamonds which they find sticking to it, go their
ways with them and leave the meat to the birds and beasts; nor
can any come at the diamonds but by this device,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued his relation of what befel him in the Mountain
of Diamonds, and informed them that the merchants cannot come at
the diamonds save by the device aforesaid. So, when I saw the
slaughtered beast fall (he pursued) and bethought me of the
story, I went up to it and filled my pockets and shawl-girdle and
turband and the folds of my clothes with the choicest diamonds;
and, as I was thus engaged, down fell before me another great
piece of meat. Then with my unrolled turband and lying on my
back, I set the bit on my breast so that I was hidden by the
meat, which was thus raised above the ground. Hardly had I
gripped it, when an eagle swooped down upon the flesh and,
seizing it with his talons, flew up with it high in air and me
clinging thereto, and ceased not its flight till it alighted on
the head of one of the mountains where, dropping the carcass he
fell to rending it; but, behold, there arose behind him a great
noise of shouting and clattering of wood, whereat the bird took
fright and flew away. Then I loosed off myself the meat, with
clothes daubed with blood therefrom, and stood up by its side;
whereupon up came the merchant, who had cried out at the eagle,
and seeing me standing there, bespoke me not, but was affrighted
at me and shook with fear. However, he went up to the carcass and
turning it over, found no diamonds sticking to it, whereat he
gave a great cry and exclaimed, "Harrow, my disappointment! There
is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah with whom we
seek refuge from Satan the stoned!" And he bemoaned himself and
beat hand upon hand, saying, "Alas, the pity of it! How cometh
this?" Then I went up to him and he said to me, "Who art thou and
what causeth thee to come hither?" And I, "Fear not, I am a man
and a good man and a merchant. My story is a wondrous and my
adventures marvellous and the manner of my coming hither is
prodigious. So be of good cheer, thou shalt receive of me what
shall rejoice thee, for I have with me great plenty of diamonds
and I will give thee thereof what shall suffice thee; for each is
better than aught thou couldst get otherwise. So fear nothing."
The man rejoiced thereat and thanked and blessed me; then we
talked together till the other merchants, hearing me in discourse
with their fellow, came up and saluted me; for each of them had
thrown down his piece of meat. And as I went off with them I told
them my whole story, how I had suffered hardships at sea and the
fashion of my reaching the valley. But I gave the owner of the
meat a n