umber of the stones I had by me, so they all wished me
joy of my escape, saying, "By Allah a new life hath been decreed
to thee, for none ever reached yonder valley and came off thence
alive before thee; but praised be Allah for thy safety!" We
passed the night together in a safe and pleasant place, beyond
measure rejoiced at my deliverance from the Valley of Serpents
and my arrival in an inhabited land; and on the morrow we set out
and journeyed over the mighty range of mountains, seeing many
serpents in the valley, till we came to a fair great island,
wherein was a garden of huge camphor trees under each of which an
hundred men might take shelter. When the folk have a mind to get
camphor, they bore into the upper part of the bole with a long
iron; whereupon the liquid camphor, which is the sap of the tree,
floweth out and they catch it in vessels, where it concreteth
like gum; but, after this, the tree dieth and becometh
firewood.[FN#24] Moreover, there is in this island a kind of wild
beast, called "Rhinoceros,"[FN#25] that pastureth as do steers
and buffalos with us; but it is a huge brute, bigger of body than
the camel and like it feedeth upon the leaves and twigs of trees.
It is a remarkable animal with a great and thick horn, ten cubits
long, amiddleward its head; wherein, when cleft in twain, is the
likeness of a man. Voyagers and pilgrims and travellers declare
that this beast called "Karkadan" will carry off a great elephant
on its horn and graze about the island and the sea-coast
therewith and take no heed of it, till the elephant dieth and its
fat, melting in the sun, runneth down into the rhinoceros's eyes
and blindeth him, so that he lieth down on the shore. Then comes
the bird Rukh and carrieth off both the rhinoceros's eyes and
blindeth him, so that he lieth down on the shore. Then comes the
bird Rukh and carrieth off both the rhinoceros and that which is
on its horn to feed its young withal. Moreover, I saw in this
island many kinds of oxen and buffalos, whose like are not found
in our country. Here I sold some of the diamonds which I had by
me for gold dinars and silver dirhams and bartered others for the
produce of the country; and, loading them upon beasts of burden,
fared on with the merchants from valley to valley and town to
town, buying and selling and viewing foreign countries and the
works and creatures of Allah, till we came to Bassorah-city,
where we abode a few days, after which I continued my journey to
Baghdad.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sindbad the Seaman returned from his travel to Baghdad, the House
of Peace, he arrived at home with great store of diamonds and
money and goods. (Continued he) I foregathered with my friends
and relations and gave alms and largesse and bestowed curious
gifts and made presents to all my friends and companions. Then I
betook myself to eating well and drinking well and wearing fine
clothes and making merry with my fellows, and forgot all my
sufferings in the pleasures of return to the solace and delight
of life, with light heart and broadened breast. And every one who
heard of my return came and questioned me of my adventures and of
foreign countries, and I related to them all that had befallen
me, and the much I had suffered, whereat they wondered and gave
me joy of my safe return. "This, then is the end of the story of
my second voyage; and to-morrow, Inshallah! I will tell you what
befel me in my third voyage." The company marvelled at his story
and supped with him; after which he ordered an hundred dinars of
gold to be given to the Porter, who took the sum with many thanks
and blessings (which he stinted not even when he reached home)
and went his way, wondering at what he had heard. Next morning as
soon as day came in its sheen and shone, he rose and praying the
dawn-prayer, repaired to the house of Sindbad the Seaman, even as
he had bidden him, and went in and gave him good-morrow. The
merchant welcomed him and made him sit with him, till the rest of
the company arrived; and when they had well eaten and drunken and
were merry with joy and jollity, their host began by saying,
"Hearken, O my brothers, to what I am about to tell you; for it
is even more wondrous than what you have already heard; but Allah
alone kenneth what things His Omniscience concealed from man! And
listen to



The Third Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.



As I told you yesterday, I returned from my second voyage
overjoyed at my safety and with great increase of wealth, Allah
having requited me all that I had wasted and lost, and I abode
awhile in Baghdad-city savouring the utmost ease and prosperity
and comfort and happiness, till the carnal man was once more
seized with longing for travel and diversion and adventure, and
yearned after traffic and lucre and emolument, for that the human
heart is naturally prone to evil. So making up my mind I laid in
great plenty of goods suitable for a sea-voyage and repairing to
Bassorah, went down to the shore and found there a fine ship
ready to sail, with a full crew and a numerous company of
merchants, men of worth and substance; faith, piety and
consideration. I embarked with them and we set sail on the
blessing of Allah Almighty and on His aidance and His favour to
bring our voyage to a safe and prosperous issue and already we
congratulated one another on our good fortune and boon voyage. We
fared on from sea to sea and from island to island and city to
city, in all delight and contentment, buying and selling wherever
we touched, and taking our solace and our pleasure, till one day
when, as we sailed athwart the dashing sea, swollen with clashing
billows, behold, the master (who stood on the gunwale examining
the ocean in all directions) cried out with a great cry, and
buffeted his face and pluckt out his beard and rent his raiment,
and bade furl the sail and cast the anchors. So we said to him,
"O Rais, what is the matter?" "Know, O my brethren (Allah
preserve you!), that the wind hath gotten the better of us and
hath driven us out of our course into mid-ocean, and destiny, for
our ill luck, hath brought us to the Mountain of the Zughb, a
hairy folk like apes,[FN#26] among whom no man ever fell and came
forth alive; and my heart presageth that we all be dead men."
Hardly had the master made an end of his speech when the apes
were upon us. They surrounded the ship on all sides swarming like
locusts and crowding the shore. They were the most frightful of
wild creatures, covered with black hair like felt, foul of favour
and small of stature, being but four spans high, yellow-eyed and
black-faced; none knoweth their language nor what they are, and
they shun the company of men. We feared to slay them or strike
them or drive them away, because of their inconceivable
multitude; lest, if we hurt one, the rest fall on us and slay us,
for numbers prevail over courage; so we let them do their will,
albeit we feared they would plunder our goods and gear. They
swarmed up the cables and gnawed them asunder, and on like wise
they did with all the ropes of the ship, so that it fell off from
the wind and stranded upon their mountainous coast. Then they
laid hands on all the merchants and crew, and landing us on the
island, made off with the ship and its cargo and went their ways,
we wot not whither. We were thus left on the island, eating of
its fruits and pot-herbs and drinking of its streams till, one
day, we espied in its midst what seemed an inhabited house. So we
made for it as fast as our feet could carry us and behold, it was
a castle strong and tall, compassed about with a lofty wall, and
having a two-leaved gate of ebony-wood both of which leaves open
stood. We entered and found within a space wide and bare like a
great square, round which stood many high doors open thrown, and
at the farther end a long bench of stone and brasiers, with
cooking gear hanging thereon and about it great plenty of bones;
but we saw no one and marvelled thereat with exceeding wonder.
Then we sat down in the courtyard a little while and presently
falling asleep, slept from the forenoon till sundown, when lo!
the earth trembled under our feet and the air rumbled with a
terrible tone. Then there came down upon us, from the top of the
castle, a huge creature in the likeness of a man, black of
colour, tall and big of bulk, as he were a great date-tree, with
eyes like coals of fire and eye-teeth like boar's tusks and a
vast big gape like the mouth of a well. Moreover, he had long
loose lips like camel's, hanging down upon his breast and ears
like two Jarms[FN#27] falling over his shoulder-blades and the
nails of his hands were like the claws of a lion.[FN#28] When we
saw this frightful giant, we were like to faint and every moment
increased our fear and terror; and we became as dead men for
excess of horror and affright.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--When we saw this frightful giant we were
struck with exceeding terror and horror. And after trampling upon
the earth, he sat awhile on the bench; then he arose and coming
to us seized me by the arm choosing me out from among my comrades
the merchants. He took me up in his hand and turning me over felt
me, as a butcher feeleth a sheep he is about to slaughter, and I
but a little mouthful in his hands; but finding me lean and
fleshless for stress of toil and trouble and weariness, let me go
and took up another, whom in like manner he turned over and felt
and let go; nor did he cease to feel and turn over the rest of
us, one after another, till he came to the master of the ship.
Now he was a sturdy, stout, broad-shouldered wight, fat and in
full vigour; so he pleased the giant, who seized him, as a
butcher seizeth a beast, and throwing him down, set his foot on
his neck and brake it; after which he fetched a long spit and
thrusting it up his backside, brought it forth of the crown of
his head. Then, lighting a fierce fire, he set over it the spit
with the Rais thereon, and turned it over the coals, till the
flesh was roasted, when he took the spit off the fire and set it
like a Kabáb-stick before him. Then he tare the body, limb from
limb, as one jointeth a chicken and, rending the flesh with his
nails, fell to eating of it and gnawing the bones, till there was
nothing left but some of these, which he threw on one side of the
wall. This done, he sat for a while; then he lay down on the
stone-bench and fell asleep, snarking and snoring like the
gurgling of a lamb or a cow with its throat cut; nor did he awake
till morning, when he rose and fared forth and went his ways. As
soon as we were certified that he was gone, we began to talk with
one another, weeping and bemoaning ourselves for the risk we ran,
and saying, "Would Heaven we had been drowned in the sea or that
the apes had eaten us! That were better than to be roasted over
the coals; by Allah, this is a vile, foul death! But whatso the
Lord willeth must come to pass and there is no Majesty and there
is no Might, save in Him, the Glorious, the Great! We shall
assuredly perish miserably and none will know of us; as there is
no escape for us from this place." Then we arose and roamed about
the island, hoping that haply we might find a place to hide us in
or a means of flight, for indeed death was a light matter to us,
provided we were not roasted over the fire[FN#29] and eaten.
However, we could find no hiding-place and the evening overtook
us; so, of the excess of our terror, we returned to the castle
and sat down awhile. Presently, the earth trembled under our feet
and the black ogre came up to us and turning us over, felt one
after other, till he found a man to his liking, whom he took and
served as he had done the captain, killing and roasting and
eating him: after which he lay down on the bench[FN#30] and slept
all night, snarking and snoring like a beast with its throat cut,
till daybreak, when he arose and went out as before. Then we drew
together and conversed and said one to other, "By Allah, we had
better throw ourselves into the sea and be drowned than die
roasted; for this is an abominable death!" Quoth one of us, "Hear
ye my words! let us cast about to kill him, and be at peace from
the grief of him and rid the Moslems of his barbarity and
tyranny." Then said I, "Hear me, O my brothers; if there is
nothing for it but to slay him, let us carry some of this
firewood and planks down to the sea-shore and make us a boat
wherein, if we succeed in slaughtering him, we may either embark
and let the waters carry us whither Allah willeth, or else abide
here till some ship pass, when we will take passage in it. If we
fail to kill him, we will embark in the boat and put out to sea;
and if we be drowned, we shall at least escape being roasted over
a kitchen fire with sliced weasands; whilst, if we escape, we
escape, and if we be drowned, we die martyrs." "By Allah," said
they all, "this rede is a right;" and we agreed upon this, and
set about carrying it out. So we haled down to the beach the
pieces of wood which lay about the bench; and, making a boat,
moored it to the strand, after which we stowed therein somewhat
of victual and returned to the castle. As soon as evening fell
the earth trembled under our feet and in came the blackamoor upon
us, snarling like a dog about to bite. He came up to us and
feeling us and turning us over one by one, took one of us and did
with him as he had done before and ate him, after which he lay
down on the bench and snored and snorted like thunder. As soon as
we were assured that he slept, we arose and taking two iron spits
of those standing there, heated them in the fiercest of the fire,
till they were red-hot, like burning coals, when we gripped fast
hold of them and going up to the giant, as he lay snoring on the
bench, thrust them into his eyes and pressed upon them, all of
us, with our united might, so that his eyeballs burst and he
became stone blind. Thereupon he cried with a great cry, whereat
our hearts trembled, and springing up from the bench, he fell a-
groping after us, blind-fold. We fled from him right and left and
he saw us not, for his sight was altogether blent; but we were in
terrible fear of him and made sure we were dead men despairing of
escape. Then he found the door, feeling for it with his hands and
went out roaring aloud; and behold, the earth shook under us, for
the noise of his roaring, and we quaked for fear. As he quitted
the castle we followed him and betook ourselves to the place
where we had moored our boat, saying to one another, "If this
accursed abide absent till the going down of the sun and come not
to the castle, we shall know that he is dead; and if he come
back, we will embark in the boat and paddle till we escape,
committing our affair to Allah." But, as we spoke, behold, up
came the blackamoor with other two as they were Ghuls, fouler and
more frightful than he, with eyes like red-hot coals; which when
we saw, we hurried into the boat and casting off the moorings
paddled away and pushed out to sea.[FN#31] As soon as the ogres
caught sight of us, they cried out at us and running down to the
sea-shore, fell a-pelting us with rocks, whereof some fell
amongst us and others fell into the sea. We paddled with all our
might till we were beyond their reach, but the most part of us
were slain by the rock-throwing, and the winds and waves sported
with us and carried us into the midst of the dashing sea, swollen
with billows clashing. We knew not whither we went and my fellows
died one after another, till there remained but three, myself and
two others;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman thus continued:--Most part of us were slain by the rock-
thowing and only three of us remained on board the boat for, as
often as one died, we threw him into the sea. We were sore
exhausted for stress of hunger, but we took courage and heartened
one another and worked for dear life and paddled with main and
might, till the winds cast us upon an island, as we were dead men
for fatigue and fear and famine. We landed on the island and
walked about it for a while, finding that it abounded in trees
and streams and birds; and we ate of the fruits and rejoiced in
our escape from the black and our deliverance from the perils of
the sea; and thus we did till nightfall, when we lay down and
fell asleep for excess of fatigue. But we had hardly closed our
eyes before we were aroused by a hissing sound like the sough of
wind, and awaking, saw a serpent like a dragon, a seld-seen
sight, of monstrous make and belly of enormous bulk which lay in
a circle around us. Presently it reared its head and, seizing one
of my companions, swallowed him up to his shoulders; then it
gulped down the rest of him, and we heard his ribs crack in its
belly. Presently it went its way, and we abode in sore amazement
and grief for our comrade and mortal fear for ourselves, saying,
"By Allah, this is a marvellous thing! Each kind of death that
threatened us is more terrible than the last. We were rejoicing
in our escape from the black ogre and our deliverance from the
perils of the sea; but now we have fallen into that which is
worse. There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!
By the Almighty, we have escaped from the blackamoor and from
drowning: but how shall we escape from this abominable and
viperish monster?" Then we walked about the island, eating of its
fruits and drinking of its streams till dusk, when we climbed up
into a high tree and went to sleep there, I being on the topmost
bough. As soon as it was dark night, up came the serpent, looking
right and left; and, making for the tree whereon we were, climbed
up to my comrade and swallowed him down to his shoulders. Then it
coiled about the bole[FN#32] with him, whilst I, who could not
take my eyes off the sight, heard his bones crack in its belly,
and it swallowed him whole, after which it slid down from the
tree. When the day broke and the light showed me that the serpent
was gone, I came down, as I were a dead man for stress of fear
and anguish, and thought to cast myself into the sea and be at
rest from the woes of the world; but could not bring myself to
this, for verily life is dear. So I took five pieces of wood,
broad and long, and bound one crosswise to the soles of my feet
and others in like fashion on my right and left sides and over my
breast; and the broadest and largest I bound across my head and
made them fast with ropes. Then I lay down on the ground on my
back, so that I was completely fenced in by the pieces of wood,
which enclosed me like a bier.[FN#33] So as soon as it was dark,
up came the serpent, as usual, and made towards me, but could not
get at me to swallow me for the wood that fenced me in. So it
wriggled round me on every side, whilst I looked on, like one
dead by reason of my terror; and every now and then it would
glide away and come back; but as often as it tried to come at me,
it was hindered by the pieces of wood wherewith I had bound
myself on every side. It ceased not to beset me thus from sundown
till dawn, but when the light of day shone upon the beast it made
off, in the utmost fury and extreme disappointment. Then I put
out my hand and unbound myself, well-nigh down among the dead men
for fear and suffering; and went down to the island-shore, whence
a ship afar off in the midst of the waves suddenly struck my
sight. So I tore off a great branch of a tree and made signs with
it to the crew, shouting out the while; which when the ship's
company saw they said to another, "We must stand in and see what
this is; peradventure 'tis a man." So they made for the island
and presently heard my cries, whereupon they took me on board and
questioned me of my case. I told them all my adventures from
first to last, whereat they marvelled mightily and covered my
shame[FN#34] with some of their clothes. Moreover, they set
before me somewhat of food and I ate my fill and I drank cold
sweet water and was mightily refreshed; and Allah Almighty
quickened me after I was virtually dead. So I praised the Most
Highest and thanked Him for His favours and exceeding mercies,
and my heart revived in me after utter despair, till meseemed as
if all I had suffered were but a dream I had dreamed. We sailed
on with a fair wind the Almighty sent us till we came to an
island, called Al-Saláhitah,[FN#35] which aboundeth in sandal-
wood when the captain cast anchor,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--And when we had cast anchor, the merchants and
the sailors landed with their goods to sell and to buy. Then the
captain turned to me and said, "Hark'ee, thou art a stranger and
a pauper and tellest us that thou hast undergone frightful
hardship; wherefore I have a mind to benefit thee with somewhat
that may further thee to thy native land, so thou wilt ever bless
me and pray for me." "So be it," answered I; "thou shalt have my
prayers." Quoth he, "Know then that there was with us a man, a
traveller, whom we lost, and we know not if he be alive or dead,
for we had no news of him; so I purpose to commit his bales of
goods to thy charge, that thou mayst sell them in this island. A
part of the proceeds we will give thee as an equivalent for thy
pains and service, and the rest we will keep till we return to
Baghdad, where we will enquire for his family and deliver it to
them, together with the unsold goods. Say me then, wilt thou
undertake the charge and land and sell them as other merchants
do?" I replied "Hearkening and obedience to thee, O my lord; and
great is thy kindness to me," and thanked him; whereupon he bade
the sailors and porters bear the bales in question ashore and
commit them to my charge. The ship's scribe asked him, "O master,
what bales are these and what merchant's name shall I write upon
them?"; and he answered, "Write on them the name of Sindbad the
Seaman, him who was with us in the ship and whom we lost at the
Rukh's island, and of whom we have no tidings; for we mean this
stranger to sell them; and we will give him a part of the price
for his pains and keep the rest till we return to Baghdad where,
if we find the owner we will make it over to him, and if not, to
his family." And the clerk said, "Thy words are apposite and thy
rede is right." Now when I heard the captain give orders for the
bales to be inscribed with my name, I said to myself, "By Allah,
I am Sindbad the Seaman!" So I armed myself with courage and
patience and waited till all the merchants had landed and were
gathered together, talking and chaffering about buying and
selling; then I went up to the captain and asked him, "O my lord,
knowest thou what manner of man was this Sindbad, whose goods
thou hast committed to me for sale?"; and he answered, "I know of
him naught save that he was a man from Baghdad-city, Sindbad
hight the Seaman, who was drowned with many others when we lay
anchored at such an island and I have heard nothing of him since
then." At this I cried out with a great cry and said, "O captain,
whom Allah keep! know that I am that Sindbad the Seaman and that
I was not drowned, but when thou castest anchor at the island, I
landed with the rest of the merchants and crew; and I sat down in
a pleasant place by myself and ate somewhat of food I had with me
and enjoyed myself till I became drowsy and was drowned in sleep;
and when I awoke, I found no ship and none near me. These goods
are my goods and these bales are my bales; and all the merchants
who fetch jewels from the Valley of Diamonds saw me there and
will bear me witness that I am the very Sindbad the Seaman; for I
related to them everything that had befallen me and told them how
you forgot me and left me sleeping on the island, and that
betided me which betided me." When the passengers and crew heard
my words, they gathered about me and some of them believed me and
others disbelieved; but presently, behold, one of the merchants,
hearing me mention the Valley of Diamonds, came up to me and said
to them, "Hear what I say, good people! When I related to you the
most wonderful thing in my travels, and I told you that, at the
time we cast down our slaughtered animals into the Valley of
Serpents (I casting with the rest as was my wont), there came up
a man hanging to mine, ye believed me not and gave me the lie."
"Yes," quoth they, "thou didst tell us some such tale, but we had
no call to credit thee." He resumed, "Now this is the very man,
by token that he gave me diamonds of great value, and high price
whose like are not to be found, requiting me more than would have
come up sticking to my quarter of meat; and I companied with him
to Bassorah-city, where he took leave of us and went on to his
native stead, whilst we returned to our own land. This is he; and
he told us his name, Sindbad the Seaman, and how the ship left
him on the desert island. And know ye that Allah hath sent him
hither, so might the truth of my story be made manifest to you.
Moreover, these are his goods for, when he first foregathered
with us, he told us of them; and the truth of his words is
patent." Hearing the merchant's speech the captain came up to me
and considered me straitly awhile, after which he said, "What was
the mark on thy bales?" "Thus and thus," answered I, and reminded
him of somewhat that had passed between him and me, when I
shipped with him from Bassorah. Thereupon he was convinced that I
was indeed Sindbad the Seaman and took me round the neck and gave
me joy of my safety, saying, "By Allah, O my lord, thy case is
indeed wondrous and thy tale marvellous; but lauded be Allah who
hath brought thee and me together again, and who hath restored to
thee thy goods and gear!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman thus continued:--"Alhamdolillah!" quoth the captain,
"lauded be Allah who hath restored unto thee thy goods and gear."
Then I disposed of my merchandise to the best of my skill, and
profited largely on them whereat I rejoiced with exceeding joy
and congratulated myself on my safety and the recovery of my
goods. We ceased not to buy and sell at the several islands till
we came to the land of Hind, where we bought cloves and ginger
and all manner spices; and thence we fared on to the land of
Sind, where also we bought and sold. In these Indian seas, I saw
wonders without number or count, amongst others a fish like a cow
which bringeth forth its young and suckleth them like human
beings; and of its skin bucklers are made.[FN#36] There were eke
fishes like asses and camels[FN#37] and tortoises twenty cubits
wide.[FN#38] And I saw also a bird that cometh out of a sea-shell
and layeth eggs and hatcheth her chicks on the surface of the
water, never coming up from the sea to the land.[FN#39] Then we
set sail again with a fair wind and the blessing of Almighty
Allah; and, after a prosperous voyage, arrived safe and sound at
Bassorah. Here I abode a few days and presently returned to
Baghdad where I went at once to my quarter and my house and
saluted my family and familiars and friends. I had gained on this
voyage what was beyond count and reckoning, so I gave alms and
largesse and clad the widow and the orphan, by way of
thanksgiving for my happy return, and fell to feasting and making
merry with my companions and intimates and forgot, while eating
well and drinking well and dressing well, everything that had
befallen me and all the perils and hardships I had suffered.
"These, then, are the most admirable things I sighted on my third
voyage, and to-morrow, an it be the will of Allah, you shall come
to me and I will relate the adventures of my fourth voyage, which
is still more wonderful than those you have already heard."
(Saith he who telleth the tale), Then Sindbad the Seaman bade
give Sindbad the Landsman an hundred golden dinars as of wont and
called for food. So they spread the tables and the company ate
the night-meal and went their ways, marvelling at the tale they
had heard. The Porter after taking his gold passed the night in
his own house, also wondering at what his namesake the Seaman had
told him, and as soon as day broke and the morning showed with
its sheen and shone, he rose and praying the dawn-prayer betook
himself to Sindbad the Seaman, who returned his salute and
received him with an open breast and cheerful favour and made him
sit with him till the rest of the company arrived, when he caused
set on food and they ate and drank and made merry. Then Sindbad
the Seaman bespake them and related to them the narrative of




The Fourth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman.



Know, O my brethren that after my return from my third voyage and
foregathering with my friends, and forgetting all my perils and
hardships in the enjoyment of ease and comfort and repose, I was
visited one day by a company of merchants who sat down with me
and talked of foreign travel and traffic, till the old bad man
within me yearned to go with them and enjoy the sight of strange
countries, and I longed for the society of the various races of
mankind and for traffic and profit. So I resolved to travel with
them and buying the necessaries for a long voyage, and great
store of costly goods, more than ever before, transported them
from Baghdad to Bassorah where I took ship with the merchants in
question, who were of the chief of the town. We set out, trusting
in the blessing of Almighty Allah; and with a favouring breeze
and the best conditions we sailed from island to island and sea
to sea, till, one day, there arose against us a contrary wind and
the captain cast out his anchors and brought the ship to a
standsill, fearing lest she should founder in mid-ocean. Then we
all fell to prayer and humbling ourselves before the Most High;
but, as we were thus engaged there smote us a furious squall
which tore the sails to rags and tatters: the anchor-cable parted
and, the ship foundering, we were cast into the sea, goods and
all. I kept myself afloat by swimming half the day, till, when I
had given myself up for lost, the Almighty threw in my way one of
the planks of the ship, whereon I and some others of the
merchants scrambled.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued as follows:--And when the ship foundered I
scrambled on to a plank with some others of the merchants and,
mounting it as we would a horse, paddled with our feet in the
sea. We abode thus a day and a night, the wind and waves helping
us on, and on the second day shortly before the mid-time between
sunrise and noon[FN#40] the breeze freshened and the sea wrought
and the rising waves cast us upon an island, well-nigh dead
bodies for weariness and want of sleep, cold and hunger and fear
and thirst. We walked about the shore and found abundance of
herbs, whereof we ate enough to keep breath in body and to stay
our failing spirits, then lay down and slept till morning hard by
the sea. And when morning came with its sheen and shone, we arose
and walked about the island to the right and left, till we came
in sight of an inhabited house afar off. So we made towards it,
and ceased not walking till we reached the door thereof when lo!
a number of naked men issued from it and without saluting us or a
word said, laid hold of us masterfully and carried us to their
king, who signed us to sit. So we sat down and they set food
before us such as we knew not[FN#41] and whose like we had never
seen in all our lives. My companions ate of it, for stress of
hunger, but my stomach revolted from it and I would not eat; and
my refraining from it was, by Allah's favour, the cause of my
being alive till now: for no sooner had my comrades tasted of it
than their reason fled and their condition changed and they began
to devour it like madmen possessed of an evil spirit. Then the
savages gave them to drink of cocoa-nut oil and anointed them
therewith; and straightway after drinking thereof, their eyes
turned into their heads and they fell to eating greedily, against
their wont. When I saw this, I was confounded and concerned for
them, nor was I less anxious about myself, for fear of the naked
folk. So I watched them narrowly, and it was not long before I
discovered them to be a tribe of Magian cannibals whose King was
a Ghul.[FN#42] All who came to their country or whoso they caught
in their valleys or on their roads they brought to this King and
fed them upon that food and anointed them with that oil,
whereupon their stomachs dilated that they might eat largely,
whilst their reason fled and they lost the power of thought and
became idiots. Then they stuffed them with cocoa-nut oil and the
aforesaid food, till they became fat and gross, when they
slaughtered them by cutting their throats and roasted them for
the King's eating; but, as for the savages themselves, they ate
human flesh raw.[FN#43] When I saw this, I was sore dismayed for
myself and my comrades, who were now become so stupefied that
they knew not what was done with them and the naked folk
committed them to one who used every day to lead them out and
pasture them on the island like cattle. And they wandered amongst
the trees and rested at will, thus waxing very fat. As for me, I
wasted away and became sickly for fear and hunger and my flesh
shrivelled on my bones; which when the savages saw, they left me
alone and took no thought of me and so far forgot me that one day
I gave them the slip and walking out of their place made for the
beach which was distant and there espied a very old man seated on
a high place, girt by the waters. I looked at him and knew him
for the herdsman, who had charge of pasturing my fellows, and
with him were many others in like case. As soon as he saw me, he
knew me to be in possession of my reason and not afflicted like
the rest whom he was pasturing; so signed to me from afar, as who
should say, "Turn back and take the right-hand road, for that
will lead thee into the King's highway." So I turned back, as he
bade me, and followed the right-hand road, now running for fear
and then walking leisurely to rest me, till I was out of the old
man's sight. By this time, the sun had gone down and the darkness
set in; so I sat down to rest and would have slept, but sleep
came not to me that night, for stress of fear and famine and
fatigue. When the night was half spent, I rose and walked on,
till the day broke in all its beauty and the sun rose over the
heads of the lofty hills and athwart the low gravelly plains. Now
I was weary and hungry and thirsty; so I ate my fill of herbs and
grasses that grew in the island and kept life in body and stayed
my stomach, after which I set out again and fared on all that day
and the next night, staying my greed with roots and herbs; nor
did I cease walking for seven days and their nights, till the
morn of the eighth day, when I caught sight of a faint object in
the distance. So I made towards it, though my heart quaked for
all I had suffered first and last, and behold it was a company of
men gathering pepper-grains.[FN#44] As soon as they saw me, they
hastened up to me and surrounding me on all sides, said to me,
"Who art thou and whence come?" I replied, "Know, O folk, that I
am a poor stranger," and acquainted them with my case and all the
hardships and perils I had suffered,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--And the men gathering pepper in the island
questioned me of my case, when I acquainted them with all the
hardships and perils I had suffered and how I had fled from the
savages; whereat they marvelled and gave me joy of my safety,
saying, "By Allah, this is wonderful! But how didst thou escape
from these blacks who swarm in the island and devour all who fall
in with them; nor is any safe from them, nor can any get out of
their clutches?" And after I had told them the fate of my
companions, they made me sit by them, till they got quit of their
work; and fetched me somewhat of good food, which I ate, for I
was hungry, and rested awhile, after which they took ship with me
and carrying me to their island-home brought me before their
King, who returned my salute and received me honourably and
questioned me of my case. I told him all that had befallen me,
from the day of my leaving Baghdad-city, whereupon he wondered
with great wonder at my adventures, he and his courtiers, and
bade me sit by him; then he called for food and I ate with him
what sufficed me and washed my hands and returned thanks to
Almighty Allah for all His favours praising Him and glorifying
Him. Then I left the King and walked for solace about the city,
which I found wealthy and populous, abounding in market-streets
well stocked with food and merchandise and full of buyers and
sellers. So I rejoiced at having reached so pleasant a place and
took my ease there after my fatigues; and I made friends with the
townsfolk, nor was it long before I became more in honour and
favour with them and their King than any of the chief men of the
realm. Now I saw that all the citizens, great and small, rode
fine horses, high-priced and thorough-bred, without saddles or
housings, whereat I wondered and said to the King, "Wherefore, O
my lord, dost thou not ride with a saddle? Therein is ease for
the rider and increase of power." "What is a saddle?" asked he:
"I never saw nor used such a thing in all my life;" and I
answered, "With thy permission I will make thee a saddle, that
thou mayest ride on it and see the comfort thereof." And quoth
he, "Do so." So quoth I to him, "Furnish me with some wood,"
which being brought, I sought me a clever carpenter and sitting
by him showed him how to make the saddle-tree, portraying for him
the fashion thereof in ink on the wood. Then I took wool and
teased it and made felt of it, and, covering the saddle-tree with
leather, stuffed it and polished it and attached the girth and
stirrup leathers; after which I fetched a blacksmith and
described to him the fashion of the stirrups and bridle-bit. So
he forged a fine pair of stirrups and a bit, and filed them
smooth and tinned[FN#45] them. Moreover, I made fast to them
fringes of silk and fitted bridle-leathers to the bit. Then I
fetched one of the best of the royal horses and saddling and
bridling him, hung the stirrups to the saddle and led him to the
King. The thing took his fancy and he thanked me; then he mounted
and rejoiced greatly in the saddle and rewarded me handsomely for
my work. When the King's Wazir saw the saddle, he asked of me one
like it and I made it for him. Furthermore, all the grandees and
officers of state came for saddles to me; so I fell to making
saddles (having taught the craft to the carpenter and
blacksmith), and selling them to all who sought, till I amassed
great wealth and became in high honour and great favour with the
King and his household and grandees. I abode thus till, one day,
as I was sitting with the King in all respect and contentment, he
said to me, "Know thou, O such an one, thou art become one of us,
dear as a brother, and we hold thee in such regard and affection
that we cannot part with thee nor suffer thee to leave our city;
wherefore I desire of thee obedience in a certain matter, and I
will not have thee gainsay me." Answered I, "O King, what is it
thou desirest of me? Far be it from me to gainsay thee in aught,
for I am indebted to thee for many favours and bounties and much
kindness, and (praised be Allah!) I am become one of thy
servants." Quoth he, "I have a mind to marry thee to a fair,
clever and agreeable wife who is wealthy as she is beautiful; so
thou mayst be naturalised and domiciled with us: I will lodge
thee with me in my palace; wherefore oppose me not neither cross
me in this." When I heard these words I was ashamed and held my
peace nor could make him any answer,[FN#46] by reason of my much
bashfulness before him. Asked he, "Why dost thou not reply to me,
O my son?"; and I answered saying, "O my master, it is thine to
command, O King of the age!" So he summoned the Kazi and the
witnesses and married me straightway to a lady of a noble tree
and high pedigree; wealthy in moneys and means; the flower of an
ancient race; of surpassing beauty and grace, and the owner of
farms and estates and many a dwelling-place.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued in these words:--Now after the King my master
had married me to this choice wife, he also gave me a great and
goodly house standing alone, together with slaves and officers,
and assigned me pay and allowances. So I became in all ease and
contentment and delight and forgot everything which had befalled
me of weariness and trouble and hardship; for I loved my wife
with fondest love and she loved me no less, and we were as one
and abode in the utmost comfort of life and in its happiness. And
I said in myself, "When I return to my native land, I will carry
her with me." But whatso is predestined to a man, that needs must
be, and none knoweth what shall befal him. We lived thus a great
while, till Almighty Allah bereft one of my neighbours of his
wife. Now he was a gossip of mine; so hearing the cry of the
keeners I went in to condole with him on his loss and found him
in very ill plight, full of trouble and weary of soul and mind. I
condoled with him and comforted him, saying, "Mourn not for thy
wife who hath now found the mercy of Allah; the Lord will surely
give thee a better in her stead and thy name shall be great and
thy life shall be long in the land, Inshallah!"[FN#47] But he
wept bitter tears and replied, "O my friend, how can I marry
another wife and how shall Allah replace her to me with a better
than she, whenas I have but one day left to live?" "O my
brother," said I, "return to thy senses and announce not the glad
tidings of thine own death, for thou art well, sound and in good
case." "By thy life, O my friend," rejoined he, "to-morrow thou
wilt lose me and wilt never see me again till the Day of
Resurrection." I asked, "How so?" and he answered, "This very day
they bury my wife, and they bury me with her in one tomb; for it
is the custom with us, if the wife die first, to bury the husband
alive with her and in like manner the wife, if the husband die
first; so that neither may enjoy life after losing his or her
mate." "By Allah," cried I, "this is a most vile, lewd custom and
not to be endured of any!" Meanwhile, behold, the most part of
the townsfolk came in and fell to condoling with my gossip for
his wife and for himself. Presently they laid the dead woman out,
as was their wont; and, setting her on a bier, carried her and
her husband without the city, till they came to a place in the
side of the mountain at the end of the island by the sea; and
here they raised a great rock and discovered the mouth of a
stone-rivetted pit or well,[FN#48] leading down into a vast
underground cavern that ran beneath the mountain. Into this pit
they threw the corpse, then tying a rope of palm-fibres under the
husband's armpits, they let him down into the cavern, and with
him a great pitcher of fresh water and seven scones by was of
viaticum.[FN#49] When he came to the bottom, he loosed himself
from the rope and they drew it up; and, stopping the mouth of the
pit with the great stone, they returned to the city, leaving my
friend in the cavern with his dead wife. When I saw this, I said
to myself, "By Allah, this fashion of death is more grievous than
the first!" And I went in to the King and said to him, "O my
lord, why do ye bury the quick with the dead?" Quoth he, "It hath
been the custom, thou must know, of our forbears and our olden
Kings from time immemorial, if the husband die first, to bury his
wife with him, and the like with the wife, so we may not sever
them, alive or dead." I asked, "O King of the age, if the wife of
a foreigner like myself die among you, deal ye with him as with
yonder man?"; and he answered, "Assuredly, we do with him even as
thou hast seen." When I heard this, my gall-bladder was like to
burst, for the violence of my dismay and concern for myself: my
wit became dazed; I felt as if in a vile dungeon; and hated their
society; for I went about in fear lest my wife should die before
me and they bury me alive with her. However, after a while, I
comforted myself, saying, "Haply I shall predecease her, or shall
have returned to my own land before she die, for none knoweth
which shall go first and which shall go last." Then I applied
myself to diverting my mind from this thought with various
occupations; but it was not long before my wife sickened and
complained and took to her pillow and fared after a few days to
the mercy of Allah; and the King and the rest of the folk came,
as was their wont, to condole with me and her family and to
console us for her loss and not less to condole with me for
myself. Then the women washed her and arraying her in her richest
raiment and golden ornaments, necklaces and jewellery, laid her
on the bier and bore her to the mountain aforesaid, where they
lifted the cover of the pit and cast her in; after which all my
intimates and acquaintances and my wife's kith and kin came round
me, to farewell me in my lifetime and console me for my own
death, whilst I cried out among them, saying, "Almighty Allah
never made it lawful to bury the quick with the dead! I am a
stranger, not one of your kind; and I cannot abear your custom,
and had I known it I never would have wedded among you!" They
heard me not and paid no heed to my words, but laying hold of me,
bound me by force and let me down into the cavern, with a large
gugglet of sweet water and seven cakes of bread, according to
their custom. When I came to the bottom, they called out to me to
cast myself loose from the cords, but I refused to do so; so they
threw them down on me and, closing the mouth of the pit with the
stones aforesaid, went their ways,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--When they left me in the cavern with my dead
wife and, closing the mouth of the pit, went their ways, I looked
about me and found myself in a vast cave full of dead bodies,
that exhaled a fulsome and loathsome smell and the air was heavy
with the groans of the dying. Thereupon I fell to blaming myself
for what I had done, saying, "By Allah, I deserve all that hath
befallen me and all that shall befal me! What curse was upon me
to take a wife in this city? There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! As often as I say,
I have escaped from one calamity, I fall into a worse. By Allah,
this is an abominable death to die! Would Heaven I had died a
decent death and been washed and shrouded like a man and a
Moslem. Would I had been drowned at sea or perished in the
mountains! It were better than to die this miserable death!" And
on such wise I kept blaming my own folly and greed of gain in
that black hole, knowing not night from day; and I ceased not to
ban the Foul Fiend and to bless the Almighty Friend. Then I threw
myself down on the bones of the dead and lay there, imploring
Allah's help and in the violence of my despair, invoking death
which came not to me, till the fire of hunger burned my stomach
and thirst set my throat aflame when I sat up and feeling for the
bread, ate a morsel and upon it swallowed a mouthful of water.
After this, the worst night I ever knew, I arose, and exploring
the cavern, found that it extended a long way with hollows in its
sides; and its floor was strewn with dead bodies and rotten
bones, that had lain there from olden time. So I made myself a
place in a cavity of the cavern, afar from the corpses lately
thrown down and there slept. I abode thus a long while, till my
provision was like to give out; and yet I ate not save once every
day or second day; nor did I drink more than an occasional
draught, for fear my victual should fail me before my death; and
I said to myself, "Eat little and drink little; belike the Lord
shall vouchsafe deliverance to thee!" One day, as I sat thus,
pondering my case and bethinking me how I should do, when my
bread and water should be exhausted, behold, the stone that
covered the opening was suddenly rolled away and the light
streamed down upon me. Quoth I, "I wonder what is the matter:
haply they have brought another corpse." Then I espied folk
standing about the mouth of the pit, who presently let down a
dead man and a live woman, weeping and bemoaning herself, and
with her an ampler supply of bread and water than usual.[FN#50] I
saw her and she was a beautiful woman; but she saw me not; and
they closed up the opening and went away. Then I took the leg-
bone of a dead man and, going up to the woman, smote her on the
crown of the head; and she cried one cry and fell down in a
swoon. I smote her a second and a third time, till she was dead,
when I laid hands on her bread and water and found on her great
plenty of ornaments and rich apparel, necklaces, jewels and gold
trinkets;[FN#51] for it was their custom to bury women in all
their finery. I carried the vivers to my sleeping place in the
cavern-side and ate and drank of them sparingly, no more than
sufficed to keep the life in me, lest the provaunt come speedily
to an end and I perish of hunger and thirst. Yet did I never
wholly lose hope in Almighty Allah. I abode thus a great while,
killing all the live folk they let down into the cavern and
taking their provisions of meat and drink; till one day, as I
slept, I was awakened by something scratching and burrowing among
the bodies in a corner of the cave and said, "What can this be?"
fearing wolves or hyaenas. So I sprang up and seizing the leg-
bone aforesaid, made for the noise. As soon as the thing was ware
of me, it fled from me into the inward of the cavern, and lo! it
was a wild beast. However, I followed it to the further end, till
I saw afar off a point of light not bigger than a star, now
appearing and then disappearing. So I made for it, and as I drew
near, it grew larger and brighter, till I was certified that it
was a crevice in the rock, leading to the open country; and I
said to myself, "There must be some reason for this opening:
either it is the mouth of a second pit, such as that by which
they let me down, or else it is a natural fissure in the
stonery." So I bethought me awhile and nearing the light, found
that it came from a breach in the back side of the mountain,
which the wild beasts had enlarged by burrowing, that they might
enter and devour the dead and freely go to and fro. When I saw
this, my spirits revived and hope came back to me and I made sure
of life, after having died a death. So I went on, as in a dream,
and making shift to scramble through the breach found myself on
the slope of a high mountain, overlooking the salt sea and
cutting off all access thereto from the island, so that none
could come at that part of the beach from the city.[FN#52] I
praised my Lord and thanked Him, rejoicing greatly and heartening
myself with the prospect of deliverance; then I returned through
the crack to t