 of sea-monsters, where it broke up
and fell asunder into planks and all and everything on board were
plunged into the sea. As for me, I tore off all my clothes but my
gown and swam a little way, till I happened upon one of the
ship's planks whereto I clung and bestrode it like a horse,
whilst the winds and the waters sported with me and the waves
carried me up and cast me down; and I was in most piteous plight
for fear and distress and hunger and thirst. Then I reproached
myself for what I had done and my soul was weary after a life of
ease and comfort; and I said to myself, "O Sindbad, O Seaman,
thou repentest not and yet thou art ever suffering hardships and
travails; yet wilt thou not renounce sea-travel; or, an thou say,
'I renounce,' thou liest in thy renouncement. Endure then with
patience that which thou sufferest, for verily thou deservest all
that betideth thee!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman continued:--But when I had bestridden the plank, quoth I
to myself, "Thou deservest all that betideth thee. All this is
decreed to me of Allah (whose name be exalted!), to turn me from
my greed of gain, whence ariseth all that I endure, for I have
wealth galore." Then I returned to my senses and said, "In very
sooth, this time I repent to the Most High, with a sincere
repentance, of my lust for gain and venture; and never will I
again name travel with tongue nor in thought." And I ceased not
to humble myself before Almighty Allah and weep and bewail
myself, recalling my former estate of solace and satisfaction and
mirth and merriment and joyance; and thus I abode two days, at
the end of which time I came to a great island abounding in trees
and streams. There I landed and ate of the fruits of the island
and drank of its waters, till I was refreshed and my life
returned to me and my strength and spirits were restored and I
recited,

"Oft when thy case shows knotty and tangled skein, * Fate downs
     from Heaven and straightens every ply:
In patience keep thy soul till clear thy lot * For He who ties
     the knot can eke untie."

Then I walked about, till I found on the further side, a great
river of sweet water, running with a strong current; whereupon I
called to mind the boat-raft I had made aforetime and said to
myself, "Needs must I make another; haply I may free me from this
strait. If I escape, I have my desire and I vow to Allah Almighty
to foreswear travel; and if I perish I shall be at peace and
shall rest from toil and moil." So I rose up and gathered
together great store of pieces of wood from the trees (which were
all of the finest sanders-wood, whose like is not albe I knew it
not), and made shift to twist creepers and tree-twigs into a kind
of rope, with which I bound the billets together and so contrived
a raft. Then saying, "An I be saved, 'tis of God's grace," I
embarked thereon and committed myself to the current, and it bore
me on for the first day and the second and the third after
leaving the island; whilst I lay in the raft, eating not and
drinking, when I was athirst, of the water of the river, till I
was weak and giddy as a chicken, for stress of fatigue and famine
and fear. At the end of this time I came to a high mountain,
whereunder ran the river; which when I saw, I feared for my life
by reason of the straitness I had suffered in my former journey,
and I would fain have stayed the raft and landed on the mountain-
side; but the current overpowered me and drew it into the
subterranean passage like an archway; whereupon I gave myself up
for lost and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" However, after a little,
the raft glided into open air and I saw before me a wide valley,
whereinto the river fell with a noise like the rolling of thunder
and a swiftness as the rushing of the wind. I held on to the
raft, for fear of falling off it, whilst the waves tossed me
right and left; and the craft continued to descend with the
current nor could I avail to stop it nor turn it shorewards, till
it stopped with me at a great and goodly city, grandly edified
and containing much people. And when the townsfolk saw me on the
raft, dropping down with the current, they threw me out ropes
which I had not strength enough to hold; then they tossed a net
over the craft and drew it ashore with me, whereupon I fell to
the ground amidst them, as I were a dead man, for stress of fear
and hunger and lack of sleep. After awhile, there came up to me
out of the crowd an old man of reverend aspect, well stricken in
years, who welcomed me and threw over me abundance of handsome
clothes, wherewith I covered my nakedness. Then he carried me to
the Hammam-bath and brought me cordial sherbets and delicious
perfumes; moreover, when I came out, he bore me to his house,
where his people made much of me and, seating me in a pleasant
place, set rich food before me, whereof I ate my fill and
returned thanks to God the Most High for my deliverance.
Thereupon his pages fetched me hot water, and I washed my hands,
and his handmaids brought me silken napkins, with which I dried
them and wiped my mouth. Also the Shaykh set apart for me an
apartment in a part of his house and charged his pages and slave-
girls to wait upon me and do my will and supply my wants. They
were assiduous in my service, and I abode with him in the guest-
chamber three days, taking my ease of good eating and good
drinking and good scents till life returned to me and my terrors
subsided and my heart was calmed and my mind was eased. On the
fourth day the Shaykh, my host, came in to me and said, "Thou
cheerest us with thy company, O my son, and praised be Allah for
thy safety! Say: wilt thou now come down with me to the beach and
the bazar and sell thy goods and take their price? Belike thou
mayst buy thee wherewithal to traffic. I have ordered my servants
to remove thy stock-in-trade from the sea and they have piled it
on the shore." I was silent awhile and said to myself, "What mean
these words and what goods have I?" Then said he, "O my son, be
not troubled nor careful, but come with me to the market and if
any offer for thy goods what price contenteth thee, take it; but,
an thou be not satisfied, I will lay them up for thee in my
warehouse, against a fitting occasion for sale." So I bethought
me of my case and said to myself, "Do his bidding and see what
are these goods!"; and I said to him, "O my nuncle the Shaykh, I
hear and I obey; I may not gainsay thee in aught for Allah's
blessing is on all thou dost." Accordingly he guided me to the
market-street, where I found that he had taken in pieces the raft
which carried me and which was of sandal-wood and I heard the
broker calling it for sale.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman thus resumed his tale:--I found that the Shaykh had taken
to pieces my raft which lay on the beach and the broker was
crying the sandal-wood for sale. Then the merchants came and
opened the gate of bidding for the wood and bid against one
another till its price reached a thousand dinars, when they left
bidding and my host said to me, "Hear, O my son, this is the
current price of thy goods in hard times like these: wilt thou
sell them for this or shall I lay them up for thee in my
storehouses, till such time as prices rise?" "O my lord,"
answered I, "the business is in thy hands: do as thou wilt." Then
asked he, "Wilt thou sell the wood to me, O my son, for an
hundred gold pieces over and above what the merchants have bidden
for it?" and I answered, "Yes, I have sold it to thee for monies
received."[FN#92] So, he bade his servants transport the wood to
his storehouses and, carrying me back to his house, seated me and
counted out to me the purchase money; after which he laid it in
bags and setting them in a privy place, locked them up with an
iron padlock and gave me its key. Some days after this, the
Shaykh said to me, "O my son, I have somewhat to propose to thee,
wherein I trust thou wilt do my bidding." Quoth I, "What is it?"
Quoth he, "I am a very old man and have no son; but I have a
daughter who is young in years and fair of favour and endowed
with abounding wealth and beauty. Now I have a mind to marry her
to thee, that thou mayst abide with her in this our country, and
I will make thee master of all I have in hand for I am an old man
and thou shalt stand in my stead." I was silent for shame and
made him no answer, whereupon he continued, "Do my desire in
this, O my son, for I wish but thy weal; and if thou wilt but do
as I say, thou shalt have her at once and be as my son; and all
that is under my hand or that cometh to me shall be thine. If
thou have a mind to traffic and travel to thy native land, none
shall hinder thee, and thy property will be at thy sole disposal;
so do as thou wilt." "By Allah, O my uncle," replied I, "thou art
become to me even as my father, and I am a stranger and have
undergone many hardships: while for stress of that which I have
suffered naught of judgment or knowledge is left to me. It is for
thee, therefore, to decide what I shall do." Hereupon he sent his
servants for the Kazi and the witnesses and married me to his
daughter making us for a noble marriage-feast[FN#93] and high
festival. When I went in to her, I found her perfect in beauty
and loveliness and symmetry and grace, clad in rich raiment and
covered with a profusion of ornaments and necklaces and other
trinkets of gold and silver and precious stones, worth a mint of
money, a price none could pay. She pleased me and we loved each
other; and I abode with her in solace and delight of life, till
her father was taken to the mercy of Allah Almighty. So we
shrouded him and buried him, and I laid hands on the whole of his
property and all his servants and slaves became mine. Moreover,
the merchants installed me in his office, for he was their Shaykh
and their Chief; and none of them purchased aught but with his
knowledge and by his leave. And now his rank passed on to me.
When I became acquainted with the townsfolk, I found that at the
beginning of each month they were transformed, in that their
faces changed and they became like birds and they put forth wings
wherewith they flew unto the upper regions of the firmament and
none remained in the city save the women and children; and I said
in my mind, "When the first of the month cometh, I will ask one
of them to carry me with them, whither they go." So when the time
came and their complexion changed and their forms altered, I went
in to one of the townsfolk and said to him, "Allah upon thee!
carry me with thee, that I might divert myself with the rest and
return with you." "This may not be," answered he; but I ceased
not to solicit him and I importuned him till he consented. Then I
went out in his company, without telling any of my family[FN#94]
or servants or friends, and he took me on his back and flew up
with me so high in air, that I heard the angels glorifying God in
the heavenly dome, whereat I wondered and exclaimed, "Praised be
Allah! Extolled be the perfection of Allah!" Hardly had I made an
end of pronouncing the Tasbih--praised be Allah!--when there came
out a fire from heaven and all but consumed the company;
whereupon they fled from it and descended with curses upon me
and, casting me down on a high mountain, went away, exceeding
wroth with me, and left me there alone. As I found myself in this
plight, I repented of what I had done and reproached myself for
having undertaken that for which I was unable, saying, "There is
no Majesty and there is no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great! No sooner am I delivered from one affliction than I
fall into a worse." And I continued in this case knowing not
whither I should go, when lo! there came up two young men, as
they were moons, each using as a staff a rod of red gold. So I
approached them and saluted them; and when they returned my
salam, I said to them, "Allah upon you twain; who are ye and what
are ye?" Quoth they, "We are of the servants of the Most High
Allah, abiding in this mountain;" and, giving me a rod of red
gold they had with them, went their ways and left me. I walked on
along the mountain-ridge staying my steps with the staff and
pondering the case of the two youths, when behold, a serpent came
forth from under the mountain, with a man in her[FN#95] jaws,
whom she had swallowed even to below his navel, and he was crying
out and saying, "Whoso delivereth me, Allah will deliver him from
all adversity!" So I went up to the serpent and smote her on the
head with the golden staff, whereupon she cast the man forth of
her mouth.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sindbad the
Seaman thus continued:--When I smote the serpent on the head with
my golden staff she cast the man forth of her mouth. Then I smote
her a second time, and she turned and fled; whereupon he came up
to me and said, "Since my deliverance from yonder serpent hath
been at thy hands I will never leave thee, and thou shalt be my
comrade on this mountain." "And welcome," answered I; so we fared
on along the mountain, till we fell in with a company of folk,
and I looked and saw amongst them the very man who had carried me
and cast me down there. I went up to him and spake him fair,
excusing myself to him and saying, "O my comrade, it is not thus
that friend should deal with friend." Quoth he, "It was thou who
well-nigh destroyed us by thy Tasbih and thy glorifying God on my
back." Quoth I, "Pardon me, for I had no knowledge of this
matter; but, if thou wilt take me with thee, I swear not to say a
word." So he relented and consented to carry me with him, but he
made an express condition that, so long as I abode on his back, I
should abstain from pronouncing the Tasbih or otherwise
glorifying God. Then I gave the wand of gold to him whom I had
delivered from the serpent and bade him farewell, and my friend
took me on his back and flew with me as before, till he brought
me to the city and set me down in my own house. My wife came to
meet me and saluting me gave me joy of my safety and then said,
"Beware of going forth hereafter with yonder folk, neither
consort with them, for they are brethren of the devils, and know
not how to mention the name of Allah Almighty; neither worship
they Him." "And how did thy father with them?" asked I; and she
answered, "My father was not of them, neither did he as they; and
as now he is dead methinks thou hadst better sell all we have and
with the price buy merchandise and journey to thine own country
and people, and I with thee; for I care not to tarry in this
city, my father and my mother being dead." So I sold all the
Shaykh's property piecemeal, and looked for one who should be
journeying thence to Bassorah that I might join myself to him.
And while thus doing I heard of a company of townsfolk who had a
mind to make the voyage, but could not find them a ship; so they
bought wood and built them a great ship wherein I took passage
with them, and paid them all the hire. Then we embarked, I and my
wife, with all our moveables, leaving our houses and domains and
so forth, and set sail, and ceased not sailing from island to
island and from sea to sea, with a fair wind and a favouring,
till we arrived at Bassorah safe and sound. I made no stay there,
but freighted another vessel and, transferring my goods to her,
set out forthright for Baghdad-city, where I arrived in safety,
and entering my quarter and repairing to my house, foregathered
with my family and friends and familiars who laid up my goods in
my warehouses. When my people who, reckoning the period of my
absence on this my seventh voyage, had found it to be seven and
twenty years, and had given up all hope of me, heard of my
return, they came to welcome me and to give me joy of my safety;
and I related to them all that had befallen me; whereat they
marvelled with exceeding marvel. Then I forswore travel and vowed
to Allah the Most High I would venture no more by land or sea,
for that this seventh and last voyage had surfeited me of travel
and adventure; and I thanked the Lord (be He praised and
glorified!), and blessed Him for having restored me to my kith
and kin and country and home. "Consider, therefore, O Sindbad, O
Landsman," continued Sindbad the Seaman, "what sufferings I have
undergone and what perils and hardships I have endured before
coming to my present state." "Allah upon thee, O my Lord!"
answered Sindbad the Landsman, "pardon me the wrong I did
thee."[FN#96] And they ceased not from friendship and fellowship,
abiding in all cheer and pleasures and solace of life till there
came to them the Destoyer of delights and the Sunderer of
Societies, and the Shatterer of palaces and the Caterer for
Cemeteries to wit, the Cup of Death, and glory be to the Living
One who dieth not!"[FN#97]




                        A Translation of
            The Seventh Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman
                                
                          according to
                       the version of the
                        Calcutta Edition
                                
                which differs in essential form
                       from the preceding
                              tale


Know, O my brothers and friends and companions all, that when I
left voyaging and commercing, I said in myself, "Sufficeth me
that hath befallen me;" and I spent my time in solace and
pleasure. One day as I sat at home there came a knock at the
door, and when the porter opened a page entered and said, "The
Caliph biddeth thee to him." I went with him to the King's
majesty and kissed ground and saluted him; whereupon he welcomed
me and entreated me with honour and said, "O Sindbad, I have an
occasion for thee: wilt thou do it?" So I kissed his hand and
asked him, saying, "O my lord, what occasion hath the master for
the slave?"; whereto he answered me, "I am minded that thou
travel to the King of Sarandib and carry to him our writ and our
gift, for that he hath sent to us a present and a letter. I
trembled at these words and rejoined, "By Allah the Omnipotent, O
my lord, I have taken a loathing to wayfare, and when I hear the
words 'Voyage' or 'Travel,' my limbs tremble for what hath
befallen me of hardships and horrors. Indeed I have no desire
whatever for this; more by token as I have bound myself by oath
not to quit Baghdad." Then I informed the Caliph of all I had
passed through from first to last, and he marvelled with
exceeding marvel and said, "By the Almighty, O Sindbad, from ages
of old such mishaps as happened to thee were never know to happen
to any, and thou dost only right never even to talk of travel.
For our sake, however, thou wilt go this time and carry our
present and our letter to him of Sarandib; and Inshallah--by
God's leave!--thou shalt return quickly; and on this wise we
shall be under no obligation to the said King." I replied that I
heard and obeyed, being unable to oppose his command, so he gave
me the gifts and the missive with money to pay my way and I
kissed hands and left the presence. Then I dropped down from
Baghdad to the Gulf, and with other merchants embarked, and our
ship sailed before a fair wind many days and nights till, by
Allah's aid, we reached the island of Sarandib. As soon as we had
made fast we landed and I took the present and the letter; and,
going in with them to the King, kissed ground before him. When he
saw me, he said, "Well come, O Sindbad! By Allah Omnipotent we
were longing to see thee, and glory be to God who hath again
shown us thy face!" Then taking me by the hand he made me sit by
his side, rejoicing, and he welcomed me with familiar kindness
again and entreated me as a friend. After this he began to
converse with me and courteously addressed me and asked, "What
was the cause of thy coming to us, O Sindbad?" So after kissing
his hand and thanking him I answered, "O my lord, I have brought
thee a present from my master, the Caliph Harun Al-Rashid;" and
offered him the present and the letter which he read and at which
he rejoiced with passing joy. The present consisted of a mare
worth ten thousand ducats, bearing a golden saddle set with
jewels; a book; a sumptuous suit of clothes and an hundred
different kinds of white Cairene cloths and silks of Suez,[FN#98]
Cufa and Alexandria; Greek carpets and an hundred maunds[FN#99]
weight of linen and raw silk. Moreover there was a wondrous
rarety, a marvellous cup of crystal middlemost of which was the
figure of a lion faced by a kneeling man grasping a bow with
arrow drawn to the very head, together with the food-tray[FN#100]
of Sulayman the son of David (on whom be peace!). The missive ran
as follows, "Peace from King Al-Rashid, the aided of Allah (who
hath vouchsafed to him and his forefathers noble rank and wide-
spread glory), be on the fortunate Sultan. But after. Thy letter
came to our hands and we rejoiced thereat; and we have sent the
book entitled 'Delight of the Intelligent and for Friends the
Rare Present,'[FN#101] together with sundry curiosities suitable
for Kings; so do thou favour us by accepting them: and peace be
with thee!" Then the King lavished upon me much wealth and
entreated me with all honour; so I prayed for him and thanked him
for his munificence. Some days after I craved his leave to
depart, but could not obtain it except by great pressing,
whereupon I farewelled him and fared forth from his city, with
merchants and other companions, homewards-bound without any
desire for travel or companions, homewards-bound without any
desire for travel or trade. We continued voyaging and coasting
along many islands; but, when we were half-way, we were
surrounded by a number of canoes, wherein were men like devils
armed with bows and arrows, swords and daggers; habited in mail-
coats and other armoury. They fell upon us and wounded and slew
all who opposed them; then, having captured the ship and her
contents, carried us to an island, where they sold us at the
meanest price. Now I was bought by a wealthy man who, taking me
to his house, gave me meat and drink and clothing and treated me
in the friendliest manner; so I was heartened and I rested a
little. One day he asked me, "Dost thou know any art or craft?"
and I answered him, "O my lord, I am a merchant and know nothing
but trade and traffic." "Dost thou know," rejoined he, "how to
use bow and arrow?" "Yes," replied I, "I know that much."
Thereupon he brought me a bow and arrows and mounted me behind
him upon an elephant: then he set out as night was well nigh over
and, passing through a forest of huge growths, came to a tall and
sturdy tree up which he made me climb. Then he gave me the bow
and arrows, saying, "Sit here now, and when the elephants troop
hither in early morning, shoot at them; belike thou wilt hit one;
and, if he fall, come and tell me." With this he left me. I hid
myself in the tree being in sore terror and trembled till the sun
arose; and, when the elephants appeared and wandered about among
the trees, I shot my arrows at them and continued till I had shot
down one of them. In the evening I reported my success to my
master who was delighted in me and entreated me with high honour;
and next morning he removed the slain elephant. In this wise I
continued, every morning shooting an elephant which my master
would remove till, one day, as I was perched in hiding on the
tree there came on suddenly and unexpectedly an innumerable host
of elephants whose screaming and trumpeting were such that I
imagined the earth trembled under them. All surrounded my tree,
whose circumference was some fifty cubits,[FN#102] and one
enormous monster came up to it and winding his trunk round the
bole haled it up by the roots, and dashed it to the ground. I
fell down fainting amongst the beasts when the monster elephant
wound his trunk about me and, setting me on his back, went off
with me, the others accompanying us. He carried me still
unconscious till he reached the place for which he was making,
when he rolled me off his back and presently went his ways
followed by the others. So I rested a little; and, when my terror
had subsided, I looked about me and I found myself among the
bones of elephants, whereby I concluded that this was their
burial-place, and that the monster elephant had led me thither on
account of the tusks.[FN#103] So I arose and walked a whole day
and night till I arrived at the house of my master, who saw my
colour changed by stress of affright and famine. He rejoiced in
my return and said to me, "By Allah, thou hast made my heart
sore! I went when thou wast missing and found the tree torn up,
and thought that the elephants had slain thee. Tell me how it was
with thee." I acquainted him with all that had betided me;
whereat he wondered greatly, and rejoiced and at last asked me,
"Dost thou know the place?"; whereto I answered, "Yes, O my
master!" So we mounted an elephant and fared until we came to the
spot and, when my master beheld the heaps of tusks, he rejoiced
greatly; then carrying away as many as he wanted he returned with
me home. After this, he entreated me with increased favour and
said, "O my son, thou hast shown us the way to great gain,
wherefore Allah requite thee! Thou art freed for the Almighty's
sake and before His face! The elephants used to destroy many of
us on account of our hunting them for their ivories and
sorivellos; but Allah hath preserved thee from them, and thou
hast profited us by the heaps to which thou hast led us." "O my
master," replied I, "God free thy neck from the fire! And do thou
grant me, O my master, thy gracious leave to return to my own
country." "Yes" quoth he, "thou shalt have that permission. But
we have a yearly fair, when merchants come to us from various
quarters to buy up these ivories. The time is drawing near; and,
when they shall have done their business, I will send thee under
their charge and will give thee wherewithal to reach thy home."
So I blessed and thanked him and remained with him, treated with
respect and honour, for some days, when the merchants came as he
had foretold, and bought and sold and bartered; and when they had
made their preparations to return, my master came to me and said,
"Rise and get thee ready to travel with the traders en route to
thy country." They had bought a number of tusks which they had
bound together in loads and were embarking them when my master
sent me with them, paying for my passage and settling all my
debts; besides which he gave me a large present in goods. We set
out and voyaged from island to island till we had crossed the sea
and landed on the shores of the Persian Gulf, when the merchants
brought out and sold their stores: I also sold what I had at a
high profit; and I bought some of the prettiest things in the
place for presents and beautiful rareties and everything else I
wanted. I likewise bought for myself a beast and we fared forth
and crossed the deserts from country to country till I reached
Baghdad. Here I went in to the Caliph and, after saluting him and
kissing hands, informed him of all that had befallen me;
whereupon he rejoiced in my safety and thanked Almighty Allah;
and he bade my story be written in letters of gold. I then
entered my house and met my family and brethren: and such is the
end of the history that happened to me during my seven voyages.
Praise be to Allah, the One, the Creator, the Maker of all things
in Heaven and Earth!--

Now when Shahrazad had ended her story of the two Sindbads,
Dinarzad exclaimed, "O my sister, how pleasant is thy tale and
how tasteful! How sweet and how grateful!" She replied, "And what
is this compared with that I could tell thee tomorrow night?"
Quoth the King, "What may it be?" And she said:--It is a tale
touching



               THE CITY OF BRASS.[FN#104]       



It is related that there was, in tide of yore and in times and
years long gone before, at Damascus of Syria, a Caliph known as
Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, the fifth of the Ommiade house. As this
Commander of the Faithful was seated one day in his palace,
conversing with his Sultans and Kings and the Grandees of his
empire, the talk turned upon the legends of past peoples and the
traditions of our lord Solomon, David's son (on the twain be
peace!), and on that which Allah Almighty had bestowed on him of
lordship and dominion over men and Jinn and birds and beasts and
reptiles and the wind and other created things; and quoth the
Caliph, "Of a truth we hear from those who forewent us that the
Lord (extolled and exalted be He!) vouchsafed unto none the like
of that which He vouchsafed unto our lord Solomon and that he
attained unto that whereto never attained other than he, in that
he was wont to imprison Jinns and Marids and Satans in cucurbites
of copper and to stop them with lead and seal[FN#105] them with
his ring."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph Abd al-Malik bin Marwan sat conversing with his Grandees
concerning our lord Solomon, and these noted what Allah had
bestowed upon him of lordship and dominion, quoth the Commander
of the Faithful, "Indeed he attained unto that whereto never
attained other than he, in that he was wont to imprison Jinns and
Marids and Satans in cucurbites of copper and stop them with lead
and seal them with his ring." Then said Talib bin Sahl (who was a
seeker after treasures and had books that discovered to him
hoards and wealth hidden under the earth), "O Commander of the
Faithful,--Allah make thy dominion to endure and exalt thy
dignity here and hereafter!--my father told me of my grandfather,
that he once took ship with a company, intending for the island
of Sikiliyah or Sicily, and sailed until there arose against them
a contrary wind, which drove them from their course and brought
them, after a month, to a great mountain in one of the lands of
Allah the Most High, but where that land was they wot not. Quoth
my grandfather:--‘This was in the darkness of the night and as
soon as it was day, there came forth to us, from the caves of the
mountain, folk black of colour and naked of body, as they were
wild beasts, understanding not one word of what was addressed to
them; nor was there any of them who knew Arabic, save their King
who was of their own kind. When he saw the ship, he came down to
it with a company of his followers and saluting us, bade us
welcome and questioned us of our case and our faith. We told him
all concerning ourselves and he said, ‘Be of good cheer for no
harm shall befal you.' And when we, in turn, asked them of their
faith, we found that each was of one of the many creeds
prevailing before the preaching of Al-Islam and the mission of
Mohammed, whom may Allah bless and keep! So my shipmates
remarked, We wot not what thou sayest.' Then quoth the King, ‘No
Adam-son hath ever come to our land before you: but fear not, and
rejoice in the assurance of safety and of return to your own
country.' Then he entertained us three days, feeding us on the
flesh of birds and wild beasts and fishes, than which they had no
other meat; and, on the fourth day, he carried us down to the
beach, that we might divert ourselves by looking upon the fisher-
folk. There we saw a man casting his net to catch fish, and
presently he pulled them up and behold, in them was a cucurbite
of copper, stopped with lead and sealed with the signet of
Solomon, son of David, on whom be peace! He brought the vessel to
land and broke it open, when there came forth a smoke, which rose
a-twisting blue to the zenith, and we heard a horrible voice,
saying, ‘I repent! I repent! Pardon, O Prophet of Allah! I will
never return to that which I did aforetime.' Then the smoke
became a terrible Giant frightful of form, whose head was level
with the mountain-tops, and he vanished from our sight, whilst
our hearts were well-nigh torn out for terror; but the blacks
thought nothing of it. Then we returned to the King and
questioned him of the matter; whereupon quoth he, ‘Know that this
was one of the Jinns whom Solomon, son of David, being wroth with
them, shut up in these vessels and cast into the sea, after
stopping the mouths with melted lead. Our fishermen ofttimes, in
casting their nets, bring up such bottles, which being broken
open, there come forth of them Jinnis who, deeming that Solomon
is still alive and can pardon them, make their submission to him
and say, I repent, O Prophet of Allah!'" The Caliph marvelled at
Talib's story and said, "Glory be to God! Verily, to Solomon was
given a mighty dominion." Now al-Nábighah al-Zubyání[FN#106] was
present, and he said, "Talib hath spoken soothly as is proven by
the saying of the All-wise, the Primæval One, 

‘And Solomon, when Allah to him said, * ‘Rise, be thou Caliph,
     rule with righteous sway:
Honour obedience for obeying thee; * And who rebels imprison him
     for aye'

Wherefore he used to put them in copper-bottles and cast them
into the sea." The poet's words seemed good to the Caliph, and he
said, "By Allah, I long to look upon some of these Solomonic
vessels, which must be a warning to whoso will be warned." "O
Commander of the Faithful," replied Talib, "it is in thy power to
do so, without stirring abroad. Send to thy brother Abd al-Aziz
bin Marwán, so he may write to Músá bin Nusayr,[FN#107] governor
of the Maghrib or Morocco, bidding him take horse thence to the
mountains whereof I spoke and fetch thee therefrom as many of
such cucurbites as thou hast a mind to; for those mountains
adjoin the frontiers of his province." The Caliph approved his
counsel and said "Thou hast spoken sooth, O Talib, and I desire
that, touching this matter, thou be my messenger to Musa bin
Nusayr; wherefore thou shalt have the White Flag[FN#108] and all
thou hast a mind to of monies and honour and so forth; and I will
care for thy family during shine absence." "With love and
gladness, O Commander of the Faithful!" answered Talib. "Go, with
the blessing of Allah and His aid," quoth the Caliph, and bade
write a letter to his brother, Abd al-Aziz, his viceroy in Egypt,
and another to Musa bin Nusayr, his viceroy in North Western
Africa, bidding him go himself in quest of the Solomonic bottles,
leaving his son to govern in his stead. Moreover, he charged him
to engage guides and to spare neither men nor money, nor to be
remiss in the matter as he would take no excuse. Then he sealed
the two letters and committed them to Talib bin Sahl, bidding him
advance the royal ensigns before him and make his utmost speed
and he gave him treasure and horsemen and footmen, to further him
on his way, and made provision for the wants of his household
during his absence. So Talib set out and arrived in due course at
Cairo.[FN#109]--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Talib bin
Sahl set out with his escort and crossed the desert country
between Syria and Egypt, where the Governor came out to meet him
and entreated him and his company with high honour whilst they
tarried with him. Then he gave them a guide to bring them to the
Sa'íd or Upper Egypt, where the Emir Musa had his abiding-place;
and when the son of Nusayr heard of Talib's coming, he went forth
to meet him and rejoiced in him. Talib gave him the Caliph's
letter, and he took it reverently and, laying it on his head,
cried, "I hear and I obey the Prince of the Faithful." Then he
deemed it best to assemble his chief officers and when all were
present he acquainted them with the contents of the Caliph's
letter and sought counsel of them how he should act. "O Emir,"
answered they, "if thou seek one who shall guide thee to the
place summon the Shaykh 'Abd al-Samad, ibn 'Abd al-Kuddús, al-
Samúdí;[FN#110] for he is a man of varied knowledge, who hath
travelled much and knoweth by experience all the seas and wastes
and words and countries of the world and the inhabitants and
wonders thereof; wherefore send thou for him and he will surely
guide thee to thy desire." So Musa sent for him, and behold, he
was a very ancient man shot in years and broken down with lapse
of days. The Emir saluted him and said, "O Shaykh Abd al-Samad,
our lord the Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan'
hath commanded me thus and thus. I have small knowledge of the
land wherein is that which the Caliph desireth; but it is told me
that thou knowest it well and the ways thither. Wilt thou,
therefore, go with me and help me to accomplish the Caliph's
need? So it please Allah the Most High, thy trouble and travail
shall not go waste." Replied the Shaykh, "I hear and obey the
bidding of the Commander of the Faithful; but know, O Emir, that
the road thither is long and difficult and the ways few." "How
far is it?" asked Musa, and the Shaykh answered, "It is a journey
of two years and some months going and the like returning; and
the way is full of hardships and terrors and things wondrous and
marvellous. Now thou art a champion of the Faith[FN#111] and our
country is hard by that of the enemy; and peradventure the
Nazarenes may come out upon us in shine absence; wherefore it
behoveth thee to leave one to rule thy government in thy stead."
"It is well," answered the Emir and appointed his son Hárún
Governor during his absence, requiring the troops to take the
oath of fealty to him and bidding them obey him in all he should
com mend. And they heard his words and promised obedience. Now
this Harun was a man of great prowess and a renowned warrior and
a doughty knight, and the Shaykh Abd al-Samad feigned to him that
the place they sought was distant but four months' journey along
the shore of the sea, with camping-places all the way, adjoining
one another, and grass and springs, adding, "Allah will assuredly
make the matter easy to us through thy blessing, O Lieutenant of
the Commander of the Faithful!" Quoth the Emir Musa, "Knowest
thou if any of the Kings have trodden this land before us?"; and
quoth the Shaykh, "Yes, it belonged aforetime to Darius the
Greek, King of Alexandria." But he said to Musa privily, "O Emir,
take with thee a thousand camels laden with victual and store of
gugglets."[FN#112] The Emir asked, "And what shall we do with
these?", and the Shaykh answered. "On our way is the desert of
Kayrwán or Cyrene, the which is a vast wold four days' journey
long, and lacketh water; nor therein doth sound of voice ever
sound nor is soul at any time to be seen. Moreover, there bloweth
the Simoon[FN#113] and other hot winds called Al-Juwayb, which
dry up the water-skins; but if the water be in gugglets, no harm
can come to it." "Right," said Musa and sending to Alexandria,
let bring thence great plenty of gugglets. Then he took with him
his Wazir and two thousand cavalry, clad in mail cap-á-pie and
set out, without other to guide them but Abd al-Samad who
forewent them, riding on his hackney. The party fared on
diligently, now passing through inhabited lands, then ruins and
anon traversing frightful words and thirsty wastes and then
mountains which spired high in air; nor did they leave journeying
a whole year's space till, one morning, when the day broke, after
they had travelled all night, behold, the Shaykh found himself in
a land he knew not and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" Quoth the Emir,
"What is to do, O Shaykh?"; and he answered, saying, "By the Lord
of the Ka'abah, we have wandered from our road!" "How cometh
that?" asked Musa, and Abd al-Samad replied, "The stars were
overclouded and I could not guide myself by them." "Where on
God's earth are we now?" asked the Emir, and the Shaykh answered,
"I know not; for I never set eyes on this land till this moment."
Said Musa, "Guide us back to the place where we went astray", but
the other, "I know it no more." Then Musa, "Let us push on; haply
Allah will guide us to it or direct us aright of His power." So
they fared on till the hour of noon-prayer, when they came to a
fair champaign, and wide and level and smooth as it were the sea
when calm, and presently there appeared to them, on the horizon
some great thing, high and black, in whose midst was as it were
smoke rising to the confines of the sky. They made for this, and
stayed not in their course till they drew near thereto, when, lo!
it was a high castle, firm of foundations and great and gruesome,
as it were a towering mountain, builded all of black stone, with
frowning crenelles and a door of gleaming China steel, that
dazzled the eyes and dazed the wits. Round about it were a
thousand steps and that which appeared afar off as it were smoke
was a central dome of lead an hundred cubits high. When the Emir
saw this, he marvelled thereat with exceeding marvel and how this
place was void of inhabitants; and the Shaykh, after he had
certified himself thereof, said, "There is no god but the God and
Mohammed is the Apostle of God!" Quoth Musa, "I hear thee praise
the Lord and hallow Him, and meseemeth thou rejoicest." "O Emir,"
answered Abd al-Samad, "Rejoice, for Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) hath delivered us from the frightful words and thirsty
wastes." "How knowest thou that?" said Musa, and the other, "I
know it for that my father told me of my grandfather that he
said, ‘We were once journeying in this land and, straying from
the road, we came to this palace and thence to the City of Brass;
between which and the place thou seekest is two full months'
travel; but thou must take to the sea-shore and leave it not, for
there be watering-places and wells and camping-grounds
established by King Zú al-Karnayn Iskandar who, when he went to
the conquest of Mauritania, found by the way thirsty deserts and
wastes and wilds and dug therein water-pits and built cisterns.'
" Quoth Musa, "Allah rejoice thee with good news!" and quoth the
Shaykh, "Come, let us go look upon yonder palace and its marvels,
for it is an admonition to whose will be admonished." So the Emir
went up to the palace, with the Shaykh and his officers, and
coming to the gate, found it open. Now this gate was builded with
lofty columns and porticoes whose walls and ceilings were inlaid
with gold and silver and precious stones; and there led up to it
flights of steps, among which were two wide stairs of coloured
marble, never was seen their like; and over the doorway was a
tablet whereon were graven letters of gold in the old ancient
Ionian character. "O Emir," asked the Shaykh, "Shall I read?";
and Musa answered, "Read and God bless thee!; for all that
betideth us in this journey dependeth upon thy blessing." So the
Shaykh, who was a very learned man and versed in all tongues and
characters, went up to the tablet and read whatso was thereon and
it was verse like this,

"The signs that here their mighty works portray * Warn us that
     all must tread the self-same way:
O thou who standest in this stead to hear * Tidings of folk,
     whose power hath passed for aye,
Enter this palace-gate and ask the news * Of greatness fallen
     into dust and clay:
Death has destroyed them and dispersed their might * And in the
     dust they lost their rich display;
As had they only set their burdens down * To rest awhile, and
     then had rode away."

When the Emir Musa heard these couplets, he wept till he lost his
senses and said, "There is no god but the God, the Living, the
Eternal, who ceaseth not!" Then he entered the palace and was
confounded at its beauty and the goodliness of its construction.
He diverted himself awhile by viewing the pictures and images
therein, till he came to another door, over which also were
written verses, and said to the Shaykh, "Come read me these!" So
he advanced and read as follows,

"Under these domes how many a company * Halted of old and fared
     with-outen stay:
See thou what might displays on other wights * Time with his
     shifts which could such lords waylay:
They shared together what they gathered * And left their joys and
     fared to Death-decay:
What joys they joyed! what food they ate! and now * In dust
     they're eaten, for the worm a prey."

At this the Emir Musa wept bitter tears; and the world waxed
yellow before his eyes and he said, "Verily, we were created for
a mighty matter!"[FN#114] Then they proceeded to explore the
palace and found it desert and void of living thing, its courts
desolate and dwelling places waste laid. In the midst stood a
lofty pavilion with a dome rising high in air, and about it were
four hundred tombs, builded of yellow marble. The Emir drew near
unto these and behold, amongst them was a great tomb, wide and
long; and at its head stood a tablet of white marble, whereon
were graven these couplets,

"How oft have I fought! and how many have slain! * How much have
     I witnessed of blessing and bane!
How much have I eaten! how much have I drunk! * How oft have I
     hearkened to singing-girl's strain!
How much have I bidden! how oft have forbid! * How many a castle
     and castellain
I have sieged and have searched, and the cloistered maids * In
     the depths of its walls for my captives were ta'en!
But of ignorance sinned I to win me the meeds * Which won proved
     naught and brought nothing of gain:
Then reckon thy reck'ning, O man, and be wise * Ere the goblet of
     death and of doom thou shalt drain;
For yet but a little the dust on thy head * They shall strew, and
     thy life shall go down to the dead."

The Emir and his companions wept; then, drawing near unto the
pavilion, they saw that it had eight doors of sandal-wood,
studded with nails of gold and stars of silver and inlaid with
all manner precious stones. On the first door were written these
verses,

"What I left, I left it not for nobility of soul, * But through
     sentence and decree that to every man are dight.
What while I lived happy, with a temper haught and high, * My
     hoarding-place defending like a lion in the fight,
I took no rest, and greed of gain forbad me give a grain * Of
     mustard seed to save from the fires of Hell my sprite,
Until stricken on a day, as with arrow, by decree * Of the Maker,
     the Fashioner, the Lord of Might and Right.
When my death was appointed, my life I could not keep * By the
     many of my stratagems, my cunning and my sleight:
My troops I had collected availed me not, and none * Of my
     friends and of my neighbours had power to mend my plight:
Through my life I was weaned in journeying to death * In stress
     or in solace, in joyance or despight:
So when money-bags are bloated, and dinar unto dinar * Thou
     addest, all may leave thee with fleeting of the night:
And the driver of a camel and the digger of a grave[FN#115] * Are
     what shine heirs shall bring ere the morning dawneth bright:
And on Judgment Day alone shalt thou stand before thy Lord, *
     Overladen with thy sins and thy crimes and shine affright:
Let the world not seduce thee with lurings, but behold * What
     measure to thy family and neighbours it hath doled."

When Musa heard these verses, he wept with such weeping that he
swooned away; then, coming to himself, he entered the pavilion
and saw therein a long tomb, awesome to look upon, whereon was a
tablet of China steel and Shaykh Abd al-Samad drew near it and
read this inscription: "In the name of Ever-lasting Allah, the
Never-beginning, the Never-ending; in the name of Allah who
begetteth not nor is He begot and unto whom the like is not; in
the name of Allah the Lord of Majesty and Might; in the name of
the Living One who to death is never dight!"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shaykh Abd
al-Samad, having read the aforesaid, also found the following, "O
thou who comest to this place, take warning by that which thou
seest of the accidents of Time and the vicissitudes of Fortune
and be not deluded by the world and its pomps and vanities and
fallacies and falsehoods and vain allurements, for that it is
flattering, deceitful end treacherous, and the things thereof are
but a loan to us which it will borrow back from all borrowers. It
is like unto the dreams of the dreamer and the sleep-visions of
the sleeper or as the mirage of the desert, which the thirsty
take for water;[FN#116] and Satan maketh it fair for men even
unto death These are the ways of the world; wherefore put not
thou thy trust therein neither incline thereto, for it bewrayeth
him who leaneth upon it and who committeth himself thereunto in
his affairs. Fall not thou into its snares neither take hold upon
its skirts, but be warned by my example. I possessed four thou
sand bay horses and a haughty palace, and I had to wife a thou
sand daughters of kings, high-bosomed maids, as they were moons:
I was blessed with a thousand sons as they were fierce lions, and
I abode a thousand years, glad of heart and mind, and I amassed
treasures beyond the competence of all the Kings of the regions
of the earth, deeming that delight would still endure to me. But
there fell on me unawares the Destroyer of delights and the
Sunderer of societies, the Desolator of domiciles and the Spoiler
of inhabited spots, the Murtherer of great and small, babes and
children and mothers, he who hath no ruth on the poor for his
poverty, or feareth the King for all his bidding or forbidding.
Verily, we abode safe and secure in this palace, till there
descended upon us the judgment of the Lord of the Three Worlds,
Lord of the Heavens, and Lord of the Earths, the vengeance of the
Manifest Truth[FN#117] overtook us, when there died of us every
day two, till a great company of us had perished. When I saw that
destruction had entered our dwellings and had homed with us and
in the sea of deaths had drowned us, I summoned a writer and bade
him indite these verses and instances and admonitions, the which
I let grave, with rule and compass, on these doors and tablets
and tombs. Now I had an army of a thousand thousand bridles, men
of warrior mien with forearms strong and keen, armed with spears
and mail-coats sheen and swords that gleam; so I bade them don
their long-hanging hauberks and gird on their biting blades and
mount their high-mettled steeds and level their dreadful lances;
and whenas there fell on us the doom of the Lord of heaven and
earth, I said to them, ‘Ho, all ye soldiers and troopers, can ye
avail to ward off that which is fallen on me from the Omnipotent
King?' But troopers and soldiers availed not unto this and said,
‘How shall we battle with Him to whom no chamberlain barreth
access, the Lord of the door which hath no doorkeeper?' Then
quoth I to them, ‘Bring me my treasures' Now I had in my
treasuries a thousand cisterns in each of which were a thousand
quintals[FN#118] of red gold and the like of white silver,
besides pearls and jewels of all kinds and other things of price,
beyond the attainment of the kings of the earth. So they did that
and when they had laid all the treasure in my presence, I said to
them, ‘Can ye ransom me with all this treasure or buy me one day
of life therewith?' But they could not! So they resigned
themselves to fore-ordained Fate and fortune and I submitted to
the judgment of Allah, enduring patiently that which he decreed
unto me of affliction, till He took my soul and made me to dwell
in my grave. And if thou ask of my name, I am Kúsh, the son of
Shaddád son of Ád the Greater." And upon the tablets were
engraved these lines,

"An thou wouldst know my name, whose day is done * With shifts of
     time and chances 'neath the sun,
Know I am Shaddád's son, who ruled mankind * 