."
Then she fetched the sieve and gave it to her husband, saying,
"Do thou sift it; for thine eyes are sharper than mine."
Accordingly he sat, sifting the clay, till his face and beard
were covered with dust; and he discovered not her trick, neither
knew what had befallen her. "This then, O King," said the Wazir,
"is an instance of the malice of women, and consider the saying
of Allah Almighty, "Surely the cunning of you (women) is
great!'[FN#176] And again, 'Indeed, the malice of Satan is weak
in comparison with the malice of women.'"[FN#177] The King gave
ear to his Wazir's speech and was persuaded thereby and was
satisfied by what he cited to him of the signs of Allah[FN#178];
and the lights of good counsel arose and shone in the firmament
of his understanding and he turned from his purpose of slaying
his son. But on the fourth day, the favourite came in to him
weeping and wailing and, kissing the ground before him, said, "O
auspicious King, and lord of good rede, I have made plainly
manifest to thee my grievance and thou hast dealt unjustly by me
and hast forborne to avenge me on him who hath wronged me,
because he is thy son and the darling of thy heart; but Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!) will presently succour me against
him, even as He succoured the King's son against his father's
Wazir." "And how was that?" asked the King; and she answered, "I
have heard tell, O King, a tale of



The Enchanted String.[FN#179]



There was once in times gone by a King who had one son and none
other; and, when the Prince grew up to man's estate, he
contracted him in marriage to another King's daughter. Now the
damsel was a model of beauty and grace and her uncle's son had
sought her in wedlock of her sire, but she would none of him. So,
when he knew that she was to be married to another, envy and
jealousy gat hold of him and he bethought himself and sent a
noble present to the Wazir of the bridegroom's father and much
treasure, desiring him to use craft for slaying the Prince or
contrive to make him leave his intent of espousing the girl and
adding, "O Wazir, indeed jealousy moveth me to this for she is my
cousin."[FN#180] The Wazir accepted the present and sent an
answer, saying, "Be of good cheer and of eyes cool and clear, for
I will do all that thou wishest." Presently, the bride's father
wrote to the Prince, bidding him to his capital, that he might go
in to his daughter; whereupon the King his father gave him leave
to wend his way thither, sending with him the bribed Wazir and a
thousand horse, besides presents and litters, tents and
pavilions. The Minister set out with the Prince, plotting the
while in his heart to do him a mischief; and when they came into
the desert, he called to mind a certain spring of running water
in the mountains there, called Al-Zahra,[FN#181] whereof
whosoever drank from a man became a woman. So he called a halt of
the troops near the fountain and presently mounting steed again,
said to the Prince, "Hast thou a mind to go with me and look upon
a spring of water near hand?" The Prince mounted, knowing not
what should befal him in the future,[FN#182] and they rode on,
unattended by any, and without stopping till they came to the
spring. The Prince being thirsty said to the Wazir, "O Minister,
I am suffering from drouth," and the other answered, "Get thee
down and drink of this spring!" So he alighted and washed his
hands and drank, when behold, he straightway became a woman. As
soon as he knew what had befallen him, he cried out and wept till
he fainted away, and the Wazir came up to him as if to learn what
had befallen him and cried, "What aileth thee?" So he told him
what had happened, and the Minister feigned to condole with him
and weep for his affliction, saying, "Allah Almighty be thy
refuge in thine affliction! How came this calamity upon thee and
this great misfortune to betide thee, and we carrying thee with
joy and gladness, that thou mightest go in to the King's
daughter? Verily, now I know not whether we shall go to her or
not; but the rede[FN#183] is thine. What dost thou command me to
do?" Quoth the Prince, "Go back to my sire and tell him what hath
betided me, for I will not stir hence till this matter be removed
from me or I die in my regret." So he wrote a letter to his
father, telling him what had happened, and the Wazir took it and
set out on his return to the city, leaving what troops he had
with the Prince and inwardly exulting for the success of his
plot. As soon as he reached the King's capital, he went in to him
and, telling him what had passed, delivered the letter. The King
mourned for his son with sore mourning and sent for the wise men
and masters of esoteric science, that they might discover and
explain to him this thing which had befallen his son, but none
could give him an answer. Then the Wazir wrote to the lady's
cousin, conveying to him the glad news of the Prince's
misfortune, and he when he read the letter rejoiced with great
joy and thought to marry the Princess and answered the Minister
sending him rich presents and great store of treasure and
thanking him exceedingly. Meanwhile, the Prince abode by the
stream three days and three nights, eating not nor drinking and
committing himself, in his strait, unto Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) who disappointeth not whoso relieth on him. On
the fourth night, lo! there came to him a cavalier on a
bright-bay steed[FN#184] with a crown on his head, as he were of
the sons of the Kings, and said to him, "Who brought thee hither,
O youth?" The Prince told him his mishap, how he was wending to
his wedding, and how the Wazir had led him to a spring whereof he
drank and incurred what had occurred; and as he spoke his speech
was broken by tears. Having heard him the horseman pitied his
case and said, "It was thy father's Wazir who cast thee into this
strait, for no man alive save he knoweth of this spring;"
presently adding, "Mount thee behind me and come with me to my
dwelling, for thou art my guest this night." "Acquaint me who
thou art ere I fare with thee," quoth the Prince; and quoth the
other, "I am a King's son of the Jánn, as thou a King's son of
mankind; so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes clear of tear,
for I will surely do away thy cark and care; and this is a slight
thing unto me." So the Prince mounted him behind the stranger,
and they rode on, leaving the troops, from the first of the day
till midnight, when the King's son of the Jinn asked the Prince,
"Knowest thou how many days' march we have covered in this time?"
"Not I." "We have come a full year's journey for a diligent
horseman." The Prince marvelled at this and said, "How shall I do
to return to my people?" "That is not thine affair, but my
business. As soon as thou art quit of thy complaint, thou shalt
return to thy people in less than the twinkling of an eye; for
that is an easy matter to me." When the Prince heard these words
he was ready to fly for excess of joy; it seemed to him as he
were in the imbroglio of a dream and he exclaimed, "Glory be to
Him who can restore the unhappy to happiness!"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince
of the Jinn said to the Prince of mankind, "When thou art quit of
thy complaint, thou shalt return to thy folk in less than the
twinkling of an eye;" and the King's son rejoiced. They fared on
all that night till the morning morrowed when lo! they found
themselves in a green and smiling country, full of trees spireing
and birds quiring and garths fruit-growing and palaces
highshowing and waters a-flowing and odoriferous flowers
a-blowing. Here the King's son of the Jinn alighted from his
steed and, bidding the Prince do the like, took him by the hand
and carried him into one of the palaces, where he found a great
King and puissant Sultan; and abode with him all that day eating
and drinking, till nightfall. Then the King's son of the Jinn
mounted his courser and taking the Prince up behind him, fared on
swiftly through the murks and glooms until morning, when lo, they
found themselves in a dark land and a desert, full of black rocks
and stones, as it were a piece of Hell; and the Prince asked the
Jinni, "What is the name of this land?" Answered the other, "It
is called the Black Country, and belongs to one of the Kings of
the Jinn, by name Zu'l Janahayn, against whom none of the other
Kings may prevail, neither may any enter his dominions save by
his permit; so tarry thou here, whilst I go ask leave." So
saying, he went away and, returning after awhile, they fared on
again, till they landed at a spring of water welling forth of a
black rock, and the King's son of the Jinn said to the King's son
of men, "Alight!" He dismounted and the other cried, "Drink of
this water!" So he drank of the spring without stay or delay;
and, no sooner had he done so than, by grace of Allah, he became
a man as before. At this he joyed with exceeding joy and asked
the Jinni, "O my brother, how is this spring called?" Answered
the other, "It is called the Women's Spring, for that no woman
drinketh thereof but she becometh a man: wherefore do thou praise
Allah the Most High and thank Him for thy restoration and mount."
So the Prince prostrated himself in gratitude to the Almighty,
after which he mounted again and they fared on diligently all
that day, till they returned to the Jinni's home, where the
Prince passed the night in all solace of life. They spent the
next day in eating and drinking till nightfall, when the King's
son of the Jinn asked the Prince, "Hast thou a mind to return to
thy people this very night?" "Yes," he answered; "for indeed I
long for them." Then the Jinni called one of his father's slaves,
Rajiz[FN#185] hight, and said to him, "Take this young man
mounted on thy shoulders, and let not the day dawn ere he be with
his father-in-law and his wife." Replied the slave, "Hearkening
and obedience, and with love and gladness, and upon my head and
eyes!" then, withdrawing awhile, re-appeared in the form of an
Ifrit. When the Prince saw this, he lost his senses for affright,
but the Jinni said to him, "Fear not; no harm shall befal thee.
Mount thy horse and leap him on to the Ifrit's shoulders." "Nay,"
answered he, "I will leave my horse with thee and bestride his
shoulders myself." So he bestrode the Ifrit's shoulders and, when
the Jinni cried, "Close thine eyes, O my lord, and be not a
craven!" he strengthened his heart and shut his eyes. Thereupon
the Ifrit rose with him into the air and ceased not to fly
between sky and earth, whilst the Prince was unconscious, nor was
the last third of the night come before he alighted down with him
on the terrace-roof of his father-in-law's palace. Then said the
Ifrit, "Dismount and open thine eyes; for this is the palace of
thy father-in-law and his daughter." So he came down and the
Ifrit flew away and left him on the roof of the palace. When the
day broke and the Prince recovered from his troubles, he
descended into the palace and as his father-in-law caught sight
of him, he came to meet him and marvelled to see him descend from
the roof of the palace, saying, "We see folk enter by the doors;
but thou comest from the skies." Quoth the Prince, "Whatso Allah
(may He be extolled and exalted!) willeth that cometh to pass."
And he told him all that had befallen him, from first to last,
whereat the King marvelled and rejoiced in his safety; and, as
soon as the sun rose, bade his Wazir make ready splendid
bride-feasts. So did he and they held the marriage festival:
after which the Prince went in unto his bride and abode with her
two months, then departed with her for his father's capital. As
for the damsel's cousin, he died forthright of envy and jealousy.
When the Prince and his bride drew near his father's city, the
King came out to meet them with his troops and Wazirs, and so
Allah (blessed and exalted be He!) enabled the Prince to prevail
against his bride's cousin and his father's Minister. "And I pray
the Almighty" (added the damsel) "to aid thee against thy Wazirs,
O King, and I beseech thee to do me justice on thy son!" When the
King heard this, he bade put his son to death;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When is was the Five Hundred and Eighty-forth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
favourite had told her tale to the King she said, "I beseech thee
to do me justice by putting thy son to death." Now this was the
fourth day, so the fourth Wazir entered and, kissing the ground
before him, said, "Allah stablish and protect the King! O King,
be deliberate in doing this thou art resolved upon, for the wise
man doth naught till he hath considered the issue thereof, and
the proverb saith, 'Whoso looketh not to his actions' end, hath
not the world to friend; and whoso acteth without consideration,
there befalleth him what befel the Hammam-keeper with his wife.'"
"And what betided him?" asked the King. And the Wazir answered,
"I have heard tell, O King, a tale of the



Wazir's Son and the Hammam-Keepeer's Wife."[FN#186]



There was once a bath-keeper, to whom resorted the notables of
the folk and head men, and one day there came in to him a
handsome youth of the sons of Wazirs who was fat and bulky of
body. So he stood to serve him and when the young man put off his
clothes[FN#187] he saw not his yard, for that it was hidden
between his thighs, by reason of the excess of his fat, and there
appeared thereof but what was like unto a filbert.[FN#188] At
this the bath-keeper fell a-lamenting and smiting hand upon hand,
which when the youth saw, he said to him, "What ails thee, O
bath-keeper, to lament thus?" And he answered, saying, "O my
lord, my lamentation is for thee, because thou art in sore
straits, for all thy fair fortune and goodliness and exceeding
comeliness, seeing thou hast naught wherewithal to do and receive
delight, like unto other men." Quoth the youth, "Thou sayst
sooth, but thou mindest me of somewhat I had forgotten." "What is
that?" asked the bathkeeper, and the youth answered, "Take this
gold piece and fetch me a pretty woman, that I may prove my
nature on her." So he took the money and betaking himself to his
wife, said to her, "O woman, there is come to me in the bath a
young man of the sons of the Wazirs, as he were the moon on the
fullest night; but he hath no prickle like other men, for that
which he hath is but some small matter like unto a filbert. I
lamented over his youth and he gave me this dinar and asked me to
fetch him a woman on whom he might approve himself. Now thou art
worthier of the money than another, and from this no harm shall
betide us, for I will protect thee. So do thou sit with him
awhile and laugh at him and take this dinar from him." So the
good wife took the dinar and rising, adorned herself and donned
the richest of her raiment. Now she was the fairest woman of her
time. Then she went out with her husband and he carried her in to
the Wazir's son in a privy place. When she came in to him, she
looked at him and finding him a handsome youth, fair of favour as
he were the moon at full, was confounded at his beauty and
loveliness; and on like wise his heart and wit were amazed at the
first sight of her and the sweetness of her smile. So he rose
forthright and locking the door, took the damsel in his arms and
pressed her to his bosom and they embraced, whereupon the young
man's yard swelled and rose on end, as it were that of a jackass,
and he rode upon her breast and futtered her, whilst she sobbed
and sighed and writhed and wriggled under him. Now the bathkeeper
was standing behind the door, awaiting what should betide between
them, and he began to call her saying, "O Umm Abdillah, enough!
Come out, for the day is long upon thy sucking child." Quoth the
youth, "Go forth to thy boy and come back;" but quoth she, "If I
go forth from thee, my soul will depart my body; as regards the
child, so I must either leave him to die of weeping or let him be
reared an orphan, without a mother." So she ceased not to abide
with him till he had done his desire of her ten times running,
while her husband stood at the door, calling her and crying out
and weeping and imploring succour. But none came to aid him and
he ceased not to do thus, saying, "I will slay myself!"; till at
last, finding no way of access to his wife, and being distraught
with rage and jealousy, to hear her sighing and murmuring and
breathing hard under the young man, he went up to the top of the
bath and, casting himself down therefrom, died. "Moreover, O
King" (continued the Wazir), "there hath reached me another story
of the malice of women." "What is that?" asked the King, and the
Wazir said, "Know, O King, that it is anent




The Wife's Device to Cheat her Husband."



There was once a woman who had no equal in her day for beauty and
loveliness and grace and perfection; and a certain lewd youth and
an obscene setting eyes on her, fell in love with her and loved
her with exceeding passion, but she was chaste and inclined not
to adultery. It chanced one day that her husband went on a
journey to a certain town, whereupon the young man fell to
sending to her many times a day; but she made him no reply. At
last, he resorted to an old woman, who dwelt hard by, and after
saluting her he sat down and complained to her of his sufferings
for love of the woman and his longing to enjoy her. Quoth she, "I
will warrant thee this; no harm shall befal thee, for I will
surely bring thee to thy desire, Inshallah, --an it please Allah
the Most High!" At these words he gave her a dinar and went his
way. When the morning morrowed she appeared before the woman and,
renewing an old acquaintance with her, fell to visiting her
daily, eating the undertime with her and the evening meal and
carrying away food for her children. Moreover, she used to sport
and jest with her, till the wife became corrupted[FN#189] and
could not endure an hour without her company. Now she was wont,
when she left the lady's house, to take bread and fat wherewith
she mixed a little pepper and to feed a bitch, that was in that
quarter; and thus she did day by day, till the bitch became fond
of her and followed her wherever she went. One day she took a
cake of dough and, putting therein an overdose of pepper, gave it
to the bitch to eat, whereupon the beast's eyes began to shed
tears, for the heat of the pepper, and she followed the old
woman, weeping. When the lady saw this she was amazed and asked
the ancient, "O my mother, what ails this bitch to weep?"
Answered she, "Learn, O my heart's love, that hers is a strange
story. Know that she was once a close friend of mine, a lovely
and accomplished young lady, a model of comeliness and perfect
grace. A young Nazarene of the quarter fell in love with her and
his passion and pining increased on him, till he took to his
pillow, and he sent to her times manifold, begging her to have
compassion on him and show him mercy, but she refused, albeit I
gave her good counsel, saying, "O my daughter, have pity on him
and be kind and consent to all he wisheth." She gave no heed to
my advice, until, the young man's patience failing him, he
complained at last to one of his friends, who cast an enchantment
on her and changed her human shape into canine form. When she saw
what transformation had befallen her and that there was none to
pity her case save myself, she came to my house and began to fawn
on me and buss my hands and feet and whine and shed tears, till I
recognised her and said to her, 'How often did I not warn thee?;
but my advice profited thee naught.'"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old
trot related to the young lady the tale of the bitch and
recounted the case in her cunning and deceit, with the view to
gain her consent and said to her, "When the enchanted beast came
to me and wept I reminded her, 'How often did I not warn thee?;
but my advice profited thee naught.' However, O my daughter,
seeing her misery, I had compassion on her case and kept her by
me; and as often as she bethinketh herself of her former estate,
she weepeth thus, in pity for herself." When the lady heard this,
she was taken with great alarm and said, "O my mother, by Allah,
thou affrightest me with this thy story." "Why so?" asked the old
woman. Answered the lady, "Because a certain handsome young man
fell in love with me and hath sent many times to me, but hitherto
I have repelled him; and now I fear lest there befal me the like
of what befel this bitch." "O my daughter," rejoined the old
woman, "look thou to what I counsel thee and beware of crossing
me, for I am in great fear for thee. If thou know not his
abiding-place, describe his semblance to me, that I may fetch him
to thee, and let not any one's heart be angered against thee." So
the lady described him to her, and she showed not to know him and
said, "When I go out, I will ask after him." But when she left
the lady, she went straight to the young man and said to him, "Be
of good cheer, for I have played with the girl's wits; so
to-morrow at noon wait thou at the head of the street, till I
come and carry thee to her house, where thou shalt take thine
ease with her the rest of the day and all night long." At this
the young man rejoiced with exceeding joy and gave her two
dinars, saying, "When I have won my wish of her, I will give thee
ten gold pieces." Then she returned to the lady and said to her,
"I have seen him and spoken with him on this matter. I found him
exceeding wroth with thee and minded to do thee a harm, but I
plied him with fair words till he agreed to come to-morrow at the
time of the call to noon-prayer." When the lady heard this she
rejoiced exceedingly and said, "O my mother, if he keep his
promise, I will give thee ten dinars." Quoth the old woman, "Look
to his coming from none but from me." When the next morn morrowed
she said to the lady, "Make ready the early meal and forget not
the wine and adorn thyself and don thy richest dress and
decoration, whilst I go and fetch him to thee." So she clad
herself in her finest finery and prepared food, whilst the old
woman went out to look for the young man, who came not. So she
went around searching for him, but could come by no news of him,
and she said to herself, "What is to be done? Shall the food and
drink she hath gotten ready be wasted and I lose the gold pieces
she promised me? Indeed, I will not allow my cunning contrivance
to come to naught, but will look her out another man and carry
him to her." So she walked about the highways till her eyes fell
on a pretty fellow, young and distinguished-looking, to whom the
folk bowed and who bore in his face the traces of travel. She
went up to him and saluting him, asked, "Hast thou a mind to meat
and drink and a girl adorned and ready?" Answered he, "Where is
this to be had?" "At home, in my house," rejoined she and
carrying him to his own house, knocked at the door. The lady
opened to them and ran in again, to make an end of her dressing
and perfuming; whilst the wicked old woman brought the man, who
was the husband and house-master, into the saloon and made him
sit down congratulating herself on her cunning contrivance.
Presently in walked the lady, who no sooner set eyes on her
husband sitting by the old trot than she knew him and guessed how
the case stood; nevertheless, she was not taken aback and without
stay or delay bethought her of a device to hoodwink him. So she
pulled off her outer boot and cried at her husband, "Is this how
thou keepest the contract between us? How canst thou betray me
and deal thus with me? Know that, when I heard of thy coming, I
sent this old woman to try thee and she hath made thee fall into
that against which I warned thee: so now I am certified of thine
affair and that thou hast broken faith with me. I thought thee
chaste and pure till I saw thee, with my own eyes, in this old
woman's company and knew that thou didst frequent loose
baggages." So saying, she fell to beating him with her slipper
about the head, and crying out, "Divorce me! Divorce me!"; whilst
he excused himself and swore to her, by Allah the Most High, that
he had never in his life been untrue to her nor had done aught of
that whereof she suspected him. But she stinted not to weep and
scream and bash him, crying out and saying, "Come to my help, O
Moslems!"; till he laid hold of her mouth with his hand and she
bit it. Moreover, he humbled himself to her and kissed her hands
and feet, whilst she would not be appeased and continued to cuff
him. At last, she winked at the old woman to come and hold her
hand from him. So she came up to her and kissed her hands and
feet, till she made peace between them and they sat down
together; whereupon the husband began to kiss her hands, saying,
"Allah Almighty requite thee with all good, for that thou hast
delivered me from her!" And the old woman marvelled at the wife's
cunning and ready wit. "This, then, O King" (said the Wazir) "is
one of many instances of the craft and malice and perfidy of
women." When the King heard this story, he was persuaded by it
and turned from his purpose to slay his son;-- And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
fourth Wazir had told his tale, the King turned from his purpose
to slay his son; but, on the fifth day, the damsel came in to him
hending a bowl of poison in hand, calling on Heaven for help and
buffeting her cheeks and face, and said to him, "O King, either
thou shalt do me justice and avenge me on thy son, or I will
drink up this poison-cup and die, and the sin of my blood shall
be on thy head at the Day of Doom. These thy Ministers accuse me
of malice and perfidy, but there be none in the world more
perfidious than men. Hast thou not heard the story of the
Goldsmith and the Cashmere[FN#190] singing-girl?" "What befel the
twain, O damsel?" asked the King; and she answered, saying,
"There hath come to my knowledge, O august King, a tale of the



Goldsmith and the Cashmere Singing-Girl.



There lived once, in a city of Persia a goldsmith who delighted
in women and in drinking wine. One day, being in the house of one
of his intimates, he saw painted on the wall the figure of a
lutanist, a beautiful damsel, beholder never beheld a fairer or a
more pleasant. He looked at the picture again and again,
marvelling at its beauty, and fell so desperately in love with
it, that he sickened for passion and came near to die. It chanced
that one of his friends came to visit him and sitting down by his
side, asked how he did and what ailed him, whereto the goldsmith
answered, "O my brother, that which ails me is love, and it befel
on this wise. I saw a figure of a woman painted on the house-
wall of my brother such an one and became enamoured of it."
Hereupon the other fell to blaming him and said, "This was of thy
lack of wit; how couldst thou fall in love with a painted figure
on a wall, that can neither harm nor profit, that seeth not
neither heareth, that neither taketh nor withholdeth." Said the
sick man, "He who painted yonder picture never could have limned
it save after the likeness of some beautiful woman." "Haply,"
rejoined his friend, "he painted it from imagination." "In any
case," replied the goldsmith, "here am I dying for love of the
picture, and if there live the original thereof in the world, I
pray Allah Most High to protect my life till I see her." When
those who were present went out, they asked for the painter of
the picture and, finding that he had travelled to another town,
wrote him a letter, complaining of their comrade's case and
enquiring whether he had drawn the figure of his own inventive
talents or copied it from a living model; to which he replied, "I
painted it after a certain singing-girl belonging to one of the
Wazirs in the city of Cashmere in the land of Hind." When the
goldsmith heard this, he left Persia for Cashmere-city, where he
arrived after much travail. He tarried awhile there till one day
he went and clapped up an acquaintance with a certain of the
citizens who was a druggist, a fellow of a sharp wit, keen,
crafty; and, being one even-tide in company with him, asked him
of their King and his polity; to which the other answered,
saying, "Well, our King is just and righteous in his governance,
equitable to his lieges and beneficent to his commons and
abhorreth nothing in the world save sorcerers; but, whenever a
sorcerer or sorceress falls into his hands, he casteth them into
a pit without the city and there leaveth them in hunger to die."
Then he questioned him of the King's Wazirs, and the druggist
told him of each Minister, his fashion and condition, till the
talk came round to the singing-girl and he told him, "She
belongeth to such a Wazir." The goldsmith took note of the
Minister's abiding place and waited some days, till he had
devised a device to his desire; and one night of rain and thunder
and stormy winds, he provided himself with thieves' tackle and
repaired to the house of the Wazir who owned the damsel. Here he
hanged a rope-ladder with grappling-irons to the battlements and
climbed up to the terrace-roof of the palace. Thence he descended
to the inner court and, making his way into the Harim, found all
the slave-girls lying asleep, each on her own couch; and amongst
them reclining on a couch of alabaster and covered with a
coverlet of cloth of gold a damsel, as she were the moon rising
on a fourteenth night. At her head stood a candle of ambergris,
and at her feet another, each in a candlestick of glittering
gold, her brilliancy dimming them both; and under her pillow lay
a casket of silver, wherein were her Jewels. He raised the
coverlet and drawing near her, considered her straitly, and
behold, it was the lutanist whom he desired and of whom he was
come in quest. So he took out a knife and wounded her in the back
parts, a palpable outer wound, whereupon she awoke in terror;
but, when she saw him, she was afraid to cry out, thinking he
came to steal her goods. So she said to him, "Take the box and
what is therein, but slay me not, for I am in thy protection and
under thy safe-guard[FN#191] and my death will profit thee
nothing." Accordingly, he took the box and went away.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When is was the Five Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
goldsmith had entered the Wazir's palace he wounded the damsel
slightly in the back parts and, taking the box which contained
her jewels, wended his way. And when morning morrowed he donned
clothes after the fashion of men of learning and doctors of the
law and, taking the jewel-case went in therewith to the King of
the city, before whom he kissed the ground and said to him, "O
King, I am a devout man; withal a loyal well-wisher to thee and
come hither a pilgrim to thy court from the land of Khorasan,
attracted by the report of thy just governance and righteous
dealing with thy subjects and minded to be under thy standard. I
reached this city at the last of the day and finding the gate
locked and barred, threw me down to sleep without the walls; but,
as I lay betwixt sleep and wake, behold, I saw four women come
up; one riding on a broom-stick, another on a wine-jar, a third
on an oven-peel and a fourth on a black bitch,[FN#192] and I knew
that they were witches making for thy city. One of them came up
to me and kicked me with her foot and beat me with a fox's tail
she had in her hand, hurting me grievously, whereat I was wroth
and smote her with a knife I had with me, wounding her in the
back parts, as she turned to flee from me. When she felt the
wound, she fled before me and in her flight let drop this casket,
which I picked up and opening, found these costly jewels therein.
So do thou take it, for I have no need thereof, being a wanderer
in the mountains[FN#193] who hath rejected the world from my
heart and renounced it and all that is in it, seeking only the
face of Allah the Most High." Then he set the casket before the
King and fared forth. The King opened the box and emptying out
all the trinkets it contained, fell to turning them over with his
hand, till he chanced upon a necklace whereof he had made gift to
the Wazir to whom the girl belonged. Seeing this, he called the
Minister in question and said to him, "This is the necklace I
gave thee?" He knew it at first sight and answered, "It is; and I
gave it to a singing girl of mine." Quoth the King, "Fetch that
girl to me forthwith." So he fetched her to him, and he said,
"Uncover her back parts and see if there be a wound therein or
no." The Wazir accordingly bared her backside and finding a
knife-wound there, said, "Yes, O my lord, there is a wound." Then
said the King, "This is the witch of whom the devotee told me,
and there can be no doubt of it," and bade cast her into the
witches' well. So they carried her thither at once. As soon as it
was night and the goldsmith knew that his plot had succeeded, he
repaired to the pit, taking with him a purse of a thousand
dinars, and, entering into converse with the warder, sat talking
with him till a third part of the night was passed, when he
broached the matter to him, saying, "Know, O my brother, that
this girl is innocent of that they lay to her charge and that it
was I brought this calamity upon her." Then he told him the whole
story, first and last, adding, "Take, O my brother, this purse of
a thousand dinars and give me the damsel, that I may carry her to
my own land, for these gold pieces will profit thee more than
keeping her in prison; moreover Allah will requite thee for us,
and we too will both offer up prayers for thy prosperity and
safety." When the warder heard this story, he marvelled with
exceeding marvel at that device and its success; then taking the
money, he delivered the girl to the goldsmith, conditioning that
he should not abide one hour with her in the city. Thereupon the
goldsmith took the girl and fared on with her, without ceasing,
till he reached his own country and so he won his wish. "See,
then, O King" (said the damsel), "the malice of men and their
wiles. Now thy Wazirs hinder thee from doing me justice on thy
son; but to-morrow we shall stand, both thou and I, before the
Just Judge, and He shall do me justice on thee, O King." When the
King heard this, he commanded to put his son to death; but the
fifth Wazir came in to him and kissing the ground before him,
said, "O mighty King, delay and hasten not to slay thy son: speed
will oftentimes repentance breed; and I fear for thee lest thou
repent, even as did the man who never laughed for the rest of his
days." "And how was that, O Wazir?" asked the King. Quoth he, "I
have heard tell, O King, this tale concerning



The Man who never Laughed during the Rest of his Days.



There was once a man who was rich in lands and houses and monies
and goods, eunuchs and slaves, and he died and went to the mercy
of Allah the Most High; leaving a young son, who, when he grew
up, gave himself to feasting and carousing and hearing music and
singing and the loud laughter of parasites; and he wasted his
substance in gifts and prodigality till he had squandered all the
money his father left him, --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
man, when he had squandered all the money his father had left him
and naught thereof remained to him, betook himself to selling his
slaves and handmaids, lands and houses and spent the proceeds on
like wise, till he was reduced to beggary and must needs labour
for his living. He abode thus a year's space, at the end of which
time he was sitting one day under a wall, awaiting who should
hire him when behold, there came up to him an old man of comely
aspect and apparel and saluted him. The young man asked, "O
uncle, hast thou known me aforetime?" and the other answered,
"Not so, O my son, I know thee not at all, at all; but I see the
trace of gentle breeding on thee despite thy present case." "O
uncle, " rejoined the poor man, "needs must Fate and Fortune be
accomplished; but, O uncle, O bright of blee, hast thou any
occasion wherein thou wouldst employ me?" Said the other, "I
wish, O my son, to employ thee in a slight matter." "What is it?"
quoth the young man, and quoth the stranger, "We are eleven old
men in one house, but we have none to serve us; so an thou wilt
stay and take service with us, thou shalt have food and clothing
to thy heart's content, besides what cometh to thee of coin and
other good; and haply Allah will restore thee thy fortune by our
means." Replied the youth, "Hearkening and obedience!" "But I
have a condition to impose on thee." "What is that?" "O my son,
it is that thou keep our secret in what thou seest us do, and if
thou see us weep, that thou question us not of the cause of our
weeping." "It is well, O uncle;" "Come with me, O my son, with
the blessing of Allah Almighty." So he followed him to the bath,
where the old man caused cleanse his body of the crusted dirt,
after which he sent one to fetch a handsome garment of linen and
clad him therein. Then he carried him to his company which was in
his domicile and the youth found a house lofty and spacious and
strongly builded, wherein were sitting-chambers facing one
another; and saloons, in each one a fountain of water, with the
birds warbling over it, and windows on every side, giving upon a
fair garden within the house. The old man brought him into one of
the parlours, which was variegated with many-coloured marbles,
the ceiling thereof being decorated with ultramarine and glowing
gold; and the floor bespread with silken carpets. Here he found
ten Shaykhs in mourning apparel, seated one opposite other,
weeping and wailing. He marvelled at their case and purposed to
ask the reason, when he remembered the condition and held his
peace. Then he who had brought him delivered to him a chest
containing thirty thousand dinars and said to him, "O my son,
spend freely from this chest what is fitting for our
entertainment and thine own; and be thou faithful and remember
that wherewith I charged thee." "I hear and I obey, " answered he
and served them days and nights, till one of them died, whereupon
his fellows washed him and shrouded him and buried him in a
garden behind the house,[FN#194] nor did death cease to take
them, one after other, till there remained but the Shaykh who had
hired the youth for service. Then the two men, old and young,
dwelt together in that house alone for years and years, nor was
there with them a third save Allah the Most High, till the elder
fell sick; and when the younger despaired of his life, he went up
to him and condoling with him, said, "O nuncle mine, I have
waited upon you twelve years and have not failed of my duties a
single hour, but have been loyal and faithful to you and served
you with my might and main." "Yes, O my son," answered the old
man, "thou hast served us well until all my comrades are gone to
the mercy of Allah (to whom belong honour and glory!) and needs
must I die also." "O my lord," said the other, "thou art in
danger of death and I would fain have thee acquaint me with the
cause of your weeping and wailing and of your unceasing mourning
and lamentation and regrets." "O my son," answered the old man,
"it concerns thee not to know this, so importune me not of what I
may not do: for I have vowed to Almighty Allah that I would
acquaint none of His creatures with this, lest he be afflicted
with what befel me and my comrades. If, then, thou desire to be
delivered from that into which we fell, look thou open not yonder
door, "[FN#195] and pointed to a certain part of the house; "but,
if thou have a mind to suffer what we have suffered, then open it
and thou shalt learn the cause of that thou hast seen us do; and
whenas thou knowest it, thou shalt repent what time repentance
will avail thee not."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
surviving Shaykh of the ten said to the youth, "Beware how thou
open yonder door or thou shalt repent what time repentance will
avail thee not." Then his sickness grew on him and he
accomplished his term and departed life to the presence of his
Lord; and the young man washed him with his own hands and
shrouded him and buried him by the side of his comrades; after
which he abode alone in the place and took possession of
whatsoever was therein. Withal he was uneasy and troubled
concerning the case of the old men, till, one day, as he sat
pondering the words of his dead master and his injunction not to
open the door, he suddenly bethought himself to go and look for
it. So he rose up and repaired to the part whither the dead man
had pointed and sought till, in a dark unfrequented corner, he
found a little door, over which the spider had spun her webs and
which was fastened with four padlocks of steel. Seeing this he
recalled the old man's warning and restrained himself and went
away; and he held aloof from it seven days, whilst all the time
his heart prompted him to open it. On the eighth day his
curiosity got the better of him and he said, "Come what will,
needs must I open the door and see what will happen to me
therefrom. Nothing can avert what is fated and fore-ordained of
Allah the Most High; nor doth aught befal but by His will." So
saying, he rose and broke the padlocks and opening the door saw a
narrow passage, which he followed for some three hours when lo!
he came out on the shore of a vast ocean[FN#196] and fared on
along the beach, marvelling at this main, whereof he had no
knowledge and turning right and left. Presently, a great eagle
swooped down upon him from the lift and seizing him in its
talons, flew away with him betwixt heaven and earth, till it came
to an island in the midst of the sea, where it cast him down and
flew away. The youth was dazed and knew not whither he should
wend, but after a few days as he sat pondering his case, he
caught sight of the sails of a ship in the middlemost of the
main, as it were a star in the sky; and his heart clave to it, so
haply his deliverance might be therein. He continued gazing at
the ship, until it drew nigh, when he saw that it was a foyst
builded all of ivory and ebony, inlaid with glistening gold made
fast by nails of steel, with oars of sandal and lign-aloes. In it
were ten damsels, high-bosomed maids, as they were moons; and
when they saw him, they came ashore to him and kissed his hands,
saying, "Thou art the King, the Bridegroom!" Then there accosted
him a young lady, as she were the sun shining in sky serene
bearing in hand a silken napkin, wherein were a royal robe and a
crown of gold set with all manner rubies and pearls. She threw
the robe over him and set the crown upon his head, after which
the damsels bore him on their arms to the foyst, where he found
all kinds of silken carpets and hangings of various colours. Then
they spread the sails and stretched out into mid-ocean. Quoth the
young man, "Indeed, when they put to sea with me, meseemed it was
a dream and I knew not whither they were wending with me.
Presently, we drew near to land, and I saw the shore full of
troops none knoweth their number save Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) and all were magnificently arrayed and clad in complete
steel. As soon as the vessel had made fast to the land, they
brought me five marked[FN#197] horses of noble breeds, housed and
saddled with gold, inlaid with all manner pearls and high-priced
bezel stones. I chose out one of them and mounted it, whilst they
led the four others before me. Then they raised the banners and
the standards over my head, whilst the troops ranged themselves
right and left, and we set out, with drums beating and cymbals
clashing, and rode on; whilst I debated in myself whether I were
in sleep or on wake; and we never ceased faring, I believing not
in that my estate, but taking all this for the imbroglio of a
dream, till we drew near to the green mead, full of palaces and
gardens and trees and streams and blooms and birds chanting the
praises of Allah the One, the Victorious. Hereupon, behold, an
army sallied out from amid the palaces and gardens, as it were
the torrent when it poureth down,[FN#198] and the host overflowed
the mead. These troops halted at a little distance from me and
presently there rode forth from amongst them a King, preceded by
some of his chief officers on foot." When he came up to the young
man (saith the tale-teller) he dismounted also, and the two
saluted each other after the goodliest fashion. Then said the
King, "Come with us, for thou art my guest." So they took horse
again and rode on stirrup touching stirrup in great and stately
procession, conversing as they went, till they came to the royal
palace, where they alighted together.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two
rode together in stately procession till they entered the palace,
when the King taking the young man by the hand, led him into a
domed room followed by his suite, and making him sit down on a
throne of gold, seated himself beside him. Then he unbound the
swathe from his lower face; and behold, the King was a young
lady, like the splendid sun shining in the sheeny sky, perfect in
beauty and loveliness, brilliancy and grace, arrogance[FN#199]
and all perfection. The youth looked upon this singular blessing
and embodied boon and was lost in wonder at her charms and
comeliness and seemlihead and at the splendour and affluence he
saw about him, when she said "Know, O King, that I am the Queen
of this land and that all the troops thou hast seen, whether
horse or foot, are women, there is no man amongst them; for in
this our state the men delve and sow and ear and occupy
themselves with the tillage of the earth and the building of
towns and other mechanical crafts and useful arts, whilst the
women govern and fill the great offices of state and bear arms."
At this the youth marvelled with exceeding marvel and, as they
were in discourse, behold, in came the Wazir who was a tall
gray-haired old woman of venerable semblance and majestic aspect,
and it was told him that this was the Minister. Quoth the Queen
to her, "Bring us the Kazi and witnesses." So she went out to do
this, and the Queen, turning to him, conversed with him in
friendly fashion, and enforced herself to reassure his awe of her
and do away his shame with speech blander than the zephyr,
saying, "Art thou content to be to me baron and I to thee feme?"
Thereupon he arose and would have kissed ground between her
hands, but she forbade him and he replied, saying, "O my lady, I
am the least of thy slaves who serve thee." "Seest thou all these
servants and soldiers and riches and hoards and treasures?" asked
she, and he answered, "Yes!" Quoth she, "All these are at thy
commandment to dispose of them and give and bestow as seemeth
good to thee." Then she pointed to a closed door and said, "All
these things are at thy disposal, save yonder door; that shalt
thou not open, and if thou open it thou shalt repent when
repentance will avail thee naught. So beware! and again I say,
beware!" Hardly had she made an end of speaking when the Waziress
entered followed by the Kazii and witnesses, all old women, with
their hair streaming over their shoulders and of reverend and
majestic presence; and the Queen bade them draw up the contract
of marriage between herself and the young man. Accordingly, they
performed the marriage-ceremony and the Queen made a great
bride-feast, to which she bade all the troops; and after they had
eaten and drunken, he went in unto his bride and found her a maid
virginal. So he did away her hymen and abode with her seven years
in all joyance and solace and delight of life, till, one day of
the days, he bethought himself of the forbidden door and said in
himself, "Except there were therein treasures greater and grander
than any I have seen, she had not forbidden me therefrom." So he
rose and opened the door, when, lo! behind it was the very bird
which had brought him from the sea-shore to the island, and it
said to him, "No welcome to a face that shall never prosper!"
When he saw it and heard what it said, he fled from it; but it
followed him and seizing him in its talons, flew with him an
hour's journey betwixt heaven and earth, till it set him down in
the place whence it had first carried him off and flew away. When
he came to his senses, he remembered his late estate, great,
grand and glorious, and the troops which rode before him and his
lordly rule and all the honour and fair fortune he had lost and
fell to weeping and wailing.[FN#200] He abode two months on the
sea-shore, where the bird had set him down, hoping yet to return
to his wife, till, as he sat one night wakeful, mourning and
musing, behold, he heard one speaking, albeit he saw no one, and
saying, "How great were the delights! Alas, far from thee is the
return of that which is past!" When he heard this, he redoubled
in his regrets and despaired of recovering his wife and his fair
estate that was; so he returned, weary and broken-hearted, to the
house where he had dwelt with the old men and knew that they had
fared even as he and that this was the cause of their shedding
tears and lamenting their lot; wherefore he ever after held them
excused. Then, being overcome with chagrin and concern, he took
to his chamber and gave himself up to mourning and lamentation;
and he ceased not crying and complaining and left eating and
drinking and pleasant scents and merriment; nor did he laugh once
till the day of his death, when they buried him beside the
Shaykhs. "See, then, O King," continued the Wazir "what cometh of
precipitance; verily, it is unpraiseworthy and bequeatheth
repentance; and in this I give thee true advice and loyal
counsel." When the King heard this story, he turned from slaying
his son;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
King heard this story he turned from slaying his son; but, on the
sixth day, the favourite came in to him hending a naked knife in
hand, and said to him, "Know, O my lord, that except thou hearken
to my complaint and protect thy right and thine honour against
these thy Ministers, who are banded together against me, to do me
wrong, I will kill myself with this knife, and my blood will
testify against thee on the Day of Doom. Indeed, they pretend
that women are full of tricks and malice and perfidy; and they
design thereby to defeat me of my due and hinder the King from
doing me justice; but, behold, I will prove to thee that men are
more perfidious than women by the story of a King among the Kings
and how he gained access to the wife of a certain merchant." "And
what passed between them?" asked the King, and she answered, "I
have heard tell, O august King, a tale of



The King's Son and the Merchant's Wife.



A certain merchant, who was addicted to jealousy, had a wife that
was a model of beauty and loveliness; and of the excess of his
fear and jealousy of her, he would not abide with her in any
town, but built her a pavilion without the city, apart from all
other buildings. And he raised its height and strengthened its
doors and provided them with curious locks; and when he had
occasion to go into the city, he locked the doors and hung the
keys about his neck.[FN#201] One day, when the