h, who took pity on him and said to him, "Wilt thou take
service with me, O Egyptian, and I will clothe thee and carry
thee with me to Jiddah?" So Judar took service with him and
accompanied him to Jiddah, where he showed him much favour. After
awhile, his master the merchant set out on a pilgrimage to
Meccah, taking Judar with him, and when they reached the city,
the Cairene repaired to the Haram temple, to circumambulate the
Ka'abah. As he was making the prescribed circuits,[FN#294] he
suddenly saw his friend Abd al-Samad the Moor doing the like;--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Judar, as
he was making the circuits, suddenly saw his friend Abd al-Samad
also circumambulating; and when the Maghribi caught sight of him,
he saluted him and asked him of his state; whereupon Judar wept
and told him all that had befallen him. So the Moor carried him
to his lodging and entreated him with honour, clothing him in a
dress of which the like was not, and saying to him, "Thou hast
seen the end of thine ills, O Judar." Then he drew out for him a
geomantic figure, which showed what had befallen Sálim and Salím
and said to Judar, "Such and such things have befallen thy
brothers and they are now in the King of Egypt's prison; but thou
art right welcome to abide with me and accomplish thine
ordinances of pilgrimage and all shall be well." Replied Judar,
"O my lord, let me go and take leave of the merchant with whom I
am and after I will come back to thee." "Dost thou owe money?"
asked the Moor, and he answered, "No." Said Abd al-Samad, "Go
thou and take leave of him and come back forth right, for bread
hath claims of its own from the ingenuous." So Judar returned to
the merchant and farewelled him, saying, "I have fallen in with
my brother."[FN#295] "Go bring him here," said the merchant, "and
we will make him an entertainment." But Judar answered, saying,
"He hath no need of that; for he is a man of wealth and hath many
servants." Then the merchant gave Judar twenty dinars, saying,
"Acquit me of responsibility";[FN#296] and he bade him adieu and
went forth from him. Presently, he saw a poor man, so he gave him
the twenty ducats and returned to the Moor, with whom he abode
till they had accomplished the pilgrimage rites when Abd al-Samad
gave him the seal ring, that he had taken from the treasure of
Al-Shamardal, saying, "This ring will win thee thy wish, for it
enchanteth and hath a servant, by name Al-Ra'ad al-Kásif; so
whatever thou hast a mind to of the wants of this world, rub this
ring and its servant will appear and do all thou biddest him."
Then he rubbed the ring before him, whereupon the Jinni appeared,
saying, "Adsum, O my lord! Ask what thou wilt and it shall be
given thee. Hast thou a mind to people a ruined city or ruin a
populous one? to slay a king or to rout a host?" "O Ra'ad," said
Abd al-Samad, "this is become thy lord; do thou serve him
faithfully." Then he dismissed him and said to Judar, "Rub the
ring and the servant will appear and do thou command him to do
whatever thou desirest, for he will not gainsay thee. Now go to
thine own country and take care of the ring, for by means of it
thou wilt baffle thine enemies; and be not ignorant of its
puissance." "O my lord," quoth Judar, "with thy leave, I will set
out homewards." Quoth the Maghribi, "Summon the Jinni and mount
upon his back; and if thou say to him, 'Bring me to my native
city this very day,' he will not disobey thy commandment." So he
took leave of Moor Abd al-Samad and rubbed the ring, whereupon
Al-Ra'ad presented himself, saying, "Adsum; ask and it shall be
given to thee." Said Judar, "Carry me to Cairo this day;" and he
replied, "Thy will be done;" and, taking him on his back, flew
with him from noon till midnight, when he set him down in the
courtyard of his mother's house and disappeared. Judar went in to
his mother, who rose weeping, and greeted him fondly, and told
him how the King had beaten his brothers and cast them into gaol
and taken the two pairs of saddle bags; which when he heard, it
was no light matter to him and he said to her, "Grieve not for
the past; I will show thee what I can do and bring my brothers
hither forth right." So he rubbed the ring, whereupon its servant
appeared, saying, "Here am I! Ask and thou shalt have." Quoth
Judar, "I bid thee bring me my two brothers from the prison of
the King." So the Jinni sank into the earth and came not up but
in the midst of the gaol where Sálim and Salím lay in piteous
plight and sore sorrow for the plagues of prison,[FN#297] so that
they wished for death, and one of them said to the other, "By
Allah, O my brother, affliction is longsome upon us! How long
shall we abide in this prison? Death would be relief." As he
spoke, behold, the earth clove in sunder and out came Al-Ra'ad,
who took both up and plunged with them into the earth. They
swooned away for excess of fear, and when they recovered, they
found themselves in their mother's house and saw Judar seated by
her side. Quoth he, "I salute you, O my brothers! you have
cheered me by your presence." And they bowed their heads and
burst into tears. Then said he, "Weep not, for it was Satan and
covetise that led you to do thus. How could you sell me? But I
comfort myself with the thought of Joseph, whose brothers did
with him even more than ye did with me, because they cast him
into the pit."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Judar
said to his brothers, "How could you do with me thus? But repent
unto Allah and crave pardon of Him, and He will forgive you both,
for He is the Most Forgiving, the Merciful. As for me, I pardon
you and welcome you: no harm shall befall you." Then he comforted
them and set their hearts at ease and related to them all he had
suffered, till he fell in with Shaykh Abd al-Samad, and told them
also of the seal ring. They replied, "O our brother, forgive us
this time; and, if we return to our old ways, do with us as thou
wilt." Quoth he, "No harm shall befall you; but tell me what the
King did with you." Quoth they, "He beat us and threatened us
with death and took the two pairs of saddle bags from us." "Will
he not care?"[FN#298] said Judar, and rubbed the ring, whereupon
Al-Ra'ad appeared. When his brothers saw him, they were frighted
and thought Judar would bid him slay them; so they fled to their
mother, crying, "O our mother, we throw our selves on thy
generosity; do thou intercede for us, O our mother!" And she said
to them, "O my sons, fear nothing!" Then said Judar to the
servant, "I command thee to bring me all that is in the King's
treasury of goods and such; let nothing remain and fetch the two
pairs of saddle bags he took from my brothers." "I hear and I
obey," replied Al-Ra'ad; and, disappearing straight way gathered
together all he found in the treasury and returned with the two
pairs of saddle bags and the deposits therein and laid them
before Judar, saying, "O my lord, I have left nothing in the
treasury." Judar gave the treasure to his mother bidding her keep
it and laying the enchanted saddle bags before him, said to the
Jinni, "I command thee to build me this night a lofty palace and
overlay it with liquid gold and furnish it with magnificent
furniture: and let not the day dawn, ere thou be quit of the
whole work." Replied he, "Thy bidding shall be obeyed;" and sank
into the earth. Then Judar brought forth food and they ate and
took their ease and lay down to sleep. Meanwhile, Al-Ra'ad
summoned his attendant Jinn and bade them build the palace. So
some of them fell to hewing stones and some to building, whilst
others plastered and painted and furnished; nor did the day dawn
ere the ordinance of the palace was complete; whereupon Al-Ra'ad
came to Judar and said to him, "O my lord, the palace is finished
and in best order, an it please thee to come and look on it." So
Judar went forth with his mother and brothers and saw a palace,
whose like there was not in the whole world; and it confounded
all minds with the goodliness of its ordinance. Judar was
delighted with it while he was passing along the highway and
withal it had cost him nothing. Then he asked his mother, "Say
me, wilt thou take up thine abode in this palace?" and she
answered, "I will, O my son," and called down blessings upon him.
Then he rubbed the ring and bade the Jinni fetch him forty
handsome white hand maids and forty black damsels and as many
Mamelukes and negro slaves. "Thy will be done," answered Al-Ra'ad
and betaking himself, with forty of his attendant Genii to Hind
and Sind and Persia, snatched up every beautiful girl and boy
they saw, till they had made up the required number. Moreover, he
sent other four score, who fetched comely black girls, and forty
others brought male chattels and carried them all to Judar's
house, which they filled. Then he showed them to Judar, who was
pleased with them and said, "Bring for each a dress of the
finest." "Ready!" replied the servant. Then quoth he, "Bring a
dress for my mother and another for myself, and also for my
brothers." So the Jinni fetched all that was needed and clad the
female slaves, saying to them, "This is your mistress: kiss her
hands and cross her not, but serve her, white and black." The
Mamelukes also dressed them selves and kissed Judar's hands; and
he and his brothers arrayed themselves in the robes the Jinni had
brought them and Judar became like unto a King and his brothers
as Wazirs. Now his house was spacious; so he lodged Sálim and his
slave girls in one part thereof and Salím and his slave girls in
another, whilst he and his mother took up their abode in the new
palace; and each in his own place was like a Sultan. So far
concerning them; but as regards the King's Treasurer, thinking to
take something from the treasury, he went in and found it
altogether empty, even as saith the poet,

"'Twas as a hive of bees that greatly thrived; * But, when the
     bee swarm fled, 'twas clean unhived."[FN#299]

So he gave a great cry and fell down in a fit. When he came to
himself, he left the door open and going in to King Shams
al-Daulah, said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful,[FN#300] I
have to inform thee that the treasury hath become empty during
the night." Quoth the King, 'What hast thou done with my monies
which were therein?" Quoth he, "By Allah, I have not done aught
with them nor know I what is come of them! I visited the place
yesterday and saw it full; but to day when I went in, I found it
clean empty, albeit the doors were locked, the walls were
unpierced[FN#301] and the bolts[FN#302] are unbroken; nor hath a
thief entered it." Asked the King, "Are the two pairs of saddle
bags gone?" "Yes," replied the Treasurer; whereupon the King's
reason flew from his head,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Treasurer informed the King that all in the treasury had been
plundered, including the two pairs of saddlebags, the King's
reason flew from his head and he rose to his feet, saying, "Go
thou before me." Then he followed the Treasurer to the treasury
and he found nothing there, whereat he was wroth with him; and he
said to them, "O soldiers! know that my treasury hath been
plundered during the night, and I know not who did this deed and
dared thus to outrage me, without fear of me." Said they, "How
so?"; and he replied, "Ask the Treasurer." So they questioned
him, and he answered, saying, "Yesterday I visited the treasury
and it was full, but this morning when I entered it I found it
empty, though the walls were unpierced and the doors unbroken."
They all marvelled at this and could make the King no answer,
when in came the Janissary, who had denounced Sálim and Salím,
and said to Shams al-Daulah, "O King of the age, all this night I
have not slept for that which I saw." And the King asked, "And
what didst thou see?" "Know, O King of the age," answered the
Kawwás, "that all night long I have been amusing myself with
watching builders at work; and, when it was day, I saw a palace
ready edified, whose like is not in the world. So I asked about
it and was told that Judar had come back with great wealth and
Mamelukes and slaves and that he had freed his two brothers from
prison, and built this palace, wherein he is as a Sultan." Quoth
the King, "Go, look in the prison." So they went thither and not
finding Sálim and Salím, returned and told the King, who said,
"It is plain now who be the thief; he who took Sálim and Salím
out of prison it is who hath stolen my monies." Quoth the Wazir,
"O my lord, and who is he?"; and quoth the King, "Their brother
Judar, and he hath taken the two pairs of saddle bags; but, O
Wazir do thou send him an Emir with fifty men to seal up his
goods and lay hands on him and his brothers and bring them to me,
that I may hang them." And he was sore enraged and said, "Ho, off
with the Emir at once, and fetch them, that I may put them to
death." But the Wazir said to him, "Be thou merciful, for Allah
is merciful and hasteth not to punish His servants, whenas they
sin against Him. More over, he who can build a palace in a single
night, as these say, none in the world can vie with him; and
verily I fear lest the Emir fall into difficulty for Judar. Have
patience, therefore, whilst I devise for thee some device of
getting at the truth of the case, and so shalt thou win thy wish,
O King of the age." Quoth the King, "Counsel me how I shall do, O
Wazir." And the Minister said, "Send him an Emir with an
invitation; and I will make much of him for thee and make a show
of love for him and ask him of his estate; after which we will
see. If we find him stout of heart, we will use sleight with him,
and if weak of will, then do thou seize him and do with him thy
desire." The King agreed to this and despatched one of his Emirs,
Othman highs, to go and invite Judar and say to him, "The King
biddeth thee to a banquet;" and the King said to him, "Return
not, except with him." Now this Othman was a fool, proud and
conceited; so he went forth upon his errand, and when he came to
the gate of Judar's palace, he saw before the door an eunuch
seated upon a chair of gold, who at his approach rose not, but
sat as if none came near, though there were with the Emir fifty
footmen. Now this eunuch was none other than Al-Ra'ad al-Kasif,
the servant of the ring, whom Judar had commanded to put on the
guise of an eunuch and sit at the palace gate. So the Emir rode
up to him and asked him, ' O slave, where is thy lord?"; whereto
he answered, "In the palace;" but he stirred not from his leaning
posture; whereupon the Emir Othman waxed wroth and said to him,
'O pestilent slave, art thou not ashamed, when I speak to thee,
to answer me, sprawling at thy length, like a gallows bird?"
Replied the eunuch "Off and multiply not words." Hardly had
Othman heard this, when he was filled with rage and drawing his
mace[FN#303] would have smitten the eunuch, knowing not that he
was a devil; but Al-Ra'ad leapt upon him and taking the mace from
him, dealt him four blows with it. Now when the fifty men saw
their lord beaten, it was grievous to them; so they drew their
swords and ran to slay the slave; but he said, "Do ye draw on us,
O dogs?" and rose at them with the mace, and every one whom he
smote, he broke his bones and drowned him in his blood. So they
fell back before him and fled, whilst he followed them, beating
them, till he had driven them far from the palace gate; after
which he returned and sat down on his chair at the door, caring
for none.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the eunuch
having put to flight the Emir Othman, the King's officer, and his
men, till they were driven far from Judar's gate, returned and
sat down on his chair at the door, caring for none. But as for
the Emir and his company, they returned, discomfited and funded,
to King Shams al-Daulah, and Othman said, "O King of the age,
when I came to the palace gate, I espied an eunuch seated there
in a chair of gold and he was passing proud for, when he saw me
approach, he stretched himself at full length albeit he had been
sitting in his chair and entreated me contumeliously, neither
offered to rise to me. So I began to speak to him and he answered
without stirring, whereat wrath get hold of me and I drew the
mace upon him, thinking to smite him. But he snatched it from me
and beat me and my men therewith and overthrew us. So we fled
from before him and could not prevail against him." At this, the
King was wroth and said, "Let an hundred men go down to him."
Accordingly, the hundred men went down to attack him; but he
arose and fell upon them with the mace and ceased not smiting
them till he had put them to the rout; when he regained his
chair; upon which they returned to the King and told him what had
passed, saying, "O King of the age, he beat us and we fled for
fear of him." Then the King sent two hundred men against him, but
these also he put to the rout, and Shams Al-Daulah said to his
Minister, "I charge thee, O Wazir, take five hundred men and
bring this eunuch in haste, and with him his master Judar and his
brothers." Replied the Wazir, "O King of the age, I need no
soldiers, but will go down to him alone and unarmed." "Go," quoth
the King, "and do as thou seest suitable." So the Wazir laid down
his arms and donning a white habit,[FN#304] took a rosary in his
hand and set out afoot alone and unattended. When he came to
Judar's gate, he saw the slave sitting there; so he went up to
him and seating himself by his side courteously, said to him,
"Peace be with thee!"; whereto he replied, "And on thee be peace,
O mortal! What wilt thou?" When the Wazir heard him say "O
mortal," he knew him to be of the Jinn and quaked for fear; then
he asked him, "O my lord, tell me, is thy master Judar here?"
Answered the eunuch, "Yes, he is in the palace." Quoth the
Minister, "O my lord, go thou to him and say to him, 'King Shams
Al-Daulah saluteth thee and biddeth thee honour his dwelling with
thy presence and eat of a banquet he hath made for thee;'" Quoth
the eunuch, "Tarry thou here, whilst I consult him. So the Wazir
stood in a respectful attitude, whilst the Marid went up to the
palace and said to Judar, "Know, O my lord, that the King sent to
thee an Emir and fifty men, and I beat them and drove them away.
Then he sent an hundred men and I beat them also; then two
hundred, and these also I put to the rout. And now he hath sent
thee his Wazir unarmed, bidding thee visit him and eat of his
banquet. What sayst thou?" Said Judar, "Go, bring the Wazir
hither." So the Marid went down and said to him, "O Wazir, come
speak with my lord." "On my head be it.", replied he and going in
to Judar, found him seated, in greater state than the King, upon
a carpet, whose like the King could not spread, and was dazed and
amazed at the goodliness of the palace and its decoration and
appointments, which made him seem as he were a beggar in
comparison. So he kissed the ground before Judar and called down
blessings on him; and Judar said to him, "What is thy business, O
Wazir?" Replied he, "O my lord, thy friend King Shams Al-Daulah
saluteth thee with the salaam and longeth to look upon thy face;
wherefore he hath made thee an entertainment. So say, wilt thou
heal his heart and eat of his banquet?" Quoth Judar, "If he be
indeed my friend, salute him and bid him come to me." "On my head
be it," quoth the Minister. Then Judar bringing out the ring
rubbed it and bade the Jinni fetch him a dress of the best, which
he gave to the Wazir saying, "Don this dress and go tell the King
what I say." So the Wazir donned the dress, the like whereof he
had never donned, and returning to the King told him what had
passed and praised the palace and that which was therein, saying,
"Judar biddeth thee to him." So the King called out, "Up, ye men;
mount your horses and bring me my steed, that we may go to
Judar!" Then he and his suite rode off for the Cairene palace.
Meanwhile Judar summoned the Marid and said to him, "It is my
will that thou bring me some of the Ifrits at thy command in the
guise of guards and station them in the open square before the
palace, that the King may see them and be awed by them; so shall
his heart tremble and he shall know that my power and majesty be
greater than his." Thereupon Al-Ra'ad brought him two hundred
Ifrits of great stature and strength, in the guise of guards,
magnificently armed and equipped, and when the King came and saw
these tall burly fellows his heart feared them. Then he entered
the palace, and found Judar sitting in such state as nor King nor
Sultan could even. So he saluted him and made his obeisance to
him, yet Judar rose not to him nor did him honour nor said "Be
seated," but left him standing,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
King entered, Judar rose not to him, nor did him honour nor even
said "Be seated!"; but left him standing,[FN#305] so that fear
entered into him and he could neither sit nor go away and said to
himself, "If he feared me, he would not leave me thus unheeded
peradventure he will do me a mischief, because of that which I
did with his brothers." Then said Judar, "O King of the age, it
beseemeth not the like of thee to wrong the folk and take away
their good." Replied the King, "O my lord, deign excuse me, for
greed impelled me to this and fate was thereby fulfilled; and,
were there no offending, there would be no forgiving." And he
went on to excuse himself for the past and pray to him for pardon
and indulgence till he recited amongst other things this poetry,

"O thou of generous seed and true nobility, * Reproach me not for
     that which came from me to thee
We pardon thee if thou have wrought us any wrong * And if I
     wrought the wrong I pray thee pardon me!"

And he ceased not to humble himself before him, till he said,
"Allah pardon thee!" and bade him be seated. So he sat down and
Judar invested him with garments of pardon and immunity and
ordered his brothers spread the table. When they had eaten, he
clad the whole of the King's company in robes of honour and gave
them largesse; after which he bade the King depart. So he went
forth and thereafter came every day to visit Judar and held not
his Divan save in his house: wherefore friendship and familiarity
waxed great between them, and they abode thus awhile, till one
day the King, being alone with his Minister, said to him, "O
Wazir, I fear lest Judar slay me and take the kingdom away from
me." Replied the Wazir, "O King of the age, as for his taking the
kingdom from thee, have no fear of that, for Judar's present
estate is greater than that of the King, and to take the kingdom
would be a lowering of his dignity; but, if thou fear that he
kill thee, thou hast a daughter: give her to him to wife and thou
and he will be of one condition." Quoth the King, "O Wazir, be
thou intermediary between us and him"; and quoth the Minister,
"Do thou invite him to an entertainment and pass the night with
him in one of thy saloons. Then bid thy daughter don her richest
dress and ornaments and pass by the door of the saloon. When he
seeth her, he will assuredly fall in love with her, and when we
know this, I will turn to him and tell him that she is thy
daughter and engage him in converse and lead him on, so that thou
shalt seem to know nothing of the matter, till he ask her to thee
to wife. When thou hast married him to the Princess, thou and he
will be as one thing and thou wilt be safe from him; and if he
die, thou wilt inherit all he hath, both great and small."
Replied the King, "Thou sayst sooth, O my Wazir," and made a
banquet and invited thereto Judar who came to the Sultan's palace
and they sat in the saloon in great good cheer till the end of
the day. Now the King had commanded his wife to array the maiden
in her richest raiment and ornaments and carry her by the door of
the saloon. She did as he told her, and when Judar saw the
Princess, who had not her match for beauty and grace, he looked
fixedly at her and said, "Ah!"; and his limbs were loosened; for
love and longing and passion and pine were sore upon him; desire
and transport get hold upon him and he turned pale. Quoth the
Wazir, "May no harm befall thee, O my lord! Why do I see thee
change colour and in suffering?" Asked Judar, "O Wazir, whose
daughter is this damsel? Verily she hath enthralled me and
ravished my reason." Replied the Wazir, "She is the daughter of
thy friend the King; and if she please thee, I will speak to him
that he marry thee to her." Quoth Judar, "Do so, O Wazir, and as
I live, I will bestow on thee what thou wilt and will give the
King whatsoever he shall ask to her dowry; and we will become
friends and kinsfolk." Quoth the Minister, "It shall go hard but
thy desire be accomplished." Then he turned to the King and said
in his ear, "O King of the age, thy friend Judar seeketh alliance
with thee and will have me ask of thee for him the hand of thy
daughter, the Princess Asiyah; so disappoint me not. but accept
my intercession, and what dowry soever thou askest he will give
thee." Said the King, "The dowry I have already received, and as
for the girl, she is his handmaid; I give her to him to wife and
he will do me honour by accepting her."--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Wazir whispered the King, "Judar seeketh alliance with thee by
taking thy daughter to wife," the other replied, "The dowry I
have already received, and the girl is his handmaid: he will do
me honour by accepting her." So they spent the rest of that night
together and on the morrow the King held a court, to which he
summoned great and small, together with the Shaykh
al-Islam.[FN#306] Then Judar demanded the Princess in marriage
and the King said, "The dowry I have received." Thereupon they
drew up the marriage contract and Judar sent for the saddle bags
containing the jewels and gave them to the King as settlement
upon his daughter. The drums beat and the pipes sounded and they
held high festival, whilst Judar went in unto the girl.
Thenceforward he and the King were as one flesh and they abode
thus for many days, till Shams al-Daulah died; whereupon the
troops proclaimed Judar Sultan, and he refused; but they
importuned him, till he consented and they made him King in his
father in law's stead. Then he bade build a cathedral mosque over
the late King's tomb in the Bundukániyah[FN#307] quarter and
endowed it. Now the quarter of Judar's house was called
Yamániyah; but, when he became Sultan he built therein a
congregational mosque and other buildings, wherefore the quarter
was named after him and was called the Judariyah[FN#308] quarter.
Moreover, he made his brother Sálim his Wazir of the right and
his brother Salím his Wazir of the left hand; and thus they abode
a year and no more; for, at the end of that time, Sálim said to
Salím, "O my brother, how long is this state to last? Shall we
pass our whole lives in slavery to our brother Judar? We shall
never enjoy luck or lordship whilst he lives," adding, "so how
shall we do to kill him and take the ring and the saddle bags?"
Replied Salím, "Thou art craftier than I; do thou devise, whereby
we may kill him." "If I effect this," asked Sálim, "wilt thou
agree that I be Sultan and keep the ring and that thou be my
right hand Wazir and have the saddle bags?" Salím answered, "I
consent to this;" and they agreed to slay Judar their brother for
love of the world and of dominion. So they laid a snare for Judar
and said to him, "O our brother, verily we have a mind to glory
in thee and would fain have thee enter our houses and eat of our
entertainment and solace our hearts." Replied Judar, "So be it,
in whose house shall the banquet be?" "In mine," said Sálim "and
after thou hast eaten of my victual, thou shalt be the guest of
my brother." Said Judar, " 'Tis well," and went with him to his
house, where he set before him poisoned food, of which when he
had eaten, his flesh rotted from his bones and he died.[FN#309]
Then Sálim came up to him and would have drawn the ring from his
finger, but it resisted him; so he cut off the finger with a
knife. Then he rubbed the ring and the Marid presented himself,
saying, "Adsum! Ask what thou wilt." Quoth Sálim, "Take my
brother Salím and put him to death and carry forth the two
bodies, the poisoned and the slaughtered, and cast them down
before the troops." So the Marid took Salím and slew him; then,
carrying the two corpses forth, he cast them down before the
chief officers of the army, who were sitting at table in the
parlour of the house. When they saw Judar and Salím slain, they
raised their hands from the food and fear get hold of them and
they said to the Marid, "Who hath dealt thus with the Sultan and
the Wazir Replied the Jinni, "Their brother Sálim." And behold,
Sálim came up to them and said, "O soldiers, eat and make merry,
for Judar is dead and I have taken to me the seal ring, whereof
the Marid before you is the servant; and I bade him slay my
brother Salím lest he dispute the kingdom with me, for he was a
traitor and I feared lest he should betray me. So now I am become
Sultan over you; will ye accept of me? If not, I will rub the
ring and bid the Marid slay you all, great and small."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and  Twenty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sálim said to the officers, "Will ye accept me as your Sultan,
otherwise I will rub the ring and the Marid shall slay you all,
great and small?"; they replied, "We accept thee to King and
Sultan." Then he bade bury his brothers and summoned the Divan;
and some of the folk followed the funeral, whilst others forewent
him in state procession to the audience hall of the palace, where
he sat down on the throne and they did homage to him as King;
after which he said, "It is my will to marry my brother Judar's
wife." Quoth they, "Wait till the days of widowhood are
accomplished.[FN#310] Quoth he, "I know not days of widowhood nor
aught else. As my head liveth, I needs must go in unto her this
very night." So they drew up the marriage contract and sent to
tell the Princess Asiyah, who replied, "Bid him enter."
Accordingly, he went in to her and she received him with a show
of joy and welcome; but by and by she gave him poison in water
and made an end of him. Then she took the ring and broke it, that
none might possess it thenceforward, and tore up the saddle bags;
after which she sent to the Shaykh al-Islam and other great
officers of state, telling them what had passed and saying to
them, "Choose you out a King to rule over you." And this is all
that hath come down to us of the Story of Judar and his
Brethren.[FN#311] But I have also heard, O King, a tale called
the




        HISTORY OF GHARIB AND HIS BROTHER AJIB.[FN#312]



There was once in olden time a King of might, Kundamir highs, who
had been a brave and doughty man of war, a Kahramán,[FN#313] in
his day, but was grown passing old and decrepit. Now it pleased
Allah to vouchsafe him, in his extreme senility, a son, whom he
named Ajíb[FN#314]--the Wonderful--because of his beauty and
loveliness; so he committed the babe to the midwives and wet-
nurses and handmaids and serving-women, and they reared him till
he was full seven years old, when his father gave him in charge
to a divine of his own folk and faith. The priest taught him the
laws and tenets of their Misbelief and instructed him in
philosophy and all manner of other knowledge, and it needed but
three full told years ere he was proficient therein and his
spirit waxed resolute and his judgment mature; and he became
learned, eloquent and philosophic[FN#315]; consorting with the
wise and disputing with the doctors of the law. When his father
saw this of him, it pleased him and he taught him to back the
steed and stab with spear and smite with sword, till he grew to
be an accomplished cavalier, versed in all martial exercises;
and, by the end of his twentieth year, he surpassed in all things
all the folk of his day. But his skill in weapons made him grow
up a stubborn tyrant and a devil arrogant, using to ride forth a-
hunting and a-chasing amongst a thousand horsemen and to make
raids and razzias upon the neighbouring knights, cutting off
caravans and carrying away the daughters of Kings and nobles;
wherefore many brought complaints against him to his father, who
cried out to five of his slaves and when they came said, "Seize
this dog!" So they seized Prince Ajib and, pinioning his hands
behind him, beat him by his father's command till he lost his
senses; after which the King imprisoned him in a chamber so dark
one might not know heaven from earth or length from breadth; and
there he abode two days and a night. Then the Emirs went in to
the King and, kissing the ground between his hands, interceded
with him for the Prince, and he released him. So Ajib bore with
his father for ten days, at the end of which he went in to him as
he slept by night and smote his neck. When the day rose, he
mounted the throne of his sire's estate and bade his men arm
themselves cap-à-pie in steel and stand with drawn swords in
front of him and on his right hand and on his left. By and by,
the Emirs and Captains entered and finding their King slain and
his son Ajib seated on the throne were confounded in mind and
knew not what to do. But Ajib said to them, "O folk, verily ye
see what your King hath gained. Whoso obeyeth me, I will honour
him, and whoso gainsayeth me I will do with him that which I did
with my sire." When they heard these words they feared lest he do
them a mischief; so they replied, "Thou art our King and the son
of our King;" and kissed ground before him; whereupon he thanked
them and rejoiced in them. Then he bade bring forth money and
apparel and clad them in sumptuous robes of honour and showered
largesse upon them, wherefore they all loved him and obeyed him.
In like manner he honoured the governors of the Provinces and the
Shaykhs of the Badawin, both tributary and independent, so that
the whole kingdom submitted to him and the folk obeyed him and he
reigned and bade and forbade in peace and quiet for a time of
five months. One Night, however, he dreamed a dream as he lay
slumbering; whereupon he awoke trembling, nor did sleep visit him
again till the morning. As soon as it was dawn he mounted his
throne and his officers stood before him, right and left. Then he
called the oneiromants and the astrologers and said to them
"Expound to me my dream!" "What was the dream?" asked they; and
he answered, "As I slept last Night, I saw my father standing
before me, with his yard uncovered, and there came forth of it a
thing the bigness of a bee, which grew till it became as a mighty
lion, with claws like hangers. As I lay wondering at this lo! it
ran upon me and smiting me with its claws, rent my belly in
sunder; whereupon I awoke startled and trembling. So expound ye
to me the meaning of this dream." The interpreters looked one at
other; and, after considering, said, "O mighty King, this dream
pointeth to one born of thy sire, between whom and thee shall
befal strife and enmity, wherein he shall get the better of thee:
so be on thy guard against him, by reason of this thy vision."
When Ajib heard their words, he said, "I have no brother whom I
should fear; so this your speech is mere lying." They replied,
"We tell thee naught save what we know;" but he was an angered
with them and bastinadoed them. Then he rose and, going in to the
paternal palace, examined his father's concubines and found one
of them seven months gone with child; whereupon he gave an order
to two of his slaves, saying, "Take this damsel, ye twain, and
carry her to the sea-shore and drown her." So they took her
forthright and, going to the sea-shore, designed to drown her,
when they looked at her and seeing her to be of singular beauty
and loveliness said to each other, "Why should we drown this
damsel? Let us rather carry her to the forest and live with her
there in rare love-liasse." Then they took her and fared on with
her days and nights till they had borne her afar off and had
brought her to a bushy forest, abounding in fruit-trees and
streams, where they both thought at the same time to win their
will of her; but each said, "I will have her first." So they fell
out one with the other concerning this, and while so doing a
company of blackamoors came down upon them, and they drew their
swords and both sides fell to laying on load. The mellay waxed
hot with cut and thrust; and the two slaves fought their best;
but the blacks slew them both in less than the twinkling of an
eye. So the damsel abode alone and wandered about the forest,
eating of its fruits and drinking of its founts, till in due time
she gave birth to a boy, brown but clean limbed and comely, whom
she named Gharíb, the Stranger, by reason of her strangerhood.
Then she cut his navel-string and wrapping him in some of her own
clothes, gave him to suck, harrowed at heart, and with vitals
sorrowing for the estate she had lost and its honour and solace.
And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say,

      When it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
abode in the bush harrowed at heart and a-sorrowed; but she
suckled her babe albeit she was full of grief and fear for her
loneliness. Now behold, one day, there came horsemen and footmen
into the forest with hawks and hounds and horses laden with
partridges and cranes and wild geese and divers and other
waterfowl; and young ostriches and hares and gazelles and wild
oxen and lynxes and wolves and lions.[FN#316] Presently, these
Arabs entered the thicket and came upon the damsel, sitting with
her child on her breast a-suckling him: so they drew near and
asked her, "Say art thou a mortal or a Jinniyah?" Answered she,
"I am a mortal, O Chiefs of the Arabs." Thereupon they told their
Emir, whose name was Mardás, Prince of the Banú Kahtán,[FN#317]
and who had come forth that day to hunt with five hundred of his
cousins and the nobles of his tribe, and who in the course of the
chase had happened upon her. He bade them bring her before him,
which they did and she related to him her past from first to
last, whereat he marvelled. Then he cried to his kinsmen and
escort to continue the chase, after which they took her and
returned to their encampment, where the Emir appointed her a
separate dwelling-place and five damsels to serve her; and he
loved her with exceeding love and went in to her and lay with
her. She conceived by him straightway, and, when her months were
accomplished, she bare a man child and named him Sahím al-
Layl.[FN#318] He grew up with his brother Gharib among the nurses
and throve and waxed upon the lap of the Emir Mardas who, in due
time committed the two boys to a Fakih for instruction in the
things of their faith; after which he gave them in charge to
valiant knights of the Arabs, for training them to smite with
sword and lunge with lance and shoot with shaft; so by the time
they reached the age of fifteen, they knew all they needed and
surpassed each and every brave of their tribe; for Gharib would
undertake a thousand horse and Sahim al-Layl no fewer. Now Mardas
had many enemies, and the men of his tribe were the bravest of
all the Arabs, being doughty cavaliers, none might warm himself
at their fire.[FN#319] In his neighbourhood was an Emir of the
Arabs, Hassan bin Sábit hight, who was his intimate friend; and
he took to wife a noble lady of his tribe and bade all his
friends to the wedding, amongst them Mardas lord of the Banu
Kahtan, who accepted his invitation and set forth with three
hundred riders of his tribe, leaving other four hundred to guard
the women. Hassan met him with honour and seated him in the
highest stead. Then came all the cavaliers to the bridal and he
made them bride-feasts and held high festival by reason of the
marriage, after which the Arabs departed to their dwelling-
places. When Mardas came in sight of his camp, he saw slain men
lying about and birds hovering over them right and left; and his
heart sank within him at the sight. Then he entered the camp and
was met by Gharib, clad in complete suit of ring-mail, who gave
him joy of his safe return. Quoth Mardas, "What meaneth this
case, O Gharib?"; and quoth Gharib, "Al-Hamal bin Májid attacked
us with five hundred horsemen of his tribe." Now the reason of
this was that the Emir Mardas had a daughter called Mahdíyah,
seer never saw fairer than she, and Al-Hamal, lord of the Banu
Nabhán,[FN#320] heard of her charms; whereupon he took horse with
five hundred of his men and rode to Mardas to demand her hand;
but he was not accepted and was sent away disappointed.[FN#321]
So he awaited till Mardas was absent on his visit to Hassan, when
he mounted with his champions and, falling upon the camp of the
Banu Kahtan, slew a number of their knights and the rest fled to
the mountains. Now Gharib and his brother had ridden forth a-
hunting and chasing with an hundred horse and returned not till
midday, when they found that Al-Hamal had seized the camp and all
therein and had carried off the maidens, among whom was Mahdiyah,
driving her away with the captives. When Gharib saw this, he lost
his wits for rage and cried out to Sahim, saying, "O my brother,
O son of an accursed dam,[FN#322] they have plundered our camp
and carried off our women and children! Up and at the enemy, that
we may deliver the captives!" So Gharib and Sahim and their
hundred horse rushed upon the foe, and Gharib's wrath redoubled,
and he reaped a harvest of heads slain, giving the champions
death-cup to drain, till he won to Al-Hamal and saw Mahdiyah
among the captives. Then he drave at the lord of the Banu Nabhan
braves; with his lance lunged him and from his destrier hurled
him; nor was the time of mid-afternoon prayer come before he had
slain the most part of the foe and put to rout the rest and
rescued the captives; whereupon he returned to the camp in
triumph, bearing the head of Al-Hamal on the point of his lance
and improvising these couplets,

"I am he who is known on the day of fight, * And the Jinn of
     earth at my shade take fright: 
And a sword have I when my right hand wields, * Death hastens
     from left on mankind to alight; 
I have eke a lance and who look thereon * See a crescent head of
     the liveliest light.[FN#323] 
And Gharib I'm highs of my tribe the brave * And if few my men I
     feel naught affright." 

Hardly had Gharib made an end of these verses when up came Mardas
who, seeing the slain and the vultures, was sore troubled and
with fluttering heart asked the cause. The youth, after due
greetings, related all that had befallen the tribe in his step-
sire's absence. So Mardas thanked him and said, "Thou hast well
requited our fosterage-pains in rearing thee, O Gharib!"; then he
alighted and entered his pavilion, and the men stood about him,
all the tribe praising Gharib and saying, "O our Emir, but for
Gharib, not one of the tribe had been saved!" And Mardas again
thanked him.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say,

      When it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Mardas,
hearing the tribesmen's praises of Gharib, again thanked him for
his derring-do. But the youth, when he had delivered Mahdiyah
from Al-Hamal whom he slew, was smitten by the shaft of her
glances and fell into the nets of her allurements, wherefore his
heart could not forget her and he became drowned in love and
longing and the sweets of sleep forsook him and he had no joy of
drink or meat. He would spur his horse up to the mountain tops,
where he would spend the day in composing verses and return at
nightfall; and indeed manifest upon him were the signs of
affection and distraction. He discovered his secret to one of his
companions and it became noised abroad in the camp, till it
reached the ears of Mardas, who thundered and lightened and rose
up and sat down and sparked and snorted and reviled the sun and
the moon, saying, "This is the reward of him who reareth the sons
of adultery! But except I kill Gharib, I shall be put to
shame.''[FN#324] Then he consulted one of the wise men of his
tribe and after telling his secret took counsel with him of
killing the youth. Quoth the elder, "O Emir, 'twas but yesterday
that he freed thy daughter from captivity. If there be no help
for it but thou must slay him, let it be by the hand of another
than thyself, so none of the folk may misdoubt of thee." Quoth
Mardas, "Advise me how I may do him die, for I look to none but
to thee for his death." "O Emir," answered the other, "wait till
he go forth to hunt and chase, when do thou take an hundred horse
and lie in wait for him in some cave till he pass; then fall upon
him unawares and cut him in pieces, so shalt thou be quit of his
reproach." Said Mardas, "This should serve me well;" and chose
out an hundred and fifty of his furious knights and
Amalekites[FN#325] whom he lessoned to his will. Then he watched
Gharib till one day, he went forth to hunt and rode far away
amongst the dells and hills; whereupon Mardas followed him with
his men, ill-omened wights, and lay in wait for him by the way
against he should return from the chase that they might sally
forth and slay him. But as they lay in ambush among the trees
behold, there fell upon them five hundred true Amalekites, who
slew sixty of them and made fourscore and ten prisoners and
trussed up Mardas with his arms behind his back. Now the reason
of this was that when Gharib put Al-Hamal and his men to the
sword, the rest fled and ceased not flying till they reached
their lord's brother and told him what had happened, whereat his
Doom-day rose and he gathered together his Amalekites and
choosing out five hundred cavaliers, each fifty ells
high,[FN#326] set out with them in quest of blood-revengement for
his brother. By the way he fell in with Mardas and his companions
and there happened between them what happened; after which he
bade his men alight and rest, saying, "O folk, the idols have
given us an easy brood-wreak; so guard ye Mardas and his
tribesmen, till I carry them away and do them die with the
foulest of deaths." When Mardas saw himself a prisoner, he
repented of what he had done and said, "This is the reward of
rebelling against the Lord!" Then the enemy passed the night
rejoicing in their victory, whilst Mardas and his men despaired
of life and made sure of doom. So far concerning them; but as
regards Sahim al-Layl, who had been wounded in the fight with Al-
Hamal, he went in to his sister Mahdiyah, and she rose to him and
kissed his hands, saying, "May thy two hands ne'er wither nor
shine enemies have occasion to be blither! But for thee and
Gharib, we had not escaped captivity among our foes. Know,
however, O my brother, that thy father hath ridden forth with an
hundred and fifty horse, purposing to slaughter Gharib; and thou
wottest it would be sore loss and foul wrong to slay him, for
that it was he who saved your shame and rescued your good." When
Sahim heard this, the light in his sight became Night, he donned
his battle-harness; and, mounting steed, rode for the place where
Gharib was a-hunting. He presently came up with him and found
that he had taken great plenty of game; so he accosted him and
saluted him and said, "O my brother, why didst thou go forth
without telling me?" Replied Gharib, "By Allah, naught hindered
me but that I saw thee wounded and thought to give thee rest."
Then said Sahim, "O my brother, beware of my sire!" and told him
how Mardas was abroad with an hundred and fifty men, seeking to
slay him. Quoth Gharib, "Allah shall cause his treason to cut his
own throat." Then the brothers set out campwards, but night
overtook them by the way and they rode on in the darkness, till
they drew near the Wady wherein the enemy lay and heard the
neighing of steeds in the gloom; whereupon said Sahim, "O my
brother, my father and his men are ambushed in yonder valley; let
us flee from it." But Gharib dismounted and throwing his bridle
to his brother, said to him, "Stay in this stead till I come back
to thee." Then he went on till he drew in sight of the folk, when
he saw that they were not of his tribe and heard them naming
Mardas and saying, "We will not slay him, save in his own land."
Wherefore he knew that nuncle Mardas was their prisoner, and
said, "By the life of Mahdiyah, I will not depart hence till I
have delivered her father, that she may not be troubled!" Then he
sought and ceased not seeking till he hit upon Mardas and found
him bound with cords; so he sat down by his side and said to him,
"Heaven deliver thee, O uncle, from these bonds and this shame!"
When Mardas saw Gharib his reason fled, and he said to him, "O my
son, I am under thy protection: so deliver me in right of my
fosterage of thee!" Quoth Gharib, "If I deliver thee, wilt thou
give me Mahdiyah?" Quoth the Emir, "O my son, by whatso I hold
sacred, she is thine to all time!" So he loosed him, saying,
"Make for the horses, for thy son Sahim is there:" and Mardas
crept along like a snake till he came to his son, who rejoiced in
him and congratulated him on his escape. Meanwhile, Gharib
unbound one after another of the prisoners, till he had freed the
whole ninety and they were all far from the foe. Then he sent
them their weapons and war horses, saying to them, "Mount ye and
scatter yourselves round about the enemy and cry out, Ho, sons of
Kahtan! And when they awake, do ye remove from them and encircle
them in a thin ring.''[FN#327] So he waited till the last and
third watch of the Night, when he cried out, "Ho, sons of
Kahtan!" and his men answered in like guise, crying, "Ho, sons of
Kahtan," as with one voice; and the mountains echoed their
slogan, so that it seemed to the raiders as though the whole
tribe of Banu Kahtan were assailing them; wherefore they all
snatched up their arms and fell upon one another,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say,

     When it was the Six Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
raiders[FN#328] awoke from sleep and heard Gharib and his men
crying out, "Ho, sons of Kahtan!"; they imagined that the whole
tribe was assailing them; wherefore they snatched up their arms
and fell one upon other with mighty slaughter. Gharib and his men
held aloof, and they fought one another till daybreak, when
Gharib and Mardas and their ninety warriors came down upon them
and killed some of them and put the rest to flight. Then the Banu
Kahtan took the horses of the fugitives and the weapons of the
slain and returned to their tribal camp, whilst Mardas could
hardly credit his deliverance from the foe. When they reached the
encampment, the stay-at-home folk all came forth to meet them and
rejoiced in their safe return. Then they alighted and betook them
to their tents; and all the youths of the tribe flocked to
Gharib's stead and great and small saluted him and did him
honour. But when Mardas saw this and the youths encircling his
stepson he waxed more jealous of Gharib than before and said to
his kinsfolk, "Verily, hatred of Gharib groweth on my heart, and
what irketh me most is that I see thes