y name is Saba' al-
Kifar." Said Gharib, "Return to thy lord and tell him that the
commander of this host is called Gharib, son of Kundamir, King of
Cufa, whom his son Ajib slew, and he is come to take blood-
revenge for his sire on Ajib the perfidious hound." So Saba' al-
Kifar returned to the city and in great joy kissed the ground,
when Al-Damigh said, "What is going on there, O Saba' al-Kifar?"
He replied, "O my master, the leader of yon host is thy nephew,
thy brother's son," and told him all. The King deemed himself in
a dream and asked the messenger, "O Saba' al-Kifar, is this thou
tellest me true?" and the Desert-lion answered, "As thy head
liveth, it is sooth!" Then Al-Damigh bade his chief officers take
horse forthright and all rode out to the camp, whence Gharib came
forth and met him and they embraced and saluted each other; after
which Gharib carried him to his tents and they sat down on beds
of estate. Al-Damigh rejoiced in Gharib, his brother's son, and
presently turning to him, said, "I also have yearned to take
blood-revenge for thy father, but could not avail against the dog
thy brother; for that his troops are many and my troops are few."
Replied Gharib, "O uncle, here am I come to avenge my sire and
blot out our shame and rid the realm of Ajib." Said Al-Damigh, "O
son of my brother, thou hast two blood-wreaks to take, that of
thy father and that of thy mother." Asked Gharib, "And what
aileth my mother?" and Al-Damigh answered, "Thy brother Ajib hath
slain her."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say,

      When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib
heard these words of his uncle Al-Damigh, "Verily thy brother
Ajib hath slain her!", he asked what was the cause thereof and
was told of all that had happened, especially how Mardas had
married his daughter to Ajib who was about to go into her.
Thereupon Gharib's reason fled from his head and he swooned away
and was nigh upon death. No sooner did he come to himself than he
cried out to the troops, saying, "To horse!" But Al-Damigh said
to him, "O son of my brother, wait till I make ready mine affairs
and mount among my men and fare with thee at thy stirrup."
Replied Gharib "I have no patience to wait; do thou equip thy
troops and join me at Cufa." Thereupon Gharib mounted with his
troops and rode, till he came to the town of Babel,[FN#363] whose
folk took fright at him. Now there was in this town a King called
Jamak, under whose hand were twenty thousand horsemen, and there
gathered themselves together to him from the villages other fifty
thousand horse, who pitched their tents facing the city. Then
Gharib wrote a letter and sent it to King Jamak by a messenger,
who came up to the city-gate and cried out, saying, "I am an
envoy;" whereupon the Warder of the Gate went in and told Jamak,
who said, "Bring him to me." So he led in the messenger, who
kissing the ground before the King, gave him the letter, and
Jamak opened it and read its contents as follows: "Praise be to
Allah, Lord of the Three Worlds, Lord of all things, who giveth
to all creatures their daily bread and who over all things is
Omnipotent! These from Gharib, son of King Kundamir, lord of Irak
and Cufa, to Jamak. Immediately this letter reacheth thee, let
not thy reply be other than to break shine idols and confess the
unity of the All-knowing King, Creator of light and darkness,
Creator of all things, the All-powerful; and except thou do as I
bid thee, I will make this day the blackest of thy days. Peace be
on those who follow in the way of Salvation, fearing the issues
of fornication, and obey the hest of the Most High King, Lord of
this world and the next, Him who saith to a thing, ‘Be'; and it
becometh!" Now when Jamak read this letter, his eyes paled and
his colour failed and he cried out to the messenger, "Go to thy
lord and say to him, ‘To-morrow, at daybreak there shall be fight
and conflict and it shall appear who is the conquering hero.'" So
he returned and told Gharib, who bade his men make ready for
battle, whilst Jamak commanded his tents to be pitched in face of
Gharib's camp; and his troops poured forth like the surging sea
and passed the night with intention of slaughter. As soon as
dawned the day, the two hosts mounted and drew up in battle array
and beat their drums amain and drave their steeds of swiftest
strain; and they filled the whole earthly plain; and the
champions to come out were fain. Now the first who sallied forth
a championing to the field was the Ghul of the Mountain, bearing
on shoulder a terrible tree, and he cried out between the two
hosts, saying, "I am Sa'adan the Ghul! Who is for fighting, who
is for jousting? Let no sluggard come forth to me nor weakling."
And he called out to his sons, saying, "Woe to you! Bring me fuel
and fire, for I am an-hungered." So they cried upon their slaves
who brought firewood and kindled a fire in the heart of the
plain. Then there came out to him a man of the Kafirs, an
Amalekite of the unbelieving Amalekites, bearing on his shoulder
a mace like the mast of a ship, and drove at Sa'adan the Ghul,
saying, "Woe to thee, O Sa'adan!" When the giant heard this, he
waxed furious beyond measure and raising his tree club, aimed at
the Infidel a blow, that hummed through the air. The Amalekite
met the stroke with his mace, but the tree beat down his guard
and descending with its own weight, together with the weight of
the mace upon his head, beat in his brain pan, and he fell like a
long-stemmed palm-tree. Thereupon Sa'adan cried to his slaves,
saying, "Take this fatted calf and roast him quickly." So they
hastened to skin the Infidel and roasted him and brought him to
the Ghul, who ate his flesh and crunched his bones.[FN#364] Now
when the Kafirs saw how Sa'adan did with their fellow, their hair
and pile stood on end; their skins quaked, their colour changed,
their hearts died within them and they said to one another,
"Whoso goeth out against this Ghul, he eateth him and cracketh
his bones and causeth him to lack the zephyr-wind of the world."
Wherefore they held their hands, quailing for fear of the Ghul
and his sons and turned to fly, making for the town; but Gharib
cried out to his troops, saying, "Up and after the runaways!" So
the Persians and the Arabs crave after the King of Babel and his
host and caused sword to smite them, till they slew of them
twenty thousand or more. Then the fugitives crowded together in
the city gate and they killed of them much people; and they could
not avail to shut the gate. So the Arabs and the Persians entered
with them, fighting, and Sa'adan, snatching a mace from one of
the slain, wielded it in the enemy's face and gained the city
race-course. Thence he fought his way through the foe and broke
into the King's palace, where he met with Jamak and so smote him
with the mace, that he toppled senseless to the ground. Then he
fell upon those who were in the palace and pounded them into
pieces, till all that were left cried out, "Quarter! Quarter!"
and Sa'adan said to them, "Pinion your King."--And Shahrazad saw
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say,



End of Vol 6.
                                



                    Arabian Nights, Volume 6
                           Footnotes



[FN#1] Lane (vol. iii. 1) calls our old friend "Es-Sindibád of
the Sea," and Benfey derives the name from the Sanskrit
"Siddhapati"=lord of sages. The etymology (in Heb. Sandabar and
in Greek Syntipas) is still uncertain, although the term often
occurs in Arab stories; and some look upon it as a mere
corruption of "Bidpai" (Bidyápati). The derivation offered by
Hole (Remarks on the Arabian Nights' Entertainments, by Richard
Hole, LL.D. London, Cadell, 1797) from the Persian ábád (a
region) is impossible. It is, however, not a little curious that
this purely Persian word (=a "habitation") should be found in
Indian names as early as Alexanders' day, e.g. the "Dachina
bades" of the Periplus is "Dakhsin-ábád," the Sanskr. being
"Dakshinapatha."

[FN#2] A porter like the famous Armenians of Constantinople. Some
edits. call him "Al-Hindibád."

[FN#3] Arab. "Karawán" (Charadrius œdicnemus, Linn.): its shrill
note is admired by Egyptians and hated by sportsmen.

[FN#4] This ejaculation, still popular, averts the evil eye. In
describing Sindbad the Seaman the Arab writer seems to repeat
what one reads of Marco Polo returned to Venice.

[FN#5] Our old friend must not be confounded with the eponym of
the "Sindibád-námah;" the Persian book of Sindbad the Sage. See
Night dlxxviii.

[FN#6] The first and second are from Eccles. chapts. vii. 1, and
ix. 4. The Bul. Edit. reads for the third, "The grave is better
than the palace." None are from Solomon, but Easterns do not
"verify quotations."

[FN#7] Arab. "Kánún"; a furnace, a brasier before noticed (vol.
v., p. 272); here a pot full of charcoal sunk in the ground, or a
little hearth of clay shaped like a horseshoe and opening down
wind.

[FN#8] These fish-islands are common in the Classics, e.g. the
Pristis of Pliny (xvii. 4), which Olaus Magnus transfers to the
Baltic (xxi. 6) and makes timid as the whales of Nearchus. C. J.
Solinus (Plinii Simia) says, "Indica maria balænas habent ultra
spatia quatuor jugerum." See also Bochart's Hierozoicon (i. 50)
for Job's Leviathan (xli. 16-17). Hence deemed an island. A
basking whale would readily suggest the Krakan and Cetus of Olaus
Magnus (xxi. 25). Al-Kazwíni's famous treatise on the "Wonders of
the World" (Ajáib al-Makhlúkát) tells the same tale of the
"Sulahfah" tortoise, the colossochelys, for which see Night dl.

[FN#9] Sindbad does not say that he was a shipwrecked man, being
a model in the matter of "travellers' tales," i.e. he always
tells the truth when an untruth would not serve him.

[FN#10] Lane (iii. 83) would make this a corruption of the Hindu
"Maharáj"=great Rajah: but it is the name of the great autumnal
fête of the Guebres; a term composed of two good old Persian
words "Mihr" (the sun, whence "Mithras") and "ján"=life. As will
presently appear, in the days of the Just King Anushirwán, the
Persians possessed Southern Arabia and East Afica south of Cape
Guardafui (Jird Háfún). On the other hand, supposing the word to
be a corruption of Maharaj, Sindbad may allude to the famous
Narsinga kingdom in Mid-south India whose capital was Vijaya-
nagar; or to any great Indian Rajah even he of Kachch (Cutch),
famous in Moslem story as the Balhará (Ballaba Rais, who founded
the Ballabhi era; or the Zamorin of Camoens, the Samdry Rajah of
Malabar). For Mahrage, or Mihrage, see Renaudot's "Two Mohammedan
Travellers of the Ninth Century." In the account of Ceylon by
Wolf (English Transl. p. 168) it adjoins the "Ilhas de Cavalos"
(of wild horses) to which the Dutch merchants sent their brood-
mares. Sir W. Jones (Description of Asia, chapt. ii.) makes the
Arabian island Soborma or Mahráj=Borneo.

[FN#11] Arab. "Sáis"; the well-known Anglo-Indian word for a
groom or rather a "horse-keeper."

[FN#12] Arab. "Darakah"; whence our word.

[FN#13] The myth of mares being impregnated by the wind was known
to the Classics of Europe; and the "sea-stallion" may have arisen
from the Arab practice of picketing mare asses to be covered by
the wild ass. Colonel J. D. Watson of the Bombay Army suggests to
me that Sindbad was wrecked at the mouth of the Ran of Kachch
(Cutch) and was carried in a boat to one of the Islands there
formed during the rains and where the wild ass (Equus Onager,
Khar-gadh, in Pers. Gor-khar) still breeds. This would explain
the "stallions of the sea" and we find traces of the ass blood in
the true Kathiawár horse, with his dun colour, barred legs and
dorsal stripe.

[FN#14] The second or warrior caste (Kshatriya), popularly
supposed to have been annihilated by Battle-axe Ramá (Parashu
Ráma); but several tribes of Rajputs and other races claim the
honourable genealogy. Colonel Watson would explain the word by
"Shakháyát" or noble Káthis (Kathiawar-men), or by "Shikári," the
professional hunter here acting as stable-groom.

[FN#15] In Bul. Edit. "Kábil." Lane (iii. 88) supposes it to be
the "Bartail" of Al-Kazwini near Borneo and quotes the Spaniard
B. L. de Argensola (History of the Moluccas), who places near
Banda a desert island, Poelsatton, infamous for cries,
whistlings, roarings and dreadful apparitions, suggesting that it
was peopled by devils (Stevens, vol. i., p. 168).

[FN#16] Some texts substitute for this last phrase, "And the
sailors say that Al-Dajjál is there." He is a manner of Moslem
Antichrist, the Man of Sin per excellentiam, who will come in the
latter days and lay waste the earth, leading 70,000 Jews, till
encountered and slain by Jesus at the gate of Lud. (Sale's Essay,
sect. 4.)

[FN#17] Also from Al-Kazwini: it is an exaggerated description of
the whale still common off the East African Coast. My crew was
dreadfully frightened by one between Berberah and Aden. Nearchus
scared away the whales in the Persian Gulf by trumpets (Strabo,
lib. xv.). The owl-faced fish is unknown to me: it may perhaps be
a seal or a manatee. Hole says that Father Martini, the Jesuit
(seventeenth century), placed in the Canton Seas, an "animal with
the head of a bird and the tail of a fish,"—a parrot-beak?

[FN#18] The captain or master (not owner) of a ship.

[FN#19] The kindly Moslem feeling, shown to a namesake, however
humble.

[FN#20] A popular phrase to express utter desolation.

[FN#21] The literature of all peoples contains this physiological
perversion. Birds do not sing hymns; the song of the male is
simply to call the female and when the pairing-season ends all
are dumb. 

[FN#22] The older "roc." The word is Persian, with many meanings,
e.g. a cheek (Lalla "Rookh"); a "rook" (hero) at chess; a
rhinoceros, etc. The fable world-wide of the wundervogel is, as
usual, founded upon fact: man remembers and combines but does not
create. The Egyptian Bennu (Ti-bennu=phoenix) may have been a
reminiscence of gigantic pterodactyls and other winged monsters.
From the Nile the legend fabled by these Oriental "putters out or
five for one" overspread the world and gave birth to the Eorosh
of the Zend, whence the Pers. "Símurgh" (=the "thirty-fowl-
like"), the "Bar Yuchre" of the Rabbis, the "Garuda" of the
Hindus; the "Anká" ("long-neck") of the Arabs; the "Hathilinga
bird," of Buddhagosha's Parables, which had the strength of five
elephants; the "Kerkes" of the Turks; the "Gryps" of the Greeks;
the Russian "Norka"; the sacred dragon of the Chinese; the
Japanese "Pheng" and "Kirni"; the "wise and ancient Bird" which
sits upon the ash-tree yggdrasil, and the dragons, griffins,
basilisks, etc. of the Middle Ages. A second basis wanting only a
superstructure of exaggeration (M. Polo's Ruch had wing-feathers
twelve paces long) would be the huge birds but lately killed out.
Sindbad may allude to the Æpyornus of Madagascar, a gigantic
ostrich whose egg contains 2.35 gallons. The late Herr Hildebrand
discovered on the African coast, facing Madagascar, traces of
another huge bird. Bochart (Hierozoicon ii. 854) notices the
Avium Avis Ruch and taking the pulli was followed by lapidation
on the part of the parent bird. A Persian illustration in Lane
(iii. 90) shows the Rukh carrying off three elephants in beak and
pounces with the proportions of a hawk and field mice: and the
Rukh hawking at an elephant is a favourite Persian subject. It is
possible that the "Twelve Knights of the Round Table" were the
twelve Rukhs of Persian story. We need not go, with Faber, to the
Cherubim which guarded the Paradise-gate. The curious reader will
consult Dr. H. H. Wilson's Essays, edited by my learned
correspondent, Dr. Rost, Librarian of the India House (vol. i.
pp. 192-3).

[FN#23] It is not easy to explain this passage unless it be a
garbled allustion to the steel-plate of the diamond-cutter. Nor
can we account for the wide diffusion of this tale of perils
unless to enhance the value of the gem. Diamonds occur in
alluvial lands mostly open and comparatively level, as in India,
the Brazil and the Cape. Archbishop Epiphanius of Salamis (ob.
A.D. 403) tells this story about the jacinth or ruby (Epiphanii
Opera, a Petaio, Coloniæ 1682); and it was transferred to the
diamond by Marco Polo (iii. 29, "of Eagles bring up diamonds")
and Nicolo de Conti, whose "mountain Albenigaras" must be
Vijayanagar in the kingdom of Golconda. Major Rennel places the
famous mines of Pauna or Purna in a mountain-tract of more than
200 miles square to the southwest of the Jumna. Al-Kazwini
locates the "Chaos" in the "Valley of the Moon amongst the
mountains of Serendib" (Ceylon); the Chinese tell the same tale
in the campaigns of Hulaku; and it is known in Armenia. Col. Yule
(M. P. ii. 349) suggests that all these are ramifications of the
legend told by Herodotus concerning the Arabs and their cinnamon
(iii. 3). But whence did Herodotus borrow the tale?

[FN#24] Sindbad correctly describes the primitive way of
extracting camphor, a drug unknown to the Greeks and Romans,
introduced by the Arabs and ruined in reputation by M. Raspail.
The best Laurus Camphora grows in the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra
and Borneo: although Marsden (Marco Polo) declares that the tree
is not found South of the Equator. In the Calc. Edit. of two
hundred Nights the camphor-island (or peninsula) is called "Al-
Ríhah" which is the Arab name for Jericho-town.

[FN#25] In Bul. Edit. Kazkazan: Calc. Karkaddan and others
Karkand and Karkadan; the word being Persian, Karg or Kargadan;
the {Greek letters} of Ælian (Hist. Anim. xvi. 21). The length of
the horn (greatly exaggerated) shows that the white species is
meant; and it supplies only walking-sticks. Cups are made of the
black horn (a bundle of fibres) which, like Venetian glass, sweat
at the touch of poison. A section of the horn is supposed to show
white lines in the figure of a man, and sundry likenesses of
birds; but these I never saw. The rhinoceros gives splendid sport
and the African is perhaps the most dangerous of noble game. It
has served to explain away and abolish the unicorn among the
Scientists of Europe. But Central Africa with one voice assures
us that a horse-like animal with a single erectile horn on the
forehead exists. The late Dr. Baikic, of Niger fame, thoroughly
believed in it and those curious on the subject will read about
Abu Karn (Father of a Horn) in Preface (pp. xvi.-xviii.) of the
Voyage au Darfour, by Mohammed ibn Oman al-Tounsy (Al-Tunisi),
Paris, Duprat, 1845.

[FN#26] Ibn al-Wardi mentions an "Isle of Apes" in the Sea of
China and Al-Idrísi places it two days' sail from Sukutra (Dwipa
Sukhatra, Socotra). It is a popular error to explain the Homeric
and Herodotean legend of the Pygmies by anthropoid apes. The
Pygmy fable (Pygmæi Spithamai=1 cubit=3 spans) was, as usual,
based upon fact, as the explorations of late years have proved:
the dwarfs are homunculi of various tribes, the Akka, Doko, Tiki-
Tiki, Wambilikimo ("two-cubit men"), the stunted race that share
the central regions of Intertropical Africa with the abnormally
tall peoples who speak dialects of the Great South African
tongue, miscalled the "Bantu." Hole makes the Pygmies "monkeys,"
a word we have borrowed from the Italians (monichio à mono=ape)
and quotes Ptolemy,                   (Ape-Islands) East of
Sunda.

[FN#27] A kind of barge (Arab. Bárijah, plur. Bawárij) used on
the Nile of sub-pyriform shape when seen in bird's eye. Lane
translates "ears like two mortars" from the Calc. Edit.

[FN#28] This giant is distinctly Polyphemus; but the East had
giants and cyclopes of her own (Hierozoicon ii. 845). The Ajáib
al-Hind (chapt. cxxii.) makes Polyphemus copulate with the sheep.
Sir John Mandeville (if such person ever existed) mentions men
fifty feet high in the Indian Islands; and Al-Kazwini and Al-
Idrisi transfer them to the Sea of China, a Botany Bay for
monsters in general.

[FN#29] Fire is forbidden as a punishment amongst Mosems, the
idea being that it should be reserved for the next world. Hence
the sailors fear the roasting more than the eating: with ours it
would probably be the reverse. The Persian insult "Pidar-
sokhtah"=(son of a) burnt father, is well known. I have noted the
advisability of burning the Moslem's corpse under certain
circumstances: otherwise the murderer may come to be canonised.

[FN#30] Arab. "Mastabah"=the bench or form of masonry before
noticed. In olden Europe benches were much more used than chairs,
these being articles of luxury. So King Horne "sett him abenche;"
and hence our "King's Bench" (Court).

[FN#31] This is from the Bresl. Edit. vol. iv. 32: the Calc. Edit
gives only an abstract and in the Bul. Edit. the Ogre returned
"accompanied by a female, greater than he and more hideous." We
cannot accept Mistress Polyphemus.

[FN#32] This is from Al-Kazwini, who makes the serpent "wind
itself round a tree or a rock, and thus break to pieces the bones
of the breast in its belly."

[FN#33] "Like a closet," in the Calc. Edit. The serpent is an
exaggeration of the python which grows to an enormous size.
Monstrous Ophidia are mentioned in sober history, e.g. that which
delayed the army of Regulus. Dr. de Lacerda, a sober and sensible
Brazilian traveller, mentions his servants sitting down upon a
tree-trunk in the Captaincy of San Paulo (Brasil), which began to
move and proved to be a huge snake. F. M. Pinto (the Sindbad of
Portugal though not so respectable) when in Sumatra takes refuge
in a tree from "tigers, crocodiles, copped adders and serpents
which slay men with their breath." Father Lobo in Tigre (chapt.
x.) was nearly killed by the poison-breath of a huge snake, and
healed himself with a bezoar carried ad hoc. Maffææus makes the
breath of crocodiles suavissimus, but that of the Malabar
serpents and vipers "adeo teter ac noxius ut afflatu ipso necare
perhibeantur."

[FN#34] Arab. "Aurat": the word has been borrowed by the
Hindostani jargon, and means a woman, a wife.

[FN#35] So in Al-Idrísi and Langlès: the Bres. Edit. has "Al-
Kalásitah"; and Al-Kazwini "Al-Salámit." The latter notes in it a
petrifying spring which Camoens (The Lus. x. 104), places in
Sunda, i.e. Java-Minor of M. Polo. Some read Salabat-Timor, one
of the Moluccas famed for sanders, cloves, cinnamon, etc.
(Purchas ii. 1784.)

[FN#36] Evidently the hippopotamus (Pliny, viii. 25; ix. 3 and
xxiii. 11). It can hardly be the Mulaccan Tapir, as shields are
not made of the hide. Hole suggests the buffalo which found its
way to Egypt from India viâ Persia; but this would not be a
speciosum miraculum.

[FN#37] The ass-headed fish is from Pliny (ix. cap. 3): all those
tales are founded upon the manatee (whose dorsal protuberance may
have suggested the camel), the seal and the dugong or sea calf. I
have noticed (Zanzibar i. 205) legends of ichthyological marvels
current on the East African seaboard; and even the monsters of
the Scottish waters are not all known: witness the mysterious
"brigdie." See Bochart De Cetis i. 7; and Purchas iii. 930.

[FN#38] The colossal tortoise is noticed by Ælian (De Nat.
Animal. xvi. 17), by Strabo (Lib. xv.), by Pliny (ix. 10) and
Diodorus Siculus (iv. 1) who had heard of a tribe of
Chelonophagi. Ælian makes them 16 cubits long near Taprobane and
serving as house-roofs; and others turn the shell into boats and
coracles. A colossochelys was first found on the Scwalik Hills by
Dr. Falconer and Major (afterwards Sir Proby) Cantley. In 1867 M.
Emile Blanchard exhibited to the Academie des Sciences a monster
crab from Japan 1.20 metres long (or 2.50 including legs); and
other travellers have reported 4 metres. These crustaceæ seem
never to cease growing and attain great dimensions under
favourable circumstances, i.e. when not troubled by man.

[FN#39] Lane suggests (iii. 97), and with some probability, that
the "bird" was a nautilus; but the wild traditions concerning the
barnacle-goose may perhaps have been the base of the fable. The
albatross also was long supposed never to touch land. Possible
the barnacle, like the barometz of Tartarean lamb, may be a
survivor of the day when the animal and vegetable kingdoms had
not yet branched off into different directions.

[FN#40] Arab. "Zahwah," also meaning a luncheon. The five daily
prayers made all Moslems take strict account of time, and their
nomenclature of its division is extensive.

[FN#41] This is the "insane herb." Davis, who visited Sumatra in
1599 (Purchas i. 120) speaks "of a kind of seed, whereof a little
being eaten, maketh a man to turn foole, all things seeming to
him to be metamorphosed." Linschoten's "Dutroa" was a poppy-like
bud containing small kernels like melons which stamped and
administered as a drink make a man "as if he were foolish, or out
of his wits." This is Father Lobo's "Vanguini" of the Cafres,
called by the Portuguese dutro (Datura Stramonium) still used by
dishonest confectioners. It may be Dampier's Ganga (Ganjah) or
Bang (Bhang) which he justly describes as acting differently
"according to different constitutions; for some it stupefies,
others it makes sleepy, others merry and some quite mad."
(Harris, Collect. ii. 900.) Dr. Fryer also mentions Duty, Bung
and Post, the Poust of Bernier, an infusion of poppy-seed.

[FN#42] Arab. "Ghul," here an ogre, a cannibal. I cannot but
regard the "Ghul of the waste" as an embodiment of the natural
fear and horror which a man feels when he faces a really
dangerous desert. As regards cannibalism, Al-Islam's religion of
common sense freely allows it when necessary to save life, and
unlike our mawkish modern sensibility, never blames those who

     Alimentis talibus usi
     Produxere animos.

[FN#43] For Cannibals, see the Massagetæ of Herod (i.), the Padæi
of India (iii.), and the Essedones near Mæotis (iv.); Strabo
(lib. iv.) of the Luci; Pomponious Mela (iii. 7) and St. Jerome
(ad Jovinum) of Scoti. M. Polo locates them in Dragvia, a kingdom
of Sumatra (iii. 17), and in Angaman (the Andamanian Isles?),
possibly the ten Maniolai which Ptolemy (vii.), confusing with
the Nicobars, places on the Eastern side of the Bay of Bengal;
and thence derives the Heraklian stone (magnet) which attracts
the iron of ships (See Serapion, De Magnete, fol. 6, Edit. of
1479, and Brown's Vulgar Errors, p. 74, 6th Edit.). Mandeville
finds his cannibals in Lamaray (Sumatra) and Barthema in the
"Isle of Gyava" (Java). Ibn Al-Wardi and Al-Kazwini notice them
in the Isle Saksar, in the Sea of the Zanj (Zanzibar): the name
is corrupted Persian "Sag-Sar" (Dogs'-heads) hence the dog-
descended race of Camoens in Pegu (The Lus. x. 122). The Bresl.
Edit. (iv. 52) calls them "Khawárij"=certain sectarians in
Eastern Arabia. Needless to say that cocoa-nut oil would have no
stupefying effect unless mixed with opium or datura, hemp or
henbane.

[FN#44] Black pepper is produced in the Goanese but we must go
south to find the "Bilád al-Filfil" (home of pepper) i.e.
Malabar. The exorbitant prices demanded by Venice for this spice
led directly to the discovery of The Cape route by the
Portuguese; as the "Grains of Paradise" (Amomum Granum Paradisi)
induced the English to explore the West African Coast.

[FN#45] Arab. "Kazdír." Sansk. "Kastír." Gr. "Kassiteron." Lat.
"Cassiteros," evidently derived from one root. The Heb. is
"Badih," a substitute, an alloy. "Tanakah" is the vulg. Arab.
word, a congener of the Assyrian "Anaku," and "Kala-i" is the
corrupt Arab. term used in India.

[FN#46] Our Arabian Ulysses had probably left a Penelope or two
at home and finds a Calypso in this Ogygia. His modesty at the
mention of womankind is notable.

[FN#47] These are the commonplaces of Moslem consolation on such
occasions: the artistic part is their contrast with the
unfortunate widower's prospect.

[FN#48] Lit. "a margin of stone, like the curb-stone of a well."

[FN#49] I am not aware that this vivisepulture of the widower is
the custom of any race, but the fable would be readily suggested
by the Sati (Suttee)-rite of the Hindus. Simple vivisepulture was
and is practised by many people.

[FN#50] Because she was weaker than a man. The Bresl. Edit.
however, has "a gugglet of water and five scones."

[FN#51] The confession is made with true Eastern sang-froid and
probably none of the hearers "disapproved" of the murders which
saved the speaker's life.

[FN#52] This tale is evidently taken from the escape of
Aristomenes the Messenian from the pit into which he had been
thrown, a fox being his guide. The Arabs in an early day were
eager students of Greek literature. Hole (p. 140) noted the
coincidence.

[FN#53] Bresl. Edit. "Khwájah," our "Howajee," meaning a
schoolmaster, a man of letters, a gentleman.

[FN#54] And he does repeat at full length what the hearers must
have known right well. I abridge.

[FN#55] Island of the Bell (Arab. "Nákús"=a wooden gong used by
Christians but forbidden to Moslems). "Kala" is written "Kela,"
"Kullah" and a variety of ways. Baron Walckenaer places it at
Keydah in the Malay peninsula opposite Sumatra. Renaudot
identifies it with Calabar, "somewhere about the point of
Malabar."

[FN#56] Islands, because Arab cosmographers love to place their
speciosa miracula in such places.

[FN#57] Like the companions of Ulysses who ate the sacred oxen
(Od. xii.).

[FN#58] So the enormous kingfisher of Lucian's True History (lib.
ii.).

[FN#59] This tale is borrowed from Ibn Al-Wardi, who adds that
the greybeards awoke in the morning after eating the young Rukh
with black hair which never turned white. The same legend is
recounted by Al-Dimiri (ob. A.H. 808=1405-6) who was translated
into Latin by Bochart (Hierozoicon ii. p. 854) and quoted by Hole
and Lane (iii. 103). An excellent study of Marco Polo's Rukh was
made by my learned friend the late Prof. G. G. Bianconi of
Bologna, "Dell'Uccello Ruc," Bologna, Gamberini, 1868. Prof.
Bianconi predicted that other giant birds would be found in
Madagascar on the East African Coast opposite; but he died before
hearing of Hildebrand's discovery.

[FN#60] Arab. "Izár," the earliest garb of Eastern man; and, as
such preserved in the Meccan pilgrimage. The "waist-cloth" is
either tucked in or kept in place by a girdle.

[FN#61] Arab. "Líf," a succedaneum for the unclean sponge, not
unknown in the "Turkish Baths" of London.

[FN#62] The Persians have a Plinian monster called "Tasmeh-
pá"=Strap-legs without bones. The "Old Man" is not an ourang-
outang nor an Ifrít as in Sayf al-Mulúk, Night dcclxxi., but a
jocose exaggeration of a custom prevailing in parts of Asia and
especially in the African interior where the Tsetse-fly prevents
the breeding of burden-beasts. Ibn Batútah tells us that in
Malabar everything was borne upon men's backs. In Central Africa
the kinglet rides a slave, and on ceremonious occasions mounts
his Prime Minister. I have often been reduced to this style of
conveyance and found man the worst imaginable riding: there is no
hold and the sharpness of the shoulder-ridge soon makes the legs
ache intolerably. The classicists of course find the Shaykh of
the Sea in the Tritons and Nereus, and Bochart (Hiero. ii. 858,
880) notices the homo aquaticus, Senex Judæus and Senex Marinus.
Hole (p. 151) suggests the inevitable ouran-outan (man o' wood),
one of "our humiliating copyists," and quotes "Destiny" in
Scarron's comical romance (Part ii. chapt. i) and "Jealousy"
enfolding Rinaldo. (O.F. lib. 42).

[FN#63] More literally "The Chief of the Sea (-Coast)," Shaykh
being here a chief rather than an elder (eoldermann, alderman).
So the "Old Man of the Mountain," famous in crusading days, was
the Chief who lived on the Nusayriyah or Ansári range, a northern
prolongation of the Libanus. Our "old man" of the text may have
been suggested by the Koranic commentators on chapt. vi. When an
Infidel rises from the grave, a hideous figure meets him and
says, "Why wonderest thou at my loathsomeness? I am thine Evil
Deeds: thou didst ride upon me in the world and now I will ride
upon thee." (Suiting the action to the words.)

[FN#64] In parts of West Africa and especially in Gorilla-land
there are many stories of women and children being carried off by
apes, and all believe that the former bear issue to them. It is
certain that the anthropoid ape is lustfully excited by the
presence of women and I have related how at Cairo (1856) a huge
cynocephalus would have raped a girl had it not been bayonetted.
Young ladies who visited the Demidoff Gardens and menagerie at
Florence were often scandalised by the vicious exposure of the
baboons' parti-coloured persons. The female monkey equally
solicits the attentions of man and I heard in India from my late
friend, Mirza Ali Akbar of Bombay, that to his knowledge
connection had taken place. Whether there would be issue and
whether such issue would be viable are still disputed points: the
produce would add another difficulty to the pseudo-science called
psychology, as such mule would have only half a soul and issue by
a congener would have a quarter-soul. A traveller well known to
me once proposed to breed pithecoid men who might be useful as
hewers of wood and drawers of water: his idea was to put the
highest races of apes to the lowest of humanity. I never heard
what became of his "breeding stables."

[FN#65] Arab. "Jauz al-Hindi": our word cocoa is from the Port.
"Coco," meaning a "bug" (bugbear) in allusion to its caricature
of the human face, hair, eyes and mouth. I may here note that a
cocoa-tree is easily climbed with a bit of rope or a
handkerchief.

[FN#66] Tomb-pictures in Egypt show tame monkeys gathering fruits
and Grossier (Description of China, quoted by Hole and Lane)
mentions a similar mode of harvesting tea by irritating the
monkeys of the Middle Kingdom.

[FN#67] Bresl. Edit. Cloves and cinnamon in those days grew in
widely distant places.

[FN#68] In pepper-plantations it is usual to set bananas (Musa
Paradisiaca) for shading the young shrubs which bear bunches like
ivy-fruit, not pods.

[FN#69] The Bresl. Edit. has "Al-Ma'arat." Langlès calls it the
Island of Al-Kamárí. See Lane, iii. 86.

[FN#70] Insula, pro. peninsula. "Comorin" is a corrupt. of
"Kanyá" (=Virgo, the goddess Durgá) and "Kumári" (a maid, a
princess); from a temple of Shiva's wife: hence Ptolemy's {Greek
letters} and near it to the N. East {Greek letters},
"Promontorium Cori quod Comorini caput insulæ vocant," says
Maffæus (Hist. Indic. i. p. 16). In the text "Al'úd" refers to
the eagle-wood (Aloekylon Agallochum) so called because spotted
like the bird's plume. That of Champa (Cochin-China, mentioned in
Camoens, The Lus. x. 129) is still famous.

[FN#71] Arab. "Birkat"=tank, pool, reach, bight. Hence Birkat
Far'aun in the Suez Gulf. (Pilgrimage i. 297.)

[FN#72] Probably Cape Comorin; to judge from the river, but the
text names Sarandib (Ceylon Island) famous for gems. This was
noticed by Marco Polo, iii. cap. 19; and ancient authors relate
the same of "Taprobane."

[FN#73] I need hardly trouble the reader with a note on pearl-
fisheries: the descriptions of travellers are continuous from the
days of Pliny (ix. 35), Solinus (cap. 56) and Marco Polo (iii.
23). Maximilian of Transylvania, in his narrative of Magellan's
voyage (Novus Orbis, p. 532) says that the Celebes produce pearls
big as turtle-doves' eggs; and the King of Porne (Borneo) had two
unions as great as goose's eggs. Pigafetta (in Purchas) reduces
this to hen's eggs and Sir Thomas Herbert to dove's eggs.

[FN#74] Arab. "Anbar" pronounced "Ambar;" wherein I would derive
"Ambrosia." Ambergris was long supposed to be a fossil, a
vegetable which grew upon the sea-bottom or rose in springs; or a
"substance produced in the water like naphtha or bitumen"(!): now
it is known to be the egesta of a whale. It is found in lumps
weighing several pounds upon the Zanzibar Coast and is sold at a
high price, being held a potent aphrodisiac. A small hollow is
drilled in the bottom of the cup and the coffee is poured upon
the bit of ambergris it contains; when the oleaginous matter
shows in dots amidst the "Kaymagh" (coffee-cream), the bubbly
froth which floats upon the surface and which an expert "coffee
servant" distributes equally among the guests. Argensola mentions
in Ceylon, "springs of liquid bitumen thicker than our oil and
some of pure balsam."

[FN#75] The tale-teller forgets that Sindbad and his companions
have just ascended it; but this inconséquence is a characteristic
of the Eastern Saga. I may note that the description of ambergris
in the text tells us admirably well what it is not.

[FN#76] This custom is alluded to by Lane (Mod Egypt, ch. xv.):
it is the rule of pilgrims to Meccah when too ill to walk or ride
(Pilgrimage i. 180). Hence all men carry their shrouds: mine,
after being dipped in the Holy Water of Zemzem, was stolen from
me by the rascally Somal of Berberah.

[FN#77] Arab. "Fulk;" some Edits. read "Kalak" and "Ramaz" (=a
raft).

[FN#78] These lines occur in modified form in Night xi.

[FN#79] These underground rivers (which Dr. Livingstone derided)
are familiar to every geographer from Spenser's "Mole" to the
Poika of Adelberg and the Timavo near Trieste. Hence "Peter
Wilkins" borrowed his cavern which let him to Grandevolet. I have
some experience of Sindbad's sorrows, having once attempted to
descend the Poika on foot. The Classics had the Alpheus (Pliny v.
31; and Seneca, Nat. Quae. vi.), and the Tigris-Euphrates
supposed to flow underground: and the Mediævals knew the Abana of
Damascus and the Zenderúd of Isfahan.

[FN#80] Abyssinians can hardly be called "blackamoors," but the
arrogance of the white skin shows itself in Easterns (e.g. Turks
and Brahmans) as much as, if not more than, amongst Europeans.
Southern India at the time it was explored by Vasco da Gama was
crowded with Abyssinian slaves imported by the Arabs.

[FN#81] "Sarandib" and "Ceylon" (the Taprobane of Ptolemy and
Diodorus Siculus) derive from the Pali "Sihalam" (not the Sansk.
"Sinhala") shortened to Silam and Ilam in old Tamul. Van der Tunk
would find it in the Malay "Pulo Selam"=Isle of Gems (the Ratna-
dwípa or Jewel Isle of the Hindus and the Jazirat al-Yakút or
Ruby-Island of the Arabs); and the learned Colonel Yule (Marco
Polo ii 296) remarks that we have adopted many Malayan names,
e.g. Pegu, China and Japan. Sarandib is clearly "Selan-dwípa,"
which Mandeville reduced to "Silha."

[FN#82] This is the well-known Adam's Peak, the Jabal al-Ramun of
the Arabs where Adam fell when cast out of Eden in the lowest or
lunar sphere. Eve fell at Jeddah (a modern myth) and the unhappy
pair met at Mount Arafat (i.e. recognition) near Meccah. Thus
their fall was a fall indeed. (Pilgrimage iii. 259.)

[FN#83] He is the Alcinous of our Arabian Odyssey.

[FN#84] This word is not in the dictionaries; Hole (p. 192) and
Lane understand it to mean the hog-deer; but why, one cannot
imagine. The animal is neither "beautiful" nor "uncommon" and
most men of my day have shot dozens in the Sind-Shikárgahs.

[FN#85] M. Polo speaks of a ruby in Seilan (Ceylon) a palm long
and three fingers thick: William of Tyre mentions a ruby weighing
twelve Egyptian drams (Gibbon ii. 123), and Mandeville makes the
King of Mammera wear about his neck a "rubye orient" one foot
long by five fingers large.

[FN#86] The fable is from Al-Kazwini and Ibn Al-Wardi who place
the serpent (an animal sacred to Æsculapius, Pliny, xxix. 4) "in
the sea of Zanj" (i.e. Zanzibar). In the "garrow hills" of N.
Eastern Bengal the skin of the snake Burrawar (?) is held to cure
pain. (Asiat. Res. vol. iii.)

[FN#87] For "Emerald," Hole (p. 177) would read emery or
adamantine spar.

[FN#88] Evidently Maháráj=Great Rajah, Rajah in Chief, an Hindu
title common to the three potentates before alluded to, the
Narsinga, Balhara or Samiry.

[FN#89] This is probably classical. So the page said to Philip of
Macedon every morning, "Remember, Philip, thou art mortal"; also
the slave in the Roman Triumph,

"Respice poste te: hominem te esse memento!"

And the dying Severus, "Urnlet, soon shalt thou enclose what
hardly a whole world could contain." But the custom may also have
been Indian: the contrast of external pomp with the real vanity
of human life suggests itself to all.

[FN#90] Arab. "Hút"; a term applied to Jonah's whale and to
monsters of the deep, "Samak" being the common fishes.

[FN#91] Usually a two-bow prayer.

[FN#92] This is the recognised formula of Moslem sales.

[FN#93] Arab. "Walímah"; like our wedding-breakfast but a much
more ceremonious and important affair.

[FN#94] i.e. his wife (euphemistically). I remember an Italian
lady being much hurt when a Maltese said to her "Mia moglie – con
rispetto parlando" (my wife, saving your presence). "What," she
cried, "he speaks of his wife as he would of the sweepings!"

[FN#95] The serpent in Arabic is mostly feminine.

[FN#96] i.e. in envying his wealth, with the risk of the evil
eye.

[FN#97] I subjoin a translation of the Seventh Voyage from the
Calc. Edit. of the two hundred Nights which differs in essential
points from the above. All respecting Sindbad the Seaman has an
especial interest. In one point this world-famous tale is badly
ordered. The most exciting adventures are the earliest and the
falling off of the interest has a somewhat depressing effect. The
Rukh, the Ogre and the Old Man o' the Sea should come last.

[FN#98] Arab. "Al-Suways:" this successor of ancient Arsinoë was,
according to local tradition, founded by a Santon from Al-Sús in
Marocco who called it after his name "Little Sús" (the wormlet).

[FN#99] Arab. "Mann," a weight varying from two to six pounds:
even this common term is not found in the tables of Lane's Mod.
Egyptians, Appendix B. The "Maund" is a well-known Anglo-Indian
weight.

[FN#100] This article is not mentioned elsewhere in The Nights.

[FN#101] Apparently a fancy title.

[FN#102] The island is evidently Ceylon, long famed for
elephants, and the tree is the well known "Banyan" (Ficus
Indica). According to Linschoten and Wolf, the elephants of all
lands do reverence and honour to those of Ceylon.

[FN#103] "Tusks" not "teeth" which are not valued. As Hole
remarks, the elephants of Pliny and Sindbad are equally conscious
of the value of ivory. Pliny (viii. 3) quotes Herodotus about the
buying of ivories and relates how elephants, when hunted, break
their "cornua" (as Juba called them) against a tree trunk by way
of ransom. Ælian, Plutarch, and Philostratus speak of the
linguistic intelligence and religious worship of the "half-reason
with the hand," which the Hindus term "Háthí"=unimanus. Finally,
Topsell's Gesner (p. 152) makes elephants bury their tusks,
"which commonly drop out every tenth year." In Arabian literature
the elephant is always connected with India.

[FN#104] This is a true "City of Brass." (Nuhás asfar=yellow
copper), as we learn in Night dcclxxii. It is situated in the
"Maghrib" (Mauritania), the region of magic and mystery; and the
idea was probably suggested by the grand Roman ruins which rise
abruptly from what has become a sandy waste. Compare with this
tale "The City of Brass" (Night cclxxii.). In Egypt Nuhás is
vulg. pronounced Nihás. 

[FN#105] The Bresl. Edit. adds that the seal-ring was of stamped
stone and iron, copper and lead. I have borrowed copiously from
its vol. vi. pp. 343, et seq. 

[FN#106] As this was a well-known pre-Islamitic bard, his
appearance here is decidedly anachronistic, probably by
intention. 

[FN#107] The first Moslem conqueror of Spain whose lieutenant,
Tárik, the gallant and unfortunate, named Gibraltar (Jabal al-
Tarik). 

[FN#108] The colours of the Banú Umayyah (Ommiade) Caliphs were
white, of the Banú Abbás (Abbasides) black, and of the Fatimites
green. Carrying the royal flag denoted the generalissimo or
plenipotentiary. 

[FN#109] i.e. Old Cairo, or Fustat: the present Cairo was then a
Coptic village founded on an old Egyptian settlement called Lui-
Tkeshroma, to which belonged the tanks on the hill and the great
well, Bir Yusuf, absurdly attributed to Joseph the Patriarch. Lui
is evidently the origin of Levi and means a high priest (Brugsh
ii. 130) and his son's name was Roma.

[FN#110] I cannot but suspect that this is a clerical error for
"Al-Samanhúdi," a native of Samanhúd (Wilkinson's "Semenood") in
the Delta on the Damietta branch, the old Sebennytus (in Coptic
Jem-nuti=Jem the God), a town which has produced many
distinguished men in Moslem times. But there is also a Samhúd
lying a few miles down stream from Denderah and, as its mounds
prove, it is an ancient site.

[FN#111] Egypt had not then been conquered from the Christians. 

[FN#112] Arab. "Kízán fukká'a," i.e. thin and slightly porous
earthenware jars used for Fukká'a, a fermented drink, made of
barley or raisins. 

[FN#113] I retain this venerable blunder: the right form is
Samúm, from Samm, the poison-wind. 

[FN#114] i.e. for worship and to prepare for futurity. 

[FN#115] The camel carries the Badawi's corpse to the cemetery
which is often distant: hence to dream of a camel is an omen of
death. 

[FN#116] Koran xxiv 39. The word "Saráb" (mirage) is found in
Isaiah (xxxv. 7) where the passage should be rendered "And the
mirage (sharab) shall become a lake" (not, "and the parched
ground shall become a pool"). The Hindus prettily call it
"Mrigatrishná" = the thirst of the deer. 

[FN#117] A name of Allah. 

[FN#118] Arab. "Kintár"=a hundredweight (i.e. 100 Ibs.), about 98
3/4 Ibs. avoir. Hence the French quintal and its congeners
(Littré).

[FN#119] i.e. "from Shám (Syria) to (the land of) Adnan,"
ancestor of the Naturalized Arabs that is, to Arabia. 

[FN#120] Koran lii. 21. "Every man is given in pledge for that
which he shall have wrought." 

[FN#121] There is a constant clerical confusion in the texts
between "Arar" (Juniperus Oxycedrus used by the Breeks for the
images of their gods) and "Marmar" marble or alabaster, in the
Talmud "Marmora" = marble. evidently from {Greek letters} =
brilliant, the brilliant stone.

[FN#122] These Ifritical names are chosed for their bizarrerie. 
"Al-Dáhish" = the Amazed; and "Al-A'amash" = one with weak eyes
always watering.

[FN#123] The Arabs have no word for million; so Messer Marco
Miglione could not have learned it from them. On the other hand
the Hindus have more quadrillions than modern Europe. 

[FN#124] This formula, according to Moslems, would begin with the
beginning "There is no iláh but Allah and Adam is the Apostle
(rasúl = one sent, a messenger, not nabí = prophet) of Allah."
And so on with Noah, Moses, David (not Solomon as a rule) and
Jesus, to Mohammed. 

[FN#125] This son of Barachia has been noticed before. The text
embroiders the Koranic chapter No. xxvii. 

[FN#126] The Bresl. Edit. (vi. 371) reads "Samm-hu"=his poison,
prob. a clerical error for "Sahmhu"=his shaft. It was a duel with
the "Shiháb" or falling stars, the meteors which are popularly
supposed, I have said, to be the arrows shot by the angels
against devils and evil spirits when they approach too near
Heaven in order to overhear divine secrets. 

[FN#127] A fancy sea from the Lat. "Carcer" ( ?). 

[FN#128] Andalusian = Spanish, the Vandal-land, a term accepted
by the Moslem invader. 

[FN#129] This fine description will remind the traveller of the
old Haurani towns deserted since the sixth century, which a silly
writer miscalled the "Giant Cities of Bashan." I have never seen
anything weirder than a moonlight night in one of these strong
places whose masonry is perfect as when first built, the snowy
light pouring on the jet-black basalt and the breeze sighing and
the jackal wailing in the desert around. 

[FN#130] "Zanj," I have said, is the Arab. form of the Persian
"Zang-bar" (=Black-land), our Zanzibar. Those who would know more
of the etymology will consult my "Zanzibar," etc., chaps. i. 

[FN#131] Arab. "Tanjah"=Strabo {Greek letters} (derivation
uncertain), Tingitania, Tangiers. But why the terminal s ? 

[FN#132] Or Amidah, by the Turks called "Kara (black) Amid" from
the colour of the stones and the Arabs "Diyar-bakr" (Diarbekir),
a name which they also give to the whole province--Mesopotamia.

[FN#133] Mayyáfárikín, an episcopal city in Diyar-bakr: the
natives are called Fárikí; hence the abbreviation in the text. 

[FN#134] Arab. "Ayát al-Naját," certain Koranic verses which act
as talismans, such as, "And wherefore should we not put our trust
in Allah ?" (xiv. 15); "Say thou, ‘Naught shall befall us save
what Allah hath decreed for us,' " (ix. 51), and sundry others. 

[FN#135] These were the "Brides of the Treasure," alluded to in
the story of Hasan of Bassorah and elsewhere. 

[FN#136] Arab. "Ishárah," which may also mean beckoning. Easterns
reverse our process: we wave hand or finger towards ourselves;
they towards the object; and our fashion represents to them, Go
away!

[FN#137] i.e. musing a long time and a longsome. 

[FN#138] Arab. "Dihlíz" from the Persian. This is the long dark
passage which leads to the inner or main gate of an Eastern city,
and which is built up before a siege. It is usually furnished
with Mastabah-benches of wood and masonry, and forms a favourite
lounge in hot weather. Hence Lot and Moses sat and stood in the
gate, and here man speaks with his enemies. 

[FN#139] The names of colours are as loosely used by the Arabs as
by the Classics of Europe; for instance, a light grey is called a
"blue or a green horse." Much nonsense has been written upon the
colours in Homer by men who imagine that the semi-civilised
determine tints as we do. They see them but they do not name
them, having no occasion for the words. As I have noticed,
however, the Arabs have a complete terminology for the varieties
of horse-hues. In our day we have witnessed the birth of colours,
named by the dozen, because required by women's dress. 

[FN#140] For David's miracles of metallurgy see vol. i. 286. 

[FN#141] Arab. "Khwárazm," the land of the Chorasmioi, who are
mentioned by Herodotus (iii. 93) and a host of classical
geographers. They place it in Sogdiana (hod. Sughd) and it
corresponds with the Khiva country. 

[FN#142] Arab. "Burka'," usually applied to a woman's face-veil
and hence to the covering of the Ka'abah, which is the "Bride of
Meccah." 

[FN#143] Alluding to the trick played upon Bilkís by Solomon who
had heard that her legs were hairy like those of an ass: he laid
down a pavement of glass over flowing water in which fish were
swimming and thus she raised her skirts as she approached him and
he saw that the report was true. Hence, as I have said, the
depilatory. 

[FN#144] I understand the curiously carved windows cut in
arabesque-work of marble. (India) or basalt (the Haurán) and
provided with small panes of glass set in emeralds where tin
would be used by the vulgar. 

[FN#145] Arab. "Bulád" from the Pers. "Pulád." Hence the name of
the famous Druze family "Jumblat," a corruption of "Ján-
pulád"=Life o' Steel.

[FN#146] Pharaoh, so called in Koran (xxxviii. 11) because he
tortured men by fastening them to four stakes driven into the
ground. Sale translates "the contriver of the stakes" and adds,
"Some understand the word figuratively, of the firm establishment
of Pharaoh's kingdom, because the Arabs fix their tents with
stakes; but they may possibly intend that prince's obstinacy and
hardness of heart." I may note that in "Tasawwuf," or Moslem
Gnosticism, Pharaoh represents, like Prometheus and Job, the
typical creature who upholds his own dignity and rights in
presence and despight of the Creator. Sáhib the Súfí declares
that the secret of man's soul (i.e. its emanation) was first
revealed when Pharaoh declared himself god; and Al-Ghazálí sees
in his claim the most noble aspiration to the divine, innate in
the human spirit. (Dabistan, vol. iii.) 

[FN#147] In the Calc. Edit. "Tarmuz, son of the daughter," etc.
According to the Arabs Tadmur (Palmyra) was built by Queen
Tadmurah, daughter of Hassán bin Uzaynah. 

[FN#148] It is only by some such drought that I can account for
the survival of those marvellous Haurani cities in the great
valley S. E. of Damascus. 

[FN#149] So Moses described his own death and burial. 

[FN#150] A man's "aurat" (shame) extends from the navel
(included) to his knees, a woman's from the top of the 