 (Al-
Hijaz) of idolatry. Commentators on the Koran (chaps. vii.) call
the Pharaoh of Moses Al-Walid and derive him from the Amalekites:
we have lately ascertained that this Mene-Ptah was of the
Shepherd-Kings and thus, according to the older Moslems, the
Hyksos were of the seed of Imlik. (Pilgrimage ii. 116, and iii.
190.) In Syria they fought with Joshua son of Nun. The tribe or
rather nationality was famous and powerful: we know little about
it and I may safely predict that when the Amalekite country shall
have been well explored, it will produce monuments second in
importance only to the Hittites. "A nomadic tribe which occupied
the Peninsula of Sinai" (Smith's Dict. of the Bible) is
peculiarly superficial, even for that most superficial of books.

[FN#326] The Amalekites were giants and lived 500 years.
(Pilgrimage, loc. cit.) 

[FN#327] His men being ninety against five hundred.

[FN#328] Arab. "Kaum" (pron. Gúm) here=a razzia, afterwards=a
tribe. Relations between Badawi tribes are of three kinds; (1)
Asháb, allies offensive and defensive, friends who intermarry;
(2) Kímán (plur. of Kaum) when the blood-feud exists, and (3)
Akhwan= brothers. The last is a complicated affair, "Akháwat" or
brotherhood, denotes the tie between patron and client (a noble
and an ignoble tribe) or between the stranger and the tribe which
claims an immemorial and unalienable right to its own lands.
Hence a small fee (Al-Rifkah) must be paid and the traveller and
his beast become "dakhíl," or entitled to brother-help. The
guardian is known in the West as Rafík; Rabí'a in Eastern Arabia;
Ghafír in "Sinai ;" amongst the Somal, Abbán and the Gallas
Mogásá. Further details are given in Pilgrimage iii. 85-87. 

[FN#329] Arab. "Mál," here=Badawi money, flocks and herds, our
"fee" from feoh, vieh, cattle; as pecunia from pecus, etc., etc.

[FN#330] The litholatry of the old Arabs is undisputed: Manát the
goddess-idol was a large rude stone and when the Meccans sent out
colonies these carried with them stones of the Holy Land to be
set up and worshipped like the Ka'abah. I have suggested
(Pilgrimage iii. 159) that the famous Black Stone of Meccah,
which appears to me a large aerolite, is a remnant of this
worship and that the tomb of Eve near Jeddah was the old "Sakhrah
tawílah" or Long Stone (ibid. iii. 388). Jeddah is now translated
the grandmother, alluding to Eve, a myth of late growth: it is
properly Juddah=a plain lacking water.

[FN#331] The First Adites, I have said, did not all perish: a few
believers retired with the prophet Hud (Heber ?) to Hazramaut.
The Second Adites, who had Márib of the Dam for capital and
Lukman for king, were dispersed by the Flood of Al-Yaman. Their
dynasty lasted a thousand years, the exodus taking place
according to De Sacy in A.D. 150-170 or shortly after A.D. 100
(C. de Perceval), and was overthrown by Ya'arub bin Kahtán, the
first Arabist; see Night dcxxv.

[FN#332] This title has been noticed: it suggests the "Saint
Abraham" of our medaeval travellers. Every great prophet has his
agnomen: Adam the Pure (or Elect) of Allah, Noah the Nájiy (or
saved) of Allah; Moses (Kalím) the Speaker with Allah; Jesus the
Rúh (Spirit breath) or Kalám (the word) of Allah. For Mohammed's
see Al-Busiri's Mantle-poem vv. 31-58. 

[FN#333] Koran (chaps. iii. 17), "Verily the true religion in the
sight of Allah is Islam" i.e. resigning or devoting myself to the
Lord, with a suspicion of "Salvation" conveyed by the root
Salima, he was safe.

[FN#334] Arab. "Sá'ikah," which is supposed to be a stone. The
allusion is to Antar's sword, "Dhámi," made of a stone, black,
brilliant and hard as a rock (an aerolite), which had struck a
camel on the right side and had come out by the left. The
blacksmith made it into a blade three feet long by two spans
broad, a kind of falchion or chopper, cased it with gold and
called it Dhámi (the "Trenchant") from its sharpness. But he said
to the owner:--
    
     The sword is trenchant, O son of the Ghalib clan, 
     Trenchant in sooth, but where is the sworder-man?

Whereupon the owner struck off the maker's head, a most
satisfactory answer to all but one.

[FN#335] Arab. "Kutá'ah": lit. a bit cut off, fragment, nail-
paring, and here un diminutif. I have described this scene in
Pilgrimage iii. 68. Latro often says, "Thy gear is wanted by the
daughter of my paternal uncle" (wife), and thus parades his
politeness by asking in a lady's name.

[FN#336] As will appear the two brothers were joined by a party
of horsemen.

[FN#337] "Four" says the Mac. Edit. forgetting Falhun with
characteristic inconsequence. 

[FN#338] Muhammad (the deserving great praise) is the name used
by men; Ahmad (more laudable) by angels, and Mahmúd (praised) by
devils. For a similar play upon the name, "Allah Allah Muhammad
ast" (God is God the praisworthy) see Dabistan ii. 416. 

[FN#339] The Mac. Edit. here gives "Sás," but elsewhere "Sásá,"
which is the correct form 

[FN#340] Sapor the Second (A.D. 310-330) was compelled to attack
the powerful Arab hordes of Oman, most of whom, like the Tayy,
Aus and Khazraj, the Banu Nabhán and the Hináwi left Al-Yaman
A.D. 100-170, and settled in the north and north-east of Al-Najd
This great exodus and dispersion of the tribes was caused, as has
been said, by the bursting of the Dam of Márib originally built
by Abd al-Shams Sabá, father of Himyar. These Yamanian races were
plunged into poverty and roamed northwards, planting themselves
amongst the Arabs of Ma'add son of Adnán. Hence the kingdom of
Ghassan in Syria whose phylarchs under the Romans (i.e. Greek
Emperors of Constantinople) controlled Palestine Tertia, the
Arabs of Syria and Palestine, and the kingdom of Hárah, whose
Lakhmite Princes, dependent upon Persia, managed the Arabs of the
Euphrates, Oman and Al-Bahrayn. The Ma'addites still continued to
occupy the central plateau of Arabia, a feature analogous with
India "above the Ghauts." 

[FN#341] I have described (Pilgrimage i. 370) the grisly spot
which a Badawi will dignify by the name of Wady al-Ward=Vale of
Roses. 

[FN#342] Koran xiii. 3, "Of every fruit two different kinds "
i.e. large and small, black and white, sweet and sour. 

[FN#343] A graft upon an almond tree, which makes its kernel
s..veet and gives it an especial delicacy of favour. See
Russell's (excellent) Natural History of Aleppo, p. 21. 

[FN#344] So called from the flavour of the kernel it is well-
known at Damascus where a favourite fruit is the dried apricot
with an almond by way of kernel. There are many preparations of
apricots, especially the "Mare's skin" (Jild al-fares or Kamar
al-din) a paste folded into sheets and exactly resembling the
article from which it takes a name. When wanted it is dissolved
in water and eaten as a relish with bread or biscuit (Pilgrimage
i. 289).

[FN#345] "Ante Kamá takúl"=the vulgarest Cairene.

[FN#346] This may be Ctesiphon, the ancient capital of the
Chosroës, on the Tigris below Baghdad; and spoken of elsewhere in
The Nights; especially as, in Night dclxvii., it is called
Isbanir Al-Madáin; Madáin Kisrá (the cities of Chosroës) being
the Arabic name of the old dual city.

[FN#347] Koran vi. 103. The translation is Sale's which I have
generally preferred, despite many imperfections: Lane renders
this sentence, "The eyes see not Him, but He seeth the eyes ;"
and Mr. Rodwell, "No vision taketh in Him ( ?), but He taketh in
all vision ," and (better) "No eyesight reacheth to Him." 

[FN#348] Sale (sect. 1.) tells us all that was then known of
these three which with Yá'úk and Nasr and the three "daughters of
God," Goddesses or Energies (the Hindu Saktis) Allát Al-Uzzá and
Manát mentioned in the Koran were the chiefs of the pre-lslamitic
Pantheon. I cannot but suspect that all will be connected with
old Babylonian worship. Al-Baydáwi (in Kor. Ixxi. 22) says of
Wadd, Suwá'a, Yaghus, Ya'úk and Nasr that they were names of
pious men between Adam and Noah, afterwards deified: Yaghús was
the giant idol of the Mazhaj tribe at Akamah of Al-Yaman and
afterwards at Najrán Al-Uzzá was widely worshipped: her idol (of
the tree Semurat) belonging to Ghatafán was destroyed after the
Prophet's order by Khálid bin Walíd. Allát or Al-Lát is written
by Pocock (spec. 110) "Ilahat" i.e. deities in general. But
Herodotus evidently refers to one god when he makes the Arabs
worship Dionysus as {Greek letters} and Urania as {Greek letters}
and the "tashdid" in Allát would, to a Greek ear, introduce
another syllable (Alilat). This was the goddess of the Kuraysh
and Thakíf whose temple at Taíf was circuited like the Ka'abah
before Mohammed destroyed it.

[FN#349] Shays (Shayth) is Ab Seth (Father Seth,) of the Hebrews,
a name containing the initial and terminal letters of the Egypto-
Phoenico-Hebrew Alphabet and the "Abjad" of the Arabs. Those
curious about its connection with the name of Allah (El), the
Zodiacal signs and with the constellations, visions but not
wholly uninteresting, will consult "Unexplored Syria" (vol. i.
33).

[FN#350] The exclamation of an honest Fellah. 

[FN#351] This is Antar with the Chosroë who "kissed the Absian
hero between the eyes and bade him adieu, giving him as a last
token a rich robe." The coarser hand of the story-teller
exaggerates everything till he makes it ridiculous.

[FN#352] The context suggests thee this is a royal form of
"throwing the handkerchief;" but it does not occur elsewhere. In
face, the European idea seems to have arisen from the oriental
practice of sending presents in napkins or kerchiefs.

[FN#353] i.e. if the disappointed suitor attack me.

[FN#354] i.e. if ever I he tempted to deny it.

[FN#355] Arab. "Musáfahah,¨' the Arab fashion of shaking hands.
The right palms are applied flat to each other; then the fingers
are squeezed and the hand is raised to the forehead (Pilgrimage
ii. 332). 

[FN#356] A city and province of Khuzistán the old Susiana. Dasht
may be either the town in Khorasan or the "forests" (dasht)
belonging to Ahwáz (Ahuaz in D'Herbelot).

[FN#357] This is the contest between "Antar and the Satrap
Khosrewan at the Court of Monzer." but without its tragical
finish.

[FN#358] Elliptical "he rode out in great state, that is to say
if greatness can truly be attributed to man," for, etc.

[FN#359] According to D'Herbelot (s.v. Rostac) it is a name given
to the villages of Khorasan as "Souad" (Sawád) to those of Irak
and Makhlaf to those of Al-Yaman: there is, how ever, a well-
known Al-Rustak (which like Al-Bahrayn always takes the article)
in the Province of Oman West of Maskat, and as it rhymes with
"Irak" it does well enough. Mr. Badger calls this ancient capital
of the Ya'arubah Imams "er-Rasták" (Imams of Oman).

[FN#360] i.e. a furious knight.

[FN#361] In the Mac. Edit. "Hassán," which may rhyme with Nabhán,
but it is a mere blunder. 

[FN#362] In Classical Arabic Irak (like Yaman, Bahrayn and
Rusták) always takes the article.

[FN#363] The story-teller goes back from Kufah founded in Omar's
day to the times of Abraham.

[FN#364] This manœuvre has often been practiced; especially by
the first Crusaders under Bohemond (Gibbon) and in late years by
the Arab slavers in Eastern Intertropical Africa. After their
skirmishes with the natives they quartered and "bristled" the
dead like game, roasted and boiled the choice pieces and
pretended to eat the flesh. The enemy, who was not afraid of
death, was struck with terror by the idea of being devoured, and
this seems instinctive to the undeveloped mind.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael Hart]





This etext was produced by anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteers





The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Complete Works of
Artemus Ward (Charles Farrar Browne) Part 6

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF ARTEMUS WARD, PART 6, ARTEMUS WARD'S
PANORAMA

(CHARLES FARRAR BROWNE)

With a biographical sketch by Melville D. Landon,
"Eli Perkins"

CONTENTS.

PART VI.

Artemus Ward's Panorama.

6.1.  Prefatory Note by Melville D. Landon.

6.2.  The Egyptian Hall Lecture.

6.3.  "The Times" Notice.

6.4.  Programme of the Egyptian Hall Lecture.

6.5.  Announcement and Programme of the Dodworth Hall Lecture.

PART VI.  ARTEMUS WARD'S PANORAMA.

(ILLUSTRATED AS DELIVERED AT EGYPTIAN HALL, LONDON.)

6.1.  PREFATORY NOTE BY MELVILLE D. LANDON.

The fame of Artemus Ward culminated in his last lectures at
Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly, the final one breaking off
abruptly on the evening of the 23d of January, 1867.  That
night the great humorist bade farewell to the public, and
retired from the stage to die!  His Mormon lectures were
immensely successful in England.  His fame became the talk
of journalists, savants, and statesmen.  Every one seemed to
be affected differently, but every one felt and acknowledged
his power.  "The Honorable Robert Lowe," says Mr. E.P.
HINGSTON, Artemus Ward's bosom friend, "attended the Mormon
lecture one evening, and laughed as hilariously as any one
in the room.  The next evening Mr. John Bright happened to
be present.  With the exception of one or two occasional
smiles, he listened with GRAVE attention."

The "London Standard," in describing his first lecture in
London, aptly said, "Artemus dropped his jokes faster than
the meteors of last night succeeded each other in the sky.
And there was this resemblance between the flashes of his
humor and the flights of the meteors, that in each case one
looked for jokes or meteors, but they always came just in
the place that one least expected to find them.  Half the
enjoyment of the evening lay, to some of those present, in
listening to the hearty cachinnation of the people, who only
found out the jokes some two or three minutes after they
were made, and who laughed apparently at some grave
statements of fact.  Reduced to paper, the showman's jokes
are certainly not brilliant; almost their whole effect lies
in their seeming impromptu character.  They are carefully
led up to, of course; but they are uttered as if they are
mere afterthoughts of which the speaker is hardly sure."

His humor was so entirely fresh and unconventional, that it
took his hearers by surprise, and charmed them.  His failing
health compelled him to abandon the lecture after about
eight or ten weeks.  Indeed, during that brief period he was
once or twice compelled to dismiss his audience.  Frequently
he sank into a chair and nearly fainted from the exertion of
dressing.  He exhibited the greatest anxiety to be at his
post at the appointed time, and scrupulously exerted himself
to the utmost to entertain his auditors.  It was not because
he was sick that the public was to be disappointed, or that
their enjoyment was to be diminished.  During the last few
weeks of his lecture-giving, he steadily abstained from
accepting any of the numerous invitations he received.  Had
he lived through the following London fashionable season,
there is little doubt that the room at the Egyptian Hall
would have been thronged nightly.  The English aristocracy
have a fine, delicate sense of humor, and the success,
artistic and pecuniary, of "Artemus Ward" would have
rivalled that of the famous "Lord Dundreary."  There were
many stupid people who did not understand the "fun" of
Artemus Ward's books.  There were many stupid people who did
not understand the fun of Artemus Ward's lecture on the
Mormons.  Highly respectable people--the pride of their
parish--when they heard of a lecture "upon the Mormons,"
expected to see a solemn person, full of old saws and new
statistics, who would denounce the sin of polygamy,--and
rave without limit against Mormons.  These uncomfortable
Christians do not like humor.  They dread it as a certain
personage is said to dread holy water, and for the same
reason that thieves fear policemen--it finds them out.  When
these good idiots heard Artemus offer if they did not like
the lecture in Piccadilly, to give them free tickets for the
same lecture in California, when he next visited that
country, they turned to each other indignantly, and said,
"What use are tickets for California to US?  WE are not
going to California.  No! we are too good, too respectable
to go so far from home.  The man is a fool!"  One of these
vestrymen complained to the doorkeeper, and denounced the
lecturer as an impostor--"and," said the wealthy
parishioner, "as for the panorama, it is the worst painted
thing I ever saw."

During the lecture Artemus was always as solemn as the
grave.  Sometimes he would seem to forget his audience, and
stand for several seconds gazing intently at his panorama.
Then he would start up and remark apologetically, "I am very
fond of looking at my pictures."  His dress was always the
same--evening toilet.  His manners were polished, and his
voice gentle and hesitating.  Many who had read of the man
who spelled joke with a "g," looked for a smart old man with
a shrewd cock eye, dressed in vulgar velvet and gold, and
they were hardly prepared to see the accomplished gentleman
with slim physique and delicate white hands.

The letters of Artemus Ward in "Punch" from the tomb of
Shakspeare and the London Tower, had made him famous in
England, and in his audience were the nobility of the realm.
His first lecture in London was delivered at Egyptian Hall,
on Tuesday, November 13th, 1866.  The room used was that
which had been occupied by Mr. Arthur Sketchley, adjoining
the one in which Mr. Arthur Smith formerly made his
appearances.  The stage, with the curtain down, had this
appearance while Artemus was delivering his prologue:

(Drawing of stage with curtain closed and eight footlights.)

Punctually at eight o'clock he would step hesitatingly
before the audience, and rubbing his hands bashfully,
commence the lecture.

6.2.  THE EGYPTIAN HALL LECTURE.

You are entirely welcome, ladies and gentlemen, to my little
picture-shop.

I couldn't give you a very clear idea of the Mormons--and
Utah--and the Plains--and the Rocky Mountains--without
opening a picture-shop--and therefore I open one.

I don't expect to do great things here--but I have thought
that if I could make money enough to by me a passage to New
Zealand I should feel that I had not lived in vain.

I don't want to live in vain.--I'd rather live in Margate--
or here.  But I wish when the Egyptians built this hall they
had given it a little more ventilation.

If you should be dissatisfied with anything here to-night--I
will admit you all free in New Zealand--if you will come to
me there for the orders.  Any respectable cannibal will tell
you where I live.  This shows that I have a forgiving
spirit.

I really don't care for money.  I only travel round to see
the world and to exhibit my clothes.  These clothes I have
on were a great success in America.

How often do large fortunes ruin young men!  I should like
to be ruined, but I can get on very well as I am.

I am not an Artist.  I don't paint myself--though perhaps if
I were a middle-aged single lady I should--yet I have a
passion for pictures--I have had a great many pictures--
photographs taken of myself.  Some of them are very pretty--
rather sweet to look at for a short time--and as I said
before, I like them.  I've always loved pictures.

I could draw on wood at a very tender age.  When a mere
child I once drew a small cart-load of raw turnips over a
wooden bridge.--the people of the village noticed me.  I
drew their attention.  They said I had a future before me.
Up to that time I had an idea it was behind me.

Time passed on.  It always does, by the way.  You may
possibly have noticed that Time passes on.--It is a kind of
way Time has.

I became a man.  I haven't distinguished myself at all as an
artist--but I have always been more or less mixed up with
Art.  I have an uncle who takes photographs--and I have a
servant who--takes anything he can get his hands on.

When I was in Rome--Rome in New York State I mean--a
distinguished sculpist wanted to sculp me.  But I said "No."
I saw through the designing man.  My model once in his
hands--he would have flooded the market with my busts-- and
I couldn't stand it to see everybody going round with a bust
of me.  Everybody would want one of course--and wherever I
should go I should meet the educated classes with my bust,
taking it home to their families.  This would be more than
my modesty could stand--and I should have to return to
America--where my creditors are.

I like Art.  I admire dramatic Art--although I failed as an
actor.

It was in my schoolboy days that I failed as an actor.
(Artemus made many attempts as an amateur actor, but never
to his own satisfaction.  He was very fond of the society of
actors and actresses.  Their weaknesses amused him as much
as their talents excited his admiration.  One of his
favorite sayings was that the world was made up of "men,
women, and the people on the stage.")--The play was 'Ruins
of Pompeii.'--I played the Ruins.  It was not a very
successful performance--but it was better than the "Burning
Mountain."  He was not good.  He was a bad Vesuvius.

The remembrance often makes me ask--"Where are the boys of
my youth?"--I assure you this is not a conundrum.--Some are
amongst you here--some in America--some are in gaol.--

Hence arises a most touching question--"Where are the girls
of my youth?"  Some are married--some would like to be.

Oh my Maria!  Alas! she married another.  They frequently
do.  I hope she is happy--because I am.  (Spoken with a
sigh.  It was a joke which always told.  Artemus never
failed to use it in his "Babes in the Wood" lecture, and the
"Sixty Minutes in Africa," as well as in the Mormon story.)
--some people are not happy.  I have noticed that.

A gentleman friend of mine came to me one day with tears in
his eyes.  I said, "Why these weeps?"  He said he had a
mortgage on his farm--and wanted to borrow 200 pounds.  I
lent him the money--and he went away.  Some time after he
returned with more tears.  He said he must leave me for
ever.  I ventured to remind him of the 200 pounds he
borrowed.  He was much cut up. I thought I would not be hard
upon him--so I told him I would throw off one hundred
pounds.  He brightened--shook my hand--and said--"Old
friend--I won't allow you to outdo me in liberality--I'll
throw off the other hundred."

As a manager I was always rather more successful than as an
actor.

Some years ago I engaged a celebrated Living American
Skeleton for a tour through Australia.  He was the thinnest
man I ever saw.  He was a splendid skeleton.  He didn't
weigh anything scarcely--and I said to myself--the people of
Australia will flock to see this tremendous curiosity.  It
is a long voyage--as you know--from New York to Melbourne--
and to my utter surprise the skeleton had no sooner got out
to sea than he commenced eating in the most horrible manner.
He had never been on the ocean before--and he said it agreed
with him.--I thought so!--I never saw a man eat so much in
my life.  Beef--mutton--pork--he swallowed them all like a
shark--and between meals he was often discovered behind
barrels eating hard-boiled eggs.  The result was that when
we reached Melbourne this infamous skeleton weighed 64
pounds more than I did!

I thought I was ruined--but I wasn't.  I took him on to
California--another very long sea voyage--and when I got him
to San Francisco I exhibited him as a Fat Man.  (The reader
need scarcely be informed that this narrative is about as
real as "A. Ward's Snaiks," and about as much matter of fact
as his journey through the States with a wax-work show.)

This story hasn't anything to do with my Entertainment, I
know--but one of the principal features of my Entertainment
is that it contains so many things that don't have anything
to do with it.

My Orchestra is small--but I am sure it is very good--so far
as it goes.  I give my pianist ten pounds a night--and his
washing.  (That a good pianist could be hired for a small
sum in England was a matter of amusement to Artemus.  More
especially when he found a gentleman obliging enough to play
anything he desired, such as break-downs and airs which had
the most absurd relation to the scene they were used to
illustrate.  In the United States his pianist was desirous
of playing music of a superior order, much against the
consent of the lecturer.)

I like Music.--I can't sing.  As a singist I am not a
success.  I am saddest when I sing.  So are those who hear
me.  They are sadder even than I am.

The other night some silver-voiced young men came under my
window and sang--"Come where my love lies dreaming."--I
didn't go.  I didn't think it would be correct.

I found music very soothing when I lay ill with fever in
Utah--and I was very ill--I was fearfully wasted.--My face
was hewn down to nothing--and my nose was so sharp I didn't
dare to stick it into other people's business--for fear it
would stay there--and I should never get it again.  And on
those dismal days a Mormon lady--she was married--tho' not
so much so as her husband--he had fifteen other wives--she
used to sing a ballad commencing "Sweet bird--do not fly
away!"--and I told her I wouldn't.--She played the accordion
divinely--accordionly I praised her.

I met a man in Oregon who hadn't any teeth--not a tooth in
his head--yet that man could play on the bass drum better
than any man I ever met.--He kept a hotel.  They have queer
hotels in Oregon.  I remember one where they gave me a bag
of oats for a pillow--I had nightmares of course.  In the
morning the landlord said--How do you feel--old hoss--hay?--
I told him I felt my oats.

(Though the serious part of the lecture was here entered
upon, it was not delivered in a graver tone than that in
which he had spoken the farcicalities of the prologue.  Most
of the prefatory matter was given with an air of earnest
thought; the arms sometimes folded, and the chin resting on
one hand.  On the occasion of his first exhibiting the
panorama at New York he used a fishing-rod to point out the
picture with; subsequently he availed himself of an old
umbrella.  In the Egyptian Hall he used his little
riding-whip.)

Permit me now to quietly state that altho' I am here with my
cap and bells I am also here with some serious descriptions
of the Mormons--their manners--their customs--and while the
pictures I shall present to your notice are by no means
works of art--they are painted from photographs actually
taken on the spot (They were photographed by Savage &
Ottinger, of Salt Lake City, the photographers to Brigham
Young.)--and I am sure I need not inform any person present
who was ever in the territory of Utah that they are as
faithful as they could possibly be.  (Curtain.--The picture
was concealed from view during the first part of the lecture
by a crimson curtain.  This was drawn together or opened
many times in the course of the lecture, and at odd points
of the lecture.  I am not aware that Artemus himself could
have explained why he caused the curtain to be drawn at one
place and not at another.  Probably he thought it to be one
of his good jokes that it should shut in the picture just
when there was no reason for its being used.)

I went to Great Salt Lake City by way of California?  (That
is, he went by steamer from New York to Aspinwall, thence
across the Isthmus of Panama by railway, and then from
Panama to California by another steamboat.  A journey which
then occupied about three weeks.)

I went to California on the steamer "Ariel."

This is the steamer "Ariel."  (Picture.)

Oblige me by calmly gazing on the steamer "Ariel"--and when
you go to California be sure and go on some other steamer--
because the Ariel isn't a very good one.

When I reached the "Ariel"--at pier No. 4--New York--I found
the passengers in a state of great confusion about their
things--which were being thrown around by the ship's porters
in a manner at once damaging and idiotic.--So great was the
excitement--my fragile form was smashed this way--and jammed
that way--till finally I was shoved into a stateroom which
was occupied by two middle-aged females--who said, "Base
man--leave us--O leave us!"--I left them--Oh--I left them!

We reach Acapulco on the coast of Mexico in due time.
Nothing of special interest occurred at Acapulco--only some
of the Mexican ladies are very beautiful.  They all have
brilliant black hair--hair "black as starless night"--if I
may quote from the "Family Herald".  It don't curl.--A
Mexican lady's hair never curls--it is straight as an
Indian's.  Some people's hair won't curl under any
circumstances.--My hair won't curl under two shillings.
(Artemus always wore his hair straight until his severe
illness in Salt Lake City.  So much of it dropped off during
his recovery that he became dissatisfied with the long
meagre appearance his countenance presented when he surveyed
it in the looking-glass.  After his lecture at the Salt Lake
City Theatre he did not lecture again until we had crossed
the Rocky Mountains and arrived at Denver City, the capital
of Colorado.  On the afternoon he was to lecture there I met
him coming out of an ironmonger's store with a small parcel
in his hand.  "I want you, old fellow," he said; "I have
been all around the city for them, and I've got them at
last."  "Got what?" I asked.  "A pair of curling-tongs.  I
am going to have my hair curled to lecture in to-night.  I
mean to cross the plains in curls.  Come home with me and
try to curl it for me.  I don't want to go to any idiot of a
barber to be laughed at."  I played the part of friseur.
Subsequently he became his own "curlist," as he phrased it.
>From that day forth Artemus was a curly-haired man.)

(Picture of) The great thoroughfare of the imperial city of
the Pacific Coast (with a sign saying "Artemus Ward, Platts
Hall every evening.")

The Chinese form a large element in the population of San
Francisco--and I went to the Chinese Theatre.

A Chinese play often lasts two months.  Commencing at the
hero's birth, it is cheerfully conducted from week to week
till he is either killed or married.

The night I was there a Chinese comic vocalist sang a
Chinese comic song.  It took him six weeks to finish it--but
as my time was limited, I went away at the expiration of 215
verses.  There were 11,000 verses to this song--the chorus
being "Tural lural dural, ri fol day"--which was repeated
twice at the end of each verse--making--as you will at once
see--the appalling number of 22,000 "tural lural dural, ri
fol days"--and the man still lives.

(Picture of) Virginia City--in the bright new State of
Nevada.  (Virginia City itself is built on a ledge cut out
of the side of Mount Davidson, which rises some 9000 feet
above the sea level--the city being about half way up its
side.  To Artemus Ward the wild character of the scenery,
the strange manners of the red-shirted citizens, and the
odd developments of the life met with in that uncouth
mountain-town were all replete with interest.  We stayed
there about a week.  During the time of our stay he explored
every part of the place, met many old friends from the Eastern
States, and formed many new acquaintances, with some of whom
acquaintance ripened into warm friendship.  Among the latter
was Mr. Samuel L. Clemens, now well known as "Mark Twain."
He was then sub-editing one of the three papers published
daily in Virginia--"The Territorial Enterprise."  Artemus
detected in the writings of Mark Twain the indications of
great humorous power, and strongly advised the writer to
seek a better field for his talents.  Since then he has
become a well-known lecturer and author.  With Mark Twain,
Artemus made a descent into the Gould and Curry Silver Mine
at Virginia, the largest mine of the kind, I believe in the
world.  The account of the descent formed a long and very
amusing article in the next morning's "Enterprise."  To
wander about the town and note its strange developments
occupied Artemus incessantly.  I was sitting writing letters
at the hotel when he came in hurriedly, and requested me to
go out with him.  "Come and see some joking much better than
mine," said he.  He led me to where one of Wells, Fargo &
Co's express wagons was being rapidly filled with silver
bricks.  Ingots of the precious metal, each almost as large
as an ordinary brick, were being thrown from one man to
another to load the wagon, just as bricks or cheeses are
transferred from hand to hand by carters in England.  "Good
old jokes those, Hingston.  Good, solid Babes in the Wood,"
observed Artemus.  Yet that evening he lectured in
"Maguire's Opera House," Virginia City, to an audience
composed chiefly of miners, and the receipts were not far
short of eight hundred dollars.)

A wonderful little city--right in the heart of the famous
Washoe silver regions--the mines of which annually produce
over twenty-five millions of solid silver.  This silver is
melted into solid bricks--about the size of ordinary
house-bricks--and carted off to San Francisco with mules.
The roads often swarm with these silver wagons.

One hundred and seventy-five miles to the east of this place
are the Reese River Silver Mines--which are supposed to be
the richest in the world.

(Pointing to Panorama)
The great American Desert in winter time--the desert which
is so frightfully gloomy always.  No trees--no houses--no
people--save the miserable beings who live in wretched huts
and have charge of the horses and mules of the Overland Mail
Company.

(Picture of) Plains Between Virginia City and Salt Lake,
(showing a carcass attended by various scavengers, with a
building and mountains in the distance.)

This picture is a great work of art.--It is an oil painting
--done in petroleum.  It is by the Old Masters.  It was the
last thing they did before dying.  They did this and then
they expired.

The most celebrated artists of London are so delighted with
this picture that they come to the Hall every day to gaze at
it.  I wish you were nearer to it--so you could see it
better.  I wish I could take it to your residences and let
you see it by daylight.  Some of the greatest artists in
London come here every morning before daylight with lanterns
to look at it. They say they never saw anything like it
before--and they hope they never shall again.

When I first showed this picture in New York, the audience
were so enthusiastic in their admiration of this picture
that they called for the Artist--and when he appeared they
threw brickbats at him.  (This portion of the panorama was
very badly painted.  When the idea of having a panorama was
first entertained by Artemus, he wished to have one of great
artistic merit.  Finding considerable difficulty in
procuring one, and also discovering that the expense of a
real work of art would be beyond his means, he resolved on
having a very bad one or one so bad in parts that its very
badness would give him scope for jest.  In the small towns
of the Western States, it passed very well for a first-class
picture, but what it was really worth in an artistic point
of view its owner was very well aware.)

(Next picture.) A bird's-eye view of Great Salt Lake City--
the strange city in the Desert about which so much has been
heard--the city of the people who call themselves Saints.

I know there is much interest taken in these remarkable
people--ladies and gentlemen--and I have thought it better
to make the purely descriptive part of my Entertainment
entirely serious.--I will not--then--for the next ten
minutes--confine myself to my subject.

Some seventeen years ago a small band of Mormons--headed by
Brigham Young--commenced in the present thrifty metropolis
of Utah.  The population of the territory of Utah is over
100,000--chiefly Mormons--and they are increasing at the
rate of from five to ten thousand annually.  The converts to
Mormonism now are almost exclusively confined to English and
Germans--Wales and Cornwall have contributed largely to the
population of Utah during the last few years.  The
population of Great Salt Lake City is 20,000.--The streets
are eight rods wide--and are neither flagged nor paved.  A
stream of pure mountain spring water courses through each
street--and is conducted into the Gardens of the Mormons.
The houses are mostly of adobe--or sun-dried brick--and
present a neat and comfortable appearance.--They are usually
a story and a half high.  Now and then you see a fine modern
house in Salt Lake City--but no house that is dirty, shabby,
and dilapidated--because there are no absolutely poor people
in Utah.  Every Mormon has a nice garden--and every Mormon
has a tidy dooryard.--Neatness is a great characteristic of
the Mormons.

The Mormons profess to believe that they are the chosen
people of God--they call themselves Latter-day Saints--and
they call us people of the outer world Gentiles.  They say
that Mr. Brigham Young is a prophet--the legitimate
successor of Joseph Smith--who founded the Mormon religion.
They also say they are authorized--by special revelation
from Heaven--to marry as many wives as they can comfortably
support.

This wife-system they call plurality--the world calls it
polygamy.  That at its best it is an accursed thing--I need
not of course inform you--but you will bear in mind that I
am here as a rather cheerful reporter of what I saw in Utah
--and I fancy it isn't at all necessary for me to grow
virtuously indignant over something we all know is hideously
wrong.

You will be surprised to hear--I was amazed to see--that
among the Mormon women there are some few persons of
education--of positive cultivation.  As a class the Mormons
are not educated people--but they are by no means the
community of ignoramuses so many writers have told us they
were.

The valley in which they live is splendidly favored.  They
raise immense crops.  They have mills of all kinds.  They
have coal--lead--and silver mines.  All they eat--all they
drink--all they wear they can produce themselves--and still
have a great abundance to sell to the gold regions of Idaho
on the one hand--and the silver regions of Nevada on the
other.

The President of this remarkable community--the head of the
Mormon Church--is Brigham Young.--He is called President
Young--and Brother Brigham.  He is about 54 years old--
altho' he doesn't look to be over 45.  He has sandy hair and
whiskers--is of medium height--and is a little inclined to
corpulency.  He was born in the State of Vermont.  His power
is more absolute than that of any living sovereign--yet he
uses it with such consummate discretion that his people are
almost madly devoted to him--and that they would cheerfully
die for him if they thought the sacrifice were demanded--I
cannot doubt.

He is a man of enormous wealth.--One-tenth of everything
sold in the territory of Utah goes to the Church--and Mr.
Brigham Young is the Church. It is supposed that he
speculates with these funds--at all events--he is one of the
wealthiest men now living--worth several millions--without
doubt.--He is a bold--bad man--but that he is also a man of
extraordinary administrative ability no one can doubt who
has watched his astounding career for the past ten years.
It is only fair for me to add that he treated me with marked
kindness during my sojourn in Utah.

(Picture of) West Side of Main Street, Salt Lake City.  (A
wagon and team stand outside the "City Bathing House" and a
pennant flies over the "temperance hotel.")

The West Side of Main Street--Salt Lake City--including a
view of the Salt Lake Hotel.  It is a temperance hotel.  (At
the date of our visit, there was only one place in Salt Lake
City where strong drink was allowed to be sold.  Brigham
Young himself owned the property, and vended the liquor by
wholesale, not permitting any of it to be drunk on the
premises.  It was a coarse, inferior kind of whisky, known
in Salt Lake as "Valley Tan."  Throughout the city there was
no drinking-bar nor billiard room, so far as I am aware.
But a drink on the sly could always be had at one of the
hard-goods stores, in the back office behind the pile of
metal saucepans; or at one of the dry-goods stores, in the
little parlor in the rear of the bales of calico.  At the
present time I believe that there are two or three open bars
in Salt Lake, Brigham Young having recognized the right of
the "Saints" to "liquor up" occasionally.  But whatever
other failings they may have, intemperance cannot be laid to
their charge.  Among the Mormons there are no paupers, no
gamblers, and no drunkards.)  I prefer temperance hotels--
altho' they sell worse liquor than any other kind of hotels.
But the Salt Lake Hotel sells none--nor is there a bar in
all Salt Lake City--but I found when I was thirsty--and I
generally am--that I could get some very good brandy of one
of the Elders--on the sly--and I never on any account allow
my business to interfere with my drinking.

(Picture of) The Overland Mail Coach.--That is, the den on
wheels in which we have been crammed for the past ten days
and ten nights.--Those of you who have been in Newgate (The
manner in which Artemus uttered this joke was peculiarly
characteristic of his style of lecturing.  The commencement
of the sentence was spoken as if unpremeditated; then when
he had got as far as the word "Newgate," he paused, as if
wishing to call back that which he had said.  The applause
was unfailingly uproarious.)-------------------------------
----------------------------and stayed there any length of
time--as visitors--can realize how I felt.

The American Overland Mail Route commences at Sacramento--
California--and ends at Atchison--Kansas.  The distance is
two thousand two hundred miles--but you go part of the way
by rail.  The Pacific Railway is now completed from
Sacramento--California--to Fulsom--California--which only
leaves two thousand two hundred and eleven miles, to go by
coach.  This breaks the monotony--it came very near breaking
my back.

(Picture of) The Mormon Theatre.

This edifice is the exclusive property of Brigham Young.  It
will comfortably hold 3,000 persons--and I beg you will
believe me when I inform you that its interior is quite as
brilliant as that of any theatre in London.  (Herein Artemus
slightly exaggerated.  The coloring of the theatre was white
and gold, but it was inefficiently lighted with oil lamps.
When Brigham Young himself showed us round the theatre, he
pointed out, as an instance of his own ingenuity, that the
central chandelier was formed out of the wheel of one of his
old coaches.  The house is now, I believe, lighted with gas.
Altogether it is a very wondrous edifice, considering where
it is built and who were the builders.)

The actors are all Mormon amateurs, who charge nothing for
their services.

You must know that very little money is taken at the doors
of this theatre. The Mormons mostly pay in grain--and all
sorts of articles.

The night I gave my little lecture there--among my receipts
were corn--flour--pork--cheese--chickens--on foot and in the
shell.

One family went in on a live pig--and a man attempted to
pass a "yaller dog" at the Box Office--but my agent repulsed
him.  One offered me a doll for admission--another infants'
clothing.--I refused to take that.--As a general rule I do
refuse.

In the middle of the parquet--in a rocking chair--with his
hat on--sits Brigham Young.  When the play drags--he either
goes out or falls into a tranquil sleep.

A portion of the dress-circle is set apart for the wives of
Brigham Young. From ten to twenty of them are usually
present.  His children fill the entire gallery--and more
too.

(Picture of) East Side of Main Street, Salt Lake City.

The East Side of Main Street--Salt Lake City--with a view of
the Council Building--The legislature of Utah meets there.
It is like all legislative bodies.  They meet this winter to
repeal the laws which they met and made last winter--and
they will meet next winter to repeal the laws which they met
and made this winter.

I dislike to speak about it--but it was in Utah that I made
the great speech of my life.  I wish you could have heard
it.  I have a fine education.  You may have noticed it.  I
speak six different languages--London--Chatham--and Dover--
Margate--Brighton--and Hastings.  My parents sold a cow--
and sent me to college when I was quite young.  During the
vacation I used to teach a school of whales--and there's
where I learned to spout.--I don't expect applause for a
little thing like that.  I wish you could have heard that
speech--however.  If Cicero--he's dead now--he has gone
from us--but if old Ciss (Here again no description can
adequately inform the reader of the drollery which
characterized the lecturer.  His reference to Cicero was
made in the most lugubrious manner, as if he really deplored
his death and valued him as a schoolfellow loved and lost.)
could have heard that effort it would have given him the
rinderpest.  I'll tell you how it was.  There are stationed
in Utah two regiments of U.S. troops--the 21st from
California--and the 37th from Nevada.  The 20-onesters asked
me to present a stand of colors to the 37-sters--and I did
it in a speech so abounding in eloquence of a bold and
brilliant character--and also some sweet talk--real pretty
shopkeeping talk--that I worked the enthusiasm of those
soldiers up to such a pitch--that they came very near
shooting me on the spot.

(Picture of) Brigham Young's Harem.--These are the houses of
Brigham Young. The first on the right is the Lion House--so
called because a crouching stone lion adorns the central
front window.  The adjoining small building is Brigham
Young's office--and where he receives his visitors.--The
large house in the centre of the picture--which displays a
huge bee-hive--is called the Bee House--the bee-hive is
supposed to be symbolical of the industry of the Mormons.--
Mrs. Brigham Young the first--now quite an old lady--lives
here with her children.  None of the other wives of the
prophet live here.  In the rear are the schoolhouses where
Brigham Young's children are educated.

Brigham Young has two hundred wives.  Just think of that!
Oblige me by thinking of that.  That is--he has eighty
actual wives, and he is spiritually married to one hundred
and twenty more.  These spiritual marriages--as the Mormons
call them--are contracted with aged widows--who think it a
great honor to be sealed--the Mormons call it being sealed--
to the Prophet.

So we may say he has two hundred wives.  He loves not
wisely--but two hundred well.  He is dreadfully married.
He's the most married man I ever saw in my life.

I saw his mother-in-law while I was there.  I can't exactly
tell you how many there is of her--but it's a good deal.  It
strikes me that one mother-in-law is about enough to have in
a family--unless you're very fond of excitement.

A few days before my arrival in Utah--Brigham was married
again--to a young and really pretty girl--but he says he
shall stop now.  He told me confidentially that he shouldn't
get married any more.  He says that all he wants now is to
live in peace for the remainder of his days--and have his
dying pillow soothed by the loving hands of his family.
Well--that's all right--that's all right--I suppose--but if
ALL his family soothe his dying pillow--he'll have to go
out-doors to die.

By the way--Shakespeare indorses polygamy.--He speaks of the
Merry Wives of Windsor.  How many wives did Mr. Windsor
have?--but we will let this pass.

Some of these Mormons have terrific families.  I lectured
one night by invitation in the Mormon village of Provost,
but during the day I rashly gave a leading Mormon an order
admitting himself and family--it was before I knew that he
was much married--and they filled the room to overflowing.
It was a great success--but I didn't get any money.

(Picture of) Heber C. Kimball's Harem.--Mr. C. Kimball is
the first vice-president of the Mormon church--and would--
consequently--succeed to the full presidency on Brigham
Young's death.

Brother Kimball is a gay and festive cuss of some seventy
summers--or some'ers thereabout.  He has one thousand head
of cattle and a hundred head of wives.  (It is an
authenticated fact that, in an address to his congregation
in the Tabernacle, Heber C. Kimball once alluded to his
wives by the endearing epithet of "my heifers;" and on
another occasion politely spoke of them as "his cows."  The
phraseology may possibly be a slight indication of the
refinement of manners prevalent in Salt Lake City.)  He says
they are awful eaters.

Mr. Kimball had a son--a lovely young man--who was married
to ten interesting wives.  But one day--while he was absent
from home--these ten wives went out walking with a handsome
young man--which so enraged Mr. Kimball's son--which made
Mr. Kimball's son so jealous--that he shot himself with a
horse pistuel.

The doctor who attended him--a very scientific man--informed
me that the bullet entered the inner parallelogram of his
diaphragmatic thorax, superinducing membranous hemorrhage in
the outer cuticle of his basiliconthamaturgist.  It killed
him.  I should have thought it would.

(Soft music.)  (Here Artemus Ward's pianist [following
instructions] sometimes played the dead march from "Saul."
At other times, the Welsh air of "Poor Mary Anne;" or
anything else replete with sadness which might chance to
strike his fancy.  The effect was irresistibly comic.)

I hope his sad end will be a warning to all young wives who
go out walking with handsome young men.  Mr. Kimball's son
is now no more.  He sleeps beneath the cypress--the myrtle--
and the willow.  This music is a dirge by the eminent
pianist for Mr. Kimball's son.  He died by request.

I regret to say that efforts were made to make a Mormon of
me while I was in Utah.

It was leap-year when I was there--and seventeen young
widows--the wives of a deceased Mormon--offered me their
hearts and hands.  I called on them one day--and taking
their soft white hands in mine--which made eighteen hands
altogether--I found them in tears.

And I said--"Why is this thus?  What is the reason of this
thusness?"

They hove a sigh--seventeen sighs of different size--They
said--

"Oh--soon thou wilt be gonested away!"

I told them that when I got ready to leave a place I
wentested.

They said--"Doth not like us?"

I said--"I doth--I doth!"

I also said--"I hope your intentions are honorable--as I am
a lone child--my parents being far--far away."

They then said--"Wilt not marry us?"

I said--"Oh--no--it cannot was."

Again they asked me to marry them--and again I declined.
When they cried--

"Oh--cruel man!  This is too much--oh! too much!"

I told them that it was on account of the muchness that I
declined.

(Picture.)  This is the Mormon Temple.

It is built of adobe--and will hold five thousand persons
quite comfortably.  A full brass and string band often
assists the choir of this church--and the choir--I may add--
is a remarkably good one.

Brigham Young seldom preaches now.  The younger elders--
unless on some special occasion--conduct the services.  I
only heard Mr. Young once.  He is not an educated man--but
speaks with considerable force and clearness.  The day I was
there there was nothing coarse in his remarks.

(Picture of) The foundations of the Temple.

These are the foundations of the magnificent Temple the
Mormons are building.  It is to be built of hewn stone--and
will cover several acres of ground.  They say it shall
eclipse in splendor all other temples in the world.  They
also say it shall be paved with solid gold.

It is perhaps worthy of remark that the architect of this
contemplated gorgeous affair repudiated Mormonism--and is
now living in London.

(Picture of) The Temple as it is to be.

This pretty little picture is from the architect's design--
and cannot therefore--I suppose--be called a fancy sketch.
(Artemus had the windows of the temple in his panorama cut
out and filled in with transparent colored paper, so that,
when lighted from behind, it had the effect of one of the
little plaster churches, with a piece of lighted candle
inside, which the Italian image-boys display at times for
sale in the streets.  Nothing in the course of the evening
pleased Artemus more than to notice the satisfaction with
which this meretricious piece of absurdity was received by
the audience.)

Should the Mormons continue unmolested--I think they will
complete this rather remarkable edifice.

(Picture of the) Great Salt Lake.

Great Salt Lake.--The great salt dead sea of the 