desert.

I know of no greater curiosity than this inland sea of thick
brine.  It is eighty miles wide--and one hundred and thirty
miles long.  Solid masses of salt are daily washed ashore in
immense heaps--and the Mormon in want of salt has only to go
to the shore of this lake and fill his cart.  Only--the salt
for table use has to be subjected to a boiling process.

These are facts--susceptible of the clearest possible proof.
They tell one story about this lake--however--that I have my
doubts about.  They say a Mormon farmer drove forty head of
cattle in there once--and they came out firstrate pickled
beef.--

         *     *     *     *     *

         *     *     *     *     *

         *     *     *     *     *

I sincerely hope you will excuse my absence--I am a man
short--and have to work the moon myself.  (Here Artemus
would leave the rostrum for a few moments, and pretend to be
engaged behind.  The picture was painted for a night-scene,
and the effect intended to be produced was that of the moon
rising over the lake and rippling on the waters.  It was
produced in the usual dioramic way, by making the track of
the moon transparent and throwing the moon on from the
bull's eye of the lantern.  When Artemus went behind, the
moon would become nervous and flickering, dancing up and
down in the most inartistic and undecided manner.  The
result was that, coupled with the lecturer's oddly expressed
apology, the "moon" became one of the best laughed-at parts
of the entertainment.)

I shall be most happy to pay a good salary to any
respectable boy of good parentage and education who is a
good moonist.

(Picture of) The Endowment House.

In this building the Mormon is initiated into the mysteries
of the faith.

Strange stories are told of the proceedings which are held
in this building--but I have no possible means of knowing
how true they may be.

Salt Lake City is fifty-five miles behind us--and this is
Echo Canyon--in reaching which we are supposed to have
crossed the summit of the Wahsatch Mountains.  These
ochre-colored bluffs--formed of conglomerate sandstone--and
full of fossils--signal the entrance to the Canyon.  At its
base lies Weber Station.

Echo Canyon is about twenty-five miles long.  It is really
the sublimest thing between the Missouri and the Sierra
Nevada.  The red wall to the left develops farther up the
Canyon into pyramids--buttresses--and castles--honey-combed
and fretted in nature's own massive magnificence of
architecture.

In 1856--Echo Canyon was the place selected by Brigham Young
for the Mormon General Wells to fortify and make impregnable
against the advance of the American army--led by General
Albert Sidney Johnson.  It was to have been the Thermopylae
of Mormondom--but it wasn't general Wells was to have done
Leonidas--but he didn't.

(Picture of) Echo Canyon.

The wild snowstorms have left us--and we have thrown our
wolf-skin overcoats aside.  Certain tribes of far-western
Indians bury their distinguished dead by placing them high
in air and covering them with valuable furs--that is a very
fair representation of these mid-air tombs.  Those animals
are horses--I know they are--because my artist says so.  I
had the picture two years before I discovered the fact.--The
artist came to me about six months ago--and said--"It is
useless to disguise it from you any longer--they are
horses."

(Picture of) A more cheerful view of the Desert.

It was while crossing this desert that I was surrounded by a
band of Ute Indians.  They were splendidly mounted--they
were dressed in beaver-skins--and they were armed with
rifles--knives--and pistols.

(Picture of) Our Encounter with the Indians.

What could I do?--What could a poor old orphan do?  I'm a
brave man.--The day before the Battle of Bull's Run I stood
in the highway while the bullets--those dreadful messengers
of death--were passing all around me thickly--IN WAGONS--on
their way to the battle-field.  (This was the great joke of
Artemus Ward's first lecture, "The Babes in the Wood."  He
never omitted it in any of his lectures, nor did it lose its
power to create laughter by repetition.  The audiences at
the Egyptian Hall, London, laughed as immoderately at it, as
did those of Irving Hall, New York, or of the Tremont Temple
in Boston.)  But there were too many of these Injuns--there
were forty of them--and only one of me--and so I said--

"Great Chief--I surrender."  His name was Wocky-bocky.

He dismounted--and approached me.  I saw his tomahawk
glisten in the morning sunlight.  Fire was in his eye.
Wocky-bocky came very close to me and seized me by the hair
of my head.  He mingled his swarthy fingers with my golden
tresses--and he rubbed his dreadful Thomashawk across my
lily-white face.  He said--

"Torsha arrah darrah mishky bookshean!"

I told him he was right.

Wocky-bocky again rubbed his tomahawk across my face, and
said--"Wink-ho--loo-boo!"

Says I--"Mr. Wocky-bocky"--says I--"Wocky--I have thought so
for years--and so's all our family."

He told me I must go to the tent of the Strong-Heart and eat
raw dog.  (While sojourning for a day in a camp of Sioux
Indians we were informed that the warriors of the tribe were
accustomed to eat raw dog to give them courage previous to
going to battle.  Artemus was greatly amused with the
information.  When, in after years, he became weak and
languid, and was called upon to go to lecture, it was a
favorite joke with him to inquire, "Hingston, have you got
any raw dog?")  It don't agree with me.  I prefer simple
food.  I prefer pork-pie--because then I know what I'm
eating.  But as raw dog was all they proposed to give to me
--I had to eat it or starve. So at the expiration of two days
I seized a tin plate and went to the chief's daughter--and I
said to her in a silvery voice--in a kind of German-silvery
voice--I said--

"Sweet child of the forest, the pale-face wants his dog."

There was nothing but his paws!  I had paused too long!
Which reminds me that time passes.  A way which time has.

I was told in my youth to seize opportunity.  I once tried
to seize one. He was rich.  He had diamonds on.  As I seized
him--he knocked me down.  Since then I have learned that he
who seizes opportunity sees the penitentiary.

(Picture of) The Rocky Mountains.

I take it for granted you have heard of these popular
mountains.  In America they are regarded as a great success,
and we all love dearly to talk about them.  It is a kind of
weakness with us.  I never knew but one American who hadn't
something--some time--to say about the Rocky Mountains--and
he was a deaf and dumb man, who couldn't say anything about
nothing.

But these mountains--whose summits are snow-covered and icy
all the year round--are too grand to make fun of.  I crossed
them in the winter of '64--in a rough sleigh drawn by four
mules.

This sparkling waterfall is the Laughing-Water alluded to by
Mr. Longfellow in his Indian poem--"Higher-Water."  The
water is higher up there.

                       (Music.)

(Picture of) The plains of Colorado.

These are the dreary plains over which we rode for so many
weary days.  An affecting incident occurred on these plains
some time since, which I am sure you will pardon me for
introducing here.

On a beautiful June morning--some sixteen years ago--

          (Music, very loud till the scene is off.)

         *     *     *     *     *

         *     *     *     *     *

         *     *     *     *     *

--and she fainted on Reginald's breast!  (At this part of
the lecture Artemus pretended to tell a story--the piano
playing loudly all the time.  He continued his narration in
excited dumb-show--his lips moving as though he were
speaking.  For some minutes the audience indulged in
unrestrained laughter.)

(Picture of) The Prairie on Fire.

A prairie on fire is one of the wildest and grandest sights
that can be possibly imagined.

These fires occur--of course--in the summer--when the grass
is dry as tinder--and the flames rush and roar over the
prairie in a manner frightful to behold.  They usually burn
better than mine is burning to-night.  I try to make my
prairie burn regularly--and not disappoint the public--but
it is not as high-principled as I am.  (The scene was a
transparent one--the light from behind so managed as to give
the effect of the prairie on fire. Artemus enjoyed the joke
of letting the fire go out occasionally, and then allowing
it to relight itself.)

(Picture of) Brigham Young at home.

The last picture I have to show you represents Mr. Brigham
Young in the bosom of his family.  His family is large--and
the olive branches around his table are in a very tangled
condition.  He is more a father than any man I know.  When
at home--as you here see him--he ought to be very happy with
sixty wives to minister to his comforts--and twice sixty
children to soothe his distracted mind.  Ah! my friends--
what is home without a family?

What will become of Mormonism?  We all know and admit it to
be a hideous wrong--a great immoral strain upon the
'scutcheon of the United States.  My belief is that its
existence is dependent upon the life of Brigham Young.  His
administrative ability holds the system together--his power
of will maintains it as the faith of a community.  When he
dies--Mormonism will die too.  The men who are around him
have neither his talent nor his energy.  By means of his
strength it is held together.  When he falls--Mormonism will
also fall to pieces.

That lion--you perceive--has a tail.  It is a long one
already.  Like mine--it is to be continued in our next.

(Reprise of first picture of curtain and footlights.

The curtain fell for the last time on Wednesday, the 23d of
January 1867. Artemus Ward had to break off the lecture
abruptly.  He never lectured again.)

6.3.  "THE TIMES" NOTICE.

"EGYPTIAN HALL.--Before a large audience, comprising an
extraordinary number of literary celebrities, Mr. Artemus
Ward, the noted American humorist, made his first appearance
as a public lecturer on Tuesday evening, the place selected
for the display of his quaint oratory being the room long
tenanted by Mr. Arthur Sketchley.  His first entrance on the
platform was the signal for loud and continuous laughter and
applause, denoting a degree of expectation which a nervous
man might have feared to encounter.  However, his first
sentences, and the way in which they were received, amply
sufficed to prove that his success was certain.  The dialect
of Artemus bears a less evident mark of the Western World
than that of many American actors, who would fain merge
their own peculiarities in the delineation of English
character; but his jokes are of that true Transatlantic
type, to which no nation beyond the limits of the States can
offer any parallel.  These jokes he lets fall with an air of
profound unconsciousness--we may almost say melancholy--
which is irresistibly droll, aided as it is by the effect of
a figure singularly gaunt and lean and a face to match.  And
he has found an audience by whom his caustic humor is
thoroughly appreciated.  Not one of the odd pleasantries
slipped out with such imperturbable gravity misses its mark,
and scarcely a minute elapses at the end of which the sedate
Artemus is not forced to pause till the roar of mirth has
subsided.  There is certainly this foundation for an entente
cordiale between the two countries calling themselves Anglo-
Saxon, that the Englishman, puzzled by Yankee politics,
thoroughly relishes Yankee jokes, though they are not in the
least like his own.  When two persons laugh together, they
cannot hate each other much so long as the laugh continues.

"The subject of Artemus Ward's lecture is a visit to the
Mormons, copiously illustrated by a series of moving
pictures, not much to be commended as works of art, but for
the most part well enough executed to give (fidelity
granted) a notion of life as it is among the remarkable
inhabitants of Utah.  Nor let the connoisseur, who detects
the shortcomings of some of these pictures, fancy that he
has discovered a flaw in the armor of the doughty Artemus.
That astute gentleman knows their worth as well as anybody
else, and while he ostensibly extols them, as a showman is
bound to do, he every now and then holds them up to ridicule
in a vein of the deepest irony.  In one case a palpable
error of perspective, by which a man is made equal in size
to a mountain, has been purposely committed, and the shouts
of laughter that arise as soon as the ridiculous picture
appears is tremendous.  But there is no mirth in the face of
Artemus; he seems even deaf to the roar; and when he
proceeds to the explanation of the landscape, he touches on
the ridiculous point in a slurring way that provokes a new
explosion.

"The particulars of the lecture we need not describe.  Many
accounts of the Mormons, more or less credible, and all
authenticated, have been given by serious historians, and
Mr. W.H. Dixon, who has just returned from Utah to London,
is said to have brought with him new stores of solid
information.  But to most of us Mormonism is still a
mystery, and under those circumstances a lecturer who has
professedly visited a country for the sake more of picking
up fun than of sifting facts, and whose chief object it must
be to make his narrative amusing, can scarcely be accepted
as an authority.  We will, therefore, content ourselves with
stating that the lecture is entertaining to such a degree
that to those who seek amusement its brevity is its only
fault; that it is utterly free from offence, though the
opportunities for offence given by the subject of Mormonism
are obviously numerous; that it is interspersed, not only
with irresistible jokes, but with shrewd remarks, proving
that Artemus Ward is a man of reflection, as well as a
consummate humorist."

6.4.  PROGRAMME OF THE EGYPTIAN HALL LECTURE.

PROGRAMME USED AT

                    EGYPTIAN HALL

                     PICCADILLY.
                    ____________

         Every Night (Except Saturday) at 8.

               SATURDAY MORNINGS AT 3.

                   ____________

                    ARTEMUS WARD

                 AMONG THE MORMONS.

                   .   .   .   .

During the Vacation the Hall has been carefully Swept out
and a new Door-Knob has been added to the Door.

                   .   .   .   .

MR. ARTEMUS WARD will call on the Citizens of London, at
their residences, and explain any jokes in his narrative
which they may not understand.

                   .   .   .   .

A person of long-established integrity will take excellent
care of Bonnets, Cloaks, etc., during the Entertainment; the
Audience better leave their money, however, with MR. WARD;
he will return it to them in a day or two, or invest it for
them in America as they may think best.

->Nobody must say that he likes the Lecture unless he wishes
to be thought eccentric; and nobody must say that he doesn't
like it unless he really IS eccentric.  (This requires
thinking over, but it will amply repay perusal.)

                   .   .   .   .

The Panorama used to Illustrate Mr. Ward's Narrative is
rather more than Panoramas usually are.

                   .   .   .   .

MR. WARD will not be responsible for any debts of his own
contracting.

                   .   .   .   .
PROGRAMME.

                   .   .   .   .

1.  APPEARANCE Of ARTEMUS WARD,

Who will be greeted with applause.  -> The stall-keeper is
particularly requested to attend to this. <-  When quiet has
been restored, the Lecturer will present a rather frisky
prologue, of about ten minutes in length, and of nearly the
same width.  It perhaps isn't necessary to speak of the
depth.

2.

THE PICTURES COMMENCE HERE, the first one being a view of
the California Steamship.  Large crowd of citizens on the
wharf, who appear to be entirely willing that ARTEMUS WARD
shall go.  "Bless you, Sir!" they say.  "Don't hurry about
coming back.  Stay away for years, if you want to!"  It was
very touching.  Disgraceful treatment of the passengers, who
are obliged to go forward to smoke pipes, while the steamer
herself is allowed 2 Smoke Pipes amidships.  At Panama.  A
glance at Mexico.

3.  THE LAND Of GOLD.

Montgomery Street, San Francisco.  The Gold Bricks.  Street
Scenes.  "The Orphan Cabman, or the Mule Driver's Step-
Father."  The Chinese Theatre.  Sixteen square yards of a
Chinese Comic Song.

4.  THE LAND Of SILVER.

Virginia City, the wild young metropolis of the new Silver
State.  Fortunes are made there in a day.  There are
instances on record of young men going to this place without
a shilling--poor and friendless--yet by energy,
intelligence, and a careful disregard to business, they have
been enabled to leave there, owing hundreds of pounds.

5.  THE GREAT DESERT AT NIGHT.

A dreary waste of Sand.  The Sand isn't worth saving,
however.  Indians occupy yonder mountains.  Little Injuns
seen in the distance trundling their war-hoops.

6.  A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF GREAT SALT LAKE CITY.

With some entirely descriptive talk.

7.  MAIN STREET, EAST SIDE.

The Salt Lake Hotel, which is conducted on Temperance
principles.  The landlord sells nothing stronger than salt
butter.

8.  THE MORMON THEATRE.

The Lady of Lyons was produced here a short time since, but
failed to satisfy a Mormon audience, on account of there
being only one Pauline in it.  The play was revised at once.
It was presented the next night, with fifteen Paulines in
the cast, and was a perfect success.  -> All these
statements may be regarded as strictly true.  Mr. Ward would
not deceive an infant.

9.  MAIN STREET, WEST SIDE.

This being a view of Main Street, West side, it is naturally
a view of the West side of Main Street.

10.  BRIGHAM YOUNG'S HAREM.

Mr. Young is an indulgent father, and a numerous husband.
For further particulars call on Mr. WARD, at Egyptian Hall,
any Evening this week.  This paragraph is intended to blend
business with amusement.

11.  HEBER C. KIMBALL'S HAREM.

We have only to repeat here the pleasant remarks above in
regard to Brigham.

                   .   .   .   .
INTERMISSION Of FIVE MINUTES.

                   .   .   .   .

12.  THE TABERNACLE.

13.  THE TEMPLE AS IT IS.

14.  THE TEMPLE AS IT IS TO BE.

15.  THE GREAT SALT LAKE.

16.  THE ENDOWMENT HOUSE.

The Mormon is initiated into the mysteries of his faith
here.  The Mormon's religion is singular and his wives are
plural.

17.  ECHO CANYON.

18.  THE DESERT AGAIN.

A more cheerful view.  The Plains of Colorado.  The Colorado
Mountains "might have been seen" in the distance, if the
Artist had painted 'em.  But he is prejudiced against
mountains, because his uncle once got lost on one.

19.  BRIGHAM YOUNG AND HIS WIVES.

The pretty girls of Utah mostly marry Young.

20.  THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS.

21.  THE PLAINS OF NEBRASKA.

22.  THE PRAIRIE ON FIRE.

                   .   .   .   .

RECOMMENDATIONS.

                         TOTNESS, Oct. 20th, 1866.

MR. ARTEMUS WARD:

My dear Sir,--My wife was dangerously unwell for over
sixteen years.  She was so weak that she could not lift a
teaspoon to her mouth.  But in a fortunate moment she
commenced reading one of your lectures.  She got better at
once.  She gained strength so rapidly that she lifted the
cottage piano quite a distance from the floor, and then
tipped it over on to her mother-in-law, with whom she had
some little trouble.  We like your lectures very much.
Please send me a barrel of them.  If you should require any
more recommendations, you can get any number of them in this
place, at two shillings each, the price I charge for this
one, and I trust you may be ever happy.

                   I am, Sir,
             Yours truly, and so is my wife,
                                     R. SPRINGERS.

                   .   .   .   .

An American correspondent of a distinguished journal in
Yorkshire thus speaks of Mr. WARD'S power as an Orator:--

"It was a grand scene, Mr. ARTEMUS WARD standing on the
platform, talking; many of the audience sleeping tranquilly
in their seats; others leaving the room and not returning;
others crying like a child at some of the jokes--all, all
formed a most impressive scene, and showed the powers of
this remarkable orator.  And when he announced that he
should never lecture in that town again, the applause was
absolutely deafening."

                   .   .   .   .

  Doors open at Half-past Seven, commence at Eight.

              Conclude at Half-past Nine.

            EVERY EVENING EXCEPT SATURDAY.

            SATURDAY AFTERNOONS AT 3 P.M.


6.5.   ANNOUNCEMENT AND PROGRAMME OF THE DODWORTH HALL LECTURE

The Lecture on the Mormons was thus announced to the public of New
York, when Artemus Ward first appeared at Dodworth Hall:

The Festivities at Dodworth Hall will be commenced by the pianist, a
gentleman who used to board in the same street with Gottschalk.  The
man who kept the boarding-house remembers it distinctly.  The
overture will consist of a medley of airs, including the touching
new ballads "Dear Sister, is there any Pie in the house"  "My
Gentle Father, have you any Fine Cut about you?"  "Mother, is the
Battle o'er and is it safe for me to come home from Canada?"  And
(by request of several families who haven't heard it) "Tramp, tramp,
tramp, the Boys are Marching."  While the enraptured ear drinks in
the sweet music (we pay our pianist nine dollars a week, and "find
him") the eye will be enchained by the magnificent green baize
covering of the panorama.  This green baize cost 40 cents a yard at
Mr. Stewart's store.  It was bought in deference to the present
popularity of "The Wearing of the Green."  We shall keep up to the
times if we spend the last dollar our friends have got.


PROGRAMME OF THE DODWORTH HALL LECTURE.



               ARTEMUS WARD,

               his Programme.

      DODWORTH HALL, 806 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

            OPEN EVERY EVENING.

                   .   .   .   .

    1.  Introductory.

    2.  The Steamer Ariel, en route.

    3.  San Francisco.

    4.  The Washoe Silver Region.

    5.  The Plains.

    6.  The City of Saints.

    7.  A Mormon Hotel.

    8.  Brigham Young's Theatre.

    9.  The Council-House.

   10.  The Home of Brigham Young.

   11.  Heber C. Kimball's Seraglio.

   12.  The Mormon House of Worship.

   13.  Foundations of the New Temple.

   14.  Architect's View of the Temple when finished.

   15.  The Great Dead Sea of the Desert.

   16.  The House of Mystery.

   17.  The Canyon.

   18.  Mid-Air Sepulture.

   19.  A Nice Family Party at Brigham Young's.

It requires a large number of Artists to produce this
Entertainment.  The casual observer can form no idea of the
quantity of unfettered genius that is soaring, like a
healthy Eagle, round this Hall, in connection with this
Entertainment.  In fact, the following gifted persons
compose the

                    OFFICIAL BUREAU.

Secretary of the Exterior...Mr. E.P. Hingston.

Secretary of the Treasury...Herr Max Field,
                 (Pupil of Signor Thomaso Jacksoni.)

Mechanical Director and Professor of Carpentry...Signor G. Wilsoni.

Crankist...Mons. Aleck.

Assistant Crankist...Boy (orphan).

Artists...Messrs. Hilliard & Maeder.

Reserved Chairists...Messrs. Persee & Jerome.

Moppist...Signorina O'Flaherty.

Broomist...Mlle. Topsia de St. Moke.

Hired Man...John.

Fighting Editor...Chevalier McArone.

Dutchman...By a Polish Refugee, named McFinnigin.

Doortendist...Mons. Jacques Ridera.

Gas Man...Artemus Ward.

____________________________________________________

This Entertainment will open with music.  The soldiers'
Chorus from "Faust."  -> First time in this city. <-
_____________________________________________________

                   .   .   .   .

Next comes a jocund and discursive preamble, calculated to
show what a good education the Lecturer has.

                   .   .   .   .

View the first is a sea-view.--Ariel navigation.--Normal
school of whales in the distance.--Isthmus of Panama.--
Interesting interview with Old Panama himself, who makes all
the hats.--Old Pan is a likely sort of man.

                   .   .   .   .

San Francisco.--City with a vigilant government.--Miners
allowed to vote.  Old inhabitants so rich that they have
legs with golden calves to them.

                   .   .   .   .

Town in the Silver region.--Good quarters to be found
there.--Playful population, fond of high-low-jack and
homicide.--Silver lying around loose.--Thefts of it termed
silver-guilt.

                   .   .   .   .

The plains in Winter.--A wild Moor, like Othello.--Mountains
in the distance forty thousand miles above the level of the
highest sea (Musiani's chest C included).--If you don't
believe this you can go there and measure them for yourself.

                   .   .   .   .

Mormondom, sometimes called the City of the Plain, but
wrongly; the women are quite pretty.--View of Old Poly
Gamy's house, &c.

                   .   .   .   .

The Salt Lake Hotel.--Stage just come in from its overland
route and retreat from the Indians.--Temperance house.--No
bar nearer than Salt Lake sand-bars.--Miners in shirts like
Artemus Ward his Programme--they are read and will wash.

                   .   .   .   .

Mormon Theatre, where Artemus Ward lectured.--Mormons like
theatricals, and had rather go to the Playhouse than to the
Workhouse, any time.  Private boxes reserved for the ears of
Brother Brigham's wives.

                   .   .   .   .

Intermission of Five Minutes.

                   .   .   .   .

Territorial State-House.--Seat of the Legislature.--About as
fair a collection as that at Albany--and "we can't say no
fairer than that."

                   .   .   .   .

Residence of Brigham Young and his wives.--Two hundred souls
with but a single thought, Two hundred hearts that beat as
one.

                   .   .   .   .

Seraglio of Heber C. Kimball.--Home of the Queens of Heber.-
-No relatives of the Queen of Sheba.--They are a nice gang
of darlings.

                    .   .   .   .

Mormon Tabernacle, where the men espouse Mormonism and the
women espouse Brother Brigham and his Elders as spiritual
Physicians, convicted of bad doct'rin.

                   .   .   .   .

Foundations of the Temple.--Beginning of a healthy little
job.--Temple to enclose all out-doors, and be paved with
gold at a premium.

                   .   .   .   .

The Temple when finished.--Mormon-idea of a meeting-house.--
N.B. It will be bigger, probably, than Dodworth Hall.--one
of the figures in the foreground is intended for Heber C.
Kimball.--You can see, by the expression of his back, that
he is thinking what a great man Joseph Smith was.

                   .   .   .   .

The Great Salt Lake.--Water actually thick with salt--too
saline to sail in.--Mariners rocked on the bosom of this
deep with rock salt.--The water isn't very good to drink.

                   .   .   .   .

House where Mormons are initiated.--Very secret and
mysterious ceremonies.--Anybody can easily find out all
about them though, by going out there and becoming a Mormon.

                   .   .   .   .

Echo Canyon.--A rough bluff sort of affair.--Great Echo.--
When Artemus Ward went through, he heard the echoes of some
things the Indians said there about four years and a half
ago.

                   .   .   .   .

The Plains again, with some noble savages, both in the live
and dead state.--The dead one on the high shelf was killed
in a Fratricidal Struggle.--They are always having
Fratricidal Struggles out in that line of country.--It would
be a good place for an enterprising Coroner to locate.

                   .   .   .   .

Brigham Young surrounded by his wives--Those ladies are
simply too numerous to mention.

                   .   .   .   .

-> Those of the Audience who do not feel offended with
Artemus Ward are cordially invited to call upon him, often,
at his fine new house in Brooklyn.  His house is on the
right hand side as you cross the Ferry, and may be easily
distinguished from the other houses by its having a Cupola
and a Mortgage on it.

                   .   .   .   .

-> Soldiers on the battle-field will be admitted to this
Entertainment gratis.

                   .   .   .   .

-> The Indians on the Overland Route live on Routes and
Herbs.  They are an intemperate people.  They drink with
impunity, or anybody who invites them.

                   .   .   .   .

-> Artemus Ward delivered Lectures before

           ALL THE CROWNED HEADS OF EUROPE

                 ever thought of delivering lectures.

 ___________________________________________________________

         TICKETS, 50 CTS.  RESERVED CHAIRS, 1 DOLLAR.

   Doors open at 7.30 P.M.; Entertainment to commence at 8.
____________________________________________________________

->The Piano used is from the famous factory of Messrs
Chicking & Sons, 653 Broadway.

The Cabinet Organ is from the famous factory of Messrs Mason
& Hamlin, Boston, and is furnished by Mason Brothers, 7
Mercer Street, New York.










This etext was scanned by JC Byers
(http://www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and proofread by
Nancy Bloomquist, J.C. Byers, Muhammad Hozien, Carrie Lorenz,
Laura Shaffer, Sara Vazirian, and Charles Wilson. 





                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                          VOLUME SEVEN
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                     I Inscribe these pages
                               to
                   An Old And Valued Friend,
                                
                        John W. Larking
                    (Whilome of Alexandria).
                                
   In Whose Hospitable Home ("The Sycamores") I Made My Final
            Preparations For A Pilgrimage To Meccah
                        and El-Medinah.

                                                   R. F. Burton


                 Contents of the Seventh Volume

     The History of Gharib and His Brother Ajib (continued)
138. Otbah and Rayya
139. Hind, Daughter of Al-Nu'man, and Al-Hajjaj
140. Khuzaymah Bin Bishr and Ikrimah Al-Fayyaz
141. Yunus the Scribe and the Caliph Walid Bin Sahl
142. Harun Al-Rashid and the Arab Girl
143. Al-Asma'i and the Three Girls of Bassorah
144. Ibrahim of Mosul and the Devil
145. The Lovers of the Banu Uzrah
146. The Badawi and His Wife
147. The Lovers of Bassorah
148. Ishak of Mosul and His Mistress and the Devil
149. The Lovers of Al-Medinah
150. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and His Wizir
151. The Rogueries of Dalilah the Crafty and Her Daughter Zaynab
the Coney-Catcher
     a.   The Adventures of Mercury Ali of Cairo
152. Ardashir and Hayat Al-nufus
153. Julnar the Sea-Born and Her Son King Badr Basim of Persia
154. King Mohammed Bin Sabaik and the Merchant Hasan
     a.   Story of Prince Sayf Al-Muluk and the Princess Badi'a
Al-Jamal



                        The Book Of The
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                                



     When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

Shahrazad continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Sa'adan having broken into the palace of King Jamak and pounded
to pieces those therein, the survivors cried out, "Quarter!
Quarter!"; and Sa'adan said to them, "Pinion your King!" So they
bound Jamak and took him up, and Sa'adan drove them before him
like sheep and brought them to Gharib's presence, after the most
part of the citizens had perished by the enemy's swords. When the
King of Babel came to himself, he found himself bound and heard
Sa'adan say, "I will sup to-night off this King Jamak:" whereupon
he turned to Gharib and cried to him, "I throw myself on thy
mercy." Replied Gharib, "Become a Moslem, and thou shalt be safe
from the Ghul and from the vengeance of the Living One who
ceaseth not." So Jamak professed Al-Islam with heart and tongue
and Gharib bade loose his bonds. Then he expounded The Faith to
his people and they all became True Believers; after which Jamak
returned to the city and despatched thence provaunt land henchmen
to Gharib; and wine to the camp before Babel where they passed
the night. On the morrow, Gharib gave the signal for the march
and they fared on till they came to Mayyafarikin,[FN#1] which
they found empty, for its people had heard what had befallen
Babel and had fled to Cufa-city and told Ajib. When he heard the
news, his Doom-day appeared to him and he assembled his braves
and informing them of the enemy's approach ordered them make
ready to do battle with his brother's host; after which he
numbered them and found them thirty-thousand horse and ten
thousand foot.[FN#2] So, needing more, he levied other fifty-
thousand men, cavalry and infantry, and taking horse amid a
mighty host, rode forwards, till he came upon his brother's army
encamped before Mosul and pitched his tents in face of their
lines. Then Gharib wrote a writ and said to his officers, "Which
of you will carry this letter to Ajib?" Whereupon Sahim sprang to
his feet and cried, "O King of the Age, I will bear thy missive
and bring thee back an answer." So Gharib gave him the epistle
and he repaired to the pavilion of Ajib who, when informed of his
coming, said, "Admit him!" and when he stood in the presence
asked him, "Whence comest thou?" Answered Sahim, "From the King
of the Arabs and the Persians, son-in-law of Chosroe, King of the
world, who sendeth thee a writ; so do thou return him a reply."
Quoth Ajib, "Give me the letter;" accordingly Sahim gave it to
him and he tore it open and found therein, "In the name of Allah
the Compassionating, the Compassionate! Peace on Abraham the
Friend await! But afterwards. As soon as this letter shall come
to thy hand, do thou confess the Unity of the Bountiful King,
Causer of causes and Mover of the clouds;[FN#3] and leave
worshipping idols. An thou do this thing, thou art my brother and
ruler over us and I will pardon thee the deaths of my father and
mother, nor will I reproach thee with what thou hast done. But an
thou obey not my bidding, behold, I will hasten to thee and cut
off thy head and lay waste thy dominions. Verily, I give thee
good counsel, and the Peace be on those who pace the path of
salvation and obey the Most High King!" When Ajib read these
words and knew the threat they contained, his eyes sank into the
crown of his head and he gnashed his teeth and flew into a
furious rage. Then he tore the letter in pieces and threw it
away, which vexed Sahim and he cried out upon Ajib, saying,
"Allah wither thy hand for the deed thou hast done!" With this
Ajib cried out to his men, saying, "Seize yonder hound and hew
him in pieces with your hangers.''[FN#4] So they ran at Sahim;
but he bared blade and fell upon them and slew of them more than
fifty braves; after which he cut his way out, though bathed in
blood, and won back to Gharib, who said, "What is this case, O
Sahim?" And he told him what had passed, whereat he grew livid
for rage and crying "Allaho Akbar God is most great!" bade the
battle-drums beat. So the fighting-men donned their hauberks and
coats of straitwoven mail and baldrick'd themselves with their
swords; the footmen drew out in battle-array, whilst the horsemen
mounted their prancing horses and dancing camels and levelled
their long lances, and the champions rushed into the field. Ajib
and his men also took horse and host charged down upon host. --
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. 

      When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Gharib and his merry men took horse, Ajib and his troops also
mounted and host charged down upon host. Then ruled the Kazi of
Battle, in whose ordinance is no wrong, for a seal is on his lips
and he speaketh not; and the blood railed in rills and purfled
earth with curious embroidery; heads grew gray and hotter waxed
battle and fiercer. Feet slipped and stood firm the valiant and
pushed forwards, whilst turned the faint-heart and fled, nor did
they leave fighting till the day darkened and the night starkened
Then clashed the cymbals of retreat and the two hosts drew apart
each from other, and returned to their tents, where they righted.
Next morning, as soon as it was day, the cymbals beat to battle
and derring-do, and the warriors donned their harness of fight
and baldrick'd[FN#5] their blades the brightest bright and with
the brown lance bedight mounted doughty steed every knight and
cried out, saying, "This day no flight!" And the two hosts drew
out in battle array, like the surging sea. The first to open the
chapter[FN#6] of war was Sahim, who crave his destrier between
the two lines and played with swords and spears and turned over
all the Capitula of combat till men of choicest wits were
confounded. Then he cried out, saying, "Who is for fighting? Who
is for jousting? Let no sluggard come out nor weakling!"
Whereupon there rushed at him a horseman of the Kafirs, as he
were a flame of fire; but Sahim let him not stand long before him
ere he overthrew him with a thrust. Then a second came forth and
he slew him also, and a third and he tare him in twain, and a
fourth and he did him to death; nor did they cease sallying out
to him and he left not slaying them, till it was noon, by which
time he had laid low two hundred braves. Then Ajib cried to his
men, "Charge once more," and sturdy host on sturdy host down bore
and great was the clash of arms and battle-roar. The shining
swords out rang; the blood in streams ran and footman rushed upon
footman; Death showed in van and horse-hoof was shodden with
skull of man; nor did they cease from sore smiting till waned the
day and the night came on in black array, when they drew apart
and, returning to their tents, passed the night there. As soon as
morning morrowed the two hosts mounted and sought the field of
fight; and the Moslems looked for Gharib to back steed and ride
under the standards as was his wont, but he came not. So Sahim
sent to his brother's pavilion a slave who, finding him not,
asked the tent-pitchers,[FN#7] but they answered, "We know naught
of him." Whereat he was greatly concerned and went forth and told
the troops, who refrained from battle, saying, "An Gharib be
absent, his foe will destroy us." Now there was for Gharib's
absence a cause strange but true which we will set out in order
due. And it was thus. When Ajib returned to his camp on the
preceding Night, he called one of his guardsmen by name Sayyar
and said to him, "O Sayyar, I have not treasured thee save for a
day like this; and now I bid thee enter among Gharib s host and,
pushing into the marquee of their lord, bring him hither to me
and prove how wily thy cunning be." And Sayyar said, "I hear and
I obey." So he repaired to the enemy's camp and stealing into
Gharib's pavilion, under the darkness of the Night, when all the
men had gone to their places of rest, stood up as though he were
a slave to serve Gharib, who present! being athirst, called to
him for water. So he brought him a pitcher of water, drugged with
Bhang, and Gharib could not fulfill his need ere he fell down
with head distancing heels, whereupon Sayyar wrapped him in his
cloak and carrying him to Ajib's tent, threw him down at his
feet. Quoth Ajib, "O Sayyar, what is this?" Quoth he, "This be
thy brother Gharib;" whereat Ajib rejoiced and said, "The
blessings of the Idols light upon thee! Loose him and wake him."
So they made him sniff up vinegar and he came to himself and
opened his eyes; then, finding himself bound and in a tent other
than his own, exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious the Great!" Thereupon Ajib
cried out at him, saying, "Dost thou draw on me, O dog, and seek
to slay me and take on me thy blood-wreak of thy father and thy
mother? I will send thee this very day to them and rid the world
of thee." Replied Gharib, Kafir hound! soon shalt thou see
against whom the wheels of fate shall revolve and who shall be
overthrown by the wrath of the Almighty King, Who wotteth what is
in hearts and Who shall leave thee in Gehenna tormented and
confounded! Have ruth on thyself and say with me, 'There is no
god but the God and Abraham is the Friend of God!' " When Ajib
heard Gharib's words, he sparked and snorted and railed at his
god, the stone, and called for the sworder and the leather rug of
blood but his Wazir, who was at heart a Moslem though outwardly a
Miscreant, rose and kissing ground before him, said, "Patience, O
King, deal not hastily, but wait till we know the conquered from
the conqueror. If we prove the victors, we shall have power to
him and, if we be beaten, his being alive in our hands will be a
strength to us." And the Emirs said, "The Minister speaketh
sooth"! --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,
                                
She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Ajib purposed to slay Gharib, the Wazir rose and said, "Deal not
hastily, for we have always power to kill him!" So Ajib bade lay
his brother Gharib in irons and chain him up in his own tent and
set a thousand stout warriors to guard him. Meanwhile Gharib's
host, when they awoke that morning and found not their King, were
as sheep sans a shepherd; but Sa'adan the Ghul cried out at them,
saying, "O folk, don your war-gear and trust to your Lord to
defend you!" So Arabs and Ajams mounted horse, after clothing
themselves in hauberks of iron and skirting themselves in
straight knit mail, and sallied forth to the field, the Chiefs
and the colours moving in van. Then dashed out the Ghul of the
Mountain, with a club on his shoulder, two hundred pounds in
weight, and wheeled and careered, saying, "Ho, worshippers of
idols, come ye out and renown it this day, for 'tis a day of
onslaught! Whoso knoweth me hath enough of my mischief and whoso
knoweth me not, I will make myself known to him. I am Sa'adan,
servant of King Gharib. Who is for jousting? Who is for fighting?
Let no faintheart come forth to me to-day nor weakling." And
there rushed upon him a Champion of the Infidels, as he were a
flame of fire, and drove at him, but Sa'adan charged home at him
and dealt him with his club a blow which broke his ribs and cast
him lifeless to the earth. Then he called out to his sons and
slaves, saying, "Light the bonfire, and whoso falleth of the
Kafirs do ye dress him and roast him well in the flame, then
bring him to me that I may break my fast on him!" So they kindled
a fire midmost the plain and laid thereon the slain, till he was
cooked, when they brought him to Sa'adan, who gnawed his flesh
and crunched his bones. When the Miscreants saw the Mountain-Ghul
do this deed they were Frighted with sore Wright, but Ajib cried
out to his men, saying, "Out on you! Fall upon the Ogre and hew
him in hunks with your scymitars!" So twenty-thousand men ran at
Sa'adan, whilst the footmen circled round him and rained upon him
darts and shafts so that he was wounded in four-and-twenty
places, and his blood ran down upon the earth, and he was alone.
Then the host of the Moslems crave at the heathenry, calling for
help upon the Lord of the three Worlds, and they ceased not from
fight and fray till the day came to an end, when they drew apart.
But the Infidels had captured Sa'adan, as he vere a drunken man
for loss of blood; and they bound him fast and set him by Gharib
who, seeing the Ghul a prisoner, said, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! O
Sa'adan, what case is this?" "O my lord," replied Sa'adan, "it is
Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) who ordaineth joy and annoy
and there is no help but this and that betide." And Gharib
rejoined, "Thou speakest sooth, O Sa'adan!" But Ajib passed the
night in joy and he said to his men, "Mount ye on the morrow and
fall upon the Moslems so shall not one of them be left alive."
And they replied, "Hearkening and obedience!" This is how it
fared with them but as regards the Moslems, they passed the
Night, dejected and weeping for their King and Sa'adan; but Sahim
said to them, "O folk, be not concerned, for the aidance of
Almighty Allah is nigh." Then he waited till midnight, when he
assumed the garb of a tent-pitcher; and, repairing to Ajib's
camp, made his way between the tents and pavilions till he came
to the King's marquee, where he saw him seated on his throne
surrounded by his Princes. So he entered and going up to the
candles which burnt in the tent snuffed them and sprinkled
levigated henbane on the wicks; after which he withdrew and
waited without the marquee, till the smoke of the burning henbane
reached Ajib and his Princes and they fell to the ground like
dead men. Then he left them and went to the prison tent, where he
found Gharib and Sa'adan, guarded by a thousand braves, who were
overcome with sleep. So he cried out at the guards, saying, "Woe
to you! Sleep not; but watch your prisoners and light the
cressets." Presently he filled a cresses with firewood, on which
he strewed henbane, and lighting it, went round about the tent
with it, till the smoke entered the nostrils of the guards, and
they all fell asleep drowned by the drug; when he entered the
tent and finding Gharib and Sa'adan also insensible he aroused
them by making them smell and sniff at a sponge full of vinegar
he had with him. Thereupon he loosed their bonds and collars, and
when they saw him, they blessed him and rejoiced In him. After
this they went forth and took all the arms of the guards and
Sahim said to them, "Go to your own camp;" while he re entered
Ajib's pavilion and, wrapping him in his cloak, lifted him up and
made for the Moslem encampment. And the Lord, Compassionate
protected him, so that he reached Gharib's tent in safety and
unrolled the cloak before him. Gharib looked at its contents and
seeing his brother Ajib bound, cried out, "Allaho Akbar --God is
Most Great! Aidance! Victory!" And he blessed Sahim and bade him
arouse Ajib. So he made him smell the vinegar mixed with incense,
and he opened his eyes and, finding himself bound and shackled,
hung down his head earth wards. --And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after Sahim
had aroused Ajib, whom he had made insensible with henbane and
had brought to his brother Gharib, the captive opened his eyes
and, feeling himself bound and shackled, hung down his head
earthwards. Thereupon cried Sahim, O Accursed, lift thy head!" So
he raised his eyes and found himself amongst Arabs and Ajamis and
saw his brother seated on the throne of his estate and the place
of his power, wherefore he was silent and spake not. Then Gharib
cried out and said, "Strip me this hound!" So they stripped him
and came down upon him with whips, till they weakened his body
and subdued his pride, after which Gharib set over him a guard of
an hundred knights. And when this fraternal correction had been
administered they heard shouts of, "There is no God but the God!"
and "God is Most Great!" from the camp of the Kafirs. Now the
cause of this was that, ten days after his nephew King Al-Damigh,
Gharib's uncle, had set out from Al-Jazirah, with twenty-thousand
horse, and on nearing the field of battle, had despatched one of
his scouts to get news. The man was absent a whole day, at the
end of which time he returned and told Al-Damigh all that had
happened to Gharib with his brother. So he waited till the Night,
when he fell upon the Infidels, crying out, "Allaho Akbar!" and
put them to the edge of the biting scymitar. When Gharib heard
the Takbir,[FN#8] he said to Sahim, "Go find out the cause of
these shouts and war cries." So Sahim repaired to the field of
battle and questioned the slaves and camp followers, who told him
that King Al-Damigh had come up with twenty-thousand men and had
fallen upon the idolaters by Night, saying, "By the virtue of
Abraham the Friend, I will not forsake my brother's son, but will
play a brave man's part and beat back the host of Miscreants and
please the Omnipotent King!" So Sahim returned and told his
uncle's derring-do to Gharib, who cried out to his men, saying,
"Don your arms and mount your steeds and let us succour my
father's brother!" So they took horse and fell upon the Infidels
and put them to the edge of the sharp sword. By the morning they
had killed nigh fifty-thousand of the Kafirs and made other
thirty-thousand prisoners, and the rest of Ajib's army dispersed
over the length and breadth of earth. Then the Moslems returned
in victory and triumph, and Gharib rode out to meet his uncle,
whom he saluted and thanked for his help Quoth Al-Damigh, "I
wonder if that dog Ajib fell in this day's affair." Quoth Gharib,
"O uncle, be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear:
know that he is with me in chains." When Al-Damigh heard this he
rejoiced with exceeding joy and the two kings dismounted and
entered the pavilion, but found no Ajib there; whereupon Gharib
exclaimed, "O glory of Abraham, the Friend (with whom be
peace!)," adding, "Alas, what an ill end is this to a glorious
day!" and he cried out to the tent-pitchers, saying, "Woe to you!
Where is my enemy who oweth me so much?" Quoth they, "When thou
mountedst and we went with thee, thou didst not bid us guard
him;" and Gharib exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" But Al-Damigh said
to him, "Hasten not nor be concerned, for where can he go, and we
in pursuit of him?" Now the manner of Ajib's escape was in this
wise. His page Sayyar had been ambushed in the camp and when he
saw Gharib mount and ride forth, leaving none to guard his enemy
Ajib, he could hardly credit his eyes. So he waited awhile and
presently crept to the tent and taking Ajib, who was senseless
for the pain of the bastinado, on his back, made off with him
into the open country and fared on at the top of his speed from
early night to the next day, till he came to a spring of water,
under an apple tree. There he set down Ajib from his back and
washed his face, whereupon he opened his eyes and seeing Sayyar,
said to him, "O Sayyar, carry me to Cufa that I may recover there
and levy horsemen and soldiers wherewith to overthrow my foe: and
know, O Sayyar, that I am anhungered." So Sayyar sprang up and
going out to the desert caught an ostrich-poult and brought it to
his lord. Then he gathered fuel and deftly using the fire sticks
kindled a fire,, by which he roasted the bird which he had
hallal'd[FN#9] and fed Ajib with its flesh and gave him to drink
of the water of the spring, till his strength returned to hits,
after which he went to one of the Badawi tribal encampments, and
stealing thence a steed mounted Ajib upon it and journeyed on
with him for many days till they drew near the city of Cufa. The
Viceroy of the capital came out to meet and salute the King, whom
he found weak with the beating his brother had inflicted upon
him; and Ajib entered the city and called his physicians. When
they answered his summons, he bade them heal him in less than ten
days' time: they said, "We hear and we obey," and they tended him
till he became whole of the sickness that was upon him and of the
punishment. Then he commanded his Wazirs to write letters to all
his Nabobs and vassals, and he indited one-and-twenty writs and
despatched them to the governors, who assembled their troops and
set out for Cufa by forced marches. --And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say. 

       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ajib
sent orders to assemble the troops, who marched forthright to
Cufa. Meanwhile, Gharib, being t