roubled for Ajib's escape,
despatched in quest of him a thousand braves, who dispersed on
all sides and sought him a day and a Night, but found no trace of
him; so they returned and told Gharib, who called for his brother
Sahim, but found him not; whereat he was sore concerned, fearing
for him from the shifts of Fortune. And lo! Sahim entered and
kissed ground before Gharib, who rose, when he saw him, and
asked, "Where hast thou been, O Sahim?" He answered, "O King, I
have been to Cufa and there I find that the dog Ajib hath made
his way to his capital and is healed of his hurts: eke, he hath
written letters to his vassals and sent them to his Nabobs who
have brought him troops." When Gharib heard this, he gave the
command to march; so they struck tents and fared for Cufa. When
they came in sight of the city, they found it compassed about
with a host like the surging main, having neither beginning nor
end. So Gharib with his troops encamped in face of the Kafirs and
set up his standards, and darkness fell down upon the two hosts,
whereupon they lighted camp-fires and kept watch till daybreak.
Then King Gharib rose and making the Wuzu-ablution, prayed a two-
bow prayer according to the rite of our father Abraham the Friend
(on whom be the Peace!); after which he commanded the battle
drums to sound the point of war. Accordingly, the kettle-drums
beat to combat and the standards fluttered whilst the fighting-
men armour donned and their horses mounted and themselves
displayed and to plain fared. Now the first to open the gate of
war was King Al-Damigh, who urged his charger between the two
opposing armies and displayed himself and played with the swords
and the spears, till both hosts were confounded and at him
marvelled, after which he cried out, saying, "Who is for
jousting? Let no sluggard come out to me nor weakling; for I am
Al-Damigh, the King, brother of Kundamir the King." Then there
rushed forth a horseman of the Kafirs, as he were a flame of
fire, and crave at Al-Damigh, without word said; but the King
received him with a lance thrust in the breast so dour that the
point issued from between his shoulders and Allah hurried his
soul to the fire, the abiding-place dire. Then came forth a
second he slew, and a third he slew likewise, and they ceased not
to come out to him and he to slay them, till he had made an end
of six-and-seventy fighting-men. Hereupon the Miscreants and men
of might hung back and would not encounter him; but Ajib cried
out to his men and said, "Fie on you, O folk! if ye all go forth
to him, one by one, he will not leave any of you, sitting or
standing. Charge on him all at once and cleanse of them our
earthly wone and strew their heads for your horses' hoofs like a
plain of stone!" So they waved the ewe striking flag and host was
heaped upon host; blood rained in streams upon earth and railed
and the Judge of battle ruled, in whose ordinance is no upright.
The fearless stood firm on feet in the stead of fight, whilst the
faint-heart gave back and took to flight thinking the day would
never come to an end nor the curtains of gloom would be drawn by
the hand of Night; and they ceased not to battle with swords and
to smite till light darkened and murk starkened. Then the kettle-
drums of the Infidels beat the retreat, but Gharib, refusing to
stay his arms, crave at the Paynimry, and the Believers in Unity,
the Moslems, followed him. How many heads and hands they shore,
how many necks and sinews they tore, how many knees and spines
they mashed and how many grown men and youths they to death
bashed! With the first gleam of morning grey the Infidels broke
and fled away, in disorder and disarray; and the Moslems followed
them till middle-day and took over twenty-thousand of them, whom
they brought to their tents in bonds to stay. Then Gharib sat
down before the gate of Cufa and commanded a herald to proclaim
pardon and protection for every wight who should leave the
worship to idols dight and profess the unity of His All-might the
Creator of mankind and of light and night. So was made
proclamation as he bade in the streets of Cufa and all that were
therein embraced the True Faith, great and small; then they
issued forth in a body and renewed their Islam before King
Gharib, who rejoiced in them with exceeding joy and his breast
broadened and he threw off all annoy. Presently he enquired of
Mardas and his daughter Mahdiyah, and, being told that he had
taken up his abode behind the Red Mountain, he called Sahim and
said to him, "Find out for me what is become of thy father."
Sahim mounted steed without stay or delay and set his berry-brown
spear in rest and fared on in quest till he reached the Red
Mountain, where he sought for his father, yet found no trace of
him nor of his tribe; however, he saw in their stead an elder of
the Arabs, a very old man, broken with excess of years, and asked
him of the folk and whither they were gone. Replied he, "O my
son, when Mardas heard of Gharib's descent upon Cufa he feared
with great fear and, taking his daughter and his folk, set out
with his handmaids and negroes into the wild and word, and I wot
not whither he went." So Sahim, hearing the Shaykh's words,
returned to Gharib and told him thereof, whereat he was greatly
concerned. Then he sat down on his father's throne and, opening
his treasuries, distributed largesse to each and every of his
braves. And he took up his abode in Cufa and sent out spies to
get news of Ajib. He also summoned the Grandees of the realm, who
came and did him homage; as also did the citizens and he bestowed
on them sumptuous robes of honour and commended the Ryots to
their care. --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib,
after giving robes of honour to the citizens of Cufa and com
mending the Ryots to their care, went out on a day of the days to
hunt, with an hundred horse, and fared on till he came to a Wady,
abounding in trees and fruits and rich in rills and birds It was
a pasturing-place for roes and gazelles, to the spirit a delight
whose scents reposed from the langour of fight. They encamped in
the valley, for the day was dear and bright, and there passed the
night. On the morrow, Gharib made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed
the two-bow dawn-prayer, offering up praise and thanks to
Almighty Allah; when, lo and behold! there arose a clamour and
confusion in the meadows, and he bade Sahim go see what was to
do. So Sahim mounted forthright and rode till he espied goods
being plundered and horses haltered and women carried off and
children crying out. Whereupon he questioned one of the
shepherds, saying, "What be all this?"; and they replied, "This
is the Harim of Mardas, Chief of the Banu Kahtan, and his good
and that of his clan; for yesterday Jamrkan slew Mardas and made
prize of his women and children and household stuff and all the
belonging of his tribe. It is his wont to go a raiding and to cut
off highways and waylay wayfarers and he is a furious tyrant;
neither Arabs nor Kings can prevail against him and he is the
scourge and curse of the country." Now when Sahim heard these
news of his sire's slaughter and the looting of his Harim and
property, he returned to Gharib and told him the case, wherefore
fire was added to his fire and his spirit chafed to wipe out his
shame and his blood wit to claim: so he rode with his men after
the robbers till he overtook them and fell upon them, crying out
and saying, "Almighty Allah upon the rebel, the traitor, the
infidel!" and he slew in a single charge one-and-twenty fighting-
men. Then he halted in mid-field, with no coward's heart, and
cried out, "Where is Jamrkan? Let him come out to me, that I may
make him quaff the cup of disgrace and rid of him earth's face!"
Hardly had he made an end of speaking, when forth rushed Jamrkan,
as he were a calamity of calamities or a piece of a mountain,
cased in steel. He was a mighty huge[FN#10] Amalekite; and he
crave at Gharib without speech or salute, like the fierce tyrant
he was. And he was armed with a mace of China steel, so heavy, so
potent, that had he smitten a hill he had smashed it. Now when he
charged, Gharib met him like a hungry lion, and the brigand aimed
a blow at his head with his mace; but he evaded it and it smote
the earth and sank therein half a cubit deep. Then Gharib took
his battle flail and smiting Jamrkan on the wrist, crushed his
fingers and the mace dropped from his grasp; whereupon Gharib
bent down from his seat in selle and snatching it up, swiftlier
than the blinding leven, smote him therewith full on the flat of
the ribs, and he fell to the earth like a long-stemmed palm-tree.
So Sahim took him and pinioning him, haled him off with a rope,
and Gharib's horsemen fell on those of Jamrkan and slew fifty of
them: the rest fled; nor did they cease flying till they reached
their tribal camp and raised their voices in clamour; whereupon
all who were in the Castle came out to meet them and asked the
news. They told the tribe what had passed; and, when they heard
that their chief was a prisoner, they set out for the valley
vying one with other in their haste to deliver him. Now when King
Gharib had captured Jamrkan and had seen his braves take flight,
he dismounted and called for Jamrkan, who humbled himself before
him, saying, "I am under thy protection, O champion of the Age!"
Replied Gharib, "O dog of the Arabs, dost thou cut the road for
the servants of Almighty Allah, and fearest thou not the Lord of
the Worlds?" "O my master," asked Jamrkan, "and who is the Lord
of the Worlds?" "O dog," answered Gharib, "and what calamity dost
thou worship?" He said, "O my lord, I worship a god made of
dates[FN#11] kneaded with butter and honey, and at times I eat
him and make me another." When Gharib heard this, he laughed till
he fell backwards and said, "O miserable, there is none worship-
worth save Almighty Allah, who created thee and created all
things and provideth all creatures with daily bread, from whom
nothing is hid and He over all things is Omnipotent." Quoth
Jamrkan, "And where is this great god, that I may worship him?"
Quoth Gharib, "O fellow, know that this god's name is Allah--the
God--and it is He who fashioned the heavens and the earth and
garred the trees to grow and the waters to flow. He created wild
beasts and birds and Paradise and Hell-fire and veileth Himself
from all eyes seeing and of none being seen. He, and He only, is
the Dweller on high. Extolled be His perfection! There is no god
but He!" When Jamrkan heard these words, the ears of his heart
were opened; his skin shuddered with horripilation and he said,
"O my lord, what shall I say that I may become of you and that
this mighty Lord may accept of me?" Replied Gharib, "Say, 'There
is no god but the God and Abraham the Friend is the Apostle of
God!'" " So he pronounced the profession of the Faith and was
written of the people of felicity. Then quoth Gharib, " Say me,
hast thou tasted the sweetness of Al-Islam?"; and quoth the
other, "Yes;" whereupon Gharib cried, "Loose his bonds!" So they
unbound him and he kissed ground before Gharib and his feet. Now
whilst this was going on, behold, they espied a great cloud of
dust that towered till it walled the word. --And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamrkan
islamised and kissed the ground between the hands of Gharib, and,
as they were thus, behold, a great cloud of dust towered till it
walled the wold and Gharib said to Sahim, "Go and see for us what
it be." So he went forth, like a bird in full flight, and
presently returned, saying, "O King of the Age, this dust is of
the Banu Amir, the comrades of Jamrkan." Whereupon quoth Gharib
to the new Moslem, "Ride out to thy people and offer to them Al-
Islam: an they profess, they shall be saved; but, an they refuse,
we will put them to the sword." So Jamrkan mounted and driving
steed towards his tribesmen, cried out to them; and they knew him
and dismounting, came up to him on foot and said, "We rejoice in
thy safety, O our lord!" Said he, "O folk, whoso obeyeth me shall
be saved; but whoso gainsayeth me, I will cut him in twain with
this scymitar." And they made answer, saying, "Command us what
thou wilt, for we will not oppose thy commandment." Quoth he,
"Then say with me, 'There is no god but the God and Abraham is
the Friend of God!' " They asked, "O our lord, whence haddest
thou these words?" And he told them what had befallen him with
Gharib, adding, "O folk, know ye not that I am your chief in
battle-plain and where men of cut and thrust are fain; and yet a
man single-handed me to prisoner hath ta'en and made me the cup
of shame and disgrace to drain?" When they heard his speech, they
spoke the word of Unity and Jamrkan led them to Gharib, at whose
hands they renewed their profession of Al-Islam and wished him
glory and victory, after they had kissed the earth before him.
Gharib rejoiced in them and said to them, "O folk, return to your
people and expound Al-Islam to them;" but all replied, "O our
lord, we will never leave thee, whilst; we live; but we will go
and fetch our families and return to thee." And Gharib said, "Go,
and join me at the city of Cufa." So Jamrkan and his comrades
returned to their tribal camp and offered Al-Islam to their women
and children, who all to a soul embraced the True Faith, after
which they dismantled their abodes and struck their tents and set
out for Cufa, driving before them their steeds, camels and sheep.
During this time Gharib returned to Cufa, where the horsemen met
him in state. He entered his palace and sat down on his sire's
throne with his champions ranged on either hand. Then the spies
came forwards, and informed him that his brother Ajib had made
his escape and had taken refuge with Jaland[FN#12] bin Karkar,
lord of the city of Oman and land of Al-Yaman; whereupon Gharib
cried aloud to his host, "O men, make you ready to march in three
days." Then he expounded Al-Islam to the thirty-thousand men he
had captured in the first affair and exhorted them to profess and
take service with him. Twenty-thousand embraced the Faith, but
the rest refused and he slew them. Then came forward Jamrkan and
his tribe and kissed the ground before Gharib, who bestowed on
him a splendid robe of honour and made him captain of his
vanguard, saying, "O Jamrkan, mount with the Chiefs of thy kith
and kin and twenty-thousand horse and fare on before us to the
land of Jaland bin Karkar." "Hearkening and obedience," answered
Jamrkan and, leaving the women and children of the tribe in Cufa,
he set forward. Then Gharib passed in review the Harim of Mardas
and his eye lit upon Mahdiyah, who was among the women, wherewith
he fell down fainting. They sprinkled rose-water on his face,
till he came to himself, when he embraced Mahdiyah and carried
her into a sitting-chamber, where he sat with her; and they twain
lay together that night without fornication. Next morning he went
out and sitting down on the throne of his kingship, robed his
uncle Al-Damigh with a robe of honour; and appointed him his
viceroy over all Al-Irak, commending Mahdiyah to his care, till
he should return from his expedition against Ajib; and, when the
order was accepted, he set out for the land of Al-Yaman and the
City of Oman with twenty-thousand horse and ten thousand foot.
Now, when Ajib and his defeated army drew in sight of Oman, King
Jaland saw the dust of their approach and sent to find out its
meaning, scouts who returned and said, "Verily this is the dust
of one highs Ajib, lord of Al-Irak." And Jaland wondered at his
coming to his country and, when assured of the tidings, he said
to his officers, "Fare ye forth and meet him." So they went out
and met him and pitched tents for him at the city-gate; and Ajib
entered in to Jaland, weeping eyed and heavy-hearted. Now
Jaland's wife was the daughter of Ajib's paternal uncle and he
had children by her; so, when he saw his kinsman in this plight,
he asked for the truth of what ailed him and Ajib told him all
that had befallen him, first and last, from his brother and said,
"O King, Gharib biddeth the folk worship the Lord of the Heavens
and forbiddeth them from the service of simulacres and other of
the gods." When Jaland heard these words he raged and revolted
and said, "By the virtue of the Sun, Lord of Life and Light, I
will not leave one of thy brother's folk in existence! But where
didst thou quit them and how many men are they?" Answered Ajib,
"I left them in Cufa and they be fifty-thousand horse." Whereupon
Jaland called his Wazir Jawamard,[FN#13] saying, "Take thee
seventy-thousand horse and fare to Cufa and bring me the Moslems
alive, that I may torture them with all manner of tortures." So
Jawamard departed with his host and fared through the first day
and the second till the seventh day, when he came to a Wady
abounding in trees and rills and fruits. Here he called a halt --
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Jaland sent Jawamard with his army to Cufa, they came upon a Wady
abounding in trees and rills where a halt was called and they
rested till the middle of the Night, when the Wazir gave the
signal for departure and mounting, rode on before them till hard
upon dawn, at which time he descended into a well-wooded valley,
whose flowers were fragrant and whose birds warbled on boughs, as
they swayed gracefully to and fro, and Satan blew into his sides
and puffed him up with pride and he improvised these couplets and
cried,

"I plunge with my braves in the seething sea; * Seize the foe in
     my strength and my valiancy; 
And the doughtiest knights wot me well to be * Friend to friend
     and fierce foe to mine enemy.
I will load Ghanb with the captive's chains * Right soon, and
     return in all Joy and glee; 
For I've donned my mail and my weapons wield * And on all sides
     charge at the chivalry."[FN#14]

Hardly had Jawamard made an end of his verses when there came out
upon him from among the trees a horseman of terrible mien covered
and clad in steely sheen, who cried out to him, saying, "Stand, O
riff-raff of the Arabs! Doff thy dress and ground thine arms gear
and dismount thy destrier and be off with thy life!" When
Jawamard heard this, the light in his eyes became darkest night
and he drew his sabre and drove at Jamrkan, for he it was,
saying, "O thief of the Arabs, wilt thou cut the road for me, who
am captain of the host of Jaland bin Karkar and am come to bring
Gharib and his men in bond?" When Jamrkan heard these words, he
said, "How cooling is this to my heart and liver!" And he made at
Jawamard versifying in these couplets,

"I'm the noted knight in the field of fight, * Whose sabre and
     spear every foe affright! 
Jamrkan am I, to my foes a fear, * With a lance lunge known unto
     every knight:
Gharib is my lord, nay my pontiff, my prince, * Where the two
     hosts dash very lion of might:
An Imam of the Faith, pious, striking awe * On the plain where
     his foes like the fawn take flight;
Whose voice bids folk to the faith of the Friend, * False,
     doubling idols and gods despite!"

Now Jamrkan had fared on with his tribesmen ten days' journey
from Cufa city and called a halt on the eleventh day till
midnight, when he ordered a march and rode on devancing them till
he descended into the valley aforesaid and heard Jawamard
reciting his verses. So he crave at him as the driving of a
ravening lion, and smiting him with his sword, clove him in twain
and waited till his captains came up, when he told them what had
passed and said to them. "Take each of you five thousand men and
disperse round about the Wady, whilst I and the Banu Amir fall
upon the enemy's van, shouting, Allaho Akbar God is Most Great!
When ye hear my slogan, do ye charge them, crying like me upon
the Lord, and smite them with the sword." "We hear and we obey,"
answered they and turning back to their braves did his bidding
and spread themselves about the sides of the valley in the
twilight forerunning the dawn. Presently, lo and behold! up came
the army of Al-Yaman, like a flock of sheep, filling plain and
steep, and Jamrkan and the Banu Amir fell upon them, shouting,
"Allaho Akbar!" till all heard it, Moslems and Miscreants.
Whereupon the True Believers ambushed in the valley answered from
every side and the hills and mountains responsive cried and all
things replied, green and dried, saying, "God is Most Great!
,Aidance and Victory to us from on High! Shame to the Miscreants
who His name deny!" And the Kafirs were confounded and smote one
another with sabres keen whilst the True Believers and pious fell
upon them like flames of fiery sheen and naught was seen but
heads flying and blood jetting and faint-hearts hieing. By the
time they could see one another's faces, two-thirds of the
Infidels had perished and Allah hastened their souls to the fire
and abiding-place dire. The rest fled and to the deserts sped
whilst the Moslems pursued them to slay and take captives till
middle-day, when they returned in triumph with seven thousand
prisoners; and but six and twenty-thousand of the Infidels
escaped and the most of them wounded. Then the Moslems collected
the horses and arms, the loads and tents of the enemy and
despatched them to Cufa with an escort of a thousand horse;--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamrkan in
his battle with Jawamard slew him and slew his men; and, after
taking many prisoners and much money and many horses and loads,
sent them with an escort of a thousand riders, to Cufa city. Then
he and the army of Al-Islam dismounted and expounded The saving
Faith to the prisoners, who made profession with heart and
tongue; whereupon they released them from bonds and embraced them
and rejoiced in them. Then Jamrkan made his troops, who had
swelled to a mighty many, rest a day and a night and marched with
the dawn, intending to attack Jaland bin Karkar in the city Of
Oman; whilst the thousand horse fared back to Cufa with the loot.
When they reached the city, they went in to King Gharib and told
him what had passed, whereat he rejoiced and gave them joy and,
turning to the Ghul of the Mountain, said, "Take horse with
twenty-thousand and follow Jamrkan." So Sa'adan and his sons
mounted and set out, amid twenty-thousand horse for Oman.
Meanwhile, the fugitives of the defeated Kafirs reached Oman and
went in to Jaland, weeping and crying, "Woe!" and "Ruin!" whereat
he was confounded and said to them, "What calamity hath befallen
you?" So they told him what had happened and he said, "Woe to
you! How many men were they?" They replied, "O King, there were
twenty standards, under each a thousand men." When Jaland heard
these words he said, "May the sun pour no blessing on you! Fie
upon you! What, shall twenty-thousand overcome you, and you
seventy-thousand horse and Jawamard able to withstand three
thousand in field of fight?" Then, in the excess of his rage and
mortification, he bared his blade and cried out to those who were
present, saying, "Fall on them!" So the courtiers drew their
swords upon the fugitives and annihilated them to the last man
and cast them to the dogs. Then Jaland cried aloud to his son,
saying, "Take an hundred thousand horse and go to Al-Irak and lay
it waste altogether." Now this son's name was Kurajan and there
was no doughtier knight in all the force; for he could charge
single handed three thousand riders. So he and his host made
haste to equip themselves and marched in battle-array, rank
following rank, with the Prince at their head, glorying in
himself and improvising these couplets,

"I'm Al-Kurajan, and my name is known * To beat all who in wold
     or in city wone!
How many a soldier my sword at will * Struck down like a cow on
     the ground bestrown?
How many a soldier I've forced to fly * And have rolled their
     heads as a ball is thrown?
Now I'll drive and harry the land Irak[FN#15] * And like rain
     I'll shower the blood of fone;
And lay hands on Ghanb and his men, whose doom * To the wise a
     warning shall soon be shown!"

The host fared on twelve days' journey and, while they were still
marching, behold, a great dust cloud arose before them and walled
the horizon and the whole region. So Kurajan sent out scouts,
saying, "Go forth and bring me tidings of what meaneth this
dust." They went till they passed under the enemy's standards and
presently returning said, "O King, verily this is the dust of the
Moslems." Whereat he was glad and said, "Did ye count them?" And
they answered, "We counted the colours and they numbered twenty."
Quoth he, "By my faith, I will not send one man-at-arms against
them, but will go forth to them alone by myself and strew their
heads under the horses' hooves!" Now this was the army of Jamrkan
who, espying the host of the Kafirs and seeing them as a surging
sea, called a halt; so his troops pitched the tents and set up
the standards, calling upon the name of the All-wise One, the
Creator of light and gloom, Lord of all creatures, Who seeth
while Him none see, the High to infinity, extolled and exalted be
He! There is no God but He! The Miscreants also halted and
pitched their tents, and Kurajan said to them "Keep on your arms,
and in armour sleep, for during the last watch of the night we
will mount and trample yonder handful under feet!" Now one of
Jamrkan's spies was standing nigh and heard what Kurajan had
contrived; so he returned to the host and told his chief who said
to them, "Arm yourselves and as soon as it is Night, bring me all
the mules and camels and hang all the bells and clinkets and
rattles ye have about their necks." Now they had with them more
than twenty-thousand camels and mules. So they waited till the
Infidels fell asleep, when Jamrkan com-mended them to mount, and
they rose to ride and on the Lord of the Worlds they relied. Then
said Jamrkan, "Drive the camels and mules to the Miscreants' camp
and push them with your spears for goads!" They did as he bade
and the beasts rushed upon the enemy's tents, whilst the bells
and clinkets and rattles jangled[FN#16] and the Moslems followed
at their heels, shouting, "God is Most Great!'' till all the
hills and mountains resounded with the name of the Highmost
Deity, to whom belong glory and majesty! The cattle hearing this
terrible din, took fright and rushed upon the tents and trampled
the folk, as they lay asleep.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.
                                
       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Jamrkan fell upon them with his men and steeds and camels, and
the camp lay sleeping, the idolaters started up in confusion and,
snatching up their arms, fell upon one another with smiting, till
the most part was slaughtered. And when the day broke, they
looked and found no Moslem slain, but saw them all on horseback,
armed and armoured; wherefore they knew that this was a sleight
which had been played upon them, and Kurajan cried out to the
remnant of his folk, "O sons of whores, what we had a mind to do
with them, that have they done with us and their craft hath
gotten the better of our cunning." And they were about to charge
when, lo and behold! a cloud of dust rose high and walled the
horizon-sky, when the wind smote it, so that it spired aloft and
spread pavilion-wise in the lift and there it hung; and presently
appeared beneath it the glint of helmet and gleam of hauberk and
splendid warriors, baldrick'd with their tempered swords and
holding in rest their supple spears. When the Kafirs saw this,
they held back from the battle and each army sent out, to know
the meaning of this dust, scouts, who returned with the news that
it was an army of Moslems. Now this was the host of the Mountain-
Ghul whom Gharib had despatched to Jamrkan's aid, and Sa'adan
himself rode in their van. So the two hosts of the True Believers
joined company and rushing upon the Paynimry like a flame of
fire, plied them with keen sword and Rudaynian spear and
quivering lance, what while day was darkened and eyes for the
much dust starkened. The valiant stood fast and the faint-hearted
coward fled and to the wilds and the words swift sped, whilst the
blood over earth was like torrents shed; nor did they cease from
fight till the day took flight and in gloom came the night. Then
the Moslems drew apart from the Miscreants and returned to their
tents, where they ate and slept, till the darkness fled away and
gave place to smiling day; when they prayed the dawn prayer and
mounted to battle. Now Kurajan had said to his men as they drew
off from fight (for indeed two thirds of their number had
perished by sword and spear), "O folk, to-morrow, I will champion
it in the stead of war where cut and thrust jar, and where braves
push and wheel I will take the field." So, as soon as light was
seen and morn appeared with its shine and sheen, took horse the
hosts twain and shouted their slogans amain and bared the brand
and hent lance in hand and in ranks took stand. The first to open
the door of war was Kurajan, who cried out, saying, "Let no
coward come out to me this day nor craven!" Whereupon Jamrkan and
Sa'adan stood by the colours, but there ran at him a captain of
the Banu Amir and the two crave each at other awhile, like two
rams butting. Presently Kurajan seized the Moslem by the jerkin
under his hauberk and, dragging him from his saddle, dashed him
to the ground where he left him; upon which the Kafirs laid hands
on him and bound him and bore him off to their tents; whilst
Kurajan wheeled about and careered and offered battle, till
another captain came out, whom also he took prisoner; nor did he
leave to do thus till he had made prize of seven captains before
mid day. Then Jamrkan cried out with so mighty a cry, that the
whole field made reply and heard it the armies twain, and ran at
Kurajan with a heart in rageful pain, improvising these couplets,

"Jamrkan am I! and a man of might, * Whom the warriors fear with
     a sore affright: 
I waste the forts and I leave the walls * To wail and weep for
     the wights I smite: 
Then, O Kurajan, tread the rightful road * And quit the paths of
     thy foul upright: 
Own the One True God, who dispread the skies * And made founts to
     flow and the hills pegged tight: 
An the slave embrace the True Faith, he'll 'scape * Hell pains
     and in Heaven be decks and dight!"

When Kurajan heard these words, he sparked and snorted and foully
abused the sun and the moon and crave at Jamrkan, versifying with
these couplets,

"I'm Kurajan, of this age the knight;  * And my shade to the
     lions of Shara'[FN#17] is blight:
I storm the forts and snare kings of beasts * And warriors fear
     me in field of fight;
Then, Harkye Jamrkan, if thou doubt my word, * Come forth to the
     combat and try my might!"

When Jamrkan heard these verses, he charged him with a stout
heart d they smote each at other with swords till the two hosts.
lamented for them, and they lunged with lance and great was the
clamour between them: nor did they leave fighting till the time
of mid-afternoon prayer was passed and the day began to wane.
Then Jamrkan crave at Kurajan and smiting him on the breast with
his mace,[FN#18] cast him to the ground, as he were the trunk of
a palm-tree; and the Moslems pinioned him and dragged him off
with ropes like a camel. Now when the Miscreants saw their Prince
captive, a hot fever-fit of ignorance seized on them and they
bore down upon the True Believers thinking to rescue him; but the
Moslem champions met them and left most of them prostrate on the
earth, whilst the rest turned and sought safety in flight,
seeking surer site, while the clanking sabres their back-sides
smite. The Moslems ceased not pursuing them till they had
scattered them over mount and word, when they returned from them
to the spoil; whereof was great store of horses and tents and so
forth: good look to it for a spoil! Then Jamrkan went in to
Kurajan and expounded to him Al-Islam, threatening him with death
unless he embraced the Faith. But he refused; so they cut off his
head and stuck it on a spear, after which they fared on towards
Oman[FN#19] city. But as regards the Kafirs, the survivors
returned to Jaland and made known to him the slaying of his son
and the slaughter of his host, hearing which he cast his crown to
the ground and buffeting his face, till the blood ran from his
nostrils, fell fainting to the floor. They sprinkled rose-water
on his head, till he came to himself and cried to his Wazir,
"Write letters to all my Governors and Nabobs, and bid them leave
not a smiter with the sword nor a lunger with the lance nor a
bender of the bow, but bring them all to me in one body." So he
wrote letters and despatched them by runners to the Governors,
who levied their power and joined the King with a prevailing
host, whose number was one hundred and eighty-thousand men. Then
they made ready tents and camels and noble steeds and were about
to march when, behold, up came Jamrkan and Sa'adan the Ghul, with
seventy-thousand horse, as they were lions fierce-faced, all
steel-encased. When Jaland saw the Moslems trooping on he
rejoiced and said, "By the virtue of the Sun, and her resplendent
light, I will not leave alive one of my foes; no, not one to
carry the news, and I will lay waste the land of Al-Irak, that I
may take my wreak for my son, the havoc making champion bold; nor
shall my fire be quenched or cooled!" Then he turned to Ajib and
said to him, "O dog of Al-Irak, 'twas thou broughtest this
calamity on us! But by the virtue of that which I worship, except
I avenge me of mine enemy I will do thee die after foulest
fashion!" When Ajib heard these words he was troubled with sore
trouble and blamed himself; but he waited till nightfall, when
the Moslems had pitched their tents for rest. Now he had been
degraded and expelled the royal camp together with those who were
left to him of his suite: so he said to them, "O my kinsmen, know
that Jaland and I are dismayed with exceeding dismay at the
coming of the Moslems, and I know that he will not avail to
protect me from my brother nor from any other; so it is my
counsel that we make our escape, whilst all eyes sleep, and flee
to King Ya'arub bin Kahtan,[FN#20] for that he hath more of men
and is stronger of reign." They, hearing his advice exclaimed
"Right is thy rede," whereupon he bade them kindle fires at their
tent-doors and march under cover of the night. They did his
bidding and set out, so by daybreak they had already fared far
away. As soon as it was morning Jaland mounted with two hundred
and sixty-thousand fighting-men, clad cap-a-pie in hauberks and
cuirasses and strait-knit mail-coats, the kettle-drums beat a
point of war and all drew out for cut and thrust and fight and
fray. Then Jamrkan and Sa'adan rode out with forty-thousand
stalwart fighting-men, under each standard a thousand cavaliers,
doughty champions, foremost in champaign. The two hosts drew out
in battles and bared their blades and levelled their limber
lances, for the drinking of the cup of death. The first to open
the gate of strife was Sa'adan, as he were a mountain of syenite
or a Marid of the Jinn. Then dashed out to him a champion of the
Infidels, and the Ghul slew him and casting him to the earth,
cried out to his sons and slaves, saying, "Light the fire and
roast me this dead one." They did as he bade and brought him the
roast and he ate it and crunched whilst the Kafirs stood looking
on from afar; and they cried out, "Oh for aid from the light-
giving Sun!" and were affrighted at the thought of being slain by
Sa'adan. Then Jaland shouted to his men, saying, "Slay me yonder
loathsome beast!" Whereupon another captain of his host drove at
the Ghul; but he slew him and he ceased not to slay horseman
after horseman, till he had made an end of thirty men. With this
the blamed Kafirs held back and feared to face him, crying, "Who
shall cope with Jinns and Ghuls?" But Jaland raised his voice
saying, "Let an hundred horse charge him and bring him to me,
bound or slain." So an hundred horse set upon Sa'adan with swords
and spears, and he met them with a heart firmer than flint,
proclaiming the unity of the Requiting King, whom no one thing
diverteth from other thing. Then he cried aloud, "Allaho Akbar!"
and, smiting them with his sword, made their heads fly and in one
onset he slew of them four-and-seventy whereupon the rest took to
flight. So Jaland shouted aloud to ten of his captains, each
commanding a thousand men, and said to them, "Shoot his horse
with arrows till it fall under him, and then lay hands on him."
Therewith ten thousand horse drove at Sa'adan who met them with a
stout heart; and Jamrkan, seeing this, bore down upon the
Miscreants with his Moslems, crying out, "God is Most Great!"
Before they could reach the Ghul, the enemy had slain his steed
and taken him prisoner; but they ceased not to charge the
Infidels, till the day grew dark for dust and eyes were blinded,
and the sharp sword clanged while firm stood the valiant cavalier
and destruction overtook the faint-heart in his fear; till the
Moslems were amongst the Paynims like a white patch on a black
bull.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that battle
raged between the Moslems and the Paynims till the True Believers
were like a white patch on a black bull. Nor did they stint from
the mellay till the darkness fell down, when they drew apart,
after there had been slain of the Infidels men without compt.
Then Jamrkan and his men returned to their tents; but they were
in great grief for Sa'adan, so that neither meat nor sleep was
sweet to them, and they counted their host and found that less
than a thousand had been slain. But Jamrkan said, "O folk, to-
morrow I will go forth into the battle-plain and place where cut
and thrust obtain, and slay their champions and make prize of
their families after taking them captives and I will ransom
Sa'adan therewith' by the leave of the Requiting King, whom no
one thing diverteth from other thing!" Wherefore their hearts
were heartened and they joyed as they separated to their tents.
Meanwhile Jaland entered his pavilion and sitting down on his
sofa of estate, with his folk about him, called for Sa'adan and
forthright on his coming, said to him, "O dog run wood and least
of the Arab brood and carrier of firewood, who was it slew my son
Kurajan, the brave of the age, slayer of heroes and caster down
of warriors?" Quoth the Ghul, "Jamrkan slew him, captain of the
armies of King Gharib, Prince of cavaliers, and I roasted and ate
him, for I was anhungered." When Jaland heard these words, his
eyes sank into his head for rage and he bade his swordbearer
smite Sa'adan's neck. So he came forward in that intent,
whereupon Sa'adan stretched himself mightily and bursting his
bonds, snatched the sword from the headsman and hewed off his
head. Then he made at Jaland who threw himself down from the
throne and fled; whilst Sa'adan fell on the bystanders and killed
twenty of the King's chief officers, and all the rest took to
flight. Therewith loud rose the crying in the camp of the
Infidels and the Ghul sallied forth of the pavilion and falling
upon the troops smote them with the sword, right and left, till
they opened and left a lane for him to pass; nor did he cease to
press forward, cutting at them on either side, till he won free
of the Miscreants' tents and made for the Moslem camp. Now these
had heard the uproar among their enemies and said, "Haply some
calamity hath befallen them." But whilst they were in perplexity,
behold, Sa adan stood amongst them and they rejoiced at his
coming with exceeding joy; more especially Jamrkan, who saluted
him with the salam as did other True Believers and gave him joy
of his escape. Such was the case with the Moslems; but as regards
the Miscreants, when, after the Ghul's departure, they and their
King returned to their tents, Jaland said to them, "Ofolk, by the
virtue of the Sun's light-giving ray and by the darkness of the
Night and the light of the Day and the Stars that stray, I
thought not this day to have escaped death in mellay; for, had I
fallen into yonder fellow's hands, he had eaten me, as I were a
kernel of wheat or a barley corn or any other grain." They re
plied, "O King, never saw we any do the like of this Ghul." And
he said, "O folk, to-morrow do ye all don arms and mount steed
and trample them under your horses' hooves." Meanwhile the
Moslems had ended their rejoicings at Sa'adan's return and
Jamrkan said to them, "To-morrow, I will show you my derring-do
and what behoveth the like of me, for by the virtue of Abraham
the Friend, I will slay them with the foulest of slaughters and
smite them with the bite of the sword, till all who have under
standing confounded at them shall stand. But I mean to attack
both right and left wings; so, when ye see me drive at the King
under the standards, do ye charge behind me with a resolute
charge, and Allah's it is to decree what thing shall be!" Accord
ingly the two sides lay upon their arms till the day broke
through night and the sun appeared to sight. Then they mounted
swiftlier than the twinkling of the eyelid; the raven of the wold
croaked and the two hosts, looking each at other with the eye of
fascina tion, formed in line-array and prepared for fight and
fray. The first to open the chapter of war was Jamrkan who
wheeled and careered and offered fight in field; and Jaland and
his men were about to charge when, behold, a cloud of dust
uprolled till it walled the wold and overlaid the day. Then the
four winds smote it and away it floated, torn to rags, and there
appeared beneath it cavaliers, with helms black and garb white
and many a princely knight and lances that bite and swords that
smite and footmen who lion-like knew no affright Seeing this,
both armies left fighting and sent out scouts to reconnoitre and
report who thus had come in main and might. So they went and
within the dust cloud disappeared from sight, and returned after
awhile with the news aright that the approaching host was one of
Moslems, under the command of King Gharib. When the True
Believers heard from the scouts of the coming of their King, they
rejoiced and driving out to meet him, dismounted and kissed the
earth between his hands--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Moslems saw the presence of their King Gharib, they joyed with
exceeding joy; and, kissing the earth between his hands, saluted
him and get around him whilst he welcomed them and rejoiced in
their safety. Then they escorted him to their camp and pitched
pavilions for him and set up standards; and Gharib sat down on
his couch of estate, with his Grandees about him; and they
related to him all that had befallen, especially to Sa'adan
Meanwhile the Kafirs sought for Ajib and finding him not among
them nor in their tents, told Jaland of his flight, whereat his
Doomsday rose and he bit his fingers, saying, "by the Sun's
light-giving round, he is a perfidious hound and hath fled with
his rascal rout to desert ground. But naught save force of hard
fighting will serve us to repel these foes; so fortify your
resolves and hearten your hearts and beware of the Moslems." And
Gharib also said to the True Believers, "Strengthen your courage
and fortify your hearts and seek aid of your Lord, beseeching him
to vouchsafe you the victory over your enemies." They replied, "O
King, soon thou shalt see what we will do in battle-plain where
men cut and thrust amain." So the two hosts slept till the day
arose with its sheen and shone and the rising sun rained light
upon hill and down, when Gharib prayed the two-bow prayer, after
the rite of Abraham the Friend (on whom be the Peace!) and wrote
a letter, which he despatched by his brother Sahim to the King of
the Kafirs. When Sahim reached the enemies' camp, the guards
asked him what he wanted, and he answered them, "I want your
ruler.''[FN#21] Quoth they, "Wait till we consult him anent
thee;" and he waited, whilst they went in to their Sovran and
told him of the coming of a messenger, and he cried, "Hither with
him to me!" So they brought Sahim before Jaland, who said to him,
"Who hath sent thee?" Quoth he, King Gharib sends me, whom Allah
hath made ruler over Arab and Ajam; receive his letter and return
its reply." Jaland took the writ and opening it, read as follows,
"In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate *
the One, the All-knowing, the supremely Great * the Immemorial,
the Lord of Noah and Salih and Hud and Abraham and of all things
He made! * The Peace be on him who followeth in the way of
righteousness and who feareth the issues of frowardness * who
obeyeth the Almighty King and followeth the Faith saving and
preferreth the next world to any present thing! * But afterwards:
O Jaland, none is worthy of worship save Allah alone, the
Victorious, the One, Creator of night and day and the sphere
revolving alway * Who sendeth the holy Prophets and garreth the
streams to flow and the trees to grow, who vaulted the heavens
and spread out the earth like a carpet below * Who feedeth the
birds in their nests and the wild beasts in the deserts * for He
is Allah the All-powerful, the Forgiving, the Long-suffering, the
Protector, whom eye comprehendeth on no wise and who maketh night
on day arise * He who sent down the Apostles and their Holy Writ.
Know, O Jaland, that there is no faith but the Faith of Abraham
the Friend; so cleave to the Creed of Salvation and be saved from
the biting glaive and the Fire which followeth the grave * But,
an thou refuse Al-Islam, look for ruin to haste and thy reign to
be waste and thy traces untraced * And, lastly, send me the dog
Ajib hight that I may take from him my father's and mother's
blood-wit." When Jaland had read this letter, he said to Sahim,
"Tell thy lord that Ajib hath fled, he and his folk, and I know
not whither he is gone; but, as for Jaland, he will not forswear
his faith, and to-morrow, there shall be battle between us and
the Sun shall give us the victory." So Sahim returned to his
brother with this reply, and when the morning morrowed, the
Moslems donned their arms and armour and bestrode their stout
steeds, calling aloud on the name of the All-conquering King,
Creator of bodies and souls, and magnifying Him with "Allaho
Akbar." Then the kettle-drums of battle beat until earth
trembled, and sought the field all the lordly warriors and
doughty champions: The first to open the gate of battle was
Jamrkan, who crave his charger into mid-plain and played with
sword and javelin, till the understanding was amazed; after which
he cried out, saying, "Ho! who is for tilting? Ho! who is for
fighting? Let no sluggard come out to me to-day nor weakling! I
am the slayer of Kurajan bin Jaland; who will come forth to
avenge him?" When Jaland heard the name of his son, he cried out
to his men, "O whore-sons, bring me yonder horseman who slew my
son, that I may eat his flesh and drink his blood." So an hundred
fighting-men charged at Jamrkan, but he slew the most part of
them and put their chief to flight; which feat when Jaland saw,
he cried out to his folk, "At him all at once and assault him
with one assault." Accordingly they waved the awe-striking
banners and host was heaped on host; Gharib rushed on with his
men and Jamrkan did the same and the two sides met like two seas
together clashing. The Yamani sword and spear wrought havoc and
breasts and bellies were rent, whilst both armies saw the Angel
of Death face to face and the dust of the battle rose to the
skirts of the sky. Ears went deaf and tongues went dumb and doom
from every side came on whilst valiant stood fast and faint-heart
fled: and they ceased not from fight and fray till ended the day,
when the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew apart and
returned, each to its tents.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Gharib ended the battle and the two hosts drew apart and each had
returned to his own tents, he sat down on the throne of his realm
and the place of his reign, whilst his chief officers ranged
themselves about him, and he said, "I am sore concerned for the
flight of the cur Ajib and I know not whither he has gone. Except
I overtake him and take my wreak of him, I shall die of despite."
Whereupon Sahim came forward and kissing the earth before him,
said, "O King, I will go to the army of the Kafirs and find out
what is come of the perfidious dog Ajib." Quoth Gharib, "Go, and
learn the truth anent the hog." So Sahim disguised himself in the
habit of the Infidels and became as he were of them; then, making
for the enemy's camp, he found them all asleep, drunken with war
and battle, and none were on wake save only the guards. He passed
on and presently came to the King's pavilion where he found King
Jaland asleep unattended; so he crept up and made him smell and
sniff up levigated Bhang and he became as one dead. Then Sahim
went out and took a male mule, and wrapping the King in the
coverlet of his bed, laid him on its back; after which he threw a
mat over him and led the beast to the Moslem camp. Now when he
came to Gharib's pavilion and would have entered, the guards knew
him not and prevented him, saying, "Who art thou?'' He laughed
and uncovered his face, and they knew him and admitted him. When
Gharib saw him he said, "What bearest there, O Sahim?"; and he
replied, "O King, this is Jaland bin Karkar." Then he uncovered
him, and Gharib knew him and said,"Arouse him, O Sahim," So he
made him smell vinegar[FN#22] and frankincense; and he cast the
Bhang from his nostrils and, opening his eyes, found himself
among the Moslems; whereupon quoth he, "What is this foul dream?"
and closing his eyelids again, would have slept; but Sahim dealt
him a kick, saying, "Open thine eyes, O accursed!" So he opened
them and asked, "Where am I?"; and Sahim answered, "Thou art in
the presence of King Gharib bin Kundamir, King of Irak." When
Jaland heard this, he said, "O King, I am under thy protection!
Know that I am not at fault, but that who led us forth to fight
thee was thy brother, and the same cast enmity between us and
then fled." Quoth Gharib, "Knowest thou whither he is gone?"; and
quoth Jaland, "No, by the light-giving sun, I know not whither."
Then Gharib bade lay him in bonds and set guards over him, whilst
each captain returned to his own tent, and Jamrkan while wending
said to his men, "O sons of my uncle, I purpose this night to do
a deed wherewith I may whiten my face with King Gharib." Quoth
they, "Do as thou wilt, we hearken to thy commandment and obey
it." Quoth he, "Arm yourselves and, muffling your steps while I
go with you, let us fare softly and disperse about the Infidels'
camp, so that the very ants shall not be ware of you; and, when
you hear me cry 'Allaho Akbar,' do ye the like and cry out,
saying, 'God is Most Great!' and hold back and make for the city-
gate; and we seek aid from the Most High." So the folk armed
themselves cap-a-pie and waited till the noon of Night, when they
dispersed about the enemy's camp and tarried awhile when, lo and
behold! Jamrkan smote shield with sword and shouted, "Allaho
Akbar'" Thereupon they 