all cried out the like, till rang again
valley and mountain, hills, sands and ruins. The Miscreants awoke
in dismay and fell one upon other, and the sword went round
amongst them; the Moslems drew back and made for the city-gates,
where they slew the warders and entering, made themselves masters
of the town with all that was therein of treasure and women. Thus
it befel with Jamrkan; but as regards King Gharib, hearing the
noise and clamour of "God is Most Great," he mounted with his
troops to the last man and sent on in advance Sahim who, when he
came near the field of fight, saw that Jamrkan had fallen upon
the Kafirs with the Banu Amir by night and made them drink the
cup of death. So he returned and told all to his brother, who
called down blessings on Jamrkan. And the Infidels ceased not to
smite one another with the biting sword and expending their
strength till the day rose and lighted up the land, when Gharib
cried out to his men, "Charge, O ye noble, and do a deed to
please the All-knowing King!" So the True Believers fell upon the
idolaters and plied upon every false hypocritical breast the keen
sword and the quivering spear. They sought to take refuge in the
city; but Jamrkan came forth upon them with his kinsmen, who
hemmed them in between two mountain-ranges, and slew an
innumerable host of them, and the rest fled into the wastes and
words.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Moslem host charged upon the Miscreants they hewed them in
pieces with the biting scymitar and the rest fled to the wastes
and words; nor did the Moslems cease pursuing them with the
sword, till they had scattered them abroad in the plains and
stony places. Then they returned to Oman city, and King Gharib
entered the palace of the King and, sitting down on the throne of
his kingship, with his Grandees and Of ficers ranged right and
left, sent for Jaland. They brought him in haste and Gharib ex
pounded to him Al-Islam; but he rejected it; wherefore Gharib
bade crucify him on the gate of the city, and they shot at him
with shafts till he was like unto a porcupine. Then Gharib
honourably robed Jamrkan and said to him, "Thou shalt be lord of
this city arid ruler thereof with power to loose and to bind
therein, for it was thou didst open it with thy sword and thy
folk." And Jamrkan kissed the King's feet, thanked him and wished
him abiding victory and glory and every blessing Morever Gharib
opened Jaland's treasuries and saw what was therein of coin,
whereof he gave largesse to his captains and standard bearers and
fighting-men, yea, even to the girls and children; and thus he
lavished his gifts ten days long. After this, one night he dreamt
a terrible dream and awoke, troubled and trembling. So he aroused
his brother Sahim and said to him, "I saw in my vision that we
were in a wide valley, when there pounced down on us two ravening
birds of prey, never in my life saw I greater than they; their
legs were like lances, and as they swooped we were in sore fear
of them." Replied Sahim, "O King, this be some great enemy; so
stand on thy guard against him." Gharib slept not the rest of the
night and, when the day broke, he called for his courser and
mounted. Quoth Sahim, "Whither goest thou, my brother?" and quoth
Gharib, "I awoke heavy at heart; so I mean to ride abroad ten
days and broaden my breast." Said Sahim, "Take with thee a
thousand braves;" but Gharib replied, "I will not go forth but
with thee and only thee." So the two brothers mounted and,
seeking the dales and leasows, fared on from Wady to Wady and
from meadow to meadow, till they came to a valley abounding in
streams and sweet-smelling flowers and trees laden with all
manner eatable fruits, two of each kind. Birds warbled on the
branches their various strains; the mocking bird trilled out her
sweet notes fain and the turtle filled with her voice the plain.
There sang the nightingale, whose chant arouses the sleeper, and
the merle with his note like the voice of man and the cushat and
the ring-dove, whilst the parrot with its eloquent tongue
answered the twain. The valley pleased them and they ate of its
fruits and drank of its waters, after which they sat under the
shadow of its trees till drowsiness overcame them and they slept,
glory be to Him who sleepeth not! As they lay asleep, lo! two
fierce Marids swooped down on them and, taking each one on his
shoulders, towered with them high in air, till they were above
the clouds. So Gharib and Sahim awoke and found themselves
betwixt heaven and earth; whereupon they looked at those who bore
them and saw that they were two Marids, the head of the one being
as that of a dog and the head of the other as that of an
ape[FN#23] with hair like horses' tails and claws like lions'
claws, and both were big as great palm-trees. When they espied
this case, they exclaimed,, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" Now the cause of
this was that a certain King of the Kings of the Jinn, highs
Mura'ash, had a son called Sa'ik, who loved a damsel of the Jinn,
named Najmah;[FN#24] and the twain used to foregather in that
Wady under the sem blance of two birds. Gharib and Sahim saw them
thus and deeming them birds, shot at them with shafts but
wounding only Sa'ik whose blood flowed. Najmah mourned over him;
then, fearing lest the like calamity befal herself, snatched up
her lover and flew with him to his father's palace, where she
cast him down at the gate. The warders bore him in and laid him
before his sire who, seeing the pile sticking in his rib
exclaimed, "Alas, my son! Who hath done with thee this thing,
that I may lay waste his abiding-place and hurry on his
destruction, though he were the greatest of the Kings of the
Jann?" Thereupon Sa'ik opened his eyes and said, "O my father,
none slew me save a mortal in the Valley of Springs." Hardly had
he made an end of these words, when his soul departed; whereupon
his father buffeted his face, till the blood streamed from his
mouth, and cried out to two Marids, saying, "Hie ye to the Valley
of Springs and bring me all who are therein." So they betook
themselves to the Wady in question, where they found Gharib and
Sahim asleep, and, snatching them up, carried them to King
Mura'ash.[FN#25]--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
two Marids, after snatching up Gharib and Sahim in their sleep,
carried them to Mura'ash, king of the Jann, whom they saw seated
on the throne of his kinship, as he were a huge mountain, with
four heads on his body,[FN#26] the first that of a lion, the
second that of an elephant, the third that of a panther, and the
fourth that of a lynx. The Marids set them down before Mura'ash
and said to him, "O King, these twain be they we found in the
Valley of Springs." Thereupon he looked at them with wrathful
eyes and sparked and snorted and shot sparks from his nostrils,
so that all who stood by feared him. Then said he, "O dogs of
mankind, ye have slain my son and lighted fire in my liver."
Quoth Gharib, "Who is thy son, and who hath seen him?" Quoth
Mura'ash "Were ye not in the Valley of Springs and did ye not see
my son there, in the guise of a bird, and did ye not shoot at him
with wooden bolts that he died?" Replied Gharib, "I know not who
slew him; and, by the virtue of the Great God, the One, the
Immemorial who knoweth things all, and of Abraham the Friend, we
saw no bird, neither slew we bird or beast!" Now when Mura'ash
heard Gharib swear by Allah and His greatness and by Abraham the
Friend, he knew him for a Moslem (he himself being a worshipper
of Fire, not of the All-powerful Sire), so he cried out to his
folk, "Bring me my Goddess.[FN#27]" Accordingly they brought a
brazier of gold and, setting it before him, kindled therein fire
and cast on drugs, whereupon there arose therefrom green and blue
and yellow flames and the King and all who were present
prostrated themselves before the brazier, whilst Gharib and Sahim
ceased not to attest the Unity of Allah Almighty, to cry out "God
is Most Great" and to bear witness to His Omnipotence. Presently,
Mura'ash raised his head and, seeing the two Princes standing in
lieu of falling down to worship, said to them, "O dogs, why do ye
not prostrate yourselves?" Replied Gharib, "Out on you, O ye
accursed! Prostration befitteth not man save to the Worshipful
King, who bringeth forth all creatures into beingness from
nothingness and maketh water to well from the barren rockwell,
Him who inclineth heart of sire unto new-born scion and who may
not be described as sitting or standing; the God of Noah and
Salih and Hud and Abraham the Friend, Who created Heaven and Hell
and trees and fruit as well,[FN#28] for He is Allah, the One, the
All-powerful." When Mura'ash heard this, his eyes sank into his
head[FN#29] and he cried out to his guards, saying, "Pinion me
these two dogs and sacrifice them to my Goddess." So they bound
them and were about to cast them into the fire when, behold, one
of the crenelles of the palace parapet fell down upon the brazier
and brake it and put out the fire, which became ashes flying in
air. Then quoth Gharib, "God is Most Great! He giveth aid and
victory and He forsaketh those who deny Him, worshipping Fire and
not the Almighty King!" Presently quoth Mura'ash, "Thou art a
sorcerer and hast bewitched my Goddess, so that this thing hath
befallen her." Gharib replied, "O madman, an the fire had soul or
sense it would have warded off from self all that hurteth it."
When Mura'ash heard these words, he roared and bellowed and
reviled the Fire, saying, "By my faith, I will not kill you save
by the fire!" Then he bade cast them into gaol; and, calling an
hundred Marids, made them bring much fuel and set fire thereto.
So they brought great plenty of wood and made a huge blaze, which
flamed up mightily till the morning, when Mura'ash mounted an
elephant, bearing on its back a throne of gold dubbed with
jewels, and the tribes of the Jinn gathered about him in their
various kinds. Presently they brought in Gharib and Sahim who,
seeing the flaming of the fire, sought help of the One, the All-
conquering Creator of night and day, Him of All-might, whom no
sight comprehendeth, but who comprehendeth all sights, for He is
the Subtle, the All-knowing. And they ceased not humbly
beseeching Him till, behold, a cloud arose from West to East and,
pouring down showers of rain, like the swollen sea, quenched the
fire. When the King saw this, he was affrighted, he and his
troops, and entered the palace, where he turned to the Wazirs and
Grandees and said to them, "How say ye of these two men?" They
replied, "O King, had they not been in the right, this thing had
not befallen the fire; wherefore we say that they be true men
which speak sooth." Rejoined Mura'ash, "Verily the Truth hath
been displayed to me, ay, and the manifest way, and I am
certified that the worship of the fire is false; for, were it
goddess, it had warded off from itself the rain which quenched it
and the stone which broke its brazier and beat it into ashes.
Wherefore I believe in Him Who created the fire and the light and
the shade and the heat. And ye, what say ye?" They answered, "O
King, we also hear and follow and obey." So the King called for
Gharib and embraced him and kissed him between the eyes and then
summoned Sahim; whereupon the bystanders all crowded to kiss
their hands and heads.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Fifth-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Mura'ash and his men found salvation in the Saving Faith, Al-
Islam, he called for Gharib and Sahim and kissed them between the
eyes and so did all the Grandees who crowded to buss their hands
and heads. Then Mura'ash sat down on the throne of his kingship
and, seating Gharib on his right and Sahim on his left hand, said
to them, "O mortals, what shall we say, that we may become
Moslems?" Replied Gharib, "Say, 'There is no god but the God, and
Abraham is the Friend of God!'" So the King and his folk
professed Al-Islam with heart and tongue, and Gharib abode with
them awhile, teaching them the ritual of prayer. But presently he
called to mind his people and sighed, whereupon quoth Mura'ash,
"Verily, trouble is gone and joy and gladness are come." Quoth
Gharib, "O King, I have many foes and I fear for my folk from
them." Then he related to him his history with his brother Ajib
from first to last, and the King of the Jinns said, "O King of
men, I will send one who shall bring thee news of thy people, for
I will not let thee go till I have had my fill of thy face." Then
he called two doughty Marids, by name Kaylajan and Kurajan, and
after they had done him homage, he bade them repair to Al-Yaman
and bring him news of Gharib's army. They replied, "To hear is to
obey," and departed. Thus far concerning the brothers; but as
regards the Moslems, they arose in the morning and led by their
captains rode to King Gharib's palace, to do their service to
him; but the eunuchs told them that the King had mounted with his
brother and had ridden forth at peep o' day. So they made for the
valleys and mountains and followed the track of the Princes, till
they came to the Valley of Springs, where they found their arms
cast down and their two gallant steeds grazing and said, "The
King is missing from this place, by the glory of Abraham the
Friend!" Then they mounted and sought in the valley and the
mountains three days, but found no trace of them; whereupon they
began the mourning ceremonies and, send ing for couriers, said to
them, "Do ye disperse yourselves about the cities and sconces and
castles, and seek ye news of our King." "Harkening and
obedience!" cried the couriers, who dispersed hither and thither
each over one of the Seven Climes and sought everywhere for
Gharib, but found no trace of him. Now when the tidings came to
Ajib by his spies that his brother was lost and there was no news
of the missing, he rejoiced and going in to King Ya'arub bin
Kahtan, sought of him aid which he granted and gave him two
hundred thousand Amalekites, wherewith he set out for Al-Yaman
and sat down before the city of Oman. Jamrkan and Sa'adan sallied
forth and offered him battle, and there were slain of the Moslems
much folk, so the True Believers retired into the city and shut
the gates and manned the walls. At this moment came up the two
Marids Kaylajan and Kurajan and, seeing the Moslem beleaguered
waited till nightfall, when they fell upon the miscreants and
plied them with sharp swords of the swords of the Jinn, each
twelve cubits long, if a man smote therewith a rock, verily he
would cleave it in sunder. They charged the Idolaters, shouting,
"Allaho Akbar! God is Most Great! He giveth aid and victory and
forsaketh those who deny the Faith of Abraham the Friend!" and
whilst they raged amongst the foes, fire issued from their mouths
and nostrils, and they made great slaughter amongst them.
Thereupon the Infidels ran out of their tents offering battle
but, seeing these strange things, were confounded and their hair
stood on end and their reason fled. So they snatched up their
arms and fell one upon other, whilst the Marids shore off their
heads, as a reaper eareth grain, crying, "God is Most Great! We
are the lads of King Gharib, the friend of Mura'ash, King of the
Jinn!" The sword ceased not to go round amongst them till the
night was half spent, when the Misbelievers, imagining that the
mountains were all Ifrits, loaded their tents and treasure and
baggage upon camels and made off; and the first to fly was Ajib.-
-And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Misbelievers made off and the first
to fly was Ajib. Thereupon the Moslems gathered together, marvelling at this that had betided
the Infidels and fearing the tribesmen of the Jinn. But the Marids ceased not from pursuit, till
they had driven them far away into the hills and words; and but fifty-thousand Rebels[FN#30] of
two hundred thousand escaped with their lives and made for their own land, wounded and sore
discomforted. Then the two Jinns returned and said to them, "O host of the Moslems, your lord
King Gharib and his brother Sahim salute you; they are the guests of Mura'ash, King of the Jann,
and will be with you anon " When Gharib's men heard that he was safe and well, they joyed with
exceeding joy and said to the Marids, "Allah gladden you twain with good news, O noble
spirits!" So Kurajan and Kaylajan returned to Mura'ash and Gharib; and acquainted them with
that which had happened, whereat Gharib finding the two sitting together felt heart at ease and
said, "Allah abundantly requite you!" Then quoth King Mura'ash, "O my brother, I am minded
to show thee our country and the city of Japhet[FN#31] son of Noah (on whom be peace!)"
Quoth Gharib, "O King, do what seemeth good to thee." So he called for three noble steeds and
mounting, he and Gharib and Sahim, set out with a thousand Marids, as they were a piece of a
mountain cloven lengthwise. They fared on, solacing themselves with the sight of valleys and
mountains, till they came to Jabarsa,[FN#32] the city of Japhet son of Noah (on whom be
peace!) where the townsfolk all, great and small, came forth to meet King Mura'ash and brought
them into the city in great state. Then Mura'ash went up to the palace of Japhet son of Noah and
sat down on the throne of his kingship, which was of alabaster, ten stages high and latticed with
wands of gold wherefrom hung all manner coloured silks. The people of the city stood before
him and he said to them, "O seed of Yafis bin Nuh, what did your fathers and grandfathers
worship?" They replied, "We found them worshipping Fire and followed their example, as thou
well knowest." "O folk," rejoined Mura'ash, "we have been shown that the fire is but one of the
creatures of Almighty Allah, Creator of all things; and when we knew this, we submitted
ourselves to God, the One, the All-powerful, Maker of night and day and the sphere revolving
alway, Whom compre hendeth no sight, but Who comprehendeth all sights, for He is the Subtle,
the All-wise. So seek ye Salvation and ye shall be saved from the wrath of the Almighty One and
from the fiery doom in the world to come." And they embraced Al-Islam with heart and tongue.
Then Mura'ash took Gharib by the hand and showed him the palace and its ordinance and all the
marvels it contained, till they came to the armoury, wherein were the arms .of Japhet son of
Noah. Here Gharib saw a sword hanging to a pin of gold and asked, "O King, whose is that?"
Mura'ash answered, " 'Tis the sword of Yafis bin Nuh, wherewith he was wont to do battle
against men and Jinn. The sage Jardum forged it and graved on its back names of might.[FN#33]
It is named Al-Mahik the Annihilator for that it never descendeth upon a man, but it annihilateth
him, nor upon a Jinni, but it crusheth him; and if one smote therewith a mountain 'twould
overthrow it." When Gharib heard tell of the virtues of the sword, he said, "I desire to look on
this blade;" and Mura'ash said, "Do as thou wilt." So Gharib put out his hand, and, hending the
sword, drew it from its sheath; whereupon it flashed and Death crept on its edge and glittered;
and it was twelve spans long and three broad. Now Gharib wished to become owner of it, and
King Mura'ash said, "An thou canst smite with it,take it." " 'Tis well," Gharib replied, and took
it up, and it was in his hand as a staff; wherefore all who were present, men and Jinn, marvelled
and said, "Well done, O Prince of Knights!" Then said Mura'ash "Lay thy hand on this hoard for
which the Kings of the earth sigh in vain, and mount, that I may show thee the city." Then they
took horse and rode forth the palace, with men and Jinns attending them on foot,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib and King Mura'ash rode
forth the palace of Japhet, with men and Jinns attending them on foot, they passed through the
streets and thoroughfares of the town, by palaces and deserted mansions and gilded doorways,
till they issued from the gates and entered gardens full of trees fruit-bearing and waters welling
and birds speaking and celebrating the praises of Him to whom belong Majesty and Eternity; nor
did they cease to solace themselves in the land till nightfall, when they returned to the palace of
Japhet son of Noah and they brought them the table of food So they ate and Gharib turned to the
King of the Jann and said to him, "O King, I would fain return to my folk and my force; for I
know not their plight after me." Replied Mura'ash, "By Allah, O my brother, I will not part with
thee for a full month, till I have had my fill of thy sight." Now Gharib could not say nay, so he
abode with him in the city of Japhet, eating and drinking and making merry, till the month
ended, when Mura'ash gave him great store of gems and precious ores, emeralds and balass-
rubies, diamonds and other jewels, ingots of gold and silver and likewise ambergis and musk and
brocaded silks and else of rarities and things of price. Moreover he clad him and Sahim in silken
robes of honour gold inwoven and set on Gharib's head a crown jewelled with pearls and
diamonds of inestimable value. All these treasures he made up into even loads for him and,
calling five hundred Marids, said to them, "Get ye ready to travel on the morrow, that we may
bring King Gharib and Sahim back to their own country." And they answered, "We hear and we
obey." So they passed the night in the city, purposing to depart on the morrow, but, next
morning, as they were about to set forth behold, they espied a great host advancing upon the city,
with horses neighing and kettle-drums beating and trumpets braying and riders filling the earth
for they numbered threescore and ten thousand Marids, flying and diving, under a King called
Barkan. Now this Barkan was lord of the City of Carnelian and the Castle of Gold and under his
rule were five hill-strongholds, in each five hundred thousand Marids; and he and his tribe
worshipped the Fire, not the Omnipotent Sire. He was a cousin of Mura'ash, the son of his
father's brother, and the cause of his coming was that there had been among the subjects of King
Mura'ash a misbelieving Marid, who professed Al-Islam hypocritically, and he stole away from
his people and made for the Valley of Carnelian, where he went in to King Barkan and, kissing
the earth before him, wished him abiding glory and prosperity. Then he told him of Mura'ash
being converted to Al-Islam, and Barkan said, "How came he to tear himself away from his
faith[FN#34]?'' So the rebel told him what had passed and, when Barkan heard it, he snorted and
sparked and railed at Sun and Moon and sparkling Fire, saying, "By the virtue of my faith, I will
surely slay mine uncle's son and his people and this mortal, nor will I leave one of them alive!"
Then he cried out to the legions of the Jinn and choosing of them seventy-thousand Marids, set
out and fared on till he came to Jabarsa[FN#35] the city of Japhet and encamped before its gates.
When Mura'ash saw this, he despatched a Marid, saying, "Go to this host and learn all that it
wanteth and return hither in haste." So the messenger rushed away to Barkan's camp, where the
Marids flocked to meet him and said to him, "Who art thou?" Replied he, "An envoy from King
Mura'ash;" whereupon they carried him in to Barkan, before whom he prostrated himself,
saying, "O my lord, my master hath sent me to thee, to learn tidings of thee." Quoth Barkan,
"Return to thy lord and say to him, 'This is thy cousin Barkan, who is come to salute thee.'"--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Marid-envoy of Mura'ash was
borne before Barkan and said to him, "O my lord, my master hath sent me to thee to learn tidings
of thee," Barkan replied, "Return to thy lord and say to him, 'This is thy cousin Barkan who is
come to salute thee!'" So the messenger went back and told Mura'ash, who said to Gharib, "Sit
thou on thy throne whilst I go and salute my cousin and return to thee." Then he mounted and
rode to the camp of his uncle's son. Now this was a trick[FN#36] of Barkan, to bring Mura'ash
out and seize upon him, and he said to his Marids, whom he had stationed about him, "When ye
see me embrace him,[FN#37] lay hold of him and pinion him." And they replied, "To hear is to
obey." So, when King Mura'ash came up and entered Barkan's pavilion, the owner rose to him
and threw his arms round his neck; whereat the Jann fell upon Mura'ash and pinioned him and
chained him. Mura'ash looked at Barkan and said, "What manner of thing is this?" Quoth
Barkan, "O dog of the Jann, wilt thou leave the faith of thy fathers and grandfathers and enter a
faith thou knowest not?" Rejoined Mura'ash, "O son of my uncle, indeed I have found the faith
of Abraham the Friend to be the True Faith and all other than it vain." Asked Barkan, "And who
told thee of this?"; and Mura'ash answered, "Gharib, King of Irak, whom I hold in the highest
honour." "By the right of the Fire and the Light and the Shade and the Heat," cried Barkan, "I
will assuredly slay both thee and him!" And he cast him into gaol. Now when Mura'ash's
henchman saw what had befallen his lord, he fled back to the city and told the King's legionaries
who cried out and mounted. Quoth Gharib, "What is the matter?" And they told him all that had
passed, whereupon he cried out to Sahim, "Saddle me one of the chargers that King Mura'ash
gave me." Said Sahim, "O my brother, wilt thou do battle with the Jinn?" Gharib replied, "Yes, I
will fight them with the sword of Japhet son of Noah, seeking help of the Lord of Abraham the
Friend (on whom be the Peace!); for He is the Lord of all things and sole Creator!" So Sahim
saddled him a sorrel horse of the horses of the Jinn, as he were a castle strong among castles, and
he armed and mounting, rode out with the legions of the Jinn, hauberk'd cap-a-pie. Then Barkan
and his host mounted also and the two hosts drew out in lines facing each other. The first to open
the gate of war was Gharib, who crave his steed into the mid-field and bared the enchanted
blade, whence issued a glittering light that dazzled the eyes of all the Jinn and struck terror to
their hearts. Then he played[FN#38] with the sword till their wits were wildered, and cried out,
saying, "Allaho Akbar! I am Gharib, King of Irak. There is no Faith save the Faith of Abraham
the Friend!" Now when Barkan heard Gharib's words, he said, "This is he who seduced my
cousin from his religion; so, by the virtue of my faith, I will not sit down on my throne till I have
decapitated this Gharib and suppressed his breath of life and forced my cousin and his people
back to their belief: and whoso baulketh me, him will I destroy." Then he mounted an elephant
paper-white as he were a tower plastered with gypsum, and goaded him with a spike of steel
which ran deep into his flesh, whereupon the elephant trumpeted and made for the battle-plain
where cut and thrust obtain; and, when he drew near Gharib, he cried out to him, saying, "O dog
of mankind, what made thee come into our land, to debauch my cousin and his folk and pervert
them from one faith to other faith. Know that this day is the last of thy worldly days." Gharib
replied, ''Avaunt,[FN#39] O vilest of the Jann!" Therewith Barkan drew a javelin and making it
quiver[FN#40] in his hand, cast it at Gharib; but it missed him. So he hurled a second javelin at
him; but Gharib caught it in mid air and after poising it launched it at the elephant. It smote him
on the flank and came out on the other side, whereupon the beast fell to the earth dead and
Barkan was thrown to the ground, like a great palm-tree. Before he could stir, Gharib smote him
with the flat of Japhet's blade on the nape of the neck, and he fell upon the earth in a fainting fit;
whereupon the Marids swooped down on him and surrounding him pinioned his elbows. When
Barkan's people saw their king a prisoner, they drove at the others, seeking to rescue him, but
Gharib and the Islamised Jinn fell upon them and gloriously done for Gharib! indeed that day he
pleased the Lord who answereth prayer and slaked his vengeance with the talisman-sword!
Whomsoever he smote, he clove him in sunder and before his soul could depart he became a
heap of ashes in the fire; whilst the two hosts of the Jinn shot each other with flamy meteors till
the battle-field was wrapped in smoke. And Gharib tourneyed right and left among the Kafirs
who gave way before him, till he came to King Barkan's pavilion, with Kaylajan and Kurajan on
his either hand, and cried out to them, "Loose your lord!" So they unbound Mura'ash and broke
his fetters and----And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Gharib cried out to
Kaylajan and Kurajan, saying, "Loose your lord!", they unbound Mura'ash and broke his fetters,
and he said to them, "Bring me my arms and my winged horse." Now he had two flying steeds,
one of which he had given to Gharib and the other he had kept for himself; and this he mounted
after he had donned his battle harness. Then he and Gharib fell upon the enemy, flying through
the air on their winged horses, and the true believing Jinn followed them, shouting "Allaho
Akbar--God is Most Great!"--till plains and hills, valleys and mountains re-worded the cry. The
Infidels fled before them and they returned, after having slain more than thirty thousand Marids
and Satans, to the city of Japhet, where the two Kings sat down on their couches of estate and
sought Barkan, but found him not; for after capturing him they were diverted from him by stress
of battle, where an Ifrit of his servants made his way to him and loosing him, carried him to his
folk, of whom he found part slain and the rest in full flight. So he flew up with the King high in
air and sat him down in the City of Carnelian and Castle of Gold, where Barkan seated himself
on the throne of his kingship. Presently, those of his people who had survived the affair came in
to him and gave him joy of his safety; and he said, "O folk, where is safety? My army is slain
and they took me prisoner and have rent in pieces mine honour among the tribes of the Jann."
Quoth they, "O King, 'tis ever thus that kings still afflict and are afflicted." Quoth he, "There is
no help but I take my wreak and wipe out my shame, else shall I be for ever disgraced among the
tribes of the Jann." Then he wrote letters to the Governors of his fortresses, who came to him
right loyally and, when he reviewed them, he found three hundred and twenty-thousand fierce
Marids and Satans, who said to him, "What is thy need?" And he replied, "Get ye ready to set
out in three days' time;" whereto they rejoined "Harkening and obedience!" On this wise it befel
King Barkan; but as regards Mura'ash, when he discovered his prisoner's escape, it was grievous
to him and he said, "Had we set an hundred Marids to guard him, he had not fled; but whither
shall he go from us?" Then said he to Gharib, "Know, O my brother, that Barkan is perfidious
and will never rest from wreaking blood-revenge on us, but will assuredly assemble his legions
and return to attack us; wherefore I am minded to forestall him and follow the trail of his defeat,
whilst he is yet weakened thereby." Replied Gharib, "This is the right rede and will best serve
our need;" and Mura'ash, said, "Oh my brother, let the Marids bear thee back to thine own
country and leave me to fight the battles of the Faith against the Infidels, that I may be lightened
of my sin-load." But Gharib rejoined "By the virtue of the Clement, the Bountiful, the Veiler, I
will not go hence till I do to death all the misbelieving Jinn; and Allah hasten their souls to the
fire and dwelling-place dire; and none shall be saved but those who worship Allah the One the
Victorious! But do thou send Sahim back to the city of Oman, so haply he may be healed of his
ailment." For Sahim was sick. So Mura'ash cried to the Marids, saying, "Take ye up Sahim and
these treasures and bear them to Oman city." And after replying, "We hear and we obey," they
took them and made for the land of men. Then Mura'ash wrote letters to all his Governors and
Captains of fortresses and they came to him with an hundred and sixty-thousand warriors. So
they made them ready and departed for the City of Carnelian and the Castle of Gold, covering in
one day a year's journey and halted in a valley, where they encamped and passed the night. Next
morning as they were about to set forth, behold, the vanguard of Barkan's army appeared,
whereupon the Jinn cried out and the two hosts met and fell each upon other in that valley. Then
the engagement was dight and there befel a sore fight as though an earthquake shook the site and
fair plight waxed foul plight. Earnest came and jest took flight, and parley ceased 'twixt wight
and wight,[FN#41] whilst long lives were cut short in a trice and the Unbelievers fell into
disgrace and despite; for Gharib charged them, proclaiming the Unity of the Worshipful, the All-
might and shore through necks and left heads rolling in the dust; nor did night betide before nigh
seventy thousand of the Miscreants were slain, and of the Moslemised over ten thousand Marids
had fallen Then the kettle-drums beat the retreat, and the two hosts drew apart,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased Baying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two hosts drew apart, Gharib
and Mura'ash returned to their tents, after wiping their weapons, and supper being set before
them, they ate and gave each other joy of their safety, and the loss of their Marids being so
small. As for Barkan, he returned to his tent, grieving for the slaughter of his champions, and
said to his officers, "O folk, an we tarry here and do battle with them on this wise in three days'
time we shall be cut off to the last wight." Quoth they, "And how shall we do, O King?" Quoth
Barkan, "We will fall upon them under cover of night whilst they are deep in sleep, and not one
of them shall be left to tell the tale. So take your arms and when I give the word of command,
attack and fall on your enemies as one." Now there was amongst them a Marid named Jandal
whose heart inclined to Al-Islam; so, when he heard the Kafirs' plot, he stole away from them
and going in to King Mura'ash and King Gharib, told the twain what Barkan had devised;
whereupon Mura'ash turned to Gharib and said to him, "O my brother, what shall we do?"
Gharib replied, "To-night we will fall upon the Miscreants and chase them into the wilds and the
words if it be the will of the Omnipotent King." Then he summoned the Captains of the Jann and
said to them, "Arm yourselves, you and yours; and, as soon as 'tis dark, steal out of your tents on
foot, hundreds after hundreds, and lie in ambush among the mountains; and when ye see the
enemy engaged among the tents, do ye fall upon them from all quarters. Hearten your hearts and
rely on your Lord, and ye shall certainly conquer; and behold, I am with you!" So, as soon as it
was dark Night, the Infidels attacked the camp, invoking aid of the fire and light; but when they
came among the tents, the Moslems fell upon them, calling for help on the Lord of the Worlds
and saying, "O Most Merciful of Mercifuls, O Creator of all createds!" till they left them like
mown grass, cut down and dead. Nor did morning dawn before the most part of the unbelievers
were species without souls and the rest made for the wastes and marshes, whilst Gharib and
Mura'ash returned triumphant and victorious; and, making prize of the enemy's baggage, they
rested till the morrow, when they set out for the City of Carnelian and Castle of Gold. As for
Barkan, when the battle had turned against him and most of his lieges were slain, he fled through
the dark with the remnant of his power to his capital where he entered his palace and assembling
his legionaries said to them, "O folk, whoso hath aught of price, let him take it and follow me to
the Mountain Kaf, to the Blue King, lord of the Pied Palace; for he it is who shall avenge us." So
they took their women and children and goods and made for the Caucasus mountain. Presently
Mura'ash and Gharib arrived at the City of Carnelian and Castle of Gold to find the gates open
and none left to give them news; whereupon they entered and Mura'ash led Gharib that he might
show him the city, whose walls were builded of emeralds and its gates of red carnelian, with
studs of silver, and the terrace-roofs of its houses and mansions reposed upon beams of lign
aloes and sandle-wood. So they took their pleasure in its streets and alleys, till they came to the
Palace of Gold and entering passed through seven vestibules, when they drew near to a building,
whose walls were of royal balass rubies and its pavement of emerald and jacinth. The two Kings
were astounded at the goodliness of the place and fared on from vestibule to vestibule, till they
had passed through the seventh and happened upon the inner court of the palace wherein they
saw four daises, each different from the others, and in the midst a jetting fount of red gold,
compassed about with golden lions,[FN#42] from whose mouths issued water. These were things
to daze man's wit. The estrade at the upper end was hung and carpeted with brocaded silks of
various colours and thereon stood two thrones of red gold, inlaid with pearls and jewels. So
Mura'ash and Gharib sat down on Barkan's thrones and held high state in the Palace of Gold.--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Mura'ash and Gharib took seat on
Barkan's thrones and held high state. Then said Gharib to Mura'ash, "What thinkest thou to do?"
And Mura'ash replied, "O King of mankind, have despatched an hundred horse to learn where
Barkan is, that we may pursue him." Then they abode three days in the palace, the scouting
Marids returned with the news that Barkan had fled to the Mountain Kaf and craved protection
of the Blue King who granted it; whereupon quoth Mura'ash to Gharib, "What sayest thou, O my
brother?" and quoth Gharib, "Except we attack them they will attack us." So they bade the host
make ready for departure and after three days, they were about to set out with their troops, when
the Marids, who had carried Sahim and the presents back to Oman, returned and kissed ground
before Gharib. He questioned them of his people and they replied, "After the last affair, thy
brother Ajib, leaving Ya'arub bin Kahtan, fled to the King of Hind and, submitting his case,
sought his protection. The King granted his prayer and writing letters to all his governors, levied
an army as it were the surging sea, having neither beginning nor end, wherewith he purposeth to
invade Al-Irak and lay it waste." When Gharib heard this, he said, "Perish the Misbelievers!
Verily, Allah Almighty shall give the victory to Al-Islam and I will soon show them hew and
foin." Said Mura'ash, "O King of humans, by the virtue of the Mighty Name, I must needs go
with thee to thy kingdom and destroy thy foes and bring thee to thy wish." Gharib thanked him
and they rested on this resolve till the morrow, when they set out, intending for Mount Caucasus
and marched many days till they reached the City of Alabaster and the Pied Palace. Now this city
was fashioned of alabaster and precious stones by Barik bin Faki', father of the Jinn, and he also
founded the Pied Palace, which was so named because edified with one brick of gold alternating
with one of silver, nor was there builded aught like it in all the world. When they came within
half a day's journey of the city, they halted to take their rest, and Mura'ash sent out to
reconnoitre a scout who returned and said, "O King, within the City of Alabaster are legions of
the Jinn, for number as the leaves of the trees or as the drops of rain." So Mura'ash said to
Gharib, "How shall we do, O King of Mankind?" He replied, "O King, divide your men into four
bodies and encompass with them the camp of the Infidels; then, in the middle of the Night, let
them cry out, saying, 'God is Most Great!' and withdraw and watch what happeneth among the
tribes of the Jinn." So Mura'ash did as Gharib counselled and the troops waited till midNight,
when they encircled the foe and shouted "Allaho Akbar! Ho for the Faith of Abraham the Friend,
on whom be the Peace!" The Misbelievers at this cry awoke in affright and snatching up their
arms, fell one upon other till the morning, when most part of them were dead bodies and but few
remained. Then Gharib cried out to the True Believers, saying, "Up and at the remnant of the
Kafirs! Behold I am with you, and Allah is your helper!" So the Moslems crave at the enemy and
Gharib bared his magical blade Al-Mahik and fell upon the foe, lopping off noses and making
heads wax hoary and whole ranks turn tail. At last be came up with Barkan and smote him and
bereft him of life and he fell down, drenched in his blood. On like wise he did with the Blue
King, and by undurn-hour not one of the Kafirs was left alive to tell the tale. Then Gharib and
Mura'ash entered the Pied Palace and found its walls builded of alternate courses of gold and
silver, with door-sills of crystal and keystones of greenest emerald. In its midst was a fountain
adorned with bells and pendants and figures of birds and beasts spouting forth water, and thereby
a dais[FN#43] furnished with gold-brocaded silk, bordered or embroidered with jewels: and they
found the treasures of the palace past count or description. Then they entered the women's court,
where they came upon a magnificent serraglio and Gharib saw, among the Blue King's woman-
folk a girl clad in a dress worth a thousand dinars, never had he beheld a goodlier. About her
were an hundred slave-girls, upholding her train with golden hooks, and she was in their midst as
the moon among stars. When he saw her, his reason was confounded and he said to one of the
waiting-women, "Who may be yonder maid?" Quoth they, "This is the Blue King's daughter,
Star o' Morn."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib asked the slave women
saying, "Who may be yonder maid," they replied, "This is Star o' Morn, daughter to the Blue
King." Then Gharib turned to Mura'ash and said to him, "O King of the Jinn, I have a mind to
take yonder damsel to wife." Replied Mura'ash, "The palace and all that therein is, live stock
and dead, are the prize of thy right hand; for, hadst thou not devised a stratagem to destroy the
Blue King and Barkan, they had cut us off to the last one: wherefore the treasure is thy treasure
and the folk thy thralls." Gharib thanked him for his fair speech and going up to the girl, gazed
steadfastly upon her and loved her with exceeding love, forgetting Fakhr Taj the Princess and
even Mahdiyah. Now her mother was the Chinese King's daughter whom the Blue King had
carried off from her palace and perforce deflowered, and she conceived by him and bare this girl,
whom he named Star o' Morn, by reason of her beauty and loveliness; for she was the very
Princess of the Fair. Her mother died when she was a babe of forty days, and the nurses and
eunuchs reared her, till she reached the age of seventeen; but she hated her sire and rejoiced in
his slaughter. So Gharib put his palm to hers[FN#44] and went in unto her that night and found
her a virgin. Then he bade pull down the Pied Palace and divided the spoil with the true-
believing Jinn, and there fell to his share one-and-twenty thousand bricks of gold and silver and
money and treasure beyond speech and count. Then Mura'ash took Gharib and showed him the
Mountain Kaf and all its marvels; after which they returned to Barkan's fortress and dismantled
it and shared the spoil thereof. Then they repaired to Mura'ash's capital, where they tarried five
days, when Gharib sought to revisit his native country and Mura'ash said, "O King of mankind, I
will ride at thy stirrup and bring thee to thine own land." Replied Gharib, "No, by the virtue of
Abraham the Friend, I will not suffer thee to weary thyself thus, nor will I take any of the Jinn
save Kaylajan and Kurajan." Quoth the King, "Take with thee ten thousand horsemen of the
Jinn, to serve thee;" but quoth Gharib, "I will take only as I said to thee." So Mura'ash bade a
thousand Marids carry him to his native land, with his share of the spoil; and he commanded
Kaylajan and Kurajan to follow him and obey him; and they answered, "Hearkening and
obedience." Then said Gharib to the Marids, "Do ye carry the treasure and Star o' Morn;" for he
himself thought to ride his flying steed. But Mura'ash said to him, "This horse, O my brother,
will live only in our region, and, if it come upon man's earth, 'twill die: but I have in my stables
a sea-horse, whose fellow is not found in Al-Irak, no, nor in all the world is its like." So he
caused bring forth the horse, and when Gharib saw it, it interposed between him and his
wits.[FN#45] Then they bound it and Kaylajan bore it on his shoulders and Kurajan took what he
could carry. And Mura'ash embraced Gharib and wept for parting from him, saying, "O my
brother, if aught befal thee wherein thou art powerless, send for me and I will come to thine aid
with an army able to lay waste the whole earth and what is thereon." Gharib thanked him for his
kindness and zeal for the True Faith and took leave of him; whereupon the Marids set out with
Gharib and his goods; and, after traversing fifty years' journey in two days and a Night, alighted
near the city of Oman and halted to take rest. Then Gharib sent out Kaylajan, to learn news of his
people, and he returned and said, "O King, the city is beleaguered by a host of Infidels, as they
were the surging sea, and thy people are fighting them. The drums beat to battle and Jamrkan
goeth forth as champion in the field." When Gharib heard this, he cried aloud, "God is Most
Great!" and said to Kaylajan, "Saddle me the steed and bring me my arms and spear; for to-day
the valiant shall be known from the coward in the place of war and battle-stead." So Kaylajan
brought him all he sought and Gharib armed and belting in baldrick Al-Mahik, mounted the sea
horse and made toward the hosts. Quoth Kaylajan and Kurajan to him, Set thy heart at rest and
let us go to the Kafirs and scatter them abroad in the wastes and wilds till, by the help of Allah,
the All-powerful, we leave not a soul alive, no, not a blower of the fire." But Gharib said "By the
virtue of Abraham the [Friend, I will not let you fight them without me and behold, I mount!"
Now the cause of the coming of that great host was right mar vellous.[FN#46]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib had bidden Kaylajan go
and learn news of his people, the Jinn fared forth and presently returning said, "Verily around
thy city is a mighty host!" Now the cause of its coming was that Ajib, having fled the field after
Ya'arub's army had been put to the rout, said to his people, "O folk, if we return to Ya'arub bin
Kahtan, he will say to us, 'But for you, my son and my people had not been slain; and he will put
us to death, even to the last man.' Wherefore, methinks we were better go to Tarkanan, King of
Hind, and beseech him to avenge us." Replied they, "Come, let us go thither; and the blessing of
the Fire be upon thee!" So they fared days and nights till they reached King Tarkanan's capital
city and, after asking and obtaining permission to present himself, Ajib went in to him and
kissed ground before him. Then he wished him what men use to wish to monarchy and said to
him, "O King, protect me, so may protect thee the sparkling Fire and the Night with its thick
darkness!" Tarkanan looked at Ajib and asked, "Who art thou and what dost thou want?"; to
which the other answered, "I am Ajib King of Al-Irak; my brother hath wronged me and gotten
the mastery of the land and the subjects have submitted themselves to him. Moreover, he hath
embraced the faith of Al-Islam and he ceaseth not to chase me from country to country; and
behold, I am come to seek protection of thee and thy power." When Tarkanan heard Ajib's
words, he rose and sat down and cried, "By the virtue of the Fire, I will assuredly avenge thee
and will let none serve other than my goddess the Fire!" And he called aloud to his son, saying,
"O my son, make ready to go to Al-Irak and lay it waste and bind all who serve aught but the
Fire and torment them and make example of them; yet slay them not, but bring them to me, that I
may ply them with various tortures and make them taste the bitterness of humiliation and leave
them a warning to whoso will be warned in this our while." Then he chose out to accompany
him eighty-thousand fighting-men on horseback and the like number on giraffes,[FN#47]
besides ten thousand elephants, bearing on their backs seats[FN#48] of sandal-wood, latticed
with golden rods, plated and studded with gold and silver and shielded with pavoises of gold and
emerald; moreover he sent good store of war-chariots, in each eight men fighting with all kinds
of weapons. Now the Prince's name was Ra'ad Shah,[FN#49] and he was the cham pion of his
time, for prowess having no peer. So he and his army equipped them in ten days' time, then set
out, as they were a bank of clouds, and fared on two months' journey, till they came upon Oman
city and encompassed it, to the joy of Ajib, who thought himself assured of victory. Jamrkan and
Sa'adan and all their fighting-men sallied forth into the field of fight whilst the kettle-drums beat
to battle and the horses neighed. At this moment up came King Gharib, who, as we have said,
had been warned by Kaylajan; and he urged on his destrier and entered among the Infidels
waiting to see who should come forth and open the chapter of war. Then out rushed Sa'adan the
Ghul and offered combat, whereupon there issued forth to him one of the champions of Hind;
but Sa'adan scarce let him take stand in front ere he smote him with his mace and crushed his
bones and stretched him on the ground; and so did he with a second and a third, till he had slain
thirty fighting-men. Then there dashed out at him an Indian cavalier, by name Battash al-
Akran,[FN#50] uncle to King Tarkanan and of his day the doughtiest man, reckoned worth five
thousand horse in battle-plain and cried out to Sa'adan, saying, "O thief of the Arabs, hath thy
daring reached that degree that thou shouldst slay the Kings of Hind and their champions and
capture their horsemen? But this day is the last of thy worldly days." When Sa'adan heard these
words, his eyes waxed blood-red and he crave at Battash and aimed a stroke at him with his club;
but he evaded it and the force of the blow bore Sa'adan to the ground; and before he could
recover himself, the Indians pinioned him and haled him off to their tents.