 Now when Jamrkan
saw his comrade a prisoner, he cried out, saying, "Ho for the Faith of Abraham the Friend!" and
clapping heel to his horse, ran at Battash. They wheeled about awhile, till Battash charged
Jamrkan and catching him by his jerkin[FN#51] tare him from his saddle and cast him to the
ground; whereupon the Indians bound him and dragged him away to their tents. And Battash
ceased not to overcome all who came out to him, Captain after Captain till he had made
prisoners of four-and-twenty Chiefs of the Moslems, whereat the True Believers were sore
dismayed. When Gharib saw what had befallen his braves, he drew from beneath his
knee[FN#52] a mace of gold weighing six-score pounds which had belonged to Barkan King of
the Jann--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib beheld what had befallen his
braves he drew forth a golden mace which had belonged to Barkan King of the Jann and clapped
heel to his sea horse, which bore him like the wind gust into mid-field. Then he let drive at
Battash, crying out, "God is Most Great! He giveth aid and victory and He abaseth whoso reject
the Faith of Abraham the Friend!" and smote him with the mace, whereupon he fell to the
ground and Gharib, turning to the Moslems, saw his brother Sahim and said to him, "Pinion me
this hound." When Sahim heard his brother's words, he ran to Battash and bound him hard and
fast and bore him off, whilst the Moslem braves wondered who this knight could be and the
Indians said one to other, "Who is this horseman which came out from among them and hath
taken our Chief prisoner?" Meanwhile Gharib continued to offer battle and there issued forth to
him a captain of the Hindis whom he felled to earth with his mace, and Kaylajan and Kurajan
pinioned him and delivered him over to Sahim; nor did Gharib leave to do thus, till he had taken
prisoner two-and-fifty of the doughtiest Captains of the army of Hind. Then the day came to an
end and the kettle-drums beat the retreat; whereupon Gharib left the field and rode towards the
Moslem camp. The first to meet him was Sahim, who kissed his feet in the stirrups and said,
"May thy hand never wither, O champion of the age! Tell us who thou art among the braves." So
Gharib raised his vizor of mail and Sahim knew him and cried out, saying, "This is your King
and your lord Gharib, who is come back from the land of the Jann!" When the Moslems heard
Gharib 's name, they threw themselves off their horses' backs, and, crowding about him, kissed
his feet in the stirrups and saluted him, rejoicing in his safe return. Then they carried him into the
city of Oman, where he entered his palace and sat down on the throne of his kingship, whilst his
officers stood around him in the utmost joy. Food was set on and they ate, after which Gharib
related to them all that had betided him with the Jinn in Mount Kaf, and they marvelled thereat
with exceeding marvel and praised Allah for his safety. Then he dismissed them to their sleeping
places; so they withdrew to their several lodgings, and when none abode with him but Kaylajan
and Kurajan, who never left him, he said to them, "Can ye carry me to Cufa that I may take my
pleasure in my Harim, and bring me back before the end of the night?" They replied, "O our
lord, this thou askest is easy." Now the distance between Cufa and Oman is sixty days' journey
for a diligent horseman, and Kaylajan said to Kurajan, "I will carry him going and thou coming
back." So he took up Gharib and flew off with him, in company with Kurajan; nor was an hour
past before they set him down at the gate of his palace, in Cufa. He went in to his uncle Al-
Damigh, who rose to him and saluted him; after which quoth Gharib, "How is it with my wives
Fakhr Taj[FN#53] and Mahdiyah?" Al-Damigh answered, "They are both well and in good
case." Then the eunuch went in and acquainted the women of the Harim with Gharib's coming,
whereat they rejoiced and raised the trill of joy and gave him the reward for good news.
Presently in came King Gharib, and they rose and saluting him, conversed with him, till Al-
Damigh entered, when Gharib related to them all that had befallen him in the land of the Jinn,
whereat they all marvelled. Then he lay with Fakhr Taj till near daybreak, when he took leave of
his wives and his uncle and mounted Kurajan's back, nor was the darkness dispelled before the
two Marids set him down in the city of Oman. Then he and his men armed and he bade open the
gates when, behold, up came a horseman from the host of the Indians, with Jamrkan and Sa'adan
and the rest of the captive captains whom he had delivered, and committed them to Gharib. The
Moslems, rejoicing in their safety, donned their mails and took horse, while the kettle-drums
beat a point of war; and the Miscreants also drew up in line.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Moslem host mounted and
rode to the plain of cut and thrust, the first to open the door of war was King Gharib who,
drawing his sword Al-Mahik, drove his charger between the two ranks and cried out, saying,
"Whoso knoweth me hath enough of my mis chief and whoso unknoweth me, to him I will make
myself known. I am Gharib, King of Al-Irak and Al-Yaman, brother of Ajib." When Ra'ad Shah,
son of the King of Hind, heard this, he shouted to his captains, "Bring me Ajib." So they brought
him and Ra'ad Shah said to him, "Thou wottest that this quarrel is thy quarrel and thou art the
cause of all this slaughter. Now yonder standeth thy brother Gharib amiddle-most the fightfield
and stead where sword and spear we shall wield; go thou to him and bring him to me a prisoner,
that I may set him on a camel arsy-versy, and make a show of him and carry him to the land of
Hind." Answered Ajib, "O King, send out to him other than I, for I am in ill-health this
morning." But Ra'ad Shah sparked and snorted and cried, "By the virtue of the sparkling Fire
and the light and the shade and the heat, unless thou fare forth to thy brother and bring him to me
in haste, I will cut off thy head and make an end of thee." So Ajib took heart and urging his
horse up to his brother in mid-field, said to him, "O dog of the Arabs and vilest of all who
hammer down tent pegs, wilt thou contend with Kings? Take what to thee cometh and receive
the glad tidings of thy death." When Gharib heard this, he said to him, "Who art thou among the
Kings? And Ajib answered, saying, "I am thy brother, and this day is the last of thy worldly
days." Now when Gharib was assured that he was indeed his brother Ajib, he cried out and said,
"Ho, to avenge my father and mother!" Then giving his sword to Kaylajan,[FN#54] he crave at
Ajib and smote him with his mace a smashing blow and a swashing, that went nigh to beat in his
ribs, and seizing him by the mail gorges tore him from the saddle and cast him to the ground;
whereupon the two Marids pounced upon him and binding him fast, dragged him off dejected
and abject; whilst Gharib rejoiced in the capture of his enemy and repeated these couplets of the
poet, 

"I have won my wish and my need have scored * Unto Thee be the praise and the thanks, O our
Lord! 
I grew up dejected and abject; poor, * But Allah vouchsafed me all boons implored:
I have conquered countries and mastered men * But for Thee were I naught, O thou Lord
adored!"

When Ra'ad Shah saw how evilly Ajib fared with his brother, he called for his charger and
donning his harness and habergeon, mounted and dashed out a field. As soon as he drew near
King Gharib, he cried out at him, saying, "O basest of Arabs and bearer of scrubs,[FN#55] who
art thou, that thou shouldest capture Kings and braves? Down from thy horse and put elbows
behind back and kiss my feet and set my warriors free and go with me in bond of chains to my
reign that I may pardon thee and make thee a Shayth in our own land, so mayst thou eat there a
bittock of bread." When Gharib heard these words he laughed till he fell backwards and
answered, saying, "O mad hound and mangy wolf, soon shalt thou see against whom the shifts of
Fortune will turn!" Then he cried out to Sahim, saying, "Bring me the prisoners; so he brought
them, and Gharib smote off their heads whereupon Ra'ad Shah crave at him, with the driving of
a lordly champion and the onslaught of a fierce slaughterer and they falsed and feinted and
fought till nightfall, when the kettle-drums beat the retreat.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the kettledrums beat the retreat,
the two Kings parted and returned, each to his own place where his people gave him joy of his
safety. And the Moslems said to Gharib, " 'Tis not thy wont O King, to prolong a fight;" and he
replied, "O folk, I have done battle with many royalties[FN#56] and champions; but never saw I
a harder hitter than this one. Had I chosen to draw Al-Mahik upon him, I had mashed his bones
and made an end of his days: but I delayed with him, thinking to take him prisoner and give him
part enjoyment in Al-Islam." Thus far concerning Gharib; but as regards Ra'ad Shah, he returned
to his marquee and sat upon his throne, when his Chiefs came in to him and asked him of his
adversary, and he answered, "By the truth of the sparkling Fire, never in my life saw I the like of
yonder brave! But to-morrow I will take him prisoner and lead him away dejected and abject."
Then they slept till daybreak, when the battle-drums beat to fight and the swords in baldric were
dight; and war-cries were cried amain and all mounted their horses of generous strain and drew
out into the field, filling every wide place and hill and plain. The first to open the door of war
was the rider outrageous and the lion rageous, King Gharib, who crave his steed between the two
hosts and wheeled and careered over the field, crying, "Who is for fray, who is for fight? Let no
sluggard come out to me this day nor dullard!" Before he had made an end of speaking, out
rushed Ra'ad Shah, riding on an elephant, as he were a vast tower, in a eat girthed with silken
bands; and between the elephant's ears at the driver, bearing in hand a hook, wherewith he
goaded the beast and directed him right and left. When the elephant drew near Gharib's horse,
and the steed saw a creature it had never before set eyes on, it took fright;[FN#57] wherefore
Gharib dismounted and gave the horse to Kaylajan. Then he drew Al-Mahik and advanced to
meet Ra'ad Shah a-foot, walking on till he faced the elephant. Now it was Ra'ad Shah's wont,
when he found himself overmatched by any brave, to mount an elephant, taking with him an
implement called the lasso,[FN#58] which was in the shape of a net, wide at base and narrow at
top with a running cord of silk passed through rings along its edges. With this he would attack
horsemen and casting the meshes over them, draw the running noose and drag the rider off his
horse and make him prisoner; and thus had he conquered many cavaliers. So, as Gharib came up
to him, he raised his hand and, despreading the net over him, pulled him on to the back of the
elephant and cried out to the beast to return to the Indian camp. But Kaylajan and Kurajan had
not left Gharib and, when they beheld what had befallen their lord, they laid hold of the elephant,
whilst Gharib strove with the net, till he rent it in sunder. Upon this the two Marids seized Ra'ad
Shah and bound him with a cord of palm fibre. Then the two armies drove each at other and met
with a shock like two seas crashing or two mountains together dashing, whilst the dust rose to
the confines of the sky and blinded was every eye. The battle waxed fierce and fell, the blood ran
in rills, nor did they cease to wage war with lunge of lance and sway of sword in lustiest way, till
the day darkened and the night starkened, when the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew
asunder.[FN#59] Now the Moslems were evilly entreated that day by reason of the riders on
elephants and giraffes,[FN#60] and many of them were killed and most of the rest were
wounded. This was grievous to Gharib who commanded the hurt to be medicined and turning to
his Chief Officers, asked them what they counselled. Answered they, "O King, 'tis only the
elephants and giraffes that irk us; were we but quit of them, we should overcome the enemy."
Quoth Kaylajan and Kurajan, "We twain will unsheath our swords and fall on them and slay the
most part of them." But there came forward a man of Oman, who had been privy counsellor to
Jaland and said, "O King, I will be surety for the host, an thou wilt but hearken to me and follow
my counsel." Gharib turned to his Captains and said to them, "Whatsoever this wise man shall
say to you that do."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,
                                
She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Gharib said to his Captains, "Whatsoever this wise man shall say
to you, that do"; they replied, "Hearing and obeying!" So the
Omani chose out ten captains and asked them, "How many braves
have ye under your hands?"; and they answered, "Ten thousand
fighting-men." Then he carried them into the armoury and armed
five thousand of them with harquebuses and other five thousand
with cross bows and taught them to shoot with these new
weapons.[FN#61] Now as soon as it was day, the Indians came out
to the field, armed cap-a-pie, with the elephants, giraffes and
champions in their van; whereupon Gharib and his men mounted and
both hosts drew out and the big drums beat to battle. Then the
man of Oman cried out to the archers and harquebusiers to shoot,
and they plied the elephants and giraffes with shafts and leaden
bullets, which entered the beasts' flanks, whereat they roared
out and turning upon their own ranks, trod them down with their
hoofs. Presently the Moslems charged the Misbelievers and
outflanked them right and left, whilst the elephants and giraffes
trampled them and drove them into the hills and words, whither
the Moslems followed hard upon them with the keen-edged sword and
but few of the giraffes and elephants escaped. Then King Gharib
and his folk returned, rejoicing in their victory; and on the
morrow they divided the loot and rested five days; after which
King Gharib sat down on the throne of his kingship and sending
for his brother Ajib, said to him, "O dog, why hast thou
assembled the Kings against us? But He who hath power over all
things hath given us the victory over thee. So embrace the Saving
Faith and thou shalt be saved, and I will forbear to avenge my
father and mother on thee therefor, and I will make thee King
again as thou west, placing myself under thy hand." But Ajib
said, "I will not leave my faith." So Gharib bade lay him in
irons and appointed an hundred stalwart slaves to guard him;
after which he turned to Ra'ad Shah and said to him, "How sayst
thou of the faith of Al-Islam?" Replied he, "O my lord, I will
enter thy faith; for, were it not a true Faith and a goodly, thou
hadst not conquered us. Put forth thy hand and I will testify
that there is no god but the God and that Abraham the Friend is
the Apostle of God." At this Gharib rejoiced and said to him, "Is
thy heart indeed stablished in the sweetness of this Belief?" And
he answered, saying, "Yes, O my lord!" Then quoth Gharib, "O.
Ra'ad Shah, wilt thou go to thy country and thy kingdom?" and
quoth he, "O. my lord, my father will put me to death, for that I
have left his faith." Gharib rejoined, "I will go with thee and
make thee king of the country and constrain the folk to obey
thee, by the help of Allah the Bountiful, the Beneficent." And
Ra'ad Shah kissed his hands and feet. Then Gharib rewarded the
counsellor who had caused the rout of the foe and gave him great
wealth; after which he turned to Kaylajan and Kurajan, and said
to them, "Harkye, Chiefs of the Jinn, 'tis my will that ye carry
me, together with Ra'ad Shah and Jamrkan and Sa'adan to the land
of Hind." "We hear and we obey," answered they. So Kurajan took
up Jamrkan and Sa'adan, whilst Kaylajan took Gharib and Ra'ad
Shah and made for the land of Hind.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two Marids had taken up Gharib
and Jamrkan, Sa'adan the Ghul and Ra'ad Shah, they flew on with them from sundown till the
last of the Night, when they set them down on the terrace of King Tarkanan's palace at
Cashmere. Now news was brought to Tarkanan by the remnants of his host of what had befallen
his son, whereat he slept not neither took delight in aught, and he was troubled with sore trouble.
As he sat in his Harim, pondering his case, behold, Gharib and his company descended the
stairways of the palace and came in to him; and when he saw his son and those who were with
him, he was confused and fear took him of the Marids. Then Ra'ad Shah turned to him and said,
"How long wilt thou persist in thy frowardness, O traitor and worshipper of the Fire? Woe to
thee! Leave worshipping the Fire and serve the Magnanimous Sire, Creator of day and Night,
whom attaineth no sight." When Tarkanan heard his son's speech, he cast at him an iron club he
had by him; but it missed him and fell upon a buttress of the palace and smote out three stones.
Then cried the King, "O dog, thou hast destroyed mine army and hast forsaken thy faith and
comest now to make me do likewise!" With this Gharib went up to him and dealt him a cuff on
the neck which knocked him down; whereupon the Marids bound him fast and all the Harim-
women fled. Then Gharib sat down on the throne of kingship and said to Ra'ad Shah, "Do thou
justice upon thy father." So Ra'ad Shah turned to him and said, 'O perverse old man, become
one of the saved and thou shalt be saved from the fire and the wrath of the All-powerful" But
Tarkanan cried, "I will not die save in my own faith" Whereupon Gharib drew Al-Mahik and
smote him therewith and he fell to the earth in two pieces, and Allah hurried his soul to the fire
and abiding-place dire.[FN#62] Then Gharib bade hang his body over the palace gate and they
hung one half on the right hand and the other on the left and waited till day, when Gharib caused
Ra'ad Shah don the royal habit and sit down on his father's throne, with himself on his dexter
hand and Jamrkan and Sa'adan and the Marids standing right and left; and he said to Kaylajan
and Kurajan, "Whoso entereth of the Princes and Officers, seize him and bind him, and let not a
single Captain escape you." And they answered, "Hearkening and obedience!" Presently the
Officers made for the palace, to do their service to e King, and the first to appear was the Chief
Captain who, seeing King Tarkanan's dead body cut in half and hanging on either side of the
gate, was seized with terror and amazement. Then Kaylajan laid hold of him by the collar and
threw him and intoned him; after which he dragged him into the palace and before sunrise they
had bound three hundred and fifty Captains and set them before Gharib, who said to them, "O
folk, have you seen your King hanging at the palace gate?" Asked they, "Who hath done this
deed?"; and he answered, "I did it, by the help of Allah Almighty; and whoso opposeth me, I
will do with him likewise." Then quoth they, "What is thy will with us?"; and quoth he, "I am
Gharib, King of Al-Irak, he who slew your warriors; and now Ra'ad Shah hath embraced the
Faith of Salvation and is become a mighty King and ruler over you. So do ye become True
Believers and all shall be well with you; but, if ye refuse, you shall repent it." So they
pronounced the profession of the Faith and were enrolled among the people of felicity. Then said
Gharib, "Are your hearts indeed stablished in the sweetness of the Belief?"; and they replied,
"Yes"; whereupon he bade release them and clad them in robes of honour, saying, "Go to your
people and expound Al-Islam to them. Whoso accepteth the Faith spare him; but if he refuse slay
him."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Gharib said to the troops of
Ra'ad Shah, "Go to your people and offer Al-Islam to them. Whoso accepteth the Faith spare
him; but if he refuse, slay him." So they went out and, assembling the men under their command,
explained what had taken place and expounded Al-Islam to them and they all professed. except a
few, whom they put to death; after which they returned and told Gharib, who blessed Allah and
glorified Him, saying, "Praised be the Almighty who hath made this thing easy to us without
strife!" Then he abode in Cashmere of India forty days, till he had ordered the affairs of the
country and cast down the shrines and temples of the Fire and built in their stead mosques and
cathedrals, whilst Ra'ad Shah made ready for him rarities and treasures beyond count and
despatched them to Al-Irak in ships Then Gharib mounted on Kaylajan's back and Jamrkan and
Sa'adan on that of Kurajan, after they had taken leave of Ra'ad Shah; and journeyed through the
night till break of day, when they reached Oman city where their troops met them and saluted
them and rejoiced in them. Then they set out for Cufa where Gharib called for his brother Ajib
and commanded to hang him. So Sahim brought hooks of iron and driving them into the tendons
of Ajib's heels, hung him over the gate; and Gharib bade them shoot him; so they riddled him
with arrows, till he was like unto a porcupine. Then Gharib entered his palace and sitting down
on the throne of his kingship, passed the day in ordering the affairs of the state. At nightfall he
went in to his Harim, where Star o' Morn came to meet him and embraced him and gave him
joy, she and her women, of his safety. He spent that day and lay that night with her and on the
morrow, after he had made the Ghusl-ablution and prayed the dawn-prayer, he sat down on his
throne and commanded preparation to be made for his marriage with Mahdiyah. Accordingly
they slaughtered three thousand head of sheep and two thousand oxen and a thousand he goats
and five hundred camels and the like number of horses, beside four thousand fowls and great
store of geese; never was such wedding in Al-Islam to that day. Then he went in to Mahdiyah
and took her maidenhead and abode with her ten days; after which he committed the kingdom to
his uncle Al-Damigh, charging him to rule the lieges justly, and journeyed with his women and
warriors, till he came to the ships laden with the treasures and rarities which Ra'ad Shah had sent
him, and divided the monies among his men who from poor became rich. Then they fared on till
they reached the city of Babel, where he bestowed on Sahim Al-Layl a robe of honour and
appointed him Sultan of the city.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib, after robing his brother Sahim
and appointing him Sultan, abode with him ten days, after which he set out again and journeyed
nor stinted travel till he reached the castle of Sa'adan the Ghul, where they rested five days.
Then quoth Gharib to Kaylajan and Kurajan' "Pass over to Isbanir al-Madain, to the palace of
the Chosroe, and find what is come of Fakhr Taj and bring me one of the King's kinsmen, who
shall acquaint me with what hath passed." Quoth they, "We hear and we obey," and set out
forthright for Isbanir. As they flew between heaven and earth, behold, they caught sight of a
mighty army, as it were the surging sea, and Kaylajan said to Kurajan, "Let us descend and
determine what be this host." So they alighted and walking among the troops, found them
Persians and questioned the soldiers whose men they were and whither they were bound;
whereto they made answer, "We are en route for Al-Irak, to slay Gharib and all who company
him." When the Marids heard these words, they repaired to the pavilion of the Persian general,
whose name was Rustam, and waited till the soldiers slept, when they took up Rustam, bed and
all, and made for the castle where Gharib lay. They arrived there by midnight and going to the
door of the King's pavilion, cried, "Permission!" which when he heard, he sat up and said,
"Come in." So they entered and set down the couch with Rustam asleep thereon. Gharib asked,
"Who be this?" and they answered, "This be a Persian Prince, whom we met coming with a great
host, thinking to slay thee and thine, and we have brought him to thee, that he may tell thee what
thou hast a mind to know." "Fetch me an hundred braves!" cried Gharib, and they fetched them;
whereupon he bade them, "Draw your swords and stand at the head of this Persian carle!" Then
they awoke him and he opened his eyes; and, finding an arch of steel over his head, shut them
again, crying, "What be this foul dream?" But Kaylajan pricked him with his sword point and he
sat up and said, "Where am I?" Quoth Sahim, "Thou art in the presence of King Gharib, son-in-
law of the King of the Persians. What is thy name and whither goest thou?" When Rustam heard
Gharib's name' he bethought himself and said in his mind, "Am I asleep or awake? Whereupon
Sahim dealt him a buffet, saying, "Why dost thou not answer?" And he raised his head and
asked, "Who brought me from my tent out of the midst of my men?" Gharib answered, "These
two Marids brought thee." So he looked at Kaylajan and Kurajan and skited in his bag-trousers.
Then the Marids fell upon him, baring their tusks and brandishing their blades, and said to him,
"Wilt thou not rise and kiss ground before King Gharib?" And he trembled at them and was
assured that he was not asleep; so he stood up and kissed the ground between the hands of
Gharib, saying, "The blessing of the Fire be on thee, and long life be thy life, O King!" Gharib
cried, "O dog of the Persians, fire is not worshipful, for that it is harmful and profiteth not save
in cooking food." Asked Rustam, "Who then is worshipful?"; and Gharib answered, "Alone
worshipworth is God, who formed thee and fashioned thee and created the heavens and the
earth." Quoth the Ajami, "What shall I say that I may become of the party of this Lord and enter
thy Faith?"; and quoth Gharib, "Say, 'There is no god but the God, and Abraham is the Friend of
God'." So Rustam pronounced the profession of the Faith and was enrolled among the people of
felicity. Then said he to Gharib, "Know, O my lord, that thy father-in-law, King Sabur, seeketh
to slay thee; and indeed he hath sent me with an hundred thousand men, charging me to spare
none of you." Gharib rejoined, "Is this my reward for having delivered his daughter from death
and dishonour? Allah will requite him his ill intent. But what is thy name?" The Persian
answered, "My name is Rustam, general of Sabur;" and Gharib, "Thou shalt have the like rank in
my army," adding, "But tell me, O Rustam, how is it with the Princess Fakhr Taj?" "May thy
head live, O King of the age!" "What was the cause of her death?" Rustam replied, "O my lord,
no sooner hadst thou left us than one of the Princess's women went in to King Sabur and said to
him, 'O my master, didst thou give Gharib leave to lie with the Princess my mistress?' whereto
he answered, 'No, by the virtue of the fire!' and drawing his sword, went in to his daughter and
said to her, 'O foul baggage, why didst thou suffer yonder Badawi to sleep with thee, without
dower or even wedding?' She replied, 'O my papa, 'twas thou gayest him leave to sleep with
me.' Then he asked, 'Did the fellow have thee?' but she was silent and hung down her head.
Hereupon he cried out to the midwives and slave-girls, saying, 'Pinion me this harlot's elbows
behind her and look at her privy parts.' So they did as he bade them and after inspecting her slit
said to him, 'O King, she hath lost her maidenhead Whereupon he ran at her and would have
slain her, but her mother rose up and threw herself between them crying, 'O King, slay her not,
lest thou be for ever dishonoured; but shut her in a cell till she die.' So he cast her into prison till
nightfall, when he called two of his courtiers and said to them, 'Carry her afar off and throw her
into the river Jayhun and tell none.' They did his commandment, and indeed her memory is
forgotten and her time is past."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib asked news of Fakhr Taj,
Rustam informed him that she had been drowned in the river by her sire's command. And when
Gharib heard this, the world waxed wan before his eyes and he cried, "By the virtue of Abraham
the Friend, I will assuredly go to yonder dog and overwhelm him and lay waste his realm!" Then
he sent letters to Jamrkan and to the governors of Mosul and Mayyafarikin; and, turning to
Rustam, said to him, "How many men hadst thou in thine army?" He replied, "An hundred
thousand Persian horse;" and Gharib rejoined, "Take ten thousand horse and go to thy people
and occupy them with war; I will follow on thy trail." So Rustam mounted and taking ten
thousand Arab horse made for his tribe, saying in himself, "I will do a deed shall whiten my face
with King Gharib." So he fared on seven days, till there remained but half a day's journey
between him and the Persian camp; when, dividing his host into four divisions he said to his
men, "Surround the Persians on all sides and fall upon them with the sword." They rode on from
eventide till midnight, when they had compassed the camp of the Ajamis, who were asleep in
security, and fell upon them, shouting, "God is Most Great!" Whereupon the Persians started up
from sleep and their feet slipped and the sabre went round amongst them; for the All-knowing
King was wroth with them, and Rustam wrought amongst them as fire in dry fuel; till, by the end
of the night, the whole of the Persian host was slain or wounded or fled, and the Moslems made
prize of their tents and baggage, horses, camels and treasure-chests. Then they alighted and
rested in the tents of the Ajamis till King Gharib came up and, seeing what Rustam had done and
how he had gained by stratagem a great and complete victory, he invested him with a robe of
honour and said to him, "O Rustam, it was thou didst put the Persians to the rout; wherefore all
the spoil is thine." So he kissed Gharib's hand and thanked him, and they rested till the end of
the day, when they set out for King Sabur's capital. Meanwhile, the fugitives of the defeated
force reached Isbanir and went in to Sabur, crying out and saying, "Alas!" and "Well-away!" and
"Woe worth the day!" Quoth he, "What hath befallen you and who with his mischief hath
smitten you?" So they told him all that had passed and said, "Naught befel us except that thy
general Rustam, fell upon us in the darkness of the night because he had turned Moslem; nor did
Gharib come near us." When the King heard this, he cast his crown to the ground and said,
"There is no worth left us!" Then he turned to his son Ward Shah[FN#63] and said to him, "O
my son, there is none for this affair save thou." Answered Ward Shah, "By thy life, O my father,
I will assuredly bring Gharib and his chiefs of the people in chains and slay all who are with
him" Then he numbered his army and found it two hundred and twenty-thousand men. So they
slept, intending to set forth on the morrow; but, next morning, as they were about to march,
behold, a cloud of dust arose and spread till it walled the world and baffled the sight of the
farthest seeing wight. Now Sabur had mounted to farewell his son, and when he saw this mighty
great dust, he let call a runner and said to him, "Go find me out the cause of this dust-cloud."
The scout went and returned, saying, "O my lord, Gharib and his braves are upon you;"
whereupon they unloaded their bat-beasts and drew out in line of battle. When Gharib came up
and saw the Persians ranged in row, he cried out to his men, saying, "Charge with the blessing of
Allah!" So they waved the flags, and the Arabs and the Ajamis crave one at other and folk were
heaped upon folk. Blood ran like water and all souls saw death face to face; the brave advanced
and pressed forward to assail and the coward hung back and turned tail and they ceased not from
fight and fray till ended day, when the kettle-drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew apart.
Then Sabur commanded to pitch his camp hard over the city-gate, and Gharib set up his
pavilions in front of theirs; and every one went to his tent.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two hosts drew apart, every one
went to his tent until the morning. As soon as it was day, the two hosts mounted their strong
steeds and levelled their lances and wore their harness of war; then they raised their slogan cries
and drew out in battle-array, whilst came forth all the lordly knights and the lions of fights. Now
the first to open the gate of battle was Rustam, who urged his charger into mid-field and cried
out, "God is most Great! I am Rustam, champion-in-chief of the Arabs and Ajamis. Who is for
tilting, who is for fighting? Let no sluggard come out to me this day nor weakling!" Then there
rushed forth to him a champion of the Persians; the two charged each other and there befel
between them a sore fight, till Rustam sprang upon his adversary and smote him with a mace he
had with him, seventy pounds in weight, and beat his head down upon his breast, and he fell to
the earth, dead and in his blood drowned. This was no light matter to Sabur and he commanded
his men to charge; so they crave at the Moslems, invoking the aid of the light-giving Sun, whilst
the True Believers called for help upon the Magnanimous King. But the Ajamis, the Miscreants,
outnumbered the Arabs, the Moslems, and made them drain the cup of death; which when
Gharib saw he drew his sword Al-Mahik and crying out his war-cry, fell upon the Persians, with
Kaylajan and Kurajan at either stirrup; nor did he leave playing upon them with blade till he
hewed his way to the standard-bearer and smote him on the head with the flat of his sword,
whereupon he fell down in a fainting-fit and the two Marids bore him off to their camp. When
the Persians saw the standard fall, they turned and fled and for the city-gates made; but the
Moslems followed them with the blade and they crowded together to enter the city, so that they
could not shut the gates and there died of them much people. Then Rustam and Sa'adan,
Jamrkan and Sahim, Al-Damigh, Kaylajan and Kurajan and all the braves Mohammedan and the
champions of Faith Unitarian fell upon the misbelieving Persians in the gates, and the blood of
the Kafirs ran in the streets like a torrent till they threw down their arms and harness and called
out for quarter; whereupon the Moslems stayed their swords from the slaughter and drove them
to their tents, as one driveth a flock of sheep. Meanwhile Gharib returned to his pavilion, where
he doffed his gear and washed himself of the blood of the Infidels; after which he donned his
royal robes and sat down on his chair of estate. Then he called for the King of the Persians and
said to him, "O dog of the Ajams, what moved thee to deal thus with thy daughter? How seest
thou me unworthy to be her baron?" And Sabur answered, saying, "O King, punish me not
because of that deed which I did; for I repent me and confronted thee not in fight but in my fear
of thee.''[FN#64] When Gharib heard these words he bade throw him flat and beat him. So they
bastinadoed him, till he could no longer groan, and cast him among the prisoners. Then Gharib
expounded Al-Islam to the Persians and one hundred and twenty-thousand of them embraced
The Faith, and the rest he put to the sword. Moreover all the citizens professed Al-Islam and
Gharib mounted and entered in great state the city Isbanir Al-Madain. Then he went into the
King's palace and sitting down on Sabur's throne, gave robes and largesse and distributed the
booty and treasure among the Arabs and Persians, wherefore they loved him and wished him
victory and honour and endurance of days. But Fakhr Taj's mother remembered her daughter
and raised the voice of mourning for her, and the palace was filled with wails and cries. Gharib
heard this and entering the Harim, asked the women what ailed them, whereupon the Princess's
mother came forward and said, "O my lord, thy presence put me in mind of my daughter and
how she would have joyed in thy coming, had she been alive and well." Gharib wept for her and
sitting down on his throne, called for Sabur, and they brought him stumbling in his shackles.
Quoth Gharib to him, "O dog of the Persians, what didst thou do with thy daughter?" "I gave her
to such an one and such an one," quoth the King, "saying, 'Drown her in the river Jayhun.'" So
Gharib sent for the two men and asked them, "Is what he saith true?" Answered they, "Yes; but,
O King, we did not drown her, nay we took pity on her and left her on the bank of the Jayhun,
saying, 'Save thyself and return not to the city, lest the King slay thee and slay us with thee.'
This is all we know of her."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Seventieth Night,
                                
She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
two men ended the tale of Fakhr Taj with these words, "And we
left her upon the bank of the river Jayhun!" Now, when Gharib
heard this he bade bring the astrologers and said to them,
"Strike me a board of geomancy and find out what is come of Fakhr
Taj, and whether she is still in the bonds of life or dead." They
did so and said, "O King of the age, it is manifest to us that
the Princess is alive and hath borne a male child; but she is
with a tribe of the Jinn, and will be parted from thee twenty
years; count, therefore, how many years thou hast been absent in
travel." So he reckoned up the years of his absence and found
them eight years and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!''[FN#65] Then he
sent for all Sabur's Governors of towns and strongholds and they
came and did him homage. Now one day after this, as he sat in his
palace, behold, a cloud of dust appeared in the distance and
spread till it walled the whole land and darkened the horizon. So
he summoned the two Marids and bade them reconnoitre, and they
went forth under the dust-cloud and snatching up a horseman of
the advancing host, returned and set him down before Gharib,
saying, "Ask this fellow, for he is of the army." Quoth Gharib,
"Whose power is this?" and the man answered, "O King, 'tis the
army of Khirad Shah,[FN#66] King of Shiras, who is come forth to
fight thee." Now the cause of Khirad Shah's coming was this. When
Gharib defeated Sabur's army, as hath been related, and took him
prisoner, the King's son fled, with a handful of his father's
force and ceased not flying till he reached the city of Shiras,
where he went into King Khirad Shah and kissed ground before him,
whilst the tears ran down his cheeks. When the King saw him in
this case, he said to him, "Lift thy head, O youth, and tell me
what maketh thee weep." He replied, "O King, a King of the Arabs,
by name Gharib, hath fallen on us and captured the King my sire
and slain the Persians making them drain the cup of death." And
he told him all that had passed from first to last Quoth Khirad
Shah, "Is my wife[FN#67] well?" and quoth the Prince "Gharib hath
taken her." Cried the King "As my head liveth I will not leave a
Badawi or a Moslem on the face of the earth'" So he wrote letters
to his Viceroys, who levied their troops and joined him with an
army which when reviewed numbered eighty-five thousand men. Then
he opened his armouries and distributed arms and armour to the
troops, after which he set out with them and journeyed till he
came to Isbanir, and all encamped before the city-gate. Hereupon
Kaylajan and Kurajan came in to Gharib and kissing his knee, said
to him, "O our Lord, heal our hearts and give us this host to our
share." And he said, "Up and at them!" So the two Marids flew
aloft high in the lift and lighting down in the pavilion of the
King of Shiras, found him seated on his chair of estate, with the
Prince of Persia Ward Shah son of Sabur, sitting on his right
hand, and about him his Captains, with whom he was taking counsel
for the slaughter of the Moslems. Kaylajan came forward and
caught up the Prince and Kurajan snatched Up the King and the
twain flew back with them to Gharib, who caused beat them till
they fainted Then the Marids returned to the Shirazian camp and,
drawing their swords, which no mortal man had strength to wield,
fell upon the Misbelievers and Allah hurried their souls to the
Fire and abiding-place dire, whilst they saw no one and nothing
save two swords flashing and reaping men, as a husbandman reaps
corn. So they left their tents and mounting their horses bare-
backed, fled, and the Marids pursued them two days and slew of
them much people; after which they returned and kissed Gharib's
hand. He thanked them for the deed they had done and said to
them, "The spoil of the Infidels is yours alone: none shall share
with you therein." So they called down blessings on him and going
forth, gathered the booty together and abode in their own homes.
On this wise it fared with them; but as regards Gharib and his
lieges,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after
Gharib had put to flight the host of Khirad Shah, he bade
Kaylajan and Kurajan take the spoil to their own possession nor
hare it with any; so they gathered the booty and abode in their
own homes. Meanwhile the remains of the beaten force ceased not
flying till they reached the city of Shiras and there lifted up
the voice of weeping and began the ceremonial lamentations for
those of them that had been slain. Now King Khirad Shah had a
brother Siran the Sorcerer highs, than whom there was no greater
wizard in his day, and he lived apart from his brother in a
certain stronghold, called the Fortalice of Fruits,[FN#68] in a
place abounding in trees and streams and birds and blooms, half a
day's journey from Shiras. So the fugitives betook them thither
and went in to Siran the Sorcerer, weeping and wailing aloud.
Quoth he, "O folk, what garreth you weep?" and they told him all
that had happened, especially how the two Marids had carried off
his brother Khirad Shah; whereupon the light of his eyes became
night and he said, "By the virtue of my faith, I will certainly
slay Gharib and all his men and leave not one alive to tell the
tale!" Then he pronounced certain magical words and summoned the
Red King, who appeared and Siran said to him, "Fare for Isbanir
and fall on Gharib, as he sitteth upon his throne." Replied he,
"Hearkening and obedience!" and, gathering his troops, repaired
to Isbanir and assailed Gharib, who seeing him, drew his sword
Al-Mahik and he and Kaylajan and Kurajan fell upon the army of
the Red King and slew of them five hundred and thirty and wounded
the King himself with a grevious wound; whereupon he and his
people fled and stayed not in their flight, till they reached the
Fortalice of Fruits and went into Siran, crying out and
exclaiming, "Woe!" and "Ruin!" And the Red King said to Siran, "O
sage, Gharib hath with him the enchanted sword of Japhet son of
Noah, and whomsoever he smiteth therewith he severeth him in
sunder, and with him also are two Marids from Mount Caucasus,
given to him by King Mura'ash. He it is who slew the Blue King
and Barkan Lord of the Carnelian City, and did to death much
people of the Jinn." When the Enchanter heard this, he said to
the Red King "Go," and he went his ways; whereupon he resumed his
conjurations, and calling up a Marid, by name Zu'azi'a gave him a
drachm of levigated Bhang and said to him, "Go thou to Isbanir
and enter King Gharib's palace and assume the form of a sparrow.
Wait till he fall asleep and there be none with him; then put the
Bhang up his nostrils and bring him to me." "To hear is to obey,"
replied the Marid and flew to Isbanir, where, changing himself
into a sparrow, he perched on the window of the palace and waited
till all Gharib's attendants retired to their rooms and the King
himself slept. Then he flew down and going up to Gharib, blew the
powdered Bhang into his nostrils, till he lost his senses,
whereupon he wrapped him in the bed-coverlet and flew off with
him, like the storm wind, to the Fortalice of Fruits; where he
arrived at midnight and laid his prize before Siran. The Sorcerer
thanked him and would have put Gharib to death, as he lay
senseless under Bhang; but a man of his people withheld him
saying, "O Sage, an thou slay him, his friend King Mura'ash will
fall on us with all his Ifrits and lay waste our realm." "How
then shall we do with him?" asked Siran, and the other answered,
"Cast him into the Jayhun while he is still in Bhang and he shall
be drowned and none will know who threw him in." And Siran bade
the Marid take Gharib and cast him into Jayhun river.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Marid took Gharib and carried him to the Jayhun purposing to cast
him therein, but it was grievous to him to drown him, wherefore
he made a raft of wood and binding it with cords, pushed it out
(and Gharib thereon) into the current, which carried it away.
Thus fared it with Gharib; but as regards his people, when they
awoke in the morning and went in to do their service to their
King, they found him not and seeing his rosary on the throne,
awaited him awhile, but he came not. So they sought out the head
Chamberlain and said to him, "Go into the Harim and look for the
King: for it is not his habit to tarry till this time."
Accordingly, the Chamberlain entered the Serraglio and enquired
for the King, but the women said, "Since yesterday we have not
seen him." Thereupon he returned and told the Officers, who were
confounded and said, "Let us see if he have gone to take his
pleasure in the gardens." Then they went out and questioned the
gardeners if they had seen the King, and they answered, "No;"
whereat they were sore concerned and searched all the garths till
the end of the day, when they returned in tears. Moreover, the
two Marids sought for him all round the city, but came back after
three days, without having happened on any tidings of him. So the
people donned black and made their complaint to the Lord of all
worshipping men who cloth as he is fain. Meanwhile, the current
bore the raft along for five days till it brought it to the salt
sea, where the waves disported with Gharib and his stomach, being
troubled, threw up the Bhang. Then he opened his eyes and finding
himself in the midst of the main, a plaything of the billows,
said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great! Would to Heaven I wot who hath done this
deed by me!" Presently as he lay, perplexed concerning his case,
lo! he caught sight of a ship sailing by and signalled with his
sleeve to the sailors, who came to him and took him up, saying,
"Who art thou and whence comest thou?" He replied, "Do ye feed me
and give me to drink, till I recover myself, and after I will
tell you who I am." So they brought him water and victual, and he
ate and drank and Allah restored to him his reason. Then he asked
them, "O folk, what countrymen are ye and what is your Faith?;"
and they answered, "We are from Karaj[FN#69] and we worship an
idol called Minkash." Cried Gharib, "Perdition to you and your
idol! O dogs, none is worthy of wor strip save Allah who creased
all things, who saith to a thing Be! and it becometh." When they
heard this, they rose up and fell upon him in great wrath and
would have seized him. Now he was without weapons, but whomsoever
he struck, he smote down and deprived of life, till he had felled
forty men, after which they overcame him by force of numbers and
bound him fast, saying, "We will not slay him save in our own
land, that we may first show him to our King." Then they sailed
on till they came to the city of Karaj.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
ship's crew seized Gharib and bound him fast they said, "We will
not slay him save in our own land." Then they sailed on till they
came to the city of Karaj, the builder whereof was an Amalekite,
fierce and furious; and he had set up at each gate of the city a
magical figure of copper which, whenever a stranger entered, blew
a blast on a trumpet, that all in the city heard it and fell upon
the stranger and slew him, except they embraced their creed When
Gharib entered the city, the figure stationed at the gate blew
such a horrible blast that the King was affrighted and going into
his idol, found fire and smoke issuing from its mouth, nose and
eyes. Now a Satan had entered the belly of the idol and speaking
as with its tongue, said, "O King, there is come to thy city one
highs Gharib, King of Al-Irak, who biddeth the folk quit their
belief and worship his Lord; wherefore, when they bring him
before thee, look thou spare him not." So the King went out and
sat down on his throne; and presently, the sailors brought in
Gharib and set him before the presence, saying, "O King, we found
this youth shipwrecked in the midst of the sea, and he is a Kafir
and believeth not in our gods." Then they told him all that had
passed and the King said, "Carry him to the house of the Great
Idol and cut his throat before him, so haply our god may look
lovingly upon us." But the Wazir said, "O King, it befitteth not
to slaughter him thus, for he would die in a moment: better we
imprison him and build a pyre of fuel and burn him with fire."
Thereupon the King commanded to cast Gharib into gaol and caused
wood to be brought, and they made a mighty pyre and set fire to
it, and it burnt till the morning. Then the King and the people
of the city came forth and the Ruler sent to fetch Gharib; but
his lieges found him not; so they returned and told their King
who said, "And how made he his escape?" Quoth they, 'We found the
chains and shackles cast down and the doors fast locked." Whereat
the King marvelled and asked, Hath this fellow to Heaven up flown
or into the earth gone down?;' and they answered, "We know not."
Then said the King, "I will go and question my God, and he will
inform me whither he is gone." So he rose and went in, to
prostrate himself to his idol, but found it not and began to rub
his eyes and say, "Am I in sleep or on wake?" Then he turned to
his Wazir and said to him, "Where is my God and where is my
prisoner? By my faith, O dog of Wazirs, haddest thou not
counselled me to burn him, I had slaughtered him; for it is he
who hath stolen my god and fled; and there is no help but I take
brood-wreak of him!" Then he drew his sword and struck off the
Wazir's head. Now there was for Gharib's escape with the idol a
strange cause and it was on this wise. When