 they had shut him up
in a cell adjoining the doomed shrine under which stood the idol,
he rose to pray, calling upon the name of Almighty Allah and
seeking deliverance of Him, to whom be honour and glory! The
Marid who had charge of the idol and spoke in its name, heard him
and fear got hold upon his heart and he said, "O shame upon me!
Who is this seeth me while I see him not?" So he went in to
Gharib and throwing himself at his feet, said to him, "O my Lord,
what must I say that I may become of thy company and enter thy
religion?" Replied Gharib, "Say, 'There is no god but the God and
Abraham is the Friend of God.'" So the Marid pronounced the
profession of Faith and was enrolled among the people of
felicity. Now his name was Zalzal, son of Al-Muzalzil,[FN#70] one
of the Chiefs of the Kings of the Jinn. Then he unbound Gharib
and taking him and the idol, made for the higher air.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Marid
took up Gharib and the idol and made for the higher air. Such was
his case; but as regards the King, when his soldiers saw what had
befallen and the slaughter of the Wazir they renounced the
worship of the idol and drawing their swords, slew the King;
after which they fell on one another, and the sword went round
amongst them three days, till there abode alive but two men, one
of whom prevailed over the other and killed him. Then the boys
attacked the survivor and slew him and fell to fighting amongst
themselves, till they were all killed; and the women and girls
fled to the hamlets and forted villages; wherefore the city
became desert and none dwelt therein but the owl. Meanwhile, the
Marid Zalzal flew with Gharib towards his own country, the Island
of Camphor and the Castle of Crystal and the Land of the
Enchanted Calf, so called because its King Al Muzalzil, had a
pied calf, which he had clad in housings brocaded with red gold,
and worshipped as a god. One day the King and his people went in
to the calf and found him trembling; so the King said, "O my God,
what hath troubled thee?" whereupon the Satan in the calf's belly
cried out and said, "O Muzalzil, verily thy son hath deserted to
the Faith of Abraham the Friend at the hands of Gharib Lord of
Al-Irak;" and went on to tell him all that had passed from first
to last. When the King heard the words of his calf he was
confounded and going forth, sat down upon his throne. Then he
summoned his Grandees who came in a body, and he told them what
he had heard from the idol, whereat they marvelled and said,
"What shall we do, O King?" Quoth he, "When my son cometh and ye
see him embrace him, do ye lay hold of him." And they said,
"Hearkening and obedience!" After two days came Zalzal and
Gharib, with the King's idol of Karaj, but no sooner had they
entered the palace-gate than the Jinn seized on them and carried
them before Al-Muzalzil, who looked at his son with eyes of ire
and said to him, "O dog of the Jann, hast thou left thy Faith and
that of thy fathers and grandfathers?" Quoth Zalzal, "I have
embraced the True Faith, and on like wise do thou (Woe be to
thee!) seek salvation and thou shalt be saved from the wrath of
the King Almighty in sway, Creator of Night and Day." Therewith
his father waxed wroth and said, "O son of adultery, dost
confront me with these words?" Then he bade clap him in prison
and turning to Gharib, said to him, "O wretch of a mortal, how
hast thou abused my son's wit and seduced him from his Faith?"
Quoth Gharib, "Indeed, I have brought him out of wrongousness
into the way of righteousness, out of Hell into Heaven and out of
unfaith to the True Faith." Whereupon the King cried out to a
Marid called Sayyar, saying "Take this dog and cast him into the
Wady of Fire, that he may perish." Now this valley was in the
"Waste Quarter[FN#71]" and was thus named from the excess of its
heat and the flaming of its fire, which was so fierce that none
who went down therein could live an hour, but was destroyed; and
it was compassed about by mountains high and slippery wherein was
no opening. So Sayyar took up Gharib and flew with him towards
the Valley of Fire, till he came within an hour's journey
thereof, when being weary, he alighted in a valley full of trees
and streams and fruits, and setting down from his back Gharib
chained as he was, fell asleep for fatigue. When Gharib heard him
snore, he strove with his bonds till he burst them; then, taking
up a heavy stone, he cast it down on the Marid's head and crushed
his bones, so that he died on the spot. Then he fared on into the
valley.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib
after killing the Marid fared on into the valley and found
himself in a great island in mid-ocean, full of all fruits that
lips and tongue could desire. So he abode alone on the island,
drinking of its waters and eating of its fruits and of fish that
he caught, and days and years passed over him, till he had
sojourned there in his solitude seven years. One day, as he sat,
be hold, there came down on him from the air two Marids, each
carrying a man; and seeing him they said, "Who art thou, O
fellow, and of which of the tribes art thou?" Now they took him
for a Jinni, because his hair was grown long; and he replied,
saying, "I am not of the Jann," whereupon they questioned him,
and he told them all that had befallen him. They grieved for him
and one of the Ifrits said, "Abide thou here till we bear these
two lambs to our King, that he may break his fast on the one and
sup on the other, and after we will come back and carry thee to
thine own country." He thanked them and said, " Where be the
lambs?" Quoth they, "These two mortals are the lambs." And Gharib
said, "I take refuge with Allah the God of Abraham the Friend,
the Lord of all creatures, who hath power over everything! Then
the Marids flew away and Gharib abode awaiting them two days,
when one of them returned, bringing with him a suit of clothes
wherewith he clad him. Then he took him up and flew with him sky-
high out of sight of earth, till Gharib heard the angels
glorifying God in Heaven, and a flaming shaft issued from amongst
them and made for the Marid, who fled from it towards the earth.
The meteor pursued him, till he came within a spear's cast of the
ground, when Gharib leaped from his shoulders and the fiery shaft
overtook the Marid, who became a heap of ashes. As for Gharib, he
fell into the sea and sank two fathoms deep, after which he rose
to the surface and swam for two days and two nights, till his
strength failed him and he made certain of death. But, on the
third day as he was despairing he caught sight of an island steep
and mountainous; so he swam for it and landing, walked on inland,
where he rested a day and a Night, feeding on the growth of the
ground. Then he climbed to the mountain top, and, descending the
opposite slope, fared on two days till he came in sight of a
walled and bulwarked city, abounding in trees and rills. He
walked up to it; but, when he reached the gate, the warders
seized on him, and carried him to their Queen, whose name was Jan
Shah.[FN#72] Now she was five hundred years old, and every man
who entered the city, they brought to her and she made him sleep
with her, and when he had done his work, she slew him and so had
she slain many men. When she saw Gharib, he pleased her mightily;
so she asked him, "What be thy name and Faith and whence comest
thou?" and he answered, "My name is Gharib King of Irak, and I am
a Moslem." Said she, "Leave this Creed and enter mine and I will
marry thee and make thee King." But he looked at her with eyes of
ire and cried, "Perish thou and thy faith!" Cried she, "Dost thou
blaspheme my idol, which is of red carnelian, set with pearls and
gems?" And she called out to her men, saying, "Imprison him in
the house of the idol; haply it will soften his heart." So they
shut him up in the domed shrine and locking the doors upon him,
went their way.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
they took Gharib, they jailed him in the idol's domed shrine; and
locking the doors upon him, went their way. As soon as they were
gone, Gharib gazed at the idol, which was of red carnelian,  with
collars of pearls and precious stones about its neck, and
presently he went close to it and lifting it up, dashed it on the
ground and brake it in bits; after which he lay down and slept
till daybreak. When morning morrowed, the Queen took seat on her
throne and said, "O men, bring me the prisoner." So they opened
the temple doors and entering, found the idol broken in pieces,
whereupon they buffeted their faces till the blood ran from the
corners of their eyes. Then they made at Gharib to seize him; but
he smote one of them with his fist and slew him, and so did he
with another and yet another, till he had slain five-and-twenty
of them and the rest fled and went in to Queen Jan Shah,
shrieking loudly. Quoth she, "What is the matter?" and quoth
they, "The prisoner hath broken thine idol and slain thy men,"
and told her all that had passed. When she heard this, she cast
her crown to the ground and said, "There is no worth left in
idols!" Then she mounted amid a thousand fighting-men and rode to
the temple, where she found Gharib had gotten him a sword and
come forth and was slaying men and overthrowing warriors. When
she saw his prowess, her heart was drowned in the love of him and
she said to herself, "I have no need of the idol and care for
naught save this Gharib, that he may lie in my bosom the rest of
my life." Then she cried to her men, "Hold aloof from him and
leave him to himself!"; then, going up to him she muttered
certain magical words, whereupon his arm became benumbed, his
forearm relaxed and the sword dropped from his hand. So they
seized him and pinioned him, as he stood confounded, stupefied.
Then the Queen returned to her palace, and seating herself on her
seat of estate, bade her people withdraw and leave Gharib with
her. When they were alone, she said to him, " O dog of the Arabs,
wilt thou shiver my idol and slay my people?" He replied, "O
accursed woman, had he been a god he had defended himself!" Quoth
she, "Stroke me and I will forgive thee all thou hast done." But
he replied, saying, "I will do nought of this." And she said, "By
the virtue of my faith, I will torture thee with grievous
torture!" So she took water and conjuring over it, sprinkled it
upon him and he became an ape. And she used to feed and water and
keep him in a (loses, appointing one to care for him; and in this
plight he abode two years. Then she called him to her one day and
said to him, "Wilt thou hearken to me?" And he signed to her with
his head, "Yes." So she rejoiced and freed him from the
enchantment. Then she brought him food and he ate and toyed with
her and kissed her, so that she trusted in him. When it was night
she lay down and said to him, "Come, do thy business." He
replied, " 'Tis well;" and, mounting on her breast, seized her by
the neck and brake it, nor did he arise from her till life had
left her. Then, seeing an open cabinet, he went in and found
there a sword of damascened[FN#73] steel and a targe of Chinese
iron; so he armed himself cap-a-pie and waited till the day. As
soon as it was morning, he went forth and stood at the gate of
the palace. When the Emirs came and would have gone in to do
their service to the Queen, they found Gharib standing at the
gate, clad in complete war-gear; and he said to them, "O folk,
leave the service of idols and worship the All-wise King, Creator
of Night and Day, the Lord of men, the Quickener of dry bones,
for He made all things and hath dominion over all." When the
Kafirs heard this, they ran at him, but he fell on them like a
rending lion and charged through them again and again, slaying of
them much people;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Kafirs fell upon Gharib, he slew of them much people; but, when
the night came, they overcame him by dint of numbers and would
have taken him by strenuous effort, when behold, there descended
upon the Infidels a thousand Marids, under the command of Zalzal,
who plied them with the keen sabre and made them drink the cup of
destruction, whilst Allah hurried their souls to Hell-fire, till
but few were left of the people of Jan Shah to tell the tale and
the rest cried out, "Quarter! Quarter!" and believed in the
Requiting King, whom no one thing diverteth from other thing, the
Destroyer of the Jababirah[FN#74] and Exterminator of the
Akasirah, Lord of this world and of the next. Then Zalzal saluted
Gharib and gave him joy of his safety; and Gharib said to him,
"How knowest thou of my case?" and he replied, "O my lord, my
father kept me in prison two years, after sending thee to the
Valley of Fire; then he released me, and I abode with him another
year, till I was restored to favour with him, when I slew him and
his troops submitted to me. I ruled them for a year's space till,
one Night, I lay down to sleep, having thee in thought, and saw
thee in a dream, fighting against the people of Jan Shah;
wherefore I took these thousand Marids and came to thee." And
Gharib marvelled at this happy conjuncture. Then he seized upon
Jan Shah's treasures and those of the slain and appointed a ruler
over the city; after which the Marids took up Gharib and the
monies and he lay the same night in the Castle of Crystal. He
abode Zalzal's guest six months, when he desired to depart; so
Zalzal gave him rich presents and despatched three thousand
Marids, who brought the spoils of Karaj-city and added them to
those of Jan Shah. Then Zalzal loaded forty-thousand Marids with
the treasure and himself taking up Gharib, flew with his host
towards the city of Isbanir al-Madain where they arrived at
midnight. But as Gharib glanced around he saw the walls invested
on all sides by a conquering army,[FN#75] as it were the surging
sea, so he said to Zalzal, "O my brother, what is the cause of
this siege and whence came this army?" Then he alighted on the
terrace roof of his palace and cried out, saying, "Ho, Star o'
Morn! Ho, Mahdiyah!" Whereupon the twain started up from sleep in
amazement and said, "Who calleth us at this hour?" Quoth he, "
'Tis I, your lord, Gharib, the Marvellous One of the deeds
wondrous." When the Princesses heard their lord's voice, they
rejoiced and so did the women and the eunuchs. Then Gharib went
down to them and they threw themselves upon him and lullilooed
with cries of joy, so that all the palace rang again and the
Captains of the army awoke and said, "What is to do?" So they
made for the palace and asked the eunuchs, "Hath one of the
King's women given birth to a child?"; and they answered, "No;
but rejoice ye, for King Gharib hath returned to you." So they
rejoiced, and Gharib, after salams to the women came forth
amongst his comrades, who threw themselves upon him and kissed
his hands and feet, returning thanks to Almighty Allah and
praising Him. Then he sat down on his throne, with his officers
sitting about him, and questioned them of the beleaguering army.
They replied, "O King, these troops sat down before the city
three days ago and there are amongst them Jinns as well as men;
but we know not what they want, for we have had with them neither
battle nor speech." And presently they added, "The name of the
commander of the besieging army is Murad Shah and he hath with
him an hundred thousand horse and three thousand foot, besides
two hundred tribesmen of the Jinn." Now the manner of his coming
was wondrous.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the cause
of this army coming upon Isbanir city was wondrous. When the two
men, whom Sabur had charged to drown his daughter Fakhr Taj, let
her go, bidding her flee for her life, she went forth distracted,
unknowing whither to turn and saying, "Where is thine eye, O
Gharib, that thou mayst see my case and the misery I am in?"; and
wandered on from country to country, and valley to valley, till
she came to a Wady abounding in trees and streams, in whose midst
stood a strong-based castle and a lofty-builded as it were one of
the pavilions of Paradise. So she betook herself thither and
entering the fortalice, found it hung and carpeted with stuffs of
silk and great plenty of gold and silver vessels; and therein
were an hundred beautiful damsels. When the maidens saw Fakhr
Taj, they came up to her and saluted her, deeming her of the
virgins of the Jinn, and asked her of her case. Quoth she, "I am
daughter to the Persians' King;" and told them all that had
befallen her; which when they heard, they wept over her and
condoled with her and comforted her, saying, "Be of good cheer
and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for here shalt thou have meat
and drink and raiment, and we all are thy handmaids." She called
down blessings on them and they brought her food, of which she
ate till she was satisfied. Then quoth she to them, "Who is the
owner of this palace and lord over you girls?" and quoth they,
"King Salsal, son of Dal, is our master; he passeth a night here
once in every month and fareth in the morning to rule over the
tribes of the Jann." So Fakhr Taj took up her abode with them and
after five days she gave birth to a male child, as he were the
moon. They cut his navel cord and kohl'd his eyes then they named
him Murad Shah, and he grew up in his mother's lap. After a while
came King Salsal, riding on a paper white elephant, as he were a
tower plastered with lime and attended by the troops of the Jinn.
He entered the palace, where the hundred damsels met him and
kissed ground before him, and amongst them Fakhr Taj. When the
King saw her, he looked at her and said to the others, "Who is
yonder damsel?"; and they replied, "She is the daughter of Sabur,
King of the Persians and Turks and Daylamites." Quoth he, "Who
brought her hither?" So they repeated to him her story; whereat
he was moved to pity for her and said to her, "Grieve not, but
take patience till thy son be grown a man, when I will go to the
land of the Ajamis and strike off thy father's head from between
his shoulders and seat thy son on the throne in his stead." So
she rose and kissed his hands and blessed him. Then she abode in
the castle and her son grew up and was reared with the children
of the King. They used to ride forth together a-hunting and
birding and he became skilled in the chase of wild beasts and
ravening lions and ate of their flesh, till his heart became
harder than the rock. When he reached the age of fifteen, his
spirit waxed big in him and he said to Fakhr Taj, "O my mamma,
who is my papa?" She replied, "O my son, Gharib, King of Irak, is
thy father and I am the King's daughter, of the Persians," and
she told him her story. Quoth he, "Did my grandfather indeed give
orders to slay thee and my father Gharib?"; and quoth she, "Yes."
Whereupon he, "By the claim thou hast on me for rearing me, I
will assuredly go to thy father's city and cut off his head and
bring it into thy pre sence!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Murad
Shah son of Fakhr Taj thus bespake his mother, she rejoiced in
his speech. Now he used to go a-riding with two hundred Marids
till he grew to man's estate, when he and they fell to making
raids and cutting off the roads and they pushed their razzias
farther till one day he attacked the city of Shiraz and took it.
Then he proceeded to the palace and cut off the King's head, as
he sat on his throne, and slew many of his troops, whereupon the
rest cried "Quarter! Quarter!" and kissed his stirrups. Finding
that they numbered ten thousand horse, he led them to Balkh,
where he slew the King of the city and put his men to the rout
and made himself master of the riches of the place. Thence he
passed to Nurayn,[FN#76] at the head of an army of thirty-
thousand horse, and the Lord of Nurayn came out to him, with
treasure and tribute, and did him homage. Then he went on to
Samarcand of the Persians and took the city, and after that to
Akhlat[FN#77] and took that town also; nor was there any city he
came to but he captured it. Thus Murad Shah became the head of a
mighty host, and all the booty he made and spoils in the sundry
cities he divided among his soldiery, who loved him for his
velour and munificence. At last he came to Isbanir al-Madain and
sat down before it, saying, "Let us wait till the rest of my army
come up, when I will seize on my grandfather and solace my
mother's heart by smiting his neck in her presence." So he sent
for her, and by reason of this, there was no battle for three
days, when Gharib and Zalzal arrived with the forty-thousand
Marids, laden with treasure and presents. They asked concerning
the besiegers, but none could enlighten them beyond saying that
the host had been there encamped for three days without a fight
taking place. Presently came Fakhr Taj, and her son Murad Shah
embraced her saying, "Sit in thy tent till I bring thy father to
thee." And she sought succour for him of the Lord of the Worlds,
the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earths. Next morning,
as soon as it was day, Murad Shah mounted and rode forth, with
the two hundred Marids on his right hand and the Kings of men on
his left, whilst the kettle-drums beat to battle. When Gharib
heard this, he also took to horse and, calling his people to the
combat, rode out, with the jinn on his dexter hand and the men on
his sinistral. Then came forth Murad Shah, armed cap-a-pie and
crave his charger right and left, crying, "O folk, let none come
forth to me but your King. If he conquer me, he shall be lord of
both armies, and if I conquer him, I will slay him, as I have
slain others." When Gharib heard his speech, he said, "Avaunt, O
dog of the Arabs!" And they charged at each other and lunged with
lances, till they broke, then hewed at each other with swords,
till the blades were notched; nor did they cease to advance and
retire and wheel and career, till the day was half spent and
their horses fell down under them, when they dismounted and
gripped each other. Then Murad Shah seizing Gharib lifted him up
and strove to dash him to the ground; but Gharib caught him by
the ears and pulled him with his might, till it seemed to the
youth as if the heavens were. falling on the earth[FN#78] and he
cried out, with his heart in his mouth, saying, "I yield myself
to thy mercy, O Knight of the Age!" So Gharib bound him,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Gharib caught Murad Shah by the ears and well nigh tore them off
he cried, "I yield myself to thy mercy, O Knight of the Age!" So
Gharib bound him, and the Marids his comrades would have charged
and rescued him, but Gharib fell on them with a thousand Marids
and was about to smite them down, when they cried out "Quarter!
Quarter!" and threw away their arms. Then Gharib returned to his
Shahmiyanah which was of green silk, embroidered with red gold
and set with pearls and gems; and, seating himself on his throne,
called for Murad Shah. So they brought him, shuffling in his
manacles and shackles. When the prisoner saw him, he hung down
his head for shame; and Gharib said to him, "O dog of the Arabs,
who art thou that thou shouldst ride forth and measure thyself
against kings?" Replied Murad Shah, "O my lord, reproach me not,
for indeed I have excuse." Quoth Gharib, "What manner of excuse
hast thou?"; And quoth he, "Know, O my lord, that I came out to
avenge my mother and my father on Sabur, King of the Persians;
for he would have slain them; but my mother escaped and I know
not whether he killed my father or not." When Gharib heard these
words, he replied, "By Allah, thou art indeed excusable! But who
were thy father and mother and what are their names?" Murad Shah
said, "My sire was Gharib, King of Al-Irak, and my mother Fakhr
Taj, daughter of King Sabur of Persia." When Gharib heard this,
he gave a great cry and fell down fainting. They sprinkled rose-
water on him, till he came to himself, when he said to Murad
Shah, "Art thou indeed Gharib's son by Fakhr Taj?"; and he
replied, "Yes." Cried Gharib, "Thou art a champion, the son of a
champion. Loose my child!" And Sahim and Kaylajan went up to
Murad Shah and set him free. Then Gharib embraced his son and,
seating him beside himself, said to him, "Where is thy mother?"
"She is with me in my tent," answered Murad Shah; and Gharib
said, "Bring her to me." So Murad Shah mounted and repaired to
his camp, where his comrades met him, rejoicing in his safety,
and asked him of his case; but he answered, "This is no time for
questions." Then he went in to his mother and told her what had
passed whereat she was gladdened with exceeding gladness: so he
carried her to Gharib, and they two embraced and rejoiced in each
other. Then Fakhr Taj and Murad Shah islamised and expounded The
Faith to their troops, who all made profession with heart and
tongue. After this, Gharib sent for Sabur and his son Ward Shah,
and upbraided them for their evil dealing and expounded Al-Islam
to them; but they refused to profess wherefore he crucified them
on the gate of the city and the people decorated the town and
held high festival. Then Gharib crowned Murad Shah with the crown
of the Chosroes and made him King of the Persians and Turks and
Medes; moreover, he made his uncle Al-Damigh, King over Al-Irak,
and all the peoples and lands submitted themselves to Gharib.
Then he abode in his kingship, doing justice among his lieges,
wherefore all the people loved him, and he and his wives and
comrades ceased not from all solace of life, till there came to
them the Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer of Societies, and
extolled be the perfection of Him whose glory endureth for ever
and aye and whose boons embrace all His creatures! This is every
thing that hath come down to us of the history of Gharib and
Ajib. And Abdullah bin Ma'amar al Kaysi hath thus related the
tale of 




                    OTBAH[FN#79] AND RAYYA.



I went one year on the pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah, and
when I had accomplished my pilgrimage, I turned back for
visitation of the tomb of the Prophet, whom Allah bless and keep!
One night, as I sat in the garden,[FN#80] between the tomb and
the pulpit, I heard a low moaning in a soft voice; so I listened
to it and it said,

"Have the doves that moan in the lotus-tree * Woke grief in thy
     heart and bred misery?
Or doth memory of maiden in beauty deckt * Cause this doubt in
     thee, this despondency?
O night, thou art longsome for love-sick sprite * Complaining of
     Love and its ecstacy:
Thou makest him wakeful, who burns with fire * Of a love, like
     the live coal's ardency.
The moon is witness my heart is held * By a moonlight brow of the
     brightest blee:
I reckt not to see me by Love ensnared * Till ensnared before I
     could reck or see."


Then the voice ceased and not knowing whence it came to me I
abode perplexed; but lo! it again took up its lament and recited,

"Came Rayya's phantom to grieve thy sight * In the thickest gloom
     of the black-haired Night!
And hath love of slumber deprived those eyes * And the
     phantom-vision vexed thy sprite?
I cried to the Night, whose glooms were like * Seas that surge
     and billow with might, with might:
'O Night, thou art longsome to lover who * Hath no aid nor help
     save the morning light!'
She replied, 'Complain not that I am long: * 'Tis love is the
     cause of thy longsome plight!'"

Now, at the first of the couplets, I sprang up and made for the
quarter whence the sound came, nor had the voice ended repeating
them, ere I was with the speaker and saw a youth of the utmost
beauty, the hair of whose side face had not sprouted and in whose
cheeks tears had worn twin trenches.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Abdullah bin Ma'amar al-Kaysi thus continued:--So I sprang up and
made for the quarter whence the sound came, nor had the voice
ended repeating the verses, ere I was with the speaker and saw a
youth on whose side face the hair had not sprouted and in whose
cheeks tears had worn twin trenches. Quoth I to him, "Fair befal
thee for a youth!"; and quoth he, "And thee also! Who art thou?"
I replied, "Abdullah bin Ma'amar al-Kaysi;" and he said, "Dost
thou want aught?" I rejoined, "I was sitting in the garden and
naught hath troubled me this night but thy voice. With my life
would I ransom thee! What aileth thee?" He said, "Sit thee down."
So I sat down and he continued, "I am Otbah bin al-Hubab bin
al-Mundhir bin al-Jamuh the Ansari.[FN#81] I went out in the
morning to the Mosque Al-Ahzab[FN#82] and occupied myself there
awhile with prayer-bows and prostrations, after which I withdrew
apart, to worship privily. But lo! up came women, as they were
moons, walking with a swaying gait, and surrounding a damsel of
passing loveliness, perfect in beauty and grace, who stopped
before me and said, 'O Otbah, what sayst thou of union with one
who seeketh union with thee?' Then she left me and went away; and
since that time I have had no tidings of her nor come upon any
trace of her; and behold, I am distracted and do naught but
remove from place to place." Then he cried out and fell to the
ground fainting. When he came to himself, it was as if the damask
of his cheeks were dyed with safflower,[FN#83] and he recited
these couplets,

"I see you with my heart from far countrie * Would Heaven you
     also me from far could see
My heart and eyes for you are sorrowing; * My soul with you
     abides and you with me.
I take no joy in life when you're unseen * Or Heaven or Garden of
     Eternity."

Said I, "O Otbah, O son of my uncle, repent to thy Lord and crave
pardon for thy sin; for before thee is the terror of standing up
to Judgment." He replied, "Far be it from me so to do. I shall
never leave to love till the two mimosa-gatherers return."[FN#84]
I abode with him till daybreak, when I said to him, "Come let us
go to the Mosque Al-Ahzab." So we went thither and sat there,
till we had prayed the midday prayers, when lo! up came the
women; but the damsel was not among them. Quoth they to him, "O
Otbah, what thinkest thou of her who seeketh union with thee?" He
said, "And what of her?"; and they replied, "Her father hath
taken her and departed to Al-Samawah."[FN#85] I asked them the
name of the damsel and they said, "She is called Rayya, daughter
of Al-Ghitrif al-Sulami."[FN#86] Whereupon Otbah raised his head
and recited these verses,

"My friends, Rayya hath mounted soon as morning shone, * And to
Samawah's wilds her caravan is gone.
My friends, I've wept till I can weep no more, Oh, say, * Hath
any one a tear that I can take on loan."

Then said I to him, "O Otbah, I have brought with me great
wealth, wherewith I desire to succour generous men; and by Allah,
I will lavish it before thee,[FN#87] so thou mayst attain thy
desire and more than thy desire! Come with me to the assembly of
the Ansaris." So we rose and went, till we entered their
assembly, when I salam'd to them and they returned my greeting
civilly. Then quoth I, "O assembly, what say ye of Otbah and his
father?": and they replied, "They are of the princes of the
Arabs." I continued, "Know that he is smitten with the calamity
of love and I desire your furtherance to Al-Samawah." And they
said, "To hear is to obey." So they mounted with us, the whole
party, and we rode till we drew near the place of the Banu
Sulaym. Now when Ghitrif heard of our being near, he hastened
forth to meet us, saying, "Long life to you, O nobles!"; whereto
we replied, "And to thee also! Behold we are thy guests." Quoth
he, "Ye have lighted down at a most hospitable abode and ample;"
and alighting he cried out, "Ho, all ye slaves, come down!" So
they came down and spread skin-rugs and cushions and slaughtered
sheep and cattle; but we said, "We will not taste of thy food,
till thou have accomplished our need." He asked, "And what is
your need?"; and we answered, "We demand thy noble daughter in
marriage for Otbah bin Hubab bin Mundhir the illustrious and well
born." "O my brethren," said he, "she whom you demand is owner of
herself, and I will go in to her and tell her." So he rose in
wrath[FN#88] and went in to Rayya, who said to him, "O my papa,
why do I see thee show anger?" And he replied, saying, "Certain
of the Ansaris have come upon me to demand thy hand of me in
marriage." Quoth she, "They are noble chiefs; the Prophet, on
whom be the choicest blessings and peace, intercedeth for them
with Allah. For whom among them do they ask me?" Quoth he, "For a
youth known as Otbah bin al-Hubab;" and she said, "I have heard
of Otbah that he performeth what he promised and findeth what he
seeketh." Ghitrif cried, "I swear that I will never marry thee to
him; no, never, for there hath been reported to me somewhat of
thy converse with him." Said she, "What was that? But in any
case, I swear that the Ansaris shall not be uncivilly rejected;
wherefore do thou offer them a fair excuse." "How so?" "Make the
dowry heavy to them and they will desist." "Thou sayst well,"
said he, and going out in haste, told the Ansaris, "The damsel of
the tribe[FN#89] consenteth; but she requireth a dowry worthy
herself. Who engageth for this?" "I," answered I. Then said he,
"I require for her a thousand bracelets of red gold and five
thousand dirhams of the coinage of Hajar[FN#90] and a hundred
pieces of woollen cloth and striped stuffs[FN#91] of Al-Yaman and
five bladders of ambergris." Said I, "Thou shalt have that much;
dost thou consent?"; and he said, "I do consent." So I despatched
to Al-Medinah the Illumined[FN#92] a party of the Ansaris, who
brought all for which I had become surety; whereupon they
slaughtered sheep and cattle and the folk assembled to eat of the
food. We abode thus forty days when Ghitrif said to us, "Take
your bride." So we sat her in a dromedary-litter and her father
equipped her with thirty camel-loads of things of price; after
which we farewelled him and journeyed till we came within a day's
journey of Al-Medinah the Illumined, when there fell upon us
horsemen, with intent to plunder, and methinks they were of the
Banu Sulaym, Otbah drove at them and slew of them much people,
but fell back, wounded by a lance-thrust, and presently dropped
to the earth. Then there came to us succour of the country
people, who drove away the highwaymen; but Otbah's days were
ended. So we said, "Alas for Otbah, oh!;" and the damsel hearing
it cast herself down from the camel and throwing herself upon
him, cried out grievously and repeated these couplets,

"Patient I seemed, yet Patience shown by me * Was but
     self-guiling till thy sight I see:
Had my soul done as due my life had gone, * Had fled before
     mankind forestalling thee:
Then, after me and thee none shall to friend * Be just, nor any
     soul with soul agree."

Then she sobbed a single sob and gave up the ghost. We dug one
grave for them and laid them in the earth, and I returned to the
dwellings of my people, where I abode seven years. Then I betook
me again to Al-Hijaz and entering Al-Medinah the Illumined for
pious visitation said in my mind, "By Allah, I will go again to
Otbah's tomb!" So I repaired thither, and, behold, over the grave
was a tall tree, on which hung fillets of red and green and
yellow stuffs.[FN#93] So I asked the people of the place, "How be
this tree called?"; and they answered, "The tree of the Bride and
the Bridegroom." I abode by the tomb a day and a night, then went
my way; and this is all I know of Otbah. Almighty Allah have
mercy upon him! And they also tell this tale of




                HIND, DAUGHTER OF AL-NU'MAN AND
                       AL-HAJJAJ.[FN#94]



It is related that Hind, daughter of Al-Nu'man, was the fairest
woman of her day, and her beauty and loveliness were reported to
Al-Hajjaj, who sought her in marriage and lavished much treasure
on her. So he took her to wife, engaging to give her a dowry of
two hundred thousand dirhams in case of divorce, and when he went
into her, he abode with her a long time. One day after this, he
went in to her and found her looking at her face in the mirror
and saying,

"Hind is an Arab filly purest bred, * Which hath been covered by
     a mongrel mule;
An colt of horse she throw by Allah! well; * If mule, it but
     results from mulish rule."[FN#95]

When Al-Hajjaj heard this, he turned back and went his way,
unseen of Hind; and, being minded to put her away, he sent
Abdullah bin Tahir to her, to divorce her. So Abdullah went in to
her and said to her, "Al-Hajjaj Abu Mohammed saith to thee: 'Here
be the two hundred thousand dirhams of thy contingent dowry he
oweth thee'; and he hath deputed me to divorce thee." Replied
she, "O Ibn Tahir, I gladly agree to this; for know that I never
for one day took pleasure in him; so, if we separate, by Allah, I
shall never regret him, and these two hundred thousand dirhams I
give to thee as a reward for the glad tidings thou bringest me of
my release from yonder dog of the Thakafites."[FN#96] After this,
the Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, heard of
her beauty and loveliness, her stature and symmetry, her sweet
speech and the amorous grace of her glances and sent to her, to
ask her in marriage;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Prince of True Believers, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, hearing of the
lady's beauty and loveliness, sent to ask her in marriage; and
she wrote him in reply a letter, in which, after the
glorification of Allah and benediction of His Prophet, she said,
"But afterwards. Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that the dog
hath lapped in the vase." When the Caliph read her answer, he
laughed and wrote to her, citing his saying (whom may Allah bless
and keep!) "If a dog lap in the vessel of one of you, let him
wash seven times, once thereof with earth," and adding, "Wash the
affront from the place of use."[FN#97] With this she could not
gainsay him; so she replied to him, saying (after praise and
blessing), "O Commander of the Faithful I will not consent save
on one condition, and if thou ask me what it is, I reply that
Al-Hajjaj lead my camel to the town where thou tarriest barefoot
and clad as he is."[FN#98] When the Caliph read her letter, he
laughed long and loudly and sent to Al-Hajjaj, bidding him to do
as she wished. He dared not disobey the order, so he submitted to
the Caliph's commandment and sent to Hind, telling her to make
ready for the journey. So she made ready and mounted her litter,
when Al-Hajjaj with his suite came up to Hind's door and as she
mounted and her damsels and eunuchs rode around her, he
dismounted and took the halter of her camel and led it along,
barefooted, whilst she and her damsels and tirewomen laughed and
jeered at him and made mock of him. Then she said to her
tirewoman, "Draw back the curtain of the litter;" and she drew
back the curtain, till Hind was face to face with Al-Hajjaj,
whereupon she laughed at him and he improvised this couplet,

"Though now thou jeer, O Hind, how many a night * I've left thee
     wakeful sighing for the light."

And she answered him with these two,

"We reck not, an our life escape from bane, * For waste of wealth
     and gear that went in vain:
Money may be regained and rank re-won * When one is cured of
     malady and pain."

And she ceased not to laugh at him and make sport of him, till
they drew near the city of the Caliph, when she threw down a
dinar with her own hand and said to Al-Hajjaj, "O camel-driver, I
have dropped a dirham; look for it and give it to me." So he
looked and seeing naught but the dinar, said, "This is a dinar."
She replied, "Nay, 'tis a dirham." But he said, "This is a
dinar." Then quoth she, "Praise be Allah who hath given us in
exchange for a paltry dirham a dinar! Give it us." And Al-Hajjaj
was abashed at this. Then he carried her to the palace of the
Commander of the Faithful, and she went in to him and became his
favourite.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that men also
tell a tale anent




                KHUZAYMAH BIN BISHR AND IKRIMAH
                       AL-FAYYAZ.[FN#99]



There lived once, in the days of the Caliph Sulayman bin Abd
al-Malik[FN#100] a man of the Banu Asad, by name Khuzaymah bin
Bishr, who was famed for bounty and abundant wealth and
excellence and righteous dealing with his brethren. He continued
thus till times grew strait with him and he became in need of the
aid of those Moslem brethren on whom he had lavished favour and
kindness. So they succoured him a while and then grew weary of
him, which when he saw, he went in to his wife who was the
daughter of his father's brother, and said to her, "O my cousin,
I find a change in my brethren; wherefore I am resolved to keep
my house till death come to me." So he shut his door and abode in
his home, living on that which he had by him, till it was spent
and he knew not what to do. Now Ikrimah al-Raba'i, surnamed
Al-Fayyaz, governor of Mesopotamia,[FN#101] had known him, and
one day, as he sat in his Audience-chamber, mention was made of
Khuzaymah, whereupon quoth Ikrimah, "How is it with him?" And
quoth they, "He is in a plight past telling, and hath shut his
door and keepeth the house." Ikrimah rejoined, "This cometh but
of his excessive generosity: but how is it that Khuzaymah bin
Bishr findeth nor comforter nor requiter?" And they replied, "He
hath found naught of this." So when it was night, Ikrimah took
four thousand dinars and laid them in one purse; then, bidding
saddle his beast, he mounted and rode privily to Khuzaymah's
house, attended only by one of his pages, carrying the money.
When he came to the door, he alighted and taking the purse from
the page made him withdraw afar off; after which he went up to
the door and knocked. Khuzaymah came out to him, and he gave him
the purse, saying, "Better thy case herewith." He took it and
finding it heavy put it from his hand and laying hold of the
bridle of Ikrimah's horse, asked, "Who art thou? My soul be thy
ransom!" Answered Ikrimah, "O man I come not to thee at a time
like this desiring that thou shouldst know me." Khuzaymah
rejoined, "I will not let thee go till thou make thyself known to
me," whereupon Ikrimah said "I am hight Jabir Atharat
al-Kiram."[FN#102] Quoth Khuzaymah, "Tell me more." But Ikrimah
cried, "No," and fared forth, whilst Khuzaymah went in to his
cousin and said to her, "Rejoice for Allah hath sent us speedy
relief and wealth; if these be but dirhams, yet are they many.
Arise and light the lamp." She said, "I have not wherewithal to
light it." So he spent the night handling the coins and felt by
their roughness that they were dinars, but could not credit it.
Meanwhile Ikrimah returned to his own house and found that his
wife had missed him and asked for him, and when they told her of
his riding forth, she misdoubted of him, and said to him, "Verily
the Wali of Al-Jazirah rideth not abroad after such an hour of
the night, unattended and secretly, save to a wife or a
mistress." He answered, "Allah knoweth that I went not forth to
either of these." "Tell me then wherefore thou wentest forth?" "I
went not forth at this hour save that none should know it." "I
must needs be told." "Wilt thou keep the matter secret, if I tell
thee?" "Yes!" So he told her the state of the case, adding, "Wilt
thou have me swear to thee?" Answered she, "No, no, my heart is
set at ease and trusteth in that which thou hast told me." As for
Khuzaymah, soon as it was day he made his peace with his
creditors and set his affairs in order; after which he got him
ready and set out for the Court of Sulayman bin Abd al-Malik, who
was then sojourning in Palestine.[FN#103] When he came to the
royal gate, he sought admission of the chamberlain, who went in
and told the Caliph of his presence. Now he was renowned for his
beneficence and Sulayman knew of him; so he bade admit him. When
he entered, he saluted the Caliph after the usual fashion of
saluting[FN#104] and the King asked, "O Khuzaymah, what hath kept
thee so long from us?" Answered he, "Evil case," and quoth the
Caliph, "What hindered thee from having recourse to us?" Quoth
he, "My infirmity, O Commander of the Faithful!" "And why," said
Sulayman, "comest thou to us now?" Khuzaymah replied, "Know, O
Commander of the Faithful, that I was sitting one night late in
my house, when a man knocked at the door and did thus and thus;"
and he went on to tell him of all that had passed between Ikrimah
and himself from first to last. Sulayman asked, "Knowest thou the
man?" and Khuzaymah answered, "No, O Commander of the Faithful,
he was reserved[FN#105] and would say naught save, 'I am hight
Jabir Atharat al-Kiram.'" When Sulayman heard this, his heart
burned within him for anxiety to discover the man, and he said,
"If we knew him, truly we would requite him for his generosity."
Then he bound for Khuzaymah a banner[FN#106] and made him
Governor of Mesopotamia, in the stead of Ikrimah Al-Fayyaz; and
he set out for Al-Jazirah. When he drew near the city, Ikrimah
and the people of the place came forth to meet him and they
saluted each other and went on into the town, where Khuzaymah
took up his lodging in the Government-house and bade take
security for Ikrimah and that he should be called to
account.[FN#107] So an account was taken against him and he was
found to be in default for much money; whereupon Khuzaymah
required of him payment, but he said, "I have no means of paying
aught." Quoth Khuzaymah, "It must be paid;" and quoth Ikrimah, "I
have it not; do what thou hast to do." So Khuzaymah ordered him
to gaol.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khuzaymah,
having ordered the imprisonment of Ikrimah Al-Fayyaz, sent to him
again to demand payment of the debt; but he replied, "I am not of
those who preserve their wealth at the expense of their honour;
do what thou wilt." Then Khuzaymah bade load him with irons and
kept him in prison a month or more, till confinement began to
tell upon him and he became wasted. After this, tidings of his
plight travelled to the daughter of his uncle who was troubled
with sore concern thereat and, sending for a freedwoman of hers,
a woman of abundant judgment, and experience, said to her, "Go
forthwith to the Emir Khuzaymah's gate and say, 'I have a counsel
for the Emir.' If they ask what it is, add, 'I will not tell it
save to himself'; and when thou enterest to him, beg to see him
in private and when private ask him, 'What be this deed thou hast
done? Hath Jabir Atharat al-Kiram deserved of thee no better
reward than to be cast into strait prison and hard bond of
irons?'" The woman did as she was bid, and when Khuzaymah heard
her words, he cried out at the top of his voice, saying, "Alas,
the baseness of it! Was it indeed he?" And she answered, "Yes."
Then he bade saddle his beast forthwith and, summoning the
honourable men of the city, repaired with them to the prison and
opening the door, went in with them to Ikrimah, whom they found
sitting in evil case, worn out and wasted with blows and misery.
When he looked at Khuzaymah, he was abashed and hung his head;
but the other bent down to him and kissed his face; whereupon he
raised his head and asked, "What maketh thee do this?" Answered
Khuzaymah, "The generosity of thy dealing and the vileness of my
requital." And Ikrimah said, "Allah pardon us and thee!" Then
Khuzaymah commanded the jailor to strike off Ikrimah's fetters
and clap them on his own feet; but Ikrimah said, "What is this
thou wilt do?" Quoth the other, "I have a mind to suffer what
thou hast suffered." Quoth Ikrimah, "I conjure thee by Allah, do
not so!" Then they went out together and returned to Khuzaymah's
house, where Ikrimah would have farewelled him and wended his
way; but he forbade him and Ikrimah said, "What is thy will of
me?" Replied Khuzaymah, "I wish to change thy case, for my shame
before the daughter of thine uncle is yet greater than my shame
before thee." So he bade clear the bath and entering with
Ikrimah, served him there in person and when they went forth be
bestowed on him a splendid robe of honour and mounted him and
gave him much money. Then he carried him to his house and asked
his leave to make his excuses to his wife and obtained her
pardon. After this he besought him to accompany him to the Caliph
who was then abiding at Ramlah[FN#108] and he agreed. So they
journeyed thither, and when they reached the royal quarters the
chamberlain went in and acquainted the Caliph Sulayman bin Abd
al-Malik with Khuzaymah's arrival, whereat he was troubled and
said, "What! is the Governor of Mesopotamia come without our
command? This can be only on some grave occasion." Then he bade
admit him and said, before saluting him, "What is behind thee, O
Khuzaymah?" Replied he, "Good, O Commander of the Faithful."
Asked Sulayman, "What bringeth thee?"; and he answered, saying,
"I have discovered Jabir Atharat al-Kiram and thought to gladden
thee with him, knowing thine excessive desire to know him and thy
longing to see him." "Who is he?" quoth the Caliph and quoth
Khuzaymah, "He is Ikrimah Al-Fayyaz." So Sulayman called for
Ikrimah, who approached and saluted him as Caliph; and the King
welcomed him and making him draw near his sitting-place, said to
him, "O Ikrimah, thy good deed to him hath brought thee naught
but evil," adding, "Now write down in a note thy needs each and
every, and that which thou desirest." He did so and the Caliph
commanded to do all that he required and that forthwith. Moreover
he gave him ten thousand dinars more than he asked for and twenty
chests of clothes over and above that he sought, and calling for
a spear, bound him a banner and made him Governor over Armenia
and Azarbijan[FN#109] and Mesopotamia, saying, "Khuzaymah's case
is in thy hands, an thou wilt, continue him in his office, and if
thou wilt, degrade him." And Ikrimah said, "Nay, but I restore
him to his office, O Commander of the Faithful." Then they went
out from him and ceased not to be Governors under Sulayman bin
Abd al-Malik all the days of his Caliphate. And they also tell a
tale of




           YUNUS THE SCRIBE AND THE CALIPH WALID BIN
                             SAHL.


There lived in the reign of the Caliph Hisham, [FN#110] son of
Abd al-Malik, a man called Yunus the Scribe well-known to the
general, and he set out one day on a journey to Damascus, having
with him a slave-girl of surpassing beauty and loveliness, whom
he had taught all that was needful to her and whose price was an
hundred thousand dirhams. When they drew near to Damascus, the
caravan halted by the side of a lake and Yunus went down to a
quiet place with his damsel and took out some victual he had with
him and a le