ather bottle of wine. As he sat at meat, behold, came
up a young man of goodly favour and dignified presence, mounted
on a sorrel horse and followed by two eunuchs, and said to him,
"Wilt thou accept me to guest?" "Yes," replied Yunus. So the
stranger alighted and said, "Give me to drink of thy wine." Yunus
gave him to drink and he said, "If it please thee, sing us a
song." So Yunus sang this couplet extempore,

"She joineth charms were never seen conjoined in mortal dress: *
     And for her love she makes me love my tears and
     wakefulness."

At which the stranger rejoiced with exceeding joy and Yunus gave
him to drink again and again, till the wine got the better of him
and he said, "Bid thy slave-girl sing." So she improvised this
couplet,

"A houri, by whose charms my heart is moved to sore distress: *
     Nor wand of tree nor sun nor moon her rivals I confess!"

The stranger was overjoyed with this and they sat drinking till
nightfall, when they prayed the evening-prayer and the youth said
to Yunus, "What bringeth thee to our city?" He replied, "Quest of
wherewithal to pay my debts and better my case." Quoth the other,
"Wilt thou sell me this slave-girl for thirty thousand dirhams?"
Whereto quoth Yunus, "I must have more than that." He asked,
"Will forty thousand content thee?"; but Yunus answered, "That
would only settle my debts, and I should remain empty-handed."
Rejoined the stranger, "We will take her of thee of fifty
thousand dirhams[FN#111] and give thee a suit of clothes to boot
and the expenses of thy journey and make thee a sharer in my
condition as long as thou livest." Cried Yunus, "I sell her to
thee on these terms." Then said the young man, "Wilt thou trust
me to bring thee the money to-morrow and let me take her with me,
or shall she abide with thee till I pay down her price?" Whereto
wine and shame and awe of the stranger led Yunus to reply, "I
will trust thee; take her and Allah bless thee in her!" Whereupon
the visitor bade one of his pages sit her before him on his
beast, and mounting his own horse, farewelled of Yunus and rode
away out of sight. Hardly had he left him, when the seller
bethought himself and knew that he had erred in selling her and
said to himself, "What have I done? I have delivered my slave-
girl to a man with whom I am unacquainted, neither know I who he
is; and grant that I were acquainted with him, how am I to get at
him?" So he abode in thought till the morning, when he prayed the
dawn-prayers and his companions entered Damascus, whilst he sat,
perplexed and wotting not what to do, till the sun scorched him
and it irked him to abide there. He thought to enter the city,
but said in his mind, "If I enter Damascus, I cannot be sure but
that the messenger will come and find me not, in which case I
shall have sinned against myself a second sin." Accordingly he
sat down in the shade of a wall that was there, and towards the
wane of day, up came one of the eunuchs whom he had seen with the
young man, whereat great joy possessed Yunus and he said in
himself, "I know not that aught hath ever given me more delight
than the sight of this castrato." When the eunuch reached him, he
said to him, "O my lord, we have kept thee long waiting"; but
Yunus disclosed nothing to him of the torments of anxiety he had
suffered. Then quoth the castrato, "Knowest thou the man who
bought the girl of thee?"; and quoth Yunus, "No," to which the
other rejoined, "'Twas Walid bin Sahl,[FN#112] the Heir
Apparent." And Yunus was silent. Then said the eunuch, "Ride,"
and made him mount a horse he had with him and they rode till
they came to a mansion, where they dismounted and entered. Here
Yunus found the damsel, who sprang up at his sight and saluted
him. He asked her how she had fared with him who had bought her
and she answered, "He lodged me in this apartment and ordered me
all I needed." Then he sat with her awhile, till suddenly one of
the servants of the houseowner came in and bade him rise and
follow him. So he followed the man into the presence of his
master and found him yesternight's guest, whom he saw seated on
his couch and who said to him, "Who art thou?" "I am Yunus the
Scribe." "Welcome to thee, O Yunus! by Allah, I have long wished
to look on thee; for I have heard of thy report. How didst thou
pass the night?" "Well, may Almighty Allah advance thee!"
"Peradventure thou repentedest thee of that thou didst yesterday
and saidst to thyself: I have delivered my slave-girl to a man
with who I am not acquainted, neither know I his name nor whence
he cometh?" "Allah forbid, O Emir, that I should repent over her!
Had I made gift of her to the Prince, she were the least of the
gifts that are given unto him,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Yunus the Scribe said to Walid, "Allah forbid I should repent
over her! Had I made gift of her to the Prince, she were the
least of gifts that are given to him, nor indeed is she worthy of
his rank," Walid rejoined, "By Allah, but I repented me of having
carried her away from thee and said to myself, 'This man is a
stranger and knoweth me not, and I have taken him by surprise and
acted inconsiderately by him, in my haste to take the damsel!'
Dost thou recall what passed between us?" Quoth Yunus, "Yes!" and
quoth Walid, "Dost thou sell this damsel to me for fifty thousand
dirhams?" And Yunus said, "I do." Then the Prince called to one
of his servants to bring him fifty thousand dirhams and a
thousand and five hundred dinars to boot, and gave them all to
Yunus, saying, "Take the slave's price: the thousand dinars are
for thy fair opinion of us and the five hundred are for thy
viaticum and for what present thou shalt buy for thy people. Art
thou content?" "I am content," answered Yunus and kissed his
hands, saying, "By Allah, thou hast filled my eyes and my hands
and my heart!" Quoth Walid, "By Allah, I have as yet had no
privacy of her nor have I taken my fill of her singing. Bring her
to me!" So she came and he bade her sit, then said to her,
"Sing." And she sang these verses,

"O thou who dost comprise all Beauty's boons! * O sweet of
     nature, fain of coquetry!
In Turks and Arabs many beauties dwell; * But, O my fawn, in none
     thy charms I see.
Turn to thy lover, O my fair, and keep * Thy word, though but in
     visioned phantasy:
Shame and disgrace are lawful for thy sake * And wakeful nights
     full fill with joy and glee:
I'm not the first for thee who fared distraught; * Slain by thy
     love how many a many be!
I am content with thee for worldly share * Dearer than life and
     good art thou to me!"

When he heard this, he was delighted exceedingly and praised
Yunus for his excellent teaching of her and her fair education.
Then he bade his servants bring him a roadster with saddle and
housings for his riding, and a mule to carry his gear, and said
to him, "O Yunus, when it shall reach thee that command hath come
to me, do thou join me; and, by Allah, I will fill thy hands with
good and advance thee to honour and make thee rich as long as
thou livest!" So Yunus said, "I took his goods and went my ways;
and when Walid succeeded to the Caliphate, I repaired to him; and
by Allah, he kept his promise and entreated me with high honour
and munificence. Then I abode with him in all content of case and
rise of rank and mine affairs prospered and my wealth increased
and goods and farms became mine, such as sufficed me and will
suffice my heirs after me; nor did I cease to abide with Walid,
till he was slain, the mercy of Almighty Allah be on him!" And
men tell a tale concerning





               HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE ARAB GIRL.



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid was walking one day with Ja'afar the
Barmecide, when he espied a company of girls drawing water and
went up to them, having a mind to drink. As he drew near, one of
them turned to her fellows and improvised these lines,

"Thy phantom bid thou fleet, and fly * Far from the couch whereon
     I lie;
So I may rest and quench the fire, * Bonfire in bones aye flaming
     high;
My love-sick form Love's restless palm * Rolls o'er the rug
     whereon I sigh:
How 'tis with me thou wottest well * How long, then, union wilt
     deny?"

The Caliph marvelled at her elegance and eloquence.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Caliph, hearing the girl's verses, marvelled at her elegance and
eloquence, and said to her, "O daughter of nobles, are these
thine own or a quotation?" Replied she, "They are my very own,"
and he rejoined, "An thou say sooth keep the sense and change the
rhyme." So she said,

"Bid thou thy phantom distance keep * And quit this couch the
     while I sleep;
So I may rest and quench the flames * Through all my body rageful
     creep,
In love-sick one, whom passion's palms * Roll o'er the bed where
     grief I weep;
How 'tis with me thou wottest well; * All but thy union hold I
     cheap!"

Quoth the Caliph, "This also is stolen"; and quoth she, "Nay,
'tis my very own." He said, "If it be indeed thine own, change
the rhyme again and keep the sense." So she recited the
following,

"Unto thy phantom deal behest * To shun my couch the while I
     rest,
So I repose and quench the fire * That burns what lieth in my
     breast,
My weary form Love's restless palm * Rolls o'er with boon of
     sleep unblest.
How 'tis with me thou wottest well * When union's bought 'tis
     haply best!"

Quoth Al-Rashid, "This too is stolen"; and quoth she, "Not, so,
'tis mine." He said, "If thy words be true change the rhyme once
more." And she recited,

"Drive off the ghost that ever shows * Beside my couch when I'd
     repose,
 So I may rest and quench the fire * Beneath my ribs e'er flames
     and glows
 In love-sick one, whom passion's palms * Roll o'er the couch
     where weeping flows.
How 'tis with me thou wottest well * Will union come as union
     goes?"

Then said the Caliph, "Of what part of this camp art thou?"; and
she replied, "Of its middle in dwelling and of its highest in
tentpoles."[FN#113] Wherefore he knew that she was the daughter
of the tribal chief. "And thou," quoth she, "of what art thou
among the guardians of the horses?"; and quoth he, "Of the
highest in tree and of the ripest in fruit." "Allah protect thee,
O Commander of the Faithful!" said she, and kissing ground called
down blessings on him. Then she went away with the maidens of the
Arabs, and the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "There is no help for it
but I take her to wife." So Ja'afar repaired to her father and
said to him, "The Commander of the Faithful hath a mind to thy
daughter." He replied, "With love and goodwill, she is a gift as
a handmaid to His Highness our Lord the Commander of the
Faithful." So he equipped her and carried her to the Caliph, who
took her to wife and went in to her, and she became of the
dearest of his women to him. Furthermore, he bestowed on her
father largesse such as succoured him among Arabs, till he was
transported to the mercy of Almighty Allah. The Caliph, hearing
of his death, went in to her greatly troubled; and, when she saw
him looking afflicted, she entered her chamber and doffing all
that was upon her of rich raiment, donned mourning apparel and
raised lament for her father. It was said to her, "What is the
reason of this?"; and she replied, "My father is dead." So they
repaired to the Caliph and told him and he rose and going in to
her, asked her who had informed her of her father's death; and
she answered "It was thy face, O Commander of the Faithful!" Said
he, "How so?"; and she said, "Since I have been with thee, I
never saw thee on such wise till this time, and there was none
for whom I feared save my father, by reason of his great age; but
may thy head live, O Commander of the Faithful!" The Caliph's
eyes filled with tears and he condoled with her; but she ceased
not to mourn for her father, till she followed him--Allah have
mercy on the twain! And a tale is also told of




           AL-ASMA'I AND THE THREE GIRLS OF BASSORAH.



The Commander of the Faithful Harun Al-Rashid was exceeding
restless one night and rising from his bed, paced from chamber to
chamber, but could not compose himself to sleep. As soon as it
was day, he said, "Fetch me Al-Asma'i!"[FN#114] So the eunuch
went out and told the doorkeepers; these sent for the poet and
when he came, informed the Caliph who bade admit him and said to
him, "O Asma'i, I wish thee to tell me the best thou hast heard
of stories of women and their verses." Answered Al-Asma'i,
"Hearkening and obedience! I have heard great store of women's
verses; but none pleased me save three sets of couplets I once
heard from three girls."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-
Asma'i said to the Prince of True Believers, "Verily I have heard
much, but nothing pleased me save three sets of couplets
improvised by as many girls." Quoth the Caliph, "Tell me of
them," and quoth he, "Know then, O Commander of the Faithful,
that I once abode in Bassorah, and one day, as I was walking, the
heat was sore upon me and I sought for a siesta-place but found
none. However by looking right and left I came upon a porch swept
and sprinkled, at the upper end whereof was a wooden bench under
an open lattice-window, whence exhaled a scent of musk. I entered
the porch and sitting down on the bench, would have stretcht me
at full length when I heard from within a girl's sweet voice
talking and saying, 'O my sisters, we are here seated to spend
our day in friendly converse; so come, let us each put down an
hundred dinars and recite a line of verse; and whoso
extemporiseth the goodliest and sweetest line, the three hundred
dinars shall be hers.' 'With love and gladness,' said the others;
and the eldest recited the first couplet which is this,

'Would he come to my bed during sleep 'twere delight * But a
     visit on wake were delightsomer sight!'

Quoth the second,

'Naught came to salute me in sleep save his shade * But 'welcome,
     fair welcome,' I cried to the spright!'

Then said the youngest,

'My soul and my folk I engage for the youth * Musk-scented I see
     in my bed every night!'

Quoth I, 'An she be fair as her verse hath grace, the thing is
complete in every case.' Then I came down from my bench[FN#115]
and was about to go away, when behold, the door opened and out
came a slave-girl, who said to me, 'Sit, O Shaykh!' So I climbed
up and sat down again when she gave me a scroll, wherein was
written, in characters of the utmost beauty, with straight
Alifs,[FN#116] big-bellied Has, and rounded Waws, the following,
'We would have the Shaykh (Allah lengthen his days!) to know that
we are three maidens, sisters, sitting in friendly converse, who
have laid down each an hundred dinars, conditioning that whoso
recite the goodliest and sweetest couplet shall have the whole
three hundred dinars; and we appoint thee umpire between us: so
decide as thou seest best, and the Peace be on thee! Quoth I to
the girl, 'Here to me inkcase and paper.' So she went in and,
returning after a little, brought me a silvered inkcase and
gilded pens[FN#117] with which I wrote these couplets,

They talked of three beauties whose converse was quite * Like the
     talk of a man with experience dight:
Three maidens who borrowed the bloom of the dawn       * Making
     hearts of their lovers in sorriest plight.
They were hidden from eyes of the prier and spy        * Who
     slept and their modesty mote not affright;
So they opened whatever lay hid in their hearts        * And in
     frolicsome fun began verse to indite.
Quoth one fair coquette with her amorous grace         * Whose
     teeth for the sweet of her speech flashed bright:--
Would he come to my bed during sleep 'twere delight    * But a
     visit on wake were delightsomer sight! 
When she ended, her verse by her smiling was gilt:     * Then
     the second 'gan singing as nightingale might:--
Naught came to salute me in sleep save his shade       * But
     'welcome, fair welcome,' I cried to the spright!
But the third I preferred for she said in reply,       * With
     expression most apposite, exquisite:--
My soul and my folk I engage for the youth             * Musk-
     scented I see in my bed every night!
So when I considered their words to decide,            * And not
     make me the mock of the cynical wight;
I pronounced for the youngest, declaring her verse     * Of all
     verses be that which is nearest the right.'

Then I gave scroll to the slave-girl, who went upsatirs with it,
and behold, I heard a noise of dancing and clapping of hands and
Doomsday astir. Quoth I to myself, ''Tis no time of me to stay
here.' So I came down from the platform and was about to go away,
when the damsel cried out to me, 'Sit down, O Asma'i!' Asked I,
'Who gave thee to know that I was Al-Asma'i?' and she answered,
'O Shaykh, an thy name be unknown to us, thy poetry is not!' So I
sat down again and suddently the door opened and out came the
first damsel, with a dish of fruits and another of sweetmeats. I
ate of both and praised their fashion and would have ganged my
gait; but she cried out, 'Sit down, O Asma'i!' Wherewith I raised
my eyes to her and saw a rosy palm in a saffron sleeve, meseemed
it was the full moon rising splendid in the cloudy East. Then she
threw me a purse containing three hundred dinars and said to me,
'This is mine and I give it to thee by way of douceur in requital
of thy judgment.'" Quoth the Caliph, "Why didst thou decide for
the youngest?" and quoth Al-Asma'i, "O Commander of the Faithful,
whose life Allah prolong! the eldest said, 'I should delight in
him, if he visited my couch in sleep.' Now this is restricted and
dependent upon a condition which may befal or may not befal;
whilst, for the second, an image of dreams came to her in sleep,
and she saluted it; but the youngest's couplet said that she
actually lay with her lover and smelt his breath sweeter than
musk and she engaged her soul and her folk for him, which she had
not done, were he not dearer to her than her sprite." Said the
Caliph, "Thou didst well, O Asma'i." and gave him other three
hundred ducats in payment of his story. And I have heard a tale
concerning




            IBRAHIM OF MOSUL AND THE DEVIL.[FN#118]



Quoth Abu Ishak Ibrahim al-Mausili:--I asked Al-Rashid once to
give me a day's leave that I might be private with the people of
my household and my brethren, and he gave me leave for Saturday
the Sabbath. So I went home and betook myself to making ready
meat and drink and other necessaires and bade the doorkeepers
shut the doors and let none come in to me. However, presently, as
I sat in my sitting-chamber, with my women who were looking after
my wants, behold, there appeared an old man of comely and
reverend aspect,[FN#119] clad in white clothes and a shirt of
fine stuff with a doctor's turband on his head and a silver-
handled staff in his hand, and the house and porch were full of
the perfumes wherewith he was scented. I was greatly vexed at his
coming in to me and thought to turn away the doorkeepers; but he
saluted me after the goodliest fashion and I returned his
greeting and bade him be seated. So he sat down and began
entertaining me with stories of the Arabs and their verses, till
my anger left me and methought my servants had sought to pleasure
me by admitting a man of such good breeding and fine culture.
Then I asked him, "Art thou for meat?"; and he answered, "I have
no need of it." "And for drink?" quoth I, and quoth he, "That is
as thou wilt." So I drank off a pint of wine and poured him out
the like. Then said he, "O Abu Ishak, wilt thou sing us somewhat,
so we may hear of thine art that wherein thou excellest high and
low?" His words angered me; but I swallowed my anger and taking
the lute played and sang. "Well done, O Abu Ishak!"[FN#120] said
he; whereat my wrath redoubled and I said to myself, "Is it not
enough that he should intrude upon me, without my leave, and
importune me thus, but he must call me by name, as though he knew
not the right way to address me?" Quoth he, "An thou wilt sing
something more we will requite thee." I dissembled my annoyance
and took the lute and sang again, taking pains with what I sang
and rising thereto altogether, in consideration of his saying,
"We will requite thee."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Shaykh said to Abu Ishak, "If thou wilt sing something more
we will requite thee," I dissembled my annoyance (continued
Ibrahim) and, taking the lute, sang again with great attention to
my singing and rising altogether thereto, in consideration of his
saying, "We will requite thee." He was delighted, and cried,
"Well done, O my lord!"; presently adding, "Dost thou give me
leave to sing?" "As thou wilt," answered I, deeming him weak of
wit, in that he should think to sing in my presence, after that
which he had heard from me. So he took the lute and swept the
strings, and by Allah, I fancied they spoke in Arabic tongue,
with a sweet and liquid and murmurous voice; then he began and
sang these couplets,

"I bear a hurt heart, who will sell me for this * A heart whole
     and free from all canker and smart?
Nay, none will consent or to barter or buy * Such loss, ne'er
     from sorrow and sickness to part:
I groan wi' the groaning of wine-wounded men * And pine for the
     pining ne'er freeth my heart."

And by Allah, meseemed the doors and the walls and all that was
in the house answered and sang with him, for the beauty of his
voice, so that I fancied my very limbs and clothes replied to
him, and I abode amazed and unable to speak or move, for the
trouble of my heart. Then he sang these couplets,

"Culvers of Liwa![FN#121] to your nests return; * Your mournful
     voices thrill this heart of mine
Then back a-copse they flew, and well-nigh took * My life and
     made me tell my secret pine.
With cooing call they one who's gone, as though * Their breasts
     were maddened with the rage of wine:
Ne'er did mine eyes their like for culvers see * Who weep yet
     tear-drops never dye their eyne."

And also these couplets,

"O Zephyr of Najd, when from Najd thou blow, * Thy breathings
     heap only new woe on woe!
The turtle bespake me in bloom of morn * From the cassia-twig an
     the willow-bough
She moaned with the moaning of love-sick youth * And exposed
     love-secret I ne'er would show:
They say lover wearies of love when near * And is cured of love
     an afar he go:
I tried either cure which ne'er cured my love; * But that
     nearness is better than farness I know:[FN#122]
Yet,--the nearness of love shall no 'vantage prove * An whoso
     thou lovest deny thee of love."

Then said he, "O Ibrahim, sing this song after me, and preserving
the mode thereof in thy singing, teach it to thy slave-girls."
Quoth I, "Repeat it to me." But he answered, "There needs no
repetition; thou hast it by heart nor is there more to learn."
Then he suddenly vanished from my sight. At this I was amazed and
running to my sword drew it and made for the door of the Harim,
but found it closed and said to the women, "What have ye heard?"
Quoth they, "We have heard the sweetest of singing and the
goodliest." Then I went forth amazed, to the house-door and,
finding it locked, questioned the doorkeepers of the old man.
They replied, "What old man? By Allah, no one hath gone in to
thee this day!" So I returned pondering the matter, when, behold,
there arose from one of the corners of the house, a Vox et
praeterea nihil, saying, "O Abu Ishak, no harm shall befal thee.
'Tis I, Abu Murrah,[FN#123] who have been thy cup-companion this
day, so fear nothing!" Then I mounted and rode to the palace,
where I told Al-Rashid what had passed, and he said, "Repeat to
me the airs thou heardest from him." So I took the lute and
played and sang them to him; for, behold, they were rooted in my
heart. The Caliph was charmed with them and drank thereto, albeit
he was no confirmed wine-bibber, saying, "Would he would some day
pleasure us with his company, as he hath pleasured thee!"[FN#124]
Then he ordered me a present and I took it and went away. And men
relate this story anent




             THE LOVERS OF THE BANU UZRAH.[FN#125]



Quoth Masrur the Eunuch, "The Caliph Harun Al-Rashid was very
wakeful one night and said to me, 'See which of the poets is at
the door to-night.' So I went out and finding Jamil bin Ma'amar
al-Uzri[FN#126] in the antechamber, said to him, 'Answer the
Commander of the Faithful.' Quoth he, 'I hear and I obey,' and
going in with me, saluted the Caliph, who returned his greeting
and bade him sit down. Then he said to him, 'O, Jamil, hast thou
any of thy wonderful new stories to tell us?' He replied, 'Yes, O
Commander of the Faithful: wouldst thou fainer hear that which I
have seen with mine eyes or that which I have only heard?' Quoth
the Caliph, 'Tell me something thou hast actually beheld.' Quoth
Jamil, ''Tis well, O Prince of True Believers; incline thy heart
to me and lend me thine ears.' The Caliph took a bolster of red
brocade, purfled with gold and stuffed with ostrich-feathers and,
laying it under his thighs, propped up both elbows thereon; then
he said to Jamil, 'Now[FN#127] for thy tale, O Jamil!' Thereupon
he begun, 'Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that I was once
desperately enamoured of a certain girl and used to pay her
frequent visits.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph had propped his elbows upon the brocaded cushion, he said,
"Out with thy tale, O Jamil!" and the poet begun:--Know, O
Commander of the Faithful, I was desperately in love with a girl
and used often to visit her, because she was my desire and
delight of all the things of this world. After a while, her
people removed with her, by reason of scarcity of pasture, and I
abode some time without seeing her, till I grew restless for
desire and longed for her sight and the flesh[FN#128] urged me to
journey to her. One night, I could hold out no longer; so I rose
and saddling my she-camel, bound on my turban and donned my
oldest dress.[FN#129] Then I baldricked myself with my sword and
slinging my spear behind me, mounted and rode forth in quest of
her. I fared on fast till, one night, it was pitch dark and
exceeding black, yet I persisted in the hard task of climbing
down Wadys and up hills, hearing on all sides the roaring of
lions and howling of wolves and the cries of the wild beasts. My
reason was troubled thereat and my heart sank within me; but for
all that my tongue ceased not to call on the name of Almighty
Allah. As I went along thus, sleep overtook me and the camel
carried me aside out of my road, till, presently,
something[FN#130] smote me on the head, and I woke, startled and
alarmed, and found myself in a pasturage full of trees and
streams and birds on the branches, warbling their various speech
and notes. As the trees were tangled I alighted and, taking my
camel's halter in hand, fared on softly with her, till I got
clear of the thick growth and came out into the open country,
where I adjusted her saddle and mounted again, knowing not where
to go nor whither the Fates should lead me; but, presently,
peering afar into the desert, I espied a fire in its middle
depth. So I smote my camel and made for the fire. When I drew
near, I saw a tent pitched, and fronted by a spear stuck in the
ground, with a pennon flying[FN#131] and horses tethered and
camels feeding, and said in myself, "Doubtless there hangeth some
grave matter by this tent, for I see none other than it in the
desert." So I went up thereto and said, "Peace be with you, O
people of the tent, and the mercy of Allah and His Blessing!"
Whereupon there came forth to me a young man as youths are when
nineteen years old, who was like the full moon shining in the
East, with valour written between his eyes, and answered, saying,
"And with thee be the Peace, and Allah's mercy and His blessing!
O brother of the Arabs, methinks thou hast lost thy way?" Replied
I, "Even so, direct me right, Allah have mercy on thee!" He
rejoined, "O brother of the Arabs, of a truth this our land is
infested with lions and the night is exceeding dark and dreary,
beyond measure cold and gloomy, and I fear lest the wild beasts
rend thee in pieces; wherefore do thou alight and abide with me
this night in ease and comfort, and to-morrow I will put thee in
the right way." Accordingly, I dismounted and hobbled my she-
camel with the end of her halter;[FN#132] then I put off my heavy
upper clothes and sat down. Presently the young man took a sheep
and slaughtered it and kindled a brisk fire; after which he went
into the tent and bringing out finely powdered salt and spices,
fell to cutting off pieces of mutton and roasting them over the
fire and feeding me therewith, weeping at one while and sighing
at another. Then he groaned heavily and wept sore and improvised
these couplets,

"There remains to him naught save a flitting breath * And an eye
     whose babe ever wandereth.
There remains not a joint in his limbs, but what * Disease firm
     fixt ever tortureth.
His tears are flowing, his vitals burning; * Yet for all his
     tongue still he silenceth.
All foemen in pity beweep his woes; * Ah for freke whom the
     foeman pitieth!"

By this I knew, O Commander of the Faithful, that the youth was a
distracted lover (for none knoweth passion save he who hath
tasted the passion-savour), and quoth I to myself, "Shall I ask
him?" But I consulted my judgment and said, "How shall I assail
him with questioning, and I in his abode?" So I restrained myself
and ate my sufficiency of the meat. When we had made an end of
eating, the young man arose and entering the tent, brought out a
handsome basin and ewer and a silken napkin, whose ends were
purfled with red gold and a sprinkling-bottle full of rose-water
mingled with musk. I marvelled at his dainty delicate ways and
said in my mind, "Never wot I of delicacy in the desert." Then we
washed our hands and talked a while, after which he went into the
tent and making a partition between himself and me with a piece
of red brocade, said to me, "Enter, O Chief of the Arabs, and
take thy rest; for thou hast suffered more of toil and travel
than sufficeth this night and in this thy journey." So I entered
and finding a bed of green brocade, doffed my dress and passed a
night such as I had never passed in my life.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamil
spoke, saying:--Never in my life passed I a night like that. I
pondered the young man's case, till the world was dark and all
eyes slept, when I was aroused by the sound of a low voice, never
heard I a softer or sweeter. I raised the curtain which hung
between us and saw a damsel (never beheld I a fairer of face), by
the young man's side and they were both weeping and complaining,
one to other of the pangs of passion and desire and of the excess
of their longing for union.[FN#133] Quoth I, "By Allah, I wonder
who may be this second one! When I entered this tent, there was
none therein save this young man." And after reflection I added,
"Doubtless this damsel is of the daughters of the Jinn and is
enamoured of this youth; so they have secluded themselves with
each other in this solitary place." Then I considered her closely
and behold, she was a mortal and an Arab girl, whose face, when
she unveiled, shamed the shining sun, and the tent was lit up by
the light of her countenance. When I was assured that she was his
beloved, I bethought me of lover-jealousy; so I let drop the
curtain and covering my face, fell asleep. As soon as it was dawn
I arose and donning my clothes, made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed
such prayers as are obligatory and which I had deferred. Then I
said, "O brother of the Arabs, wilt thou direct me into the right
road and thus add to thy favours?" He replied, "At thy leisure, O
chief of the Arabs, the term of the guest-rite is three
days,[FN#134] and I am not one to let thee go before that time."
So I abode with him three days, and on the fourth day as we sat
talking, I asked him of his name and lineage. Quoth he "As for my
lineage, I am of the Banu Odhrah; my name is such an one, son of
such an one and my father's brother is called such an one." And
behold, O Commander of the Faithful, he was the son of my
paternal uncle and of the noblest house of the Banu Uzrah. Said
I, "O my cousin, what moved thee to act on this wise, secluding
thyself in the waste and leaving thy fair estate and that of thy
father and thy slaves and handmaids?" When he heard my words, his
eyes filled with tears and he replied, "Know, O my cousin, that I
fell madly in love of the daughter of my father's brother,
fascinated by her, distracted for her, passion-possessed as by a
Jinn, wholly unable to let her out of my sight. So I sought her
in marriage of her sire, but he refused and married her to a man
of the Banu Odhrah, who went in to her and carried her to his
abiding-place this last year. When she was thus far removed from
me and I was prevented from looking on her, the fiery pangs of
passion and excess of love-longing and desire drove me to forsake
my clan[FN#135] and friends and fortune and take up my abode in
this desert, where I have grown used to my solitude." I asked,
"Where are their dwellings?" and he answered, "They are hard by,
on the crest of yonder hill; and every night, at the dead time,
when all eyes sleep, she stealeth secretly out of the camp,
unseen of any one, and I satisfy my desire of her converse and
she of mine.[FN#136] So I abide thus, solacing myself with her a
part of the night, till Allah work out that which is to be
wrought; either I shall compass my desire, in spite[FN#137] of
the envious, or Allah will determine for me and He is the best of
determinators." Now when the youth told me his case, O Commander
of the Faithful, I was concerned for him and perplexed by reason
of my jealousy for his honour; so I said to him, "O son of my
uncle, wilt thou that I point out to thee a plan and suggest to
thee a project, whereby (please Allah) thou shalt find perfect
welfare and the way of right and successful issue whereby the
Almighty shall do away from thee that thou dreadest?" He replied,
"Say on, O my cousin"; and quoth I, "When it is night and the
girl cometh, set her on my she-camel which is swift of pace, and
mount thou thy steed, whilst I bestride one of these dromedaries.
So will we fare on all night and when the morrow morns, we shall
have traversed wolds and wastes, and thou wilt have attained thy
desire and won the beloved of thy heart. The Almighty's earth is
wide, and by Allah, I will back thee with heart and wealth and
sword."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Jamil
advised the elopement and night journey, promising his aid as
long as he lived, the youth accepted and said, "O cousin, wait
till I take counsel with her, for she is quick-witted and prudent
and hath insight into affairs." So (continued Jamil) when the
night darkened and the hour of her coming arrived, and he
awaiting her at the appointed tide, she delayed beyond her usual
time, and I saw him go forth the door of the tent and opening his
mouth, inhale the wafts of breeze that blew from her quarter, as
if to snuff her perfume, and he repeated these two couplets:--

"Breeze of East who bringest me gentle air * From the place of
     sojourn where dwells my fair:
O Breeze, of the lover thou bearest sign, * Canst not of her
     coming some signal bear?"

Then he entered the tent and sat weeping awhile; after which he
said to me, "O my cousin, some mischance must have betided the
daughter of mine uncle, or some accident must have hindered her
from coming to me this night," presently adding, "But abide where
thou art, till I bring thee the news." And he took sword and
shield and was absent a while of the night, after which he
returned, carrying something in hand and called aloud to me. So I
hastened to him and he said, "O my cousin, knowest thou what hath
happened?" I replied, "No, by Allah!" Quoth he, "Verily, I am
distraught concerning my cousin this night; for, as she was
coming to me, a lion met her in the way and devoured her, and
there remaineth of her but what thou seest." So saying, he threw
down what he had in his hand, and behold, it was the damsel's
turband and what was left of her bones. Then he wept sore and
casting down his bow,[FN#138] took a bag and went forth again
saying, "Stir not hence till I return to thee, if it please
Almighty Allah." He was absent a while and presently returned,
bearing in his hand a lion's head, which he threw on the ground
and called for water. So I brought him water, with which he
washed the lion's mouth and fell to kissing it and weeping; and
he mourned for her exceedingly and recited these couplets,

"Ho thou lion who broughtest thyself to woe, * Thou art slain and
     worse sorrows my bosom rend!
Thou hast reft me of fairest companionship, * Made her home
     Earth's womb till the world shall end.
To Time, who hath wrought me such grief, I say, * 'Allah grant in
     her stead never show a friend!'"

Then said he to me, "O cousin, I conjure thee by Allah and the
claims of kindred and consanguinity[FN#139] between us, keep thou
my charge. Thou wilt presently see me dead before thee; whereupon
do thou wash me and shroud me and these that remain of my
cousin's bones in this robe and bury us both in one grave and
write thereon these two couplets,

'On Earth surface we lived in rare ease and joy * By fellowship
     joined in one house and home.
But Fate with her changes departed us, * And the shroud conjoins
     us in Earth's cold womb.'"

Then he wept with sore weeping and, entering the tent, was absent
awhile, after which he came forth, groaning and crying out. Then
he gave one sob and departed this world. When I saw that he was
indeed dead, it was grievous to me and so sore was my sorrow for
him that I had well-nigh followed him for excess of mourning over
him. Then I laid him out and did as he had enjoined me, shrouding
his cousin's remains with him in one robe and laying the twain in
one grave. I abode by their tomb three days, after which I
departed and continued to pay frequent pious visits[FN#140] to
the place for two years. This then is their story, O Commander of
the Faithful! Al-Rashid was pleased with Jamil's story and
rewarded him with a robe of honour and a handsome present. And
men also tell a tale concerning




                THE BADAWI AND HIS WIFE.[FN#141]



Caliph Mu'awiyah was sitting one day in his palace[FN#142] at
Damascus, in a room whose windows were open on all four sides,
that the breeze might enter from every quarter. Now it was a day
of excessive heat, with no breeze from the hills stirring, and
the middle of the day, when the heat was at its height, and the
Caliph saw a man coming along, scorched by the heat of the ground
and limping, as he fared on barefoot. Mu'awiyah considered him
awhile and said to his courtiers, "Hath Allah (may He be extolled
and exalted!) created any miserabler than he who need must hie
abroad at such an hour and in such sultry tide as this?" Quoth
one of them, "Haply he seeketh the Commander of the Faithful;"
and quoth the Caliph, "By Allah, if he seek me, I will assuredly
give to him, and if he be wronged, I will certainly succour him.
Ho, boy! Stand at the door, and if yonder wild Arab seek to come
in to me, forbid him not therefrom." So the page went out and
presently the Arab came up to him and he said, "What dost thou
want?" Answered the other, "I want the Commander of the
Faithful," and the page said, "Enter." So he entered and saluted
the Caliph,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
page allowed him to enter, the Badawi saluted the Caliph, who
said to him, "Who art thou?" Replied the Arab, "I am a man of the
Banu Tamim."[FN#143] "And what bringeth thee here at this
season?" asked Mu'awiyah; and the Arab answered, "I come to thee,
complaining and thy protection imploring." "Against whom?"
"Against Marwan bin al-Hakam,[FN#144] thy deputy," replied he,
and began reciting,

"Mu'awiyah,[FN#145] thou gen'rous lord, and best of men that be;
     * And oh, thou lord of learning, grace and fair humanity,
Thee-wards I come because my way of life is strait to me: * O
     help! and let me not despair thine equity to see.
Deign thou redress the wrong that dealt the tyrant whim of him *
     Who better had my life destroyed than made such wrong to
     dree.
He robbed me of my wife Su'ad and proved him worst of foes, *
     Stealing mine honour 'mid my folk with foul iniquity;
And went about to take my life before th' appointed day * Hath
     dawned which Allah made my lot by destiny's decree."

Now when Mu'awiyah heard him recite these verses, with the fire
flashing from his mouth, he said to him, "Welcome and fair
welcome, O brother of the Arabs! Tell me thy tale and acquaint me
with thy case." Replied the Arab, "O Commander of the Faithful, I
had a wife whom I loved passing dear with love none came near;
and she was the coolth of mine eyes and the joy of my heart; and
I had a herd of camels, whose produce enabled me to maintain my
condition; but there came upon us a bad year which killed off
hoof and horn and left me naught. When what was in my hand failed
me and wealth fell from me and I lapsed into evil case, I at once
became abject and a burden to those who erewhile wished to visit
me; and when her father knew it, he took her from me and abjured
me and drove me forth without ruth. So I repaired to thy deputy,
Marwan bin al-Hakam, and asked his aid. He summoned her sire and
questioned him of my case, when he denied any knowledge of me.
Quoth I, 'Allah assain the Emir! An it please him to send for the
woman and question her of her father's saying, the truth will
appear.' So he sent for her and brought her; but no sooner had he
set eyes on her than he fell in love with her; so, becoming my
rival, he denied me succour and was wroth with me, and sent me to
prison, where I became as I had fallen from heaven and the wind
had cast me down in a far land. Then said Marwan to her father,
'Wilt thou give her to me to wife, on a present settlement of a
thousand dinars and a contingent dowry of ten thousand
dirhams,[FN#146] and I will engage to free her from yonder wild
Arab!' Her father was seduced by the bribe and agreed to the
bargain; whereupon Marwan sent for me and looking at me like an
angry lion, said to me, 'O Arab, divorce Su'ad.' I replied, 'I
will not put her away;' but he set on me a company of his
servants, who tortured me with all manner of tortures, till I
found no help for it but to divorce her. I did so and he sent me
back to prison, where I abode till the days of her purification
were accomplished, when he married her and let me go. So now I
come hither in thee hoping and thy succour imploring and myself
on thy protection throwing." And he spoke these couplets,

"Within my heart is fire       * Whichever flameth higher;
Within my frame are pains      * For skill of leach too dire.
Live coals in vitals burn      * And sparks from coal up spire:
Tears flood mine eyes and down * Coursing my cheek ne'er tire:
Only God's aid and thine       * I crave for my desire!"

Then he was convulsed,[FN#147] and his teeth chattered and he
fell down in a fit, squirming like a scotched snake. When
Mu'awiyah heard his story and his verse, he said, "Marwan bin al-
Hakam hath transgressed against the laws of the Faith and hath
violated the Harim of True Believers!"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Caliph Mu'awiyah heard the wild Arab's words, he said, "The
son of Al-Hakam hath indeed transgressed against the laws of the
Faith and hath violated the Harim of True Believers," presently
adding, "O Arab, thou comest to me with a story, the like whereof
I never heard!" Then he called for inkcase and paper and wrote to
Marwan as follows, "Verily it hath reached me that thou
transgresseth the laws of the Faith with regard to thy lieges.
Now it behoveth the Wali who governeth the folk to keep his eyes
from their lusts and stay his flesh from its delights." And after
he wrote many words, which (quoth he who told me the tale) I
omit, for brevity's sake, and amongst them these couplets,

"Thou wast invested (woe to thee!)[FN#148] with rule for the
     unfit; * Crave thou of Allah pardon for thy foul adultery.
Th' unhappy youth to us is come complaining 'mid his groans * And
     asks for redress for parting-grief and saddened me through
     thee. 
An oath have I to Allah sworn shall never be forsworn; * Nay,
     for I'll do what Faith and Creed command me to decree.
An thou dare cross me in whate'er to thee I now indite * I of
     thy flesh assuredly will make the vulture free.
Divorce Su'ad, equip her well, and in the hottest haste * With
     Al-Kumayt and Ziban's son, hight Nasr, send to me."

Then he folded the letter and, sealing it with his seal,
delivered it to Al-Kumayt[FN#149] and Nasr bin Ziban (whom he
was wont to employ on weighty matters, because of their
trustiness) who took the missive and carried it to Al-Medinah,
where they went in to Marwan and saluting him delivered to him
the writ and told him how the case stood. He read the letter
and fell a-weeping; but he went in to Su'ad (as 'twas not in
his power to refuse obedience to the Caliph) and, acquainting
her with the case, divorced her in the presence of Al-Kumayt
and Nasr; after which he equipped her and delivered her to
them, together with a letter to the Caliph wherein he
versified as follows,

"Hurry not, Prince of Faithful Men! with best of grace thy vow
     * I will accomplish as 'twas vowed and with the gladdest
     gree.
I sinned not adulterous sin when loved her I, then how * Canst
     charge me with advowtrous deed or any villainy?
Soon comes to thee that splendid sun which hath no living peer
     * On earth, nor aught in mortal men of Jinns her like
     shalt see."

This he sealed with his own signet and gave to the messengers
who returned with Su'ad to Damascus and delivered to Mu'awiyah
the letter, and when he had read it he cried, "Verily, he hath
obeyed handsomely, but he exceedeth in his praise of the
woman." Then he called for her and saw beauty such as he had
never seen, for comeliness and loveliness, stature and
symmetrical grace; moreover, he talked with her and found her
fluent of speech and choice in words. Quoth he, "Bring me the
Arab." So they fetched the man, who came, sore disordered for
shifts and changes of fortune, and Mu'awiyah said to him, "O
Arab, an thou wilt freely give her up to me, I will bestow
upon thee in her stead three slave girls, high-bosomed maids
like moons, with each a thousand dinars; and I will assign
thee on the Treasury such an annual sum as shall content thee
and enrich thee." When the Arab heard this, he groaned one
groan and swooned away, so that Mu'awiyah thought he was dead;
and, as soon as he revived, the Caliph said to him, "What
aileth thee?" The Arab answered, "With heavy heart and in sore
need have I appealed to thee from the injustice of Marwan bin
al-Hakam; but to whom shall I appeal from thine injustice?"
And he versified in these couplets,

"Make me not (Allah save the Caliph!) one of the betrayed *
     Who from the fiery sands to fire must sue for help and
     aid:
Deign thou restore Su'ad to this afflicted heart distraught, *
     Which every morn and eve by sorest sorrow is waylaid:
Loose thou my bonds and grudge me not and give her back to me;
     * And if thou do so ne'er thou shalt for lack of thanks
     upbraid!"

Then said he, "By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, wert
thou to give me all the riches contained in the Caliphate, yet
would I not take them without Su'ad." And he recited this
couplet,

"I love Su'ad and unto all but hers my love is dead, * Each
     morn I feel her love to me is drink and daily bread."

Quoth the Caliph, "Thou confessest to having divorced her and
Marwan owned the like; so now we will give her free choice. An
she choose other than thee, we will marry her to him, and if
she choose thee, we will restore her to thee." Replied the
Arab, "Do so." So Mu'awiyah said to her, "What sayest thou, O
Su'ad? Which does thou choose; the Commander of the Faithful,
with his honour and glory and dominion and palaces and
treasures and all else thou seest at this command, or Marwin
bin al-Hakam with his violence and tyranny, or this Arab, with
his hunger and poverty?" So she improvised these couplets,

"This one, whom hunger plagues, and rags unfold, * Dearer than
     tribe and kith and kin I hold;
Than crowned head, or deputy Marwan, * Or all who boast of
     silver coins and gold."

Then said she, "By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I will
not forsake him for the shifts of Fortune or the perfidies of
Fate, there being between us old companionship we may not
forget, and love beyond stay and let; and indeed 'tis but just
that I bear with him in his adversity, even as I shared with
him in prosperity." The Caliph marvelled at her wit and love
and constancy and, ordering her ten thousand dirhams,
delivered her to the Arab, who took his wife and went
away.[FN#150] And they likewise tell a tale of




                   THE LOVERS OF BASSORAH.



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid was sleepless one night; so he sent
for Al-Asma'i and Husayn al-Khali'a[FN#151] and said to them,
"Tell me a story you twain and do thou begin, O Husayn." He
said, "'Tis well, O Commander of the Faithful;" and thus
began: Some years ago, I dropped down stream to Bassorah, to
present to Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Rabi'i[FN#152] a Kasidah
or elegy I had composed in his praise; and he accepted it and
bade me abide with him. One day, I went out to
Al-Mirbad,[FN#153] by way of Al-Muhaliyah;[FN#154] and, being
oppressed by the excessive heat, went up to a great door, to
ask for drink, when I was suddenly aware of a damsel, as she
were a branch swaying, with eyes languishing, eye brows arched
and finely pencilled and smooth cheeks rounded clad in a shift
the colour of a pomegranate flower, and a mantilla of
Sana'a[FN#155] work; but the perfect whiteness of her body
overcame the redness of her shift, through which glittered two
breasts like twin granadoes and a waist, as it were a roll of
fine Coptic linen, with creases like scrolls of pure white
paper stuffed with musk [FN#156] Moreover, O Prince of True
Believers, round her neck was slung an amulet of red gold that
fell down between her breasts, and on the plain of her
forehead were browlocks like jet.[FN#157] Her eyebrows joined
and her eyes were like lakes; she had an aquiline nose and
thereunder shell like lips showing teeth like pearls.
Pleasantness prevailed in every part of her; but she seemed
dejected, disturbed, distracted and in the vestibule came and
went, walking upon the hearts of her lovers, whilst her
legs[FN#158] made mute the voices of their ankle rings; and
i