ndeed she was as saith the poet,

"Each portion of her charms we see * Seems of the whole a
     simile"

I was overawed by her, O Commander of the Faithful, and drew
near her to greet her, and behold, the house and vestibule and
highways breathed fragrant with musk. So I saluted her and she
returned my salaam with a voice dejected and heart depressed
and with the ardour of passion consumed. Then said I to her,
"O my lady, I am an old man and a stranger and sore troubled
by thirst. Wilt thou order me a draught of water, and win
reward in heaven?" She cried, "Away, O Shaykh, from me! I am
distracted from all thought of meat and drink."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
damsel said, "O Shaykh, I am distracted from all thought of
meat and drink." Quoth I (continued Husayn), "By what ailment,
O my lady?" and quoth she, "I love one who dealeth not justly
by me and I desire one who of me will none. Wherefore I am
afflicted with the wakefulness of those who wake star gazing."
I asked, "O my lady, is there on the wide expanse of earth one
to whom thou hast a mind and who to thee hath no mind?"
Answered she, "Yes; and this for the perfection of beauty and
loveliness and goodliness wherewith he is endowed." "And why
standeth thou in this porch?" enquired I. "This is his road,"
replied she, "and the hour of his passing by." I said, "O my
lady, have ye ever foregathered and had such commerce and
converse as might cause this passion?" At this she heaved a
deep sigh; the tears rained down her cheeks, as they were dew
falling upon roses, and she versified with these couplets,

"We were like willow boughs in garden shining * And scented
     joys in happiest life combining;
Whenas one bough from other self would rend * And oh! thou
     seest this for that repining!"

Quoth I, "O maid, and what betideth thee of thy love for this
man?"; and quoth she, "I see the sun upon the walls of his
folk and I think the sun is he; or haply I catch sight of him
unexpectedly and am confounded and the blood and the life fly
my body and I abide in unreasoning plight a week or e'en a
se'nnight." Said I, "Excuse me, for I also have suffered that
which is upon thee of love longing and distraction of soul and
wasting of frame and loss of strength; and I see in thee
pallor of complexion and emaciation, such as testify of the
fever fits of desire. But how shouldst thou be unsmitten of
passion and thou a sojourner in the land of Bassorah?" Said
she, "By Allah, before I fell in love of this youth, I was
perfect in beauty and loveliness and amorous grace which
ravished all the Princes of Bassorah, till he fell in love
with me." I asked, "O maid, and who parted you?"; and she
answered, "The vicissitudes of fortune, but the manner of our
separation was strange; and 'twas on this wise. One New Year's
day I had invited the damsels of Bassorah and amongst them a
girl belonging to Siran, who had bought her out of Oman for
four score thousand dirhams. She loved me and loved me to
madness and when she entered she threw herself upon me and
well nigh tore me in pieces with bites and pinches.[FN#159]
Then we withdrew apart, to drink wine at our ease, till our
meat was ready[FN#160] and our delight was complete, and she
toyed with me and I with her, and now I was upon her and now
she was upon me. Presently, the fumes of the wine moved her to
strike her hand on the inkle of my petticoat trousers, whereby
it became loosed, unknown of either of us, and my trousers
fell down in our play. At this moment he came in unobserved
and, seeing me thus, was wroth at the sight and made off, as
the Arab filly hearing the tinkle of her bridle."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
maiden said to Husayn al-Khali'a, "When my lover saw me
playing, as I described to thee, with Siran's girl, he went
forth in anger. And 'tis now, O Shaykh, three years ago, and
since then I have never ceased to excuse myself to him and
coax him and crave his indulgence, but he will neither cast a
look at me from the corner of his eye, nor write me a word nor
speak to me by messenger nor hear from me aught." Quoth I,
"Harkye maid, is he an Arab or an Ajam?"; and quoth she, "Out
on thee! He is of the Princes of Bassorah." "Is he old or
young?" asked I; and she looked at me laughingly and answered,
"Thou art certainly a simpleton! He is like the moon on the
night of its full, smooth checked and beardless, nor is there
any defect in him except his aversion to me." Then I put the
question, "What is his name?" and she replied, "What wilt thou
do with him?" I rejoined, "I will do my best to come at him,
that I may bring about reunion between you." Said she, "I will
tell thee on condition that thou carry him a note;" and I said
"I have no objection to that." Then quoth she, "His name is
Zamrah bin al-Mughayrah, hight Abu al-Sakha,[FN#161] and his
palace is in the Mirbad." Therewith she called to those within
for inkcase and paper and tucking up[FN#162] her sleeves,
showed two wrists like broad rings of silver. She then wrote
after the Basmalah as follows, "My lord, the omission of
blessings[FN#163] at the head of this my letter shows mine
insufficiency, and know that had my prayer been answered, thou
hadst never left me; for how often have I prayed that thou
shouldest not leave me, and yet thou didst leave me! Were it
not that distress with me exceedeth the bounds of restraint,
that which thy servant hath forced herself to do in writing
this writ were an aidance to her, despite her despair of thee,
because of her knowledge of thee that thou wilt fail to
answer. Do thou fulfil her desire, my lord, of a sight of thee
from the porch, as thou passest in the street, wherewith thou
wilt quicken the dead soul in her. Or, far better for her
still than this, do thou write her a letter with thine own
hand (Allah endow it with all excellence!), and appoint it in
requital of the intimacy that was between us in the nights of
time past, whereof thou must preserve the memory. My lord, was
I not to thee a lover sick with passion? An thou answer my
prayer, I will give to thee thanks and to Allah praise; and so
The Peace!"[FN#164] Then she gave me the letter and I went
away. Next morning I repaired to the door of the Viceroy
Mohammed bin Sulayman, where I found an assembly of the
notables of Bassorah, and amongst them a youth who adorned the
gathering and surpassed in beauty and brightness all who were
there; and indeed the Emir Mohammed set him above himself. I
asked who he was and behold, it was Zamrah himself: so I said
in my mind, "Verily, there hath befallen yonder unhappy one
that which hath befallen her[FN#165]!" Then I betook myself to
the Mirbad and stood waiting at the door of his house, till he
came riding up in state, when I accosted him and invoking more
than usual blessings on him, handed him the missive. When he
read it and understood it he said to me, "O Shaykh, we have
taken other in her stead. Say me, wilt thou see the
substitute?" I answered, "Yes." Whereupon he called out a
woman's name, and there came forth a damsel who shamed the two
greater lights; swelling breasted, walking the gait of one who
hasteneth without fear, to whom he gave the note, saying, "Do
thou answer it." When she read it, she turned pale at the
contents and said to me, " O old man, crave pardon of Allah
for this that thou hast brought." So I went out, O Commander
of the Faithful, dragging my feet and returning to her asked
leave to enter. When she saw me, she asked, "What is behind
thee?"; and I answered, "Evil and despair." Quoth she, "Have
thou no concern of him. Where are Allah and His
power?"[FN#166] Then she ordered me five hundred dinars and I
took them and went away. Some days after I passed by the place
and saw there horsemen and footmen. So I went in and lo! these
were the companions of Zamrah, who were begging her to return
to him; but she said, "No, by Allah, I will not look him in
the face!" And she prostrated herself in gratitude to Allah
and exultation over Zamrah's defeat. Then I drew near her, and
she pulled out to me a letter, wherein was written, after the
Bismillah, "My lady, but for my forbearance towards thee
(whose life Allah lengthen!) I would relate somewhat of what
betided from thee and set out my excuse, in that thou
transgressedst against me, whenas thou west manifestly a
sinner against thyself and myself in breach of vows and lack
of constancy and preference of another over us; for, by Allah,
on whom we call for help against that which was of thy free
will, thou didst transgress against the love of me; and so The
Peace!" Then she showed me the presents and rarities he had
sent her, which were of the value of thirty thousand dinars. I
saw her again after this, and Zamrah had married her. Quoth
Al-Rashid, "Had not Zamrah been beforehand with us, I should
certainly have had to do with her myself."[FN#167] And men
tell the tale of




           ISHAK OF MOSUL AND HIS MISTRESS AND THE
                        DEVIL.[FN#168]



Quoth Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Mausili: I was in my house one
night in the winter time, when the clouds had dispread
themselves and the rains poured down in torrents, as from the
mouths of water skins, and the folk forbore to come and go
about the ways for that which was therein of rain and slough.
Now I was straitened in breast because none of my brethren
came to me nor could I go to them, by reason of the mud and
mire; so I said to my servant, "Bring me wherewithal I may
divert myself." Accordingly he brought me meat and drink, but
I had no heart to eat, without some one to keep me company,
and I ceased not to look out of window and watch the ways till
nightfall, when I bethought myself of a damsel belonging to
one of the sons of Al-Mahdi,[FN#169] whom I loved and who was
skilled in singing and playing upon instruments of music, and
said to myself, "Were she here with us to night, my joy would
be complete and my night would be abridged of the melancholy
and restlessness which are upon me." At this moment one
knocked at the door, saying, "Shall a beloved enter in who
standeth at the door?" Quoth I to myself, "Meseems the plant
of my desire hath fruited." So I went to the door and found my
mistress, with a long green skirt[FN#170] wrapped about her
and a kerchief of brocade on her head, to fend her from the
rain. She was covered with mud to her knees and all that was
upon her was drenched with water from gargoyles[FN#171] and
house spouts; in short, she was in sorry plight. So I said to
her, "O my mistress, what bringeth thee hither through all
this mud?" Replied she, "Thy messenger came and set forth to
me that which was with thee of love and longing, so that I
could not choose but yield and hasten to thee." I marvelled at
this And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel came and knocked at Ishak's door, he went forth to her
and cried, 'O my lady, what bringeth thee hither through all
this mud?"; and she replied, "Thy messenger came and set forth
to me that which was with thee of love and longing, so that I
could not choose but yield and hasten to thee." I marvelled at
this, but did not like to tell her that I had sent no
messenger; wherefore I said, "Praised be Allah for that He
hath brought us together, after all I have suffered by the
mortification of patience! Verily, hadst thou delayed an hour
longer, I must have run to thee, because of my much love for
thee and longing for thy presence." Then I called to my boy
for water, that I might better her plight, and he brought a
kettle full of hot water such as she wanted. I bade pour it
over her feet, whilst I set to work to wash them myself; after
which I called for one of my richest dresses and clad her
therein after she had doffed the muddy clothes. Then, as soon
as we were comfortably seated, I would have called for food,
but she refused and I said to her, "Art thou for wine?"; and
she replied, "Yes." So I fetched cups and she asked me, "Who
shall sing?" "I, O my princess!" "I care not for that;" "One
of my damsels?" "I have no mind to that either!" "Then sing
thyself." "Not I!" "Who then shall sing for thee?" I enquired,
and she rejoined, "Go out and seek some one to sing for me."
So I went out, in obedience to her, though I despaired of
finding any one in such weather and fared on till I came to
the main street, where I suddenly saw a blind man striking the
earth with his staff and saying, "May Allah not requite with
weal those with whom I was! When I sang, they listened not,
and when I was silent, they made light of me." So I said to
him, "Art thou a singer?" and he replied, "Yes." Quoth I,
"Wilt thou finish thy night with us and cheer us with thy
company?"; and quoth he, "If it be thy will, take my hand." So
I took his hand and, leading him to my house, said to the
damsel, "O my mistress, I have brought a blind singer, with
whom we may take our pleasure and he will not see us." She
said, "Bring him to me." So I brought him in and invited him
to eat. He ate but a very little and washed his hands, after
which I brought him wine and he drank three cupsful. Then he
said to me, "Who art thou?"; and I replied, "I am Ishak bin
Ibrahim al-Mausili." Quoth he, "I have heard of thee and now I
rejoice in thy company;" and I, "O my lord, I am glad in thy
gladness." He said, "O Ishak, sing to me." So I took the lute
by way of jest, and cried, "I hear and I obey." When I had
made an end of my song, he said to me, "O Ishak, thou comest
nigh to be a singer!" His words belittled me in mine own eyes
and I threw the lute from my hand, whereupon he said, "Hast
thou not with thee some one who is skilled in singing?" Quoth
I, "I have a damsel with me;" and quoth he "Bid her sing." I
asked him, "Wilt thou sing, when thou hast had enough of her
singing?"; and he answered "Yes." So she sang and he said,
"Nay, thou hast shown no art." Whereupon she flung the lute
from her hand in wrath and cried, "We have done our best: if
thou have aught, favour us with it by way of an alms." Quoth
he, "Bring me a lute hand hath not touched." So I bade the
servant bring him a new lute and he tuned it and preluding in
a mode I knew not began to sing, improvising these couplets,

"Clove through the shades and came to me in night so dark and
     sore * The lover weeting of herself 'twas trysting tide
     once more:
Naught startled us but her salaam and first of words she said
     * 'May a beloved enter in who standeth at the door!'"

When the girl heard this, she looked at me askance and said,
"What secret was between us could not thy breast hold for one
hour, but thou must discover it to this man?" However, I swore
to her that I had not told him and excused myself to her and
fell to kissing her hands and tickling her breasts and biting
her cheeks, till she laughed and, turning to the blind man,
said to him, "Sing, O my lord!" So he took the lute and sang
these two couplets,

"Ah, often have I sought the fair; how often fief and fain *
     My palming felt the finger ends that bear the varied
     stain!
And tickled pouting breasts that stand firm as pomegranates
     twain * And bit the apple of her cheek kissed o'er and
     o'er again."

So I said to her, "O my princess, who can have told him what
we were about?" Replied she, "True," and we moved away from
him. Presently quoth he, "I must make water;" and quoth I, "O
boy, take the candle and go before him." Then he went out and
tarried a long while. So we went in search of him, but could
not find him; and behold, the doors were locked and the keys
in the closet, and we knew not whether to heaven he had flown
or into earth had sunk. Wherefore I knew that he was Iblis and
that he had done me pimp's duty, and I returned, recalling to
my self the words of Abu Nowas in these couplets,

"I marvel in Iblis such pride to see * Beside his low intent
     and villainy:
He sinned to Adam who to bow refused, * Yet pimps for all of
     Adam's progeny,"

And they tell a tale concerning




                  THE LOVERS OF AL-MEDINAH.



Quoth Ibrahim the father of Ishak,[FN#172] I was ever a
devoted friend to the Barmecide family. And it so happened to
me one day, as I sat at home quite alone, a knock was heard at
the door; so my servant went out and returned, saying, "A
comely youth is at the door, asking admission." I bade admit
him and there came in to me a young man, on whom were signs of
sickness, and he said, "I have long wished to meet thee, for I
have need of thine aid." "What is it thou requirest?" asked I.
Whereupon he pulled out three hundred dinars and laying them
before me, said, "I beseech thee to accept these and compose
me an air to two couplets I have made." Said I, "Repeat them
to me;"--and Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when the youth came in to Ibrahim and placed the gold in his
hands, saying, "Prithee accept it and compose me an air to two
couplets," he replied, "Recite them to me," whereupon he
recited,

"By Allah, glance of mine! thou hast opprest * My heart, so
     quench the fire that burns my breast
Blames me the world because in him[FN#173] * I live Yet cannot
     see him till in shroud I rest."

Accordingly, quoth Ibrahim, I set the verses to an air
plaintive as a dirge and sang it to him; whereupon he swooned
away and I thought that he was dead. However, after a while,
he came to himself, and said to me, "Repeat the air." But I
conjured him by Allah to excuse me, saying, "I fear lest thou
die." "Would Heaven it were so!" replied he and ceased not
humbly to importune me, till I had pity on him and repeated
it; whereupon he cried out with a grievous cry and fell into a
fit worse than before and I doubted not but that he was dead;
but I sprinkled rose water on him till he revived and sat up.
I praised Allah for his recovery and laying the ducats before
him, said, "Take thy money and depart from me." Quoth he, "I
have no need of the money and thou shalt have the like of it,
if thou wilt repeat the air." My breast broadened at the
mention of the money and I said, "I will repeat it, but on
three conditions: the first, that thou tarry with me and eat
of my victual, till thou regain strength; the second, that
thou drink wine enough to hearten thy heart, and the third,
that thou tell me thy tale." He agreed to this and ate and
drank; after which he said, "I am of the citizens of
Al-Medinah and I went forth one day a pleasuring with my
friends; and, following the road to Al-Akik,[FN#174] saw a
company of girls and amongst them a damsel as she were a
branch pearled with dew with eyes whose sidelong glances were
never withdrawn till they had stolen away his soul who looked
on them. The maidens rested in the shade till the end of the
day, when they went away leaving in my heart wounds slow to
heal. I returned next morning to scent out news of her, but
found none who could tell me of her; so I sought her in the
streets and markets, but could come on no trace of her;
wherefore I fell ill of grief and told my case to one of my
kinsmen, who said to me, 'No harm shall befall thee: the days
of spring are not yet past and the skies show sign of
rain,[FN#175] whereupon she will go forth, and I will go out
with thee, and do thou thy will.' His words comforted my heart
and I waited till al-Akik ran with water, when I went
forthwith my friends and kinsmen and sat in the very same
place where I first saw her. We had not been seated long
before up came the women, like horses running for a wager; and
I whispered to a girl of my kindred, 'Say to yonder damse--
'Quoth this man to thee, He did well who spoke this couplet,

'She shot my heart with shaft, then turned on heel * And
     flying dealt fresh wound and scarring wheel.'

So she went to her and repeated my words, to which she replied
saying, 'Tell him that he said well who answered in this
couplet,

'The like of whatso feelest thou we feel; * Patience!
     perchance swift cure our hearts shall heal.'

I refrained from further speech for fear of scandal and rose
to go away. She rose at my rising, and I followed and she
looked back at me, till she saw I had noted her abode. Then
she began to come to me and I to go to her, so that we
foregathered and met often, till the case was noised abroad
and grew notorious and her sire came to know of it. However I
ceased not to meet her most assiduously and complained of my
condition to my father, who assembled our kindred and repaired
to ask her in marriage for me, of her sire, who cried, 'Had
this been proposed to me before he gave her a bad name by his
assignations, I would have consented; but now the thing is
notorious and I am loath to verify the saying of the folk.' "
Then (continued Ibrahim) I repeated the air to him and he went
away, after having acquainted me with his abode, and we became
friends. Now I was devoted to the Barmecides; so next time
Ja'afar bin Yahya sat to give audience, I attended, as was my
wont, and sang to him the young man's verses. They pleased him
and he drank some cups of wine and said, "Fie upon thee whose
song is this?" So I told him the young man's tale and he bade
me ride over to him and give him assurances of the winning of
his wish. Accordingly I fetched him to Ja'afar who asked him
to repeat his story. He did so and Ja'afar said, "Thou art now
under my protection: trust me to marry thee to her." So his
heart was comforted and he abode with us. When the morning
morrowed Ja'afar mounted and went in to Al-Rashid, to whom he
related the story. The Caliph was pleased with it and sending
for the young man and myself, commanded me to repeat the air
and drank thereto. Then he wrote to the Governor of Al-Hijaz,
bidding him despatch the girl's father and his household in
honour able fashion to his presence and spare no expense for
their outfit. So, in a little while, they came and the Caliph,
sending for the man, commanded him to marry his daughter to
her lover; after which he gave him an hundred thousand dinars,
and the father went back to his folk. As for the young man, he
abode one of Ja'afar's cup companions till there happened what
happened[FN#176] whereupon he returned with his household to
al-Medinah; may Almighty Allah have mercy upon their souls one
and all! And they also tell, O auspicious King, a tale of




               AL-MALIK AL-NASIR AND HIS WAZIR.



There was given to Abu Amir bin Marwan,[FN#177] a boy of the
Christians, than whom never fell eyes on a handsomer. Al-Nasir
the conquering Soldan saw him and said to Abu Amir, who was
his Wazir, "Whence cometh this boy?" Replied he, "From Allah;"
whereupon the other, "Wilt thou terrify us with stars and make
us prisoner with moons?" Abu Amir excused himself to him and
preparing a present, sent it to him with the boy, to whom he
said, "Be thou part of the gift: were it not of necessity, my
soul had not consented to give thee away." And he wrote with
him these two couplets,

"My lord, this full moon takes in Heaven of thee new birth; *
     Nor can deny we Heaven excelleth humble earth:
Thee with my soul I please and oh! the pleasant case! * No man
     e'er saw I who to give his soul prefer'th."

The thing pleased Al-Nasir and he requited him with much
treasure and the Minister became high in favour with him.
After this, there was presented to the Wazir a slave girl, one
of the loveliest women in the world, and he feared lest this
should come to the King's ears and he desire her, and the like
should happen as with the boy. So he made up a present still
costlier than the first and sent it with her to the King,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir Abu Amir, when presented with the beautiful slave girl,
feared lest it come to the Conquering King's ears and that the
like should happen as with the boy, so he made up a present
still costlier than the first and sent it with her to his
master, accompanying it with these couplets,

"My lord, this be the Sun, the Moon thou hadst before; * So
     the two greater lights now in thy Heaven unite:
Conjunction promising to me prosperity, * And Kausar draught
     to thee and Eden's long delight.
Earth shows no charms, by Allah, ranking as their third, * Nor
     King who secondeth our Conquering King in might."

Wherefore his credit redoubled with al-Nasir; but, after a
while, one of his enemies maligned him to the King, alleging
that there still lurked in him a hot lust for the boy and that
he ceased not to desire him, whenever the cool northern
breezes moved him, and to gnash his teeth for having given him
away. Cried the King, "Wag not thou thy tongue at him, or I
will shear off thy head." However, he wrote Abu Amir a letter,
as from the boy. to the following effect: "O my lord, thou
knowest that thou wast all and one to me and that I never
ceased from delight with thee. Albeit I am with the Sultan,
yet would I choose rather solitude with thee, but that I fear
the King's majesty: wherefore devise thou to demand me of
him." This letter he sent to Abu Amir by a little foot page,
whom he enjoined to say, "This is from such an one: the King
never speaketh to him." When the Wazir read the letter and
heard the cheating message, he noted the poison
draught[FN#178] and wrote on the back of the note these
couplets,

"Shall man experience-lectured ever care * Fool-like to thrust
     his head in lion's lair?
I'm none of those whose wits to love succumb * Nor witless of
     the snares my foes prepare:
Wert thou my sprite, I'd give thee loyally; * Shall sprite,
     from body sundered, backwards fare?"

When al-Nasir knew of this answer, he marvelled at the Wazir's
quickness of wit and would never again lend ear to aught of
insinuations against him. Then said he to him, "How didst thou
escape falling into the net?" And he replied, "Because my
reason is unentangled in the toils of passion." And they also
tell a tale of




           THE ROGUERIES OF DALILAH THE CRAFTY AND
                HER DAUGHTER ZAYNAB THE CONEY-
                       CATCHER.[FN#179]



There lived in the time of Harun al-Rashid a man named Ahmad 
al-Danaf and another Hasan Shuman[FN#180] hight, the twain
past-masters in fraud and feints, who had done rare things in
their day;  wherefore the Caliph invested them with caftans of
honour and  made them Captains of the Watch for Baghdad (Ahmad
of the  right hand and Hasan of the left hand); and appointed
to each of  them a stipend of a thousand dinars a month and
forty stalwart  men to be at their bidding. Moreover to
Calamity Ahmad was  committed the watch of the district
outside the walls. So Ahmad  and Hasan went forth in company
of the Emir Khalid, the Wali  or Chief of Police, attended
each by his forty followers on horse-back, and preceded by the
Crier, crying aloud and saying, "By  command of the Caliph!
None is captain of the watch of  the right hand but Ahmad al-
Danaf and none is captain of the  watch of the left hand but
Hasan Shuman, and both are to  be obeyed when they bid and are
to be held in all honour and  worship." Now there was in the
city an old woman called Dalilah  the Wily, who had a daughter
by name Zaynab the Coney-catcher.  They heard the proclamation
made and Zaynab said to Dalilah,  "See, O my mother, this
fellow, Ahmad al-Danaf! He came  hither from Cairo, a
fugitive, and played the double-dealer in  Baghdad, till he
got into the Caliph's company and is now become  captain of
the right hand, whilst that mangy chap Hasan Shuman  is
captain of the left hand, and each hath a table spread morning 
and evening and a monthly wage of a thousand dinars; whereas 
we abide unemployed and neglected in this house, without
estate  and without honour, and have none to ask of us." Now
Dalilah's  husband had been town-captain of Baghdad with a
monthly wage  of one thousand dinars; but he died leaving two
daughters, one  married and with a son by name Ahmad al-
Lakit[FN#181] or Ahmad the  Abortion; and the other called
Zaynab, a spinster. And this  Dalilah was a past mistress in
all manner of craft and trickery and  double dealing; she
could wile the very dragon out of his den  and Iblis himself
might have learnt deceit of her. Her father[FN#182]  had also
been governor of the carrier-pigeons to the Caliph with a 
solde of one thousand dinars a month. He used to rear the
birds  to carry letters and messages, wherefore in time of
need each was  dearer to the Caliph than one of his own sons.
So Zaynab said  to her mother, "Up and play off some feint and
fraud that may  haply make us notorious"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn  of day and ceased saying her permitted
say. 

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night, 

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Zaynab  thus addressed her dam, "Up and play off some feint
and fraud  which may haply make us notorious in Baghdad, so
perchance we  shall win our father's stipend for ourselves."
Replied the old  trot, "As thy head liveth, O my daughter, I
will play off higher-class rogueries in Baghdad than ever
played Calamity Ahmad or  Hasan the Pestilent." So saying, she
rose and threw over her  face the Lisam-veil and donned
clothes such as the poorer Sufis  wear, petticoat-trousers
falling over her heels, and a gown of  white wool with a broad
girdle. She also took a pitcher[FN#183] and  filled it with
water to the neck; after which she set three dinars in  the
mouth and stopped it up with a plug of palm-fibre. Then she 
threw round her shoulder, baldrick-wise, a rosary as big as a
load  of firewood, and taking in her hand a flag, made of
parti-coloured  rags, red and yellow and green, went out,
crying, "Allah! Allah!"  with tongue celebrating the praises
of the Lord, whilst her heart  galloped in the Devil's race-
course, seeking how she might play  some sharping trick upon
town. She walked from street to street,  till she came to an
alley swept and watered and marble-paved,  where she saw a
vaulted gateway, with a threshold of alabaster,  and a Moorish
porter standing at the door, which was of sandalwood  plated
with brass and furnished with a ring of silver for  knocker.
Now this house belonged to the Chief of the Caliph's 
Serjeant-ushers, a man of great wealth in fields, houses and
allowances,  called the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarik, or Evil of
the Way,  and therefor called because his blow forewent his
word. He was  married to a fair damsel, Khatun[FN#184] hight,
whom he loved and who  had made him swear, on the night of his
going in unto her, that  he would take none other to wife over
her nor lie abroad for a  single night. And so things went on
till one day, he went to the  Divan and saw that each Emir had
with him a son or two. Then  he entered the Hammam-bath and
looking at his face in the  mirror, noted that the white hairs
in his beard overlay its black,  and he said in himself, "Will
not He who took thy sire bless thee  with a son?" So he went
in to his wife, in angry mood, and she  said to him, "Good
evening to thee"; but he replied, "Get thee  out of my sight:
from the day I saw thee I have seen naught of  good." "How
so?" quoth she. Quoth he, "On the night of my  going in unto
thee, thou madest me swear to take no other wife  over thee,
and this very day I have seen each Emir with a son  and some
with two. So I minded me of death[FN#185]; and also that to 
me hath been vouchsafed neither son nor daughter and that 
whoso leaveth no male hath no memory. This, then, is the 
reason of my anger, for thou art barren; and knowing thee is
like  planing a rock." Cried she, "Allah's name upon thee.
Indeed,  I have worn out the mortars with beating wool and
pounding  drugs,[FN#186] and I am not to blame; the barrenness
is with thee, for  that thou art a snub-nosed mule and thy
sperm is weak and  watery and impregnateth not neither getteth
children." Said he,  "When I return from my journey, I will
take another wife;" and  she, "My luck is with Allah!" Then he
went out from her and  both repented of the sharp words spoken
each to other. Now as  the Emir's wife looked forth of her
lattice, as she were a Bride of  the Hoards[FN#187] for the
jewellery upon her, behold, there stood  Dalilah espying her
and seeing her clad in costly clothes and  ornaments, said to
herself, "'Twould be a rare trick, O Dalilah, to  entice
yonder young lady from her husband's house and strip her  of
all her jewels and clothes and make off with the whole lot." 
So she took up her stand under the windows of the Emir's
house,  and fell to calling aloud upon Allah's name and
saying, "Be  present, O ye Walis, ye friends of the Lord!"
Whereupon every  woman in the street looked from her lattice
and, seeing a matron  clad, after Sufi fashion, in clothes of
white wool, as she were a  pavilion of light, said, "Allah
bring us a blessing by the aidance  of this pious old person,
from whose face issueth light!" And  Khatun, the wife of the
Emir Hasan, burst into tears and said to  her handmaid, "Get
thee down, O Makbulah, and kiss the hand of  Shaykh Abu Ali,
the porter, and say to him, 'Let yonder  Religious enter to my
lady, so haply she may get a blessing of  her.'" So she went
down to the porter and kissing his hand, said  to him, "My
mistress telleth thee, 'Let yonder pious old woman  come in to
me, so may I get a blessing of her'; and belike her 
benediction may extend to us likewise."--And Shahrazad 
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

            When it was the Seven Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the 
handmaid went down and said to the porter, "Suffer yonder 
Religious enter to my lady so haply she may get a blessing of 
her, and we too may be blessed, one and all," the gate-keeper 
went up to Dalilah and kissed her hand, but she forbade him, 
saying, "Away from me, lest my ablution be made null and 
void.[FN#188] Thou, also, art of the attracted God-wards and
kindly  looked upon by Allah's Saints and under His especial
guardianship.  May He deliver thee from this servitude, O Abu
Ali!"  Now the Emir owed three months' wage to the porter who
was  straitened thereby, but knew not how to recover his due
from his  lord; so he said to the old woman, "O my mother,
give me to  drink from thy pitcher, so I may win a blessing
through thee."  She took the ewer from her shoulder and
whirled it about in air,  so that the plug flew out of its
mouth and the three dinars fell to  the ground. The porter saw
them and picked them up, saying in  his mind, "Glory to God!
This old woman is one of the Saints that  have hoards at their
command! It hath been revealed to her of  me that I am in want
of money for daily expenses; so she hath  conjured me these
three dinars out of the air." Then said he to  her, "Take, O
my aunt, these three dinars which fell from thy  pitcher;" and
she replied, "Away with them from me! I am of  the folk who
occupy not themselves with the things of the world,  no never!
Take them and use them for thine own benefit, in  lieu of
those the Emir oweth thee." Quoth he, "Thanks to Allah  for
succour! This is of the chapter of revelation!" Thereupon  the
maid accosted her and kissing her hand, carried her up to her 
mistress. She found the lady as she were a treasure, whose 
guardian talisman had been loosed; and Khatun bade her 
welcome and kissed her hand. Quoth she, "O my daughter, I 
come not to thee save for thy weal and by Allah's will." Then 
Khatun set food before her; but she said, "O my daughter, I
eat  naught except of the food of Paradise and I keep
continual fast  breaking it but five days in the year. But, O
my child, I see thee  chagrined and desire that thou tell me
the cause of thy concern."  "O my mother," replied Khatun, "I
made my husband swear, on  my wedding-night, that he would
wive none but me, and he saw  others with children and longed
for them and said to me, 'Thou art  a barren thing!' I
answered, 'Thou art a mule which begetteth  not'; so he left
me in anger, saying, 'When I come back from my  journey, I
will take another wife,' for he hath villages and lands  and
large allowances, and if he begat children by another, they 
will possess the money and take the estates from me." Said 
Dalilah, "O my daughter, knowest thou not of my master, the 
Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat,[FN#189] whom if any debtor visit, Allah 
quitteth him his debt, and if a barren woman, she conceiveth?" 
Khatun replied, "O my mother, since the day of my wedding I 
have not gone forth the house, no, not even to pay visits of 
condolence or congratulation." The old woman rejoined, "O my 
child, I will carry thee to him and do thou cast thy burden on 
him and make a vow to him: haply when thy husband shall 
return from his journey and lie with thee thou shalt conceive
by  him and bear a girl or a boy: but, be it female or male,
it shall  be a dervish of the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat." Thereupon
Khatun  rose and arrayed herself in her richest raiment, and
donning all  her jewellery said, "Keep thou an eye on the
house," to her  maid, who replied, "I hear and obey, O my
lady." Then she  went down and the porter Abu Ali met her and
asked her,  "Whither away, O my lady?" "I go to visit the
Shaykh Abu  al-Hamlat;" answered she; and he, "Be a year's
fast incumbent  on me! Verily yon Religious is of Allah's
saints and full of  holiness, O my lady, and she hath hidden
treasure at her  command, for she gave me three dinars of red
gold and divined  my case, without my asking her, and knew
that I was in want."  Then the old woman went out with the
young lady Khatun,  saying to her, "Inshallah, O my daughter,
when thou hast visited  the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat, there shall
betide thee solace of soul  and by leave of Almighty Allah
thou shalt conceive, and thy  husband the Emir shall love thee
by the blessing of the Shaykh  and shall never again let thee
hear a despiteful word." Quoth  Khatun, "I will go with thee
to visit him, O my mother!" But  Dalilah said to herself,
"Where shall I strip her and take her  clothes and jewellery,
with the folk coming and going?" Then  she said to her, "O my
daughter, walk thou behind me, within  sight of me, for this
thy mother is a woman sorely burdened;  everyone who hath a
burden casteth it on me and all who have  pious
offerings[FN#190] to make give them to me and kiss my hand." 
So the young lady followed her at a distance, whilst her
anklets  tinkled and her hair-coins[FN#191] clinked as she
went, till they reached  the bazar of the merchants.
Presently, they came to the shop of a  young merchant, by name
Sidi Hasan who was very handsome[FN#192]  and had no hair on
his face. He saw the lady approaching and  fell to casting
stolen glances at her, which when the old woman  saw, she
beckoned to her and said, "Sit down in this shop,  till I
return to thee." Khatun obeyed her and sat down in the  shop-
front of the young merchant, who cast at her one glance of 
eyes that cost him a thousand sighs. Then the old woman 
accosted him and saluted him, saying, "Tell me, is not thy 
name Sidi Hasan, son of the merchant Mohsin?" He replied, 
"Yes, who told thee my name?" Quoth she, "Folk of good  repute
direct me to thee. Know that this young lady is my  daughter
and her father was a merchant who died and left her  much
money. She is come of marriageable age and the wise  say,
'Offer thy daughter in marriage and not thy son'; and all  her
life she hath not come forth the house till this day. Now a 
divine warning and a command given in secret bid me wed her 
to thee; so, if thou art poor, I will give thee capital and
will  open for thee instead of one shop two shops." Thereupon
quoth  the young merchant to himself, "I asked Allah for a
bride, and  He hath given me three things, to wit, coin,
clothing, and coynte."  Then he continued to the old trot, "O
my mother, that where-to thou directest me is well; but this
long while my mother  saith to me, 'I wish to marry thee,' but
I object replying, 'I will  not marry except on the sight of
my own eyes.'" Said Dalilah,  "Rise and follow my steps, and I
will show her to thee, naked."[FN#193]  So he rose and took a
thousand dinars, saying in himself,  "Haply we may need to buy
somewhat"--And Shahrazad  perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

        When it was the Seven Hundred and First Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
old woman said to Hasan, son of Mohsin the merchant, "Rise  up
and follow me, and I will show her naked to thee." So he  rose
and took with him a thousand dinars, saying in himself, 
"Haply we may need to buy somewhat or pay the fees for 
drawing up the marriage contract." The old woman bade him 
walk behind the young lady at a distance but within shot of
sight  and said to herself, "Where wilt thou carry the young
lady and  the merchant that thou mayest strip them both whilst
his shop  is still shut?" Then she walked on and Khatun after
her,  followed by the young merchant, till she came to a
dyery, kept  by a master dyer, by name Hajj Mohammed, a man of
ill-repute;  like the colocasia[FN#194] seller's knife cutting
male and female, and  loving to eat both figs and
pomegranates.[FN#195] He heard the tinkle of  the ankle rings
and, raising his head, saw the lady and the young  man.
Presently the old woman came up to him and, after  salaming to
him and sitting down opposite him, asked him, "Art  thou not
Hajj Mohammed the dyer?" He answered, "Yes, I am  he: what
dost thou want?" Quoth she, "Verily, folks of fair  repute
have directed me to thee. Look at yonder handsome girl,  my
daughter, and that comely beardless youth, my son; I brought 
them both up and spent much money on both of them. Now,  thou
must know that I have a big old ruinous house which I have 
shored up with wood, and the builder saith to me, 'Go and 
live in some other place, lest belike it fall upon thee; and
when  this is repaired return hither.' So I went forth to seek
me a  lodging, and people of worth directed me to thee, and I
wish to  lodge my son and daughter with thee." Quoth the dyer
in his  mind, "Verily, here is fresh butter upon cake come to
thee." But  he said to the old woman, "'Tis true I have a
house and saloon  and upper floor; but I cannot spare any part
thereof, for I want it  all for guests and for the indigo-
growers my clients." She replied,  "O my son, 'twill be only
for a month or two at the most, till our  house be repaired,
and we are strange folk. Let the guest-chamber  be shared
between us and thee, and by thy life, O my son, an thou 
desire that thy guests be ours, we will welcome them and eat
with  them and sleep with them." Then he gave her the keys,
one big  and one small and one crooked, saying to her "The big
key is  that of the house, the crooked one that of the saloon
and the little  one that of the upper floor." So Dalilah took
the keys and fared  on, followed by the lady who forwent the
young merchant, till  she came to the lane wherein was the
house. She opened the  door and entered, introducing the
damsel to whom said she, "O  my daughter, this (pointing to
the saloon) is the lodging of the  Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat; but
go thou into the upper floor and  loose thy outer veil and
wait till I come to thee." So she went  up and sat down.
Presently appeared the young merchant, whom  Dalilah carried
into the saloon, saying, "Sit down, whilst I fetch  my
daughter and show her to thee." So he sat down and the old 
trot went up to Khatun who said to her, "I wish to visit the 
Shaykh, before the folk come." Replied the beldame, "O my 
daughter, we fear for thee." Asked Khatun, "Why so?" and 
Dalilah answered, "Because here is a son of mine, a natural
who  knoweth not summer from winter, but goeth ever naked. He
is  the Shaykh's deputy and, if he saw a girl like thee come
to visit  his chief, he would snatch her earrings and tear her
ears and rend  her silken robes.[FN#196] So do thou doff thy
jewellery and clothes and  I will keep them for thee, till
thou hast made thy pious visitation."  Accordingly the damsel
did off her outer dress and jewels and  gave them to the old
woman, who said, "I will lay them for thee  on the Shaykh's
curtain, that a blessing may betide thee." Then  she went out,
leaving the lady in her shift and petticoat-trousers,  and hid
the clothes and jewels in a place on the staircase; after 
which she betook herself to the young merchant, whom she found 
impatiently awaiting the girl, and he cried, "Where is thy 
daughter, that I may see her?" But she smote palm on breast 
and he said "What aileth thee?" Quoth she, "Would there  were
no such thing as the ill neighbour and the envious! They  saw
thee enter the house with me and asked me of thee; and I 
said, 'This is a bridegroom I have found for my daughter.' So 
they envied me on thine account and said to my girl, 'Is thy
mother  tired of keeping thee, that she marrieth thee to a
leper?' There-upon I swore to her that she should not see thee
save naked."  Quoth he, "I take refuge with Allah from the
envious," and baring  his fore-arm, showed her that it was
like silver. Said she, "Have  no fear; thou shalt see her
naked, even as she shall see thee  naked;" and he said, "Let
her come and look at me. Then he  put off his pelisse and
sables and his girdle and dagger and the  rest of his raiment,
except his shirt and bag-trousers, and would  have laid the
purse of a thousand dinars with them, but Dalilah  cried,
'Give them to me, that I may take care of them." So she  took
them and fetching the girl's clothes and jewellery shouldered 
the whole and locking the door upon them went her ways.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her 
permitted say.

       When it was the Seven Hundred and Second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
the old woman had taken the property of the young merchant and 
the damsel and wended her ways, having locked the door upon 
them, she deposited her spoils with a druggist of her
acquaintance  and returned to the dyer, whom she found
sitting, awaiting her.  Quoth he, "Inshallah, the house
pleaseth thee?"; and quoth she,  "There is a blessing in it;
and I go now to fetch porters to carry  hither our goods and
furniture. But my children would have me  bring them a panade
with meat; so do thou take this dinar and  buy the dish and go
and eat the morning meal with them." Asked  the dyer, "Who
shall guard the dyery meanwhile and the people's  goods that
be therein?"; and the old woman answered, "Thy  lad!" "So be
it," rejoined he, and taking a dish and cover, went  out to do
her bidding. So far concerning the dyer who will again  be
mentioned in the tale; but as regards the old woman, she 
fetched the clothes and jewels she had left with the druggist
and  going back to the dyery, said to the lad, "Run after thy
master,  and I will not stir hence till you both return." "To
hear is to  obey," answered he and went away, while she began
to collect all  the customers' goods. Presently, there came up
an ass-driver, a  scavenger, who had been out of work for a
week and who was an  Hashish-eater to boot; and she called
him, saying, "Hither, O  donkey-boy!" So he came to her and
she asked, "Knowest thou  my son the dyer?"; whereto he
answered, "Yes, I know him."  Then she said, "The poor fellow
is insolvent and loaded with  debts, and as often as he is put
in prison, I set him free. Now  we wish to see him declared
bankrupt and I am going to return  the goods to their owners;
so do thou lend me thine ass to carry  the load and receive
this dinar to its hire. When I am gone, take  the handsaw and
empty out the vats and jars and break them, so  that if there
come an officer from the Kazi's court, he may find  nothing in
the dyery." Quoth he, "I owe the Hajj a kindness  and will do
something for Allah's love." So she laid the things  on the
ass and, the Protector protecting her, made for her own 
house; so that she arrived there in safety and went in to her 
daughter Zaynab, who said to her, "O my mother, my heart bath 
been with thee! What hast thou done by way of roguery?" 
Dalilah replied, "I have played off four tricks on four
wights; the  wife of the Serjeant-usher, a young merchant, a
dyer and an ass-driver, and have brought thee all their spoil
on the donkey-boy's  beast." Cried Zaynab, "O my mother, thou
wilt never more be  able to go about the town, for fear of the
Serjeant-usher, whose  wife's raiment and jewellery thou hast
taken, and the merchant  whom thou hast stripped naked, and
the dyer whose customers'  goods thou hast stolen and the
owner of the ass." Rejoined the  old woman, "Pooh, my girl! I
reck not of them, save the donkey-boy, who knoweth me."
Meanwhile the dyer bought the meat-panade and set out for the
house, followed by his servant with the  food on head. On his
way thither, he passed his shop, where he  found the donkey-
boy breaking the vats and jars and saw that  there was neither
stuff nor liquor left in them and that the dyery  was in
ruins. So he said to him, "Hold thy hand, O ass-driver;"  and
the donkey-boy desisted and cried, "Praised be Allah for thy 
safety, O master! Verily my heart was with thee." "Why so?" 
"Thou art become bankrupt and they have filed a docket of
thine  insolvency." "Who told thee this?" "Thy mother told me,
and  bade me break the jars and empty the vats, that the
Kazi's officers  might find nothing in the shop, if they
should come." "Allah  confound the far One!"[FN#197] cried the
dyer; "My mother died long  ago." And he beat his breast,
exclaiming, "Alas, for the loss of  my goods and those of the
folk!" The donkey-boy also wept  and ejaculated, "Alas, for
the loss of my ass!"; and he said to  the dyer, "Give me back
my beast which thy mother stole from  me." The dyer laid hold
of him by the throat and fell to buffeting  him, saying,
"Bring me the old woman;" whilst the other buffeted  him in
return saying, "Give me back my beast." So they beat  and
cursed each other, till the folk collected around them--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her 
permitted say.

        When it was the Seven Hundred and Third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
dyer caught hold of the donkey-boy and the donkey-boy caught 
hold of the dyer and they beat and cursed each other till the
folk  collected round them and one of them asked, "What is the
matter,  O Master Mohammed?" The ass-driver answered, "I will
tell  thee the tale," and related to them his story, saying,
"I deemed I  was doing the dyer a good turn; but, when he saw
me he beat his  breast and said, 'My mother is dead.' And now,
I for one require  my ass of him, it being he who hath put
this trick on me, that he  might make me lose my beast." Then
said the folk to the dyer,  "O Master Mohammed, dost thou know
this matron, that thou  didst entrust her with the dyery and
all therein?" And he  replied, "I know her not; but she took
lodgings with me to-day,  she and her son and daughter." Quoth
one, "In my judgment,  the dyer is bound to indemnify the ass-
driver." Quoth another,  "Why so?" "Because," replied the
first, "he trusted not the old  Woman nor gave her his ass
save only because he saw that the  dyer had entrusted her with
the dyery and its contents." And a  third said, "O master,
since thou hast lodged her with thee, it  behoveth thee to get
the man back his ass." Then they made for  the house, and the
tale will come round to them again. Mean-while, the young
merchant remained awaiting the old woman's  coming with her
daughter, but she came not nor did her daughter;  w