hilst the
young lady in like manner sat expecting her return  with leave
from her son, the God-attended one, the Shaykh's  deputy, to
go in to the holy presence. So weary of waiting, she  rose to
visit the Shaykh by herself and went down into the saloon, 
where she found the young merchant, who said to her, "Come 
hither! where is thy mother, who brought me to marry thee?" 
She replied, "My mother is dead, art thou the old woman's son, 
the ecstatic, the deputy of the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat?" Quoth 
he, "The swindling old trot is no mother of mine; she hath 
cheated me and taken my clothes and a thousand dinars." Quoth 
Khatun, "And me also hath she swindled for she brought me to 
see the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat and in lieu of so doing she hath 
stripped me." Thereupon he, "I look to thee to make good my 
clothes and my thousand dinars;" and she, "I look to thee to 
make good my clothes and jewellery." And, behold, at this 
moment in came the dyer and seeing them both stripped of their 
raiment, said to them, "Tell me where your mother is." So the 
young lady related all that had befallen her and the young 
merchant related all that had betided him, and the Master-dyer 
exclaimed, "Alas, for the loss of my goods and those of the
folk!";  and the ass-driver ejaculated, "Alas, for my ass!
Give me, O  dyer, my ass!" Then said the dyer, "This old woman
is a  sharper. Come forth, that I may lock the door." Quoth
the  young merchant, "'Twere a disgrace to thee that we should
enter  thy house dressed and go forth from it undressed." So
the dyer  clad him and the damsel and sent her back to her
house where we  shall find her after the return of her
husband. Then he shut the  dyery and said to the young
merchant, "Come, let us go and  search for the old woman and
hand her over to the Wali,[FN#198] the  Chief of Police." So
they and the ass-man repaired to the house  of the master of
police and made their complaint to him. Quoth  he, "O folk,
what want ye?" and when they told him he rejoined,  "How many
old women are there not in the town! Go ye and  seek for her
and lay hands on her and bring her to me, and I will  torture
her for you and make her confess." So they sought for  her all
round the town; and an account of them will presently be 
given.[FN#199] As for old Dalilah the Wily, she said, "I have
a mind to  play off another trick," to her daughter who
answered, "O my  mother, I fear for thee;" but the beldam
cried, "I am like the bean  husks which fall, proof against
fire and water." So she rose, and  donning a slave-girl's
dress of such as serve people of condition,  went out to look
for some one to defraud. Presently she came to  a by-street,
spread with carpets and lighted with hanging lamps,  and heard
a noise of singing-women and drumming of tambourines.  Here
she saw a handmaid bearing on her shoulder a boy, clad in 
trousers laced with silver and a little Aba-cloak of velvet,
with a  pearl embroidered Tarbush-cap on his head, and about
his neck a  collar of gold set with jewels. Now the house
belonged to the  Provost of the Merchants of Baghdad, and the
boy was his son.  He had a virgin daughter, to boot, who was
promised in marriage,  and it was her betrothal they were
celebrating that day. There  was with her mother a company of
noble dames and singing-women, and whenever she went upstairs
or down, the boy clung  to her. So she called the slave-girl
and said to her, "Take thy  young master and play with him,
till the company break up."  Seeing this, Dalilah asked the
handmaid, "What festivities are  these in your mistress's
house;" and was answered "She celebrates  her daughter's
betrothal this day, and she hath singing-women  with her."
Quoth the old woman to herself, "O Dalilah, the  thing to do
is to spirit away this boy from the maid,"--And  Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her  permitted
say. 

       When it was the Seven Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the 
old trot said to herself, "O Dalilah, the thing to do is to
spirit  away this boy from the maid!" she began crying out, "O 
disgrace! O ill luck!" Then pulling out a brass token,
resembling  a dinar, she said to the maid, who was a
simpleton, "Take  this ducat and go in to thy mistress and say
to her, 'Umm  al-Khayr rejoiceth with thee and is beholden to
thee for thy  favours, and on the day of assembly she and her
daughters will  visit thee and handsel the tiring-women with
the usual gifts.'"  Said the girl, "O my mother, my young
master here catcheth hold  of his mamma, whenever he seeth
her;" and she replied "Give  him to me, whilst thou goest in
and comest back." So she gave  her the child and taking the
token, went in; whereupon Dalilah  made off with the boy to a
by-lane, where she stripped him of his  clothes and jewels,
saying to herself, "O Dalilah, 'twould indeed  be the finest
of tricks, even as thou hast cheated the maid and  taken the
boy from her, so now to carry on the game and pawn  him for a
thousand dinars." So she repaired to the jewel-bazar,  where
she saw a Jew goldsmith seated with a cage full of jewellery 
before him, and said to herself, "'Twould be a rare trick to 
chouse this Jew fellow and get a thousand gold pieces worth of 
jewellery from him and leave the boy in pledge for it."
Presently  the Jew looked at them and seeing the boy with the
old woman,  knew him for the son of the Provost of the
Merchants. Now the  Israelite was a man of great wealth, but
would envy his neighbour  if he sold and himself did not sell;
so espying Dalilah, he said to  her, "What seekest thou, O my
mistress?" She asked, "Art  thou Master Azariah[FN#200] the
Jew?" having first enquired his name  of others; and he
answered, "Yes." Quoth she, "This boy's  sister, daughter of
the Shahbandar of the Merchants, is a promised  bride, and to-
day they celebrate her betrothal; and she hath need  of
jewellery. So give me two pair of gold ankle-rings, a brace of 
gold bracelets, and pearl ear-drops, with a girdle, a poignard
and  a seal-ring." He brought them out and she took of him a
thousand  dinars' worth of jewellery, saying, "I will take
these ornaments on  approval; and whatso pleaseth them, they
will keep and I will  bring thee the price and leave this boy
with thee till then." He  said, "Be it as thou wilt!" So she
took the jewellery and made  off to her own house, where her
daughter asked her how the trick  had sped. She told her how
she had taken and stripped the  Shahbandar's boy, and Zaynab
said, "Thou wilt never be able to  walk abroad again in the
town." Meanwhile, the maid went in  to her mistress and said
to her, "O my lady, Umm al-Khayr  saluteth thee and rejoiceth
with thee and on assembly-day she  will come, she and her
daughters, and give the customary  presents." Quoth her
mistress, "Where is thy young master?"  Quoth the slave-girl,
"I left him with her lest he cling to thee,  and she gave me
this, as largesse for the singing-women." So  the lady said to
the chief of the singers, "Take thy money;" and  she took it
and found it a brass counter; whereupon the lady cried  to the
maid, "Get thee down, O whore, and look to thy young  master."
Accordingly, she went down and finding neither boy  nor old
woman, shrieked aloud and fell on her face. Their joy was 
changed into annoy, and behold, the Provost came in, when his 
wife told him all that had befallen and he went out in quest
of the  child, whilst the other merchants also fared forth and
each sought  his own road. Presently, the Shahbandar, who had
looked every-where, espied his son seated, naked, in the Jew's
shop and said to  tile owner, "This is my son." "'Tis well,"
answered the Jew. So  he took him up, without asking for his
clothes, of the excess of his  joy at finding him; but the Jew
laid hold of him, saying, "Allah  succour the Caliph against
thee!"[FN#201] The Provost asked, "What  aileth thee, O Jew?";
and he answered, "Verily the old woman  took of me a thousand
dinars' worth of jewellery for thy daughter,  and left this
lad in pledge for the price; and I had not trusted  her, but
that she offered to leave the child whom I knew for thy  Son."
Said the Provost, "My daughter needeth no jewellery, give  me
the boy's clothes." Thereupon the Jew shrieked out, "Come  to
my aid, O Moslems!" but at that moment up came the dyer  and
the ass-man and the young merchant, who were going about, 
seeking the old woman, and enquired the cause of their jangle. 
So they told them the case and they said, "This old woman is a 
cheat, who hath cheated us before you." Then they recounted to 
them how she had dealt with them, and the Provost said, "Since 
I have found my son, be his clothes his ransom! If I come upon 
the old woman, I will require them of her." And he carried the 
child home to his mother, who rejoiced in his safety. Then the 
Jew said to the three others "Whither go ye?"; and they 
answered, "We go to look for her." Quoth the Jew, "Take me 
with you," presently adding, "Is there any one of you knoweth 
her?" The donkey-boy cried, "I know her;" and the Jew said, 
"If we all go forth together, we shall never catch her; for
she will  flee from us. Let each take a different road, and be
our rendezvous  at the shop of Hajj Mas'ud, the Moorish
barber." They  agreed to this and set off, each in a different
direction. Presently,  Dalilah sallied forth again to play her
tricks and the ass-driver  met her and knew her. So he caught
hold of her and said to  her, "Woe to thee! Hast thou been
long at this trade?" She  asked, "What aileth thee?"; and he
answered, "Give me back  my ass." Quoth she, "Cover what Allah
covereth, O my son!  Dost thou seek thine ass and the people's
things?" Quoth he,  "I want my ass; that's all;" and quoth
she, "I saw that thou  wast poor: so I deposited thine ass for
thee with the Moorish  barber. Stand off, whilst I speak him
fair, that he may give thee  the beast." So she went up to the
Maghrabi and kissed his hand  and shed tears. He asked her
what ailed her and she said, "O  my son, look at my boy who
standeth yonder. He was ill and  exposed himself to the air,
which injured his intellect. He used  to buy asses and now, if
he stand he saith nothing but, My ass!  if he sit he crieth,
My ass! and if he walk he crieth, My ass!  Now I have been
told by a certain physician that his mind is  disordered and
that nothing will cure him but drawing two of his  grinders
and cauterising him twice on either temple. So do thou  take
this dinar and call him to thee, saying, 'Thine ass is with 
me.'" Said the barber, "May I fast for a year, if I do not
give him  his ass in his fist!" Now he had with him two
journeymen, so he  said to one of them "Go, heat the irons."
Then the old woman  went her way and the barber called to the
donkey-boy,[FN#202] saying,  "Thine ass is with me, good
fellow! come and take him, and as  thou livest, I will give
him into thy palm." So he came to him  and the barber carried
him into a dark room, where he knocked  him down and the
journeymen bound him hand and foot. Then  the Maghrabi arose
and pulled out two of his grinders and fired  him on either
temple; after which he let him go, and he rose and  said, "O
Moor, why hast thou used me with this usage?" Quoth  the
barber, "Thy mother told me that thou hadst taken cold whilst 
ill, and hadst lost thy reason, so that, whether sitting or
standing  or walking, thou wouldst say nothing but My ass! So
here is  thine ass in thy fist." Said the other, "Allah
requite thee for  pulling out my teeth." Then the barber told
him all that the old  woman had related and he exclaimed,
"Allah torment her!"; and  the twain left the shop and went
out, disputing. When the barber  returned, he found his booth
empty, for, whilst he was absent, the  old woman had taken all
that was therein and made off with it to  her daughter, whom
she acquainted with all that had befallen and  all she had
done. The barber, seeing his place plundered, caught  hold of
the donkey-boy and said to him, "Bring me thy mother"  But he
answered, saying, "She is not my mother; she is a sharper  who
hath cozened much people and stolen my ass." And lo! at  this
moment up came the dyer and the Jew and the young  merchant,
and seeing the Moorish barber holding on to the ass-driver who
was fired on both temples, they said to him, "What  hath
befallen thee, O donkey-boy?" So he told them all that  had
betided him and the barber did the like; and the others in 
turn related to the Moor the tricks the old woman had played 
them. Then he shut up his shop and went with them to the 
office of the Police-master to whom they said, "We look to 
thee for our case and our coin."[FN#203] Quoth the Wali, "And
how  many old women are there not in Baghdad! Say me, doth any 
of you know her?" Quoth the ass-man, "I do; so give me ten  of
thine officers." He gave them half a score archers and they 
all five went out, followed by the sergeants, and patrolled
the  city, till they met the old woman, when they laid hands
on her  and carrying her to the house of the Chief of Police,
stood waiting  under his office windows till he should come
forth. Presently,  the warders fell asleep, for excess of
watching with their chief,  and old Dalilah feigned to follow
their example, till the ass-man  and his fellows slept
likewise, when she stole away from them  and, going in to the
Wali's Harim, kissed the hand of the mistress  of the house
and asked her "Where is the Chief of Police?"  The lady
answered, "He is asleep; what wouldst thou with  him?" Quoth
Dalilah, "My husband is a merchant of chattels  and gave me
five Mamelukes to sell, whilst he went on a journey.  The
Master of Police met me and bought them of me for a  thousand
dinars and two hundred for myself, saying, 'Bring  them to my
house.' So I have brought them."--And  Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her  permitted say. 

        When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
old woman, entering the Harim of the Police-Master, said to
his  wife, "Verily the Wali bought of me five slaves for one
thousand  ducats and two hundred for myself, saying, 'Bring
them to my  quarters.' So I have brought them." Hearing the
old woman's  story she believed it and asked her, "Where are
the slaves?"  Dalilah replied, "O my lady, they are asleep
under the palace  window"; whereupon the dame looked out and
seeing the Moorish  barber clad in a Mameluke habit and the
young merchant as he  were a drunken Mameluke[FN#204] and the
Jew and the dyer and the ass-driver as they were shaven
Mamelukes, said in herself, "Each  of these white slaves is
worth more than a thousand dinars." So  she opened her chest
and gave the old woman the thousand ducats,  saying, "Fare
thee forth now and come back anon; when my  husband waketh, I
will get thee the other two hundred dinars from  him."
Answered the old woman, "O my lady, an hundred of them  are
thine, under the sherbert-gugglet whereof thou
drinkest,[FN#205] and  the other hundred do thou keep for me
against I come back,"  presently adding, "Now let me out by
the private door." So she  let her out, and the Protector
protected her and she made her way  home to her daughter, to
whom she related how she had gotten a  thousand gold pieces
and sold her five pursuers into slavery,  ending with, "O my
daughter, the one who troubleth me most is  the ass-driver,
for he knoweth me." Said Zaynab, "O my mother,  abide quiet
awhile and let what thou hast done suffice thee, for the 
crock shall not always escape the shock." When the Chief of 
Police awoke, his wife said to him, "I give thee joy of the
five  slaves thou hast bought of the old woman." Asked he,
"What  slaves?" And she answered, "Why dost thou deny it to
me?  Allah willing, they shall become like thee people of
condition."  Quoth he, "As my head liveth, I have bought no
slaves! Who  saith this?" Quoth she, "The old woman, the
brokeress, from  whom thou boughtest them; and thou didst
promise her a  thousand dinars for them and two hundred for
herself." Cried  he, "Didst thou give her the money?" And she
replied, "Yes;  for I saw the slaves with my own eyes, and on
each is a suit of  clothes worth a thousand dinars; so I sent
out to bid the sergeants  have an eye to them." The Wali went
out and, seeing the five  plaintiffs, said to the officers,
"Where are the five slaves we bought  for a thousand dinars of
the old woman?" Said they, "There  are no slaves here; only
these five men, who found the old woman,  and seized her and
brought her hither. We fell asleep, whilst  waiting for thee,
and she stole away and entered the Harim.  Presently out came
a maid and asked us, 'Are the five with you  with whom the old
woman came?'; and we answered, 'Yes.'"  Cried the Master of
Police, "By Allah, this is the biggest of  swindles!"; and the
five men said, "We look to thee for our  goods." Quoth the
Wali, "The old woman, your mistress, sold  you to me for a
thousand gold pieces." Quoth they, "That were  not allowed of
Allah; we are free-born men and may not be  sold, and we
appeal from thee to the Caliph." Rejoined the Master  of
Police, "None showed her the way to the house save you, and I 
will sell you to the galleys for two hundred dinars apiece."
Just  then, behold, up came the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarik who,
on his  return from his journey, had found his wife stripped
of her clothes  and jewellery and heard from her all that had
passed; whereupon  quoth he, "The Master of Police shall
answer me this" and  repairing to him, said "Dost thou suffer
old women to go round  about the town and cozen folk of their
goods? This is thy duty  and I look to thee for my wife's
property." Then said he to the  five men, "What is the case
with you?" So they told him their  stories and he said, "Ye
are wronged men," and turning to the  Master of Police, asked
him, "Why dost thou arrest them?"  Answered he, "None brought
the old wretch to my house save  these five, so that she took
a thousand dinars of my money and  sold them to my women."
Whereupon the five cried, "O Emir  Hasan, be thou our advocate
in this cause." Then said the Master  of Police to the Emir,
"Thy wife's goods are at my charge and I  will be surety for
the old woman. But which of you knoweth  her?" They cried, "We
all know her: send ten apparitors with  us, and we will take
her." So he gave them ten men, and the ass-driver said to
them, "Follow me, for I should know her with blue 
eyes."[FN#206] Then they fared forth and lo! they meet old
Dalilah  coming out of a by-street: so they at once laid hands
on her and  brought her to the office of the Wali who asked
her, "Where are  the people's goods?" But she answered,
saying, "I have neither  gotten them nor seen them." Then he
cried to the gaoler, "Take  her with thee and clap her in gaol
till the morning;" but he replied,  "I will not take her nor
will I imprison her lest she play a trick  on me and I be
answerable for her." So the Master of Police  mounted and rode
out with Dalilah and the rest to the bank of the  Tigris,
where he bade the lamp-lighter crucify her by her hair.  He
drew her up by the pulley and bound her on the cross; after 
which the Master of Police set ten men to guard her and went 
home. Presently, the night fell down and sleep overcame the 
watchmen. Now a certain Badawi had heard one man say to a 
friend, "Praise be to Allah for thy safe return! Where hast
thou  been all this time?" Replied the other, "In Baghdad
where I  broke my fast on honey-fritters."[FN#207] Quoth the
Badawi to himself  "Needs must I go to Baghdad and eat honey-
fritters therein"; for  in all his life he had never entered
Baghdad nor seen fritters of the  sort. So he mounted his
stallion and rode on towards Baghdad,  saying in his mind,
"'Tis a fine thing to eat honey-fritters! On the  honour of an
Arab, I will break my fast with honey-fritters and  naught
else!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and  ceased to
say her permitted say. 

        When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
wild  Arab mounted horse and made for Baghdad saying in his
mind,  "'Tis a fine thing to eat honey-fritters! On the honour
of an  Arab I will break my fast with honey-fritters and
naught else;"  and he rode on till he came to the place where
Dalilah was  crucified and she heard him utter these words. So
he went up  to her and said to her, "What art thou?" Quoth
she, "I throw  myself on thy protection, O Shaykh of the
Arabs!" and quoth  lie, "Allah indeed protect thee! But what
is the cause of thy  crucifixion?" Said she, "I have an enemy,
an oilman, who frieth  fritters, and I stopped to buy some of
him, when I chanced to spit  and my spittle fell on the
fritters. So he complained of me to the  Governor who
commanded to crucify me, saying, 'I adjudge  that ye take ten
pounds of honey-fritters and feed her therewith  upon the
cross. If she eat them, let her go, but if not, leave her 
hanging.' And my stomach will not brook sweet things." Cried 
the Badawi, "By the honour of the Arabs, I departed not the 
camp but that I might taste of honey-fritters! I will eat them 
for thee." Quoth she, "None may eat them, except he be hung 
up in my place." So he fell into the trap and unbound her; 
whereupon she bound him in her stead, after she had stripped
him  of his clothes and turband and put them on; then covering
herself  with his burnouse and mounting his horse, she rode to
her house,  where Zaynab asked her, "What meaneth this
plight?"; and she  answered, "They crucified me;" and told her
all that had befallen  her with the Badawi. This is how it
fared with her; but as regards  the watchmen, the first who
woke roused his companions and they  saw that the day had
broken. So one of them raised his eyes  and cried, "Dalilah."
Replied the Badawi, "By Allah! I have  not eaten all night.
Have ye brought the honey-fritters?" All  exclaimed, "This is
a man and a Badawi, and one of them  asked him, "O Badawi,
where is Dalilah and who loosed her?"  He answered, "'Twas I;
she shall not eat the honey-fritters against  her will; for
her soul abhorreth them." So they knew that the  Arab was
ignorant of her case, whom she had cozened, and said  to one
another, "Shall we flee or abide the accomplishment of that 
which Allah hath written for us?" As they were talking, up
came  the Chief of Police, with all the folk whom the old
woman had  cheated, and said to the guards, "Arise, loose
Dalilah." Quoth  the Badawi, "We have not eaten to-night. Hast
thou brought the  honey-fritters?" Whereupon the Wali raised
his eyes to the cross  and seeing the Badawi hung up in the
stead of the old woman,  said to the watchmen, "What is this?"
"Pardon, O our lord!"  "Tell me what hath happened" "We were
weary with watching  with thee on guard and , 'Dalilah is
crucified.' So we fell  asleep, and when we awoke, we found
the Badawi hung up in her  room; and we are at thy mercy." "O
folk, Allah's pardon be  upon you! She is indeed a clever
cheat!" Then they unbound  the Badawi, who laid hold of the
Master of Police, saying, "Allah  succour the Caliph against
thee! I look to none but thee for my  horse and clothes!" So
the Wali questioned him and he told  him what had passed
between Dalilah and himself. The magistrate  marvelled and
asked him, "Why didst thou release her?";  and the Badawi
answered, "I knew not that she was a felon."  Then said the
others, "O Chief of Police, we look to thee in the  matter of
our goods; for we delivered the old woman into thy  hands and
she was in thy guard; and we cite thee before the  Divan of
the Caliph." Now the Emir Hasan had gone up to the  Divan,
when in came the Wali with the Badawi and the five others, 
saying, "Verily, we are wronged men!" "Who hath wronged  you?"
asked the Caliph; so each came forward in turn and told  his
story, after which said the Master of Police, "O Commander  of
the Faithful, the old woman cheated me also and sold me these 
five men as slaves for a thousand dinars, albeit they are
free-born."  Quoth the Prince of True Believers, "I take upon
myself all that  you have lost"; adding to the Master of
Police, "I charge thee  with the old woman." But he shook his
collar, saying, "O Commander  of the Faithful, I will not
answer for her; for, after I had  hung her on the cross, she
tricked this Badawi and, when he loosed  her, she tied him up
in her room and made off with his clothes and  horse." Quoth
the Caliph, "Whom but thee shall I charge with  her?"; and
quoth the Wali, "Charge Ahmad al-Danaf, for he  hath a
thousand dinars a month and one-and-forty followers, at a 
monthly wage of an hundred dinars each." So the Caliph said, 
"Harkye, Captain Ahmad!" "At thy service, O Commander of  the
Faithful," said he; and the Caliph cried, "I charge thee to 
bring the old woman before us." Replied Ahmad, "I will answer 
for her." Then the Caliph kept the Badawi and the five with
him,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying  her permitted say. 

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventh Night, 

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
the Caliph said to Calamity Ahmad, "I charge thee to bring the 
old woman before us," he said, "I will answer for her O
Commander  of the Faithful!" Then the Caliph kept the Badawi
and  the five with him, whilst Ahmad and his men went down to
their  hall,[FN#208] saying to one another, "How shall we lay
hands on her,  seeing that there are many old women in the
town?" And quoth  Ahmad to Hasan Shuman, "What counsellest
thou?" Whereupon  quoth one of them, by name Ali Kitf al-
Jamal,[FN#209] to Al-Danaf, "Of  what dost thou take counsel
with Hasan Shuman? Is the Pestilent  one any great shakes?"
Said Hasan, "O Ali, why dost thou  disparage me? By the Most
Great Name, I will not company  with thee at this time!"; and
he rose and went out in wrath.  Then said Ahmad, "O my braves,
let every sergeant take ten men,  each to his own quarter and
search for Dalilah." All did his  bidding, Ali included, and
they said, "Ere we disperse let us agree  to rendezvous in the
quarter Al-Kalkh." It was noised abroad  in the city that
Calamity Ahmad had undertaken to lay hands on  Dalilah the
Wily, and Zaynab said to her, "O my mother, an thou  be indeed
a trickstress, do thou befool Ahmad al-Danaf and his 
company." Answered Dalilah, "I fear none save Hasan Shuman;" 
and Zaynab said, "By the life of my browlock, I will assuredly 
get thee the clothes of all the one-and-forty." Then she
dressed  and veiled herself and going to a certain druggist,
who had a  saloon with two doors, salamed to him and gave him
an ashrafi  and said to him, "Take this gold piece as a
douceur for thy saloon  and let it to me till the end of the
day." So he gave her the  keys and she fetched carpets and so
forth on the stolen ass and  furnishing the place, set on each
raised pavement a tray of meat  and wine. Then she went out
and stood at the door, with her  face unveiled and behold, up
came Ali Kitf al-Jamal and his  men. She kissed his hand; and
he fell in love with her, seeing  her to be a handsome girl,
and said to her, "What dost thou  want?" Quoth she, "Art thou
Captain Ahmad al-Danaf?";  and quoth he, "No, but I am of his
company and my name is  Ali Camel-shoulder." Asked she,
"Whither fare you?"; and he  answered, "We go about in quest
of a sharkish old woman, who  hath stolen folk's good, and we
mean to lay hands on her. But  who art thou and what is thy
business?" She replied, "My  father was a taverner at Mosul
and he died and left me much  money. So I came hither, for
fear of the Dignities, and asked  the people who would protect
me, to which they replied, 'None  but Ahmad al-Danaf.'" Said
the men, "From this day forth,  thou art under his
protection"; and she replied, "Hearten me  by eating a bit and
drinking a sup of water."[FN#210] They consented  and
entering, ate and drank till they were drunken, when she 
drugged them with Bhang and stripped them of their clothes and 
arms; and on like wise she did with the three other
companions.  Presently, Calamity Ahmad went out to look for
Dalilah, but  found her not, neither set eyes on any of his
followers, and went  on till he came to the door where Zaynab
was standing. She  kissed his hand and he looked on her and
fell in love with her.  Quoth she, "Art thou Captain Ahmad al-
Danaf?"; and quoth he,  "Yes: who art thou?" She replied, "I
am a stranger from  Mosul. My father was a vintner at that
place and he died and  left me much money wherewith I came to
this city, for fear of the  powers that be, and opened this
tavern. The Master of Police  hath imposed a tax on me, but it
is my desire to put myself under  thy protection and pay thee
what the police would take of me, for  thou hast the better
right to it." Quoth he, "Do not pay him  aught: thou shalt
have my protection and welcome." Then quoth  she, "Please to
heal my heart and eat of my victual," So he  entered and ate
and drank wine, till he could not sit upright, when  she
drugged him and took his clothes and arms. Then she loaded 
her purchase on the Badawi's horse and the donkey-boy's ass
and  made off with it, after she had aroused Ali Kitf al-
Jamal. Camel-shoulder awoke and found himself naked and saw
Ahmad and his  men drugged and stripped: so he revived them
with the counter-drug and they awoke and found themselves
naked. Quoth Calamity  Ahmad, "O lads, what is this? We were
going to catch her,  and lo! this strumpet hath caught us! How
Hasan Shuman will  rejoice over us! But we will wait till it
is dark and then go away."  Meanwhile Pestilence Hasan said to
the hall-keeper, "Where are  the men?"; and as he asked, up
they came naked; and he recited  these two couplets[FN#211], 

"Men in their purposes are much alike, * But in their issues
     difference comes to light:
Of men some wise are, others simple souls; * As of the stars
     some dull, some pearly bright. 

Then he looked at them and asked, "Who hath played you this 
trick and made you naked?"; and they answered, "We went in 
quest of an old woman, and a pretty girl stripped us." Quoth 
Hasan, "She hath done right well." They asked, "Dost thou 
know her?"; and he answered, "Yes, I know her and the old trot 
too." Quoth they, "What shall we say to the Caliph?"; and 
quoth he, "O Danaf, do thou shake thy collar before him, and
he  will say, 'Who is answerable for her'; and if he ask why
thou  hast not caught her; say thou, 'We know her not; but
charge  Hasan Shuman with her.' And if he give her into my
charge, I  will lay hands on her." So they slept that night
and on the  morrow they went up to the Caliph's Divan and
kissed ground  before him. Quoth he, "Where is the old woman,
O Captain  Ahmad?" But he shook his collar. The Caliph asked
him why  he did so, and he answered, "I know her not; but do
thou charge  Hasan Shuman to lay hands on her, for he knoweth
her and her  daughter also." Then Hasan interceded for her
with the Caliph,  saying, "Indeed, she hath not played off
these tricks, because she  coveted the folk's stuff, but to
show her cleverness and that of her  daughter, to the intent
that thou shouldst continue her husband's  stipend to her and
that of her father to her daughter. So an thou  wilt spare her
life I will fetch her to thee." Cried the Caliph,  "By the
life of my ancestors, if she restore the people's goods, I 
will pardon her on thine intercession!" And said the
Pestilence,  "Give me a pledge, O Prince of True Believers!"
Whereupon  Al-Rashid gave him the kerchief of pardon. So Hasan
repaired  to Dalilah's house and called to her. Her daughter
Zaynab  answered him and he asked her, "Where is thy mother?" 
"Upstairs," she answered; and he said, "Bid her take the
people's  goods and come with me to the presence of the
Caliph; for I  have brought her the kerchief of pardon, and if
she will not come  with a good grace, let her blame only
herself." So Dalilah came  down and tying the kerchief about
her neck gave him the people's  goods on the donkey-boy's ass
and the Badawi's horse. Quoth  he, "There remain the clothes
of my Chief and his men"; and  quoth she, "By the Most Great
Name, 'twas not I who stripped  them!" Rejoined Hasan, "Thou
sayst sooth, it was thy daughter  Zaynab's doing, and this was
a good turn she did thee." Then he  carried her to the Divan
and laying the people's goods and stuff  before the Caliph,
set the old trot in his presence. As soon as he  saw her, he
bade throw her down on the carpet of blood, whereat  she
cried, "I cast myself on thy protection, O Shuman."' So he 
rose and kissing the Caliph's hands, said, "Pardon, O
Commander  of the Faithful! Indeed, thou gavest me the
kerchief of pardon."  Said the Prince of True Believers, "I
pardon her for thy sake:  come hither, O old woman; what is
thy name?" "My name is  Wily Dalilah," answered she, and the
Caliph said "Thou art  indeed crafty and full of guile."
Whence she was dubbed Dalilah  the Wily One. Then quoth he,
"Why hast thou played all these  tricks on the folk and
wearied our hearts?" and quoth she, "I did  it not of lust for
their goods, but because I had heard of the  tricks which
Ahmad al-Danaf and Hasan Shuman played in  Baghdad and said to
myself, 'I too will do the like.' And now  I have returned the
folk their goods." But the ass-driver rose  and said "I invoke
Allah's law[FN#212] between me and her; for it  sufficed her
not to take my ass, but she must needs egg on the  Moorish
barber to tear out my eye-teeth and fire me on both 
temples."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and  ceased
to say her permitted say. 

       When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the 
donkey-boy rose and cried out, "I invoke Allah's law between
me  and her; for it sufficed her not to take my ass, but she
must needs  egg on the barber to tear out my eye-teeth and
fire me on both  temples;" thereupon the Caliph bade give him
an hundred  dinars and ordered the dyer the like, saying, "Go;
set up thy  dyery again." So they called down blessings on his
head and  went away. The Badawi also took his clothes and
horse and  departed, saying, "'Tis henceforth unlawful and
forbidden me to  enter Baghdad and eat honey-fritters." And
the others took their  goods and went away. Then said the
Caliph, "Ask a boon of  me, O Dalilah!"; and she said,
"Verily, my father was governor  of the carrier-pigeons to
thee and I know how to rear the birds;  and my husband was
town-captain of Baghdad. Now I wish to  have the reversion of
my husband and my daughter wisheth to  have that of her
father." The Caliph granted both their requests  and she said,
"I ask of thee that I may be portress of thy Khan."  Now he
had built a Khan of three stories, for the merchants to  lodge
in, and had assigned to its service forty slaves and also
forty  dogs he had brought from the King of the
Sulaymaniyah,[FN#213] when  he deposed him; and there was in
the Khan a cook-slave, who  cooked for the chattels and fed
the hounds for which he let make  collars. Said the Caliph, "O
Dalilah, I will write thee a patent  of guardianship of the
Khan, and if aught be lost therefrom, thou  shalt be
answerable for it. "'Tis well," replied she; "but do  thou
lodge my daughter in the pavilion over the door of the Khan, 
for it hath terraced roofs, and carrier-pigeons may not be
reared to  advantage save in an open space." The Caliph
granted her this  also and she and her daughter removed to the
pavilion in question,  where Zaynab hung up the one-and-forty
dresses of Calamity  Ahmad and his company. Moreover, they
delivered to Dalilah  the forty pigeons which carried the
royal messages, and the Caliph  appointed the Wily One
mistress over the forty slaves and charged  them to obey her.
She made the place of her sitting behind the  door of the
Khan, and every day she used to go up to the Caliph's  Divan,
lest he should need to send a message by pigeon-post and  stay
there till eventide whilst the forty slaves stood on guard at 
the Khan; and when darkness came on they loosed the forty 
dogs that they might keep watch over the place by night. Such 
were the doings of Dalilah the Wily One in Baghdad and much 
like them were 




The Adventures of Mercury Ali of Cairo.[FN#214] 



Now as regards the works of Mercury 'Ali; there lived once at 
Cairo,[FN#215] in the days of Salah the Egyptian, who was
Chief of the  Cairo Police and had forty men under him, a
sharper named Ali,  for whom the Master of Police used to set
snares and think that  he had fallen therein; but, when they
sought for him, they found  that he had fled like zaybak, or
quicksilver, wherefore they dubbed  him Ali Zaybak or Mercury
Ali of Cairo. Now one day, as he  sat with his men in his
hall, his heart became heavy within him  and his breast was
straitened. The hall-keeper saw him sitting  with frowning
face and said to him, "What aileth thee, O my  Chief? If thy
breast be straitened take a turn in the streets of  Cairo, for
assuredly walking in her markets will do away with  thy irk."
So he rose up and went out and threaded the streets  awhile,
but only increased in cark and care. Presently, he came  to a
wine-shop and said to himself, "I will go in and drink myself 
drunken." So he entered and seeing seven rows of people in 
the shop, said, "Harkye, taverner! I will not sit except by 
myself." Accordingly, the vintner placed him in a chamber
alone  and set strong pure wine before him whereof he drank
till he lost  his senses. Then he sallied forth again and
walked till he came  to the road called Red, whilst the people
left the street clear  before him, out of fear of him.
Presently, he turned and saw a  water-carrier trudging along,
with his skin and gugglet, crying out  and saying, "O
exchange! There is no drink but what raisins  make, there is
no love-delight but what of the lover we take and  none
sitteth in the place of honour save the sensible
freke[FN#216]!" So  he said to him, "Here, give me to drink!"
The water-carrier  looked at him and gave him the gugglet
which he took and  gazing into it, shook it up and lastly
poured it out on the ground.  Asked the water-carrier, "Why
dost thou not drink?"; and he  answered, saying, "Give me to
drink." So the man filled the cup  a second time and he took
it and shook it and emptied it on the  ground; and thus he did
a third time. Quoth the water-carrier,  "An thou wilt not
drink, I will be off." And Ali said, "Give me  to drink." So
he filled the cup a fourth time and gave it to him;  and he
drank and gave the man a dinar. The water-carrier looked  at
him with disdain and said, belittling him, "Good luck to thee! 
Good luck to thee, my lad! Little folk are one thing and great 
folk another!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and 
ceased saying her permitted say, 

       When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninth Night, 

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
water-carrier receiving the dinar, looked at the giver with
disdain  and said "Good luck to thee! Good luck to thee!
Little folk  are one thing and great folk another." Now when
Mercury Ali  heard this, he caught hold of the man's gaberdine
and drawing on  him a poignard of price, such an one as that
whereof the poet  speaketh in these two couplets,

"Watered steel-blade, the world perfection calls, * Drunk with
     the viper poison foes appals,
Cuts lively, burns the blood whene'er it falls; * And picks up
     gems from pave of marble halls;"[FN#217]

cried to him, "O Shaykh, speak reasonably to me! Thy water-
skin is worth if dear three dirhams, and the gugglets I
emptied on  the ground held a pint or so of water." Replied
the water-carrier  "'Tis well," and Ali rejoined, "I gave thee
a golden ducat: why,  then dost thou belittle me? Say me, hast
thou ever seen any  more valiant than I or more generous than
I?" Answered the  water-carrier; "I have indeed, seen one more
valiant than thou  and eke more generous than thou; for,
never, since women bare  children, was there on earth's face a
brave man who was not  generous." Quoth Ali, "And who is he
thou deemest braver and  more generous than I?" Quoth the
other, "Thou must know  that I have had a strange adventure.
My father was a Shaykh  of the Water-carriers who give drink
in Cairo and, when he died,  he left me five male camels, a
he-mule, a shop and a house; but  the poor man is never
satisfied; or, if he be satisfied he dieth.  So I said to
myself, 'I will go up to Al-Hijaz'; and, taking a  string of
camels, bought goods on tick, till I had run in debt for  five
hundred ducats, all of which I lost in the pilgrimage. Then  I
said in my mind, 'If I return to Cairo the folk will clap me
in  jail for their goods.' So I fared with the pilgrims-
caravan of  Damascus to Aleppo and thence I went on to
Baghdad, where I  sought out the Shaykh of the Water-carriers
of the city and  finding his house I went in and repeated the
opening chapter of  the Koran to him. He questioned me of my
case and I told  him all that had betided me, whereupon he
assigned me a shop  and gave me a water-skin and gear. So I
sallied forth a-morn  trusting in Allah to provide, and went
round about the city. I  offered the gugglet to one, that he
might drink; but he cried, 'I  have eaten naught whereon to
drink; for a niggard invited me  this day and set two gugglets
before me; so I said to him, 'O  son of the sordid, hast thou
given me aught to eat that thou  offerest me drink after it?'
Wherefore wend thy ways, O water-carrier, till I have eaten
somewhat: then come and give me to  drink.' Thereupon I
accosted another and he said, 'Allah  provide thee!' And so I
went on till noon, without taking hansel,  and I said to
myself, 'Would Heaven I had never come to  Baghdad!'
Presently, I saw the folk running as fast as they could;  so I
followed them and behold, a long file of men riding two and 
two and clad in steel, with double neck-rings and felt bonnets
and  burnouses and swords and bucklers. I asked one of the
folk  whose suite this was, and he answered, 'That of Captain
Ahmad  al-Danaf.' Quoth I, 'And what is he?' and quoth the
other, 'He  is town-captain of Baghdad and her Divan, and to
him is  committed the care of the suburbs. He getteth a
thousand dinars a  month from the Caliph and Hasan Shuman hath
the like. More-over, each of his men draweth an hundred dinars
a month; and  they are now returning to their barrack from the
Divan.' And lo!  Calamity Ahmad saw me and cried out, 'Come
give me drink.' So  I filled the cup and gave it him, and he
shook it and emptied it  out, like unto thee; and thus he did
a second time. Then I filled  the cup a third time and he took
a draught as thou diddest; after  which he asked me, 'O water-
carrier, whence comest thou?' And  I answered, 'From Cairo,'
and he, 'Allah keep Cairo and her  citizens! What may bring
thee thither?' So I told him my story  and gave him to
understand that I was a debtor fleeing from debt  and
distress. He cried, 'Thou art welcome to Baghdad'; then he 
gave me five dinars and said to his men, 'For the love of
Allah be  generous to him.' So each of them gave me a dinar
and Ahmad  said to me, 'O Shaykh, what while thou abidest in
Baghdad thou  shalt have of us the like every time thou givest
us to drink.'  Accordingly, I paid them frequent visits and
good ceased not to  come to me from the folk till, one day,
reckoning up the profit I  had made of them, I found it a
thousand dinars and said to  myself, 'The best thing thou
canst do is to return to Egypt.' So I  went to Ahmad's house
and kissed his hand, and he said, 'What  seekest thou?' Quoth
I, 'I have a mind to depart'; and I repeated  these two
couplets,

'Sojourn of stranger, in whatever land, * Is like castle based
     upon the wind:
The breaths of breezes level all he raised. * And so on
     homeward-way's the stranger's mind.' 

I added, 'The caravan is about to start for Cairo and I wish
to  return to my people.' So he gave me a she-mule and an
hundred  dinars and said to me, 'I desire to send somewhat by
thee, O  Shaykh! Dost thou know the people of Cairo?' 'Yes,'
answered  I";--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to  say her permitted say.

        When it was the Seven Hundred and Tenth Night,

She pursued, It bath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Ahmad al-Danaf had given the water-carrier a she-mule and an 
hundred dinars and said to him, "I desire to send a trust by
thee.  Dost thou know the people of Cairo?" "I answered (quoth
the  water-carrier), 'Yes'; and he said, 'Take this letter and
carry it to  Ali Zaybak of Cairo and say to him, 'Thy Captain
saluteth thee  and he is now with the Caliph.' So I took the
letter and journeyed  back to Cairo, where I paid my debts and
plied my water-carrying  trade; but I have not delivered the
letter, because I know  not the abode of Mercury Ali." Quoth
Ali, "O elder, be of  good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear: I am that Ali,  the first of the lads of Captain Ahmad:
here with the letter!"  So he gave him the missive and he
opened it and read these two  couplets,

"O adornment of beauties to thee write I * On a paper that
     flies as the winds go by:
Could I fly, I had flown to their arms in desire, * But a bird
     with cut wings; how shall ever he fly?"

"But after salutation from Captain Ahmad al-Danaf to the 
eldest of his sons, Mercury Ali of Cairo. Thou knowest that I 
tormented Salah al-Din the Cairene and befooled him till I
buried  him alive and reduced his lads to obey me, and amongst
them  Ali Kitf al-Jamal; and I am now become town-captain of 
Baghdad in the Divan of the Caliph who hath made me over-seer
of the suburbs. An thou be still mindful of our covenant, 
come to me; haply thou shalt play some trick in Baghdad which 
may promote thee to the Caliph's service, so he may appoint
thee  stipends and allowances and assign thee a lodging, which
is what  thou wouldst see and so peace be on thee." When Ali
read this  letter, he kissed it and laying it on his head,
gave the water-carrier ten dinars; after which he returned to
his barracks and  told his comrades and said to them, "I
commend you one to  other." Then he changed all his clothes
and, donning a travelling  cloak and a tarboosh, took a case,
containing a spear of bamboo-cane, four-and-twenty cubits
long, made in several pieces, to fit  into one another. Quoth
his lieutenant, "Wilt thou go a journey  when the treasury is
empty?"; and quoth Ali, "When I reach  Damascus I will send
you what shall suffice you." Then he set  out and fared on,
till he overtook a caravan about to start,  whereof were the
Shah-bandar, or Provost of the Merchants, and  forty other
traders. They had all loaded their beasts, except  the
Provost, whose loads lay upon the ground, and Ali heard his 
caravan-leader, who was a Syrian, say to the muleteers, "Bear
a  hand, one of you!" But they reviled him and abused him. 
Quoth Ali in himself, "None will suit me so well to travel 
withal as this leader." Now Ali was beardless and well-
favoured;  so he went up to and saluted the leader who
welcomed him and  said, "What seekest thou?" Replied Ali, "O
my uncle, I see  thee alone with forty mule-loads of goods;
but why hast thou not  brought hands to help thee?" Rejoined
the other, "O my son, I  hired two lads and clothed them and
put in each one's pocket  two hundred dinars; and they helped
me till we came to the  Dervishes' Convent,[FN#218] when they
ran away." Quoth Ali, "Whither  are you bound?" and quoth the
Syrian, "to Aleppo," when  Ali said, "I will lend thee a
hand." Accordingly they loaded  the beasts and the Provost
mounted his she-mule and they set out  he rejoicing in Ali;
and presently he loved him and made  much of him and on this
wise they fared on till nightfall, when  they dismounted and
ate and drank. Then came the time of  sleep and Ali lay down
on his side and made as if he slept;  whereupon the Syrian
stretched himself near him and Ali rose  from his stead and
sat down at the door of the merchant's  pavilion. Presently
the Syrian turned over and would have  taken Ali in his arms,
but found him not and said to himself,  "Haply he hath
promised another and he hath taken him;  but I have the first
right and another night I will keep him."  Now Ali continued
sitting at the door of the tent till nigh upon  daybreak, when
he returned and lay down near the Syrian, who  found him by
his side, when he awoke, and said to himself, "If  I ask him
where he hath been, he will leave me and go away."  So he
dissembled with him and they went on till they came to  a
forest, in which was a cave, where dwelt a rending lion. Now 
whenever a caravan passed, they would draw lots among 
themselves and him on whom the lot fell they would throw to 
the beast. So they drew lots and the lot fell not save upon
the  Provost of the Merchants. And lo! the lion cut off their
way  awaiting his prey, wherefore the Provost was sore
distressed  and said to the leader, "Allah disappoint the
fortunes[FN#219] of the far  one and bring his journey to
naught! I charge thee, after my  death, give my loads to my
children." Quoth Ali the Clever  One, "What meaneth all this?"
So they told him the case and  he said, "Why do ye run from
the tom-cat of the desert? I  warrant you I will kill him." So
the Syrian went to the Provost  and told him of this and he
said, "If he slay him, I will give him  a thousand dinars,"
and said the other merchants, "We will  reward him likewise
one and all." With this Ali put off  his mantle and there
appeared upon him a suit of steel; then he  took a chopper of
steel[FN#220] and opening it turned the screw; after  which he
went forth alone and standing in the road before the  lion,
cried out to him. The lion ran at him, but Ali of Cairo  smote
him between the eyes with his chopper and cut him in  sunder,
whilst the caravan-leader and the merchants looked on.  Then
said he to the leader, "Have no fear, O nuncle!" and the 
Syrian answered, saying, "O my son, I am thy servant for all 
future time." Then the Provost embraced him and kissed him 
between the eyes and gave him the thousand dinars, and each of 
the other merchants gave him twenty dinars. He deposited all 
the coin with the Provost and they slept that night till the
morning,  when they set out again, intending for Baghdad, and
fared on  till they came to the Lion's Clump and the Wady of
Dogs, where  lay a villain Badawi, a brigand and his tribe,
who sallied forth on  them. The folk fled from the highwaymen,
and the Provost said,  "My monies are lost!"; when, lo! up
came Ali in a buff coat  hung with bells, and bringing out his
long lance, fitted the pieces  together. Then he seized one of
the Arab's horses and mounting  it cried out to the Badawi
Chief, saying, "Come out to fight me  with spears!" Moreover
he shook his bells and the Arab's mare  took fright at the
noise and Ali struck the Chief's spear and broke  it. Then he
smote him on the neck and cut off his head.[FN#221] When the 
Badawin saw their chief fall, they ran at Ali, but he cried
out, saying,  "Allaho Akbar--God is Most Great!"--and, falling
on them  broke them and put them to flight. Then he raised the
Chief's head  on his spear-point and returned to the
merchants, who rewarded  him liberally and continued their
journey, till they reached  Baghdad. Thereupon Ali took his
money from the Provost and  committed it to the Syrian
caravan-leader, saying, "When thou  returnest to Cairo, ask
for my barracks and give these monies to  my deputy." Then he
slept that night and on the morrow he  entered the city and
threading the streets enquired for Calamity  Ahmad's quarters;
but none would direct him thereto.[FN#222] So he  walked on,
till he came to the square Al-Nafz, where he saw  children at
play, and amongst them a lad called Ahmad al-Lakit,[FN#223] 
and said to himself, "O my Ali, thou shalt not get news of
them  but from their little ones." Then he turned and seeing a
sweet-meat-seller bought Halwa of him and called to the
children; but  A