hmad al-Lakit drove the rest away and coming
up to him, said,  "What seekest thou?" Quoth Ali, "I had a son
and he died and  I saw him in a dream asking for sweetmeats:
wherefore I have  bought them and wish to give each child a
bit." So saying, he  gave Ahmad a slice, and he looked at it
and seeing a dinar  sticking to it, said "Begone! I am no
catamite: seek another  than I." Quoth Ali, "O my son, none
but a sharp fellow taketh  the hire, even as he is a sharp one
who giveth it. I have sought  all day for Ahmad al-Danaf's
barrack, but none would direct me  thereto; so this dinar is
thine an thou wilt guide me thither."  Quoth the lad, "I will
run before thee and do thou keep up with  me, till I come to
the place, when I will catch up a pebble with  my foot[FN#224]
and kick it against the door; and so shalt thou know it." 
Accordingly he ran on and Ali after him, till they came to the 
place, when the boy caught up a pebble between his toes and 
kicked it against the door so as to make the place known.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her 
permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Ahmad the Abortion had made known the place, Ali laid hold of 
him and would have taken the dinar from him, but could not; so 
he said to him, "Go: thou deservest largesse for thou art a
sharp  fellow, whole of wit and stout of heart. Inshallah, if
I become a  captain to the Caliph, I will make thee one of my
lads." Then  the boy made off and Ali Zaybak went up to the
door and knocked;  whereupon quoth Ahmad al-Danaf, "O
doorkeeper, open the  door; that is the knock of Quicksilver
Ali the Cairene." So he  opened the door and Ali entered and
saluted with the salam  Ahmad who embraced him, and the Forty
greeted him. Then  Calamity Ahmad gave him a suit of clothes,
saying, "When the  Caliph made me captain, he clothed my lads
and I kept this suit[FN#225]  for thee." Then they seated him
in the place of honour and  setting on meat they ate well and
drink they drank hard and  made merry till the morning, when
Ahmad said to Ali, "Beware  thou walk not about the streets of
Baghdad, but sit thee still in  this barrack." Asked Ali, "Why
so? Have I come hither to be  shut up? No, I came to look
about me and divert myself."  Replied Ahmad, "O my son, think
not that Baghdad be like  Cairo. Baghdad is the seat of the
Caliphate; sharpers abound  therein and rogueries spring
therefrom as worts spring out of  earth." So Ali abode in the
barrack three days when Ahmad  said to him, "I wish to present
thee to the Caliph, that he  may assign thee an allowance."
But he replied, "When the  time cometh." So he let him go his
own way. One day, as  Ali sat in the barrack, his breast
became straitened and his soul  troubled and he said in
himself, "Come, let us up and thread the  ways of Baghdad and
broaden my bosom." So he went out and  walked from street to
street, till he came to the middle bazar,  where he entered a
cook-shop and dined;[FN#226] after which he went out  to wash
his hands. Presently he saw forty slaves, with felt  bonnets
and steel cutlasses, come walking, two by two; and last of all 
came Dalilah the Wily, mounted on a she-mule, with a gilded 
helmet which bore a ball of polished steel, and clad in a coat
of  mail, and such like. Now she was returning from the Divan
to  the Khan of which she was portress; and when she espied
Ali,  she looked at him fixedly and saw that he resembled
Calamity  Ahmad in height and breadth. Moreover, he was clad
in a striped  Aba-cloak and a burnous, with a steel cutlass by
his side and  similar gear, while valour shone from his eyes,
testifying in favour  of him and not in disfavour of him. So
she returned to the Khan  and going in to her daughter,
fetched a table of sand, and struck  a geomantic figure,
whereby she discovered that the stranger's  name was Ali of
Cairo and that his fortune overcame her fortune  and that of
her daughter. Asked Zaynab, "O my mother, what  hath befallen
thee that thou hast recourse to the sand-table?"  Answered
Dalilah, "O my daughter, I have seen this day a young  man who
resembleth Calamity Ahmad, and I fear lest he come to  hear
how thou didst strip Ahmad and his men and enter the Khan  and
play us a trick, in revenge for what we did with his chief and 
the forty; for methinks he has taken up his lodging in Al-
Danaf's  barrack." Zaynab rejoined, "What is this? Methinks
thou hast  taken his measure." Then she donned her fine
clothes and went  out into the streets. When the people saw
her, they all made love  to her and she promised and sware and
listened and coquetted and  passed from market to market, till
she saw Ali the Cairene coming,  when she went up to him and
rubbed her shoulder against him.  Then she turned and said
"Allah give long life to folk of  discrimination!" Quoth he,
"How goodly is thy form! To whom  dost thou belong?"; and
quoth she, "To the gallant[FN#227] like thee;"  and he said,
"Art thou wife or spinster?" "Married," said she.  Asked Ali,
"Shall it be in my lodging or thine?[FN#228] and she 
answered, "I am a merchant's daughter and a merchant's wife 
and in all my life I have never been out of doors till to-day,
and  my only reason was that when I made ready food and
thought to  eat, I had no mind thereto without company. When I
saw thee,  love of thee entered my heart: so wilt thou deign
solace my soul  and eat a mouthful with me?" Quoth he, "Whoso
is invited, let  him accept." Thereupon she went on and he
followed her from  street to street, but presently he
bethought himself and said,  "What wilt thou do and thou a
stranger? Verily 'tis said,  'Whoso doth whoredom in his
strangerhood, Allah will send him  back disappointed.' But I
will put her off from thee with fair  words." So he said to
her, "Take this dinar and appoint me a  day other than this;"
and she said, "By the Mighty Name, it  may not be but thou
shalt go home with me as my guest this very  day and I will
take thee to fast friend." So he followed her till  she came
to a house with a lofty porch and a wooden bolt on the  door
and said to him, "Open this lock."[FN#229] Asked he "Where is 
the key?"; and she answered, "'Tis lost." Quoth he, "Whoso 
openeth a lock without a key is a knave whom it behoveth the
ruler  to punish, and I know not how to open doors without
keys?"[FN#230]  With this she raised her veil and showed him
her face, whereat he  took one glance of eyes that cost him a
thousand sighs. Then she  let fall her veil on the lock and
repeating over it the names of the  mother of Moses, opened it
without a key and entered. He  followed her and saw swords and
steel-weapons hanging up; and she  put off her veil and sat
down with him. Quoth he to himself,  "Accomplish what Allah
bath decreed to thee," and bent over her,  to take a kiss of
her cheek; but she caught the kiss upon her palm,  saying,
"This beseemeth not but by night." Then she brought a  tray of
food and wine, and they ate and drank; after which she  rose
and drawing water from the well, poured it from the ewer over 
his hands, whilst he washed them. Now whilst they were on this 
wise, she cried out and beat upon her breast, saying, "My
husband  had a signet-ring of ruby, which was pledged to him
for five  hundred dinars, and I put it on; but 'twas too large
for me, so I  straitened it with wax, and when I let down the
bucket,[FN#231] that  ring must have dropped into the well. So
turn thy face to the  door, the while I doff my dress and go
down into the well and  fetch it." Quoth Ali, "'Twere shame on
me that thou shouldst  go down there I being present; none
shall do it save I." So he  put off his clothes and tied the
rope about himself and she let him  down into the well. Now
there was much water therein and she  said to him, "The rope
is too short; loose thyself and drop down."  So he did himself
loose from the rope and dropped into the  water, in which he
sank fathoms deep without touching bottom;  whilst she donned
her mantilla and taking his clothes, returned to  her mother--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and  ceased to say her
permitted say. 

      When is was the Seven Hundred and Twelfth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali 
of Cairo was in the well, Zaynab donned her mantilla and,
taking  his clothes, returned to her mother and said, "I have
stripped Ali  the Egyptian and cast him into the Emir Hasan's
well, whence  alas for his chance of escaping!"[FN#232]
Presently, the Emir Hasan,  the master of the house, who had
been absent at the Divan, came  home and, finding the door
open, said to his Syce, "Why didst  thou not draw the bolt?"
"O my lord," replied the groom,  "indeed I locked it with my
own hand." The Emir cried, "As  my head liveth, some robber
hath entered my house!" Then he  went in and searched, but
found none and said to the groom,  "Fill the ewer, that I may
make the Wuzu-ablution." So the  man lowered the bucket into
the well but, when he drew it up, he  found it heavy and
looking down, saw something therein sitting;  whereupon he let
it fall into the water and cried out, saying, "O  my lord, an
Ifrit came up to me out of the well!" Replied the  Emir, "Go
and fetch four doctors of the law, that they may read  the
Koran over him, till he go away." So he fetched the doctors 
and the Emir said to them, "Sit round this well and exorcise
me  this Ifrit." They did as he bade them; after which the
groom and  another servant lowered the bucket again and Ali
clung to it and  hid himself under it patiently till he came
near the top, when he  sprang out and landed among the
doctors, who fell a-cuffing one  another and crying out,
"Ifrit! Ifrit!" The Emir looked at Ali  and seeing him a young
man, said to him, "Art thou a thief?"  "No," replied Ali;
"Then what dost thou in the well?" asked  the Emir; and Ali
answered, "I was asleep and dreamt a wet  dream;[FN#233] so I
went down to the Tigris to wash myself and dived,  whereupon
the current carried me under the earth and I came up  in this
well." Quoth the other, "Tell the truth."[FN#234] So Ali told 
him all that had befallen him, and the Emir gave him an old 
gown and let him go. He returned to Calamity Ahmad's lodging 
and related to him all that had passed. Quoth Ahmad, "Did I 
not warn thee that Baghdad is full of women who play tricks
upon  men?" And quoth Ali Kitf al-Jamal, "I conjure thee by
the  Mighty Name, tell me how it is that thou art the chief of
the lads  of Cairo and yet hast been stripped by a girl?" This
was  grievous to Ali and he repented him of not having
followed  Ahmad's advice. Then the Calamity gave him another
suit of  clothes and Hasan Shuman said to him, "Dost thou know
the  young person?" "No," replied Ali; and Hasan rejoined, 
"'Twas Zaynab, the daughter of Dalilah the Wily, the portress
of  the Caliph's Khan; and hast thou fallen into her toils, O
Ali?"  Quoth he, "Yes," and quoth Hasan, "O Ali, 'twas she who
took  thy Chief's clothes and those of all his men." "This is
a disgrace  to you all!" "And what thinkest thou to do?" "I
purpose to  marry her." "Put away that thought far from thee,
and console thy  heart of her." "O Hasan, do thou counsel me
how I shall do to  marry her." "With all my heart: if thou
wilt drink from my  hand and march under my banner, I will
bring thee to thy will of  her." "I will well." So Hasan made
Ali put off his clothes;  and, taking a cauldron heated
therein somewhat as it were pitch,  wherewith he anointed him
and he became like unto a blackamoor  slave. Moreover, he
smeared his lips and cheeks and pencilled  his eyes with red
Kohl.[FN#235] Then he clad him in a slave's habit and  giving
him a tray of kabobs and wine, said to him, "There is a  black
cook in the Khan who requires from the bazar only meat;  and
thou art now become his like; so go thou to him civilly and 
accost him in friendly fashion and speak to him in the blacks' 
lingo, and salute him, saying, ''Tis long since we met in the 
beer-ken.' He will answer thee, 'I have been too busy: on my 
hands be forty slaves, for whom I cook dinner and supper,
besides  making ready a tray for Dalilah and the like for her
daughter  Zaynab and the dogs' food.' And do thou say to him,
'Come, let  us eat kabobs and lush swipes.'[FN#236] Then go
with him into the  saloon and make him drunken and question
him of his service,  how many dishes and what dishes he hath
to cook, and ask him of  the dogs' food and the keys of the
kitchen and the larder; and he  will tell thee; for a man,
when he is drunken, telleth all he would  conceal were he
sober. When thou hast done this drug him and  don his clothes
and sticking the two knives in thy girdle, take the 
vegetable-basket and go to the market and buy meat and greens, 
with which do thou return to the Khan and enter the kitchen
and  the larder and cook the food. Dish it up and put Bhang in
it, so  as to drug the dogs and the slaves and Dalilah and
Zaynab and  lastly serve up. When all are asleep, hie thee to
the upper  chamber and bring away every suit of clothes thou
wilt find  hanging there. And if thou have a mind to marry
Zaynab, bring  with thee also the forty carrier-pigeons." So
Ali went to the  Khan and going in to the cook, saluted him
and said, "'Tis long  since I have met thee in the beer-ken."
The slave replied, "I  have been busy cooking for the slaves
and the dogs." Then he  took him and making him drunken,
questioned him of his work.  Quoth the kitchener, "Every day I
cook five dishes for dinner  and the like for supper; and
yesterday they sought of me a sixth  dish,[FN#237] yellow
rice,[FN#238] and a seventh, a mess of cooked pomegranate 
seed." Ali asked, "And what is the order of thy service?" and 
the slave answered, "First I serve up Zaynab's tray, next
Dalilah's;  then I feed the slaves and give the dogs their
sufficiency of meat,  and the least that satisfies them is a
pound each." But, as fate  would have it, he forgot to ask him
of the keys. Then he drugged  him and donned his clothes;
after which he took the basket and  went to the market. There
he bought meat and greens.--And  Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her  permitted say. 

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali
of  Cairo, after drugging the cook-slave with Bhang, took the
two  knives which he stuck in his belt and, carrying the
vegetable-basket, went to the market where he bought meat and
greens;  and, presently returning to the Khan, he saw Dalilah
seated at the  gate, watching those who went in and came out,
and the forty  slaves with her, armed. So he heartened his
heart and entered;  but Dalilah knew him and said to him,
"Back, O captain of  thieves! Wilt thou play a trick on me in
the Khan?" Thereupon  he (dressed as a slave) turned and said
to her, "What sayest thou,  O portress?" She asked, "What hast
thou done with the slave,  our cook?; say me if thou hast
killed or drugged him?" He  answered, "What cook? Is there
here another slave-cook than  I?" She rejoined, "Thou liest,
thou art Mercury Ali the Cairene."  And he said to her, in
slaves' patois, "O portress, are the Cairenes  black or white?
I will slave for you no longer." Then said the  slaves to him,
"What is the matter with thee, O our cousin?"  Cried Dalilah,
"This is none of your uncle's children, but Ali  Zaybak the
Egyptian; and meseems he hath either drugged your  cousin or
killed him." But they said, "Indeed this is our cousin 
Sa'adu'llah the cook;" and she, "Not so, 'tis Mercury Ali, and 
he hath dyed his skin." Quoth the sharper, "And who is Ali? I 
am Sa'adu'llah." Then she fetched unguent of proof, with which 
she anointed Ali's forearm and rubbed it; but the black did
not  come off; whereupon quoth the slaves "Let him go and
dress us  our dinner." Quoth Dalilah, "If he be indeed your
cousin, he  knoweth what you sought of him yesternight[FN#239]
and how many  dishes he cooketh every day." So they asked him
of this and he  said, "Every day I cook you five dishes for
the morning and the  like for the evening meal, lentils and
rice and broth and stew[FN#240] and  sherbet of roses; and
yesternight ye sought of me a sixth dish and  a seventh, to
wit yellow rice and cooked pomegranate seed." And  the slaves
said "Right!" Then quoth Dalilah, "In with him and  if he know
the kitchen and the larder, he is indeed your cousin;  but, if
not, kill him." Now the cook had a cat which he had  brought
up, and whenever he entered the kitchen it would stand  at the
door and spring to his back, as soon as he went in. So,  when
Ali entered, the cat saw him and jumped on his shoulders;  but
he threw it off and it ran before him to the door of the
kitchen  and stopped there. He guessed that this was the
kitchen door; so  he took the keys and seeing one with traces
of feathers thereon,  knew it for the kitchen key and
therewith opened the door. Then  he entered and setting down
the greens, went out again, led by the  cat, which ran before
him and stopped at another door. He guessed  that this was the
larder and seeing one of the keys marked with  grease, knew it
for the key and opened the door therewith; where-upon quoth
the slaves, "O Dalilah, were he a stranger, he had not  known
the kitchen and the larder, nor had he been able to
distinguish  the keys thereof from the rest; verily, he is our
cousin  Sa'adu'llah." Quoth she, "He learned the places from
the cat and  distinguished the keys one from the other by the
appearance: but  this cleverness imposeth not upon me." Then
he returned to the  kitchen where he cooked the dinner and,
carrying Zaynab's tray up  to her room, saw all the stolen
clothes hanging up; after which he  went down and took Dalilah
her tray and gave the slaves and the  dogs their rations. The
like he did at sundown and drugged  Dalilah's food and that of
Zaynab and the slaves. Now the doors  of the Khan were opened
and shut with the sun. So Ali went  forth and cried out,
saying, "O dwellers in the Khan, the watch  is set and we have
loosed the dogs; whoso stirreth out after this  can blame none
save himself." But he had delayed the dogs'  supper and put
poison therein; consequently when he set it before  them, they
ate of it and died while the slaves and Dalilah and  Zaynab
still slept under Bhang. Then he went up and took all the 
clothes and the carrier-pigeons and, opening the gate made off
to  the barrack of the Forty, where he found Hasan Shuman the 
Pestilence who said to him, "How hast thou fared?" Thereupon 
he told him what had passed and he praised him. Then he 
caused him to put off his clothes and boiled a decoction of
herbs  wherewith he washed him, and his skin became white as
it was;  after which he donned his own dress and going back to
the Khan,  clad the cook in the habit he had taken from him
and made him smell  to the counter-drug; upon which the slave
awoke and going forth  to the greengrocer's, bought vegetables
and returned to the Khan.  Such was the case with Al-Zaybak of
Cairo; but as regards Dalilah  the Wily, when the day broke,
one of the lodgers in the Khan came  out of his chamber and,
seeing the gate open and the slaves drugged  and the dogs
dead, he went in to her and found her lying drugged,  with a
scroll on her neck and at her head a sponge steeped in the 
counter-drug. He set the sponge to her nostrils and she awoke
and  asked, "Where am I?" The merchant answered, "When I came 
down from my chamber I saw the gate of the Khan open and the 
dogs dead and found the slaves and thee drugged." So she took
up  the paper and read therein these words, "None did this
deed save  Ali the Egyptian." Then she awoke the slaves and
Zaynab by  making them smell the counter-Bhang and said to
them, "Did I not  tell you that this was Ali of Cairo?";
presently adding to the slaves,  "But do ye conceal the
matter." Then she said to her daughter,  "How often have I
warned thee that Ali would not forego his  revenge? He hath
done this deed in requital of that which  thou diddest with
him and he had it in his power to do with thee  other than
this thing; but he refrained therefrom out of courtesy  and a
desire that there should be love and friendship between us." 
So saying, she doffed her man's gear and donned woman's
attire[FN#241]  and, tying the kerchief of peace about her
neck, repaired to Ahmad  al-Danaf's barrack. Now when Ali
entered with the clothes and  the carrier-pigeons, Hasan
Shuman gave the hall-keeper the price  of forty pigeons and he
bought them and cooked them amongst  the men. Presently there
came a knock at the door and Ahmad  said, "That is Dalilah's
knock: rise and open to her, O hall-keeper." So he admitted
her and--And Shahrazad perceived  the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say. 

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Fourteenth Night, 

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Dalilah was admitted, Hasan asked her, "What bringeth thee 
hither, O ill-omened old woman? Verily, thou and thy brother 
Zurayk the fishmonger are of a piece!"; and she answered, "O 
captain I am in the wrong and this my neck is at thy mercy;
but  tell me which of you it was that played me this trick?"
Quoth  Calamity Ahmad, "'Twas the first of my lads." Rejoined
Dalilah,  "For the sake of Allah intercede with him to give me
back the  carrier-pigeons and what not, and thou wilt lay me
under great  obligation." When Hasan heard this he said,
"Allah requite thee,  O Ali! Why didst thou cook the
pigeons?"; and Ali answered,  "I knew not that they were
carrier-pigeons." Then said Ahmad,  "O hall-keeper bring us
the cooked pigeons." So he brought them  and Dalilah took a
piece and tasting it, said, "This is none of the  carrier-
pigeons' flesh, for I fed them on grains of musk and their 
meat is become even as musk." Quoth Shuman, "An thou desire 
to have the carrier-pigeons, comply with Ali's will." Asked
she  "What is that?" And Hasan answered, "He would have thee 
marry him to thy daughter Zaynab." She said, "I have not 
command over her except of affection"; and Hasan said to Ali
the  Cairene "Give her the pigeons." So he gave them to her,
and she  took them and rejoiced in them. Then quoth Hasan to
her,  "There is no help but thou return us a sufficient
reply"; and  Dalilah rejoined, "If it be indeed his wish to
marry her, it availed  nothing to play this clever trick upon
us: it behoveth him rather  to demand her in marriage of her
mother's brother and her  guardian, Captain Zurayk, him who
crieth out, saying, 'Ho! a  pound of fish for two farthings!'
and who hangeth up in his shop  a purse containing two
thousand dinars." When the Forty heard  this, they all rose
and cried out, saying, "What manner of blather  is this, O
harlot? Dost thou wish to bereave us of our brother  Ali of
Cairo?" Then she returned to the Khan and said to her 
daughter, "Ali the Egyptian seeketh thee in marriage." Whereat 
Zaynab rejoiced, for she loved him because of his chaste
forbearance  towards her,[FN#242] and asked her mother what
had passed. So  she told her, adding, "I made it a condition
that he should demand  thy hand of thine uncle, so I might
make him fall into destruction."  Meanwhile Ali turned to his
fellows and asked them,  "What manner of man is this Zurayk?";
and they answered, "He  was chief of the sharpers of Al-Irak
land and could all but pierce  mountains and lay hold upon the
stars. He would steal the Kohl  from the eye and, in brief, he
had not his match for roguery; but  he hath repented his sins
and foresworn his old way of life and  opened him a
fishmonger's shop. And now he hath amassed two  thousand
dinars by the sale of fish and laid them in a purse with 
strings of silk, to which he hath tied bells and rings and
rattles of  brass, hung on a peg within the doorway. Every
time he openeth  his shop he suspendeth the said purse and
crieth out, saying,  'Where are ye, O sharpers of Egypt, O
prigs of Al-Irak, O  tricksters of Ajam-land? Behold, Zurayk
the fishmonger hath  hung up a purse in front of his shop, and
whoso pretendeth to  craft and cunning, and can take it by
sleight, it is his.' So the long  fingered and greedy-minded
come and try to take the purse, but  cannot; for, whilst he
frieth his fish and tendeth the fire, he layeth  at his feet
scone-like circles of lead; and whenever a thief thinketh  to
take him unawares and maketh a snatch at the purse he casteth 
at him a load of lead and slayeth him or doeth him a damage.
So  O Ali, wert thou to tackle him, thou wouldst be as one who 
jostleth a funeral cortege, unknowing who is dead;[FN#243] for
thou art no  match for him, and we fear his mischief for thee.
Indeed, thou  hast no call to marry Zaynab, and he who leaveth
a thing alone  liveth without it." Cried Ali, "This were
shame, O comrades;  needs must I take the purse: but bring me
a young lady's habit."  So they brought him women's clothes
and he clad himself therein  and stained his hands with Henna,
and modestly hung down his  veil. Then he took a lamb and
killing it, cut out the long  intestine[FN#244] which he
cleaned and tied up below; moreover he filled  it with the
blood and bound it between his thighs; after which he  donned
petticoat-trousers and walking boots. He also made  himself a
pair of false breasts with birds' crops and filled them  with
thickened milk and tied round his hips and over his belly a 
piece of linen, which he stuffed with cotton, girding himself
over  all with a kerchief of silk well starched. Then he went
out,  whilst all who saw him exclaimed, "What a fine pair of
hind  cheeks!" Presently he saw an ass-driver coming, so he
gave  him a dinar and mounting, rode till he came to Zurayk's
shop,  where he saw the purse hung up and the gold glittering 
through it. Now Zurayk was frying fish, and Ali said, "O  ass-
man, what is that smell?" Replied he, "It's the smell  of
Zurayk's fish." Quoth Ali, "I am a woman with child and  the
smell harmeth me; go, fetch me a slice of the fish." So the 
donkey-boy said to Zurayk, "What aileth thee to fry fish so
early  and annoy pregnant women with the smell? I have here
the wife  of the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarik, and she is with
child; so give  her a bit of fish, for the babe stirreth in
her womb. O Protector,  O my God, avert from us the mischief
of this day!" Thereupon  Zurayk took a piece of fish and would
have fried it, but the fire  had gone out and he went in to
rekindle it. Meanwhile Ali  dismounted and sitting down,
pressed upon the lamb's intestine till  it burst and the blood
ran out from between his legs. Then he  cried aloud, saying,
"O my back! O my side!" Whereupon the  driver turned and
seeing the blood running, said, "What aileth  thee, O my
lady?" Replied Ali, "I have miscarried"; where-upon Zurayk
looked out and seeing the blood fled affrighted  into the
inner shop. Quoth the donkey-driver, "Allah torment  thee, O
Zurayk! The lady hath miscarried and thou art no  match for
her husband. Why must thou make a stench so early  in the
morning? I said to thee, 'Bring her a slice,' but thou 
wouldst not." Thereupon, he took his ass and went his way and, 
as Zurayk still did not appear, Ali put out his hand to the
purse;  but no sooner had he touched it than the bells and
rattles and  rings began to jingle and the gold to chink.
Quoth Zurayk, who  returned at the sound, "Thy perfidy hath
come to light, O gallows-bird! Wilt thou put a cheat on me and
thou in a woman's habit?  Now take what cometh to thee!" And
he threw a cake of lead  at him, but it went agley and lighted
on another; whereupon the  people rose against Zurayk and said
to him, "Art thou a trades-man or a swashbuckler? An thou be a
tradesman, take down thy  purse and spare the folk thy
mischief." He replied, "Bismillah,  in the name of Allah! On
my head be it." As for Ali, he made  off to the barrack and
told Hasan Shuman what had happened,  after which he put off
his woman's gear and donning a groom's  habit which was
brought to him by his chief took a dish and five  dirhams.
Then he returned to Zurayk's shop and the fishmonger  said to
him, "What dost thou want, O my master?"[FN#245] He showed 
him the dirhams and Zurayk would have given him of the fish 
in the tray, but he said, "I will have none save hot fish." So
he  set fish in the earthen pan and finding the fire dead,
went in to  relight it; whereupon Ali put out his hand to the
purse and  caught hold of the end of it. The rattles and rings
and bells  jingled and Zurayk said, "Thy trick hath not
deceived me. I  knew thee for all thou art disguised as a
groom by the grip of  thy hand on the dish and the dirhams."--
And Shahrazad  perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. 

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Ali of Egypt put out his hand to the purse, the bells and
rings  jingled and Zurayk said, "Thy trick hath not deceived
me for  all thou comest disguised as a groom I knew thee by
the grip of  thy hand on the dish and the dirhams!" So saying,
he threw the  lead at him, but he avoided it and it fell into
the pan full of  hot fish and broke it and overturned it, fat
and all, upon the  breast and shoulders of the Kazi, who was
passing. The oil ran  down inside his clothes to his privy
parts and he cried out, "O  my privities! What a sad pickle
you are in! Alas, unhappy I!  Who hath played me this trick?"
Answered the people, "O  our lord, it was some small boy that
threw a stone into the  pan: but for Allah's word, it had been
worse." Then they  turned and seeing the loaf of lead and that
it was Zurayk who  had thrown it, rose against him and said to
him, "O Zurayk,  this is not allowed of Allah! Take down the
purse or it shall  go ill for thee." Answered he, "I will take
it down, Inshallah!"  Meanwhile Ali returned to the barrack
and told his comrades  who cried, "Where is the purse?", all
that had passed and they  said, "Thou hast exhausted two-
thirds of his cunning." Then  he changed his groom's dress for
the garb of a merchant and  going out, met a snake-charmer,
with a bag of serpents and a  wallet containing his kit to
whom said he, "O charmer, come  and amuse my lads, and thou
shalt have largesse." So he  accompanied him to the barrack,
where he fed him and drugging him  with Bhang, doffed his
clothes and put them on. Then he took  the bags and repairing
to Zurayk's shop began to play the reed-pipe. Quoth Zurayk,
"Allah provide thee!" But Ali pulled  out the serpents and
cast them down before him; whereat the  fishseller, who was
afraid of snakes, fled from them into the  inner shop.
Thereupon Ali picked up the reptiles and, thrusting  them back
into the bag, stretched out his hand and caught hold  of the
end of the purse. The rings again rang and the bells and 
rattles jangled, and Zurayk cried, "Wilt thou never cease to
play  me tricks? Now thou feignest thyself a serpent-charmer!"
So  saying, he took up a piece of lead, and hurled it at Ali;
but it  missed him and fell on the head of a groom, who was
passing  by, following his master, a trooper, and knocked him
down.  Quoth the soldier, "Who felled him?"; and the folk
said,  "'Twas a stone fell from the roof." So the soldier
passed on  and the people, seeing the piece of lead, went up
to Zurayk  and cried to him, "Take down the purse!"; and he
said,  "Inshallah, I will take it down this very night!" Ali
ceased  not to practice upon Zurayk till he had made seven
different  attempts but without taking the purse. Then he
returned the  snake-charmer his clothes and kit and gave him
due benevolence;  after which he went back to Zurayk's shop
and heard  him say, "If I leave the purse here to-night, he
will dig through  the shop-wall and take it; I will carry it
home with me." So  he arose and shut the shop; then he took
down the purse and  putting it in his bosom set out home, till
he came near his  house, when he saw a wedding in a
neighbour's lodging and  said to himself, "I will hie me home
and give my wife the purse  and don my fine clothes and return
to the marriage." And Ali  followed him. Now Zurayk had
married a black girl, one of the  freed women of the Wazir
Ja'afar and she had borne him a son,  whom he named Abdallah,
and he had promised her to spend the  money in the purse on
the occasion of the boy's circumcision and  of his marriage-
procession. So he went into his house and, as he  entered, his
wife saw that his face was overcast and asked him,  "What hath
caused thy sadness?" Quoth he, "Allah hath  afflicted me this
day with a rascal who made seven attempts to get  the purse,
but without avail;" and quoth she, "Give it to me, that  I may
lay it up against the boy's festival-day." (Now Ali, who  had
followed him lay hidden in a closet whence he could see and 
hear all.) So he gave her the purse and changed his clothes,
saying,  "Keep the purse safely, O Umm Abdallah, for I am
going to  the wedding." But she said, "Take thy sleep awhile."
So he lay  down and fell asleep. Presently, Ali rose and going
on tiptoe to  the purse, took it and went to the house of the
wedding and stood  there, looking on at the fun. Now
meanwhile, Zurayk dreamt  that he saw a bird fly away with the
purse and awaking in affright,  said to his wife, "Rise; look
for the purse." So she looked and  finding it gone, buffeted
her face and said, "Alas the blackness of  thy fortune, O Umm
Abdallah! A sharker hath taken the purse."  Quoth Zurayk, "By
Allah it can be none other than rascal Ali  who hath plagued
me all day! He hath followed me home and  seized the purse;
and there is no help but that I go and get it  back." Quoth
she, "Except thou bring it, I will lock on thee  the door and
leave thee to pass the night in the street." So  he went up to
the house of the wedding, and seeing Ali looking  on, said to
himself, "This is he who took the purse; but he lodgeth  with
Ahmad al-Danaf." So he forewent him to the barrack and, 
climbing up at the back, dropped down into the saloon, where
he  found every one asleep. Presently there came a rap at the
door  and Zurayk asked, "Who is there!" "Ali of Cairo,"
answered the  knocker; and Zurayk said, "Hast thou brought the
purse?" So Ali thought it was Hasan Shuman and replied, "I
have brought  it;[FN#246] open the door." Quoth Zurayk,
"Impossible that I open to  thee till I see the purse; for thy
chief and I have laid a wager  about it." Said Ali, "Put out
thy hand." So he put out his hand  through the hole in the
side-door and Ali laid the purse in it;  whereupon Zurayk took
it and going forth, as he had come in,  returned to the
wedding. Ali stood for a long while at the door,  but none
opened to him; and at last he gave a thundering knock  that
awoke all the men and they said, "That is Ali of Cairo's 
peculiar rap." So the hall-keeper opened to him and Hasan 
Shuman said to him, "Hast thou brought the purse?" Replied 
Ali, "Enough of jesting, O Shuman: didst thou not swear that 
thou wouldest not open to me till I showed thee the purse, and 
did I not give it thee through the hole in the side door? And 
didst thou not say to me, 'I am sworn never to open the door
till  thou show me the purse?'" Quoth Hasan? "By Allah, 'twas
not  I who took it, but Zurayk!" Quoth Ali, "Needs must I get
it  again," and repaired to the house of the wedding, where he
heard  the buffoon[FN#247] say, "Bravo,[FN#248] O Abu
Abdallah! Good luck to thee  with thy son!" Said Ali, "My luck
is in the ascendant," and  going to the fishmonger's lodging,
climbed over the back wall of  the house and found his wife
asleep. So he drugged her with  Bhang and clad himself in her
clothes. Then he took the child in  his arms and went round,
searching, till he found a palm-leaf  basket containing
buns,[FN#249] which Zurayk of his niggardliness, had  kept
from the Greater Feast. Presently, the fishmonger returned 
and knocked at the door, whereupon Ali imitated his wife's
voice  and asked, "Who is at the door?" "Abu Abdallah,"
answered  Zurayk and Ali said, "I swore that I would not open
the door to  thee, except thou broughtest back the purse."
Quoth the fish-monger, "I have brought it." Cried All, "Here
with it into my  hand before I open the door;" and Zurayk
answered, saying, "Let  down the basket and take it therein."
So Sharper Ali let down  the basket and the other put the
purse therein, whereupon Ali  took it and drugged the child.
Then he aroused the woman and  making off by the back way as
he had entered, returned with the  child and the purse and the
basket of cakes to the barrack and  showed them all to the
Forty, who praised his dexterity. There-upon he gave them
cakes, which they ate, and made over the boy  to Hasan Shuman,
saying, "This is Zurayk's child; hide it by  thee." So he hid
it and fetching a lamb, gave it to the hall-keeper  who cooked
it whole, wrapped in a cloth, and laid it out shrouded  as it
were a dead body. Meanwhile Zurayk stood awhile, waiting  at
the door, then gave a knock like thunder and his wife said to 
him, "Hast thou brought the purse?" He replied, "Didst thou 
not take it up in the basket thou diddest let down but now?";
and  she rejoined, "I let no basket down to thee, nor have I
set eyes  on the purse." Quoth he, "By Allah the sharper hath
been  beforehand with me and hath taken the purse again!" Then
he  searched the house and found the basket of cakes gone and
the  child missing and cried out, saying, "Alas, my child!"
Where-upon the woman beat her breast and said, "I and thee to
the  Wazir, for none hath killed my son save this sharper, and
all  because of thee." Cried Zurayk, "I will answer for him."
So he  tied the kerchief of truce about his neck and going to
Ahmad  al-Danaf's lodging, knocked at the door. The hall-
keeper admitted him and as he entered Hasan Shuman asked him,
"What  bringeth thee here?" He answered, "Do ye intercede with
Ali  the Cairene to restore me my child and I will yield to
him the  purse of gold." Quoth Hasan, "Allah requite thee, O
Ali! Why  didst thou not tell me it was his child?" "What hath
befallen  him?" cried Zurayk, and Hasan replied, "We gave him
raisins to  eat, and he choked and died and this is he." Quoth
Zurayk  "Alas, my son! What shall I say to his mother?" Then
he  rose and opening the shroud, saw it was a lamb barbecued
and  said, "Thou makest sport of me, O Ali!" Then they gave
him  the child and Calamity Ahmad said to him, "Thou didst
hang up  the purse, proclaiming that it should be the property
of any sharper  who should be able to take it, and Ali hath
taken it; so 'tis the  very property of our Cairene." Zurayk
answered "I make him  a present of it;" but Ali said to him,
"Do thou accept it on  account of thy niece Zaynab." And
Zurayk replied, "I accept it."  Then quoth the Forty, "We
demand of thee Zaynab in marriage  for Ali of Cairo;" but
quoth he, "I have no control over her save  of kindness."
Hasan asked, "Dost thou grant our suit?"; and he  answered,
"Yes, I will grant her in marriage to him who can avail  to
her mahr or marriage-settlement." "And what is her dowry?" 
enquired Hasan; and Zurayk replied, "She hath sworn that none 
shall mount her breast save the man who bringeth her the robe
of  Kamar, daughter of Azariah the Jew and the rest of her
gear."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to 
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Zurayk replied to Shuman, "She hath sworn that none shall 
ride astraddle upon her breast save the man who bringeth her 
the clothes of Kamar, daughter of Azariah the Jew and her 
crown and girdle and pantoufle[FN#250] of gold," Ali cried,
"If I do  not bring her the clothes this very night, I
renounce my claim to  her." Rejoined Zurayk, "O Ali, thou art
a dead man if thou play  any of thy pranks on Kamar." "Why
so?" asked Ali and the  other answered, "Her father, Jew
Azariah, is a skilful, wily,  perfidious magician who hath the
Jinn at his service. He owneth  without the city a castle,
whose walls are one brick of gold and  one of silver and which
is visible to the folk only whilst he is  therein: when he
goeth forth, it disappeareth. He brought his  daughter this
dress I speak of from an enchanted treasure, and  every day he
layeth it in a charger of gold and, opening the  windows of
the palace, crieth out, 'Where are the sharpers of  Cairo, the
prigs of Al-Irak, the master-thieves of Ajam-land?  Whoso
prevaileth to take this dress, 'tis his.' So all the long-
fingered ones essayed the adventure, but failed to take it,
and he  turned them by his magic into apes and asses." But Ali
said, "I  will assuredly take it, and Zaynab shall be
displayed therein."[FN#251]  So he went to the shop of the Jew
and found him a man of stern  and forbidding aspect, seated
with scales and stone-weights and  gold and silver and nests
of drawers and so forth before him, and  a she-mule tethered
hard by. Presently he rose and shutting his  shop, laid the
gold and silver in two purses, which he placed in a  pair of
saddle-bags and set on the she-mule's back. Then he  mounted
and rode till he reached the city-outskirts followed, with-out
his knowledge, by Ali, when he took out some dust from a 
pocket-purse and, muttering over it, sprinkled it upon the
air. No  sooner had he done this than sharper Ali saw a castle
which had  not its like, and the Jew mounted the steps upon
his beast which  was a subject Jinni; after which he
dismounted and taking the  saddle-bags off her back, dismissed
the she-mule and she vanished.  Then he entered the castle and
sat down. Presently, he arose and  opening the lattices, took
a wand of gold, which he set up in the  open window and,
hanging thereto a golden charger by chains of  the same metal,
laid in it the dress, whilst Ali watched him from  behind the
door, and presently he cried out, saying, "Where are  the
sharpers of Cairo? Where are the prigs of Al-Irak, the 
master-thieves of the Ajam-land? Whoso can take this dress by 
his sleight, 'tis his!" Then he pronounced certain magical
words  and a tray of food spread itself before him. He ate and
conjured  a second time, whereupon the tray disappeared; and
yet a third  time, when a table of wine was placed between his
hands and he  drank. Quoth Ali, "I know not how I am to take
the dress  except if he be drunken." Then he stole up behind
the Jew  whinger in grip; but the other turned and conjured,
saying to his  hand, "Hold with the sword;" whereupon Ali's
right arm was held  and abode half-way in the air hending the
hanger. He put out his  left hand to the weapon, but it also
stood fixed in the air, and so  with his right foot, leaving
him standing on one foot. Then the  Jew dispelled the charm
from him and Ali became as before.  Presently Azariah struck a
table of sand and found that the thief's  name was Mercury Ali
of Cairo; so he turned to him and said,  "Come nearer! Who art
thou and what dost thou here?" He  replied, "I am Ali of
Cairo, of the band of Ahmad al-Danaf. I  sought the hand of
Zaynab, daughter of Dalilah the Wily, and  she demanded thy
daughter's dress to her dowry; so do thou give  it to me and
become a Moslem, an thou wouldst save thy life."  Rejoined the
Jew, "After thy death! Many have gone about to  steal the
dress, but failed to take it from me; wherefore an thou  deign
be advised, thou wilt begone and save thyself; for they only 
seek the dress of thee, that thou mayst fall into destruction;
and  indeed, had I not seen by geomancy that thy fortune
overrideth  my fortunes I had smitten thy neck." Ali rejoiced
to hear that  his luck overcame that of the Jew and said to
him, "There is no  help for it but I must have the dress and
thou must become a True  Believer." Asked the Jew, "Is this
thy will and last word," and  Ali answered, "Yes." So the Jew
took a cup and filling it with  water, conjured over it and
said to Ali, "Come forth from this  shape of a man into the
form of an ass." Then he sprinkled him  with the water and
straightway he became a donkey, with hoofs  and long ears, and
fell to braying after the manner of asinines.  The Jew drew
round him a circle which became a wall over  against him, and
drank on till the morning, when he said to Ali,  "I will ride
thee to-day and give the she-mule a rest." So he  locked up
the dress, the charger, the rod and the charms in a 
cupboard[FN#252] and conjured over Ali, who followed him. Then
he  set the saddle-bags on his back and mounting, fared forth
of the  Castle, whereupon it disappeared from sight and he
rode into  Baghdad, till he came to his shop, where he
alighted and emptied  the bags of gold and silver into the
trays before him. As for Ali,  he was tied up by the shop-
door, where he stood in his asinine  form hearing and
understanding all that passed, without being  able to speak.
And behold, up came a young merchant with  whom fortune had
played the tyrant and who could find no easier  Way of earning
his livelihood than water-carrying. So he brought  his wife's
bracelets to the Jew and said to him, "Give me the  price of
these bracelets, that I may buy me an ass." Asked the  Jew,
"What wilt thou do with him?"; and the other answered,  "O
master, I mean to fetch water from the river on his back, and 
earn my living thereby." Quoth the Jew, "Take this ass of
mine."  So he sold him the bracelets and received the ass-
shaped Ali of  Cairo in part payment and carried him home.
Quoth Ali to himself,  "If the Ass-man clap the pannel on thee
and load thee with  water-skins and go with thee half a score
journeys a day he will  ruin thy health and thou wilt die."
So, when the water-carrier's  wife came to bring him his
fodder, he butted her with his head  and she fell on her back;
whereupon he sprang on her and smiting  her brow with his
mouth, put out and displayed that which his  begetter left
him. She cried aloud and the neighbours came to  her
assistance and beat him and raised him off her breast. When 
her husband the intended water-carrier came home, she said to 
him, "Now either divorce me or return the ass to his owner."
He  asked, "What hath happened?"; and she answered, "This is a 
devil in the guise of a donkey. He sprang upon me, and had not 
the neighbours beaten him off my bosom he had done with me a 
foul thing." So he carried the ass back to the Jew, who said 
to him, "Wherefore hast thou brought him back?" and he 
replied, "He did a foul thing with my wife." So the Jew gave 
him his money again and he went away; and Azariah said to Ali, 
"Hast thou recourse to knavery, unlucky wretch that thou art,
in  order that"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and 
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when  the water-carrier brought back the ass, its Jew owner
returned to  him the monies and turning to Ali of Cairo said,
"Hast thou  recourse to knavery, unlucky wretch that thou art,
in order that  he may return thee to me? But since it pleaseth
thee to be an  ass, I will make thee a spectacle and a
laughing stock to great and  small." Then he mounted him and
rode till he came without the  city, when he brought out the
ashes in powder and conjuring over  it sprinkled it upon the
air and immediately the Castle appeared.  He entered and
taking the saddle-bags off the ass's back set up the rod and
hung to it the charger wherein were the clothes  proclaiming
aloud, "Where be the clever ones of all quarters who  may
avail to take this dress?" Then he conjured as before and 
meat was set before him and he ate and then wine when he
drank;  after which he took a cup of water and muttering
certain words  thereover, sprinkled it on the ass Ali, saying,
"Quit this form and  return to thy former shape." Ali
straightway became a man once  more and Azariah said to him,
"O Ali, take good advice and be  content with my mischief.
Thou hast no call to marry Zaynab  nor to take my daughter's
dress, for 'tis no easy matter for thee:  so leave greed and
'twill be better for thee; else will I turn thee  into a bear
or an ape or set on thee an Ifrit, who will cast thee  behind
the Mountain Kaf." He replied, "I have engaged to take  the
dress and needs must I have it and thou must Islamise or I 
will slay thee." Rejoined the Jew, "O Ali, thou art like a
walnut;  unless it be broken it cannot be eaten." Then he took
a cup of  water and conjuring over it, sprinkled Ali with
somewhat thereof,  saying, "Take thou shape of bear;"
whereupon he instantly  became a bear and the Jew put a collar
about his neck, muzzled him  and chained him to a picket of
iron. Then he sat down and ate  and drank, now and then
throwing him a morsel of his orts and  emptying the dregs of
the cup over him, till the morning, when he  rose and laid by
the tray and the dress and conjured over the  bear, which
followed him to the shop. There the Jew sat down  and emptied
the gold and silver into the trays before Ali, after  binding
him by the chain; and the bear there abode seeing and 
comprehending but not able to speak. Presently up came a man 
and a merchant, who accosted the Jew and said to him, "O
Master,  wilt thou sell me yonder bear? I have a wife who is
my cousin  and is sick; and they have prescribed for her to
eat bears' flesh  and anoint herself with bears' grease." At
this the Jew rejoiced  and said to himself, "I will sell him
to this merchant, so he may  slaughter him and we be at peace
from him." And Ali also said in  his mind, "By Allah, this
fellow meaneth to slaughter me; but  deliverance is with the
Almighty." Then said the Jew, "He is a  present from me to
thee." So the merchant took him and carried  him into the
butcher, to whom he said, "Bring thy tools and  company me."
The butcher took his knives and followed the merchant  to his
house, where he bound the beast and fell to sharpening his 
blade: but, when he went up to him to slaughter him, the bear 
escaped from his hands and rising into the air, disappeared
from sight between heaven and earth; nor did he cease flying
till he  alighted at the Jew's castle. Now the reason thereof
was on this  wise. When the Jew returned home, his daughter
questioned him  of Ali and he told her what had happened;
whereupon she said,  "Summon a Jinni and ask him of the youth,
whether he be indeed  Mercury Ali or another who seeketh to
put a cheat on thee." So  Azariah called a Jinni by
conjurations and questioned him of Ali;  and he replied, "'Tis
Ali of Cairo himself. The butcher hath  pinioned him and
whetted his knife to slaughter him." Quoth the  Jew, "Go,
snatch him up and bring him hither, ere the butcher cut  his
throat." So the Jinni flew off and, snatching Ali out of the 
butcher's hands, bore him to the palace and set him down
before  the Jew, who took a cup of water and conjuring over
it, sprinkled  him therewith, saying, "Return to thine own
shape." And he  straightway became a man again as before. The
Jew's daughter  Kamar,[FN#253] seeing him to be a handsome
young man, fell in love with  him and he fell in love with
her; and she said to him, "O unlucky  one, why dost thou go
about to take my dress, enforcing my father  to deal thus with
thee?" Quoth he, "I have engaged to get it for  Zaynab the
Coney-catcher, that I may wed her therewith." And  she said,
"Others than thou have played pranks with my father to  get my
dress, but could not win to it," presently adding, "So put 
away this thought from thee." But he answered, "Needs must I 
have it, and thy father must become a Moslem, else I will slay 
him." Then said the Jew, "See, O my daughter, how this 
unlucky fellow seeketh his own destruction," adding, "Now I
will  turn thee into a dog." So he took a cup graven with
characters  and full of water and conjuring over it, sprinkled
some of it upon  Ali, saying, "Take thou form of dog."
Whereupon he straight-way became a dog, and the Jew and his
daughter drank together  till the morning, when the father
laid up the dress and charger  and mounted his mule. T