hen he
conjured over the dog, which  followed him, as he rode towards
the town, and all dogs barked at  Ali[FN#254] as he passed,
till he came to the shop of a broker, a seller of  second-hand
goods, who rose and drove away the dogs, and Ali  lay down
before him. The Jew turned and looked for him, but finding him
not, passed onwards. Presently, the broker shut up  his shop
and went home, followed by the dog, which, when his  daughter
saw enter the house, she veiled her face and said, "O my 
papa, dost thou bring a strange man in to me?" He replied, "O 
my daughter, this is a dog." Quoth she, "Not so, 'tis Ali the 
Cairene, whom the Jew Azariah hath enchanted;" and she turned 
to the dog and said to him, "Art not Ali of Cairo?" And he 
signed to her with his head, "Yes." Then her father asked her, 
"Why did the Jew enchant him?"; and she answered, "Because  of
his daughter Kamar's dress; but I can release him." Said the 
broker, "An thou canst indeed do him this good office, now is
the  time," and she, "If he will marry me, I will release
him." And  he signed to her with his head, "Yes."  So she took
a cup of  water, graven with certain signs and conjuring over
it, was about  to sprinkle Ali therewith, when lo and behold!
she heard a great  cry and the cup fell from her hand. She
turned and found that it  was her father's handmaid, who had
cried out; and she said to  her, "O my mistress, is't thus
thou keepest the covenant between  me and thee? None taught
thee this art save I, and thou didst  agree with me that thou
wouldst do naught without consulting  me and that whoso
married thee should marry me also, and that  one night should
be mine and one night thine." And the broker's  daughter said,
"'Tis well." When the broker heard the maid's  words, he asked
his daughter, "Who taught the maid?"; and  she answered, "O my
papa, enquire of herself." So he put the  question and she
replied, "Know, O my lord, that, when I was  with Azariah the
Jew, I used to spy upon him and listen to him,  when he
performed his gramarye; and when he went forth to his  shop in
Baghdad, I opened his books and read in them, till I  became
skilled in the Cabbala-science. One day, he was warm  with
wine and would have me lie with him, but I objected, saying, 
'I may not grant thee this except thou become a Moslem.' He 
refused and I said to him, 'Now for the Sultan's
market.'[FN#255] So he  sold me to thee and I taught my young
mistress, making it a  condition with her that she should do
naught without my counsel,  and that whoso might wed her
should wed me also, one night  for me and one night for her."
Then she took a cup of water and  conjuring over it, sprinkled
the dog therewith; saying, "Return  thou to form of man." And
he straightway was restored to his  former shape; whereupon
the broker saluted him with the salam  and asked him the
reason of his enchantment. So Ali told him  all that had
passed--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day  and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighteenth Night, 

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
broker, having saluted Ali of Cairo with the salam, asked him
the  reason of his enchantment and what had befallen him; and
he  answered by telling him all that had passed, when the
broker said  to him, "Will not my daughter and the handmaid
suffice thee?"  but he answered, "Needs must I have Zaynab
also."  Now  suddenly there came a rap at the door and the
maid said, "Who  is at the door?"  The knocker replied,
"Kamar, daughter of  Azariah the Jew; say me, is Ali of Cairo
with you?" Replied  the broker's daughter, "O thou daughter of
a dog! If he be  with us, what wilt thou with him? Go down, O
maid, and open  to her."  So the maid let her in, and when she
looked upon  Ali and he upon her, he said,  "What bringeth
thee hither  O dog's daughter?"  Quoth she, "I testify that
there is no  god but the God and I testify that Mohammed is
the Apostle  of God." And, having thus Islamised, she asked
him, "Do men  in the Faith of Al-Islam give marriage portions
to women or  do women dower men?"  Quoth he, "Men endow
women."  "Then," said she, "I come and dower myself for thee, 
bringing thee, as my marriage-portion, my dress together with 
the rod and charger and chains and the head of my father,  the
enemy of thee and the foeman of Allah." And she threw  down
the Jew's head before him.  Now the cause of her  slaying her
sire was as follows.  On the night of his turning  Ali into a
dog, she saw, in a dream, a speaker who said to her,  "Become
a Moslemah." She did so; and as soon as she awoke  next
morning she expounded Al-Islam to her father who  refused to
embrace the Faith; so she drugged him with Bhang  and killed
him. As for Ali, he took the gear and said to the  broker,
"Meet we to-morrow at the Caliph's Divan, that I may  take thy
daughter and the handmaid to wife." Then he set out 
rejoicing, to return to the barrack of the Forty. On his way
he  met a sweetmeat seller, who was beating hand upon hand and
saying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah,  the Glorious, the Great! Folk's labour hath waxed
sinful and  man is active only in fraud!" Then said he to Ali,
"I conjure  thee, by Allah, taste of this confection!"  So Ali
took a piece  and ate it and fell down senseless, for there
was Bhang therein;  whereupon the sweetmeat-seller seized the
dress and the charger  and the rest of the gear and thrusting
them into the box where  he kept his sweetmeats hoisted it up
and made off. Presently he  met a Kazi, who called to him,
saying, "Come hither, O sweet-meat seller!" So he went up to
him and setting down his sack  laid the tray of sweetmeats
upon it and asked, "What dost thou  want?" "Halwa and
dragees,[FN#256]" answered the Kazi and, taking  some in his
hand, said, "Both of these are adulterated." Then  he brought
out sweetmeats from his breast-pocket[FN#257] and gave them 
to the sweetmeat-seller, saying, "Look at this fashion; how 
excellent it is! Eat of it and make the like of it." So he ate 
and fell down senseless, for the sweetmeats were drugged with 
Bhang, whereupon the Kazi bundled him into the sack and made 
off with him, charger and chest and all, to the barrack of the 
Forty. Now the Judge in question was Hasan Shuman and the 
reason of this was as follows. When Ali had been gone some 
days in quest of the dress and they heard no news of him, 
Calamity Ahmad said to his men, "O lads, go and seek for your 
brother Ali of Cairo." So they sallied forth in quest of him
and  among the rest Hasan Shuman the Pestilence, disguised in
a Kazi's  gear.  He came upon the sweetmeat-seller and,
knowing him  for Ahmad al-Lakit[FN#258] suspected him of
having played some trick  upon Ali; so he drugged him and did
as we have seen. Mean-while, the other Forty fared about the
streets and highways  making search in different directions,
and amongst them Ali  Kitf al-Jamal, who espying a crowd, made
towards the people  and found the Cairene Ali lying drugged
and senseless in their  midst. So he revived him and he came
to himself and seeing the  folk flocking around him asked,
"Where am I?"  Answered  Ali Camel-shoulder and his comrades,
"We found thee lying here  drugged but know not who drugged
thee." Quoth Ali, "'Twas  a certain sweetmeat-seller who
drugged me and took the gear  from me; but where is he gone?"
Quoth his comrades, "We  have seen nothing of him; but come,
rise and go home with  us." So they returned to the barrack,
where they found Ahmad  al-Danaf, who greeted Ali and enquired
if he had brought the  dress.  He replied, "I was coming
hither with it and other  matters, including the Jew's head,
when a sweetmeat-seller met  me and drugged me with Bhang and
took them from me." Then  he told him the whole tale ending
with, "If I come across that  man of goodies again, I will
requite him."  Presently Hasan  Shuman came out of a closet
and said to him, "Hast thou gotten  the gear, O Ali?" So he
told him what had befallen him and  added, "If I know whither
the rascal is gone and where to  find the knave, I would pay
him out. Knowest thou whither  he went?" Answered Hasan, "I
know where he is," and  opening the door of the closet, showed
him the sweetmeat-seller  within, drugged and senseless.  Then
he aroused  him and he opened his eyes and finding himself in
presence of  Mercury Ali and Calamity Ahmad and the Forty,
started up and  said, "Where am I and who hath laid hands on
me?" Replied  Shuman, "'Twas I laid hands on thee;" and Ali
cried, "O  perfidious wretch, wilt thou play thy pranks on
me?" And he  would have slain him: but Hasan said to him,
"Hold thy hand  for this fellow is become thy kinsman."  "How
my kinsman?"  quoth Ali; and quoth Hasan, "This is Ahmad al-
Lakit son of  Zaynab's sister." Then said Ali to the prisoner,
"Why didst thou  thus, O Lakit?" and he replied, "My
grandmother, Dalilah the  Wily, bade me do it; only because
Zurayk the fishmonger fore-gathered with the old woman and
said, 'Mercury Ali of Cairo is  a sharper and a past master in
knavery, and he will certainly slay  the Jew and bring hither
the dress.'  So she sent for me and  said to me, 'O Ahmad,
dost thou know Ali of Cairo?' Answered  I, 'Indeed I do and
'twas I directed him to Ahmad al-Danaf's  lodging when he
first came to Baghdad.' Quoth she, 'Go and set  thy nets for
him, and if he have brought back the gear, put a  cheat on him
and take it from him.' So I went round about the  highways of
the city, till I met a sweetmeat-seller and buying his 
clothes and stock-in-trade and gear for ten dinars, did what
was  done." Thereupon quoth Ali, "Go back to thy grandmother
and  Zurayk, and tell them that I have brought the gear and
the Jew's  head and tell them to meet me to-morrow at the
Caliph's Divan, there to receive Zaynab's dowry." And Calamity
Ahmad  rejoiced in this and said, "We have not wasted our
pains in  rearing thee, O Ali!"  Next morning Ali took the
dress, the  charger, the rod and the chains of gold, together
with the head of  Azariah the Jew mounted on a pike, and went
up, accompanied  by Ahmad al-Danaf and the Forty, to the
Divan, where they  kissed ground before the Caliph--And
Shahrazad perceived  the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali 
the Cairene went up to the Caliph's Divan, accompanied by his 
uncle Ahmad al-Danaf and his lads they kissed ground before
the  Caliph who turned and seeing a youth of the most valiant
aspect,  enquired of Calamity Ahmad concerning him and he
replied, "O  Commander of the Faithful, this is Mercury Ali
the Egyptian  captain of the brave boys of Cairo, and he is
the first of my lads."  And the Caliph loved him for the
valour that shone from between  his eyes, testifying for him
and not against him. Then Ali rose;  and, casting the Jew's
head down before him, said, "May thine  every enemy be like
this one, O Prince of True Believers!"  Quoth Al-Rashid,
"Whose head is this?"; and quoth Ali, "'Tis  the head of
Azariah the Jew." "Who slew him?" asked the  Caliph. So Ali
related to him all that had passed, from first to  last, and
the Caliph said, "I had not thought thou wouldst kill  him,
for that he was a sorcerer." Ali replied, "O Commander of  the
Faithful, my Lord made me prevail to his slaughter." Then  the
Caliph sent the Chief of Police to the Jew's palace, where he 
found him lying headless; so he laid the body on a
bier,[FN#259] and  carried it to Al-Rashid, who commanded to
burn it. Whereat,  behold, up came Kamar and kissing the
ground before the Caliph,  informed him that she was the
daughter of Jew Azariah and that  she had become a Moslemah.
Then she renewed her profession of Faith before the Commander
of the Faithful and said to him  "Be thou my intercessor with
Sharper Ali that he take me to  wife." She also appointed him
her guardian to consent to her  marriage with the Cairene, to
whom he gave the Jew's palace and  all its contents, saying,
"Ask a boon of me." Quoth Ali, "I beg  of thee to let me stand
on thy carpet and eat of thy table;" and  quoth the Caliph, "O
Ali, hast thou any lads?" He replied, "I  have forty lads; but
they are in Cairo." Rejoined the Caliph,  "Send to Cairo and
fetch them hither," presently adding, "But,  O Ali, hast thou
a barrack for them?" "No," answered Ali;  and Hasan Shuman
said, "I make him a present of my barrack  with all that is
therein, O Commander of the Faithful."  However, the Caliph
retorted, saying, "Thy lodging is thine own, O  Hasan;" and he
bade his treasurer give the court architect ten  thousand
dinars, that he might build Ali a hall with four daises  and
forty sleeping-closets for his lads. Then said he, "O Ali, 
hast thou any further wish, that we may command its
fulfilment?".  and said Ali, "O King of the age, be thou my
intercessor with  Dalilah the Wily that she give me her
daughter Zaynab to wife  and take the dress and gear of
Azariah's girl in lieu of dower."  Dalilah accepted the
Caliph's intercession and accepted the  charger and dress and
what not, and they drew up the marriage  contracts between Ali
and Zaynab and Kamar, the Jew's daughter  and the broker's
daughter and the handmaid. Moreover, the  Caliph assigned him
a solde with a table morning and evening,  and stipends and
allowances for fodder; all of the most liberal.  Then Ali the
Cairene fell to making ready for the wedding  festivities and,
after thirty days, he sent a letter to his comrades in  Cairo,
wherein he gave them to know of the favours and honours  which
the Caliph had bestowed upon him and said, "I have  married
four maidens and needs must ye come to the wedding."  So,
after a reasonable time the forty lads arrived and they held 
high festival; he homed them in his barrack and entreated them 
with the utmost regard and presented them to the Caliph, who 
bestowed on them robes of honour and largesse. Then the
tiring-women displayed Zaynab before Ali in the dress of the
Jew's  daughter, and he went in unto her and found her a pearl 
unthridden and a filly by all save himself unridden. Then he 
went in unto the three other maidens and found them
accomplished  in beauty and loveliness. After this it befel
that Ali of Cairo was  one night on guard by the Caliph who
said to him, "I wish thee  O Ali, to tell me all that hath
befallen thee from first to last with  Dalilah the Wily and
Zaynab the Coney-catcher and Zurayk the  Fishmonger." So Ali
related to him all his adventures and the  Commander of the
Faithful bade record them and lay them up in  the royal
muniment-rooms. So they wrote down all that had  befallen him
and kept it in store with other histories for the  people of
Mohammed the Best of Men. And Ali and his wives  and comrades
abode in all solace of life, and its joyance, till there  came
to them the Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer of Societies; 
and Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) is All-
knowing![FN#260] And  also men relate the tale of 




             ARDASHIR AND HAYAT AL-NUFUS.[FN#261]



There was once in the city of Shiraz a mighty King called Sayf
al-A'azam Shah, who had grown old, without being blessed with
a son. So he summoned the physicists and physicians and said
to them, "I am now in years and ye know my case and the state
of the kingdom and its ordinance; and I fear for my subjects
after me; for that up to this present I have not been
vouchsafed a son." Thereupon they replied, "We will compound
thee a somewhat of drugs wherein shall be efficacy, if it
please Almighty Allah!" So they mixed him drugs, which he used
and knew his wife carnally, and she conceived by leave of the
Most High Lord, who saith to a thing, "Be," and it becometh.
When her months were accomplished, she gave birth to a male
child like the moon, whom his father named Ardashir,[FN#262]
and he grew up and throve and applied himself to the study of
learning and letters, till he attained the age of fifteen. Now
there was in Al-Irak a King called Abd al-Kadir who had a
daughter, by name Hayat al-Nufus, and she was like the rising
full moon, but she had an hatred for men and the folk very
hardly dared name mankind in her presence. The Kings of the
Chosroes had sought her in marriage of her sire; but, when he
spoke with her thereof, she said, "Never will I do this; and
if thou force me thereto, I will slay myself." Now Prince
Ardashir heard of her fame and fell in love with her and told
his father who, seeing his case, took pity on him and promised
him day by day that he should marry her. So he despatched his
Wazir to demand her in wedlock, but King Abd al-Kadir refused,
and when the Minister returned to King Sayf al-A'azam and
acquainted him with what had befallen his mission and the
failure thereof, he was wroth with exceeding wrath and cried,
"Shall the like of me send to one of the Kings on a
requisition and he accomplish it not?" Then he bade a herald
make proclamation to his troops, bidding them bring out the
tents and equip them for war with all diligence, though they
should borrow money for the necessary expenses; and he said,
"I will on no wise turn back, till I have laid waste King Abd
al-Kadir's dominions and slain his men and plundered his
treasures and blotted out his traces!" When the report of this
reached Ardashir he rose from his carpet-bed, and going in to
his father, kissed ground[FN#263] between his hands and said,
"O mighty King, trouble not thyself with aught of this
thing"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when report of this reached the Prince he went in to his sire
the King and, kissing ground between his hands, said, "O
mighty King, trouble not thy soul with aught of this thing and
levy not thy champions and armies neither spend thy monies.
Thou art stronger than he, and if thou loose upon him this thy
host, thou wilt lay waste his cities and dominions and spoil
his good and slay his strong men and himself; but when his
daughter shall come to know what hath befallen her father and
his people by reason of her, she will slay herself, and I
shall die on her account; for I can never live after her; no,
never." Asked the King, "And what then thinkest thou to do, O
my son?" and the Prince answered, "I will don a merchant's
habit and cast about how I may win to the Princess and compass
my desire of her." Quoth Sayf al-A'azam, "Art thou determined
upon this?"; and quoth the Prince, "Yes, O my sire;" whereupon
the King called to his Wazir, and said to him, "Do thou
journey with my son, the core of my heart, and help him to win
his will and watch over him and guide him with thy sound
judgment, for thou standest to him even in my stead." "I hear
and obey," answered the Minister; and the King gave his son
three hundred thousand dinars in gold and great store of
jewels and precious stones and goldsmiths' ware and stuffs and
other things of price. Then Prince Ardashir went in to his
mother and kissed her hands and asked her blessing. She
blessed him and, forthright opening her treasures, brought out
to him necklaces and trinkets and apparel and all manner of
other costly objects hoarded up from the time of the bygone
Kings, whose price might not be evened with coin. Moreover, he
took with him of his Mamelukes and negro-slaves and cattle all
that he needed for the road and clad himself and the Wazir and
their company in traders' gear. Then he farewelled his parents
and kinsfolk and friends; and, setting out, fared on over
wolds and wastes all hours of the day and watches of the
night; and whenas the way was longsome upon him he improvised
these couplets,

"My longing bred of love with mine unease for ever grows; *
     Nor against all the wrongs of time one succourer arose:
When Pleiads and the Fishes show in sky the rise I watch, * As
     worshipper within whose breast a pious burning glows:
For Star o' Morn I speer until at last when it is seen, * I'm
     madded with my passion and my fancy's woes and throes:
I swear by you that never from your love have I been loosed; *
     Naught am I save a watcher who of slumber nothing knows!
Though hard appear my hope to win, though languor aye
     increase, * And after thee my patience fails and ne'er a
     helper shows;
Yet will I wait till Allah shall be pleased to join our loves;
     * I'll mortify the jealous and I'll mock me of my foes."

When he ended his verse he swooned away and the Wazir
sprinkled rose-water on him, till the Prince came to himself,
when the Minister said to him, "O King's son, possess thy soul
in patience; for the consequence of patience is consolation,
and behold, thou art on the way to whatso thou wishest." And
he ceased not to bespeak him fair and comfort him till his
trouble subsided; and they continued their journey with all
diligence. Presently, the Prince again became impatient of the
length of the way and bethought him of his beloved and recited
these couplets,

"Longsome is absence, restlessness increaseth and despite; *
     And burn my vitals in the blaze my love and longings
     light:
Grows my hair gray from pains and pangs which I am doomed bear
     * For pine, while tear-floods stream from eyes and sore
     offend my sight:
I swear, O Hope of me, O End of every wish and will, * By Him
     who made mankind and every branch with leafage dight,
A passion-load for thee, O my Desire, I must endure, * And
     boast I that to bear such load no lover hath the might.
Question the Night of me and Night thy soul shall satisfy *
     Mine eyelids never close in sleep throughout the livelong
     night."

Then he wept with sore weeping and 'plained of that he
suffered for stress of love-longing; but the Wazir comforted
him and spoke him fair, promising him the winning of his wish;
after which they fared on again for a few days, when they drew
near to the White City, the capital of King Abd al-Kadir, soon
after sunrise. Then said the Minister to the Prince, "Rejoice,
O King's son, in all good; for see, yonder is the White City,
that which thou seekest." Whereat the Prince rejoiced with
exceeding joy and recited these couplets,

"My friends, I yearn in heart distraught for him; * Longing
     abides and with sore pains I brim:
I mourn like childless mother, nor can find       * One to
     console me when the light grows dim;
Yet when the breezes blow from off thy land,      * I feel
     their freshness shed on heart and limb;
And rail mine eyes like water-laden clouds,       * While in a
     tear-sea shed by heart I swim."

Now when they entered the White City they asked for the
Merchants' Khan, a place of moneyed men; and when shown the
hostelry they hired three magazines and on receiving the
keys[FN#264] they laid up therein all their goods and gear.
They abode in the Khan till they were rested, when the Wazir
applied himself to devise a device for the Prince,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Prince and the Minister alighted at the Khan and lodged their
goods in the ground-floor magazines and there settled their
servants. Then they tarried awhile till they had rested, when
the Wazir arose and applied himself to devise a device for the
Prince, and said to him, "I have bethought me of somewhat
wherein, methinks, will be success for thee, so it please
Almighty Allah." Quoth Ardashir, "O thou Wazir of good
counsel, do what cometh to thy mind, and may the Lord direct
thy rede aright!" Quoth the Minister, "I purpose to hire thee
a shop in the market-street of the stuff-sellers and set thee
therein; for that all, great and small, have recourse to the
bazar and, meseems, when the folk see thee with their own eyes
sitting in the shop their hearts will incline to thee and thou
wilt thus be enabled to attain thy desire, for thou art fair
of favour and souls incline to thee and sight rejoiceth in
thee." The other replied, "Do what seemeth good to thee." So
the Wazir forthright began to robe the Prince and himself in
their richest raiment and, putting a purse of a thousand
dinars in his breast-pocket, went forth and walked about the
city, whilst all who looked upon them marvelled at the beauty
of the King's son, saying, "Glory be to Him who created this
youth 'of vile water[FN#265]'! Blessed be Allah excellentest
of Creators!" Great was the talk anent him and some said,
"This is no mortal, 'this is naught save a noble
angel'";[FN#266] and others, "Hath Rizwan, the door-keeper of
the Eden-garden, left the gate of Paradise unguarded, that
this youth hath come forth." The people followed them to the
stuff- market, where they entered and stood, till there came
up to them an old man of dignified presence and venerable
appearance, who saluted them, and they returned his salam.
Then the Shaykh said to them, "O my lords, have ye any need,
that we may have the honour of accomplishing?"; and the Wazir
asked him, "Who art thou, O elder?" He answered, "I am the
Overseer of the market." Quoth the Wazir, "Know then, O
Shaykh, that this youth is my son and I wish to hire him a
shop in the bazar, that he may sit therein and learn to sell
and buy and take and give, and come to ken merchants' ways and
habits." "I hear and I obey," replied the Overseer and brought
them without stay or delay the key of a shop, which he caused
the brokers sweep and clean. And they did his bidding. Then
the Wazir sent for a high mattress, stuffed with ostrich-down,
and set it up in the shop, spreading upon it a small
prayer-carpet, and a cushion fringed with broidery of red
gold. Moreover he brought pillows and transported thither so
much of the goods and stuffs that he had brought with him as
filled the shop. Next morning the young Prince came and
opening the shop, seated himself on the divan, and stationed
two Mamelukes, clad in the richest of raiment before him and
two black slaves of the goodliest of the Abyssinians in the
lower part of the shop. The Wazir enjoined him to keep his
secret from the folk, so thereby he might find aid in the
winning of his wishes; then he left him and charging him to
acquaint him with what befel him in the shop, day by day
returned to the Khan. The Prince sat in the shop till night as
he were the moon at its fullest, whilst the folk, hearing tell
of his comeliness, flocked to the place, without errand, to
gaze on his beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect
grace and glorify the Almighty who created and shaped him,
till none could pass through that bazar for the excessive
crowding of the folk about him. The King's son turned right
and left, abashed at the throng of people that stared at him,
hoping to make acquaintance with some one about the court, of
whom he might get news of the Princess; but he found no way to
this, wherefore his breast was straitened. Meanwhile, the
Wazir daily promised him the attainment of his desire and the
case so continued for a time till, one morning, as the youth
sat in the shop, there came up an old woman of respectable
semblance and dignified presence clad in raiment of
devotees[FN#267] and followed by two slave-girls like moons.
She stopped before the shop and, having considered the Prince
awhile, cried, "Glory be to God who fashioned that face and
perfected that figure!" Then she saluted him and he returned
her salam and seated her by his side. Quoth she, "Whence
cometh thou, O fair of favour?"; and quoth he, "From the parts
of Hind, O my mother; and I have come to this city to see the
world and look about me." "Honour to thee for a visitor! What
goods and stuffs hast thou? Show me something handsome, fit
for Kings." "If thou wish for handsome stuffs, I will show
them to thee; for I have wares that beseem persons of every
condition." "O my son, I want somewhat costly of price and
seemly to sight; brief, the best thou hast." "Thou must needs
tell me for whom thou seekest it, that I may show thee goods
according to the rank of the requiter." "Thou speakest sooth,
O my son," said she. "I want somewhat for my mistress, Hayat
al-Nufus, daughter of Abd al-Kadir, lord of this land and King
of this country." Now when Ardashir heard his mistress's name,
his reason flew for joy and his heart fluttered and he gave no
order to slave or servant, but, putting his hand behind him,
pulled out a purse of an hundred dinars and offered it to the
old woman, saying, "This is for the washing of thy clothes."
Then he again put forth his hand and brought out of a wrapper
a dress worth ten thousand dinars or more and said to her,
"This is of that which I have brought to your country." When
the old woman saw it, it pleased her and she asked, "What is
the price of this dress, O perfect in qualities?" Answered he,
"I will take no price for it!" whereupon she thanked him and
repeated her question; but he said, "By Allah, I will take no
price for it. I make thee a present of it, an the Princess
will not accept it and 'tis a guest-gift from me to thee.
Alham- dolillah--Glory be to God--who hath brought us
together, so that, if one day I have a want, I shall find in
thee a helper to me in winning it!" She marvelled at the
goodliness of his speech and the excess of his generosity and
the perfection of his courtesy and said to him, "What is thy
name, O my lord?" He replied, "My name is Ardashir;" and she
cried, "By Allah this is a rare name! Therewith are Kings'
sons named, and thou art in a guise of the sons of the
merchants!" Quoth he, "Of the love my father bore me, he gave
me this name, but a name signifieth naught;" and quoth she in
wonder, "O my son, take the price of thy goods." But he swore
that he would not take aught. Then the old lady said to him,
"O my dear one, Truth (I would have thee know) is the greatest
of all things and thou hadst not dealt thus generously by me
but for a special reason: so tell me thy case and thy secret
thought; belike thou hast some wish to whose winning I may
help thee." Thereupon he laid his hand in hers and, after
exacting an oath of secrecy, told her the whole story of his
passion for the Princess and his condition by reason thereof.
The old woman shook her head and said, "True; but O my son,
the wise say, in the current adage, 'An thou wouldest be
obeyed, abstain from ordering what may not be made'; and thou,
my son, thy name is Merchant, and though thou hadst the keys
of the Hidden Hoards, yet wouldst thou be called naught but
Merchant. An thou wouldst rise to high rank, according to thy
station, then seek the hand of a Kazi's daughter or even an
Emir's; but why, O my son, aspirest thou to none but the
daughter of the King of the age and the time, and she a clean
maid, who knoweth nothing of the things of the world and hath
never in her life seen anything but her palace wherein she
dwelleth? Yet, for all her tender age, she is intelligent,
shrewd, vivacious, penetrating, quick of wit, sharp of act and
rare of rede: her father hath no other child and she is dearer
to him than his life and soul. Every morning he cometh to her
and giveth her good-morrow, and all who dwell in the palace
stand in dread of her. Think not, O my son, that any dare
bespeak her with aught of these words; nor is there any way
for me thereto. By Allah, O my son, my heart and vitals love
thee and were it in my power to give thee access to her, I
would assuredly do it; but I will tell thee somewhat, wherein
Allah may haply appoint the healing of thy heart, and will
risk life and goods for thee, till I win thy will for thee."
He asked, "And what is that, O my mother?" and she answered,
"Seek of me the daughter of a Wazir or an Emir, and I will
grant thy request; but it may not be that one should mount
from earth to heaven at one bound." When the Prince heard
this, he replied to her with courtesy and sense, "O my mother,
thou art a woman of wit and knowest how things go. Say me doth
a man, when his head irketh him, bind up his hand?" Quoth she,
"No, by Allah, O my son"; and quoth he, "Even so my heart
seeketh none but her and naught slayeth me but love of her. By
Allah, I am a dead man, and I find not one to counsel me
aright and succour me! Allah upon thee, O my mother, take pity
on my strangerhood and the streaming of my tears!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Ardashir, the King's son said to the old woman, "Allah upon
thee, O my mother, take pity on my strangerhood and the
streaming of my tears." Replied she, "By Allah, O my son, thy
words rend my heart, but my hand hath no cunning wherewith to
help thee." Quoth he, "I beseech thee of thy favour, carry her
a letter and kiss her hands for me." So she had compassion on
him and said, "Write what thou wilt and I will bear it to
her." When he heard this, he was ready to fly for joy and
calling for ink-case and paper, wrote these couplets,

"O Hayat al-Nufus, be gen'rous, and incline * To one who
     loving thee for parting's doomed to pine.
I was in all delight, in gladsomest of life, * But now I am
     distraught with sufferings condign.
To wakefulness I cling through longsomeness of night * And
     with me sorrow chats[FN#268] through each sad eye of
     mine;
Pity a lover sad, a sore afflicted wretch, * Whose eyelids
     ever ulcered are with tearful brine;
And when the morning comes at last, the real morn, * He finds
     him drunken and distraught with passion's wine."

Then he folded the scroll and kissing it, gave it to the old
woman; after which he put his hand to a chest and took out a
second purse containing an hundred dinars, which he presented
to her, saying, "Divide this among the slave-girls." She
refused it and cried, "By Allah, O my son, I am not with thee
for aught of this!"; however, he thanked her and answered,
"There is no help but that thou accept of it." So she took it
and kissing his hands, returned home; and going in to the
Princess, cried, "O my lady, I have brought thee somewhat the
like whereof is not with the people of our city, and it cometh
from a handsome young man, than whom there is not a goodlier
on earth's face!" She asked "O my nurse, and whence cometh the
youth?" and the old woman answered, "From the parts of Hind;
and he hath given me this dress of gold brocade, embroidered
with pearls and gems and worth the Kingdom of Chosroes and
Caesar." Thereupon she opened the dress and the whole palace
was illuminated by its brightness, because of the beauty of
its fashion and the wealth of unions and jewels wherewith it
was broidered, and all who were present marvelled at it. The
Princess examined it and, judging it to be worth no less than
a whole year's revenue of her father's kingdom, said to the
old woman, "O my nurse, cometh this dress from him or from
another?"[FN#269] Replied she, "From him;" and Hayat al-Nufus
asked, "Is this trader of our town or a stranger?" The old
woman answered, "He is a foreigner, O my lady, newly come
hither; and by Allah he hath servants and slaves; and he is
fair of face, symmetrical of form, well mannered, open-handed
and open-hearted, never saw I a goodlier than he, save
thyself." The King's daughter rejoined, "Indeed this is an
extraordinary thing, that a dress like this, which money
cannot buy, should be in the hands of a merchant! What price
did he set on it, O my nurse?" Quoth she, "By Allah, he would
set no price on it, but gave me back the money thou sentest by
me and swore that he would take naught thereof, saying, ''Tis
a gift from me to the King's daughter; for it beseemeth none
but her; and if she will not accept it, I make thee a present
of it.'" Cried the Princess, "By Allah, this is indeed
marvellous generosity and wondrous munificence! But I fear the
issue of his affair, lest haply[FN#270] he be brought to
necessity. Why didst thou not ask him, O my nurse, if he had
any desire, that we might fulfil it for him?" The nurse
replied, "O my lady, I did ask him, and he said to me, 'I have
indeed a desire'; but he would not tell me what it was.
However, he gave me this letter and said, 'Carry it to the
Princess.'" So Hayat al-Nufus took the letter and opened and
read it to the end; whereupon she was sore chafed; and lost
temper and changing colour for anger she cried out to the old
woman, saying, "Woe to thee, O nurse! What is the name of this
dog who durst write this language to a King's daughter? What
affinity is there between me and this hound that he should
address me thus? By Almighty Allah, Lord of the well Zemzem
and of the Hatim Wall,[FN#271] but that I fear the Omnipotent,
the Most High, I would send and bind the cur's hands behind
him and slit his nostrils, and shear off his nose and ears and
after, by way of example, crucify him on the gate of the bazar
wherein is his booth!" When the old woman heard these words,
she waxed yellow; her side-muscles[FN#272] quivered and her
tongue clave to her mouth; but she heartened her heart and
said, "Softly, O my lady! What is there in his letter to
trouble thee thus? Is it aught but a memorial containing his
complaint to thee of poverty or oppression, from which he
hopeth to be relieved by thy favour?" Replied she, "No, by
Allah, O my nurse, 'tis naught of this; but verses and
shameful words! However, O my nurse, this dog must be in one
of three cases: either he is Jinn-mad, and hath no wit, or he
seeketh his own slaughter, or else he is assisted to his wish
of me by some one of exceeding puissance and a mighty Sultan.
Or hath he heard that I am one of the baggages of the city,
who lie a night or two with whosoever seeketh them, that he
writeth me immodest verses to debauch my reason by talking of
such matters?" Rejoined the old woman, "By Allah, O my lady,
thou sayst sooth! But reck not thou of yonder ignorant hound,
for thou art seated in thy lofty, firm-builded and
unapproachable palace, to which the very birds cannot soar
neither the wind pass over it, and as for him, he is clean
distraught. Wherefore do thou write him a letter and chide him
angrily and spare him no manner of reproof, but threaten him
with dreadful threats and menace him with death and say to
him, 'Whence hast thou knowledge of me, that thou durst write
me, O dog of a merchant, O thou who trudgest far and wide all
thy days in wilds and wolds for the sake of gaining a dirham
or a dinar? By Allah, except thou awake from thy sleep and put
off thine intoxication, I will assuredly crucify thee on the
gate of the market-street wherein is thy shop!'" Quoth the
Princess, "I fear lest he presume, if I write to him"; and
quoth the nurse, "And pray what is he and what is his rank
that he should presume to us? Indeed, we write him but to the
intent that his presumption may be cut off and his fear
magnified." And she ceased not craftily to persuade her, till
she called for ink-case and paper and wrote him these
couplets,

"O thou who claimest to be prey of love and ecstasy; * Thou,
     who for passion spendest nights in grief and saddest
     gree: 
Say, dost thou (haughty one!) desire enjoyment of the moon? *
     Did man e'er sue the moon for grace whate'er his lunacy?
I verily will counsel thee with rede the best to hear: * Cut
     short this course ere come thou nigh sore risk, nay
     death, to dree!
If thou to this request return, surely on thee shall fall *
     Sore punishment, for vile offence a grievous penalty.
Be reasonable then, be wise, hark back unto thy wits; *
     Behold, in very truth I speak with best advice to thee:
By Him who did all things that be create from nothingness; *
     Who dressed the face of heaven with stars in brightest
     radiancy:
If in the like of this thy speech thou dare to sin again! *
     I'll surely have thee crucified upon a trunk of tree."

Then she rolled up the letter and gave it to the old woman who
took it and, repairing to Ardashir's shop, delivered it to
him, --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
old woman took that letter from Hayat al-Nufus she fared forth
till she found the youth who was sitting in his shop and gave
it to him, saying, "Read thine answer and know that when she
perused thy paper she was wroth with exceeding wrath; but I
soothed her and spake her fair, till she consented to write
thee a reply." He took the letter joyfully but, when he had
read it and understood its drift, he wept sore, whereat the
old woman's heart ached and she cried, "O my son, Allah never
cause thine eyes to weep nor thy heart to mourn! What can be
more gracious than that she should answer thy letter when thou
hast done what thou diddest?" He replied, "O my mother what
shall I do for a subtle device? Behold, she writeth to me,
threatening me with death and crucifixion and forbidding me
from writing to her; and I, by Allah, see my death to be
better than my life; but I beg thee of thy grace[FN#273] to
carry her another letter from me." She said, "Write and I
warrant I'll bring thee an answer. By Allah, I will assuredly
venture my life to win for thee thy wish, though I die to
pleasure thee!" He thanked her and kissing her hands, wrote
these verses,

"Do you threaten me wi' death for my loving you so well? *
     When Death to me were rest and all dying is by Fate?
And man's death is but a boon, when so longsome to him grows *
     His life, and rejected he lives in lonest state:
Then visit ye a lover who hath ne'er a soul to aid; * For on
     pious works of men Heaven's blessing shall await.
But an ye be resolved on this deed then up and on; * I'm in
     bonds to you, a bondsman confined within your gate:
What path have I whose patience without you is no more? * How
     is this, when a lover's heart in stress of love is
     strait?
O my lady show me ruth, who by passion am misused; * For all
     who love the noble stand for evermore excused."

He then folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman,
together with two purses of two hundred dinars, which she
would have refused, but he conjured her by oath to accept of
them. So she took them both and said, "Needs must I bring thee
to thy desire, despite the noses of thy foes." Then she
repaired to the palace and gave the letter to Hayat al-Nufus
who said, "What is this, O my nurse? Here are we in a
correspondence and thou coming and going! Indeed, I fear lest
the matter get wind and we be disgraced." Rejoined the old
woman, "How so, O my lady? Who dare speak such word?" So she
took the letter and after reading and understanding it she
smote hand on hand, saying "Verily, this is a calamity which
is fallen upon us, and I know not whence this young man came
to us!" Quoth the old woman, "O my lady, Allah upon thee,
write him another letter; but be rough with him this time and
say to him, 'An thou write me another word after this, I will
have thy head struck off.'" Quoth the Princess, "O my nurse, I
am assured that the matter will not end on such wise; 'twere
better to break off this exchange of letters; and, except the
puppy take warning by my previous threats, I will strike off
his head." The old woman said, "Then write him a letter and
give him to know this condition." So Hayat al-Nufus called for
pen-case and paper and wrote these couplets,

'Ho, thou heedless of Time and his sore despight! * Ho, thou
     heart whom hopes of my favours excite!
Think O pride-full! would'st win for thyself the skies? *
     Would'st attain to the moon shining clear and bright?
I will burn thee with fire that shall ne'er be quenched, * Or
     will slay thee with scymitar's sharpest bite!
Leave it, friend, and 'scape the tormenting pains, * Such as
     turn hair- partings[FN#274] from black to white.
Take my warning and fly from the road of love; * Draw thee
     back from a course nor seemly nor right!"

Then she folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, who
was puzzled and perplexed by the matter. She carried it to
Ardashir, and the Prince read the letter and bowed his head to
the earth, making as if he wrote with his finger and speaking
not a word. Quoth the old woman, "How is it I see thee silent
stay and not say thy say?"; and quoth he, "O my mother, what
shall I say, seeing that she doth but threaten me and
redoubleth in hard- heartedness and aversion?" Rejoined the
nurse, "Write her a letter of what thou wilt: I will protect
thee; nor let thy heart be cast down, for needs must I bring
you twain together." He thanked her for her kindness and
kissing her hand, wrote these couplets,

"A heart, by Allah! never soft to lover-wight, * Who sighs for
     union only with his friends, his sprite!
Who with tear-ulcered eyelids evermore must bide, * When
     falleth upon earth first darkness of the night:
Be just, be gen'rous, lend thy ruth and deign give alms * To
     love-molested lover, parted, forced to flight!
He spends the length of longsome night without a doze; *
     Fire-brent and drent in tear-flood flowing infinite:
Ah; cut not off the longing of my fondest heart * Now
     disappointed, wasted, flutt'ring for its blight."

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman,
together with three hundred dinars, saying, "This is for the
washing of thy hands." She thanked him and kissed his hands,
after which she returned to the palace and gave the letter to
the Princess, who took it and read it and throwing it from her
fingers, sprang to her feet. Then she walked, shod as she was
with pattens of gold, set with pearls and jewels, till she
came to her sire's palace, whilst the vein of anger started
out between her eyes, and none dared ask her of her case. When
she reached the palace, she enquired for the King, and the
slave-girls and concubines replied to her, "O my lady, he is
gone forth a-hunting and sporting." So she returned, as she
were a rending lioness, and bespake none for the space of
three hours, when her brow cleared and her wrath cooled. As
soon as the old woman saw that her irk and anger were past,
she went up to her and, kissing ground between her hands,
asked her, "O my lady, whither went those noble steps?" The
Princess answered, "To the palace of the King my sire." "And
could no one do thine errand?" enquired the nurse. Replied the
Princess, "No, for I went to acquaint him of that which hath
befallen me with yonder cur of a merchant, so he might lay
hands on him and on all the merchants of his bazar and crucify
them over their shops nor suffer a single foreign merchant to
tarry in our town." Quoth the old woman, "And was this thine
only reason, O my lady, for going to thy sire?"; and quoth
Hayat al-Nufus, "Yes, but I found him absent a-hunting and
sporting and now I await his return." Cried the old nurse, "I
take refuge with Allah, the All hearing, the All knowing!
Praised be He! O my lady, thou art the most sensible of women
and how couldst thou think of telling the King these fond
words, which it behoveth none to publish?" Asked the Princess,
"And why so?" and the nurse answered, "Suppose thou had found
the King in his palace and told him all this tale and he had
sent after the merchants and commanded to hang them over their
shops, the folk would have seen them hanging and asked the
reason and it would have been answered them, 'They sought to
seduce the King's daughter.'" --And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
old woman said to the Princess, "Suppose thou had told this to
the King and he had ordered the merchants to be hanged, would
not folk have seen them and have asked the cause of the
execution when the answer would have been, 'They sought to
seduce the King's daughter?' Then would they have dispread
divers reports concerning thee, some saying, 'She abode with
them ten days, away from her palace, till they had taken their
fill of her'; and other some in otherguise: for woman's
honour, O my lady, is like ourded milk, the least dust fouleth
it; and like glass, which, if it be cracked, may not be
mended. So beware of telling thy sire or any other of this
matter, lest thy fair fame be smirched, O mistress mine, for
'twill never profit thee to tell folk aught; no, never! Weigh
what I say with thy keen wit, and if thou find it not just, do
whatso thou wilt." The Princess pondered her words, and seeing
them to be altogether profitable and right, said, "Thou
speaketh sooth, O my nurse; but anger had blinded my
judgment." Quoth the old woman, "Thy resolve to tell no one is
pleasing to the Almighty; but something remaineth to be done:
we must not let the shamelessness of yonder vile dog of a
merchant pass without notice. Write him a letter and say to
him 'O vilest of traders, but that I found the King my father
absent, I had straightway commanded to hang thee and all thy
neighbours. But thou shalt gain nothing by this; for I swear
to thee, by Allah the Most High, that an thou return to the
like of this talk, I will blot out the trace of thee from the
face of earth!' And deal thou roughly with him in words, so
shalt thou discourage him in this attempt and arouse him from
his heedlessness." "And will these words cause him to abstain
from his offending?" asked the Princess; and the old woman
answered, "How should he not abstain? Besides, I will talk
with him and tell him what hath passed." So the Princess
called for ink-case and paper and wrote these couplets,

"To win our favours still thy hopes are bent;    * And still
     to win thy will art confident!
Naught save his pride-full aim shall slay a man; * And he by
     us shall die of his intent
 Thou art no lord of might, no chief of men,     * Nabob or
     Prince or Soldan Heaven-sent;
And were this deed of one who is our peer,       * He had
     returned with hair for fear white-sprent:
Yet will I deign once more excuse thy sin        * So from
     this time thou prove thee penitent."

Then she gave the missive to the old woman, saying, "O my
nurse, do thou admonish this puppy lest I be forced to cut off
his head and sin on his account." Replied the old woman, "By
Allah, O my lady, I will not leave him a side to turn on!"
Then she returned to the youth and, when salams had been
exchanged, she gave him the letter. He read it and shook his
head, saying, "Verily, we are Allah's and unto him shall we
return!" adding, "O my mother, what shall I do? My fortitude
faileth me and my patience palleth upon me!" She replied, "O
my son, be long- suffering: peradventure, after this Allah
shall bring somewhat to pass. Write that which is in thy mind
and I will fetch thee an answer, and be of good cheer and keep
thine eyes cool and clear; for needs must I bring about union
between thee and her,-- Inshallah!" He blessed her and wrote
to the Princess a note containing these couplets,

"Since none will lend my love a helping hand, * And I by
     passion's bale in death low-lain,
I bear a flaming fire within my heart * By day and night nor
     place of rest attain,
How cease to hope in thee, my wishes' term? * Or with my
     longings to be glad and fain?
The Lord of highmost Heaven to grant my prayer * Pray I, whom
     love of lady fair hath slain;
And as I'm clean o'erthrown by love and fear, * To grant me
     speedy union deign, oh deign!"

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman,
bringing out at the same time a purse of four hundred dinars.
She took the whole and returning to the palace sought the
Princess to whom she gave the letter; but the King's daughter
refused to take it and cried, "What is this?" Replied the old
woman, "O my lady, this is only the answer to the letter thou
sentest to that merchant dog." Quoth Hayat al-Nufus, "Didst
thou forbid him as I told thee?"; and quoth she, "Yes, and
this is his reply." So the Princess took the letter and read
it to the end; then she turned to the old woman and exclaimed,
"Where is the result o