f thy promise?" "O my lady, saith he not
in his letter that he repenteth and will not again offend,
excusing himself for the past?" "Not so, by Allah!: on the
contrary, he increaseth." "O my lady, write him a letter and
thou shalt presently see what I will do with him." "There
needeth nor letter nor answer." "I must have a letter that I
may rebuke him roughly and cut off his hopes." "Thou canst do
that without a letter." "I cannot do it without the letter."
So Hayat al-Nufus called for pen-case and paper and wrote
these verses,

"Long have I chid thee but my chiding hindereth thee not * How
     often would my verse with writ o' hand ensnare thee, ah!
Then keep thy passion hidden deep and ever unrevealed, * And
     if thou dare gainsay me Earth shall no more bear thee,
     ah!
And if, despite my warning, thou dost to such words return, *
     Death's Messenger[FN#275] shall go his rounds and dead
     declare thee, ah!
Soon shall the wold's fierce chilling blast o'erblow that
     corse o' thine; * And birds o' the wild with ravening
     bills and beaks shall tear thee, ah!
Return to righteous course; perchance that same will profit
     thee; * If bent on wilful aims and lewd I fain forswear
     thee, ah!"

When she had made an end of her writing this, she cast the
writ from her hand in wrath, and the old woman picked it up
and went with it to Ardashir. When he read it to the last he
knew that she had not softened to him, but only redoubled in
rage against him and that he would never win to meet her, so
he bethought himself to write her an answer invoking Allah's
help against her. Thereupon he indited these couplets,

"O Lord, by the Five Shaykhs, I pray deliver me * From love,
     which gars me bear such grief and misery.
Thou knowest what I bear for passion's fiery flame; * What
     stress of sickness for that merciless maid I dree.
She hath no pity on the pangs to me decreed; * How long on
     weakly wight shall last her tyranny?
I am distraught for her with passing agonies * And find no
     friend, O folk! to hear my plaint and plea.
How long, when Night hath drooped her pinions o'er the world,
     * Shall I lament in public as in privacy?
For love of you I cannot find forgetfulness; * And how forget
     when Patience taketh wings to flee?
O thou wild parting-bird[FN#276] say is she safe and sure *
     From shift and change of time and the world's cruelty?"

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, adding
a purse of five hundred dinars; and she took it and carried it
to the Princess, who read it to the end and learned its
purport. Then, casting it from her hand, she cried, "Tell me O
wicked old woman, the cause of all that hath befallen me from
thee and from thy cunning and thine advocacy of him, so that
thou hast made me write letter after letter and thou ceasest
not to carry messages, going and coming between us twain, till
thou hast brought about a correspondence and a connection.
Thou leavest not to say, 'I will ensure thee against his
mischief and cut off from thee his speech'; but thou speakest
not thus save only to the intent that I may continue to write
thee letters and thou to fetch and carry between us, evening
and morning, till thou ruin my repute. Woe to thee! Ho,
eunuchs, seize her!" Then Hayat al-Nufus commanded them to
beat her, and they lashed her till her whole body flowed with
blood and she fainted away, whereupon the King's daughter
caused her slave-women to drag her forth by the feet and cast
her without the palace and bade one of them stand by her head
till she recovered, and say to her, "The Princess hath sworn
an oath that thou shalt never return to and re-enter this
palace; and she hath commanded to slay thee without mercy an
thou dare return hither." So, when she came to herself, the
damsel told her what the King's daughter said and she
answered, "Hearkening and obedience." Presently the
slave-girls fetched a basket and a porter whom they caused
carry her to her own house; and they sent after her a
physician, bidding him tend her assiduously till she
recovered. He did what he was told to do and as soon as she
was whole she mounted and rode to the shop of Ardashir who was
concerned with sore concern for her absence and was longing
for news of her. As soon as he saw her, he sprang up and
coming to meet her, saluted her; then he noticed that she was
weak and ailing; so he questioned her of her case and she told
him all that had befallen her from her nursling. When he heard
this, he found it grievous and smote hand upon hand, saying,
"By Allah, O my mother, this that hath betided thee
straiteneth my heart! But, what, O my mother, is the reason of
the Princess's hatred to men?" Replied the old woman, "Thou
must know O my son, that she hath a beautiful garden, than
which there is naught goodlier on earth's face and it chanced
that she lay there one night. In the joyance of sleep, she
dreamt a dream and 'twas this, that she went down into the
garden, where she saw a fowler set up his net and strew corn
thereabout, after which he withdrew and sat down afar off to
await what game should fall into it. Ere an hour had passed
the birds flocked to pick up the corn and a male
pigeon[FN#277] fell into the net and struggled in it, whereat
all the others took fright and fled from him. His mate was
amongst them, but she returned to him after the shortest
delay; and, coming up to the net, sought out the mesh wherein
his foot was entangled and ceased not to peck at it with her
bill, till she severed it and released her husband, with whom
she flew away. All this while, the fowler sat dozing, and when
he awoke, he looked at the net and found it spoilt. So he
mended it and strewed fresh grain, then withdrew to a distance
and sat down to watch it again. The birds soon returned and
began to pick up the corn, and among the rest the pair of
pigeons. Presently, the she-pigeon fell into the net and
struggled to get free; whereupon all the other birds flew
away, and her mate, whom she had saved, fled with the rest and
did not return to her. Meantime, sleep had again overcome the
fowler; and, when he awoke after long slumbering, he saw the
she-pigeon caught in the net; so he went up to her and freeing
her feet from the meshes, cut her throat. The Princess
startled by the dream awoke troubled, and said, 'Thus do men
with women, for women have pity on men and throw away their
lives for them, when they are in difficulties; but if the Lord
decree against a woman and she fall into calamity, her mate
deserteth her and rescueth her not, and wasted is that which
she did with him of kindness. Allah curse her who putteth her
trust in men, for they ill requite the fair offices which
women do them!' And from that day she conceived an hatred to
men." Said the King's son, "O my mother, doth she never go out
into the highways?"; and the old woman replied, "Nay, O my
son; but I will tell thee somewhat wherein, Allah willing,
there shall be profit for thee. She hath a garden which is of
the goodliest pleasaunces of the age; and every year, at the
time of the ripening of the fruits, she goeth thither and
taketh her pleasure therein only one day, nor layeth the night
but in her pavilion. She entereth the garden by the private
wicket of the palace which leadeth thereto; and thou must know
that it wanteth now but a month to the time of her going
forth. So take my advice and hie thee this very day to the
keeper of that garden and make acquaintance with him and gain
his good graces, for he admitteth not one of Allah's creatures
into the garth, because of its communication with the
Princess's palace. I will let thee know two days beforehand of
the day fixed for her coming forth, when do thou repair to the
garden, as of thy wont, and make shift to night there. When
the King's daughter cometh be thou hidden in some place or
other";--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
old woman charged the King's son, saying, "I will let thee
know two days beforehand of the King's daughter going down to
the garden: do thou hide thee in some place or other; and,
when thou espiest her, come forth and show thyself to her.
When she seeth thee, she will fall in love with thee; for thou
art fair to look upon and love covereth all things. So keep
thine eyes cool and clear[FN#278] and be of good cheer, O my
son, for needs must I bring about union between thee and her."
The young Prince kissed her hand and thanked her and gave her
three pieces of Alexandrian silk and three of satin of various
colours, and with each piece, linen for shifts and stuff for
trousers and a kerchief for the turband and fine white cotton
cloth of Ba'albak for the linings, so as to make her six
complete suits, each handsomer than its sister. Moreover, he
gave her a purse containing six hundred gold pieces and said
to her, "This is for the tailoring." She took the whole and
said to him, "O my son, art thou not pleased to acquaint me
with thine abiding-place and I also will show thee the way to
my lodging?" "Yes," answered he and sent a Mameluke with her
to note her home and show her his own house. Then he rose and
bidding his slaves shut the shop, went back to the Wazir, to
whom he related all that had passed between him and the old
woman, from first to last. Quoth the Minister, "O my son,
should the Princess Hayat al-Nufus come out and look upon thee
and thou find no favour with her what wilt thou do?" Quoth
Ardashir, "There will be nothing left but to pass from words
to deeds and risk my life with her; for I will snatch her up
from amongst her attendants and set her behind me on a swift
horse and make for the wildest of the wold. If I escape, I
shall have won my wish and if I perish, I shall be at rest
from this hateful life." Rejoined the Minister, "O my son,
dost thou think to do this thing and live? How shall we make
our escape, seeing that our country is far distant, and how
wilt thou deal thus with a King of the Kings of the Age, who
hath under his hand an hundred thousand horse, nor can we be
sure but that he will despatch some of his troops to cut off
our way? Verily, there is no good in this project which no
wise man would attempt." Asked Ardashir, "And how then shall
we do, O Wazir of good counsel? For unless I win her I am a
dead man without a chance." The Minister answered, "Wait till
to-morrow when we will visit this garden and note its
condition and see what betideth us with the care-taker." So
when the morning morrowed they took a thousand dinars in a
poke and, repairing to the garden, found it compassed about
with high walls and strong, rich in trees and rill-full leas
and goodly fruiteries. And indeed its flowers breathed perfume
and its birds warbled amid the bloom as it were a garden of
the gardens of Paradise. Within the door sat a Shaykh, an old
man on a stone bench and they saluted him. When he saw them
and noted the fairness of their favour, he rose to his feet
after returning their salute, and said, "O my lords, perchance
ye have a wish which we may have the honour of satisfying?"
Replied the Wazir, "Know, O elder, that we are strangers and
the heat hath overcome us: our lodging is afar off at the
other end of the city; so we desire of thy courtesy that thou
take these two dinars and buy us somewhat of provaunt and open
us meanwhile the door of this flower-garden and seat us in
some shaded place, where there is cold water, that we may cool
ourselves there, against thy return with the provision, when
we will eat, and thou with us, and then, rested and refreshed,
we shall wend our ways." So saying, he pulled out of his pouch
a couple of dinars and put them into the keeper's hand. Now
this care-taker was a man aged three-score and ten, who had
never in all his life possessed so much money: so, when he saw
the two dinars in his hand, he was like to fly for joy and
rising forthwith opened the garden gate to the Prince and the
Wazir, and made them enter and sit down under a
wide-spreading, fruit-laden, shade-affording tree, saying,
"Sit ye here and go no further into the garden, for it hath a
privy door communicating with the palace of the Princess Hayat
al-Nufus." They replied, "We will not stir hence." Whereupon
he went out to buy what they had ordered and returned after
awhile, with a porter bearing on his head a roasted lamb and
bread. They ate and drank together and talked awhile, till,
presently, the Wazir, looking about him in all corners right
and left, caught sight of a lofty pavilion at the farther end
of the garden; but it was old and the plaster was peeled from
its walls and its buttresses were broken down. So he said to
the Gardener, "O Shaykh, is this garden thine own or dost thou
hire it?"; and he replied, "I am neither owner nor tenant of
the garden, only its care-taker." Asked the Minister, "And
what is thy wage?" whereto the old man answered, "A dinar a
month," and quoth the Wazir, "Verily they wrong thee,
especially an thou have a family." Quoth the elder, "By Allah,
O my lord, I have eight children and I"-- The Wazir broke in,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! Thou makest me bear thy grief my poor
fellow! What wouldst thou say of him who should do thee a good
turn, on account of this family of thine?" Replied the old
man, "O my lord, whatsoever good thou dost shall be garnered
up for thee with God the Most High!" Thereupon said the Wazir,
"O Shaykh, thou knowest this garden of thine to be a goodly
place; but the pavilion yonder is old and ruinous. Now I mean
to repair it and stucco it anew and paint it handsomely, so
that it will be the finest thing in the garth; and when the
owner comes and finds the pavilion restored and beautified, he
will not fail to question thee concerning it. Then do thou
say, 'O my lord, at great expense I set it in repair, for that
I saw it in ruins and none could make use of it nor could
anyone sit therein.' If he says, 'Whence hadst thou the money
for this?' reply, 'I spent of my own money upon the stucco,
thereby thinking to whiten my face with thee and hoping for
thy bounties.' And needs must he recompense thee fairly over
the extent of thine expenses. To-morrow I will bring builders
and plasterers and painters to repair this pavilion and will
give thee what I promised thee." Then he pulled out of his
poke a purse of five hundred dinars and gave it to the
Gardener, saying, "Take these gold pieces and expend them upon
thy family and let them pray for me and for this my son."
Thereupon the Prince asked the Wazir, "What is the meaning of
all this?" and he answered, "Thou shalt presently see the
issue thereof."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Wazir gave five hundred ducats to the old Gardener,
saying, "Take these gold pieces and expend them upon thy
family and let them pray for this my son," the old man looked
at the gold and his wits fled; so he fell down at the Wazir's
feet, kissing them and invoking blessings on him and his son;
and when they went away, he said to them, "I shall expect you
to-morrow: for by Allah Almighty, there must be no parting
between us, night or day." Next morning the Wazir went to the
Prince's shop and sent for the syndic of the builders; then he
carried him and his men to the garth, where the Gardener
rejoiced in their sight. He gave them the price of
rations[FN#279] and what was needful to the work- men for the
restoration of the pavilion, and they repaired it and stucco'd
it and decorated it. Then said the Minister to the painters,
"Harkye, my masters, listen to my words and apprehend my wish
and my aim. Know that I have a garden like this, where I was
sleeping one night among the nights and saw in a dream a
fowler set up nets and sprinkle corn thereabout. The birds
flocked to pick up the grain, and a cock-bird fell into the
net, whereupon the others took fright and flew away, and
amongst the rest his mate; but, after awhile, she returned
alone and picked at the mesh that held his feet, till she set
him free and they flew away together. Now the fowler had
fallen asleep and, when he awoke, he found the net empty; so
he mended it and strewing fresh grain sat down afar off,
waiting for game to fall into that snare. Presently the birds
assembled again to pick up the grains, and amongst the rest
the two pigeons. By-and-by, the hen-bird fell into the net,
when all the other birds took fright at her and flew away, and
her husband flew with them and did not return; whereupon the
fowler came up and taking the quarry, cut her throat. Now,
when her mate flew away with the others, a bird of raven
seized him and slew him and ate his flesh and drank his blood,
and I would have you pourtray me the presentment of this my
dream, even as I have related it to you, in the liveliest
colours, laying the fair scene in this rare garden, with its
walls and trees and rills, and dwell especially on the fowler
and the falcon. If ye do this I have set forth to you and the
work please me, I will give you what shall gladden your
hearts, over and above your wage." The painters, hearing these
words, applied themselves with all diligence to do what he
required of them and wrought it out in masterly style; and
when they had made an end of the work, they showed it to the
Wazir who, seeing his so-called dream set forth as it
was[FN#280] was pleased and thanked them and rewarded them
munificently. Presently, the Prince came in, according to his
custom, and entered the pavilion, unweeting what the Wazir had
done. So when he saw the portraiture of the fowler and the
birds and the net and beheld the male pigeon in the clutches
of the hawk, which had slain him and was drinking his blood
and eating his flesh, his understanding was confounded and he
returned to the Minister and said, "O Wazir of good counsel, I
have seen this day a marvel which, were it graven with
needle-gravers on the eye-corners would be a warner to whoso
will be warned?" Asked the Minister, "And what is that, O my
lord?"; and the Prince answered, "Did I not tell thee of the
dream the Princess had and how it was the cause of her hatred
for men?" "Yes," replied the Wazir; and Ardashir rejoined, "By
Allah, O Minister, I have seen the whole dream pourtrayed in
painting, as I had eyed it with mine own eyes; but I found
therein a circumstance which was hidden from the Princess, so
that she saw it not, and 'tis upon this that I rely for the
winning of my wish." Quoth the Wazir, "And what is that, O my
son?"; and quoth the Prince, "I saw that, when the male bird
flew away; and, leaving his mate entangled in the net, failed
to return and save her, a falcon pounced on him and slaying
him, ate his flesh and drank his blood. Would to Heaven the
Princess had seen the whole of the dream and had beheld the
cause of his failure to return and rescue her!" Replied the
Wazir, "By Allah, O auspicious King, this is indeed a rare
thing and a wonderful!" And the King's son ceased not to
marvel at the picture and lament that the King's daughter had
not beheld the dream to its end, saying in himself, "Would she
had seen it to the last or might see the whole over again,
though but in the imbroglio of sleep!" Then quoth the Wazir to
him, "Thou saidst to me, 'Why wilt thou repair the pavilion?';
and I replied, 'Thou shalt presently see the issue thereof.'
And behold, now its issue thou seest; for it was I did this
deed and bade the painters pourtray the Princess's dream thus
and paint the male bird in the pounces of the falcon which
eateth his flesh and drinketh his blood; so that when she
cometh to the pavilion, she will behold her dream depicted and
see how the cock-pigeon was slain and excuse him and turn from
her hate for men." When the Prince heard the Wazir's words, he
kissed his hands and thanked him, saying, "Verily, the like of
thee is fit to be Minister to the most mighty King, and, by
Allah, an I win my wish and return to my sire, rejoicing, I
will assuredly acquaint him with this, that he may redouble in
honouring thee and advance thee in dignity and hearken to
thine every word." So the Wazir kissed his hand and they both
went to the old Gardener and said, "Look at yonder pavilion
and see how fine it is!" And he replied, "This is all of your
happy thought." Then said they, "O elder, when the owners of
the place question thee concerning the restoration of the
pavilion, say thou, ''Twas I did it of my own monies'; to the
intent that there may betide thee fair favour and good
fortune." He said, "I hear and I obey"; and the Prince
continued to pay him frequent visits. Such was the case with
the Prince and the Wazir; but as regards Hayat al-Nufus, when
she ceased to receive the Prince's letters and messages and
when the old woman was absent from her, she rejoiced with joy
exceeding and concluded that the young man had returned to his
own country. One day, there came to her a covered tray from
her father; so she uncovered it and finding therein fine
fruits, asked her waiting-women, "Is the season of these
fruits come?" Answered they, "Yes." Thereupon she cried,
"Would we might make ready to take our pleasure in the
flower-garden!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

   When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Princess, after receiving the fruit from her sire, asked, "Is
the season of these fruits set in?"; and they answered, "Yes!"
Thereupon she cried, "Would we might make ready to take our
pleasure in the flower-garden!" "O my lady," they replied,
"thou sayest well, and by Allah, we also long for the garden!"
So she enquired, "How shall we do, seeing that every year it
is none save my nurse who taketh us to walk in the garden and
who pointeth out to us the various trees and plants; and I
have beaten her and forbidden her from me? Indeed, I repent me
of what was done by me to her, for that, in any case, she is
my nurse and hath over me the right of fosterage. But there is
no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great!" When her handmaids heard this, they all sprang up;
and, kissing the ground between her hands, exclaimed, "Allah
upon thee, O my lady, do thou pardon her and bid her to the
presence!"; and quoth she, "By Allah, I am resolved upon this;
but which of you will go to her, for I have prepared her a
splendid robe of honour?" Hereupon two damsels came forward,
by name Bulbul and Siwad al-'Ayn, who were comely and graceful
and the principals among the Princess's women, and her
favourites. And they said, "We will go to her, O King's
daughter!"; and she said, "Do what seemeth good to you." So
they went to the house of the nurse and knocked at the door
and entered; and she, recognising the twain, received them
with open arms and welcomed them. When they had sat awhile
with her, they said to her, "O nurse, the Princess pardoneth
thee and desireth to take thee back into favour." She replied,
"This may never be, though I drink the cup of ruin! Hast thou
forgotten how she put me to shame before those who love me and
those who hate me, when my clothes were dyed with my blood and
I well nigh died for stress of beating, and after this they
dragged me forth by the feet, like a dead dog, and cast me
without the door? So by Allah, I will never return to her nor
fill my eyes with her sight!" Quoth the two girls, "Disappoint
not our pains in coming to thee nor send us away unsuccessful.
Where is thy courtesy uswards? Think but who it is that cometh
in to visit thee: canst thou wish for any higher of standing
than we with the King's daughter?" She replied, "I take refuge
with Allah: well I wot that my station is less than yours;
were it not that the Princess's favour exalted me above all
her women, so that, were I wroth with the greatest of them,
she had died in her skin of fright." They rejoined, "All is as
it was and naught is in anywise changed. Indeed, 'tis better
than before, for the Princess humbleth herself to thee and
seeketh a reconciliation without intermediary." Said the old
woman, "By Allah, were it not for your presence and
intercession with me, I had never returned to her; no, not
though she had commanded to slay me!" They thanked her for
this and she rose and dressing herself accompanied them to the
palace. Now when the King's daughter saw her, she sprang to
her feet in honour, and the old woman said, "Allah! Allah! O
King's daughter, say me, whose was the fault, mine or thine?"
Hayat al-Nufus replied, "The fault was mine, and 'tis thine to
pardon and forgive. By Allah, O my nurse, thy rank is high
with me and thou hast over me the right of fosterage; but thou
knowest that Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) hath allotted
to His creatures four things, disposition, life, daily bread
and death; nor is it in man's power to avert that which is
decreed. Verily, I was beside myself and could not recover my
senses; but, O my nurse, I repent of what deed I did." With
this, the crone's anger ceased from her and she rose and
kissed the ground before the Princess, who called for a costly
robe of honour and threw it over her, whereat she rejoiced
with exceeding joy in the presence of the Princess's slaves
and women. When all ended thus happily, Hayat al-Nufus said to
the old woman, "O my nurse, how go the fruits and growths of
our garth?"; and she replied, "O my lady, I see excellent
fruits in the town; but I will enquire of this matter and
return thee an answer this very day." Then she withdrew,
honoured with all honour and betook herself to Ardashir, who
received her with open arms and embraced her and rejoiced in
her coming, for that he had expected her long and longingly.
She told him all that had passed between herself and the
Princess and how her mistress was minded to go down into the
garden on such a day.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
old woman betook herself to the Prince and told him all that
had passed between herself and the Princess Hayat al-Nufus;
and how her mistress was minded to go down into the garden on
such a day and said to him, "Hast thou done as I bade thee
with the Warder of the garden and hast thou made him taste of
thy bounties?" He replied, "Yes, and the oldster is become my
good friend: my way is his way and he would well I had need of
him." Then he told her all that had happened and of the
dream-paintings which the Wazir had caused to be limned in the
pavilion; especially of the fowler, the net and the falcon:
whereat she joyed with great joy and said, "Allah upon thee,
do thou set thy Minister mid- most thy heart, for this that he
hath done pointeth to the keenness of his wit and he hath
helped thee to the winning thy wish. So rise forthright, O my
son, and go to the Hammam-bath and don thy daintiest dress,
wherein may be our success. Then fare thou to the Gardener and
make shift to pass the night in the garden, for though he
should give the earth full of gold none may win to pass into
it, whilst the King's daughter is therein. When thou hast
entered, hide thee where no eye may espy thee and keep
concealed till thou hear me cry, 'O Thou whose boons are
hidden, save us from that we fear!' Then come forth from thine
ambush and walk among the trees and show thy beauty and
loveliness which put the moons to shame, to the intent that
Princess Hayat al-Nufus may see thee and that her heart and
soul may be filled with love of thee; so shalt thou attain to
thy wish and thy grief be gone." "To hear is to obey," replied
the young Prince and gave her a purse of a thousand dinars,
which she took and went away. Thereupon Ardashir fared
straight for the bath and washed; after which he arrayed
himself in the richest of robes of the apparel of the Kings of
the Chosroes and girt his middle with a girdle wherein were
conjoined all manner precious stones and donned a turband
inwoven with red gold and purfled with pearls and gems. His
cheeks shone rosy-red and his lips were scarlet; his eyelids
like the gazelle's wantoned; like a wine-struck wight in his
gait he swayed; beauty and loveliness garbed him, and his
shape shamed the bowing of the bough. Then he put in his
pocket a purse containing a thousand dinars and, repairing to
the flower-garden, knocked at the door. The Gardener opened to
him and rejoicing with great joy salamed to him in most
worshipful fashion; then, observing that his face was
overcast, he asked him how he did. The King's son answered,
"Know, O elder, that I am dear to my father and he never laid
his hand on me till this day, when words arose between us and
he abused me and smote me on the face and struck me with his
staff and drave me away. Now I have no friend to turn to and I
fear the perfidy of Fortune, for thou knowest that the wrath
of parents is no light thing. Wherefore I come to thee, O
uncle, seeing that to my father thou art known, and I desire
of thy favour that thou suffer me abide in the garden till the
end of the day, or pass the night there, till Allah grant good
understanding between myself and my sire." When the old man
heard these words he was concerned anent what had occurred and
said, "O my lord, dost thou give me leave to go to thy sire
and be the means of reconciliation between thee and him?"
Replied Ardashir, "O uncle, thou must know that my father is
of impatient nature, and irascible; so an thou proffer him
reconciliation in his heat of temper he will make thee no
answer; but when a day or two shall have passed, his heat will
soften. Then go thou in to him and thereupon he will relent."
"Hearkening and obedience," quoth the Gardener; "But, O my
lord, do thou come with me to my house, where thou shalt night
with my children and my family and none shall reproach this to
us." Quoth Ardashir, "O uncle, I must be alone when I am
angry."[FN#281] The old man said, "It irketh me that thou
shouldst lie solitary in the garden, when I have a house." But
Ardashir said, "O uncle, I have an aim in this, that the
trouble of my mind may be dispelled from me and I know that in
this lies the means of regaining his favour and softening his
heart to me." Rejoined the Gardener, "I will fetch thee a
carpet to sleep on and a coverlet wherewith to cover thee;"
and the Prince said, "There is no harm in that, O uncle." So
the keeper rose and opened the garden to him, and brought him
the carpet and coverlet, knowing not that the King's daughter
was minded to visit the garth. On this wise fared it with the
Prince; but as regards the nurse, she returned to the Princess
and told her that the fruits were kindly ripe on the garden
trees; whereupon she said, "O my nurse, go down with me
to-morrow into the garden, that we may walk about in it and
take our pleasure,--Inshallah; and send meanwhile to the
Gardener, to let him know what we purpose." So she sent to the
Gardener to say, "The Princess will visit the parterre
to-morrow, so leave neither water-carriers nor tree-tenders
therein, nor let one of Allah's creatures enter the garth."
When word came to him, he set his water-ways and channels in
order and, going to Ardashir, said to him, "O my lord, the
King's daughter is mistress of this garden; and I have only to
crave thy pardon, for the place is thy place and I live only
in thy favours, except that my tongue is under thy
feet.[FN#282] I must tell thee that the Princess Hayat
al-Nufus hath a mind to visit it to-morrow at the first of the
day and hath bidden me leave none therein who might look upon
her. So I would have thee of thy favour go forth of the garden
this day, for the Queen will abide only in it till the time of
mid-afternoon prayer and after it shall be at thy service for
se'nnights and fortnights, months and years." Ardashir asked,
"O elder, haply we have caused thee some mishap?"; and the
other answered, "By Allah, O my lord, naught hath betided me
from thee but honour!" Rejoined the Prince, "An it be so,
nothing but all good shall befal thee through us; for I will
hide in the garden and none shall espy me, till the King's
daughter hath gone back to her palace." Said the Gardener, "O
my lord, an she espy the shadow of a man in the garden or any
of Allah's male creatures she will strike off my head;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. 

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when the Gardener said to the Prince, "An the King's daughter
espy the shadow of a man in her garden, she will strike off my
head;" the youth replied, "Have no fear, I will on no wise let
any see me. But doubtless to-day thou lackest of
spending-money for thy family." Then he put his hand to his
purse and pulled out five hundred ducats, which he gave to him
saying, "Take this gold and lay it out on thy family, that thy
heart may be at ease concerning them." When the Shaykh looked
upon the gold, his life seemed a light thing to him[FN#283]
and he suffered the Prince to tarry where he was, charging him
straitly not to show himself in the garden. Then he left him
loitering about. Meanwhile, when the eunuchs went in to the
Princess at break of day, she bade open the private wicket
leading from the palace to the parterres and donned a royal
robe, embroidered with pearls and jewels and gems, over a
shift of fine silk purfled with rubies. Under the whole was
that which tongue refuseth to explain, whereat was confounded
the brain and whose love would embrave the craven's strain. On
her head she set a crown of red gold, inlaid with pearls and
gems and she tripped in pattens of cloth of gold, embroidered
with fresh pearls[FN#284] and adorned with all manner precious
stones. Then she put her hand upon the old woman's shoulder
and commanded to go forth by the privy door; but the nurse
looked at the garden and, seeing it full of eunuchs and
handmaids walking about, eating the fruits and troubling the
streams and taking their ease of sport and pleasure in the
water said to the Princess, "O my lady, is this a garden or a
madhouse?" Quoth the Princess, "What meaneth thy speech, O
nurse?"; and quoth the old woman, "Verily the garden is full
of slave-girls and eunuchs, eating of the fruits and troubling
the streams and scaring the birds and hindering us from taking
our ease and sporting and laughing and what not else; and thou
hast no need of them. Wert thou going forth of thy palace into
the highway, this would be fitting, as an honour and a ward to
thee; but, now, O my lady, thou goest forth of the wicket into
the garden, where none of Almighty Allah's creatures may look
on thee." Rejoined the Princess, "By Allah, O nurse mine, thou
sayst sooth! But how shall we do?"; and the old woman said,
"Bid the eunuchs send them all away and keep only two of the
slave-girls, that we may make merry with them. So she
dismissed them all, with the exception of two of her handmaids
who were most in favour with her. But when the old woman saw
that her heart was light and that the season was pleasant to
her, she said to her, "Now we can enjoy ourselves aright: so
up and let us take our pleasance in the garden." The Princess
put her hand upon her shoulder and went out by the private
door. The two waiting-women walked in front and she followed
them laughing at them and swaying gracefully to and fro in her
ample robes; whilst the nurse forewent her, showing her the
trees and feeding her with fruits; and so they fared on from
place to place, till they came to the pavilion, which when the
King's daughter beheld and saw that it had been restored, she
asked the old woman, "O my nurse, seest thou yonder pavilion?
It hath been repaired and its walls whitened." She answered,
"By Allah, O my lady, I heard say that the keeper of the
garden had taken stuffs of a company of merchants and sold
them and bought bricks and lime and plaster and stones and so
forth with the price; so I asked him what he had done with all
this, and he said, 'I have repaired the pavilion which lay in
ruins,' presently adding, 'And when the merchants sought their
due of me, I said to them, 'Wait 'till the Princess visit the
garden and see the repairs and they satisfy her; then will I
take of her what she is pleased to bestow on me, and pay you
what is your due.' Quoth I, 'What moved thee to do this
thing?'; and quoth he, 'I saw the pavilion in ruins, the
coigns thrown down and the stucco peeled from the walls, and
none had the grace to repair it; so I borrowed the coin on my
own account and restored the place; and I trust in the King's
daughter to deal with me as befitteth her dignity.' I said,
'The Princess is all goodness and generosity and will no doubt
requite thee.' And he did all this but in hopes of thy
bounty." Replied the Princess, "By Allah, he hath dealt nobly
in rebuilding it and hath done the deed of generous men! Call
me my purse-keeperess." The old woman accordingly fetched the
purse-keeperess, whom the Princess bade give the Gardener two
thousand dinars; whereupon the nurse sent to him, bidding him
to the presence of the King's daughter. But when the messenger
said to him, "Obey the Queen's order," the Gardener felt
feeble and, trembling in every joint, said in himself,
"Doubtless, the Princess hath seen the young man, and this day
will be the most unlucky of days for me." So he went home and
told his wife and children what had happened and gave them his
last charges and farewelled them, while they wept for and with
him. Then he presented himself before the Princess, with a
face the colour of turmeric and ready to fall flat at full
length. The old woman remarked his plight and hastened to
forestall him, saying "O Shaykh, kiss the earth in
thanksgiving to Almighty Allah and be constant in prayer to
Him for the Princess. I told her what thou didst in the matter
of repairing the ruined pavilion, and she rejoiceth in this
and bestoweth on thee two thousand dinars in requital of thy
pains; so take them from the purse-keeperess and kiss the
earth before the King's daughter and bless her and wend thy
way." Hearing these words he took the gold and kissed the
ground before Hayat al-Nufus, calling down blessings on her.
Then he returned to his house, and his family rejoiced in him
and blessed him[FN#285] who had been the prime cause of this
business.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Care-taker took the two thousand ducats from the Princess
and returned to his house, all his family rejoiced in him and
blessed him who had been the prime cause of this business.
Thus it fared with these; but as regards the old woman, she
said to the Princess, "O my lady, this is indeed become a fine
place! Never saw I a purer white than its plastering nor
properer than its painting! I wonder if he have also repaired
it within: else hath he made the outside white and left the
inside black. Come, let us enter and inspect." So they went
in, the nurse preceding, and found the interior painted and
gilded in the goodliest way. The Princess looked right and
left, till she came to the upper end of the estrade, when she
fixed her eyes upon the wall and gazed long and earnestly
thereat; whereupon the old woman knew that her glance had
lighted on the presentment of her dream and took the two
waiting-women away with her, that they might not divert her
mind. When the King's daughter had made an end of examining
the painting, she turned to the old woman, wondering and
beating hand on hand, and said to her, "O my nurse, come, see
a wondrous thing which were it graven with needle-gravers on
the eye corners would be a warner to whoso will be warned."
She replied, "And what is that, O my lady?"; when the Princess
rejoined, "Go, look at the upper end of the estrade, and tell
me what thou seest there." So she went up and considered the
dream-drawing: then she came down, wondering, and said, "By
Allah, O my lady, here is depicted the garden and the fowler
and his net and the birds and all thou sawest in thy dream;
and verily, nothing but urgent need withheld the male pigeon
from returning to free his mate after he had fled her, for I
see him in the talons of a bird of raven which hath
slaughtered him and is drinking his blood and rending his
flesh and eating it; and this, O my lady, caused his tarrying
to return and rescue her from the net. But, O my mistress, the
wonder is how thy dream came to be thus depicted, for, wert
thou minded to set it forth in painture, thou hadst not
availed to portray it. By Allah, this is a marvel which should
be recorded in histories! Surely, O my lady, the angels
appointed to attend upon the sons of Adam, knew that the
cock-pigeon was wronged of us, because we blamed him for
deserting his mate; so they embraced his cause and made
manifest his excuse; and now for the first time we see him in
the hawk's pounces a dead bird." Quoth the Princess, "O my
nurse, verily, Fate and Fortune had course against this bird,
and we did him wrong." Quoth the nurse, "O my mistress, foes
shall meet before Allah the Most High: but, O my lady, verily,
the truth hath been made manifest and the male pigeon's excuse
certified to us; for had the hawk not seized him and drunk his
blood and rent his flesh he had not held aloof from his mate,
but had returned to her, and set her free from the net; but
against death there is no recourse, nor, O my lady, is there
aught in the world more tenderly solicitous than the male for
the female, among all creatures which Almighty Allah hath
created. And especially 'tis thus with man; for he starveth
himself to feed his wife, strippeth himself to clothe her,
angereth his family to please her and disobeyeth and denieth
his parents to endow her. She knoweth his secrets and
concealeth them and she cannot endure from him a single
hour.[FN#286] An he be absent from her one night, her eyes
sleep not, nor is there a dearer to her than he: she loveth
him more than her parents and they lie down to sleep in each
other's arms, with his hand under her neck and her hand under
his neck, even as saith the poet,

'I made my wrist her pillow and I lay with her in litter; *
     And I said to Night 'Be long!' while the full moon showed
     glitter:
Ah me, it was a night, Allah never made its like; * Whose
     first was sweetest sweet and whose last bitt'rest
     bitter!'[FN#287]

Then he kisseth her and she kisseth him; and I have heard of a
certain King that, when his wife fell sick and died, he buried
himself alive with her, submitting himself to death, for the
love of her and the strait companionship which was between
them. Moreover, a certain King sickened and died, and when
they were about to bury him, his wife said to her people: 'Let
me bury myself alive with him: else will I slay myself and my
blood shall be on your heads.' So, when they saw she would not
be turned from this thing, they left her, and she cast herself
into the grave with her dead husband, of the greatness of her
love and tenderness for him." And the old woman ceased not to
ply the Princess with anecdotes of conjugal love between men
and women, till there ceased that which was in her heart of
hatred for the sex masculine; and when she felt that she had
succeeded in renewing in her the natural inclination of woman
to man, she said to her, "'Tis time to go and walk in the
garden." So they fared forth from the pavilion and paced among
the trees. Presently the Prince chanced to turn and his eyes
fell on Hayat al-Nufus; and when he saw the symmetry of her
shape and the rosiclearness of her cheeks and the blackness of
her eyes and her exceeding grace and her passing loveliness
and her excelling beauty and her prevailing elegance and her
abounding perfection, his reason was confounded and he could
not take his eyes off her. Passion annihilated his right
judgment and love overpassed all limits in him; his vitals
were occupied with her service and his heart was aflame with
the fire of repine, so that he swooned away and fell to the
ground. When he came to himself, she had passed from his sight
and was hidden from him among the trees;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Prince Ardashir, who lay hid in the garden, saw the Princess
and her nurse walking amongst the trees, he swooned away for
very love-longing. When he came to himself Hayat al-Nufus had
passed from his sight and was hidden from him among the trees;
so he sighed from his heart-core and improvised these
couplets,

"Whenas mine eyes behold her loveliness, * My heart is torn
     with love's own ecstasy.
I wake o'erthrown, castdown on face of earth * Nor can the
     Princess[FN#288] my sore torment see.
She turned and ravished this sad Love-thrall'd sprite; *
     Mercy, by Allah, ruth; nay, sympathy!
O Lord, afford me union, deign Thou soothe * My soul, ere
     grave-niche house this corse of me;
I'll kiss her ten times ten times, and times ten * For lover's
     wasted cheek the kisses be!"

The old woman ceased not to lead the Princess a-pleasuring
about the garden, till they reached the place where the Prince
lay ambushed, when, behold she said, "O Thou whose bounties
are hidden, vouchsafe us assurance from that we fear!" The
King's son hearing the signal, left his lurking-place and,
surprised by the summons, walked among the trees, swaying to
and fro with a proud and graceful gait and a shape that shamed
the branches. His brow was crowned with pearly drops and his
cheeks red as the afterglow, extolled be Allah the Almighty in
that He hath created! When the King's daughter caught sight of
him, she gazed a long while on him and noticed his beauty and
grace and loveliness and his eyes that wantoned like the
gazelle's, and his shape that outvied the branches of the
myrobalan; wherefore her wits were confounded and her soul
captivated and her heart transfixed with the arrows of his
glances. Then she said to the old woman, "O my nurse, whence
came yonder handsome youth?"; and the nurse asked, "Where is
he, O my lady?" "There he is," answered Hayat al-Nufus; "near
hand, among the trees." The old woman turned right and left,
as if she knew not of his presence, and cried, "And pray, who
can have taught this youth the way into this garden?" Quoth
Hayat al-Nufus, "Who shall give us news of the young man?
Glory be to Him who created men! But say me, dost thou know
him, O my nurse?" Quoth the old woman, "O my lady, he is the
young merchant who wrote to thee by me." The Princess (and
indeed she was drowned in the sea of her desire and the fire
of her passion and love-longing) broke out, "O my nurse, how
goodly is this youth! Indeed he is fair of favour. Methinks,
there is not on the face of earth a goodlier than he!" Now
when the old woman was assured that the love of him had gotten
possession of the Princess, she said to her, "Did I not tell
thee, O my lady, that he was a comely youth with a beaming
favour?" Replied Hayat al-Nufus, "O my nurse, King's daughters
know not the ways of the world nor the manners of those that
be therein, for that they company with none, neither give they
nor take they. O my nurse, how shall I do to bring about a
meeting and present myself to him, and what shall I say to him
and what will he say to me?" Said the old woman, "What device
is left me? Indeed, we were confounded in this matter by thy
behaviour"; and the Princess said, "O my nurse, know thou that
if any ever died of passion, I shall do so, and behold, I look
for nothing but death on the spot by reason of the fire of my
love-longing." When the old woman heard her words and saw the
transport of her desire for him, she answered, "O my lady, now
as for his coming to thee, there is no way thereto; and indeed
thou art excused from going to him, because of thy tender age;
but rise with me and follow me. I will accost him: so shalt
thou not be put to shame, and in the twinkling of an eye
affection shall ensue between you." The King's daughter cried,
"Go thou before me, for the decree of Allah may not be
rejected." Accordingly they went up to the place where
Ardashir sat, as he were the full moon at its fullest, and the
old woman said to him, "See O youth, who is present before
thee! 'Tis the daughter of our King of the age, Hayat
al-Nufus: bethink thee of her rank and appreciate the honour
she doth thee in coming to thee and rise out of respect for
her and stand before her." The Prince sprang to his feet in an
instant and his eyes met her eyes, whereupon they both became
as they were drunken without wine. Then the love of him and
desire redoubled upon the Princess and she opened her arms and
he his, and they embraced; but love-longing and passion
overcame them and they swooned away and fell to the ground and
lay a long while without sense. The old woman, fearing
scandalous exposure, carried them both into the pavilion, and,
sitting down at the door, said to the two waiting-women,
"Seize the occasion to take your pleasure in the garden, for
the Princess sleepeth." So they returned to their diversion.
Presently the lovers revived from their swoon and found
themselves in the pavilion, whereat quoth the Prince, "Allah
upon thee, O Princess of fair ones, is this vision or
sleep-illusion?" Then the twain embraced and intoxicated
themselves without wine, complaining each to other of the
anguish of passion; and the Prince improvised these couplets,

"Sun riseth sheen from her brilliant brow, * And her cheek
     shows the rosiest afterglow:
And when both appear to the looker-on, * The skyline star
     ne'er for shame will show:
An the leven flash from those smiling lips, * Morn breaks and
     the rays dusk and gloom o'erthrow.
And when with her graceful shape she sways, * Droops leafiest
     Ban-tree[FN#289] for envy low:
Me her sight suffices; naught crave I more: * Lord of Men and
     Morn, be her guard from foe!
The full moon borrows a part of her charms; * The sun would
     rival but fails his lowe.
Whence could Sol aspire to that bending grace? * Whence should
     Luna see such wit and such mind-gifts know?
Who shall blame me for being all love to her, * 'Twixt accord
     and discord aye doomed to woe:
'Tis she won my heart with those forms that bend * What shall
     lover's heart from such charms defend?"

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prince had made an end of his verses, the Princess strained
him to her bosom and kissed him on the mouth and between the
eyes; whereupon his soul returned to him and he fell to
complaining to her of that he had endured for stress of love
and tyranny of longing and excess of transport and distraction
and all he had suffered for the hardness of her heart. Hearing
those words she kissed his hands and feet and bared her
head,[FN#290] whereupon the gloom gathered and the full moons
dawned therein. Then said she to him, "O my beloved and term
of all my wishes, would the day of estrangement had never been
and Allah grant it may never return between us!" And they
embraced and wept together, whilst she recited these couplets,

"O who shamest the Moon and the sunny glow: * Thou whose
     slaught'ring tyranny lays me low;
With the sword of a look thou hast shorn my heart, * How
     escape thy sword-glance fatal of blow?
Thus eke are thine eyebrows a bow that shot * My bosom with
     shafts of fiercest lowe:
From thy cheeks' rich crop cometh Paradise; * How, then, shall
     my heart the rich crop forego?
Thy graceful shape is a blooming branch, * And shall pluck the
     fruits who shall bear that bough.
Perforce