 thou drawest me, robst my sleep; * In thy love I
     strip me and shameless show:[FN#291]
Allah lend thee the rays of most righteous light, * Draw the
     farthest near and a tryst bestow:
Then have ruth on the vitals thy love hath seared, * And the
     heart that flies to thy side the mo'e!"

And when she ended her recitation, passion overcame her and
she was distraught for love and wept copious tears, rain-like
streaming down. This burnt the Prince's heart and he in turn
became troubled and distracted for love of her. So he drew
nearer to her and kissed her hands and wept with sore weeping
and they ceased not from lover-reproaches and converse and
versifying, until the call to mid-afternoon prayer (nor was
there aught between them other than this), when they bethought
them of parting and she said to him, "O light of mine eyes and
core of my heart, the time of severance has come between us
twain: when shall we meet again?" "By Allah," replied he (and
indeed her words shot him as with shafts), "to mention of
parting I am never fain!" Then she went forth of the pavilion,
and he turned and saw her sighing sighs would melt the rock
and weeping shower-like tears; whereupon he for love was
sunken in the sea of desolation and improvised these couplets,

"O my heart's desire! grows my misery * From the stress of
     love, and what cure for me?
By thy face, like dawn when it lights the dark, * And thy hair
     whose hue beareth night-tide's blee,
And thy form like the branch which in grace inclines * To
     Zephyr's[FN#292] breath blowing fain and free,
By the glance of thine eyes like the fawn's soft gaze, * When
     she views pursuer of high degree,
And thy waist down borne by the weight of hips, * These so
     heavy and that lacking gravity,
By the wine of thy lip-dew, the sweetest of drink, * Fresh
     water and musk in its purity,
O gazelle of the tribe, ease my soul of grief, * And grant me
     thy phantom in sleep to see!"

Now when she heard his verses in praise of her, she turned
back to him and embracing him, with a heart on fire for the
anguish of severance, fire which naught save kisses and
embraces might quench, cried, "Sooth the byword saith,
Patience is for a lover and not the lack thereof. There is no
help for it but I contrive a means for our reunion." Then she
farewelled him and fared forth, knowing not where she set her
feet, for stress of her love; nor did she stay her steps till
she found herself in her own chamber. When she was gone,
passion and love-longing redoubled upon the young Prince and
the delight of sleep was forbidden him, and the Princess in
her turn tasted not food and her patience failed and she
sickened for desire. As soon as dawned the day, she sent for
the nurse, who came and found her condition changed and she
cried, "Question me not of my case; for all I suffer is due to
thy handiwork. Where is the beloved of my heart?" "O my lady,
when did he leave thee? Hath he been absent from thee more
than this night?" "Can I endure absence from him an hour?
Come, find some means to bring us together speedily, for my
soul is like to flee my body." "O my lady, have patience till
I contrive thee some subtle device, whereof none shall be
ware." "By the Great God, except thou bring him to me this
very day, I will tell the King that thou hast corrupted me,
and he will cut off thy head!" "I conjure thee, by Allah, have
patience with me, for this is a dangerous matter!" And the
nurse humbled herself to her, till she granted her three days'
delay, saying, "O my nurse, the three days will be three years
to me; and if the fourth day pass and thou bring him not, I
will go about to slay thee." So the old woman left her and
returned to her lodging, where she abode till the morning of
the fourth day, when she summoned the tirewomen of the town
and sought of them fine dyes and rouge for the painting of a
virgin girl and adorning; and they brought her cosmetics of
the best. Then she sent for the Prince and, opening her chest,
brought out a bundle containing a suit of woman's apparel,
worth five thousand dinars, and a head-kerchief fringed with
all manner gems. Then said she to him, "O my son, hast thou a
mind to foregather with Hayat al-Nufus?"; and he replied,
"Yes." So she took a pair of tweezers and pulled out the hairs
of his face and pencilled his eyes with Kohl.[FN#293] Then she
stripped him and painted him with Henna[FN#294] from his nails
to his shoulders and from his insteps to his thighs and
tattooed[FN#295] him about the body, till he was like red
roses upon alabaster slabs. After a little, she washed him and
dried him and bringing out a shift and a pair of
petticoat-trousers made him put them on. Then she clad him in
the royal suit aforesaid and, binding the kerchief about his
head, veiled him and taught him how to walk, saying, "Advance
thy left and draw back thy right." He did her bidding and
forewent her, as he were a Houri faring abroad from Paradise.
Then said she to him, "Fortify thy heart, for thou art going
to the King's palace, where there will without fail be guards
and eunuchs at the gate; and if thou be startled at them and
show doubt or dread, they will suspect thee and examine thee,
and we shall both get into grievous trouble and haply lose our
lives: wherefore an thou feel thyself unable to this, tell
me." He answered, "In very sooth this thing hath no terrors
for me, so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear." Then she went out preceding him till the twain came to
the palace-gate, which was full of eunuchs. She turned and
looked at him, as much as to say, "Art thou troubled or no?"
and finding him all unchanged, went on. The chief eunuch
glanced at the nurse and knew her but, seeing a damsel
following her, whose charms confounded the reason, he said in
his mind, "As for the old woman, she is the nurse; but as for
the girl who is with her there is none in our land resembleth
her in favour or approacheth her in fairness save the Princess
Hayat al-Nufus, who is secluded and never goeth out. Would I
knew how she came into the streets and would Heaven I wot
whether or no 'twas by leave of the King!" Then he rose to
learn somewhat concerning her and well nigh thirty castratos
followed him; which when the old woman saw, her reason fled
for fear and she said, "Verily, we are Allah's and to Him we
shall return! Without recourse we are dead folk this
time."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when the old nurse saw the head of the eunuchry and his
assistants making for her she was in exceeding fear and cried,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! Verily we are God's and unto him we shall
return; without recourse we be dead folk this time." When the
head eunuch heard her speak thus, fear gat hold upon him, by
reason of that which he knew of the Princess's violence and
that her father was ruled by her, and he said to himself,
"Belike the King hath commanded the nurse to carry his
daughter forth upon some occasion of hers, whereof she would
have none know; and if I oppose her, she will be wroth with me
and will say, 'This eunuch fellow stopped me, that he might
pry into my affairs.' So she will do her best to kill me, and
I have no call to meddle in this matter." So saying, he turned
back, and with him the thirty assistants who drove the people
from the door of the palace; whereupon the nurse entered and
saluted the eunuchs with her head, whilst all the thirty stood
to do her honour and returned her salam. She led in the Prince
and he ceased not following her from door to door, and the
Protector protected them, so that they passed all the guards,
till they came to the seventh door: it was that of the great
pavilion, wherein was the King's throne, and it communicated
with the chambers of his women and the saloons of the Harim,
as well as with his daughter's pavilion. So the old woman
halted and said, "Here we are, O my son, and glory be to Him
who hath brought us thus far in safety! But, O my son, we
cannot foregather with the Princess except by night; for night
enveileth the fearful." He replied, "True, but what is to be
done?" Quoth she, "Hide thee in this black hole," showing him
behind the door a dark and deep cistern, with a cover thereto.
So he entered the cistern, and she went away and left him
there till ended day, when she returned and carried him into
the palace, till they came to the door of Hayat al-Nufus's
apartment. The old woman knocked and a little maid came out
and said, "Who is at the door?" Said the nurse, "'Tis I,"
whereupon the maid returned and craved permission of her lady,
who said, "Open to her and let her come in with any who may
accompany her." So they entered and the nurse, casting a
glance around, perceived that the Princess had made ready the
sitting-chamber and ranged the lamps in row and lighted
candles of wax in chandeliers of gold and silver and spread
the divans and estrades with carpets and cushions. Moreover,
she had set on trays of food and fruits and confections and
she had perfumed the place with musk and aloes-wood and
ambergris. She was seated among the lamps and the tapers and
the light of her face outshone the lustre of them all. When
she saw the old woman, she said to her, "O nurse, where is the
beloved of my heart?"; and the other replied, "O my lady, I
cannot find him nor have mine eyes espied him, but I have
brought thee his own sister; and here she is." Cried the
Princess, "Art thou Jinn-mad? What need have I of his sister?
Say me, an a man's head irk him, doth he bind up his hand?"
The old woman answered, "No, by Allah, O my lady! But look on
her, and if she pleases thee, let her be with thee." Then she
uncovered the Prince's face, whereupon Hayat al-Nufus knew him
and running to him, pressed him to her bosom, and he pressed
her to his breast. Then they both fell down in a swoon and lay
without sense a long while. The old woman sprinkled rose-water
upon them till they came to themselves, when she kissed him on
the mouth more than a thousand times and improvised these
couplets,

"Sought me this heart's dear love at gloom of night; * I rose
     in honour till he sat forthright,
And said, 'O aim of mine, O sole desire * In such night-visit
     hast of guards no fright?'
Replied he, 'Yes, I feared much, but Love * Robbed me of all
     my wits and reft my sprite.'
We clipt with kisses and awhile clung we, * For here 'twas
     safe; nor feared we watchman-wight:
Then rose we parting without doubtful deed * And shook out
     skirts where none a stain could sight."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
her lover visited Hayat al-Nufus in her palace, the twain
embraced and she improvised some happy couplets beseeming the
occasion. And when she had ended her extempore lines she said,
"Is it indeed true that I see thee in my abode and that thou
art my cup-mate and my familiar?" Then passion grew on her and
love was grievous to her, so that her reason well-nigh fled
for joy and she improvised these couplets,

"With all my soul I'll ransom him who came to me in gloom * Of
     night, whilst I had waited long to see his figure loom;
And naught aroused me save his weeping voice of tender tone *
     And whispered I, 'Fair fall thy foot and welcome and well
     come!'
His cheek I kissed a thousand times, and yet a thousand more;
     * Then clipt and clung about his breast enveiled in
     darkling room.
And cried, 'Now verily I've won the aim of every wish * So
     praise and prayers to Allah for this grace now best
     become.'
Then slept we even as we would the goodliest of nights * Till
     morning came to end our night and light up earth with
     bloom."

As soon as it was day, she made him enter a place in her
apartment unknown to any and he abode there till nightfall,
when she brought him out and they sat in converse and carouse.
Presently he said to her, "I wish to return to my own country
and tell my father what hath passed between us, that he may
equip his Wazir to demand thee in marriage of thy sire." She
replied, "O my love, I fear, an thou return to thy country and
kingdom, thou wilt be distracted from me and forget the love
of me; or that thy father will not further thy wishes in this
matter and I shall die. Meseems the better rede were that thou
abide with me and in my hand-grasp, I looking on thy face, and
thou on mine, till I devise some plan, whereby we may escape
together some night and flee to thy country; for I have cut
off my hopes from my own people and I despair of them." He
rejoined, "I hear and obey;" and they fell again to their
carousal and conversing. He tarried with her thus for some
time till, one night, the wine was pleasant to them and they
lay not down nor did they sleep till break of day. Now it
chanced that one of the Kings sent her father a present, and
amongst other things, a necklace of union jewels,
nine-and-twenty grains, to whose price a King's treasures
might not suffice. Quoth Abd al-Kadir, "This riviere beseemeth
none but my daughter Hayat al-Nufus;" and, turning to an
eunuch, whose jaw-teeth the Princess had knocked out for
reasons best known to herself,[FN#296] he called to him and
said, "Carry the necklace to thy lady and say to her, 'One of
the Kings hath sent thy father this, as a present, and its
price may not be paid with money; put it on thy neck.'" The
slave took the necklace, saying in himself, "Allah Almighty
make it the last thing she shall put on in this world, for
that she deprived me of the benefit of my grinder-teeth!"; and
repairing to the Princess's apartment, found the door locked
and the old woman asleep before the threshold. He shook her,
and she awoke in affright and asked, "What dost thou want?";
to which he answered, "The King hath sent me on an errand to
his daughter." Quoth the nurse, "The key is not here, go away,
whilst I fetch it;" but quoth he, "I cannot go back to the
King without having done his commandment." So she went away,
as if to fetch the key; but fear overtook her and she sought
safety in flight. Then the eunuch awaited her awhile; then,
finding she did not return, he feared that the King would be
angry at his delay; so he rattled at the door and shook it,
whereupon the bolt gave way and the leaf opened. He entered
and passed on, till he came to the seventh door and walking in
to the Princess's chamber found the place splendidly furnished
and saw candles and flagons there. At this spectacle he
marvelled and going close up to the bed, which was curtained
by a hanging of silk, embroidered with a net-work of jewels,
drew back the curtain from before the Princess and saw her
sleeping with her arms about the neck of a young man handsomer
than herself; whereat he magnified Allah Almighty, who had
created such a youth of vile water, and said, "How goodly be
this fashion for one who hateth men! How came she by this
fellow? Methinks 'twas on his account that she knocked out my
back teeth!" Then he drew the curtain and made for the door;
but the King's daughter awoke in affright and seeing the
eunuch, whose name was Kafur, called to him. He made her no
answer: so she came down from the bed on the estrade; and
catching hold of his skirt laid it on her head and kissed his
feet, saying, "Veil what Allah veileth!" Quoth he, "May Allah
not veil thee nor him who would veil thee! Thou didst knock
out my grinders and saidst to me, 'Let none make mention to me
aught of men and their ways!'" So saying, he disengaged
himself from her grasp and running out, locked the door on
them and set another eunuch to guard it. Then he went in to
the King who said to him "Hast thou given the necklace to
Hayat al-Nufus?" The eunuch replied, "By Allah, thou deservest
altogether a better fate;" and the King asked, "What hath
happened? Tell me quickly;" whereto he answered, "I will not
tell thee, save in private and between our eyes," but the King
retorted, saying, "Tell me at once and in public." Cried the
eunuch, "Then grant me immunity." So the King threw him the
kerchief of immunity and he said, "O King, I went into the
Princess Hayat al-Nufus and found her asleep in a carpeted
chamber and on her bosom was a young man. So I locked the door
upon the two and came back to thee." When the King heard these
words he started up and taking a sword in his hand, cried out
to the Rais of the eunuchs, saying, "Take thy lads and go to
the Princess's chamber and bring me her and him who is with
her as they twain lie on the bed; but cover them both
up."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the King commanded the head eunuch to take his lads and to
fetch and set before him Hayat al-Nufus and him who was with
her, the chief and his men entered the Princess's apartment
where he found her standing up, dissolved in railing tears,
and the Prince by her side; so he said to them, "Lie down on
the bed, as thou wast and let him do likewise." The King's
daughter feared for her lover[FN#297] and said to him, "This
is no time for resistance." So they both lay down and the
eunuchs covered them up and carried the twain into the King's
presence. Thereupon Abd al-Kadir pulled off the coverings and
the Princess sprang to her feet. He looked at her and would
have smitten her neck: but the Prince threw himself on the
father's breast, saying, "The fault was not hers but mine
only: kill me before thou killest her." The King made at him,
to cut him down, but Hayat al-Nufus cast herself on her father
and said, "Kill me not him; for he is the son of a great King,
lord of all the land in its length and breadth." When the King
heard this, he turned to the Chief Wazir, who was a
gathering-place of all that is evil, and said to him, "What
sayst thou of this matter, O Minister?" Quoth his Wazir, "What
I say is that all who find themselves in such case as this
have need of lying, and there is nothing for it but to cut off
both their heads, after torturing them with all manner of
tortures." Hereupon the King called his sworder of vengeance,
who came with his lads, and said to him, "Take this gallows
bird and strike off his head and after do the like with this
harlot and burn their bodies, and consult me not about them a
second time." So the headsmen put his hand to her back, to
take her; but the King cried out at him and cast at him
somewhat he hent in hand, which had well-nigh killed him,
saying, "O dog, how durst thou show ruth to those with whom I
am wroth? Put thy hand to her hair and drag her along by it,
so that she may fall on her face." Accordingly he haled her by
her hair and the Prince in like manner to the place of blood,
where he tore off a piece of his skirt and therewith bound the
Prince's eyes putting the Princess last, in the hope that some
one would intercede for her. Then, having made ready the
Prince he swung his sharp sword three times (whilst all the
troops wept and prayed Allah to send them deliverance by some
intercessor), and raised his hand to cut off Ardashir's head
when, behold, there arose a cloud of dust, that spread and
flew till it veiled the view. Now the cause thereof was that
when the young Prince had delayed beyond measure, the King,
his sire, had levied a mighty host and had marched with it in
person to get tidings of his son. Such was his case; but as
regards King Abd al-Kadir, when he saw this, he said, "O
wights, what is the meaning of yonder dust that dimmeth
sights?" The Grand Wazir sprang up and went out to reconnoitre
and found behind the cloud men like locusts, of whom no count
could be made nor aught avail of aid, filling the hills and
plains and valleys. So he returned with the report to the
King, who said to him, "Go down and learn for us what may be
this host and the cause of its marching upon our country. Ask
also of their commander and salute him for me and enquire the
reason of his coming. An he came in quest of aught, we will
aid him, and if he have a blood-feud with one of the Kings, we
will ride with him; or, if he desire a gift, we will handsel
him; for this is indeed a numerous host and a power uttermost,
and we fear for our land from its mischief." So the Minister
went forth and walked among the tents and troopers and
body-guards, and ceased not faring on from the first of the
day till near sundown, when he came to the warders with gilded
swords in tents star-studded. Passing these, he made his way
through Emirs and Wazirs and Nabobs and Chamberlains, to the
pavilion of the Sultan, and found him a mighty King. When the
King's officers saw him, they cried out to him, saying, "Kiss
ground! Kiss ground!"[FN#298] He did so and would have risen,
but they cried out at him a second and a third time. So he
kissed the earth again and again and raised his head and would
have stood up, but fell down at full length for excess of awe.
When at last he was set between the hands of the King he said
to him, "Allah prolong thy days and increase thy sovranty and
exalt thy rank, O thou auspicious King! And furthermore, of a
truth, King Abd al-Kadir saluteth thee and kisseth the earth
before thee and asketh on what weighty business thou art come.
An thou seek to avenge thee for blood on any King, he will
take horse in thy service; or, an thou come in quest of aught,
wherein it is in his power to help thee, he standeth up at thy
service on account thereof." So Ardashir's father replied to
the Wazir, saying, "O messenger, return to thy lord and tell
him that the most mighty King Sayf al-A'azam Shah, Lord of
Shiraz, had a son who hath been long absent from him and news
of him have not come and all traces of him have been cut off.
An he be in this city, he will take him and depart from you;
but, if aught have befallen him or any mischief have ensued to
him from you, his father will lay waste your land and make
spoil of your goods and slay your men and seize your women.
Return, therefore, to thy lord in haste and tell him this, ere
evil befal him." Answered the Minister, "To hear is to obey!"
and turned to go away, when the Chamberlains cried out to him,
saying, "Kiss ground! Kiss ground!" So he kissed the ground a
score of times and rose not till his life-breath was in his
nostrils.[FN#299] Then he left the King's high court and
returned to the city, full of anxious thought concerning the
affair of this King and the multitude of his troops, and going
in to King Abd al-Kadir, pale with fear and trembling in his
side-muscles, acquainted him with that had befallen him; --And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir returned from the court of the Great King, pale with
fear and with side-muscles quivering for dread exceeding; and
acquainted his lord with that had befallen him. Hereat
disquietude and terror for himself and for his people laid
hold upon him and he said to the Minister, "O Wazir, and who
is this King's son?" Replied the other, "'Tis even he whom
thou badest put to death, but praised be Allah who hastened
not his slaughter! Else had his father wasted our lands and
spoiled our good." Quoth the King "See now thy corrupt
judgment, in that thou didst counsel us to slay him! Where is
the young man, the son of yonder magnanimous King?" And quoth
the Wazir, "O mighty King, thou didst command him be put to
death." When the King heard this, he was clean distraught and
cried out from his heart's core and in-most of head, saying,
"Woe to you! Fetch me the Heads- man forthright, lest death
fall on him!" So they fetched the Sworder and he said, "0 King
of the Age, I have smitten off his head even as thou badest
me." Cried Abd al-Kadir "O dog, an this be true, I will
assuredly send thee after him." The Heads- man replied, "O
King, thou didst command me to slay him without consulting
thee a second time." Said the King, "I was in my wrath; but
speak the truth, ere thou lose thy life;" and said the
Sworder, "O King, he is yet in the chains of life." At this
Abd al-Kadir rejoiced and his heart was set at rest; then he
called for Ardashir, and when he came, he stood up to receive
him and kissed his mouth, saying, "O my son, I ask pardon of
Allah Almighty for the wrong I have done thee, and say thou
not aught that may lower my credit with thy sire, the Great
King." The Prince asked "O King of the Age, and where is my
father?" and the other answered, "He is come hither on thine
account." Thereupon quoth Ardashir, "By thy worship, I will
not stir from before thee till I have cleared my honour and
the honour of thy daughter from that which thou laidest to our
charge; for she is a pure virgin. Send for the midwives and
let them examine her before thee. An they find her maidenhead
gone, I give thee leave to shed my blood; and if they find her
a clean maid, her innocence of dishonour and mine also will be
made manifest." So he summoned the midwives, who examined the
Princess and found her a pure virgin and so told the King,
seeking largesse of him. He gave them what they sought,
putting off his royal robes to bestow on them, and in like
manner he was bountiful to all who were in the Harim. And they
brought forth the scent-cups and perfumed all the Lords of
estate and Grandees; and not one but rejoiced with exceeding
joy. Then the King threw his arms about Ardashir's neck and
entreated him with all worship and honour, bidding his chief
eunuchs bear him to the bath. When he came out, he cast over
his shoulders a costly robe and crowned him with a coronet of
jewels; he also girt him with a girdle of silk, purfled with
red gold and set with pearls and gems, and mounted him on one
of his noblest mares, with selle and trappings of gold inlaid
with pearls and jewels. Then he bade his Grandees and Captains
mount on his service and escort him to his father's presence;
and charged him tell his sire that King Abd al-Kadir was at
his disposal, hearkening to and obeying him in whatso he
should bid or forbid. "I will not fail of this," answered
Ardashir and farewelling him, repaired to his father who, at
sight of him, was transported for delight and springing up,
advanced to meet him and embraced him, whilst joy and gladness
spread among all the host of the Great King. Then came the
Wazirs and Chamberlains and Captains and guards and kissed the
ground before the Prince and rejoiced in his coming: and it
was a great day with them for enjoyment, for the King's son
gave leave to those of King Abd al-Kadir's officers who had
accompanied him and others of the townsfolk, to view the
ordinance of his father's host, without let or stay, so they
might know the multitude of the Great King's troops and the
might of his empire. And all who had seen him selling stuffs
in the linendrapers' bazar marvelled how his soul could have
consented thereto, considering the nobility of his spirit and
the loftiness of his dignity; but it was his love and
inclination to the King's daughter that to this had
constrained him. Meanwhile, news of the multitude of her
lover's troops came to Hayat al-Nufus, who was still jailed by
her sire's commandment, till they knew what he should order
respecting her, whether pardon and release or death and
burning; and she looked down from the terrace-roof of the
palace and, turning towards the mountains, saw even these
covered with armed men. When she beheld all those warriors and
knew that they were the army of Ardashir's father, she feared
lest he should be diverted from her by his sire and forget her
and depart from her, whereupon her father would slay her. So
she called a handmaid that was with her in her apartment by
way of service, and said to her, "Go to Ardashir, son of the
Great King, and fear not. When thou comest into his presence,
kiss the ground before him and tell him what thou art and say
to him, 'My lady saluteth thee and would have thee to know
that she is a prisoner in her father's palace, awaiting his
sentence, whether he be minded to pardon her or put her to
death, and she beseecheth thee not to forget her or forsake
her; for to-day thou art all-powerful; and, in whatso thou
commandest, no man dare cross thee. Wherefore, an it seem good
to thee to rescue her from her sire and take her with thee, it
were of thy bounty, for indeed she endureth all these trials
for thy sake. But, an this seem not good to thee, for that thy
desire of her is at an end, still speak to thy sire, so haply
he may intercede for her with her father and he depart not,
till he have made him set her free and taken surety from and
made covenant with him, that he will not go about to put her
to death nor work her aught of harm. This is her last word to
thee, may Allah not desolate her of thee, and so The
Peace!'"[FN#300]--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

   When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
bondmaid sent by Hayat al-Nufus made her way to Ardashir and
delivered him her lady's message, which when he heard, he wept
with sore weeping and said to her, "Know that Hayat al-Nufus
is my mistress and that I am her slave and the captive of her
love. I have not forgotten what was between us nor the
bitterness of the parting day; so do thou say to her, after
thou hast kissed her feet, that I will speak with my father of
her, and he shall send his Wazir, who sought her aforetime in
marriage for me, to demand her hand once more of her sire, for
he dare not refuse. So, if he send to her to consult her, let
her make no opposition; for I will not return to my country
without her." Then the handmaid returned to Hayat al-Nufus;
and, kissing her hands, delivered to her the message, which
when she heard, she wept for very joy and returned thanks to
Almighty Allah. Such was her case; but as regards Ardashir, he
was alone with his father that night and the Great King
questioned him of his case, whereupon he told him all that had
befallen him, first and last. Then quoth the King, "What wilt
thou have me do for thee, O my son? An thou desire Abd
al-Kadir's ruin, I will lay waste his lands and spoil his
hoards and dishonour his house." Replied Ardashir, "I do not
desire that, O my father, for he hath done nothing to me
deserving thereof; but I wish for union with her; wherefore I
beseech thee of thy favour to make ready a present for her
father (but let it be a magnificent gift!) and send it to him
by thy Minister, the man of just judgment." Quoth the King, "I
hear and consent;" and sending for the treasures he had laid
up from time past, brought out all manner precious things and
showed them to his son, who was pleased with them. Then he
called his Wazir and bade him bear the present with
him[FN#301] to King Abd al-Kadir and demand his daughter in
marriage for Ardashir, saying, "Accept the present and return
him a reply." Now from the time of Ardashir's departure, King
Abd al-Kadir had been troubled and ceased not to be heavy at
heart, fearing the laying waste of his reign and the spoiling
of his realm; when behold, the Wazir came in to him and
saluting him, kissed ground before him. He rose up standing
and received him with honour; but the Minister made haste to
fall at his feet and kissing them cried, "Pardon, O King of
the Age! The like of thee should not rise to the like of me,
for I am the least of servants' slaves. Know, O King, that
Prince Ardashir hath acquainted his father with some of the
favours and kindnesses thou hast done him, wherefore he
thanketh thee and sendeth thee in company of thy servant who
standeth before thee, a present, saluting thee and wishing
thee especial blessings and prosperities." Abd al-Kadir could
not believe what he heard of the excess of his fear, till the
Wazir laid the present before him, when he saw it to be such
gift as no money could purchase nor could one of the Kings of
the earth avail to the like thereof; wherefore he was
belittled in his own eyes and springing to his feet, praised
Almighty Allah and glorified Him and thanked the Prince. Then
said the Minister to him, "O noble King, give ear to my word
and know that the Great King sendeth to thee, desiring thine
alliance, and I come to thee seeking and craving the hand of
thy daughter, the chaste dame and treasured gem Hayat
al-Nufus, in wedlock for his son Ardashir, wherefore, if thou
consent to this proposal and accept of him, do thou agree with
me for her marriage-portion." Abd al-Kadir hearing these words
replied, "I hear and obey. For my part, I make no objection,
and nothing can be more pleasurable to me; but the girl is of
full age and reason and her affair is in her own hand. So be
assured that I will refer it to her and she shall choose for
herself." Then he turned to the chief eunuch and bade him go
and acquaint the Princess with the event. So he repaired to
the Harim and, kissing the Princess's hands, acquainted her
with the Great King's offer adding, "What sayest thou in
answer?" "I hear and I obey," replied she.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
chief eunuch of the Harim having informed the Princess how she
had been demanded in marriage by the Great King and having
heard her reply, "I hear and I obey," returned therewith to
the King and gave him this answer, whereat he rejoiced with
exceeding joy and, calling for a costly robe of honour, threw
it over the Wazir's shoulders. Furthermore, he ordered him ten
thousand dinars and bade him carry the answer to the Great
King and crave leave for him to pay him a visit. "Hearing and
obeying," answered the Minister; and, returning to his master,
delivered him the reply and Abd al-Kadir's message, and
repeated all their talk, whereat he rejoiced greatly and
Ardashir was transported for delight and his breast broadened
and he was a most happy man. King Sayf al-A'azam also gave
King Abd al-Kadir leave to come forth to visit him; so, on the
morrow, he took horse and rode to the camp of the Great King,
who came to meet him and saluting him, seated him in the place
of honour, and gave him welcome; and they two sat whilst
Ardashir stood before them. Then arose an orator of the King
Abd al-Kadir's court and pronounced an eloquent discourse,
giving the Prince joy of the attainment of his desire and of
his marriage with the Princess, a Queen among King's
daughters. When he sat down the Great King caused bring a
chest full of pearls and gems, together with fifty thousand
dinars, and said to King Abd al-Kadir, "I am my son's deputy
in all that concerneth this matter." So Abd al-Kadir
acknowledged receipt of the marriage-portion and amongst the
rest, fifty thousand dinars for the nuptial festivities; after
which they fetched the Kazis and the witnesses, who wrote out
the contract of marriage between the Prince and Princess, and
it was a notable day, wherein all lovers made merry and all
haters and enviers were mortified. They spread the
marriage-feasts and banquets and lastly Ardashir went in unto
the Princess and found her a jewel which had been hidden, an
union pearl unthridden and a filly that none but he had
ridden, so he notified this to his sire. Then King Sayf
al-A'azam asked his son, "Hast thou any wish thou wouldst have
fulfilled ere we depart?"; and he answered, "Yes, O King, know
that I would fain take my wreak of the Wazir who entreated us
on evil wise and the eunuch who forged a lie against us." So
the King sent forthright to Abd al-Kadir, demanding of him the
Minister and the castrato, whereupon he despatched them both
to him and he commanded to hang them over the city gate. After
this, they abode a little while and then sought of Abd
al-Kadir leave for his daughter to equip her for departure. So
he equipped her and mounted her in a Takhtrawan, a travelling
litter of red gold, inlaid with pearls and gems and drawn by
noble steeds. She carried with her all her waiting-women and
eunuchs, as well as the nurse, who had returned, after her
flight, and resumed her office. Then King Sayf al-A'azam and
his son mounted and Abd al-Kadir mounted also with all the
lords of his land, to take leave of his son-in-law and
daughter; and it was a day to be reckoned of the goodliest of
days. After they had gone some distance, the Great King
conjured Abd al-Kadir to turn back; so he farewelled him and
his son, after he had strained him to his breast and kissed
him between the eyes and thanked him for his grace and favours
and commended his daughter to his care. Then he went in to the
Princess and embraced her; and she kissed his hands and they
wept in the standing-place of parting. After this he returned
to his capital and Ardashir and his company fared on, till
they reached Shiraz, where they celebrated the marriage-
festivities anew. And they abode in all comfort and solace and
joyance of life, till there came to them the Destroyer of
delights and Severer of societies; the Depopulator of palaces
and the Garnerer of graveyards. And men also relate the tale
of




             JULNAR THE SEA-BORN AND HER SON KING
                    BADR BASIM OF PERSIA.



There was once in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, in Ajam-land a King Shahriman[FN#302] hight, whose
abiding place was Khorasan. He owned an hundred concubines,
but by none of them had he been blessed with boon of child,
male or female, all the days of his life. One day, among the
days, he bethought him of this and fell lamenting for that the
most part of his existence was past and he had not been
vouchsafed a son to inherit the kingdom after him, even as he
had inherited it from his fathers and forebears; by reason
whereof there betided him sore cark and care and chagrin
exceeding. As he sat thus one of his Mamelukes came in to him
and said, "O my lord, at the door is a slave girl with her
merchant, and fairer than she eye hath never seen." Quoth the
King, "Hither to me with merchant and maid!"; and both came in
to him. Now when Shahriman beheld the girl, he saw that she
was like a Rudaynian lance,[FN#303] and she was wrapped in a
veil of gold-purfled silk. The merchant uncovered her face,
whereupon the place was illumined by her beauty and her seven
tresses hung down to her anklets like horses' tails. She had
Nature kohl'd eyes, heavy hips and thighs and waist of
slenderest guise, her sight healed all maladies and quenched
the fire of sighs, for she was even as the poet cries, 

"I love her madly for she is perfect fair, * Complete in
     gravity and gracious way;
Nor overtall nor overshort, the while * Too full for trousers
     are those hips that sway:
Her shape is midmost 'twixt o'er small and tall; * Nor long to
     blame nor little to gainsay:
O'erfall her anklets tresses black as night * Yet in her face
     resplends eternal day."

 The King seeing her marvelled at her beauty and loveliness,
her symmetry and perfect grace and said to the merchant, "O
Shaykh, how much for this maiden?" Replied the merchant, "O my
lord, I bought her for two thousand diners of the merchant who
owned her before myself, since when I have travelled with her
three years and she hath cost me, up to the time of my coming
hither, other three thousand gold pieces; but she is a gift
from me to thee." The King robed him with a splendid robe of
honour and ordered him ten thousand ducats, whereupon he
kissed his hands, thanking him for his bounty and beneficence,
and went his ways. Then the King committed the damsel to the
tire women, saying, "Amend ye the case of this maiden[FN#304]
and adorn her and furnish her a bower and set her therein."
And he bade his chamberlains carry her everything she needed
and shut all the doors upon her. Now his capital wherein he
dwelt  was called the White City and was seated on the sea
shore; so they lodged her in a chamber, whose latticed
casements overlooked the main.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
after taking the maiden, committed her to the tire women
bidding them amend her case and set her in a bower, and
ordered his chamberlains to shut all the doors upon her when
they had lodged her in a chamber whose latticed casements
overlooked the main. Then Shahriman went in to her; but she
spake not to him neither took any note of him.[FN#305] Quoth
he, 'Twould seem she hath been with folk who have not taught
her manners." Then he looked at the damsel and saw her
surpassing beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect
grace, with a face like the rondure of the moon at its full or
the sun shining in the sheeny sky. So he marvelled at her
charms of favour and figure and he praised Allah the Creator
(magnified be His might!), after which he walked up to her and
sat him down by her side; then he pressed her to his bosom and
seating her on his thighs, sucked the dew of her lips' which
he found sweeter than honey. Presently he called for trays
spread with richest viands of all kinds and ate and fed her by
mouthfuls, till she had enough; yet she spoke not one word.
The King began to talk to her and asked her of her name; but
she abode still silent and uttered not a syllable nor made him
any answer, neither ceased to hang down her head groundwards,
and it was but the excess of her beauty and loveliness and the
amorous grace that saved her from the royal wrath. Quoth he to
himself, "Glory be to God, the Creator of this girl! How
charming she is, save that she speaketh not! But perfection
belongeth only to Allah the Most High." And he asked the slave
girls whether she had spoken, and they said, "From the time of
her coming until now she hath not uttered a word nor have we
heard her address us." Then he summoned some of his women and
concubines and bade them sing to her and make merry with her,
so haply she might speak. Accordingly they played before her
all manner instruments of music and sports and what not and
sang, till the whole company was moved to mirth, except the
damsel, who looked at them in silence, but neither laughed nor
spoke. The King's breast was straitened; thereupon he
dismissed the women and abode alone with that damsel: after
which he doffed his clothes and disrobing her with his own
hand, looked upon her body and saw it as it were a silvern
ingot. So he loved her with exceeding love and falling upon
her, took her maidenhead and found her a pure virgin; whereat
he rejoiced with excessive joy and said in himself, "By Allah,
'tis a wonder that a girl so fair of form and face should have
been left by the merchants a clean maid as she is!"[FN#306]
Then he devoted himself altogether to her, heeding none other
and forsaking all his concubines and favourites, and tarried
with her a whole year as it were a single day. Still she spoke
not till, one morning he said to her (and indeed the love of
her and longing waxed upon him), "O desire of souls, verily
passion for thee is great with me, and I have forsaken for thy
sake all my slave girls and concubines and women and
favourites and I have made thee my portion of the world and
had patience with thee a whole year; and now I beseech
Almighty Allah, of His favour, to soften thy heart to me, so
thou mayst speak to me. Or, an thou be dumb, tell me by a
sign, that I may give up hope of thy speech. I pray the Lord
(extolled be He!) to vouchsafe me by thee a son child, who
shall inherit the kingdom after me; for I am old and lone and
have none to be my heir. Wherefore, Allah upon thee, an thou
love me, return me a reply." The damsel bowed her head awhile
in thought, and presently raising it, smiled in his face,
whereat it seemed to him as if lightning filled the chamber.
Then she said, "O magnanimous liege lord, and valorous lion,
Allah hath answered thy prayer, for I am with child by thee
and the time of my delivery is near at hand, though I know not
if the unborn babe be male or female.[FN#307] But, had I not
conceived by thee, I had not spoken to thee one word." When
the King heard her speech, his face shone with joy and
gladness and he kissed her head and hands for excess of
delight, saying Alhamdolillah--laud to Lord--who hath
vouchsafed me the things I desired!, first, thy speech, and
secondly, thy tidings that thou art with child by me." Then he
rose up and went forth from her and, seating himself on the
throne of his kingship, in an ecstasy of happiness, bade his
Wazir distribute to the poor and needy and widows and others
an hundred thousand dinars, by way of thank offering to Allah
Most High and alms on his own account. The Minister did as
bidden by the King who, returning to the damsel, sat with her
and embraced and pressed her to his breast, saying, "O my
lady, my queen, whose slave I am, prithee what was the cause
of this thy silence? Thou hast been with me a whole year,
night and day, waking and sleeping, yet hast not spoken to me
till this day." She replied, "Hearken, O King of the Age, and
know that I am a wretched exile, broken hearted and far parted
from my mother and my family and my brother." When the King
heard her words, he knew her desire and said, "As for thy
saying that thou art wretched, there is for such speech no
ground, inasmuch as my kingdom and good and all I possess are
at thy service and I also am become thy bondman; but, as for
thy saying, 'I am parted from my mother and brother and
family', tell me where they are and I will send and fetch them
to thee." There' upon she answered, "Know, then, O auspicious
King, that I am called Julnar[FN#308] the Sea born and that my
father was of the Kings of the Main. He died and left us his
reign, but while we were yet unsettled, behold, one of the
other Kings arose against us and took the realm from our
hands. I have a brother called Salih, and my mother also is a
woman of the sea; but I fell out with my brother 'The Pious'
and swore that I would throw myself into the hands of a man of
the folk of the land. So I came forth of the sea and sat down
on the edge of an island in the moonshine[FN#309], where a
passer by found me and, carrying me to his house, besought me
of love liesse; but I smote him on the head, so that he all
but died; whereupon he carried me forth and sold me to the
merchant from whom thou hadst me, and this was a good man and
a virtuous; pious, loyal and generous. Were it not that thy
heart loved me and that thou promotedest me over all thy
concubines, I had not remained with thee a single hour, but
had cast myself from this window into the sea and gone to my
mother and family; but I was ashamed to fare themwards, being
with child by thee; for they would have deemed evilly of me
and would not have credited me, even although I swore to them,
an I told them that a King had bought me with his gold and
made me his portion of the world and preferred me over all his
wives and every thing that his right hand possessed. This then
is my story and--the Peace!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Julnar[FN#310] the Sea-born, answering the question of King
Shahriman, told him her past from first to last, the King
thanked her and kissed her between the eyes, saying, "By
Allah, O my lady and light of mine eyes" I cannot bear to be
parted from thee one hour; and given thou leave me, I shall
die forthright. What then is to be done?" Replied she "O my
lord, the time of my delivery is at hand and my family needs
must be present, that they may tend me; for the women of the
land know not the manner of child bearing of the women of the
sea, nor do the daughters of the ocean know the manner of the
daughters of the earth; and when my people come, I shall be
reconciled to them and they will be reconciled to me." Quoth
the King, "How do the people of the sea walk therein, without
being wetted?"; and quoth she, "O King of the Age, we walk in
the waters with our eyes open, as do ye on the ground, by the
blessing of the names graven upon the seal-ring of Solomon
Davidson (on whom be peace!). But, O King, when my kith and
kin come, I will tell them how thou boughtest me with thy
gold, and hast entreated me with kindness and benevolence. It
behoveth that thou confirm my words to them and that they
witness thine estate with their own eyes and they learn that
thou art a King, son of a King." He rejoined, "O my lady, do
what seemeth good to thee and what pleaseth thee and I will
consent to thee in all thou wouldst do." The damsel continued,
yes, we walk in the sea and see what is therein and behold the
sun, moon, stars and sky, as it were on the surface of earth
and this irketh us naught. Know also that there be many
peoples in the main and various forms and creatures of all
kinds that are on the land, and that all that is on the land
compared with that which is in the main is but a very small
matter." And the King marvelled at her words. Then she pulled
out from her bosom two bits of Comorin lign-aloes and,
kindling fire in a chafing dish, chose somewhat of them and
threw it in, then she whistled a loud whistle and spake words
none understood. Thereupon arose a great smoke and she said to
the King, who was looking on, "O my lord, arise and hide
thyself in a closet, that I may show thee my brother and
mother and family, whilst they see thee not; for I design to
bung them hither, and thou shalt presently espy a wondrous
thing and shalt marvel at the several creatures and strange
shapes which Almighty Allah hath created." So he arose without
stay or delay and entering a closet, fell a-watching what she
should do. She continued her fumigations and conjurations till
the sea foamed and frothed turbid and there rose from it a
handsome young man of a bright favour, as he were the moon at
its full, with brow flower-white, cheeks of ruddy light and
teeth like the marguerite. He was the likest of all creatures
to his sister and the tongue of the case spoke in his praise
these two couplets,

"The full moon groweth perfect once a month * But thy face
     each day we see perfected.
And the full moon dwelleth in single sign, * But to thee all
     hearts be a dwelling stead."

After him there came forth of the sea an ancient dame with
hair speckled gray and five maidens, as they were moons,
bearing a likeness to the damsel hight Julnar. The King looked
upon them as they all walked upon the face of the water, till
they drew near the window and saw Julnar, whereupon they knew
her and went in to her. She rose to them and met them with joy
and gladness, and they embraced her and wept with sore
weeping. Then said they to her, "O Julnar, how couldst thou
leave us four years, and we unknowing of thine abiding place?
By Allah the world hath been straitened upon us for stress of
severance from thee, and we have had no delight of food or
drink; no, not for one day, but have wept with sore weeping
night and day for the excess of our longing after thee!" Then
she fell to kissing the hands of the youth her brother and her
mother and cousins, and they sat with her awhile, questioning
her of her case and of what had betided her, as well as of her
present estate. "Know," replied she, "that, when I left you, I
issued from the sea and sat down on the shore of an island,
where a man found me and sold me to a merchant, who brought me
to this city and sold me for ten thousand diners to the King
of the country, who entreated me with honour and forsook all
his concubines and women and favourites for my sake and was
distracted by me from all he had and all that was in his
city." Quoth her brother, "Praised be Allah, who hath reunited
us with thee! But now, O my sister, 'tis my purp