and exalted be He!) who hath saddened us shall
gladden us!" Quoth he, "O my brothers, how shall we win free
from this accursed woman? I see no way of escape for us, save
Allah of his grace deliver us from her; but methinks we may
flee and be at rest from this hard labour." And quoth they, "O
King of the Age, whither shall we flee? For the whole island
is full of Ghuls which devour the Sons of Adam, and
whithersoever we go, they will find us there and either eat us
or capture and carry us back to that accursed, the King's
daughter, who will be wroth with us." Sayf al-Muluk rejoined,
"I will contrive you somewhat, whereby peradventure Allah
Almighty shall deliver us and help us to escape from this
island." They asked, "And how wilt thou do?"; and he answered,
"Let us cut some of these long pieces of wood, and twist ropes
of their bark and bind them one with another, and make of them
a raft[FN#406] which we will launch and load with these
fruits: then we will fashion us paddles and embark on the raft
after breaking our bonds with the axe. It may be that Almighty
Allah will make it the means of our deliverance from this
accursed woman and vouchsafe us a fair wind to bring us to the
land of Hind, for He over all things is Almighty!" Said they,
"Right is thy rede," and rejoiced thereat with exceeding joy.
So they arose without stay or delay and cut with their axes
wood for the raft and twisted ropes to bind the logs and at
this they worked a whole month. Every day about evening they
gathered somewhat of fuel and bore it to the Princess's
kitchen, and employed the rest of the twenty-four hours
working at the raft.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Sayf al-Muluk and his Mamelukes, having cut the wood and
twisted the ropes for their raft, made an end of it and
launched it upon the sea; then, after breaking their bonds
with the axe, and loading the craft with fruits plucked from
the island-trees, they embarked at close of day; nor did any
wot of their intent. They put out to sea in their raft and
paddled on four months, knowing not whither the craft carried
them, till their provaunt failed them and they were suffering
the severest extreme of hunger and thirst, when behold, the
sea waxed troubled and foamed and rose in high waves, and
there came forth upon them a frightful crocodile,[FN#407]
which put out its claw and catching up one of the Mamelukes
swallowed him. At the sight of this horror Sayf al-Muluk wept
bitterly and he and the two men[FN#408] that remained to him
pushed off from the place where they had seen the crocodile,
sore affrighted. After this they continued drifting on till
one day they espied a mountain terrible tall and spiring high
in air, whereat they rejoiced, when presently an island
appeared. They made towards it with all their might
congratulating one another on the prospect of making land; but
hardly had they sighted the island on which was the mountain,
when the sea changed face and boiled and rose in big waves and
a second crocodile raised its head and putting out its claw
caught up the two remaining Mamelukes and swallowed them. So
Sayf al-Muluk abode alone, and making his way to the island,
toiled till he reached the mountain-top, where he looked about
and found a copse, and walking among the trees feel to eating
of the fruits. Presently, he saw among the branches more than
twenty great apes, each bigger than a he-mule, whereat he was
seized with exceeding fear. The apes came down and surrounded
him;[FN#409] then forewent him, signing to him to follow them,
and walked on, and he too, till he came to a castle, tall of
base and strong of build whose ordinance was one brick of gold
and one of silver. The apes entered and he after them, and he
saw in the castle all manner of rarities, jewels and precious
metals such as tongue faileth to describe. Here also he found
a young man, passing tall of stature with no hair on his
cheeks, and Sayf al-Muluk was cheered by the sight for there
was no human being but he in the castle. The stranger
marvelled exceedingly at sight of the Prince and asked him,
"What is thy name and of what land art thou and how camest
thou hither? Tell me thy tale and hide from me naught
thereof." Answered the Prince, "By Allah, I came not hither of
my own consent nor is this place of my intent; yet I cannot
but go from place to place till I win my wish." Quoth the
youth, "And what is thy object?"; and quoth the other, "I am
of the land of Egypt and my name is Sayf al-Muluk son of King
Asim bin Safwan"; and told him all that had passed with him,
from first to last. Whereupon the youth arose and stood in his
service, saying, "O King of the Age, I was erst in Egypt and
heard that thou hadst gone to the land of China; but where is
this land and where lies China-land?[FN#410] Verily, this is a
wondrous thing and marvellous matter!" Answered the Prince,
"Sooth thou speakest but, when I left China-land, I set out,
intending for the land of Hind and a stormy wind arose and the
sea boiled and broke all my ships"; brief, he told him all
that had befallen him till he came thither; whereupon quoth
the other, "O King's son, thou hast had enough of strangerhood
and its sufferings; Alhamdolillah,--praised be Allah who hath
brought thee hither! So now do thou abide with me, that I may
enjoy thy company till I die, when thou shalt become King over
this island, to which no bound is known, and these apes thou
seest are indeed skilled in all manner of crafts; and whatso
thou seekest here shalt thou find." Replied Sayf al-Muluk, "O
my brother I may not tarry in any place till my wish be won,
albeit I compass the whole world in pursuit thereof and make
quest of every one so peradventure Allah may bring me to my
desire or my course lead me to the place wherein is the
appointed term of my days, and I shall die my death." Then the
youth turned with a sign to one of the apes, and he went out
and was absent awhile, after which he returned with other apes
girt with silken zones.[FN#411] They brought the trays and set
on near[FN#412] an hundred chargers of gold and saucers of
silver, containing all manner of meats. Then they stood, after
the manner of servants between the hands of Kings, till the
youth signalled to the Chamberlains, who sat down, and he
whose wont it was to serve stood, whilst the two Princes ate
their sufficiency. Then the apes cleared the table and brought
basins and ewers of gold, and they washed their hands in rose
water; after which they set on fine sugar and nigh forty
flagons, in each a different kind of wine, and they drank and
took their pleasure and made merry and had a fine time. And
all the apes danced and gambolled before them, what while the
eaters sat at meat; which when Sayf al-Muluk saw, he marvelled
at them and forgot that which had befallen him of
sufferings.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sayf al-Muluk saw the gestures and gambols of the apes, he
marvelled thereat and forgot that which had betided him of
strangerhood and its sufferings. At nightfall they lighted
waxen candles in candlesticks of gold studded with gems and
set on dishes of confections and fruits of sugar-candy. So
they ate; and when the hour of rest was come, the apes spread
them bedding and they slept. And when morning morrowed, the
young man arose, as was his wont, before sunrise and waking
Sayf al-Muluk said to him, "Put thy head forth of this lattice
and see what standeth beneath it." So he put out his head and
saw the wide waste and all the wold filled with apes, whose
number none knew save Allah Almighty. Quoth he, "Here be great
plenty of apes, for they cover the whole country: but why are
they assembled at this hour?" Quoth the youth, "This is their
custom. Every Sabbath,[FN#413] all the apes in the island come
hither, some from two and three days' distance, and stand here
till I awake from sleep and put forth my head from this
lattice, when they kiss ground before me and go about their
business." So saying, he put his head out of the window; and
when the apes saw him, they kissed the earth before him and
went their way. Sayf al-Muluk abode with the young man a whole
month when he farewelled him and departed, escorted by a party
of nigh a hundred apes, which the young man bade escort him.
They journeyed with him seven days, till they came to the
limits of their islands,[FN#414] when they took leave of him
and returned to their places, while Sayf al-Muluk fared on
alone over mount and hill, desert and plain, four months'
journey, one day anhungered and the next satiated, now eating
of the herbs of the earth and then of the fruits of the trees,
till he repented him of the harm he had done himself by
leaving the young man; and he was about to retrace his steps
to him, when he saw something black afar off and said to
himself, "Is this a city or trees? But I will not turn back
till I see what it is." So he made towards it and when he drew
near, he saw that it was a palace tall of base. Now he who
built it was Japhet son of Noah (on whom be peace!) and it is
of this palace that God the Most High speaketh in His precious
Book, whenas He saith, "And an abandoned well and a
high-builded palace."[FN#415] Sayf al-Muluk sat down at the
gate and said in his mind, "Would I knew what is within yonder
palace and what King dwelleth there and who shall acquaint me
whether its folk are men or Jinn? Who will tell me the truth
of the case?" He sat considering awhile, but, seeing none go
in or come out, he rose and committing himself to Allah
Almighty entered the palace and walked on, till he had counted
seven vestibules; yet saw no one. Presently looking to his
right he beheld three doors, while before him was a fourth,
over which hung a curtain. So he went up to this and raising
the curtain, found himself in a great hall[FN#416] spread with
silken carpets. At the upper end rose a throne of gold whereon
sat a damsel, whose face was like the moon, arrayed in royal
raiment and beautified as she were a bride on the night of her
displaying; and at the foot of the throne was a table of forty
trays spread with golden and silvern dishes full of dainty
viands. The Prince went up and saluted her, and she returned
his salam, saying, "Art thou of mankind or of the Jinn?"
Replied he, "I am a man of the best of mankind;[FN#417] for I
am a King, son of a King." She rejoined, "What seekest thou?
Up with thee and eat of yonder food, and after tell me thy
past from first to last and how thou camest hither." So he sat
down at the table and removing the cover from a tray of meats
(he being hungry), ate till he was full; then washed his right
hand and going up to the throne, sat down by the damsel who
asked him, "Who art thou and what is thy name and whence
comest thou and who brought thee hither?" He answered, "Indeed
my story is a long but do thou first tell me who and what and
whence thou art and why thou dwellest in this place alone."
She rejoined, "My name is Daulat Khatun[FN#418] and I am the
daughter of the King of Hind. My father dwelleth in the
Capital-city of Sarandib and hath a great and goodly garden,
there is no goodlier in all the land of Hind or its
dependencies; and in this garden is a great tank. One day, I
went out into the garden with my slave-women and I stripped me
naked and they likewise and, entering the tank, fell to
sporting and solacing ourselves therein. Presently, before I
could be ware, a something as it were a cloud swooped down on
me and snatching me up from amongst my handmaids, soared aloft
with me betwixt heaven and earth, saying, 'Fear not, O Daulat
Khatun, but be of good heart.' Then he flew on with me a
little while, after which he set me down in this palace and
straightway without stay or delay became a handsome young man
daintily apparelled, who said to me, 'Now dost thou know me?'
Replied I, 'No, O my lord'; and he said, 'I am the Blue King,
Sovran of the Jann; my father dwelleth in the Castle
Al-Kulzum[FN#419] hight, and hath under his hand six hundred
thousand Jinn, flyers and divers. It chanced that while
passing on my way I saw thee and fell in love with thee for
thy lovely form: so I swooped down on thee and snatched thee
up from among the slave-girls and brought thee to this the
High-builded Castle, which is my dwelling-place. None may fare
hither be he man or be he Jinni, and from Hind hither is a
journey of an hundred and twenty years: wherefore do thou hold
that thou wilt never again behold the land of thy father and
thy mother; so abide with me here, in contentment of heart and
peace, and I will bring to thy hands whatso thou seekest.'
Then he embraced me and kissed me,"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
damsel said to Sayf al-Muluk, "Then the King of the Jann,
after he had acquainted me with his case, embraced me and
kissed me, saying, 'Abide here and fear nothing'; whereupon he
went away from me for an hour and presently returned with
these tables and carpets and furniture. He comes to me every
Third[FN#420] and abideth with me three days and on Friday, at
the time of mid-afternoon prayer, he departeth and is absent
till the following Third. When he is here, he eateth and
drinketh and kisseth and huggeth me, but doth naught else with
me, and I am a pure virgin, even as Allah Almighty created me.
My father's name is Taj al-Muluk, and he wotteth not what is
come of me nor hath he hit upon any trace of me. This is my
story: now tell me thy tale." Answered the Prince, "My story
is a long and I fear lest while I am telling it to thee the
Ifrit come." Quoth she "He went out from me but an hour before
thy entering and will not return till Third: so sit thee down
and take thine ease and hearten thy heart and tell me what
hath betided thee, from beginning to end." And quoth he, "I
hear and I obey." So he fell to telling her all that had
befallen him from commencement to conclusion but, when she
heard speak of Badi'a al-Jamal, her eyes ran over with railing
tears and she cried, "O Badi'a al-Jamal, I had not thought
this of thee! Alack for our luck! O Badi'a al-Jamal, dost thou
not remember me nor say, 'My sister Daulat Khatun whither is
she gone?'" And her weeping redoubled, lamenting for that
Badi'a al-Jamal had forgotten her.[FN#421] Then said Sayf
al-Muluk, "O Daulat Khatun, thou art a mortal and she is a
Jinniyah: how then can she be thy sister?" Replied the
Princess, "She is my sister by fosterage and this is how it
came about. My mother went out to solace herself in the
garden, when labour-pangs seized her and she bare me. Now the
mother of Badi'a al-Jamal chanced to be passing with her
guards, when she also was taken with travail-pains; so she
alighted in a side of the garden and there brought forth
Badi'a al-Jamal. She despatched one of her women to seek food
and childbirth-gear of my mother, who sent her what she sought
and invited her to visit her. So she came to her with Badi'a
al-Jamal and my mother suckled the child, who with her mother
tarried with us in the garden two months. And before wending
her ways the mother of Badi'a al-Jamal gave my mother
somewhat,[FN#422] saying, 'When thou hast need of me, I will
come to thee a middlemost the garden,' and departed to her own
land; but she and her daughter used to visit us every year and
abide with us awhile before returning home. Wherefore an I
were with my mother, O Sayf al-Muluk, and if thou wert with me
in my own country and Badi'a al-Jamal and I were together as
of wont, I would devise some device with her to bring thee to
thy desire of her: but I am here and they know naught of me;
for that an they kenned what is become of me, they have power
to deliver me from this place; however, the matter is in
Allah's hands (extolled and exalteth be He!) and what can I
do?" Quoth Sayf al-Muluk, "Rise and let us flee and go whither
the Almighty willeth;" but, quoth she, "We cannot do that:
for, by Allah, though we fled hence a year's journey that
accursed would overtake us in an hour and slaughter us." Then
said the Prince, "I will hide myself in his way, and when he
passeth by I will smite him with the sword and slay him."
Daulat Khatun replied, "Thou canst not succeed in slaying him
save thou his soul." Asked he, "And where is his soul?"; and
she answered, "Many a time have I questioned him thereof but
he would not tell me, till one day I pressed him and he waxed
wroth with me and said to me, 'How often wilt thou ask me of
my soul? What hast thou to do with my soul?' I rejoined, 'O
Hatim,[FN#423] there remaineth none to me but thou, except
Allah; and my life dependeth on thy life and whilst thou
livest, all is well for me; so, except I care for thy soul and
set it in the apple of this mine eye, how shall I live in
thine absence? An I knew where thy soul abideth, I would never
cease whilst I live, to hold it in mine embrace and would keep
it as my right eye.' Whereupon said he to me, 'What time I was
born, the astrologers predicted that I should lose my soul at
the hands of the son of a king of mankind. So I took it and
set it in the crop of a sparrow, and shut up the bird in a
box. The box I set in a casket, and enclosing this in seven
other caskets and seven chests, laid the whole in a
alabastrine coffer,[FN#424] which I buried within the marge of
yon earth-circling sea; for that these parts are far from the
world of men and none of them can win hither. So now see I
have told thee what thou wouldst know, and do thou tell none
thereof, for it is a secret between me and thee.'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Daulat Khatun acquainted Sayf al-Muluk with the whereabouts of
the soul of the Jinni who had carried her off and repeated to
him his speech ending with, "And this is a secret between me
and thee!" "I rejoined," quoth she, "'To whom should I tell
it, seeing that none but thou cometh hither with whom I may
talk thereof?' adding, 'By Allah, thou hast indeed set thy
soul in the strongest of strongholds to which none may gain
access! How should a man win to it, unless the impossible be
fore-ordained and Allah decree like as the astrologers
predicted?' Thereupon the Jinni, 'Peradventure one may come,
having on his finger the seal-ring of Solomon son of David (on
the twain be peace!) and lay his hand with the ring on the
face of the water, saying, 'By the virtue of the names
engraven upon this ring, let the soul of such an one come
forth!' Whereupon the coffer will rise to the surface and he
will break it open and do the like with the chests and
caskets, till he come to the little box, when he will take out
the sparrow and strangle it, and I shall die.'" Then said Sayf
al-Muluk, "I am the King's son of whom he spake, and this is
the ring of Solomon David-son on my finger: so rise, let us go
down to the sea-shore and see if his words be leal or
leasing!" Thereupon the two walked down to the sea-shore and
the Princess stood on the beach, whilst the Prince waded into
the water to his waist and laying his hand with the ring on
the surface of the sea, said, "By the virtue of the names and
talismans engraven on this ring, and by the might of Sulayman
bid Daud (on whom be the Peace!), let the soul of Hatim the
Jinni, son of the Blue King, come forth!" Whereat the sea
boiled in billows and the coffer of alabaster rose to the
surface. Sayf al-Muluk took it and shattered it against the
rock and broke open the chests and caskets, till he came to
the little box and drew thereout the sparrow. Then the twain
returned to the castle and sat down on the throne; but hardly
had they done this, when lo and behold! there arose a
dust-cloud terrifying and some huge thing came flying and
crying, "Spare me, O King's son, and slay me not; but make me
thy freedman, and I will bring thee to thy desire!" Quoth
Daulat Khatun, "The Jinni cometh; slay the sparrow, lest this
accursed enter the palace and take it from thee and slaughter
me and slaughter thee after me." So the Prince wrung the
sparrow's neck and it died, whereupon the Jinni fell down at
the palace-door and became a heap of black ashes. Then said
Daulat Khatun, "We are delivered from the hand of yonder
accursed; what shall we do now?"; and Sayf al-Muluk replied,
"It behoveth us to ask aid of Allah Almighty who hath
afflicted us; belike He will direct us and help us to escape
from this our strait." So saying, he arose and pulling
up[FN#425] half a score of the doors of the palace, which were
of sandal-wood and lign-aloes with nails of gold and silver,
bound them together with ropes of silk and floss[FN#426]-silk
and fine linen and wrought of them a raft, which he and the
Princess aided each other to hale down to the sea-shore. They
launched it upon the water till it floated and, making it fast
to the beach, returned to the palace, whence they removed all
the chargers of gold and saucers of silver and jewels and
precious stones and metals and what else was light of load and
weighty of worth and freighted the raft therewith. Then they
embarked after fashioning two pieces of wood into the likeness
of paddles and casting off the rope-moorings, let the raft
drift out to sea with them, committing themselves to Allah the
Most High, who contenteth those that put their trust in Him
and disappointeth not them who rely upon Him. They ceased not
faring on thus four months until their victual was exhausted
and their sufferings waxed severe and their souls were
straitened; so they prayed Allah to vouchsafe them deliverance
from that danger. But all this time when they lay down to
sleep, Sayf al-Muluk set Daulat Khatun behind him and laid a
naked brand at his back, so that, when he turned in sleep the
sword was between them.[FN#427] At last it chanced one night,
when Sayf al-Muluk was asleep and Daulat Khatun awake, that
behold, the raft drifted landwards and entered a port wherein
were ships. The Princess saw the ships and heard a man, he
being the chief and head of the captains, talking with the
sailors; whereby she knew that this was the port of some city
and that they were come to an inhabited country. So she joyed
with exceeding joy and waking the Prince said to him, "Ask the
captain the name of the city and harbour." Thereupon Sayf
al-Muluk arose and said to the captain, "O my brother, how is
this harbour hight and what be the names of yonder city and
its King?" Replied the Captain, "O false face![FN#428] O
frosty beard! an thou knew not the name of this port and city,
how camest thou hither?" Quoth Sayf al-Muluk, "I am a stranger
and had taken passage in a merchant ship which was wrecked and
sank with all on board; but I saved myself on a plank and made
my way hither; wherefore I asked thee the name of the place,
and in asking is no offence." Then said the captain, "This is
the city of 'Amariyah and this harbour is called Kamin
al-Bahrayn."[FN#429] When the Princess heard this she rejoiced
with exceeding joy and said, "Praised be Allah!" He asked,
"What is to do?"; and she answered, "O Sayf al-Muluk, rejoice
in succour near hand; for the King of this city is my uncle,
my father's brother."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Daulat Khatun said to Sayf al-Muluk, "Rejoice in safety near
hand; for the King of this city is my uncle, my father's
brother and his name is 'Ali al-Muluk,"[FN#430] adding, "Say
thou then to the captain, 'Is the Sultan of the city, Ali
al-Muluk, well?'" He asked but the captain was wroth with him
and cried, "Thou sayest, 'I am a stranger and never in my life
came hither.' Who then told thee the name of the lord of the
city?" When Daulat Khatun heard this, she rejoiced and knew
him for Mu'in al-Din,[FN#431] one of her father's captains.
Now he had fared forth in search of her, after she was lost
and finding her not, he never ceased cruising till he came to
her uncle's city. Then she bade Sayf al-Muluk say to him, "O
Captain Mu'in al-Din, come and speak with thy mistress!" So he
called out to him as she bade, whereat he was wroth with
exceeding wrath and answered, "O dog, O thief, O spy, who art
thou and how knowest thou me?" Then he said to one of the
sailors, "Give me an ash[FN#432]-stave, that I may go to
yonder plaguing Arab and break his head." So he tookt he stick
and made for Sayf al-Muluk, but, when he came to the raft, he
saw a something, wondrous, beauteous, which confounded his
wits and considering it straitly he made sure that it was
Daulat Khatun sitting there, as she were a slice of the moon;
whereat he said to the Prince, "Who is that with thee?"
Replied he, "A damsel by name Daulat Khatun." When the captain
heard the Princess's name and knew that she was his mistress
and the daughter of his King, he fell down in a fainting-fit,
and when he came to himself, he left the raft and whatso was
thereon and riding up to the palace, craved an audience of the
King; whereupon the chamberlain went in to the presence and
said, "Captain Mu'in al-Din is come to bring thee good news;
so bid he be brought in." The King bade admit him; accordingly
he entered and kissing ground[FN#433] said to him, "O King,
thou owest me a gift for glad tidings; for thy brother's
daughter Daulat Khatun hath reached our city safe and sound,
and is now on a raft in the harbour, in company with a young
man like the moon on the night of its full." When the King
heard this, he rejoiced and conferred a costly robe of honour
on the captain. Then he straightway bade decorate the city in
honour of the safe return of his brother's daughter, and
sending for her and Sayf al-Muluk, saluted the twain and gave
them joy of their safety; after which he despatched a
messenger to his brother, to let him know that his daughter
was found and was with him. As soon as the news reached Taj
al-Muluk he gat him ready and assembling his troops set out
for his brother's capital, where he found his daughter and
they rejoiced with exceeding joy. He sojourned with his
brother a week, after which he took his daughter and Sayf
al-Muluk and returned to Sarandib, where the Princess
foregathered with her mother and they rejoiced at her safe
return; and held high festival and that day was a great day,
never was seen its like. As for Sayf al-Muluk, the King
entreated him with honour and said to him, "O Sayf al-Muluk,
thou hast done me and my daughter all this good for which I
cannot requite thee nor can any requite thee, save the Lord of
the three Worlds; but I wish thee to sit upon the throne in my
stead and rule the land of Hind, for I offer thee of my throne
and kingdom and treasures and servants, all this in free gift
to thee." Whereupon Sayf al-Muluk rose and kissing the ground
before the King, thanked him and answered, "O King of the Age,
I accept all thou givest me and return it to thee in freest
gift; for I, O King of the Age, covet not sovranty nor
sultanate nor desire aught but that Allah the Most High bring
me to my desire." Rejoined the King, "O Sayf al-Muluk these my
treasures are at thy disposal: take of them what thou wilt,
without consulting me, and Allah requite thee for me with all
weal!" Quoth the Prince, "Allah advance the King! There is no
delight for me in money or in dominion till I win my wish: but
now I have a mind to solace myself in the city and view its
thoroughfares and market-streets." So the King bade bring him
a mare of the thoroughbreds, saddled and bridled; and Sayf
al-Muluk mounted her and rode through the streets and markets
of the city. As he looked about him right and left, lo! his
eyes fell on a young man, who was carrying a tunic and crying
it for sale at fifteen dinars: so he considered him and saw
him to be like his brother Sa'id; and indeed it was his very
self, but he was wan of blee and changed for long strangerhood
and the travails of travel, so that he knew him not. However,
he said to his attendants, "Take yonder youth and carry him to
the palace where I lodge, and keep him with you till my return
from the ride when I will question him." But they understood
him to say, "Carry him to the prison," and said in themselves
"Haply this is some runaway Mameluke of his." So they took him
and bore him to the bridewell, where they laid him in irons
and left him seated in solitude, unremembered by any.
Presently Sayf al-Muluk returned to the palace, but he forgot
his brother Sa'id, and none made mention of him. So he abode
in prison, and when they brought out the prisoners, to cut
ashlar from the quarries they took Sa'id with them, and he
wrought with the rest. He abode a month's space, in this
squalor and sore sorrow, pondering his case and saying in
himself, "What is the cause of my imprisonment?"; while Sayf
al-Muluk's mind was diverted from him by rejoicing and other
things; but one day, as he sat, he bethought him of Sa'id and
said to his Mamelukes, "Where is the white slave I gave into
your charge on such a day?" Quoth they, "Didst thou not bid us
bear him to the bridewell?"; and quoth he, "Nay, I said not
so; I bade you carry him to my palace after the ride." Then he
sent his Chamberlains and Emirs for Sa'id and they fetched him
in fetters, and loosing him from his irons set him before the
Prince, who asked him, "O young man, what countryman art
thou?"; and he answered, "I am from Egypt and my name is
Sa'id, son of Faris the Wazir." Now hearing these words Sayf
al-Muluk sprang to his feet and throwing himself off the
throne and upon his friend, hung on his neck, weeping aloud
for very joy and saying, "O my brother, O Sa'id, praise be
Allah for King Asim." Then they embraced and shed tears
together and all who were present marvelled at them. After
this Sayf al-Muluk bade his people bear Sa'id to the
Hammam-bath: and they did so. When he came out, they clad him
in costly clothing and carried him back to Sayf al-Muluk who
seated him on the throne beside himself. When King Taj
al-Muluk heard of the reunion of Sayf al-Muluk and his brother
Sa'id, he joyed with you exceeding and came to them, and the
three sat devising of all that had befallen them in the past
from first to last. Then said Sa'id, "O my brother, O Sayf
al-Muluk, when the ship sank with all on board I saved myself
on a plank with a company of Mamelukes and it drifted with us
a whole month, when the wind cast us, by the ordinance of
Allah Almighty, upon an island. So we landed and entering
among the trees took to eating of the fruits, for we were
anhungred. Whilst we were busy eating, there fell on us
unawares, folk like Ifrits[FN#434] and springing on our
shoulders rode us[FN#435] and said to us, 'Go on with us; for
ye are become our asses.' So I said to him who had mounted me,
'What art thou and why mountest thou me?' At this he twisted
one of his legs about my neck, till I was all but dead, and
beat upon my back the while with the other leg, till I thought
he had broken my backbone. So I fell to the ground on my face,
having no strength left in me for famine and thirst. From my
fall he knew that I was hungry and taking me by the hand, led
me to a tree laden with fruit which was a pear-tree[FN#436]
and said to me, 'Eat thy fill of this tree.' So I ate till I
had enough and rose to walk against my will; but, ere I had
fared afar the creature turned and leaping on my shoulders
again drove me on, now walking, now running and now trotting,
and he the while mounted on me, laughing and saying, 'Never in
my life saw I a donkey like unto thee!' We abode thus for
years till, one day of the days, it chanced that we saw there
great plenty of vines, covered with ripe fruit; so we gathered
a quantity of grape-bunches and throwing them into a pit, trod
them with our feet, till the pit became a great water-pool.
Then we waited awhile and presently returning thither, found
that the sun had wroughten on the grape-juice and it was
become wine. So we used to drink it till we were drunken and
our faces flushed and we fell to singing and dancing and
running about in the merriment of drunkenness;[FN#437]
whereupon our masters said to us, 'What is it that reddeneth
your faces and maketh you dance and sing?' We replied, 'Ask us
not, what is your quest in questioning us hereof?' But they
insisted, saying, 'You must tell us so that we may know the
truth of the case,' till we told them how we had pressed
grapes and made wine. Quoth they, 'Give us to drink thereof';
but quoth we, 'The grapes are spent.' So they brought us to a
Wady, whose length we knew not from its breadth nor its
beginning from its end wherein were vines each bunch of grapes
on them weighing twenty pounds[FN#438] by the scale and all
within easy reach, and they said, 'Gather of these.' So we
gathered a mighty great store of grapes and finding there a
big trench bigger than the great tank in the King's garden we
filled it full of fruit. This we trod with our feet and did
with the juice as before till it became strong wine, which it
did after a month; whereupon we said to them, ''Tis come to
perfection; but in what will ye drink it?' And they replied,
'We had asses like unto you; but we ate them and kept their
heads: so give us to drink in their skulls.' We went to their
caves which we found full of heads and bones of the Sons of
Adam, and we gave them to drink, when they became drunken and
lay down, nigh two hundred of them. Then we said to one
another, 'Is it not enough that they should ride us, but they
must eat us also? There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! But we will ply them
with wine, till they are overcome by drunkenness, when we will
slay them and be at rest from them.' Accordingly, we awoke
them and fell to filling the skulls and gave them to drink,
but they said, 'This is bitter.' We replied, 'Why say ye 'tis
bitter? Whoso saith thus, except he drink of it ten times, he
dieth the same day.' When they heard this, they feared death
and cried to us, 'Give us to drink the whole ten times.' So we
gave them to drink, and when they swallowed the rest of the
ten draughts they waxed drunken exceedingly and their strength
failed them and they availed not to mount us. Thereupon we
dragged them together by their hands and laying them one upon
another, collected great plenty of dry vine-stalks and
branches and heaped it about and upon them: then we set fire
to the pile and stood afar off, to see what became of
them."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

   When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sa'id
continued, "When we set fire to the pile wherein were the
Ghuls, I with the Mamelukes stood afar off to see what became
of them; and, as soon the fire was burnt out, we came back and
found them a heap of ashes, wherefore we praised Allah
Almighty who had delivered us from them. Then we went forth
about the island and sought the sea-shore, where we parted and
I and two of the Mamelukes fared on till we came to a thick
copse full of fruit and there busied ourselves with eating,
and behold, presently up came a man tall of stature, long of
beard and lengthy of ear, with eyes like cressets, driving
before him and feeding a great flock of sheep.[FN#439] When he
saw us he rejoiced and said to us, 'Well come, and fair
welcome to you! Draw near me that I may slaughter you an ewe
of these sheep and roast it and give you to eat.' Quoth we,
'Where is thine abode?' And quoth he, 'Hard by yonder
mountain; go on towards it till ye come to a cave and enter
therein, for you will see many guests like yourselves; and do
ye sit with them, whilst we make ready for you the
guest-meal.' We believed him so fared on, as he bade us, till
we came to the cavern, where we found many guests, Sons of
Adam like ourselves, but they were all blinded;[FN#440] and
when we entered, one said, 'I'm sick'; and another, 'I'm
weak.' So we cried to them, 'What is this you say and what is
the cauase of your sickness and weakness?' They asked, 'Who
are ye?'; and we answered, 'We are guests.' Then said they,
'What hath made you fall into the hands of yonder accursed?
But there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great! This is a Ghul who devoureth the Sons
of Adam and he hath blinded us and meaneth to eat us.' Said
we, 'And how did he blind you?' and they replied, 'Even as he
will blind yourselves anon.' Quoth we, 'And how so?' And quoth
they, 'He will bring you bowls of soured milk[FN#441] and will
say to you, 'Ye are weary with wayfare: take this milk and
drink it.' And when ye have drunken thereof, ye will become
blind like us.' Said I to myself, 'There is no escape for us
but by contrivance.' So I dug a hole in the ground and sat
over it. After an hour or so in came the accursed Ghul with
bowls of milk, whereof he gave to each of us, saying, 'Ye come
from the desert and are athirst: so take this milk and drink
it, whilst I roast you the flesh.' I took the cup and carried
it to my mouth but emptied it into the hole; then I cried out,
'Alas! my sight is gone and I am blind!' and clapping my hand
to my eyes, fell a-weeping and a-wailing, whilst the accursed
laughed and said, 'Fear not, thou art now become like mine
other guests.' But, as for my two comrades, they drank the
milk and became blind. Thereupon the Ghul arose and stopping
up the mouth of the cavern came to me and felt my ribs, but
found me lean and with no flesh on my bones: so he tried
another and finding him fat, rejoiced. Then he slaughtered
three sheep and skinned them and fetching iron spits, spitted
the flesh thereon and set them over the fire to roast. When
the meat was done, he placed it before my comrades who ate and
he with them; after which he brought a leather-bag full of
wine and drank thereof and lay down prone and snored. Said I
to myself, 'He's drowned in sleep: how shall I slay him?' Then
I bethought me of the spits and thrusting two of them into the
fire, waited till they were as red-hot coals: whereupon I
arose and girded myself and taking a spit in each hand went up
to the accursed Ghul and thrust them into his eyes, pressing
upon them with all my might. He sprang to his feet for sweet
life and would have laid hold of me; but he was blind. So I
fled from him into the inner cavern, whilst he ran after me;
but I found no place of refuge from him nor whence I might
escape into the open country, for the cave was stopped up with
stones; wherefore I was bewildered and said to the blind men,
'How shall I do with this accursed?' Replied one of them, 'O
Sa'id, with a run and a spring mount up to yonder
niche[FN#442] and thou wilt find there a sharpened scymitar of
copper: bring it to me and I will tell thee what to do.' So I
clombed to the niche and taking the blade, returned to the
blind man, who said to me, 'Smite him with the sword in his
middle, and he will die forthright.' So I rushed after the
Ghul, who was weary with running after me and felt for the
blind men that he might kill them and, coming up to him smote
him with the sword a single stroke across his waist and he
fell in twain. then he screamed and cried out to me, 'O man,
an thou desire to slay me, strike me a second stroke.'
Accordingly, I was about to smite him another cut; but he who
had directed me to the niche and the scymitar said, 'Smite him
not a second time, for then he will not die, but will live and
destroy us.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sa'id
continued, "Now when I struck the Ghul with the sword he cried
out to me, 'O man, an thou desire to slay me, strike me a
second stroke!" I was about so to do when he who had directed
me to the scymitar said, 'Smite him not a second time, for
then he will not die but will live and destroy us!' So I held
my hand as he bade me, and the Ghul died. Then said the blind
man to me, 'Open the mouth of the cave and let us fare forth;
so haply Allah may help us and bring us to rest from this
place.' And I said, 'No harm can come to us now; let us rather
abide here and repose and eat of these sheep and drink of this
wine, for long is the land.' Accordingly we tarried there two
months, eating of the sheep and of the fruits of the island
and drinking the generous grape-juice till it so chanced one
day, as we sat upon the beach, we caught sight of a ship
looming large in the distance; so we made signs for the crew
and holla'd to them. They feared to draw near, knowing that
the island was inhabited by a Ghul[FN#443] who ate Adamites,
and would have sheered off; but we ran down to the marge of
the sea and made signs to them, with our turband-ends and
shouted to them, whereupon one of the sailors, who was sharp
of sight, said to the rest, "Harkye, comrades, I see these men
formed lke ourselves, for they have not the fashion of Ghuls.'
So they made for us, little by little, till they drew near us
in the dinghy[FN#444] and were certified that we were indeed
human beings, when they saluted us and we returned their salam
and gave them the glad tidings of the slaying of the accursed,
wherefore they thanked us. Then we carried to the ship all
that was in the cave of stuffs and sheep and treasure,
together with a viaticum of the island-fruits, such as should
serve us days and months, and embarking, sailed on with a fair
breeze three days; at the end of which the wind veered round
against us and the air became exceeding dark; nor had an hour
passed before the wind drave the craft on to a rock, where it
broke up and its planks were torn asunder.[FN#445] However,
the Great God decreed that I should lay hold of one of the
planks, which I bestrode, and it bore me along two days, for
the wind had fallen fair again, and I paddled with my feet
awhile, till Allah the Most High brought me safe ashore and I
landed and came to this city, where I found myself a stranger,
solitary, friendless, not knowing what to do; for hunger was
sore upon me and I was in great tribulation. Thereupon I, O my
brother, hid myself and pulling off this my tunic, carried it
to the market, saying in my mind, 'I will sell it and live on
its price, till Allah accomplish to me whatso he will
accomplish.' Then I took the tunic in my hand and cried it for
sale, and the folk were looking at it and bidding for it,
when, O my brother, thou camest by and seeing me commandedst
me to the palace; but thy pages arrested and thrust me into
the prison and there I abode till thou bethoughtest thee of me
and badst bring me before thee. So now I have told thee what
befel me, and Alhamdolillah--Glorified be God--for reunion!"
Much marvelled the two Kings at Sa'id's tale and Taj al-Muluk
having made ready a goodly dwelling for Sayf al-Muluk and his
Wazir, Daulat Khatun used to visit the Prince there and thank
him for his favours and talk with him. One day, he met her and
said to her, "O my lady, where is the promise thou madest me,
in the palace of Japhet son of Noah, saying, 'Were I with my
people, I would make shift to bring thee to thy desire?'" And
Sa'id said to her, "O Princess, I crave thine aid to enable
him to win his will." Answered she, "Yea, verily; I will do my
endeavour for him, that he may attain his aim, if it please
Allah Almighty." And she turned to Sayf al-Muluk and said to
him, "Be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear."
Then she rose and going in to her mother, said to her, "Come
with me forthright and let us purify ourselves and make
fumigations[FN#446] that Badi'a al-Jamal and her mother may
come and see me and rejoice in me." Answered the Queen, "With
love and goodly gree;" and rising, betook herself to the
garden and burnt off these perfumes which she always had by
her; nor was it long before Badi'a al-Jamal and her mother
made their appearance. The Queen of Hind foregathered with the
other Queen and acquainted her with her daughter's safe
return, whereat she rejoiced; and rejoiced in each other. Then
they pitched the pavilions[FN#447] and dressed dainty viands
and made ready the place of entertainment; whilst the two
Princesses withdrew to a tent apart and ate together and drank
and made merry; after which they sat down to converse, and
Badi'a al-Jamal said, "What hath befallen thee in thy
strangerhood?" Replied Daulat Khatun, "O my sister how sad is
severance and how gladsome is reunion; ask me not what hath
befallen me! Oh, what hardships mortals suffer!" cried she,
"How so?" and the other said to her, "O my sister, I was
inmured in the High-builded Castle of Japhet son of Noah,
whither the son of the Blue King carried me off, till Sayf
al-Muluk slew the Jinni and brought me back to my sire;" and
she told her to boot all that the Prince had undergone of
hardships and horrors before he came to the Castle.[FN#448]
Badi'a al-Jamal marvelled at her tale and said, "By Allah, O
my sister, this is the most wondrous of wonders! This Sayf
al-Muluk is indeed a man! But why did he leave his father and
mother and betake himself to travel and expose himself to
these perils?" Quoth Daulat Khatun, "I have a mind to tell
thee the first part of his history; but shame of thee
hindereth me therefrom." Quoth Badi'a al-Jamal, "Why shouldst
thou have shame of me, seeing that thou art my sister and my
bosom-friend and there is muchel a matter between thee and me
and I know thou willest me naught but well? Tell me then what
thou hast to say and be not abashed at me and hide nothing
from me and have no fear of consequences." Answered Daulat
Khatun, "By Allah, all the calamities that have betided this
unfortunate have been on thine account and because of thee!"
Asked Badi'a al-Jamal, "How so, O my sister?"; and the other
answered, "Know that he saw thy portrait wrought on a tunic
which thy father sent to Solomon son of David (on the twain be
peace!) and he opened it not neither looked at it, but
despatched it, with other presents and rarities to Asim bin
Safwan, King of Egypt, who gave it, still unopened, to his son
Sayf al-Muluk. The Prince unfolded the tunic, thinking to put
it on, and seeing thy portrait, became enamoured of it;
wherefore he came forth in quest of thee, and left his folk
and reign and suffered all these terrors and hardships on
thine account."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

   When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Daulat
Khatun related to Badi'a al-Jamal the first part of Sayf
al-Muluk's history; how his love for her was caused by the
tunic whereon her presentment was wrought; how he went forth,
passion-distraught, in quest of her; how he forsook his people
and his kingdom for her sake and how he had suffered all these
terrors and hardships on her account. When Badi'a al-Jamal
hear this, she blushed rosy red and was confounded at Daulat
Khatun and said, "Verily this may never, never be; for man
accordeth not with the Jann." Then Daulat Khatun went on to
praise Sayf al-Muluk and extol his comeliness and courage and
cavalarice, and ceased not repeating her memories of his
prowess and his excellent qualities till she ended with
saying, "For the sake of Almighty Allah and of me, O sister
mine, come and speak with him, though but one word!" But
Badi'a al-Jamal cried, "By Allah, O sister mine, this that
thou sayest I will not hear, neither will I assent to thee
therein;" and it was as if she heard naught of what the other
said and as if no love of Sayf al-Muluk and his beauty and
bearing and bravery had gotten hold upon her heart. Then
Daulat Khatun humbled herself and said, "O Badi'a al-Jamal, by
the milk we have sucked, I and thou, and by that which is
graven on the seal-ring of Solomon (on whom be peace!) hearken
to these my words for I pledged myself in the High-builded
Castle of Japhet, to show him thy face. So Allah upon thee,
show it to him once, for the love of me, and look thyself on
him!" And she ceased not to weep and implore her and kiss her
hands and feet, till she consented and said, "For thy sake I
will show him my face once and he shall have a single glance."
With that Daulat Khatun's heart was gladdened and she kissed
her hands and feet. Then she went forth and fared to the great
pavilion in the garden and bade her slave-women spread it with
carpets and set up a couch of gold and place the wine-vessels
in order; after which she went into Sayf al-Muluk and to his
Wazir Sa'id, whom she found seated in their lodging, and gave
the Prince the glad tidings of the winning of his wish,
saying, "Go to the pavilion in the garden, thou and thy
brother, and hide yourselves there from the eyes of men so
none in the palace may espy you, till I come to you with
Badi'a al-Jamal." So they rose and repaired to the appointed
pavilion, where they found the couch of gold set and furnished
with cushions, and meat and wine ready served. So they sat
awhile, whilst Sayf al-Muluk bethought him of his beloved and
his breast was straitened and love and longing assailed him:
wherefore he rose and walked forth from the vestibule of the
pavilion. Sa'id would have followed him, but he said to him,
"O my brother, follow me not, but sit in thy stead till I
return to thee." So Sa'id abode seated, whilst Sayf al-Muluk
went down into the garden, drunken with the wine of desire and
distracted for excess of love-longing and passion-fire:
yearning agitated him and transport overcame him and he
recited these couplets,

"O passing Fair[FN#449] I have none else but thee; * Pity this
     slave in thy love's slavery!
Thou art my search, my joy and my desire! * None save thyself
     shall love this heart of me:
Would Heaven I knew thou knewest of my wails * Night-long and
     eyelids oped by memory.
Bid sleep to soourn on these eyen-lids * Haply in vision I thy
     sight shall see.
Show favour then to one thus love-distraught: * Save him from
     ruin by thy cruelty!
Allah increase thy beauty and thy weal; * And be thy ransom
     every enemy!
So shall on Doomsday lovers range beneath * Thy flag, and
     beauties 'neath thy banner be."

Then he wept and recited these also,

"That rarest beauty ever bides my foe * Who holds my heart and
     lurks in secresy:
Speaking, I speak of nothing save her charms * And when I'm
     dumb in heart-core woneth she."

Then he wept sore and recited the following,

"And in my liver higher flames the fire; * You are my wish and
     longsome still I yearn:
To you (none other!) bend I and I hope * (Lovers long-
     suffering are!) your grace to earn;
And that you pity me whose frame by Love * Is waste and weak
     his heart with sore concern:
Relent, be gen'rous, tender-hearted, kind: * From you I'll
     ne'er remove, from you ne'er turn!"

Then he wept and recited these also,

"Came to me care when came the love of thee, * Cruel sleep
     fled me like thy cruelty:
Tells me the messenger that thou are wroth: * Allah forfend
     what evils told me he!"

Presently Sa'id waxed weary of awaiting him and going forth in
quest of him, found him walking in the garden, distraught and
reciting these two couplets,

"By Allah, by th' Almighty, by his right[FN#450] * Who read
     the Koran-Chapter 'Fatir[FN#451] hight;
Ne'er roam my glances o'er the charms I see; * Thy grace, rare
     beauty, is my talk by night."

So he joined him and the twain walked about the garden
together solacing themselves and ate of its fruits. Such was
their case;[FN#452] but as regards the two Princesses, they
came to the pavilion and entering therein after the eunuchs
had richly furnished it, according to command, sat down on the
couch of gold, beside which was a w