ee vol. i. 37.

[FN#411] Arab. "Futah", a napkin, a waistcloth, the Indian
Zones alluded to by the old Greek travellers.

[FN#412] Arab. "Yaji (it comes) miat khwanjah"--quite Fellah
talk.

[FN#413] As Trebutien shows (ii. 155) these apes were a
remnant of some ancient tribe possibly those of Ad who had
gone to Meccah to pray for rain and thus escaped the general
destruction. See vol. i. 65. Perhaps they were the Jews of
Aylah who in David's day were transformed into monkeys for
fishing on the Sabbath (Saturday) Koran ii. 61.

[FN#414] I can see no reason why Lane purposely changes this
to "the extremity of their country."

[FN#415] Koran xxii. 44, Mr. Payne remarks:--This absurd
addition is probably due to some copyist, who thought to show
his knowledge of the Koran, but did not understand the meaning
of the verse from which the quotation is taken and which runs
thus, "How many cities have We destroyed, whilst yet they
transgressed, and they are laid low on their own foundations
and wells abandoned and high-builded palaces!" Mr. Lane
observes that the words are either misunderstood or purposely
misapplied by the author of the tale. Purposeful perversions
of Holy Writ are very popular amongst Moslems and form part of
their rhetoric; but such is not the case here. According to
Von Hammer (Trebutien ii. 154), "Eastern geographers place the
Bir al-Mu'utallal (Ruined Well) and the Kasr al-Mashid
(High-builded Castle) in the province of Hadramaut, and we
wait for a new Niebuhr to inform us what are the monuments or
the ruins so called." His text translates puits arides et
palais de platre (not likely!). Lane remarks that Mashid
mostly means "plastered," but here = Mushayyad, lofty,
explained in the Jalalayn Commentary as = rafi'a, high-raised.
The two places are also mentioned by Al-Mas'udi; and they
occur in Al-Kazwini (see Night dccclviii.): both of these
authors making the Koran directly allude to them.

[FN#416] Arab. (from Pers.) "Aywan" which here corresponds
with the Egyptian "liwan" a tall saloon with estrades.

[FN#417] This naive style of "renowning it" is customary in
the East, contrasting with the servile address of the
subject--"thy slave" etc.

[FN#418] Daulat (not Dawlah) the Anglo-Indian Dowlat; prop.
meaning the shifts of affairs, hence, fortune, empire,
kingdom. Khatun = "lady," I have noted, follows the name after
Turkish fashion.

[FN#419] The old name of Suez-town from the Greek Clysma (the
shutting), which named the Gulf of Suez "Sea of Kulzum." The
ruins in the shape of a huge mound, upon which Sa'id Pasha
built a Kiosk-palace, lie to the north of the modern town and
have been noticed by me. (Pilgrimage, Midian, etc.) The Rev.
Prof. Sayce examined the mound and from the Roman remains
found in it determined it to be a fort guarding the old mouth
of the Old Egyptian Sweet-water Canal which then debouched
near the town.

[FN#420] i.e. Tuesday. See vol. iii. 249.

[FN#421] Because being a Jinniyah the foster-sister could have
come to her and saved her from old maidenhood.

[FN#422] Arab. "Hajah" properly a needful thing. This
consisted according to the Bresl. Edit. of certain perfumes,
by burning which she could summon the Queen of the Jinn.

[FN#423] Probably used in its sense of a "black crow." The
Bresl. Edit. (iv. 261) has "Khatim" (seal-ring) which is but
one of its almost innumerable misprints.

[FN#424] Here it is called "Tabik" and afterwards "Tabut."

[FN#425] i.e. raising from the lower hinge-pins. See vol. ii.
214.

[FN#426] Arab. "Abrisam" or "Ibrisam" (from Persian Abrisham
or Ibrisham) = raw silk or floss, i.e. untwisted silk.

[FN#427] This knightly practice, evidently borrowed from the
East, appears in many romances of chivalry e.g. When Sir
Tristram is found by King Mark asleep beside Ysonde (Isentt)
with drawn sword between them, the former cried:--

          Gif they weren in sinne
          Nought so they no lay.

And we are told:--

          Sir Amys and the lady bright
               To bed gan they go;
          And when they weren in bed laid,
          Sir Amys his sword out-brayed
          And held it between them two.

This occurs in the old French romance of Amys and Amyloun
which is taken into the tale of the Ravens in the Seven Wise
Masters where Ludovic personates his friend Alexander in
marrying the King of Egypt's daughter and sleeps every night
with a bare blade between him and the bride. See also Aladdin
and his lamp. An Englishman remarked, "The drawn sword would
be little hindrance to a man and maid coming together." The
drawn sword represented only the Prince's honour.

[FN#428] Arab. "Ya Saki' al-Wajh," which Lane translates by
"lying" or "liar."

[FN#429] Kamin (in Bresl. Edit. "bayn" = between) Al-Bahrayn =
Ambuscade or lurking-place of the two seas. The name of the
city in Lane is "'Emareeych" imaginary but derived from Emarch
('imarah) = being populous. Trebutien (ii. 161) takes from
Bresl. Edit. "Amar" and translates the port-name, "le lieu de
refuge des deux mers."

[FN#430] i.e. "High of (among) the Kings." Lane proposes to
read 'Ali al-Mulk = high in dominion.

[FN#431] Pronounce Mu'inuddeen = Aider of the Faith. The
Bresl. Edit. (iv. 266) also read "Mu'in al-Riyasah" = Mu'in of
the Captaincies.

[FN#432] Arab. "Shum" = a tough wood used for the staves with
which donkeys are driven. Sir Gardner Wilkinson informed Lane
that it is the ash.

[FN#433] In Persian we find the fuller metaphorical form,
"kissing the ground of obedience."

[FN#434] For the Shaykh of the Sea(-board) in Sindbad the
Seaman see vol. vi. 50.

[FN#435] That this riding is a facetious exaggeration of the
African practice I find was guessed by Mr. Keightley.

[FN#436] Arab. "Kummasra": the root seems to be "Kamsara" =
being slender or compact.

[FN#437] Lane translates, "by reason of the exhilaration
produced by intoxication." But the Arabic here has no
assonance. The passage also alludes to the drunken habits of
those blameless Ethiopians, the races of Central Africa where,
after midday a chief is rarely if ever found sober. We hear
much about drink in England but Englishmen are mere babes
compared with these stalwart Negroes. In Unyamwezi I found all
the standing bedsteads of pole-sleepers and bark-slabs
disposed at an angle of about 20 degrees for the purpose of
draining off the huge pottle-fulls of Pome (Osirian beer)
drained by the occupants; and, comminxit lectum potus might be
said of the whole male population.

[FN#438] This is not exaggerated. When at Hebron I saw the
biblical spectacle of two men carrying a huge bunch slung to a
pole, not so much for the weight as to keep the grapes from
injury.

[FN#439] The Mac. and Bul. Edits. add, "and with him a host of
others after his kind"; but these words are omitted by the
Bresl. Edit. and apparently from the sequel there was only one
Ghul-giant.

[FN#440] Probably alluding to the most barbarous Persian
practice of plucking or tearing out the eyes from their
sockets. See Sir John Malcolm's description of the capture of
Kirman and Morier (in Zohrab, the hostage) for the wholesale
blinding of the Asterabadian by the Eunuch-King Agha Mohammed
Shah. I may note that the mediaeval Italian practice called
bacinare, or scorching with red-hot basins, came from Persia.

[FN#441] Arab. "Laban" as opposed to "Halib": in Night
dcclxxiv. (infra p. 365) the former is used for sweet milk,
and other passages could be cited. I have noted that all
galaktophagi, or milk-drinking races, prefer the artificially
soured to the sweet, choosing the fermentation to take place
outside rather than inside their stomachs. Amongst the Somal I
never saw man, woman or child drink a drop of fresh milk; and
they offered considerable opposition to our heating it for
coffee.

[FN#442] Arab. "Takah" not "an aperture" as Lane has it, but
an arched hollow in the wall.

[FN#443] In Trebutien (ii. 168) the cannibal is called "Goul
Eli-Fenioun" and Von Hammer remarks, "There is no need of such
likeness of name to prove that al this episode is a manifest
imitation of the adventures of Ulysses in Polyphemus's cave; *
* * and this induces the belief that the Arabs have been
acquainted with the poems of Homer." Living intimately with
the Greeks they could not have ignored the Iliad and the
Odyssey: indeed we know by tradition that they had
translations, now apparently lost. I cannot however, accept
Lane's conjecture that "the story of Ulysses and Polyphemus
may have been of Eastern origin." Possibly the myth came from
Egypt, for I have shown that the opening of the Iliad bears a
suspicious likeness to the proem of Pentaur's Epic.

[FN#444] Arab. "Shakhtur".

[FN#445] In the Bresl. Edit. the ship ips not wrecked but
lands Sa'id in safety.

[FN#446] So in the Shah-nameth the Simurgh-bird gives one of
her feathers to her protege Zal which he will throw into the
fire when she is wanted.

[FN#447] Bresl. Edit. "Al-Zardakhanat" Arab. plur of
Zarad-Khanah, a bastard word = armoury, from Arab. Zarad
(hauberk) and Pers. Khanah = house etc.

[FN#448] Some retrenchment was here found necessary to avoid
"damnable iteration."

[FN#449] i.e. Badi'a al-Jamal.

[FN#450] Mohammed.

[FN#451] Koran xxxv. "The Creator" (Fatir) or the Angels, so
called from the first verse.

[FN#452] In the Bresl. Edit. (p. 263) Sayf al-Muluk drops
asleep under a tree to the lulling sound of a Sakiyah or
water-wheel, and is seen by Badi'a al-Jamal, who falls in love
with im and drops tears upon his cheeks, etc. The scene,
containing much recitation, is long and well told.

[FN#453] Arab. "Lukmah" = a bouchee of bread, meat, fruit or
pastry, and especially applied to the rice balled with the
hand and delicately inserted into a friend's mouth.

[FN#454] Arab. "Salahiyah," also written Sarahiyah: it means
an ewer-shaped glass-bottle.

[FN#455] Arab. "Sarmujah," of which Von Hammer remarks that
the dictionaries ignore it; Dozy gives the forms Sarmuj,
Sarmuz, and Sarmuzah and explains them by "espece de guetre,
de sandale ou de mule, qu'on chausse par-dessus la botte."

[FN#456] In token of profound submission.

[FN#457] Arab. "Misr" in Ibn Khaldun is a land whose people
are settled and civilised hence "Namsur" = we settle; and
"Amsar" = settled provinces. Al-Misrayn was the title of
Basrah and Kufah the two military cantonments founded by
Caliph Omar on the frontier of conquering Arabia and conquered
Persia. Hence "Tamsir" = founding such posts, which were
planted in Mesopotamia, Syria and Egypt. In these camps were
stationed the veterans who had fought under Mohammed; but the
spoils of the East soon changed them to splendid cities where
luxury and learning fluorished side by side. Sprenger
(Al-Mas'udi pp. 19, 177) compares them ecclesiastically with
the primitive Christian Churches such as Jerusalem, Alexandria
and Antioch. But the Moslems were animated with an ardent love
of liberty and Kufah under Al-Hajjaj the masterful, lost
100,000 of her turbulent sons without the thirst for
independence being quenched. This can hardly be said of the
Early Christians who, with the exception of a few
staunch-hearted martyrs, appear in history as pauvres diables
and poules mouillees, ever oppressed by their own most
ignorant and harmful fancy that the world was about to end.

[FN#458] i.e. Waiting to be sold and wasting away in single
cursedness.

[FN#459] Arab. "Ya dadati": dadat is an old servant-woman or
slave, often applied to a nurse, like its congener the Pers.
Dada, the latter often pronounced Daddeh, as Daddeh Bazm-ara
in the Kuisum-nameh (Atkinson's "Customs of the Women of
Persia," London, 8vo, 1832).

[FN#460] Marjanah has been already explained. D'Herbelot
derives from it the Romance name Morgante la Deconvenue, here
confounding Morgana with Urganda; and Keltic scholars make
Morgain = Mor Gwynn-the white maid (p. 10, Keightley's Fairy
Mythology, London, Whittaker, 1833).










This etext was scanned by JC Byers
(http://www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and proofread by
Nancy Bloomquist, J.C. Byers, Muhammad Hozien, Carrie Lorenz,
Laura Shaffer, Sara Vazirian, and Charles Wilson. 






                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                          VOLUME SEVEN
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                     I Inscribe these pages
                               to
                   An Old And Valued Friend,
                                
                        John W. Larking
                    (Whilome of Alexandria).
                                
   In Whose Hospitable Home ("The Sycamores") I Made My Final
            Preparations For A Pilgrimage To Meccah
                        and El-Medinah.

                                                   R. F. Burton


                 Contents of the Seventh Volume

     The History of Gharib and His Brother Ajib (continued)
138. Otbah and Rayya
139. Hind, Daughter of Al-Nu'man, and Al-Hajjaj
140. Khuzaymah Bin Bishr and Ikrimah Al-Fayyaz
141. Yunus the Scribe and the Caliph Walid Bin Sahl
142. Harun Al-Rashid and the Arab Girl
143. Al-Asma'i and the Three Girls of Bassorah
144. Ibrahim of Mosul and the Devil
145. The Lovers of the Banu Uzrah
146. The Badawi and His Wife
147. The Lovers of Bassorah
148. Ishak of Mosul and His Mistress and the Devil
149. The Lovers of Al-Medinah
150. Al-Malik Al-Nasir and His Wizir
151. The Rogueries of Dalilah the Crafty and Her Daughter Zaynab
the Coney-Catcher
     a.   The Adventures of Mercury Ali of Cairo
152. Ardashir and Hayat Al-nufus
153. Julnar the Sea-Born and Her Son King Badr Basim of Persia
154. King Mohammed Bin Sabaik and the Merchant Hasan
     a.   Story of Prince Sayf Al-Muluk and the Princess Badi'a
Al-Jamal



                        The Book Of The
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                                



     When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

Shahrazad continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Sa'adan having broken into the palace of King Jamak and pounded
to pieces those therein, the survivors cried out, "Quarter!
Quarter!"; and Sa'adan said to them, "Pinion your King!" So they
bound Jamak and took him up, and Sa'adan drove them before him
like sheep and brought them to Gharib's presence, after the most
part of the citizens had perished by the enemy's swords. When the
King of Babel came to himself, he found himself bound and heard
Sa'adan say, "I will sup to-night off this King Jamak:" whereupon
he turned to Gharib and cried to him, "I throw myself on thy
mercy." Replied Gharib, "Become a Moslem, and thou shalt be safe
from the Ghul and from the vengeance of the Living One who
ceaseth not." So Jamak professed Al-Islam with heart and tongue
and Gharib bade loose his bonds. Then he expounded The Faith to
his people and they all became True Believers; after which Jamak
returned to the city and despatched thence provaunt land henchmen
to Gharib; and wine to the camp before Babel where they passed
the night. On the morrow, Gharib gave the signal for the march
and they fared on till they came to Mayyáfárikín,[FN#1] which
they found empty, for its people had heard what had befallen
Babel and had fled to Cufa-city and told Ajib. When he heard the
news, his Doom-day appeared to him and he assembled his braves
and informing them of the enemy's approach ordered them make
ready to do battle with his brother's host; after which he
numbered them and found them thirty-thousand horse and ten
thousand foot.[FN#2] So, needing more, he levied other fifty-
thousand men, cavalry and infantry, and taking horse amid a
mighty host, rode forwards, till he came upon his brother's army
encamped before Mosul and pitched his tents in face of their
lines. Then Gharib wrote a writ and said to his officers, "Which
of you will carry this letter to Ajib?" Whereupon Sahim sprang to
his feet and cried, "O King of the Age, I will bear thy missive
and bring thee back an answer." So Gharib gave him the epistle
and he repaired to the pavilion of Ajib who, when informed of his
coming, said, "Admit him!" and when he stood in the presence
asked him, "Whence comest thou?" Answered Sahim, "From the King
of the Arabs and the Persians, son-in-law of Chosroë, King of the
world, who sendeth thee a writ; so do thou return him a reply."
Quoth Ajib, "Give me the letter;" accordingly Sahim gave it to
him and he tore it open and found therein, "In the name of Allah
the Compassionating, the Compassionate! Peace on Abraham the
Friend await! But afterwards. As soon as this letter shall come
to thy hand, do thou confess the Unity of the Bountiful King,
Causer of causes and Mover of the clouds;[FN#3] and leave
worshipping idols. An thou do this thing, thou art my brother and
ruler over us and I will pardon thee the deaths of my father and
mother, nor will I reproach thee with what thou hast done. But an
thou obey not my bidding, behold, I will hasten to thee and cut
off thy head and lay waste thy dominions. Verily, I give thee
good counsel, and the Peace be on those who pace the path of
salvation and obey the Most High King!" When Ajib read these
words and knew the threat they contained, his eyes sank into the
crown of his head and he gnashed his teeth and flew into a
furious rage. Then he tore the letter in pieces and threw it
away, which vexed Sahim and he cried out upon Ajib, saying,
"Allah wither thy hand for the deed thou hast done!" With this
Ajib cried out to his men, saying, "Seize yonder hound and hew
him in pieces with your hangers.''[FN#4] So they ran at Sahim;
but he bared blade and fell upon them and slew of them more than
fifty braves; after which he cut his way out, though bathed in
blood, and won back to Gharib, who said, "What is this case, O
Sahim?" And he told him what had passed, whereat he grew livid
for rage and crying "Allaho Akbar God is most great!" bade the
battle-drums beat. So the fighting-men donned their hauberks and
coats of straitwoven mail and baldrick'd themselves with their
swords; the footmen drew out in battle-array, whilst the horsemen
mounted their prancing horses and dancing camels and levelled
their long lances, and the champions rushed into the field. Ajib
and his men also took horse and host charged down upon host. --
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. 

      When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Gharib and his merry men took horse, Ajib and his troops also
mounted and host charged down upon host. Then ruled the Kazi of
Battle, in whose ordinance is no wrong, for a seal is on his lips
and he speaketh not; and the blood railed in rills and purfled
earth with curious embroidery; heads grew gray and hotter waxed
battle and fiercer. Feet slipped and stood firm the valiant and
pushed forwards, whilst turned the faint-heart and fled, nor did
they leave fighting till the day darkened and the night starkened
Then clashed the cymbals of retreat and the two hosts drew apart
each from other, and returned to their tents, where they righted.
Next morning, as soon as it was day, the cymbals beat to battle
and derring-do, and the warriors donned their harness of fight
and baldrick'd[FN#5] their blades the brightest bright and with
the brown lance bedight mounted doughty steed every knight and
cried out, saying, "This day no flight!" And the two hosts drew
out in battle array, like the surging sea. The first to open the
chapter[FN#6] of war was Sahim, who crave his destrier between
the two lines and played with swords and spears and turned over
all the Capitula of combat till men of choicest wits were
confounded. Then he cried out, saying, "Who is for fighting? Who
is for jousting? Let no sluggard come out nor weakling!"
Whereupon there rushed at him a horseman of the Kafirs, as he
were a flame of fire; but Sahim let him not stand long before him
ere he overthrew him with a thrust. Then a second came forth and
he slew him also, and a third and he tare him in twain, and a
fourth and he did him to death; nor did they cease sallying out
to him and he left not slaying them, till it was noon, by which
time he had laid low two hundred braves. Then Ajib cried to his
men, "Charge once more," and sturdy host on sturdy host down bore
and great was the clash of arms and battle-roar. The shining
swords out rang; the blood in streams ran and footman rushed upon
footman; Death showed in van and horse-hoof was shodden with
skull of man; nor did they cease from sore smiting till waned the
day and the night came on in black array, when they drew apart
and, returning to their tents, passed the night there. As soon as
morning morrowed the two hosts mounted and sought the field of
fight; and the Moslems looked for Gharib to back steed and ride
under the standards as was his wont, but he came not. So Sahim
sent to his brother's pavilion a slave who, finding him not,
asked the tent-pitchers,[FN#7] but they answered, "We know naught
of him." Whereat he was greatly concerned and went forth and told
the troops, who refrained from battle, saying, "An Gharib be
absent, his foe will destroy us." Now there was for Gharib's
absence a cause strange but true which we will set out in order
due. And it was thus. When Ajib returned to his camp on the
preceding Night, he called one of his guardsmen by name Sayyar
and said to him, "O Sayyar, I have not treasured thee save for a
day like this; and now I bid thee enter among Gharib s host and,
pushing into the marquee of their lord, bring him hither to me
and prove how wily thy cunning be." And Sayyar said, "I hear and
I obey." So he repaired to the enemy's camp and stealing into
Gharib's pavilion, under the darkness of the Night, when all the
men had gone to their places of rest, stood up as though he were
a slave to serve Gharib, who present! being athirst, called to
him for water. So he brought him a pitcher of water, drugged with
Bhang, and Gharib could not fulfill his need ere he fell down
with head distancing heels, whereupon Sayyar wrapped him in his
cloak and carrying him to Ajib's tent, threw him down at his
feet. Quoth Ajib, "O Sayyar, what is this?" Quoth he, "This be
thy brother Gharib;" whereat Ajib rejoiced and said, "The
blessings of the Idols light upon thee! Loose him and wake him."
So they made him sniff up vinegar and he came to himself and
opened his eyes; then, finding himself bound and in a tent other
than his own, exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious the Great!" Thereupon Ajib
cried out at him, saying, "Dost thou draw on me, O dog, and seek
to slay me and take on me thy blood-wreak of thy father and thy
mother? I will send thee this very day to them and rid the world
of thee." Replied Gharib, Kafir hound! soon shalt thou see
against whom the wheels of fate shall revolve and who shall be
overthrown by the wrath of the Almighty King, Who wotteth what is
in hearts and Who shall leave thee in Gehenna tormented and
confounded! Have ruth on thyself and say with me, ‘There is no
god but the God and Abraham is the Friend of God!' " When Ajib
heard Gharib's words, he sparked and snorted and railed at his
god, the stone, and called for the sworder and the leather rug of
blood but his Wazir, who was at heart a Moslem though outwardly a
Miscreant, rose and kissing ground before him, said, "Patience, O
King, deal not hastily, but wait till we know the conquered from
the conqueror. If we prove the victors, we shall have power to
him and, if we be beaten, his being alive in our hands will be a
strength to us." And the Emirs said, "The Minister speaketh
sooth"! --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,
                                
She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Ajib purposed to slay Gharib, the Wazir rose and said, "Deal not
hastily, for we have always power to kill him!" So Ajib bade lay
his brother Gharib in irons and chain him up in his own tent and
set a thousand stout warriors to guard him. Meanwhile Gharib's
host, when they awoke that morning and found not their King, were
as sheep sans a shepherd; but Sa'adan the Ghul cried out at them,
saying, "O folk, don your war-gear and trust to your Lord to
defend you!" So Arabs and Ajams mounted horse, after clothing
themselves in hauberks of iron and skirting themselves in
straight knit mail, and sallied forth to the field, the Chiefs
and the colours moving in van. Then dashed out the Ghul of the
Mountain, with a club on his shoulder, two hundred pounds in
weight, and wheeled and careered, saying, "Ho, worshippers of
idols, come ye out and renown it this day, for 'tis a day of
onslaught! Whoso knoweth me hath enough of my mischief and whoso
knoweth me not, I will make myself known to him. I am Sa'adan,
servant of King Gharib. Who is for jousting? Who is for fighting?
Let no faintheart come forth to me to-day nor weakling." And
there rushed upon him a Champion of the Infidels, as he were a
flame of fire, and drove at him, but Sa'adan charged home at him
and dealt him with his club a blow which broke his ribs and cast
him lifeless to the earth. Then he called out to his sons and
slaves, saying, "Light the bonfire, and whoso falleth of the
Kafirs do ye dress him and roast him well in the flame, then
bring him to me that I may break my fast on him!" So they kindled
a fire midmost the plain and laid thereon the slain, till he was
cooked, when they brought him to Sa'adan, who gnawed his flesh
and crunched his bones. When the Miscreants saw the Mountain-Ghul
do this deed they were Frighted with sore Wright, but Ajib cried
out to his men, saying, "Out on you! Fall upon the Ogre and hew
him in hunks with your scymitars!" So twenty-thousand men ran at
Sa'adan, whilst the footmen circled round him and rained upon him
darts and shafts so that he was wounded in four-and-twenty
places, and his blood ran down upon the earth, and he was alone.
Then the host of the Moslems crave at the heathenry, calling for
help upon the Lord of the three Worlds, and they ceased not from
fight and fray till the day came to an end, when they drew apart.
But the Infidels had captured Sa'adan, as he vere a drunken man
for loss of blood; and they bound him fast and set him by Gharib
who, seeing the Ghul a prisoner, said, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! O
Sa'adan, what case is this?" "O my lord," replied Sa'adan, "it is
Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) who ordaineth joy and annoy
and there is no help but this and that betide." And Gharib
rejoined, "Thou speakest sooth, O Sa'adan!" But Ajib passed the
night in joy and he said to his men, "Mount ye on the morrow and
fall upon the Moslems so shall not one of them be left alive."
And they replied, "Hearkening and obedience!" This is how it
fared with them but as regards the Moslems, they passed the
Night, dejected and weeping for their King and Sa'adan; but Sahim
said to them, "O folk, be not concerned, for the aidance of
Almighty Allah is nigh." Then he waited till midnight, when he
assumed the garb of a tent-pitcher; and, repairing to Ajib's
camp, made his way between the tents and pavilions till he came
to the King's marquee, where he saw him seated on his throne
surrounded by his Princes. So he entered and going up to the
candles which burnt in the tent snuffed them and sprinkled
levigated henbane on the wicks; after which he withdrew and
waited without the marquee, till the smoke of the burning henbane
reached Ajib and his Princes and they fell to the ground like
dead men. Then he left them and went to the prison tent, where he
found Gharib and Sa'adan, guarded by a thousand braves, who were
overcome with sleep. So he cried out at the guards, saying, "Woe
to you! Sleep not; but watch your prisoners and light the
cressets." Presently he filled a cresses with firewood, on which
he strewed henbane, and lighting it, went round about the tent
with it, till the smoke entered the nostrils of the guards, and
they all fell asleep drowned by the drug; when he entered the
tent and finding Gharib and Sa'adan also insensible he aroused
them by making them smell and sniff at a sponge full of vinegar
he had with him. Thereupon he loosed their bonds and collars, and
when they saw him, they blessed him and rejoiced In him. After
this they went forth and took all the arms of the guards and
Sahim said to them, "Go to your own camp;" while he re entered
Ajib's pavilion and, wrapping him in his cloak, lifted him up and
made for the Moslem encampment. And the Lord, Compassionate
protected him, so that he reached Gharib's tent in safety and
unrolled the cloak before him. Gharib looked at its contents and
seeing his brother Ajib bound, cried out, "Allaho Akbar --God is
Most Great! Aidance! Victory!" And he blessed Sahim and bade him
arouse Ajib. So he made him smell the vinegar mixed with incense,
and he opened his eyes and, finding himself bound and shackled,
hung down his head earth wards. --And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after Sahim
had aroused Ajib, whom he had made insensible with henbane and
had brought to his brother Gharib, the captive opened his eyes
and, feeling himself bound and shackled, hung down his head
earthwards. Thereupon cried Sahim, O Accursed, lift thy head!" So
he raised his eyes and found himself amongst Arabs and Ajamis and
saw his brother seated on the throne of his estate and the place
of his power, wherefore he was silent and spake not. Then Gharib
cried out and said, "Strip me this hound!" So they stripped him
and came down upon him with whips, till they weakened his body
and subdued his pride, after which Gharib set over him a guard of
an hundred knights. And when this fraternal correction had been
administered they heard shouts of, "There is no God but the God!"
and "God is Most Great!" from the camp of the Kafirs. Now the
cause of this was that, ten days after his nephew King Al-Damigh,
Gharib's uncle, had set out from Al-Jazirah, with twenty-thousand
horse, and on nearing the field of battle, had despatched one of
his scouts to get news. The man was absent a whole day, at the
end of which time he returned and told Al-Damigh all that had
happened to Gharib with his brother. So he waited till the Night,
when he fell upon the Infidels, crying out, "Allaho Akbar!" and
put them to the edge of the biting scymitar. When Gharib heard
the Takbir,[FN#8] he said to Sahim, "Go find out the cause of
these shouts and war cries." So Sahim repaired to the field of
battle and questioned the slaves and camp followers, who told him
that King Al-Damigh had come up with twenty-thousand men and had
fallen upon the idolaters by Night, saying, "By the virtue of
Abraham the Friend, I will not forsake my brother's son, but will
play a brave man's part and beat back the host of Miscreants and
please the Omnipotent King!" So Sahim returned and told his
uncle's derring-do to Gharib, who cried out to his men, saying,
"Don your arms and mount your steeds and let us succour my
father's brother!" So they took horse and fell upon the Infidels
and put them to the edge of the sharp sword. By the morning they
had killed nigh fifty-thousand of the Kafirs and made other
thirty-thousand prisoners, and the rest of Ajib's army dispersed
over the length and breadth of earth. Then the Moslems returned
in victory and triumph, and Gharib rode out to meet his uncle,
whom he saluted and thanked for his help Quoth Al-Damigh, "I
wonder if that dog Ajib fell in this day's affair." Quoth Gharib,
"O uncle, be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear:
know that he is with me in chains." When Al-Damigh heard this he
rejoiced with exceeding joy and the two kings dismounted and
entered the pavilion, but found no Ajib there; whereupon Gharib
exclaimed, "O glory of Abraham, the Friend (with whom be
peace!)," adding, "Alas, what an ill end is this to a glorious
day!" and he cried out to the tent-pitchers, saying, "Woe to you!
Where is my enemy who oweth me so much?" Quoth they, "When thou
mountedst and we went with thee, thou didst not bid us guard
him;" and Gharib exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" But Al-Damigh said
to him, "Hasten not nor be concerned, for where can he go, and we
in pursuit of him?" Now the manner of Ajib's escape was in this
wise. His page Sayyar had been ambushed in the camp and when he
saw Gharib mount and ride forth, leaving none to guard his enemy
Ajib, he could hardly credit his eyes. So he waited awhile and
presently crept to the tent and taking Ajib, who was senseless
for the pain of the bastinado, on his back, made off with him
into the open country and fared on at the top of his speed from
early night to the next day, till he came to a spring of water,
under an apple tree. There he set down Ajib from his back and
washed his face, whereupon he opened his eyes and seeing Sayyar,
said to him, "O Sayyar, carry me to Cufa that I may recover there
and levy horsemen and soldiers wherewith to overthrow my foe: and
know, O Sayyar, that I am anhungered." So Sayyar sprang up and
going out to the desert caught an ostrich-poult and brought it to
his lord. Then he gathered fuel and deftly using the fire sticks
kindled a fire,, by which he roasted the bird which he had
hallal'd[FN#9] and fed Ajib with its flesh and gave him to drink
of the water of the spring, till his strength returned to hits,
after which he went to one of the Badawi tribal encampments, and
stealing thence a steed mounted Ajib upon it and journeyed on
with him for many days till they drew near the city of Cufa. The
Viceroy of the capital came out to meet and salute the King, whom
he found weak with the beating his brother had inflicted upon
him; and Ajib entered the city and called his physicians. When
they answered his summons, he bade them heal him in less than ten
days' time: they said, "We hear and we obey," and they tended him
till he became whole of the sickness that was upon him and of the
punishment. Then he commanded his Wazirs to write letters to all
his Nabobs and vassals, and he indited one-and-twenty writs and
despatched them to the governors, who assembled their troops and
set out for Cufa by forced marches. --And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say. 

       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ajib
sent orders to assemble the troops, who marched forthright to
Cufa. Meanwhile, Gharib, being troubled for Ajib's escape,
despatched in quest of him a thousand braves, who dispersed on
all sides and sought him a day and a Night, but found no trace of
him; so they returned and told Gharib, who called for his brother
Sahim, but found him not; whereat he was sore concerned, fearing
for him from the shifts of Fortune. And lo! Sahim entered and
kissed ground before Gharib, who rose, when he saw him, and
asked, "Where hast thou been, O Sahim?" He answered, "O King, I
have been to Cufa and there I find that the dog Ajib hath made
his way to his capital and is healed of his hurts: eke, he hath
written letters to his vassals and sent them to his Nabobs who
have brought him troops." When Gharib heard this, he gave the
command to march; so they struck tents and fared for Cufa. When
they came in sight of the city, they found it compassed about
with a host like the surging main, having neither beginning nor
end. So Gharib with his troops encamped in face of the Kafirs and
set up his standards, and darkness fell down upon the two hosts,
whereupon they lighted camp-fires and kept watch till daybreak.
Then King Gharib rose and making the Wuzu-ablution, prayed a two-
bow prayer according to the rite of our father Abraham the Friend
(on whom be the Peace!); after which he commanded the battle
drums to sound the point of war. Accordingly, the kettle-drums
beat to combat and the standards fluttered whilst the fighting-
men armour donned and their horses mounted and themselves
displayed and to plain fared. Now the first to open the gate of
war was King Al-Damigh, who urged his charger between the two
opposing armies and displayed himself and played with the swords
and the spears, till both hosts were confounded and at him
marvelled, after which he cried out, saying, "Who is for
jousting? Let no sluggard come out to me nor weakling; for I am
Al-Damigh, the King, brother of Kundamir the King." Then there
rushed forth a horseman of the Kafirs, as he were a flame of
fire, and crave at Al-Damigh, without word said; but the King
received him with a lance thrust in the breast so dour that the
point issued from between his shoulders and Allah hurried his
soul to the fire, the abiding-place dire. Then came forth a
second he slew, and a third he slew likewise, and they ceased not
to come out to him and he to slay them, till he had made an end
of six-and-seventy fighting-men. Hereupon the Miscreants and men
of might hung back and would not encounter him; but Ajib cried
out to his men and said, "Fie on you, O folk! if ye all go forth
to him, one by one, he will not leave any of you, sitting or
standing. Charge on him all at once and cleanse of them our
earthly wone and strew their heads for your horses' hoofs like a
plain of stone!" So they waved the ewe striking flag and host was
heaped upon host; blood rained in streams upon earth and railed
and the Judge of battle ruled, in whose ordinance is no upright.
The fearless stood firm on feet in the stead of fight, whilst the
faint-heart gave back and took to flight thinking the day would
never come to an end nor the curtains of gloom would be drawn by
the hand of Night; and they ceased not to battle with swords and
to smite till light darkened and murk starkened. Then the kettle-
drums of the Infidels beat the retreat, but Gharib, refusing to
stay his arms, crave at the Paynimry, and the Believers in Unity,
the Moslems, followed him. How many heads and hands they shore,
how many necks and sinews they tore, how many knees and spines
they mashed and how many grown men and youths they to death
bashed! With the first gleam of morning grey the Infidels broke
and fled away, in disorder and disarray; and the Moslems followed
them till middle-day and took over twenty-thousand of them, whom
they brought to their tents in bonds to stay. Then Gharib sat
down before the gate of Cufa and commanded a herald to proclaim
pardon and protection for every wight who should leave the
worship to idols dight and profess the unity of His All-might the
Creator of mankind and of light and night. So was made
proclamation as he bade in the streets of Cufa and all that were
therein embraced the True Faith, great and small; then they
issued forth in a body and renewed their Islam before King
Gharib, who rejoiced in them with exceeding joy and his breast
broadened and he threw off all annoy. Presently he enquired of
Mardas and his daughter Mahdiyah, and, being told that he had
taken up his abode behind the Red Mountain, he called Sahim and
said to him, "Find out for me what is become of thy father."
Sahim mounted steed without stay or delay and set his berry-brown
spear in rest and fared on in quest till he reached the Red
Mountain, where he sought for his father, yet found no trace of
him nor of his tribe; however, he saw in their stead an elder of
the Arabs, a very old man, broken with excess of years, and asked
him of the folk and whither they were gone. Replied he, "O my
son, when Mardas heard of Gharib's descent upon Cufa he feared
with great fear and, taking his daughter and his folk, set out
with his handmaids and negroes into the wild and word, and I wot
not whither he went." So Sahim, hearing the Shaykh's words,
returned to Gharib and told him thereof, whereat he was greatly
concerned. Then he sat down on his father's throne and, opening
his treasuries, distributed largesse to each and every of his
braves. And he took up his abode in Cufa and sent out spies to
get news of Ajib. He also summoned the Grandees of the realm, who
came and did him homage; as also did the citizens and he bestowed
on them sumptuous robes of honour and commended the Ryots to
their care. --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib,
after giving robes of honour to the citizens of Cufa and com
mending the Ryots to their care, went out on a day of the days to
hunt, with an hundred horse, and fared on till he came to a Wady,
abounding in trees and fruits and rich in rills and birds It was
a pasturing-place for roes and gazelles, to the spirit a delight
whose scents reposed from the langour of fight. They encamped in
the valley, for the day was dear and bright, and there passed the
night. On the morrow, Gharib made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed
the two-bow dawn-prayer, offering up praise and thanks to
Almighty Allah; when, lo and behold! there arose a clamour and
confusion in the meadows, and he bade Sahim go see what was to
do. So Sahim mounted forthright and rode till he espied goods
being plundered and horses haltered and women carried off and
children crying out. Whereupon he questioned one of the
shepherds, saying, "What be all this?"; and they replied, "This
is the Harim of Mardas, Chief of the Banu Kahtan, and his good
and that of his clan; for yesterday Jamrkan slew Mardas and made
prize of his women and children and household stuff and all the
belonging of his tribe. It is his wont to go a raiding and to cut
off highways and waylay wayfarers and he is a furious tyrant;
neither Arabs nor Kings can prevail against him and he is the
scourge and curse of the country." Now when Sahim heard these
news of his sire's slaughter and the looting of his Harim and
property, he returned to Gharib and told him the case, wherefore
fire was added to his fire and his spirit chafed to wipe out his
shame and his blood wit to claim: so he rode with his men after
the robbers till he overtook them and fell upon them, crying out
and saying, "Almighty Allah upon the rebel, the traitor, the
infidel!" and he slew in a single charge one-and-twenty fighting-
men. Then he halted in mid-field, with no coward's heart, and
cried out, "Where is Jamrkan? Let him come out to me, that I may
make him quaff the cup of disgrace and rid of him earth's face!"
Hardly had he made an end of speaking, when forth rushed Jamrkan,
as he were a calamity of calamities or a piece of a mountain,
cased in steel. He was a mighty huge[FN#10] Amalekite; and he
crave at Gharib without speech or salute, like the fierce tyrant
he was. And he was armed with a mace of China steel, so heavy, so
potent, that had he smitten a hill he had smashed it. Now when he
charged, Gharib met him like a hungry lion, and the brigand aimed
a blow at his head with his mace; but he evaded it and it smote
the earth and sank therein half a cubit deep. Then Gharib took
his battle flail and smiting Jamrkan on the wrist, crushed his
fingers and the mace dropped from his grasp; whereupon Gharib
bent down from his seat in selle and snatching it up, swiftlier
than the blinding leven, smote him therewith full on the flat of
the ribs, and he fell to the earth like a long-stemmed palm-tree.
So Sahim took him and pinioning him, haled him off with a rope,
and Gharib's horsemen fell on those of Jamrkan and slew fifty of
them: the rest fled; nor did they cease flying till they reached
their tribal camp and raised their voices in clamour; whereupon
all who were in the Castle came out to meet them and asked the
news. They told the tribe what had passed; and, when they heard
that their chief was a prisoner, they set out for the valley
vying one with other in their haste to deliver him. Now when King
Gharib had captured Jamrkan and had seen his braves take flight,
he dismounted and called for Jamrkan, who humbled himself before
him, saying, "I am under thy protection, O champion of the Age!"
Replied Gharib, "O dog of the Arabs, dost thou cut the road for
the servants of Almighty Allah, and fearest thou not the Lord of
the Worlds?" "O my master," asked Jamrkan, "and who is the Lord
of the Worlds?" "O dog," answered Gharib, "and what calamity dost
thou worship?" He said, "O my lord, I worship a god made of
dates[FN#11] kneaded with butter and honey, and at times I eat
him and make me another." When Gharib heard this, he laughed till
he fell backwards and said, "O miserable, there is none worship-
worth save Almighty Allah, who created thee and created all
things and provideth all creatures with daily bread, from whom
nothing is hid and He over all things is Omnipotent." Quoth
Jamrkan, "And where is this great god, that I may worship him?"
Quoth Gharib, "O fellow, know that this god's name is Allah--the
God--and it is He who fashioned the heavens and the earth and
garred the trees to grow and the waters to flow. He created wild
beasts and birds and Paradise and Hell-fire and veileth Himself
from all eyes seeing and of none being seen. He, and He only, is
the Dweller on high. Extolled be His perfection! There is no god
but He!" When Jamrkan heard these words, the ears of his heart
were opened; his skin shuddered with horripilation and he said,
"O my lord, what shall I say that I may become of you and that
this mighty Lord may accept of me?" Replied Gharib, "Say, ‘There
is no god but the God and Abraham the Friend is the Apostle of
God!'" " So he pronounced the profession of the Faith and was
written of the people of felicity. Then quoth Gharib, " Say me,
hast thou tasted the sweetness of Al-Islam?"; and quoth the
other, "Yes;" whereupon Gharib cried, "Loose his bonds!" So they
unbound him and he kissed ground before Gharib and his feet. Now
whilst this was going on, behold, they espied a great cloud of
dust that towered till it walled the word. --And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamrkan
islamised and kissed the ground between the hands of Gharib, and,
as they were thus, behold, a great cloud of dust towered till it
walled the wold and Gharib said to Sahim, "Go and see for us what
it be." So he went forth, like a bird in full flight, and
presently returned, saying, "O King of the Age, this dust is of
the Banu Amir, the comrades of Jamrkan." Whereupon quoth Gharib
to the new Moslem, "Ride out to thy people and offer to them Al-
Islam: an they profess, they shall be saved; but, an they refuse,
we will put them to the sword." So Jamrkan mounted and driving
steed towards his tribesmen, cried out to them; and they knew him
and dismounting, came up to him on foot and said, "We rejoice in
thy safety, O our lord!" Said he, "O folk, whoso obeyeth me shall
be saved; but whoso gainsayeth me, I will cut him in twain with
this scymitar." And they made answer, saying, "Command us what
thou wilt, for we will not oppose thy commandment." Quoth he,
"Then say with me, ‘There is no god but the God and Abraham is
the Friend of God!' " They asked, "O our lord, whence haddest
thou these words?" And he told them what had befallen him with
Gharib, adding, "O folk, know ye not that I am your chief in
battle-plain and where men of cut and thrust are fain; and yet a
man single-handed me to prisoner hath ta'en and made me the cup
of shame and disgrace to drain?" When they heard his speech, they
spoke the word of Unity and Jamrkan led them to Gharib, at whose
hands they renewed their profession of Al-Islam and wished him
glory and victory, after they had kissed the earth before him.
Gharib rejoiced in them and said to them, "O folk, return to your
people and expound Al-Islam to them;" but all replied, "O our
lord, we will never leave thee, whilst; we live; but we will go
and fetch our families and return to thee." And Gharib said, "Go,
and join me at the city of Cufa." So Jamrkan and his comrades
returned to their tribal camp and offered Al-Islam to their women
and children, who all to a soul embraced the True Faith, after
which they dismantled their abodes and struck their tents and set
out for Cufa, driving before them their steeds, camels and sheep.
During this time Gharib returned to Cufa, where the horsemen met
him in state. He entered his palace and sat down on his sire's
throne with his champions ranged on either hand. Then the spies
came forwards, and informed him that his brother Ajib had made
his escape and had taken refuge with Jaland[FN#12] bin Karkar,
lord of the city of Oman and land of Al-Yaman; whereupon Gharib
cried aloud to his host, "O men, make you ready to march in three
days." Then he expounded Al-Islam to the thirty-thousand men he
had captured in the first affair and exhorted them to profess and
take service with him. Twenty-thousand embraced the Faith, but
the rest refused and he slew them. Then came forward Jamrkan and
his tribe and kissed the ground before Gharib, who bestowed on
him a splendid robe of honour and made him captain of his
vanguard, saying, "O Jamrkan, mount with the Chiefs of thy kith
and kin and twenty-thousand horse and fare on before us to the
land of Jaland bin Karkar." "Hearkening and obedience," answered
Jamrkan and, leaving the women and children of the tribe in Cufa,
he set forward. Then Gharib passed in review the Harim of Mardas
and his eye lit upon Mahdiyah, who was among the women, wherewith
he fell down fainting. They sprinkled rose-water on his face,
till he came to himself, when he embraced Mahdiyah and carried
her into a sitting-chamber, where he sat with her; and they twain
lay together that night without fornication. Next morning he went
out and sitting down on the throne of his kingship, robed his
uncle Al-Damigh with a robe of honour; and appointed him his
viceroy over all Al-Irak, commending Mahdiyah to his care, till
he should return from his expedition against Ajib; and, when the
order was accepted, he set out for the land of Al-Yaman and the
City of Oman with twenty-thousand horse and ten thousand foot.
Now, when Ajib and his defeated army drew in sight of Oman, King
Jaland saw the dust of their approach and sent to find out its
meaning, scouts who returned and said, "Verily this is the dust
of one highs Ajib, lord of Al-Irak." And Jaland wondered at his
coming to his country and, when assured of the tidings, he said
to his officers, "Fare ye forth and meet him." So they went out
and met him and pitched tents for him at the city-gate; and Ajib
entered in to Jaland, weeping eyed and heavy-hearted. Now
Jaland's wife was the daughter of Ajib's paternal uncle and he
had children by her; so, when he saw his kinsman in this plight,
he asked for the truth of what ailed him and Ajib told him all
that had befallen him, first and last, from his brother and said,
"O King, Gharib biddeth the folk worship the Lord of the Heavens
and forbiddeth them from the service of simulacres and other of
the gods." When Jaland heard these words he raged and revolted
and said, "By the virtue of the Sun, Lord of Life and Light, I
will not leave one of thy brother's folk in existence! But where
didst thou quit them and how many men are they?" Answered Ajib,
"I left them in Cufa and they be fifty-thousand horse." Whereupon
Jaland called his Wazir Jawámard,[FN#13] saying, "Take thee
seventy-thousand horse and fare to Cufa and bring me the Moslems
alive, that I may torture them with all manner of tortures." So
Jawamard departed with his host and fared through the first day
and the second till the seventh day, when he came to a Wady
abounding in trees and rills and fru