its. Here he called a halt --
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Jaland sent Jawamard with his army to Cufa, they came upon a Wady
abounding in trees and rills where a halt was called and they
rested till the middle of the Night, when the Wazir gave the
signal for departure and mounting, rode on before them till hard
upon dawn, at which time he descended into a well-wooded valley,
whose flowers were fragrant and whose birds warbled on boughs, as
they swayed gracefully to and fro, and Satan blew into his sides
and puffed him up with pride and he improvised these couplets and
cried,

"I plunge with my braves in the seething sea; * Seize the foe in
     my strength and my valiancy; 
And the doughtiest knights wot me well to be * Friend to friend
     and fierce foe to mine enemy.
I will load Ghanb with the captive's chains * Right soon, and
     return in all Joy and glee; 
For I've donned my mail and my weapons wield * And on all sides
     charge at the chivalry."[FN#14]

Hardly had Jawamard made an end of his verses when there came out
upon him from among the trees a horseman of terrible mien covered
and clad in steely sheen, who cried out to him, saying, "Stand, O
riff-raff of the Arabs! Doff thy dress and ground thine arms gear
and dismount thy destrier and be off with thy life!" When
Jawamard heard this, the light in his eyes became darkest night
and he drew his sabre and drove at Jamrkan, for he it was,
saying, "O thief of the Arabs, wilt thou cut the road for me, who
am captain of the host of Jaland bin Karkar and am come to bring
Gharib and his men in bond?" When Jamrkan heard these words, he
said, "How cooling is this to my heart and liver!" And he made at
Jawamard versifying in these couplets,

"I'm the noted knight in the field of fight, * Whose sabre and
     spear every foe affright! 
Jamrkan am I, to my foes a fear, * With a lance lunge known unto
     every knight:
Gharib is my lord, nay my pontiff, my prince, * Where the two
     hosts dash very lion of might:
An Imam of the Faith, pious, striking awe * On the plain where
     his foes like the fawn take flight;
Whose voice bids folk to the faith of the Friend, * False,
     doubling idols and gods despite!"

Now Jamrkan had fared on with his tribesmen ten days' journey
from Cufa city and called a halt on the eleventh day till
midnight, when he ordered a march and rode on devancing them till
he descended into the valley aforesaid and heard Jawamard
reciting his verses. So he crave at him as the driving of a
ravening lion, and smiting him with his sword, clove him in twain
and waited till his captains came up, when he told them what had
passed and said to them. "Take each of you five thousand men and
disperse round about the Wady, whilst I and the Banu Amir fall
upon the enemy's van, shouting, Allaho Akbar God is Most Great!
When ye hear my slogan, do ye charge them, crying like me upon
the Lord, and smite them with the sword." "We hear and we obey,"
answered they and turning back to their braves did his bidding
and spread themselves about the sides of the valley in the
twilight forerunning the dawn. Presently, lo and behold! up came
the army of Al-Yaman, like a flock of sheep, filling plain and
steep, and Jamrkan and the Banu Amir fell upon them, shouting,
"Allaho Akbar!" till all heard it, Moslems and Miscreants.
Whereupon the True Believers ambushed in the valley answered from
every side and the hills and mountains responsive cried and all
things replied, green and dried, saying, "God is Most Great!
,Aidance and Victory to us from on High! Shame to the Miscreants
who His name deny!" And the Kafirs were confounded and smote one
another with sabres keen whilst the True Believers and pious fell
upon them like flames of fiery sheen and naught was seen but
heads flying and blood jetting and faint-hearts hieing. By the
time they could see one another's faces, two-thirds of the
Infidels had perished and Allah hastened their souls to the fire
and abiding-place dire. The rest fled and to the deserts sped
whilst the Moslems pursued them to slay and take captives till
middle-day, when they returned in triumph with seven thousand
prisoners; and but six and twenty-thousand of the Infidels
escaped and the most of them wounded. Then the Moslems collected
the horses and arms, the loads and tents of the enemy and
despatched them to Cufa with an escort of a thousand horse;--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamrkan in
his battle with Jawamard slew him and slew his men; and, after
taking many prisoners and much money and many horses and loads,
sent them with an escort of a thousand riders, to Cufa city. Then
he and the army of Al-Islam dismounted and expounded The saving
Faith to the prisoners, who made profession with heart and
tongue; whereupon they released them from bonds and embraced them
and rejoiced in them. Then Jamrkan made his troops, who had
swelled to a mighty many, rest a day and a night and marched with
the dawn, intending to attack Jaland bin Karkar in the city Of
Oman; whilst the thousand horse fared back to Cufa with the loot.
When they reached the city, they went in to King Gharib and told
him what had passed, whereat he rejoiced and gave them joy and,
turning to the Ghul of the Mountain, said, "Take horse with
twenty-thousand and follow Jamrkan." So Sa'adan and his sons
mounted and set out, amid twenty-thousand horse for Oman.
Meanwhile, the fugitives of the defeated Kafirs reached Oman and
went in to Jaland, weeping and crying, "Woe!" and "Ruin!" whereat
he was confounded and said to them, "What calamity hath befallen
you?" So they told him what had happened and he said, "Woe to
you! How many men were they?" They replied, "O King, there were
twenty standards, under each a thousand men." When Jaland heard
these words he said, "May the sun pour no blessing on you! Fie
upon you! What, shall twenty-thousand overcome you, and you
seventy-thousand horse and Jawamard able to withstand three
thousand in field of fight?" Then, in the excess of his rage and
mortification, he bared his blade and cried out to those who were
present, saying, "Fall on them!" So the courtiers drew their
swords upon the fugitives and annihilated them to the last man
and cast them to the dogs. Then Jaland cried aloud to his son,
saying, "Take an hundred thousand horse and go to Al-Irak and lay
it waste altogether." Now this son's name was Kúraján and there
was no doughtier knight in all the force; for he could charge
single handed three thousand riders. So he and his host made
haste to equip themselves and marched in battle-array, rank
following rank, with the Prince at their head, glorying in
himself and improvising these couplets,

"I'm Al-Kurajan, and my name is known * To beat all who in wold
     or in city wone!
How many a soldier my sword at will * Struck down like a cow on
     the ground bestrown?
How many a soldier I've forced to fly * And have rolled their
     heads as a ball is thrown?
Now I'll drive and harry the land Irak[FN#15] * And like rain
     I'll shower the blood of fone;
And lay hands on Ghanb and his men, whose doom * To the wise a
     warning shall soon be shown!"

The host fared on twelve days' journey and, while they were still
marching, behold, a great dust cloud arose before them and walled
the horizon and the whole region. So Kurajan sent out scouts,
saying, "Go forth and bring me tidings of what meaneth this
dust." They went till they passed under the enemy's standards and
presently returning said, "O King, verily this is the dust of the
Moslems." Whereat he was glad and said, "Did ye count them?" And
they answered, "We counted the colours and they numbered twenty."
Quoth he, "By my faith, I will not send one man-at-arms against
them, but will go forth to them alone by myself and strew their
heads under the horses' hooves!" Now this was the army of Jamrkan
who, espying the host of the Kafirs and seeing them as a surging
sea, called a halt; so his troops pitched the tents and set up
the standards, calling upon the name of the All-wise One, the
Creator of light and gloom, Lord of all creatures, Who seeth
while Him none see, the High to infinity, extolled and exalted be
He! There is no God but He! The Miscreants also halted and
pitched their tents, and Kurajan said to them "Keep on your arms,
and in armour sleep, for during the last watch of the night we
will mount and trample yonder handful under feet!" Now one of
Jamrkan's spies was standing nigh and heard what Kurajan had
contrived; so he returned to the host and told his chief who said
to them, "Arm yourselves and as soon as it is Night, bring me all
the mules and camels and hang all the bells and clinkets and
rattles ye have about their necks." Now they had with them more
than twenty-thousand camels and mules. So they waited till the
Infidels fell asleep, when Jamrkan com-mended them to mount, and
they rose to ride and on the Lord of the Worlds they relied. Then
said Jamrkan, "Drive the camels and mules to the Miscreants' camp
and push them with your spears for goads!" They did as he bade
and the beasts rushed upon the enemy's tents, whilst the bells
and clinkets and rattles jangled[FN#16] and the Moslems followed
at their heels, shouting, "God is Most Great!'' till all the
hills and mountains resounded with the name of the Highmost
Deity, to whom belong glory and majesty! The cattle hearing this
terrible din, took fright and rushed upon the tents and trampled
the folk, as they lay asleep.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.
                                
       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Jamrkan fell upon them with his men and steeds and camels, and
the camp lay sleeping, the idolaters started up in confusion and,
snatching up their arms, fell upon one another with smiting, till
the most part was slaughtered. And when the day broke, they
looked and found no Moslem slain, but saw them all on horseback,
armed and armoured; wherefore they knew that this was a sleight
which had been played upon them, and Kurajan cried out to the
remnant of his folk, "O sons of whores, what we had a mind to do
with them, that have they done with us and their craft hath
gotten the better of our cunning." And they were about to charge
when, lo and behold! a cloud of dust rose high and walled the
horizon-sky, when the wind smote it, so that it spired aloft and
spread pavilion-wise in the lift and there it hung; and presently
appeared beneath it the glint of helmet and gleam of hauberk and
splendid warriors, baldrick'd with their tempered swords and
holding in rest their supple spears. When the Kafirs saw this,
they held back from the battle and each army sent out, to know
the meaning of this dust, scouts, who returned with the news that
it was an army of Moslems. Now this was the host of the Mountain-
Ghul whom Gharib had despatched to Jamrkan's aid, and Sa'adan
himself rode in their van. So the two hosts of the True Believers
joined company and rushing upon the Paynimry like a flame of
fire, plied them with keen sword and Rudaynian spear and
quivering lance, what while day was darkened and eyes for the
much dust starkened. The valiant stood fast and the faint-hearted
coward fled and to the wilds and the words swift sped, whilst the
blood over earth was like torrents shed; nor did they cease from
fight till the day took flight and in gloom came the night. Then
the Moslems drew apart from the Miscreants and returned to their
tents, where they ate and slept, till the darkness fled away and
gave place to smiling day; when they prayed the dawn prayer and
mounted to battle. Now Kurajan had said to his men as they drew
off from fight (for indeed two thirds of their number had
perished by sword and spear), "O folk, to-morrow, I will champion
it in the stead of war where cut and thrust jar, and where braves
push and wheel I will take the field." So, as soon as light was
seen and morn appeared with its shine and sheen, took horse the
hosts twain and shouted their slogans amain and bared the brand
and hent lance in hand and in ranks took stand. The first to open
the door of war was Kurajan, who cried out, saying, "Let no
coward come out to me this day nor craven!" Whereupon Jamrkan and
Sa'adan stood by the colours, but there ran at him a captain of
the Banu Amir and the two crave each at other awhile, like two
rams butting. Presently Kurajan seized the Moslem by the jerkin
under his hauberk and, dragging him from his saddle, dashed him
to the ground where he left him; upon which the Kafirs laid hands
on him and bound him and bore him off to their tents; whilst
Kurajan wheeled about and careered and offered battle, till
another captain came out, whom also he took prisoner; nor did he
leave to do thus till he had made prize of seven captains before
mid day. Then Jamrkan cried out with so mighty a cry, that the
whole field made reply and heard it the armies twain, and ran at
Kurajan with a heart in rageful pain, improvising these couplets,

"Jamrkan am I! and a man of might, * Whom the warriors fear with
     a sore affright: 
I waste the forts and I leave the walls * To wail and weep for
     the wights I smite: 
Then, O Kurajan, tread the rightful road * And quit the paths of
     thy foul upright: 
Own the One True God, who dispread the skies * And made founts to
     flow and the hills pegged tight: 
An the slave embrace the True Faith, he'll ‘scape * Hell pains
     and in Heaven be decks and dight!"

When Kurajan heard these words, he sparked and snorted and foully
abused the sun and the moon and crave at Jamrkan, versifying with
these couplets,

"I'm Kurajan, of this age the knight;  * And my shade to the
     lions of Shara'[FN#17] is blight:
I storm the forts and snare kings of beasts * And warriors fear
     me in field of fight;
Then, Harkye Jamrkan, if thou doubt my word, * Come forth to the
     combat and try my might!"

When Jamrkan heard these verses, he charged him with a stout
heart d they smote each at other with swords till the two hosts.
lamented for them, and they lunged with lance and great was the
clamour between them: nor did they leave fighting till the time
of mid-afternoon prayer was passed and the day began to wane.
Then Jamrkan crave at Kurajan and smiting him on the breast with
his mace,[FN#18] cast him to the ground, as he were the trunk of
a palm-tree; and the Moslems pinioned him and dragged him off
with ropes like a camel. Now when the Miscreants saw their Prince
captive, a hot fever-fit of ignorance seized on them and they
bore down upon the True Believers thinking to rescue him; but the
Moslem champions met them and left most of them prostrate on the
earth, whilst the rest turned and sought safety in flight,
seeking surer site, while the clanking sabres their back-sides
smite. The Moslems ceased not pursuing them till they had
scattered them over mount and word, when they returned from them
to the spoil; whereof was great store of horses and tents and so
forth: good look to it for a spoil! Then Jamrkan went in to
Kurajan and expounded to him Al-Islam, threatening him with death
unless he embraced the Faith. But he refused; so they cut off his
head and stuck it on a spear, after which they fared on towards
Oman[FN#19] city. But as regards the Kafirs, the survivors
returned to Jaland and made known to him the slaying of his son
and the slaughter of his host, hearing which he cast his crown to
the ground and buffeting his face, till the blood ran from his
nostrils, fell fainting to the floor. They sprinkled rose-water
on his head, till he came to himself and cried to his Wazir,
"Write letters to all my Governors and Nabobs, and bid them leave
not a smiter with the sword nor a lunger with the lance nor a
bender of the bow, but bring them all to me in one body." So he
wrote letters and despatched them by runners to the Governors,
who levied their power and joined the King with a prevailing
host, whose number was one hundred and eighty-thousand men. Then
they made ready tents and camels and noble steeds and were about
to march when, behold, up came Jamrkan and Sa'adan the Ghul, with
seventy-thousand horse, as they were lions fierce-faced, all
steel-encased. When Jaland saw the Moslems trooping on he
rejoiced and said, "By the virtue of the Sun, and her resplendent
light, I will not leave alive one of my foes; no, not one to
carry the news, and I will lay waste the land of Al-Irak, that I
may take my wreak for my son, the havoc making champion bold; nor
shall my fire be quenched or cooled!" Then he turned to Ajib and
said to him, "O dog of Al-Irak, ‘twas thou broughtest this
calamity on us! But by the virtue of that which I worship, except
I avenge me of mine enemy I will do thee die after foulest
fashion!" When Ajib heard these words he was troubled with sore
trouble and blamed himself; but he waited till nightfall, when
the Moslems had pitched their tents for rest. Now he had been
degraded and expelled the royal camp together with those who were
left to him of his suite: so he said to them, "O my kinsmen, know
that Jaland and I are dismayed with exceeding dismay at the
coming of the Moslems, and I know that he will not avail to
protect me from my brother nor from any other; so it is my
counsel that we make our escape, whilst all eyes sleep, and flee
to King Ya'arub bin Kahtán,[FN#20] for that he hath more of men
and is stronger of reign." They, hearing his advice exclaimed
"Right is thy rede," whereupon he bade them kindle fires at their
tent-doors and march under cover of the night. They did his
bidding and set out, so by daybreak they had already fared far
away. As soon as it was morning Jaland mounted with two hundred
and sixty-thousand fighting-men, clad cap-à-pie in hauberks and
cuirasses and strait-knit mail-coats, the kettle-drums beat a
point of war and all drew out for cut and thrust and fight and
fray. Then Jamrkan and Sa'adan rode out with forty-thousand
stalwart fighting-men, under each standard a thousand cavaliers,
doughty champions, foremost in champaign. The two hosts drew out
in battles and bared their blades and levelled their limber
lances, for the drinking of the cup of death. The first to open
the gate of strife was Sa'adan, as he were a mountain of syenite
or a Marid of the Jinn. Then dashed out to him a champion of the
Infidels, and the Ghul slew him and casting him to the earth,
cried out to his sons and slaves, saying, "Light the fire and
roast me this dead one." They did as he bade and brought him the
roast and he ate it and crunched whilst the Kafirs stood looking
on from afar; and they cried out, "Oh for aid from the light-
giving Sun!" and were affrighted at the thought of being slain by
Sa'adan. Then Jaland shouted to his men, saying, "Slay me yonder
loathsome beast!" Whereupon another captain of his host drove at
the Ghul; but he slew him and he ceased not to slay horseman
after horseman, till he had made an end of thirty men. With this
the blamed Kafirs held back and feared to face him, crying, "Who
shall cope with Jinns and Ghuls?" But Jaland raised his voice
saying, "Let an hundred horse charge him and bring him to me,
bound or slain." So an hundred horse set upon Sa'adan with swords
and spears, and he met them with a heart firmer than flint,
proclaiming the unity of the Requiting King, whom no one thing
diverteth from other thing. Then he cried aloud, "Allaho Akbar!"
and, smiting them with his sword, made their heads fly and in one
onset he slew of them four-and-seventy whereupon the rest took to
flight. So Jaland shouted aloud to ten of his captains, each
commanding a thousand men, and said to them, "Shoot his horse
with arrows till it fall under him, and then lay hands on him."
Therewith ten thousand horse drove at Sa'adan who met them with a
stout heart; and Jamrkan, seeing this, bore down upon the
Miscreants with his Moslems, crying out, "God is Most Great!"
Before they could reach the Ghul, the enemy had slain his steed
and taken him prisoner; but they ceased not to charge the
Infidels, till the day grew dark for dust and eyes were blinded,
and the sharp sword clanged while firm stood the valiant cavalier
and destruction overtook the faint-heart in his fear; till the
Moslems were amongst the Paynims like a white patch on a black
bull.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that battle
raged between the Moslems and the Paynims till the True Believers
were like a white patch on a black bull. Nor did they stint from
the mellay till the darkness fell down, when they drew apart,
after there had been slain of the Infidels men without compt.
Then Jamrkan and his men returned to their tents; but they were
in great grief for Sa'adan, so that neither meat nor sleep was
sweet to them, and they counted their host and found that less
than a thousand had been slain. But Jamrkan said, "O folk, to-
morrow I will go forth into the battle-plain and place where cut
and thrust obtain, and slay their champions and make prize of
their families after taking them captives and I will ransom
Sa'adan therewith' by the leave of the Requiting King, whom no
one thing diverteth from other thing!" Wherefore their hearts
were heartened and they joyed as they separated to their tents.
Meanwhile Jaland entered his pavilion and sitting down on his
sofa of estate, with his folk about him, called for Sa'adan and
forthright on his coming, said to him, "O dog run wood and least
of the Arab brood and carrier of firewood, who was it slew my son
Kurajan, the brave of the age, slayer of heroes and caster down
of warriors?" Quoth the Ghul, "Jamrkan slew him, captain of the
armies of King Gharib, Prince of cavaliers, and I roasted and ate
him, for I was anhungered." When Jaland heard these words, his
eyes sank into his head for rage and he bade his swordbearer
smite Sa'adan's neck. So he came forward in that intent,
whereupon Sa'adan stretched himself mightily and bursting his
bonds, snatched the sword from the headsman and hewed off his
head. Then he made at Jaland who threw himself down from the
throne and fled; whilst Sa'adan fell on the bystanders and killed
twenty of the King's chief officers, and all the rest took to
flight. Therewith loud rose the crying in the camp of the
Infidels and the Ghul sallied forth of the pavilion and falling
upon the troops smote them with the sword, right and left, till
they opened and left a lane for him to pass; nor did he cease to
press forward, cutting at them on either side, till he won free
of the Miscreants' tents and made for the Moslem camp. Now these
had heard the uproar among their enemies and said, "Haply some
calamity hath befallen them." But whilst they were in perplexity,
behold, Sa adan stood amongst them and they rejoiced at his
coming with exceeding joy; more especially Jamrkan, who saluted
him with the salam as did other True Believers and gave him joy
of his escape. Such was the case with the Moslems; but as regards
the Miscreants, when, after the Ghul's departure, they and their
King returned to their tents, Jaland said to them, "Ofolk, by the
virtue of the Sun's light-giving ray and by the darkness of the
Night and the light of the Day and the Stars that stray, I
thought not this day to have escaped death in mellay; for, had I
fallen into yonder fellow's hands, he had eaten me, as I were a
kernel of wheat or a barley corn or any other grain." They re
plied, "O King, never saw we any do the like of this Ghul." And
he said, "O folk, to-morrow do ye all don arms and mount steed
and trample them under your horses' hooves." Meanwhile the
Moslems had ended their rejoicings at Sa'adan's return and
Jamrkan said to them, "To-morrow, I will show you my derring-do
and what behoveth the like of me, for by the virtue of Abraham
the Friend, I will slay them with the foulest of slaughters and
smite them with the bite of the sword, till all who have under
standing confounded at them shall stand. But I mean to attack
both right and left wings; so, when ye see me drive at the King
under the standards, do ye charge behind me with a resolute
charge, and Allah's it is to decree what thing shall be!" Accord
ingly the two sides lay upon their arms till the day broke
through night and the sun appeared to sight. Then they mounted
swiftlier than the twinkling of the eyelid; the raven of the wold
croaked and the two hosts, looking each at other with the eye of
fascina tion, formed in line-array and prepared for fight and
fray. The first to open the chapter of war was Jamrkan who
wheeled and careered and offered fight in field; and Jaland and
his men were about to charge when, behold, a cloud of dust
uprolled till it walled the wold and overlaid the day. Then the
four winds smote it and away it floated, torn to rags, and there
appeared beneath it cavaliers, with helms black and garb white
and many a princely knight and lances that bite and swords that
smite and footmen who lion-like knew no affright Seeing this,
both armies left fighting and sent out scouts to reconnoitre and
report who thus had come in main and might. So they went and
within the dust cloud disappeared from sight, and returned after
awhile with the news aright that the approaching host was one of
Moslems, under the command of King Gharib. When the True
Believers heard from the scouts of the coming of their King, they
rejoiced and driving out to meet him, dismounted and kissed the
earth between his hands--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Moslems saw the presence of their King Gharib, they joyed with
exceeding joy; and, kissing the earth between his hands, saluted
him and get around him whilst he welcomed them and rejoiced in
their safety. Then they escorted him to their camp and pitched
pavilions for him and set up standards; and Gharib sat down on
his couch of estate, with his Grandees about him; and they
related to him all that had befallen, especially to Sa'adan
Meanwhile the Kafirs sought for Ajib and finding him not among
them nor in their tents, told Jaland of his flight, whereat his
Doomsday rose and he bit his fingers, saying, "by the Sun's
light-giving round, he is a perfidious hound and hath fled with
his rascal rout to desert ground. But naught save force of hard
fighting will serve us to repel these foes; so fortify your
resolves and hearten your hearts and beware of the Moslems." And
Gharib also said to the True Believers, "Strengthen your courage
and fortify your hearts and seek aid of your Lord, beseeching him
to vouchsafe you the victory over your enemies." They replied, "O
King, soon thou shalt see what we will do in battle-plain where
men cut and thrust amain." So the two hosts slept till the day
arose with its sheen and shone and the rising sun rained light
upon hill and down, when Gharib prayed the two-bow prayer, after
the rite of Abraham the Friend (on whom be the Peace!) and wrote
a letter, which he despatched by his brother Sahim to the King of
the Kafirs. When Sahim reached the enemies' camp, the guards
asked him what he wanted, and he answered them, "I want your
ruler.''[FN#21] Quoth they, "Wait till we consult him anent
thee;" and he waited, whilst they went in to their Sovran and
told him of the coming of a messenger, and he cried, "Hither with
him to me!" So they brought Sahim before Jaland, who said to him,
"Who hath sent thee?" Quoth he, King Gharib sends me, whom Allah
hath made ruler over Arab and Ajam; receive his letter and return
its reply." Jaland took the writ and opening it, read as follows,
"In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate *
the One, the All-knowing, the supremely Great * the Immemorial,
the Lord of Noah and Sálih and Húd and Abraham and of all things
He made! * The Peace be on him who followeth in the way of
righteousness and who feareth the issues of frowardness * who
obeyeth the Almighty King and followeth the Faith saving and
preferreth the next world to any present thing! * But afterwards:
O Jaland, none is worthy of worship save Allah alone, the
Victorious, the One, Creator of night and day and the sphere
revolving alway * Who sendeth the holy Prophets and garreth the
streams to flow and the trees to grow, who vaulted the heavens
and spread out the earth like a carpet below * Who feedeth the
birds in their nests and the wild beasts in the deserts * for He
is Allah the All-powerful, the Forgiving, the Long-suffering, the
Protector, whom eye comprehendeth on no wise and who maketh night
on day arise * He who sent down the Apostles and their Holy Writ.
Know, O Jaland, that there is no faith but the Faith of Abraham
the Friend; so cleave to the Creed of Salvation and be saved from
the biting glaive and the Fire which followeth the grave * But,
an thou refuse Al-Islam, look for ruin to haste and thy reign to
be waste and thy traces untraced * And, lastly, send me the dog
Ajib hight that I may take from him my father's and mother's
blood-wit." When Jaland had read this letter, he said to Sahim,
"Tell thy lord that Ajib hath fled, he and his folk, and I know
not whither he is gone; but, as for Jaland, he will not forswear
his faith, and to-morrow, there shall be battle between us and
the Sun shall give us the victory." So Sahim returned to his
brother with this reply, and when the morning morrowed, the
Moslems donned their arms and armour and bestrode their stout
steeds, calling aloud on the name of the All-conquering King,
Creator of bodies and souls, and magnifying Him with "Allaho
Akbar." Then the kettle-drums of battle beat until earth
trembled, and sought the field all the lordly warriors and
doughty champions: The first to open the gate of battle was
Jamrkan, who crave his charger into mid-plain and played with
sword and javelin, till the understanding was amazed; after which
he cried out, saying, "Ho! who is for tilting? Ho! who is for
fighting? Let no sluggard come out to me to-day nor weakling! I
am the slayer of Kurajan bin Jaland; who will come forth to
avenge him?" When Jaland heard the name of his son, he cried out
to his men, "O whore-sons, bring me yonder horseman who slew my
son, that I may eat his flesh and drink his blood." So an hundred
fighting-men charged at Jamrkan, but he slew the most part of
them and put their chief to flight; which feat when Jaland saw,
he cried out to his folk, "At him all at once and assault him
with one assault." Accordingly they waved the awe-striking
banners and host was heaped on host; Gharib rushed on with his
men and Jamrkan did the same and the two sides met like two seas
together clashing. The Yamáni sword and spear wrought havoc and
breasts and bellies were rent, whilst both armies saw the Angel
of Death face to face and the dust of the battle rose to the
skirts of the sky. Ears went deaf and tongues went dumb and doom
from every side came on whilst valiant stood fast and faint-heart
fled: and they ceased not from fight and fray till ended the day,
when the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew apart and
returned, each to its tents.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Gharib ended the battle and the two hosts drew apart and each had
returned to his own tents, he sat down on the throne of his realm
and the place of his reign, whilst his chief officers ranged
themselves about him, and he said, "I am sore concerned for the
flight of the cur Ajib and I know not whither he has gone. Except
I overtake him and take my wreak of him, I shall die of despite."
Whereupon Sahim came forward and kissing the earth before him,
said, "O King, I will go to the army of the Kafirs and find out
what is come of the perfidious dog Ajib." Quoth Gharib, "Go, and
learn the truth anent the hog." So Sahim disguised himself in the
habit of the Infidels and became as he were of them; then, making
for the enemy's camp, he found them all asleep, drunken with war
and battle, and none were on wake save only the guards. He passed
on and presently came to the King's pavilion where he found King
Jaland asleep unattended; so he crept up and made him smell and
sniff up levigated Bhang and he became as one dead. Then Sahim
went out and took a male mule, and wrapping the King in the
coverlet of his bed, laid him on its back; after which he threw a
mat over him and led the beast to the Moslem camp. Now when he
came to Gharib's pavilion and would have entered, the guards knew
him not and prevented him, saying, "Who art thou?'' He laughed
and uncovered his face, and they knew him and admitted him. When
Gharib saw him he said, "What bearest there, O Sahim?"; and he
replied, "O King, this is Jaland bin Karkar." Then he uncovered
him, and Gharib knew him and said,"Arouse him, O Sahim," So he
made him smell vinegar[FN#22] and frankincense; and he cast the
Bhang from his nostrils and, opening his eyes, found himself
among the Moslems; whereupon quoth he, "What is this foul dream?"
and closing his eyelids again, would have slept; but Sahim dealt
him a kick, saying, "Open thine eyes, O accursed!" So he opened
them and asked, "Where am I?"; and Sahim answered, "Thou art in
the presence of King Gharib bin Kundamir, King of Irak." When
Jaland heard this, he said, "O King, I am under thy protection!
Know that I am not at fault, but that who led us forth to fight
thee was thy brother, and the same cast enmity between us and
then fled." Quoth Gharib, "Knowest thou whither he is gone?"; and
quoth Jaland, "No, by the light-giving sun, I know not whither."
Then Gharib bade lay him in bonds and set guards over him, whilst
each captain returned to his own tent, and Jamrkan while wending
said to his men, "O sons of my uncle, I purpose this night to do
a deed wherewith I may whiten my face with King Gharib." Quoth
they, "Do as thou wilt, we hearken to thy commandment and obey
it." Quoth he, "Arm yourselves and, muffling your steps while I
go with you, let us fare softly and disperse about the Infidels'
camp, so that the very ants shall not be ware of you; and, when
you hear me cry ‘Allaho Akbar,' do ye the like and cry out,
saying, ‘God is Most Great!' and hold back and make for the city-
gate; and we seek aid from the Most High." So the folk armed
themselves cap-à-pie and waited till the noon of Night, when they
dispersed about the enemy's camp and tarried awhile when, lo and
behold! Jamrkan smote shield with sword and shouted, "Allaho
Akbar'" Thereupon they all cried out the like, till rang again
valley and mountain, hills, sands and ruins. The Miscreants awoke
in dismay and fell one upon other, and the sword went round
amongst them; the Moslems drew back and made for the city-gates,
where they slew the warders and entering, made themselves masters
of the town with all that was therein of treasure and women. Thus
it befel with Jamrkan; but as regards King Gharib, hearing the
noise and clamour of "God is Most Great," he mounted with his
troops to the last man and sent on in advance Sahim who, when he
came near the field of fight, saw that Jamrkan had fallen upon
the Kafirs with the Banu Amir by night and made them drink the
cup of death. So he returned and told all to his brother, who
called down blessings on Jamrkan. And the Infidels ceased not to
smite one another with the biting sword and expending their
strength till the day rose and lighted up the land, when Gharib
cried out to his men, "Charge, O ye noble, and do a deed to
please the All-knowing King!" So the True Believers fell upon the
idolaters and plied upon every false hypocritical breast the keen
sword and the quivering spear. They sought to take refuge in the
city; but Jamrkan came forth upon them with his kinsmen, who
hemmed them in between two mountain-ranges, and slew an
innumerable host of them, and the rest fled into the wastes and
words.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Moslem host charged upon the Miscreants they hewed them in
pieces with the biting scymitar and the rest fled to the wastes
and words; nor did the Moslems cease pursuing them with the
sword, till they had scattered them abroad in the plains and
stony places. Then they returned to Oman city, and King Gharib
entered the palace of the King and, sitting down on the throne of
his kingship, with his Grandees and Of ficers ranged right and
left, sent for Jaland. They brought him in haste and Gharib ex
pounded to him Al-Islam; but he rejected it; wherefore Gharib
bade crucify him on the gate of the city, and they shot at him
with shafts till he was like unto a porcupine. Then Gharib
honourably robed Jamrkan and said to him, "Thou shalt be lord of
this city arid ruler thereof with power to loose and to bind
therein, for it was thou didst open it with thy sword and thy
folk." And Jamrkan kissed the King's feet, thanked him and wished
him abiding victory and glory and every blessing Morever Gharib
opened Jaland's treasuries and saw what was therein of coin,
whereof he gave largesse to his captains and standard bearers and
fighting-men, yea, even to the girls and children; and thus he
lavished his gifts ten days long. After this, one night he dreamt
a terrible dream and awoke, troubled and trembling. So he aroused
his brother Sahim and said to him, "I saw in my vision that we
were in a wide valley, when there pounced down on us two ravening
birds of prey, never in my life saw I greater than they; their
legs were like lances, and as they swooped we were in sore fear
of them." Replied Sahim, "O King, this be some great enemy; so
stand on thy guard against him." Gharib slept not the rest of the
night and, when the day broke, he called for his courser and
mounted. Quoth Sahim, "Whither goest thou, my brother?" and quoth
Gharib, "I awoke heavy at heart; so I mean to ride abroad ten
days and broaden my breast." Said Sahim, "Take with thee a
thousand braves;" but Gharib replied, "I will not go forth but
with thee and only thee." So the two brothers mounted and,
seeking the dales and leasows, fared on from Wady to Wady and
from meadow to meadow, till they came to a valley abounding in
streams and sweet-smelling flowers and trees laden with all
manner eatable fruits, two of each kind. Birds warbled on the
branches their various strains; the mocking bird trilled out her
sweet notes fain and the turtle filled with her voice the plain.
There sang the nightingale, whose chant arouses the sleeper, and
the merle with his note like the voice of man and the cushat and
the ring-dove, whilst the parrot with its eloquent tongue
answered the twain. The valley pleased them and they ate of its
fruits and drank of its waters, after which they sat under the
shadow of its trees till drowsiness overcame them and they slept,
glory be to Him who sleepeth not! As they lay asleep, lo! two
fierce Marids swooped down on them and, taking each one on his
shoulders, towered with them high in air, till they were above
the clouds. So Gharib and Sahim awoke and found themselves
betwixt heaven and earth; whereupon they looked at those who bore
them and saw that they were two Marids, the head of the one being
as that of a dog and the head of the other as that of an
ape[FN#23] with hair like horses' tails and claws like lions'
claws, and both were big as great palm-trees. When they espied
this case, they exclaimed,, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" Now the cause of
this was that a certain King of the Kings of the Jinn, highs
Mura'ash, had a son called Sá'ik, who loved a damsel of the Jinn,
named Najmah;[FN#24] and the twain used to foregather in that
Wady under the sem blance of two birds. Gharib and Sahim saw them
thus and deeming them birds, shot at them with shafts but
wounding only Sa'ik whose blood flowed. Najmah mourned over him;
then, fearing lest the like calamity befal herself, snatched up
her lover and flew with him to his father's palace, where she
cast him down at the gate. The warders bore him in and laid him
before his sire who, seeing the pile sticking in his rib
exclaimed, "Alas, my son! Who hath done with thee this thing,
that I may lay waste his abiding-place and hurry on his
destruction, though he were the greatest of the Kings of the
Jann?" Thereupon Sa'ik opened his eyes and said, "O my father,
none slew me save a mortal in the Valley of Springs." Hardly had
he made an end of these words, when his soul departed; whereupon
his father buffeted his face, till the blood streamed from his
mouth, and cried out to two Marids, saying, "Hie ye to the Valley
of Springs and bring me all who are therein." So they betook
themselves to the Wady in question, where they found Gharib and
Sahim asleep, and, snatching them up, carried them to King
Mura'ash.[FN#25]--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
two Marids, after snatching up Gharib and Sahim in their sleep,
carried them to Mura'ash, king of the Jann, whom they saw seated
on the throne of his kinship, as he were a huge mountain, with
four heads on his body,[FN#26] the first that of a lion, the
second that of an elephant, the third that of a panther, and the
fourth that of a lynx. The Marids set them down before Mura'ash
and said to him, "O King, these twain be they we found in the
Valley of Springs." Thereupon he looked at them with wrathful
eyes and sparked and snorted and shot sparks from his nostrils,
so that all who stood by feared him. Then said he, "O dogs of
mankind, ye have slain my son and lighted fire in my liver."
Quoth Gharib, "Who is thy son, and who hath seen him?" Quoth
Mura'ash "Were ye not in the Valley of Springs and did ye not see
my son there, in the guise of a bird, and did ye not shoot at him
with wooden bolts that he died?" Replied Gharib, "I know not who
slew him; and, by the virtue of the Great God, the One, the
Immemorial who knoweth things all, and of Abraham the Friend, we
saw no bird, neither slew we bird or beast!" Now when Mura'ash
heard Gharib swear by Allah and His greatness and by Abraham the
Friend, he knew him for a Moslem (he himself being a worshipper
of Fire, not of the All-powerful Sire), so he cried out to his
folk, "Bring me my Goddess.[FN#27]" Accordingly they brought a
brazier of gold and, setting it before him, kindled therein fire
and cast on drugs, whereupon there arose therefrom green and blue
and yellow flames and the King and all who were present
prostrated themselves before the brazier, whilst Gharib and Sahim
ceased not to attest the Unity of Allah Almighty, to cry out "God
is Most Great" and to bear witness to His Omnipotence. Presently,
Mura'ash raised his head and, seeing the two Princes standing in
lieu of falling down to worship, said to them, "O dogs, why do ye
not prostrate yourselves?" Replied Gharib, "Out on you, O ye
accursed! Prostration befitteth not man save to the Worshipful
King, who bringeth forth all creatures into beingness from
nothingness and maketh water to well from the barren rockwell,
Him who inclineth heart of sire unto new-born scion and who may
not be described as sitting or standing; the God of Noah and
Salih and Hud and Abraham the Friend, Who created Heaven and Hell
and trees and fruit as well,[FN#28] for He is Allah, the One, the
All-powerful." When Mura'ash heard this, his eyes sank into his
head[FN#29] and he cried out to his guards, saying, "Pinion me
these two dogs and sacrifice them to my Goddess." So they bound
them and were about to cast them into the fire when, behold, one
of the crenelles of the palace parapet fell down upon the brazier
and brake it and put out the fire, which became ashes flying in
air. Then quoth Gharib, "God is Most Great! He giveth aid and
victory and He forsaketh those who deny Him, worshipping Fire and
not the Almighty King!" Presently quoth Mura'ash, "Thou art a
sorcerer and hast bewitched my Goddess, so that this thing hath
befallen her." Gharib replied, "O madman, an the fire had soul or
sense it would have warded off from self all that hurteth it."
When Mura'ash heard these words, he roared and bellowed and
reviled the Fire, saying, "By my faith, I will not kill you save
by the fire!" Then he bade cast them into gaol; and, calling an
hundred Marids, made them bring much fuel and set fire thereto.
So they brought great plenty of wood and made a huge blaze, which
flamed up mightily till the morning, when Mura'ash mounted an
elephant, bearing on its back a throne of gold dubbed with
jewels, and the tribes of the Jinn gathered about him in their
various kinds. Presently they brought in Gharib and Sahim who,
seeing the flaming of the fire, sought help of the One, the All-
conquering Creator of night and day, Him of All-might, whom no
sight comprehendeth, but who comprehendeth all sights, for He is
the Subtle, the All-knowing. And they ceased not humbly
beseeching Him till, behold, a cloud arose from West to East and,
pouring down showers of rain, like the swollen sea, quenched the
fire. When the King saw this, he was affrighted, he and his
troops, and entered the palace, where he turned to the Wazirs and
Grandees and said to them, "How say ye of these two men?" They
replied, "O King, had they not been in the right, this thing had
not befallen the fire; wherefore we say that they be true men
which speak sooth." Rejoined Mura'ash, "Verily the Truth hath
been displayed to me, ay, and the manifest way, and I am
certified that the worship of the fire is false; for, were it
goddess, it had warded off from itself the rain which quenched it
and the stone which broke its brazier and beat it into ashes.
Wherefore I believe in Him Who created the fire and the light and
the shade and the heat. And ye, what say ye?" They answered, "O
King, we also hear and follow and obey." So the King called for
Gharib and embraced him and kissed him between the eyes and then
summoned Sahim; whereupon the bystanders all crowded to kiss
their hands and heads.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Fifth-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Mura'ash and his men found salvation in the Saving Faith, Al-
Islam, he called for Gharib and Sahim and kissed them between the
eyes and so did all the Grandees who crowded to buss their hands
and heads. Then Mura'ash sat down on the throne of his kingship
and, seating Gharib on his right and Sahim on his left hand, said
to them, "O mortals, what shall we say, that we may become
Moslems?" Replied Gharib, "Say, ‘There is no god but the God, and
Abraham is the Friend of God!'" So the King and his folk
professed Al-Islam with heart and tongue, and Gharib abode with
them awhile, teaching them the ritual of prayer. But presently he
called to mind his people and sighed, whereupon quoth Mura'ash,
"Verily, trouble is gone and joy and gladness are come." Quoth
Gharib, "O King, I have many foes and I fear for my folk from
them." Then he related to him his history with his brother Ajib
from first to last, and the King of the Jinns said, "O King of
men, I will send one who shall bring thee news of thy people, for
I will not let thee go till I have had my fill of thy face." Then
he called two doughty Marids, by name Kaylaján and Kúraján, and
after they had done him homage, he bade them repair to Al-Yaman
and bring him news of Gharib's army. They replied, "To hear is to
obey," and departed. Thus far concerning the brothers; but as
regards the Moslems, they arose in the morning and led by their
captains rode to King Gharib's palace, to do their service to
him; but the eunuchs told them that the King had mounted with his
brother and had ridden forth at peep o' day. So they made for the
valleys and mountains and followed the track of the Princes, till
they came to the Valley of Springs, where they found their arms
cast down and their two gallant steeds grazing and said, "The
King is missing from this place, by the glory of Abraham the
Friend!" Then they mounted and sought in the valley and the
mountains three days, but found no trace of them; whereupon they
began the mourning ceremonies and, send ing for couriers, said to
them, "Do ye disperse yourselves about the cities and sconces and
castles, and seek ye news of our King." "Harkening and
obedience!" cried the couriers, who dispersed hither and thither
each over one of the Seven Climes and sought everywhere for
Gharib, but found no trace of him. Now when the tidings came to
Ajib by his spies that his brother was lost and there was no news
of the missing, he rejoiced and going in to King Ya'arub bin
Kahtan, sought of him aid which he granted and gave him two
hundred thousand Amalekites, wherewith he set out for Al-Yaman
and sat down before the city of Oman. Jamrkan and Sa'adan sallied
forth and offered him battle, and there were slain of the Moslems
much folk, so the True Believers retired into the city and shut
the gates and manned the walls. At this moment came up the two
Marids Kaylajan and Kurajan and, seeing the Moslem beleaguered
waited till nightfall, when they fell upon the miscreants and
plied them with sharp swords of the swords of the Jinn, each
twelve cubits long, if a man smote therewith a rock, verily he
would cleave it in sunder. They charged the Idolaters, shouting,
"Allaho Akbar! God is Most Great! He giveth aid and victory and
forsaketh those who deny the Faith of Abraham the Friend!" and
whilst they raged amongst the foes, fire issued from their mouths
and nostrils, and they made great slaughter amongst them.
Thereupon the Infidels ran out of their tents offering battle
but, seeing these strange things, were confounded and their hair
stood on end and their reason fled. So they snatched up their
arms and fell one upon other, whilst the Marids shore off their
heads, as a reaper eareth grain, crying, "God is Most Great! We
are the lads of King Gharib, the friend of Mura'ash, King of the
Jinn!" The sword ceased not to go round amongst them till the
night was half spent, when the Misbelievers, imagining that the
mountains were all Ifrits, loaded their tents and treasure and
baggage upon camels and made off; and the first to fly was Ajib.-
-And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Misbelievers made off and the first
to fly was Ajib. Thereupon the Moslems gathered together, marvelling at this that had betided
the Infidels and fearing the tribesmen of the Jinn. But the Marids ceased not from pursuit, till
they had driven them far away into the hills and words; and but fifty-thousand Rebels[FN#30] of
two hundred thousand escaped with their lives and made for their own land, wounded and sore
discomforted. Then the two Jinns returned and said to them, "O host of the Moslems, your lord
King Gharib and his brother Sahim salute you; they are the guests of Mura'ash, King of the Jann,
and will be with you anon " When Gharib's men heard that he was safe and well, they joyed with
exceeding joy and said to the Marids, "Allah gladden you twain with good news, O noble
spirits!" So Kurajan and Kaylajan returned to Mura'ash and Gharib; and acquainted them with
that which had happened, whereat Gharib finding the two sitting together felt heart at ease and
said, "Allah abundantly re