quite you!" Then quoth King Mura'ash, "O my brother, I am minded
to show thee our country and the city of Japhet[FN#31] son of Noah (on whom be peace!)"
Quoth Gharib, "O King, do what seemeth good to thee." So he called for three noble steeds and
mounting, he and Gharib and Sahim, set out with a thousand Marids, as they were a piece of a
mountain cloven lengthwise. They fared on, solacing themselves with the sight of valleys and
mountains, till they came to Jabarsá,[FN#32] the city of Japhet son of Noah (on whom be
peace!) where the townsfolk all, great and small, came forth to meet King Mura'ash and brought
them into the city in great state. Then Mura'ash went up to the palace of Japhet son of Noah and
sat down on the throne of his kingship, which was of alabaster, ten stages high and latticed with
wands of gold wherefrom hung all manner coloured silks. The people of the city stood before
him and he said to them, "O seed of Yafis bin Nuh, what did your fathers and grandfathers
worship?" They replied, "We found them worshipping Fire and followed their example, as thou
well knowest." "O folk," rejoined Mura'ash, "we have been shown that the fire is but one of the
creatures of Almighty Allah, Creator of all things; and when we knew this, we submitted
ourselves to God, the One, the All-powerful, Maker of night and day and the sphere revolving
alway, Whom compre hendeth no sight, but Who comprehendeth all sights, for He is the Subtle,
the All-wise. So seek ye Salvation and ye shall be saved from the wrath of the Almighty One and
from the fiery doom in the world to come." And they embraced Al-Islam with heart and tongue.
Then Mura'ash took Gharib by the hand and showed him the palace and its ordinance and all the
marvels it contained, till they came to the armoury, wherein were the arms .of Japhet son of
Noah. Here Gharib saw a sword hanging to a pin of gold and asked, "O King, whose is that?"
Mura'ash answered, " 'Tis the sword of Yafis bin Nuh, wherewith he was wont to do battle
against men and Jinn. The sage Jardúm forged it and graved on its back names of might.[FN#33]
It is named Al-Máhík the Annihilator for that it never descendeth upon a man, but it annihilateth
him, nor upon a Jinni, but it crusheth him; and if one smote therewith a mountain ‘twould
overthrow it." When Gharib heard tell of the virtues of the sword, he said, "I desire to look on
this blade;" and Mura'ash said, "Do as thou wilt." So Gharib put out his hand, and, hending the
sword, drew it from its sheath; whereupon it flashed and Death crept on its edge and glittered;
and it was twelve spans long and three broad. Now Gharib wished to become owner of it, and
King Mura'ash said, "An thou canst smite with it,take it." " 'Tis well," Gharib replied, and took
it up, and it was in his hand as a staff; wherefore all who were present, men and Jinn, marvelled
and said, "Well done, O Prince of Knights!" Then said Mura'ash "Lay thy hand on this hoard for
which the Kings of the earth sigh in vain, and mount, that I may show thee the city." Then they
took horse and rode forth the palace, with men and Jinns attending them on foot,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib and King Mura'ash rode
forth the palace of Japhet, with men and Jinns attending them on foot, they passed through the
streets and thoroughfares of the town, by palaces and deserted mansions and gilded doorways,
till they issued from the gates and entered gardens full of trees fruit-bearing and waters welling
and birds speaking and celebrating the praises of Him to whom belong Majesty and Eternity; nor
did they cease to solace themselves in the land till nightfall, when they returned to the palace of
Japhet son of Noah and they brought them the table of food So they ate and Gharib turned to the
King of the Jann and said to him, "O King, I would fain return to my folk and my force; for I
know not their plight after me." Replied Mura'ash, "By Allah, O my brother, I will not part with
thee for a full month, till I have had my fill of thy sight." Now Gharib could not say nay, so he
abode with him in the city of Japhet, eating and drinking and making merry, till the month
ended, when Mura'ash gave him great store of gems and precious ores, emeralds and balass-
rubies, diamonds and other jewels, ingots of gold and silver and likewise ambergis and musk and
brocaded silks and else of rarities and things of price. Moreover he clad him and Sahim in silken
robes of honour gold inwoven and set on Gharib's head a crown jewelled with pearls and
diamonds of inestimable value. All these treasures he made up into even loads for him and,
calling five hundred Marids, said to them, "Get ye ready to travel on the morrow, that we may
bring King Gharib and Sahim back to their own country." And they answered, "We hear and we
obey." So they passed the night in the city, purposing to depart on the morrow, but, next
morning, as they were about to set forth behold, they espied a great host advancing upon the city,
with horses neighing and kettle-drums beating and trumpets braying and riders filling the earth
for they numbered threescore and ten thousand Marids, flying and diving, under a King called
Barkan. Now this Barkan was lord of the City of Carnelian and the Castle of Gold and under his
rule were five hill-strongholds, in each five hundred thousand Marids; and he and his tribe
worshipped the Fire, not the Omnipotent Sire. He was a cousin of Mura'ash, the son of his
father's brother, and the cause of his coming was that there had been among the subjects of King
Mura'ash a misbelieving Marid, who professed Al-Islam hypocritically, and he stole away from
his people and made for the Valley of Carnelian, where he went in to King Barkan and, kissing
the earth before him, wished him abiding glory and prosperity. Then he told him of Mura'ash
being converted to Al-Islam, and Barkan said, "How came he to tear himself away from his
faith[FN#34]?'' So the rebel told him what had passed and, when Barkan heard it, he snorted and
sparked and railed at Sun and Moon and sparkling Fire, saying, "By the virtue of my faith, I will
surely slay mine uncle's son and his people and this mortal, nor will I leave one of them alive!"
Then he cried out to the legions of the Jinn and choosing of them seventy-thousand Marids, set
out and fared on till he came to Jabarsá[FN#35] the city of Japhet and encamped before its gates.
When Mura'ash saw this, he despatched a Marid, saying, "Go to this host and learn all that it
wanteth and return hither in haste." So the messenger rushed away to Barkan's camp, where the
Marids flocked to meet him and said to him, "Who art thou?" Replied he, "An envoy from King
Mura'ash;" whereupon they carried him in to Barkan, before whom he prostrated himself,
saying, "O my lord, my master hath sent me to thee, to learn tidings of thee." Quoth Barkan,
"Return to thy lord and say to him, ‘This is thy cousin Barkan, who is come to salute thee.'"--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Marid-envoy of Mura'ash was
borne before Barkan and said to him, "O my lord, my master hath sent me to thee to learn tidings
of thee," Barkan replied, "Return to thy lord and say to him, ‘This is thy cousin Barkan who is
come to salute thee!'" So the messenger went back and told Mura'ash, who said to Gharib, "Sit
thou on thy throne whilst I go and salute my cousin and return to thee." Then he mounted and
rode to the camp of his uncle's son. Now this was a trick[FN#36] of Barkan, to bring Mura'ash
out and seize upon him, and he said to his Marids, whom he had stationed about him, "When ye
see me embrace him,[FN#37] lay hold of him and pinion him." And they replied, "To hear is to
obey." So, when King Mura'ash came up and entered Barkan's pavilion, the owner rose to him
and threw his arms round his neck; whereat the Jann fell upon Mura'ash and pinioned him and
chained him. Mura'ash looked at Barkan and said, "What manner of thing is this?" Quoth
Barkan, "O dog of the Jann, wilt thou leave the faith of thy fathers and grandfathers and enter a
faith thou knowest not?" Rejoined Mura'ash, "O son of my uncle, indeed I have found the faith
of Abraham the Friend to be the True Faith and all other than it vain." Asked Barkan, "And who
told thee of this?"; and Mura'ash answered, "Gharib, King of Irak, whom I hold in the highest
honour." "By the right of the Fire and the Light and the Shade and the Heat," cried Barkan, "I
will assuredly slay both thee and him!" And he cast him into gaol. Now when Mura'ash's
henchman saw what had befallen his lord, he fled back to the city and told the King's legionaries
who cried out and mounted. Quoth Gharib, "What is the matter?" And they told him all that had
passed, whereupon he cried out to Sahim, "Saddle me one of the chargers that King Mura'ash
gave me." Said Sahim, "O my brother, wilt thou do battle with the Jinn?" Gharib replied, "Yes, I
will fight them with the sword of Japhet son of Noah, seeking help of the Lord of Abraham the
Friend (on whom be the Peace!); for He is the Lord of all things and sole Creator!" So Sahim
saddled him a sorrel horse of the horses of the Jinn, as he were a castle strong among castles, and
he armed and mounting, rode out with the legions of the Jinn, hauberk'd cap-à-pie. Then Barkan
and his host mounted also and the two hosts drew out in lines facing each other. The first to open
the gate of war was Gharib, who crave his steed into the mid-field and bared the enchanted
blade, whence issued a glittering light that dazzled the eyes of all the Jinn and struck terror to
their hearts. Then he played[FN#38] with the sword till their wits were wildered, and cried out,
saying, "Allaho Akbar! I am Gharib, King of Irak. There is no Faith save the Faith of Abraham
the Friend!" Now when Barkan heard Gharib's words, he said, "This is he who seduced my
cousin from his religion; so, by the virtue of my faith, I will not sit down on my throne till I have
decapitated this Gharib and suppressed his breath of life and forced my cousin and his people
back to their belief: and whoso baulketh me, him will I destroy." Then he mounted an elephant
paper-white as he were a tower plastered with gypsum, and goaded him with a spike of steel
which ran deep into his flesh, whereupon the elephant trumpeted and made for the battle-plain
where cut and thrust obtain; and, when he drew near Gharib, he cried out to him, saying, "O dog
of mankind, what made thee come into our land, to debauch my cousin and his folk and pervert
them from one faith to other faith. Know that this day is the last of thy worldly days." Gharib
replied, ‘‘Avaunt,[FN#39] O vilest of the Jann!" Therewith Barkan drew a javelin and making it
quiver[FN#40] in his hand, cast it at Gharib; but it missed him. So he hurled a second javelin at
him; but Gharib caught it in mid air and after poising it launched it at the elephant. It smote him
on the flank and came out on the other side, whereupon the beast fell to the earth dead and
Barkan was thrown to the ground, like a great palm-tree. Before he could stir, Gharib smote him
with the flat of Japhet's blade on the nape of the neck, and he fell upon the earth in a fainting fit;
whereupon the Marids swooped down on him and surrounding him pinioned his elbows. When
Barkan's people saw their king a prisoner, they drove at the others, seeking to rescue him, but
Gharib and the Islamised Jinn fell upon them and gloriously done for Gharib! indeed that day he
pleased the Lord who answereth prayer and slaked his vengeance with the talisman-sword!
Whomsoever he smote, he clove him in sunder and before his soul could depart he became a
heap of ashes in the fire; whilst the two hosts of the Jinn shot each other with flamy meteors till
the battle-field was wrapped in smoke. And Gharib tourneyed right and left among the Kafirs
who gave way before him, till he came to King Barkan's pavilion, with Kaylajan and Kurajan on
his either hand, and cried out to them, "Loose your lord!" So they unbound Mura'ash and broke
his fetters and----And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King Gharib cried out to
Kaylajan and Kurajan, saying, "Loose your lord!", they unbound Mura'ash and broke his fetters,
and he said to them, "Bring me my arms and my winged horse." Now he had two flying steeds,
one of which he had given to Gharib and the other he had kept for himself; and this he mounted
after he had donned his battle harness. Then he and Gharib fell upon the enemy, flying through
the air on their winged horses, and the true believing Jinn followed them, shouting "Allaho
Akbar--God is Most Great!"--till plains and hills, valleys and mountains re-worded the cry. The
Infidels fled before them and they returned, after having slain more than thirty thousand Marids
and Satans, to the city of Japhet, where the two Kings sat down on their couches of estate and
sought Barkan, but found him not; for after capturing him they were diverted from him by stress
of battle, where an Ifrit of his servants made his way to him and loosing him, carried him to his
folk, of whom he found part slain and the rest in full flight. So he flew up with the King high in
air and sat him down in the City of Carnelian and Castle of Gold, where Barkan seated himself
on the throne of his kingship. Presently, those of his people who had survived the affair came in
to him and gave him joy of his safety; and he said, "O folk, where is safety? My army is slain
and they took me prisoner and have rent in pieces mine honour among the tribes of the Jann."
Quoth they, "O King, 'tis ever thus that kings still afflict and are afflicted." Quoth he, "There is
no help but I take my wreak and wipe out my shame, else shall I be for ever disgraced among the
tribes of the Jann." Then he wrote letters to the Governors of his fortresses, who came to him
right loyally and, when he reviewed them, he found three hundred and twenty-thousand fierce
Marids and Satans, who said to him, "What is thy need?" And he replied, "Get ye ready to set
out in three days' time;" whereto they rejoined "Harkening and obedience!" On this wise it befel
King Barkan; but as regards Mura'ash, when he discovered his prisoner's escape, it was grievous
to him and he said, "Had we set an hundred Marids to guard him, he had not fled; but whither
shall he go from us?" Then said he to Gharib, "Know, O my brother, that Barkan is perfidious
and will never rest from wreaking blood-revenge on us, but will assuredly assemble his legions
and return to attack us; wherefore I am minded to forestall him and follow the trail of his defeat,
whilst he is yet weakened thereby." Replied Gharib, "This is the right rede and will best serve
our need;" and Mura'ash, said, "Oh my brother, let the Marids bear thee back to thine own
country and leave me to fight the battles of the Faith against the Infidels, that I may be lightened
of my sin-load." But Gharib rejoined "By the virtue of the Clement, the Bountiful, the Veiler, I
will not go hence till I do to death all the misbelieving Jinn; and Allah hasten their souls to the
fire and dwelling-place dire; and none shall be saved but those who worship Allah the One the
Victorious! But do thou send Sahim back to the city of Oman, so haply he may be healed of his
ailment." For Sahim was sick. So Mura'ash cried to the Marids, saying, "Take ye up Sahim and
these treasures and bear them to Oman city." And after replying, "We hear and we obey," they
took them and made for the land of men. Then Mura'ash wrote letters to all his Governors and
Captains of fortresses and they came to him with an hundred and sixty-thousand warriors. So
they made them ready and departed for the City of Carnelian and the Castle of Gold, covering in
one day a year's journey and halted in a valley, where they encamped and passed the night. Next
morning as they were about to set forth, behold, the vanguard of Barkan's army appeared,
whereupon the Jinn cried out and the two hosts met and fell each upon other in that valley. Then
the engagement was dight and there befel a sore fight as though an earthquake shook the site and
fair plight waxed foul plight. Earnest came and jest took flight, and parley ceased ‘twixt wight
and wight,[FN#41] whilst long lives were cut short in a trice and the Unbelievers fell into
disgrace and despite; for Gharib charged them, proclaiming the Unity of the Worshipful, the All-
might and shore through necks and left heads rolling in the dust; nor did night betide before nigh
seventy thousand of the Miscreants were slain, and of the Moslemised over ten thousand Marids
had fallen Then the kettle-drums beat the retreat, and the two hosts drew apart,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased Baying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two hosts drew apart, Gharib
and Mura'ash returned to their tents, after wiping their weapons, and supper being set before
them, they ate and gave each other joy of their safety, and the loss of their Marids being so
small. As for Barkan, he returned to his tent, grieving for the slaughter of his champions, and
said to his officers, "O folk, an we tarry here and do battle with them on this wise in three days'
time we shall be cut off to the last wight." Quoth they, "And how shall we do, O King?" Quoth
Barkan, "We will fall upon them under cover of night whilst they are deep in sleep, and not one
of them shall be left to tell the tale. So take your arms and when I give the word of command,
attack and fall on your enemies as one." Now there was amongst them a Marid named Jandal
whose heart inclined to Al-Islam; so, when he heard the Kafirs' plot, he stole away from them
and going in to King Mura'ash and King Gharib, told the twain what Barkan had devised;
whereupon Mura'ash turned to Gharib and said to him, "O my brother, what shall we do?"
Gharib replied, "To-night we will fall upon the Miscreants and chase them into the wilds and the
words if it be the will of the Omnipotent King." Then he summoned the Captains of the Jann and
said to them, "Arm yourselves, you and yours; and, as soon as 'tis dark, steal out of your tents on
foot, hundreds after hundreds, and lie in ambush among the mountains; and when ye see the
enemy engaged among the tents, do ye fall upon them from all quarters. Hearten your hearts and
rely on your Lord, and ye shall certainly conquer; and behold, I am with you!" So, as soon as it
was dark Night, the Infidels attacked the camp, invoking aid of the fire and light; but when they
came among the tents, the Moslems fell upon them, calling for help on the Lord of the Worlds
and saying, "O Most Merciful of Mercifuls, O Creator of all createds!" till they left them like
mown grass, cut down and dead. Nor did morning dawn before the most part of the unbelievers
were species without souls and the rest made for the wastes and marshes, whilst Gharib and
Mura'ash returned triumphant and victorious; and, making prize of the enemy's baggage, they
rested till the morrow, when they set out for the City of Carnelian and Castle of Gold. As for
Barkan, when the battle had turned against him and most of his lieges were slain, he fled through
the dark with the remnant of his power to his capital where he entered his palace and assembling
his legionaries said to them, "O folk, whoso hath aught of price, let him take it and follow me to
the Mountain Káf, to the Blue King, lord of the Pied Palace; for he it is who shall avenge us." So
they took their women and children and goods and made for the Caucasus mountain. Presently
Mura'ash and Gharib arrived at the City of Carnelian and Castle of Gold to find the gates open
and none left to give them news; whereupon they entered and Mura'ash led Gharib that he might
show him the city, whose walls were builded of emeralds and its gates of red carnelian, with
studs of silver, and the terrace-roofs of its houses and mansions reposed upon beams of lign
aloes and sandle-wood. So they took their pleasure in its streets and alleys, till they came to the
Palace of Gold and entering passed through seven vestibules, when they drew near to a building,
whose walls were of royal balass rubies and its pavement of emerald and jacinth. The two Kings
were astounded at the goodliness of the place and fared on from vestibule to vestibule, till they
had passed through the seventh and happened upon the inner court of the palace wherein they
saw four daises, each different from the others, and in the midst a jetting fount of red gold,
compassed about with golden lions,[FN#42] from whose mouths issued water. These were things
to daze man's wit. The estrade at the upper end was hung and carpeted with brocaded silks of
various colours and thereon stood two thrones of red gold, inlaid with pearls and jewels. So
Mura'ash and Gharib sat down on Barkan's thrones and held high state in the Palace of Gold.--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Mura'ash and Gharib took seat on
Barkan's thrones and held high state. Then said Gharib to Mura'ash, "What thinkest thou to do?"
And Mura'ash replied, "O King of mankind, have despatched an hundred horse to learn where
Barkan is, that we may pursue him." Then they abode three days in the palace, the scouting
Marids returned with the news that Barkan had fled to the Mountain Kaf and craved protection
of the Blue King who granted it; whereupon quoth Mura'ash to Gharib, "What sayest thou, O my
brother?" and quoth Gharib, "Except we attack them they will attack us." So they bade the host
make ready for departure and after three days, they were about to set out with their troops, when
the Marids, who had carried Sahim and the presents back to Oman, returned and kissed ground
before Gharib. He questioned them of his people and they replied, "After the last affair, thy
brother Ajib, leaving Ya'arub bin Kahtan, fled to the King of Hind and, submitting his case,
sought his protection. The King granted his prayer and writing letters to all his governors, levied
an army as it were the surging sea, having neither beginning nor end, wherewith he purposeth to
invade Al-Irak and lay it waste." When Gharib heard this, he said, "Perish the Misbelievers!
Verily, Allah Almighty shall give the victory to Al-Islam and I will soon show them hew and
foin." Said Mura'ash, "O King of humans, by the virtue of the Mighty Name, I must needs go
with thee to thy kingdom and destroy thy foes and bring thee to thy wish." Gharib thanked him
and they rested on this resolve till the morrow, when they set out, intending for Mount Caucasus
and marched many days till they reached the City of Alabaster and the Pied Palace. Now this city
was fashioned of alabaster and precious stones by Bárik bin Fáki', father of the Jinn, and he also
founded the Pied Palace, which was so named because edified with one brick of gold alternating
with one of silver, nor was there builded aught like it in all the world. When they came within
half a day's journey of the city, they halted to take their rest, and Mura'ash sent out to
reconnoitre a scout who returned and said, "O King, within the City of Alabaster are legions of
the Jinn, for number as the leaves of the trees or as the drops of rain." So Mura'ash said to
Gharib, "How shall we do, O King of Mankind?" He replied, "O King, divide your men into four
bodies and encompass with them the camp of the Infidels; then, in the middle of the Night, let
them cry out, saying, ‘God is Most Great!' and withdraw and watch what happeneth among the
tribes of the Jinn." So Mura'ash did as Gharib counselled and the troops waited till midNight,
when they encircled the foe and shouted "Allaho Akbar! Ho for the Faith of Abraham the Friend,
on whom be the Peace!" The Misbelievers at this cry awoke in affright and snatching up their
arms, fell one upon other till the morning, when most part of them were dead bodies and but few
remained. Then Gharib cried out to the True Believers, saying, "Up and at the remnant of the
Kafirs! Behold I am with you, and Allah is your helper!" So the Moslems crave at the enemy and
Gharib bared his magical blade Al-Mahik and fell upon the foe, lopping off noses and making
heads wax hoary and whole ranks turn tail. At last be came up with Barkan and smote him and
bereft him of life and he fell down, drenched in his blood. On like wise he did with the Blue
King, and by undurn-hour not one of the Kafirs was left alive to tell the tale. Then Gharib and
Mura'ash entered the Pied Palace and found its walls builded of alternate courses of gold and
silver, with door-sills of crystal and keystones of greenest emerald. In its midst was a fountain
adorned with bells and pendants and figures of birds and beasts spouting forth water, and thereby
a daïs[FN#43] furnished with gold-brocaded silk, bordered or embroidered with jewels: and they
found the treasures of the palace past count or description. Then they entered the women's court,
where they came upon a magnificent serraglio and Gharib saw, among the Blue King's woman-
folk a girl clad in a dress worth a thousand dinars, never had he beheld a goodlier. About her
were an hundred slave-girls, upholding her train with golden hooks, and she was in their midst as
the moon among stars. When he saw her, his reason was confounded and he said to one of the
waiting-women, "Who may be yonder maid?" Quoth they, "This is the Blue King's daughter,
Star o' Morn."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib asked the slave women
saying, "Who may be yonder maid," they replied, "This is Star o' Morn, daughter to the Blue
King." Then Gharib turned to Mura'ash and said to him, "O King of the Jinn, I have a mind to
take yonder damsel to wife." Replied Mura'ash, "The palace and all that therein is, live stock
and dead, are the prize of thy right hand; for, hadst thou not devised a stratagem to destroy the
Blue King and Barkan, they had cut us off to the last one: wherefore the treasure is thy treasure
and the folk thy thralls." Gharib thanked him for his fair speech and going up to the girl, gazed
steadfastly upon her and loved her with exceeding love, forgetting Fakhr Taj the Princess and
even Mahdiyah. Now her mother was the Chinese King's daughter whom the Blue King had
carried off from her palace and perforce deflowered, and she conceived by him and bare this girl,
whom he named Star o' Morn, by reason of her beauty and loveliness; for she was the very
Princess of the Fair. Her mother died when she was a babe of forty days, and the nurses and
eunuchs reared her, till she reached the age of seventeen; but she hated her sire and rejoiced in
his slaughter. So Gharib put his palm to hers[FN#44] and went in unto her that night and found
her a virgin. Then he bade pull down the Pied Palace and divided the spoil with the true-
believing Jinn, and there fell to his share one-and-twenty thousand bricks of gold and silver and
money and treasure beyond speech and count. Then Mura'ash took Gharib and showed him the
Mountain Kaf and all its marvels; after which they returned to Barkan's fortress and dismantled
it and shared the spoil thereof. Then they repaired to Mura'ash's capital, where they tarried five
days, when Gharib sought to revisit his native country and Mura'ash said, "O King of mankind, I
will ride at thy stirrup and bring thee to thine own land." Replied Gharib, "No, by the virtue of
Abraham the Friend, I will not suffer thee to weary thyself thus, nor will I take any of the Jinn
save Kaylajan and Kurajan." Quoth the King, "Take with thee ten thousand horsemen of the
Jinn, to serve thee;" but quoth Gharib, "I will take only as I said to thee." So Mura'ash bade a
thousand Marids carry him to his native land, with his share of the spoil; and he commanded
Kaylajan and Kurajan to follow him and obey him; and they answered, "Hearkening and
obedience." Then said Gharib to the Marids, "Do ye carry the treasure and Star o' Morn;" for he
himself thought to ride his flying steed. But Mura'ash said to him, "This horse, O my brother,
will live only in our region, and, if it come upon man's earth, ‘twill die: but I have in my stables
a sea-horse, whose fellow is not found in Al-Irak, no, nor in all the world is its like." So he
caused bring forth the horse, and when Gharib saw it, it interposed between him and his
wits.[FN#45] Then they bound it and Kaylajan bore it on his shoulders and Kurajan took what he
could carry. And Mura'ash embraced Gharib and wept for parting from him, saying, "O my
brother, if aught befal thee wherein thou art powerless, send for me and I will come to thine aid
with an army able to lay waste the whole earth and what is thereon." Gharib thanked him for his
kindness and zeal for the True Faith and took leave of him; whereupon the Marids set out with
Gharib and his goods; and, after traversing fifty years' journey in two days and a Night, alighted
near the city of Oman and halted to take rest. Then Gharib sent out Kaylajan, to learn news of his
people, and he returned and said, "O King, the city is beleaguered by a host of Infidels, as they
were the surging sea, and thy people are fighting them. The drums beat to battle and Jamrkan
goeth forth as champion in the field." When Gharib heard this, he cried aloud, "God is Most
Great!" and said to Kaylajan, "Saddle me the steed and bring me my arms and spear; for to-day
the valiant shall be known from the coward in the place of war and battle-stead." So Kaylajan
brought him all he sought and Gharib armed and belting in baldrick Al-Mahik, mounted the sea
horse and made toward the hosts. Quoth Kaylajan and Kurajan to him, Set thy heart at rest and
let us go to the Kafirs and scatter them abroad in the wastes and wilds till, by the help of Allah,
the All-powerful, we leave not a soul alive, no, not a blower of the fire." But Gharib said "By the
virtue of Abraham the [Friend, I will not let you fight them without me and behold, I mount!"
Now the cause of the coming of that great host was right mar vellous.[FN#46]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib had bidden Kaylajan go
and learn news of his people, the Jinn fared forth and presently returning said, "Verily around
thy city is a mighty host!" Now the cause of its coming was that Ajib, having fled the field after
Ya'arub's army had been put to the rout, said to his people, "O folk, if we return to Ya'arub bin
Kahtan, he will say to us, ‘But for you, my son and my people had not been slain; and he will put
us to death, even to the last man.' Wherefore, methinks we were better go to Tarkanán, King of
Hind, and beseech him to avenge us." Replied they, "Come, let us go thither; and the blessing of
the Fire be upon thee!" So they fared days and nights till they reached King Tarkanan's capital
city and, after asking and obtaining permission to present himself, Ajib went in to him and
kissed ground before him. Then he wished him what men use to wish to monarchy and said to
him, "O King, protect me, so may protect thee the sparkling Fire and the Night with its thick
darkness!" Tarkanan looked at Ajib and asked, "Who art thou and what dost thou want?"; to
which the other answered, "I am Ajib King of Al-Irak; my brother hath wronged me and gotten
the mastery of the land and the subjects have submitted themselves to him. Moreover, he hath
embraced the faith of Al-Islam and he ceaseth not to chase me from country to country; and
behold, I am come to seek protection of thee and thy power." When Tarkanan heard Ajib's
words, he rose and sat down and cried, "By the virtue of the Fire, I will assuredly avenge thee
and will let none serve other than my goddess the Fire!" And he called aloud to his son, saying,
"O my son, make ready to go to Al-Irak and lay it waste and bind all who serve aught but the
Fire and torment them and make example of them; yet slay them not, but bring them to me, that I
may ply them with various tortures and make them taste the bitterness of humiliation and leave
them a warning to whoso will be warned in this our while." Then he chose out to accompany
him eighty-thousand fighting-men on horseback and the like number on giraffes,[FN#47]
besides ten thousand elephants, bearing on their backs seats[FN#48] of sandal-wood, latticed
with golden rods, plated and studded with gold and silver and shielded with pavoises of gold and
emerald; moreover he sent good store of war-chariots, in each eight men fighting with all kinds
of weapons. Now the Prince's name was Ra'ad Sháh,[FN#49] and he was the cham pion of his
time, for prowess having no peer. So he and his army equipped them in ten days' time, then set
out, as they were a bank of clouds, and fared on two months' journey, till they came upon Oman
city and encompassed it, to the joy of Ajib, who thought himself assured of victory. Jamrkan and
Sa'adan and all their fighting-men sallied forth into the field of fight whilst the kettle-drums beat
to battle and the horses neighed. At this moment up came King Gharib, who, as we have said,
had been warned by Kaylajan; and he urged on his destrier and entered among the Infidels
waiting to see who should come forth and open the chapter of war. Then out rushed Sa'adan the
Ghul and offered combat, whereupon there issued forth to him one of the champions of Hind;
but Sa'adan scarce let him take stand in front ere he smote him with his mace and crushed his
bones and stretched him on the ground; and so did he with a second and a third, till he had slain
thirty fighting-men. Then there dashed out at him an Indian cavalier, by name Battásh al-
Akrán,[FN#50] uncle to King Tarkanan and of his day the doughtiest man, reckoned worth five
thousand horse in battle-plain and cried out to Sa'adan, saying, "O thief of the Arabs, hath thy
daring reached that degree that thou shouldst slay the Kings of Hind and their champions and
capture their horsemen? But this day is the last of thy worldly days." When Sa'adan heard these
words, his eyes waxed blood-red and he crave at Battash and aimed a stroke at him with his club;
but he evaded it and the force of the blow bore Sa'adan to the ground; and before he could
recover himself, the Indians pinioned him and haled him off to their tents. Now when Jamrkan
saw his comrade a prisoner, he cried out, saying, "Ho for the Faith of Abraham the Friend!" and
clapping heel to his horse, ran at Battash. They wheeled about awhile, till Battash charged
Jamrkan and catching him by his jerkin[FN#51] tare him from his saddle and cast him to the
ground; whereupon the Indians bound him and dragged him away to their tents. And Battash
ceased not to overcome all who came out to him, Captain after Captain till he had made
prisoners of four-and-twenty Chiefs of the Moslems, whereat the True Believers were sore
dismayed. When Gharib saw what had befallen his braves, he drew from beneath his
knee[FN#52] a mace of gold weighing six-score pounds which had belonged to Barkan King of
the Jann--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib beheld what had befallen his
braves he drew forth a golden mace which had belonged to Barkan King of the Jann and clapped
heel to his sea horse, which bore him like the wind gust into mid-field. Then he let drive at
Battash, crying out, "God is Most Great! He giveth aid and victory and He abaseth whoso reject
the Faith of Abraham the Friend!" and smote him with the mace, whereupon he fell to the
ground and Gharib, turning to the Moslems, saw his brother Sahim and said to him, "Pinion me
this hound." When Sahim heard his brother's words, he ran to Battash and bound him hard and
fast and bore him off, whilst the Moslem braves wondered who this knight could be and the
Indians said one to other, "Who is this horseman which came out from among them and hath
taken our Chief prisoner?" Meanwhile Gharib continued to offer battle and there issued forth to
him a captain of the Hindis whom he felled to earth with his mace, and Kaylajan and Kurajan
pinioned him and delivered him over to Sahim; nor did Gharib leave to do thus, till he had taken
prisoner two-and-fifty of the doughtiest Captains of the army of Hind. Then the day came to an
end and the kettle-drums beat the retreat; whereupon Gharib left the field and rode towards the
Moslem camp. The first to meet him was Sahim, who kissed his feet in the stirrups and said,
"May thy hand never wither, O champion of the age! Tell us who thou art among the braves." So
Gharib raised his vizor of mail and Sahim knew him and cried out, saying, "This is your King
and your lord Gharib, who is come back from the land of the Jann!" When the Moslems heard
Gharib ‘s name, they threw themselves off their horses' backs, and, crowding about him, kissed
his feet in the stirrups and saluted him, rejoicing in his safe return. Then they carried him into the
city of Oman, where he entered his palace and sat down on the throne of his kingship, whilst his
officers stood around him in the utmost joy. Food was set on and they ate, after which Gharib
related to them all that had betided him with the Jinn in Mount Kaf, and they marvelled thereat
with exceeding marvel and praised Allah for his safety. Then he dismissed them to their sleeping
places; so they withdrew to their several lodgings, and when none abode with him but Kaylajan
and Kurajan, who never left him, he said to them, "Can ye carry me to Cufa that I may take my
pleasure in my Harim, and bring me back before the end of the night?" They replied, "O our
lord, this thou askest is easy." Now the distance between Cufa and Oman is sixty days' journey
for a diligent horseman, and Kaylajan said to Kurajan, "I will carry him going and thou coming
back." So he took up Gharib and flew off with him, in company with Kurajan; nor was an hour
past before they set him down at the gate of his palace, in Cufa. He went in to his uncle Al-
Damigh, who rose to him and saluted him; after which quoth Gharib, "How is it with my wives
Fakhr Taj[FN#53] and Mahdiyah?" Al-Damigh answered, "They are both well and in good
case." Then the eunuch went in and acquainted the women of the Harim with Gharib's coming,
whereat they rejoiced and raised the trill of joy and gave him the reward for good news.
Presently in came King Gharib, and they rose and saluting him, conversed with him, till Al-
Damigh entered, when Gharib related to them all that had befallen him in the land of the Jinn,
whereat they all marvelled. Then he lay with Fakhr Taj till near daybreak, when he took leave of
his wives and his uncle and mounted Kurajan's back, nor was the darkness dispelled before the
two Marids set him down in the city of Oman. Then he and his men armed and he bade open the
gates when, behold, up came a horseman from the host of the Indians, with Jamrkan and Sa'adan
and the rest of the captive captains whom he had delivered, and committed them to Gharib. The
Moslems, rejoicing in their safety, donned their mails and took horse, while the kettle-drums
beat a point of war; and the Miscreants also drew up in line.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the Moslem host mounted and
rode to the plain of cut and thrust, the first to open the door of war was King Gharib who,
drawing his sword Al-Mahik, drove his charger between the two ranks and cried out, saying,
"Whoso knoweth me hath enough of my mis chief and whoso unknoweth me, to him I will make
myself known. I am Gharib, King of Al-Irak and Al-Yaman, brother of Ajib." When Ra'ad Shah,
son of the King of Hind, heard this, he shouted to his captains, "Bring me Ajib." So they brought
him and Ra'ad Shah said to him, "Thou wottest that this quarrel is thy quarrel and thou art the
cause of all this slaughter. Now yonder standeth thy brother Gharib amiddle-most the fightfield
and stead where sword and spear we shall wield; go thou to him and bring him to me a prisoner,
that I may set him on a camel arsy-versy, and make a show of him and carry him to the land of
Hind." Answered Ajib, "O King, send out to him other than I, for I am in ill-health this
morning." But Ra'ad Shah sparked and snorted and cried, "By the virtue of the sparkling Fire
and the light and the shade and the heat, unless thou fare forth to thy brother and bring him to me
in haste, I will cut off thy head and make an end of thee." So Ajib took heart and urging his
horse up to his brother in mid-field, said to him, "O dog of the Arabs and vilest of all who
hammer down tent pegs, wilt thou contend with Kings? Take what to thee cometh and receive
the glad tidings of thy death." When Gharib heard this, he said to him, "Who art thou among the
Kings? And Ajib answered, saying, "I am thy brother, and this day is the last of thy worldly
days." Now when Gharib was assured that he was indeed his brother Ajib, he cried out and said,
"Ho, to avenge my father and mother!" Then giving his sword to Kaylajan,[FN#54] he crave at
Ajib and smote him with his mace a smashing blow and a swashing, that went nigh to beat in his
ribs, and seizing him by the mail gorges tore him from the saddle and cast him to the ground;
whereupon the two Marids pounced upon him and binding him fast, dragged him off dejected
and abject; whilst Gharib rejoiced in the capture of his enemy and repeated these couplets of the
poet, 

"I have won my wish and my need have scored * Unto Thee be the praise and the thanks, O our
Lord! 
I grew up dejected and abject; poor, * But Allah vouchsafed me all boons implored:
I have conquered countries and mastered men * But for Thee were I naught, O thou Lord
adored!"

When Ra'ad Shah saw how evilly Ajib fared with his brother, he called for his charger and
donning his harness and habergeon, mounted and dashed out a field. As soon as he drew near
King Gharib, he cried out at him, saying, "O basest of Arabs and bearer of scrubs,[FN#55] who
art thou, that thou shouldest capture Kings and braves? Down from thy horse and put elbows
behind back and kiss my feet and set my warriors free and go with me in bond of chains to my
reign that I may pardon thee and make thee a Shayth in our own land, so mayst thou eat there a
bittock of bread." When Gharib heard these words he laughed till he fell backwards and
answered, saying, "O mad hound and mangy wolf, soon shalt thou see against whom the shifts of
Fortune will turn!" Then he cried out to Sahim, saying, "Bring me the prisoners; so he brought
them, and Gharib smote off their heads whereupon Ra'ad Shah crave at him, with the driving of
a lordly champion and the onslaught of a fierce slaughterer and they falsed and feinted and
fought till nightfall, when the kettle-drums beat the retreat.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the kettledrums beat the retreat,
the two Kings parted and returned, each to his own place where his people gave him joy of his
safety. And the Moslems said to Gharib, " 'Tis not thy wont O King, to prolong a fight;" and he
replied, "O folk, I have done battle with many royalties[FN#56] and champions; but never saw I
a harder hitter than this one. Had I chosen to draw Al-Mahik upon him, I had mashed his bones
and made an end of his days: but I delayed with him, thinking to take him prisoner and give him
part enjoyment in Al-Islam." Thus far concerning Gharib; but as regards Ra'ad Shah, he returned
to his marquee and sat upon his throne, when his Chiefs came in to him and asked him of his
adversary, and he answered, "By the truth of the sparkling Fire, never in my life saw I the like of
yonder brave! But to-morrow I will take him prisoner and lead him away dejected and abject."
Then they slept till daybreak, when the battle-drums beat to fight and the swords in baldric were
dight; and war-cries were cried amain and all mounted their horses of generous strain and drew
out into the field, filling every wide place and hill and plain. The first to open the door of war
was the rider outrageous and the lion rageous, King Gharib, who crave his steed between the two
hosts and wheeled and careered over the field, crying, "Who is for fray, who is for fight? Let no
sluggard come out to me this day nor dullard!" Before he had made an end of speaking, out
rushed Ra'ad Shah, riding on an elephant, as he were a vast tower, in a eat girthed with silken
bands; and between the elephant's ears at the driver, bearing in hand a hook, wherewith he
goaded the beast and directed him right and left. When the elephant drew near Gharib's horse,
and the steed saw a creature it had never before set eyes on, it took fright;[FN#57] wherefore
Gharib dismounted and gave the horse to Kaylajan. Then he drew Al-Mahik and advanced to
meet Ra'ad Shah a-foot, walking on till he faced the elephant. Now it was Ra'ad Shah's wont,
when he found himself overmatched by any brave, to mount an elephant, taking with him an
implement called the lasso,[FN#58] which was in the shape of a net, wide at base and narrow at
top with a running cord of silk passed through rings along its edges. With this he would attack
horsemen and casting the meshes over them, draw the running noose and drag the rider off his
horse and make him prisoner; and thus had he conquered many cavaliers. So, as Gharib came up
to him, he raised his hand and, despreading the net over him, pulled him on to the back of the
elephant and cried out to the beast to return to the Indian camp. But Kaylajan and Kurajan had
not left Gharib and, when they beheld what had befallen their lord, they laid hold of the elephant,
whilst Gharib strove with the net, till he rent it in sunder. Upon this the two Marids seized Ra'ad
Shah and bound him with a cord of palm fibre. Then the two armies drove each at other and met
with a shock like two seas crashing or two mountains together dashing, whilst the dust rose to
the confines of the sky and blinded was every eye. The battle waxed fierce and fell, the blood ran
in rills, nor did they cease to wage war with lunge of lance and sway of sword in lustiest way, till
the day darkened and the night starkened, when the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew
asunder.[FN#59] Now the Moslems were evilly entreated that day by reason of the riders on
elephants and giraffes,[FN#60] and many of them were killed and most of the rest were
wounded. This was grievous to Gharib who commanded the hurt to be medicined and turning to
his Chief Officers, asked them what they counselled. Answered they, "O King, 'tis only the
elephants and giraffes that irk us; were we but quit of them, we should overcome the enemy."
Quoth Kaylajan and Kurajan, "We twain will unsheath our swords and fall on them and slay the
most part of them." But there came forward a man of Oman, who had been privy counsellor to
Jaland and said, "O King, I will be surety for the host, an thou wilt but hearken to me and follow
my counsel." Gharib turned to his Captains and said to them, "Whatsoever this wise man shall
say to you that do."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,
                                
She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Gharib said to his Captains, "Whatsoever this wise man shall say
to you, that do"; they replied, "Hearing and obeying!" So the
Omani chose out ten captains and asked them, "How many braves
have ye under your hands?"; and they answered, "Ten thousand
fighting-men." Then he carried them into the armoury and armed
five thousand of them with harquebuses and other five thousand
with cross bows and taught them to shoot with these new
weapons.[FN#61] Now as soon as it was day, the Indians came out
to the field, armed cap-à-pie, with the elephants, giraffes and
champions in their van; whereupon Gharib and his men mounted and
both hosts drew out and the big drums beat to battle. Then the
man of Oman cried out to the archers and harquebusiers to shoot,
and they plied the elephants and giraffes with shafts and leaden
bullets, which entered the beasts' flanks, whereat they roared
out and turning upon their own ranks, trod them down with their
hoofs. Presently the Moslems charged the Misbelievers and
outflanked them right and left, whilst the elephants and giraffes
trampled them and drove them into the hills and words, whither
the Moslems followed hard upon them with the keen-edged sword and
but few of the giraffes and elephants escaped. Then King Gharib
and his folk returned, rejoicing in their victory; and on the
morrow they divided the loot and rested five days; after which
King Gharib sat down on the throne of his kingship and sending
for his brother Ajib, said to him, "O dog, why hast thou
assembled the Kings against us? But He who hath power over all
things hath given us the victory over thee. So embrace the Saving
Faith and thou shalt be saved, and I will forbear to avenge my
father and mother on thee therefor, and I will make thee King
again as thou west, placing myself under thy hand." But Ajib
said, "I will not leave my faith." So Gharib bade lay him in
irons and appointed an hundred stalwart slaves to guard him;
after which he turned to Ra'ad Shah and said to him, "How sayst
thou of the faith of Al-Islam?" Replied he, "O my lord, I will
enter thy faith; for, were it not a true Faith and a goodly, thou
hadst not conquered us. Put forth thy hand and I will testify
that there is no god but the God and that Abraham the Friend is
the Apostle of God." At this Gharib rejoiced and said to him, "Is
thy heart indeed stablished in the sweetness of this Belief?" And
he answered, saying, "Yes, O my lord!" Then quoth Gharib, "O.
Ra'ad Shah, wilt thou go to thy country and thy kingdom?" and
quoth he, "O. my lord, my father will put me to death, for that I
have left his faith." Gharib rejoined, "I will go with thee and
make thee king of the country and constrain the folk to obey
thee, by the help of Allah the Bountiful, the Beneficent." And
Ra'ad Shah kissed his hands and feet. Then Gharib rewarded the
counsellor who had caused the rout of the foe and gave him great
wealth; after which he turned to Kaylajan and Kurajan, and said
to them, "Harkye, Chiefs of the Jinn, 'tis my will that ye carry
me, together with Ra'ad Shah and Jamrkan and Sa'adan to the land
of Hind." "We hear and we obey," answered they. So Kurajan took
up Jamrkan and Sa'adan, whilst Kaylajan took Gharib and Ra'ad
Shah and made for the land of Hind.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two Marids had taken up Gharib
and Jamrkan, Sa'adan the Ghul and Ra'ad Shah, they flew on with them from sundown till the
last of the Night, when they set them down on the terrace of King Tarkanan's palace at
Cashmere. Now news was brought to Tarkanan by the remnants of his host of what had befallen
his son, whereat he slept not neither took delight in aught, and he was trou