bled with sore trouble.
As he sat in his Harim, pondering his case, behold, Gharib and his company descended the
stairways of the palace and came in to him; and when he saw his son and those who were with
him, he was confused and fear took him of the Marids. Then Ra'ad Shah turned to him and said,
"How long wilt thou persist in thy frowardness, O traitor and worshipper of the Fire? Woe to
thee! Leave worshipping the Fire and serve the Magnanimous Sire, Creator of day and Night,
whom attaineth no sight." When Tarkanan heard his son's speech, he cast at him an iron club he
had by him; but it missed him and fell upon a buttress of the palace and smote out three stones.
Then cried the King, "O dog, thou hast destroyed mine army and hast forsaken thy faith and
comest now to make me do likewise!" With this Gharib went up to him and dealt him a cuff on
the neck which knocked him down; whereupon the Marids bound him fast and all the Harim-
women fled. Then Gharib sat down on the throne of kingship and said to Ra'ad Shah, "Do thou
justice upon thy father." So Ra'ad Shah turned to him and said, ‘O perverse old man, become
one of the saved and thou shalt be saved from the fire and the wrath of the All-powerful" But
Tarkanan cried, "I will not die save in my own faith" Whereupon Gharib drew Al-Mahik and
smote him therewith and he fell to the earth in two pieces, and Allah hurried his soul to the fire
and abiding-place dire.[FN#62] Then Gharib bade hang his body over the palace gate and they
hung one half on the right hand and the other on the left and waited till day, when Gharib caused
Ra'ad Shah don the royal habit and sit down on his father's throne, with himself on his dexter
hand and Jamrkan and Sa'adan and the Marids standing right and left; and he said to Kaylajan
and Kurajan, "Whoso entereth of the Princes and Officers, seize him and bind him, and let not a
single Captain escape you." And they answered, "Hearkening and obedience!" Presently the
Officers made for the palace, to do their service to e King, and the first to appear was the Chief
Captain who, seeing King Tarkanan's dead body cut in half and hanging on either side of the
gate, was seized with terror and amazement. Then Kaylajan laid hold of him by the collar and
threw him and intoned him; after which he dragged him into the palace and before sunrise they
had bound three hundred and fifty Captains and set them before Gharib, who said to them, "O
folk, have you seen your King hanging at the palace gate?" Asked they, "Who hath done this
deed?"; and he answered, "I did it, by the help of Allah Almighty; and whoso opposeth me, I
will do with him likewise." Then quoth they, "What is thy will with us?"; and quoth he, "I am
Gharib, King of Al-Irak, he who slew your warriors; and now Ra'ad Shah hath embraced the
Faith of Salvation and is become a mighty King and ruler over you. So do ye become True
Believers and all shall be well with you; but, if ye refuse, you shall repent it." So they
pronounced the profession of the Faith and were enrolled among the people of felicity. Then said
Gharib, "Are your hearts indeed stablished in the sweetness of the Belief?"; and they replied,
"Yes"; whereupon he bade release them and clad them in robes of honour, saying, "Go to your
people and expound Al-Islam to them. Whoso accepteth the Faith spare him; but if he refuse slay
him."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Gharib said to the troops of
Ra'ad Shah, "Go to your people and offer Al-Islam to them. Whoso accepteth the Faith spare
him; but if he refuse, slay him." So they went out and, assembling the men under their command,
explained what had taken place and expounded Al-Islam to them and they all professed. except a
few, whom they put to death; after which they returned and told Gharib, who blessed Allah and
glorified Him, saying, "Praised be the Almighty who hath made this thing easy to us without
strife!" Then he abode in Cashmere of India forty days, till he had ordered the affairs of the
country and cast down the shrines and temples of the Fire and built in their stead mosques and
cathedrals, whilst Ra'ad Shah made ready for him rarities and treasures beyond count and
despatched them to Al-Irak in ships Then Gharib mounted on Kaylajan's back and Jamrkan and
Sa'adan on that of Kurajan, after they had taken leave of Ra'ad Shah; and journeyed through the
night till break of day, when they reached Oman city where their troops met them and saluted
them and rejoiced in them. Then they set out for Cufa where Gharib called for his brother Ajib
and commanded to hang him. So Sahim brought hooks of iron and driving them into the tendons
of Ajib's heels, hung him over the gate; and Gharib bade them shoot him; so they riddled him
with arrows, till he was like unto a porcupine. Then Gharib entered his palace and sitting down
on the throne of his kingship, passed the day in ordering the affairs of the state. At nightfall he
went in to his Harim, where Star o' Morn came to meet him and embraced him and gave him
joy, she and her women, of his safety. He spent that day and lay that night with her and on the
morrow, after he had made the Ghusl-ablution and prayed the dawn-prayer, he sat down on his
throne and commanded preparation to be made for his marriage with Mahdiyah. Accordingly
they slaughtered three thousand head of sheep and two thousand oxen and a thousand he goats
and five hundred camels and the like number of horses, beside four thousand fowls and great
store of geese; never was such wedding in Al-Islam to that day. Then he went in to Mahdiyah
and took her maidenhead and abode with her ten days; after which he committed the kingdom to
his uncle Al-Damigh, charging him to rule the lieges justly, and journeyed with his women and
warriors, till he came to the ships laden with the treasures and rarities which Ra'ad Shah had sent
him, and divided the monies among his men who from poor became rich. Then they fared on till
they reached the city of Babel, where he bestowed on Sahim Al-Layl a robe of honour and
appointed him Sultan of the city.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib, after robing his brother Sahim
and appointing him Sultan, abode with him ten days, after which he set out again and journeyed
nor stinted travel till he reached the castle of Sa'adan the Ghul, where they rested five days.
Then quoth Gharib to Kaylajan and Kurajan' "Pass over to Isbánír al-Madáin, to the palace of
the Chosroe, and find what is come of Fakhr Taj and bring me one of the King's kinsmen, who
shall acquaint me with what hath passed." Quoth they, "We hear and we obey," and set out
forthright for Isbanir. As they flew between heaven and earth, behold, they caught sight of a
mighty army, as it were the surging sea, and Kaylajan said to Kurajan, "Let us descend and
determine what be this host." So they alighted and walking among the troops, found them
Persians and questioned the soldiers whose men they were and whither they were bound;
whereto they made answer, "We are en route for Al-Irak, to slay Gharib and all who company
him." When the Marids heard these words, they repaired to the pavilion of the Persian general,
whose name was Rustam, and waited till the soldiers slept, when they took up Rustam, bed and
all, and made for the castle where Gharib lay. They arrived there by midnight and going to the
door of the King's pavilion, cried, "Permission!" which when he heard, he sat up and said,
"Come in." So they entered and set down the couch with Rustam asleep thereon. Gharib asked,
"Who be this?" and they answered, "This be a Persian Prince, whom we met coming with a great
host, thinking to slay thee and thine, and we have brought him to thee, that he may tell thee what
thou hast a mind to know." "Fetch me an hundred braves!" cried Gharib, and they fetched them;
whereupon he bade them, "Draw your swords and stand at the head of this Persian carle!" Then
they awoke him and he opened his eyes; and, finding an arch of steel over his head, shut them
again, crying, "What be this foul dream?" But Kaylajan pricked him with his sword point and he
sat up and said, "Where am I?" Quoth Sahim, "Thou art in the presence of King Gharib, son-in-
law of the King of the Persians. What is thy name and whither goest thou?" When Rustam heard
Gharib's name' he bethought himself and said in his mind, "Am I asleep or awake? Whereupon
Sahim dealt him a buffet, saying, "Why dost thou not answer?" And he raised his head and
asked, "Who brought me from my tent out of the midst of my men?" Gharib answered, "These
two Marids brought thee." So he looked at Kaylajan and Kurajan and skited in his bag-trousers.
Then the Marids fell upon him, baring their tusks and brandishing their blades, and said to him,
"Wilt thou not rise and kiss ground before King Gharib?" And he trembled at them and was
assured that he was not asleep; so he stood up and kissed the ground between the hands of
Gharib, saying, "The blessing of the Fire be on thee, and long life be thy life, O King!" Gharib
cried, "O dog of the Persians, fire is not worshipful, for that it is harmful and profiteth not save
in cooking food." Asked Rustam, "Who then is worshipful?"; and Gharib answered, "Alone
worshipworth is God, who formed thee and fashioned thee and created the heavens and the
earth." Quoth the Ajami, "What shall I say that I may become of the party of this Lord and enter
thy Faith?"; and quoth Gharib, "Say, ‘There is no god but the God, and Abraham is the Friend of
God'." So Rustam pronounced the profession of the Faith and was enrolled among the people of
felicity. Then said he to Gharib, "Know, O my lord, that thy father-in-law, King Sabur, seeketh
to slay thee; and indeed he hath sent me with an hundred thousand men, charging me to spare
none of you." Gharib rejoined, "Is this my reward for having delivered his daughter from death
and dishonour? Allah will requite him his ill intent. But what is thy name?" The Persian
answered, "My name is Rustam, general of Sabur;" and Gharib, "Thou shalt have the like rank in
my army," adding, "But tell me, O Rustam, how is it with the Princess Fakhr Taj?" "May thy
head live, O King of the age!" "What was the cause of her death?" Rustam replied, "O my lord,
no sooner hadst thou left us than one of the Princess's women went in to King Sabur and said to
him, ‘O my master, didst thou give Gharib leave to lie with the Princess my mistress?' whereto
he answered, ‘No, by the virtue of the fire!' and drawing his sword, went in to his daughter and
said to her, ‘O foul baggage, why didst thou suffer yonder Badawi to sleep with thee, without
dower or even wedding?' She replied, ‘O my papa, 'twas thou gayest him leave to sleep with
me.' Then he asked, ‘Did the fellow have thee?' but she was silent and hung down her head.
Hereupon he cried out to the midwives and slave-girls, saying, ‘Pinion me this harlot's elbows
behind her and look at her privy parts.' So they did as he bade them and after inspecting her slit
said to him, ‘O King, she hath lost her maidenhead Whereupon he ran at her and would have
slain her, but her mother rose up and threw herself between them crying, ‘O King, slay her not,
lest thou be for ever dishonoured; but shut her in a cell till she die.' So he cast her into prison till
nightfall, when he called two of his courtiers and said to them, ‘Carry her afar off and throw her
into the river Jayhun and tell none.' They did his commandment, and indeed her memory is
forgotten and her time is past."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Gharib asked news of Fakhr Taj,
Rustam informed him that she had been drowned in the river by her sire's command. And when
Gharib heard this, the world waxed wan before his eyes and he cried, "By the virtue of Abraham
the Friend, I will assuredly go to yonder dog and overwhelm him and lay waste his realm!" Then
he sent letters to Jamrkan and to the governors of Mosul and Mayyáfáríkín; and, turning to
Rustam, said to him, "How many men hadst thou in thine army?" He replied, "An hundred
thousand Persian horse;" and Gharib rejoined, "Take ten thousand horse and go to thy people
and occupy them with war; I will follow on thy trail." So Rustam mounted and taking ten
thousand Arab horse made for his tribe, saying in himself, "I will do a deed shall whiten my face
with King Gharib." So he fared on seven days, till there remained but half a day's journey
between him and the Persian camp; when, dividing his host into four divisions he said to his
men, "Surround the Persians on all sides and fall upon them with the sword." They rode on from
eventide till midnight, when they had compassed the camp of the Ajamis, who were asleep in
security, and fell upon them, shouting, "God is Most Great!" Whereupon the Persians started up
from sleep and their feet slipped and the sabre went round amongst them; for the All-knowing
King was wroth with them, and Rustam wrought amongst them as fire in dry fuel; till, by the end
of the night, the whole of the Persian host was slain or wounded or fled, and the Moslems made
prize of their tents and baggage, horses, camels and treasure-chests. Then they alighted and
rested in the tents of the Ajamis till King Gharib came up and, seeing what Rustam had done and
how he had gained by stratagem a great and complete victory, he invested him with a robe of
honour and said to him, "O Rustam, it was thou didst put the Persians to the rout; wherefore all
the spoil is thine." So he kissed Gharib's hand and thanked him, and they rested till the end of
the day, when they set out for King Sabur's capital. Meanwhile, the fugitives of the defeated
force reached Isbanir and went in to Sabur, crying out and saying, "Alas!" and "Well-away!" and
"Woe worth the day!" Quoth he, "What hath befallen you and who with his mischief hath
smitten you?" So they told him all that had passed and said, "Naught befel us except that thy
general Rustam, fell upon us in the darkness of the night because he had turned Moslem; nor did
Gharib come near us." When the King heard this, he cast his crown to the ground and said,
"There is no worth left us!" Then he turned to his son Ward Shah[FN#63] and said to him, "O
my son, there is none for this affair save thou." Answered Ward Shah, "By thy life, O my father,
I will assuredly bring Gharib and his chiefs of the people in chains and slay all who are with
him" Then he numbered his army and found it two hundred and twenty-thousand men. So they
slept, intending to set forth on the morrow; but, next morning, as they were about to march,
behold, a cloud of dust arose and spread till it walled the world and baffled the sight of the
farthest seeing wight. Now Sabur had mounted to farewell his son, and when he saw this mighty
great dust, he let call a runner and said to him, "Go find me out the cause of this dust-cloud."
The scout went and returned, saying, "O my lord, Gharib and his braves are upon you;"
whereupon they unloaded their bât-beasts and drew out in line of battle. When Gharib came up
and saw the Persians ranged in row, he cried out to his men, saying, "Charge with the blessing of
Allah!" So they waved the flags, and the Arabs and the Ajamis crave one at other and folk were
heaped upon folk. Blood ran like water and all souls saw death face to face; the brave advanced
and pressed forward to assail and the coward hung back and turned tail and they ceased not from
fight and fray till ended day, when the kettle-drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew apart.
Then Sabur commanded to pitch his camp hard over the city-gate, and Gharib set up his
pavilions in front of theirs; and every one went to his tent.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the two hosts drew apart, every one
went to his tent until the morning. As soon as it was day, the two hosts mounted their strong
steeds and levelled their lances and wore their harness of war; then they raised their slogan cries
and drew out in battle-array, whilst came forth all the lordly knights and the lions of fights. Now
the first to open the gate of battle was Rustam, who urged his charger into mid-field and cried
out, "God is most Great! I am Rustam, champion-in-chief of the Arabs and Ajamis. Who is for
tilting, who is for fighting? Let no sluggard come out to me this day nor weakling!" Then there
rushed forth to him a champion of the Persians; the two charged each other and there befel
between them a sore fight, till Rustam sprang upon his adversary and smote him with a mace he
had with him, seventy pounds in weight, and beat his head down upon his breast, and he fell to
the earth, dead and in his blood drowned. This was no light matter to Sabur and he commanded
his men to charge; so they crave at the Moslems, invoking the aid of the light-giving Sun, whilst
the True Believers called for help upon the Magnanimous King. But the Ajamis, the Miscreants,
outnumbered the Arabs, the Moslems, and made them drain the cup of death; which when
Gharib saw he drew his sword Al-Mahik and crying out his war-cry, fell upon the Persians, with
Kaylajan and Kurajan at either stirrup; nor did he leave playing upon them with blade till he
hewed his way to the standard-bearer and smote him on the head with the flat of his sword,
whereupon he fell down in a fainting-fit and the two Marids bore him off to their camp. When
the Persians saw the standard fall, they turned and fled and for the city-gates made; but the
Moslems followed them with the blade and they crowded together to enter the city, so that they
could not shut the gates and there died of them much people. Then Rustam and Sa'adan,
Jamrkan and Sahim, Al-Damigh, Kaylajan and Kurajan and all the braves Mohammedan and the
champions of Faith Unitarian fell upon the misbelieving Persians in the gates, and the blood of
the Kafirs ran in the streets like a torrent till they threw down their arms and harness and called
out for quarter; whereupon the Moslems stayed their swords from the slaughter and drove them
to their tents, as one driveth a flock of sheep. Meanwhile Gharib returned to his pavilion, where
he doffed his gear and washed himself of the blood of the Infidels; after which he donned his
royal robes and sat down on his chair of estate. Then he called for the King of the Persians and
said to him, "O dog of the Ajams, what moved thee to deal thus with thy daughter? How seest
thou me unworthy to be her baron?" And Sabur answered, saying, "O King, punish me not
because of that deed which I did; for I repent me and confronted thee not in fight but in my fear
of thee.''[FN#64] When Gharib heard these words he bade throw him flat and beat him. So they
bastinadoed him, till he could no longer groan, and cast him among the prisoners. Then Gharib
expounded Al-Islam to the Persians and one hundred and twenty-thousand of them embraced
The Faith, and the rest he put to the sword. Moreover all the citizens professed Al-Islam and
Gharib mounted and entered in great state the city Isbanir Al-Madain. Then he went into the
King's palace and sitting down on Sabur's throne, gave robes and largesse and distributed the
booty and treasure among the Arabs and Persians, wherefore they loved him and wished him
victory and honour and endurance of days. But Fakhr Taj's mother remembered her daughter
and raised the voice of mourning for her, and the palace was filled with wails and cries. Gharib
heard this and entering the Harim, asked the women what ailed them, whereupon the Princess's
mother came forward and said, "O my lord, thy presence put me in mind of my daughter and
how she would have joyed in thy coming, had she been alive and well." Gharib wept for her and
sitting down on his throne, called for Sabur, and they brought him stumbling in his shackles.
Quoth Gharib to him, "O dog of the Persians, what didst thou do with thy daughter?" "I gave her
to such an one and such an one," quoth the King, "saying, ‘Drown her in the river Jayhún.'" So
Gharib sent for the two men and asked them, "Is what he saith true?" Answered they, "Yes; but,
O King, we did not drown her, nay we took pity on her and left her on the bank of the Jayhun,
saying, ‘Save thyself and return not to the city, lest the King slay thee and slay us with thee.'
This is all we know of her."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Six Hundred and Seventieth Night,
                                
She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
two men ended the tale of Fakhr Taj with these words, "And we
left her upon the bank of the river Jayhun!" Now, when Gharib
heard this he bade bring the astrologers and said to them,
"Strike me a board of geomancy and find out what is come of Fakhr
Taj, and whether she is still in the bonds of life or dead." They
did so and said, "O King of the age, it is manifest to us that
the Princess is alive and hath borne a male child; but she is
with a tribe of the Jinn, and will be parted from thee twenty
years; count, therefore, how many years thou hast been absent in
travel." So he reckoned up the years of his absence and found
them eight years and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!''[FN#65] Then he
sent for all Sabur's Governors of towns and strongholds and they
came and did him homage. Now one day after this, as he sat in his
palace, behold, a cloud of dust appeared in the distance and
spread till it walled the whole land and darkened the horizon. So
he summoned the two Marids and bade them reconnoitre, and they
went forth under the dust-cloud and snatching up a horseman of
the advancing host, returned and set him down before Gharib,
saying, "Ask this fellow, for he is of the army." Quoth Gharib,
"Whose power is this?" and the man answered, "O King, 'tis the
army of Khirad Shah,[FN#66] King of Shiras, who is come forth to
fight thee." Now the cause of Khirad Shah's coming was this. When
Gharib defeated Sabur's army, as hath been related, and took him
prisoner, the King's son fled, with a handful of his father's
force and ceased not flying till he reached the city of Shiras,
where he went into King Khirad Shah and kissed ground before him,
whilst the tears ran down his cheeks. When the King saw him in
this case, he said to him, "Lift thy head, O youth, and tell me
what maketh thee weep." He replied, "O King, a King of the Arabs,
by name Gharib, hath fallen on us and captured the King my sire
and slain the Persians making them drain the cup of death." And
he told him all that had passed from first to last Quoth Khirad
Shah, "Is my wife[FN#67] well?" and quoth the Prince "Gharib hath
taken her." Cried the King "As my head liveth I will not leave a
Badawi or a Moslem on the face of the earth'" So he wrote letters
to his Viceroys, who levied their troops and joined him with an
army which when reviewed numbered eighty-five thousand men. Then
he opened his armouries and distributed arms and armour to the
troops, after which he set out with them and journeyed till he
came to Isbanir, and all encamped before the city-gate. Hereupon
Kaylajan and Kurajan came in to Gharib and kissing his knee, said
to him, "O our Lord, heal our hearts and give us this host to our
share." And he said, "Up and at them!" So the two Marids flew
aloft high in the lift and lighting down in the pavilion of the
King of Shiras, found him seated on his chair of estate, with the
Prince of Persia Ward Shah son of Sabur, sitting on his right
hand, and about him his Captains, with whom he was taking counsel
for the slaughter of the Moslems. Kaylajan came forward and
caught up the Prince and Kurajan snatched Up the King and the
twain flew back with them to Gharib, who caused beat them till
they fainted Then the Marids returned to the Shirazian camp and,
drawing their swords, which no mortal man had strength to wield,
fell upon the Misbelievers and Allah hurried their souls to the
Fire and abiding-place dire, whilst they saw no one and nothing
save two swords flashing and reaping men, as a husbandman reaps
corn. So they left their tents and mounting their horses bare-
backed, fled, and the Marids pursued them two days and slew of
them much people; after which they returned and kissed Gharib's
hand. He thanked them for the deed they had done and said to
them, "The spoil of the Infidels is yours alone: none shall share
with you therein." So they called down blessings on him and going
forth, gathered the booty together and abode in their own homes.
On this wise it fared with them; but as regards Gharib and his
lieges,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after
Gharib had put to flight the host of Khirad Shah, he bade
Kaylajan and Kurajan take the spoil to their own possession nor
hare it with any; so they gathered the booty and abode in their
own homes. Meanwhile the remains of the beaten force ceased not
flying till they reached the city of Shiras and there lifted up
the voice of weeping and began the ceremonial lamentations for
those of them that had been slain. Now King Khirad Shah had a
brother Sírán the Sorcerer highs, than whom there was no greater
wizard in his day, and he lived apart from his brother in a
certain stronghold, called the Fortalice of Fruits,[FN#68] in a
place abounding in trees and streams and birds and blooms, half a
day's journey from Shiras. So the fugitives betook them thither
and went in to Siran the Sorcerer, weeping and wailing aloud.
Quoth he, "O folk, what garreth you weep?" and they told him all
that had happened, especially how the two Marids had carried off
his brother Khirad Shah; whereupon the light of his eyes became
night and he said, "By the virtue of my faith, I will certainly
slay Gharib and all his men and leave not one alive to tell the
tale!" Then he pronounced certain magical words and summoned the
Red King, who appeared and Siran said to him, "Fare for Isbanir
and fall on Gharib, as he sitteth upon his throne." Replied he,
"Hearkening and obedience!" and, gathering his troops, repaired
to Isbanir and assailed Gharib, who seeing him, drew his sword
Al-Mahik and he and Kaylajan and Kurajan fell upon the army of
the Red King and slew of them five hundred and thirty and wounded
the King himself with a grevious wound; whereupon he and his
people fled and stayed not in their flight, till they reached the
Fortalice of Fruits and went into Siran, crying out and
exclaiming, "Woe!" and "Ruin!" And the Red King said to Siran, "O
sage, Gharib hath with him the enchanted sword of Japhet son of
Noah, and whomsoever he smiteth therewith he severeth him in
sunder, and with him also are two Marids from Mount Caucasus,
given to him by King Mura'ash. He it is who slew the Blue King
and Barkan Lord of the Carnelian City, and did to death much
people of the Jinn." When the Enchanter heard this, he said to
the Red King "Go," and he went his ways; whereupon he resumed his
conjurations, and calling up a Marid, by name Zu'ázi'a gave him a
drachm of levigated Bhang and said to him, "Go thou to Isbanir
and enter King Gharib's palace and assume the form of a sparrow.
Wait till he fall asleep and there be none with him; then put the
Bhang up his nostrils and bring him to me." "To hear is to obey,"
replied the Marid and flew to Isbanir, where, changing himself
into a sparrow, he perched on the window of the palace and waited
till all Gharib's attendants retired to their rooms and the King
himself slept. Then he flew down and going up to Gharib, blew the
powdered Bhang into his nostrils, till he lost his senses,
whereupon he wrapped him in the bed-coverlet and flew off with
him, like the storm wind, to the Fortalice of Fruits; where he
arrived at midnight and laid his prize before Siran. The Sorcerer
thanked him and would have put Gharib to death, as he lay
senseless under Bhang; but a man of his people withheld him
saying, "O Sage, an thou slay him, his friend King Mura'ash will
fall on us with all his Ifrits and lay waste our realm." "How
then shall we do with him?" asked Siran, and the other answered,
"Cast him into the Jayhun while he is still in Bhang and he shall
be drowned and none will know who threw him in." And Siran bade
the Marid take Gharib and cast him into Jayhun river.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Marid took Gharib and carried him to the Jayhun purposing to cast
him therein, but it was grievous to him to drown him, wherefore
he made a raft of wood and binding it with cords, pushed it out
(and Gharib thereon) into the current, which carried it away.
Thus fared it with Gharib; but as regards his people, when they
awoke in the morning and went in to do their service to their
King, they found him not and seeing his rosary on the throne,
awaited him awhile, but he came not. So they sought out the head
Chamberlain and said to him, "Go into the Harim and look for the
King: for it is not his habit to tarry till this time."
Accordingly, the Chamberlain entered the Serraglio and enquired
for the King, but the women said, "Since yesterday we have not
seen him." Thereupon he returned and told the Officers, who were
confounded and said, "Let us see if he have gone to take his
pleasure in the gardens." Then they went out and questioned the
gardeners if they had seen the King, and they answered, "No;"
whereat they were sore concerned and searched all the garths till
the end of the day, when they returned in tears. Moreover, the
two Marids sought for him all round the city, but came back after
three days, without having happened on any tidings of him. So the
people donned black and made their complaint to the Lord of all
worshipping men who cloth as he is fain. Meanwhile, the current
bore the raft along for five days till it brought it to the salt
sea, where the waves disported with Gharib and his stomach, being
troubled, threw up the Bhang. Then he opened his eyes and finding
himself in the midst of the main, a plaything of the billows,
said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great! Would to Heaven I wot who hath done this
deed by me!" Presently as he lay, perplexed concerning his case,
lo! he caught sight of a ship sailing by and signalled with his
sleeve to the sailors, who came to him and took him up, saying,
"Who art thou and whence comest thou?" He replied, "Do ye feed me
and give me to drink, till I recover myself, and after I will
tell you who I am." So they brought him water and victual, and he
ate and drank and Allah restored to him his reason. Then he asked
them, "O folk, what countrymen are ye and what is your Faith?;"
and they answered, "We are from Karaj[FN#69] and we worship an
idol called Minkásh." Cried Gharib, "Perdition to you and your
idol! O dogs, none is worthy of wor strip save Allah who creased
all things, who saith to a thing Be! and it becometh." When they
heard this, they rose up and fell upon him in great wrath and
would have seized him. Now he was without weapons, but whomsoever
he struck, he smote down and deprived of life, till he had felled
forty men, after which they overcame him by force of numbers and
bound him fast, saying, "We will not slay him save in our own
land, that we may first show him to our King." Then they sailed
on till they came to the city of Karaj.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
ship's crew seized Gharib and bound him fast they said, "We will
not slay him save in our own land." Then they sailed on till they
came to the city of Karaj, the builder whereof was an Amalekite,
fierce and furious; and he had set up at each gate of the city a
magical figure of copper which, whenever a stranger entered, blew
a blast on a trumpet, that all in the city heard it and fell upon
the stranger and slew him, except they embraced their creed When
Gharib entered the city, the figure stationed at the gate blew
such a horrible blast that the King was affrighted and going into
his idol, found fire and smoke issuing from its mouth, nose and
eyes. Now a Satan had entered the belly of the idol and speaking
as with its tongue, said, "O King, there is come to thy city one
highs Gharib, King of Al-Irak, who biddeth the folk quit their
belief and worship his Lord; wherefore, when they bring him
before thee, look thou spare him not." So the King went out and
sat down on his throne; and presently, the sailors brought in
Gharib and set him before the presence, saying, "O King, we found
this youth shipwrecked in the midst of the sea, and he is a Kafir
and believeth not in our gods." Then they told him all that had
passed and the King said, "Carry him to the house of the Great
Idol and cut his throat before him, so haply our god may look
lovingly upon us." But the Wazir said, "O King, it befitteth not
to slaughter him thus, for he would die in a moment: better we
imprison him and build a pyre of fuel and burn him with fire."
Thereupon the King commanded to cast Gharib into gaol and caused
wood to be brought, and they made a mighty pyre and set fire to
it, and it burnt till the morning. Then the King and the people
of the city came forth and the Ruler sent to fetch Gharib; but
his lieges found him not; so they returned and told their King
who said, "And how made he his escape?" Quoth they, ‘We found the
chains and shackles cast down and the doors fast locked." Whereat
the King marvelled and asked, Hath this fellow to Heaven up flown
or into the earth gone down?;' and they answered, "We know not."
Then said the King, "I will go and question my God, and he will
inform me whither he is gone." So he rose and went in, to
prostrate himself to his idol, but found it not and began to rub
his eyes and say, "Am I in sleep or on wake?" Then he turned to
his Wazir and said to him, "Where is my God and where is my
prisoner? By my faith, O dog of Wazirs, haddest thou not
counselled me to burn him, I had slaughtered him; for it is he
who hath stolen my god and fled; and there is no help but I take
brood-wreak of him!" Then he drew his sword and struck off the
Wazir's head. Now there was for Gharib's escape with the idol a
strange cause and it was on this wise. When they had shut him up
in a cell adjoining the doomed shrine under which stood the idol,
he rose to pray, calling upon the name of Almighty Allah and
seeking deliverance of Him, to whom be honour and glory! The
Marid who had charge of the idol and spoke in its name, heard him
and fear got hold upon his heart and he said, "O shame upon me!
Who is this seeth me while I see him not?" So he went in to
Gharib and throwing himself at his feet, said to him, "O my Lord,
what must I say that I may become of thy company and enter thy
religion?" Replied Gharib, "Say, ‘There is no god but the God and
Abraham is the Friend of God.'" So the Marid pronounced the
profession of Faith and was enrolled among the people of
felicity. Now his name was Zalzál, son of Al-Muzalzil,[FN#70] one
of the Chiefs of the Kings of the Jinn. Then he unbound Gharib
and taking him and the idol, made for the higher air.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Marid
took up Gharib and the idol and made for the higher air. Such was
his case; but as regards the King, when his soldiers saw what had
befallen and the slaughter of the Wazir they renounced the
worship of the idol and drawing their swords, slew the King;
after which they fell on one another, and the sword went round
amongst them three days, till there abode alive but two men, one
of whom prevailed over the other and killed him. Then the boys
attacked the survivor and slew him and fell to fighting amongst
themselves, till they were all killed; and the women and girls
fled to the hamlets and forted villages; wherefore the city
became desert and none dwelt therein but the owl. Meanwhile, the
Marid Zalzal flew with Gharib towards his own country, the Island
of Camphor and the Castle of Crystal and the Land of the
Enchanted Calf, so called because its King Al Muzalzil, had a
pied calf, which he had clad in housings brocaded with red gold,
and worshipped as a god. One day the King and his people went in
to the calf and found him trembling; so the King said, "O my God,
what hath troubled thee?" whereupon the Satan in the calf's belly
cried out and said, "O Muzalzil, verily thy son hath deserted to
the Faith of Abraham the Friend at the hands of Gharib Lord of
Al-Irak;" and went on to tell him all that had passed from first
to last. When the King heard the words of his calf he was
confounded and going forth, sat down upon his throne. Then he
summoned his Grandees who came in a body, and he told them what
he had heard from the idol, whereat they marvelled and said,
"What shall we do, O King?" Quoth he, "When my son cometh and ye
see him embrace him, do ye lay hold of him." And they said,
"Hearkening and obedience!" After two days came Zalzal and
Gharib, with the King's idol of Karaj, but no sooner had they
entered the palace-gate than the Jinn seized on them and carried
them before Al-Muzalzil, who looked at his son with eyes of ire
and said to him, "O dog of the Jann, hast thou left thy Faith and
that of thy fathers and grandfathers?" Quoth Zalzal, "I have
embraced the True Faith, and on like wise do thou (Woe be to
thee!) seek salvation and thou shalt be saved from the wrath of
the King Almighty in sway, Creator of Night and Day." Therewith
his father waxed wroth and said, "O son of adultery, dost
confront me with these words?" Then he bade clap him in prison
and turning to Gharib, said to him, "O wretch of a mortal, how
hast thou abused my son's wit and seduced him from his Faith?"
Quoth Gharib, "Indeed, I have brought him out of wrongousness
into the way of righteousness, out of Hell into Heaven and out of
unfaith to the True Faith." Whereupon the King cried out to a
Marid called Sayyár, saying "Take this dog and cast him into the
Wady of Fire, that he may perish." Now this valley was in the
"Waste Quarter[FN#71]" and was thus named from the excess of its
heat and the flaming of its fire, which was so fierce that none
who went down therein could live an hour, but was destroyed; and
it was compassed about by mountains high and slippery wherein was
no opening. So Sayyar took up Gharib and flew with him towards
the Valley of Fire, till he came within an hour's journey
thereof, when being weary, he alighted in a valley full of trees
and streams and fruits, and setting down from his back Gharib
chained as he was, fell asleep for fatigue. When Gharib heard him
snore, he strove with his bonds till he burst them; then, taking
up a heavy stone, he cast it down on the Marid's head and crushed
his bones, so that he died on the spot. Then he fared on into the
valley.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Gharib
after killing the Marid fared on into the valley and found
himself in a great island in mid-ocean, full of all fruits that
lips and tongue could desire. So he abode alone on the island,
drinking of its waters and eating of its fruits and of fish that
he caught, and days and years passed over him, till he had
sojourned there in his solitude seven years. One day, as he sat,
be hold, there came down on him from the air two Marids, each
carrying a man; and seeing him they said, "Who art thou, O
fellow, and of which of the tribes art thou?" Now they took him
for a Jinni, because his hair was grown long; and he replied,
saying, "I am not of the Jann," whereupon they questioned him,
and he told them all that had befallen him. They grieved for him
and one of the Ifrits said, "Abide thou here till we bear these
two lambs to our King, that he may break his fast on the one and
sup on the other, and after we will come back and carry thee to
thine own country." He thanked them and said, " Where be the
lambs?" Quoth they, "These two mortals are the lambs." And Gharib
said, "I take refuge with Allah the God of Abraham the Friend,
the Lord of all creatures, who hath power over everything! Then
the Marids flew away and Gharib abode awaiting them two days,
when one of them returned, bringing with him a suit of clothes
wherewith he clad him. Then he took him up and flew with him sky-
high out of sight of earth, till Gharib heard the angels
glorifying God in Heaven, and a flaming shaft issued from amongst
them and made for the Marid, who fled from it towards the earth.
The meteor pursued him, till he came within a spear's cast of the
ground, when Gharib leaped from his shoulders and the fiery shaft
overtook the Marid, who became a heap of ashes. As for Gharib, he
fell into the sea and sank two fathoms deep, after which he rose
to the surface and swam for two days and two nights, till his
strength failed him and he made certain of death. But, on the
third day as he was despairing he caught sight of an island steep
and mountainous; so he swam for it and landing, walked on inland,
where he rested a day and a Night, feeding on the growth of the
ground. Then he climbed to the mountain top, and, descending the
opposite slope, fared on two days till he came in sight of a
walled and bulwarked city, abounding in trees and rills. He
walked up to it; but, when he reached the gate, the warders
seized on him, and carried him to their Queen, whose name was Ján
Sháh.[FN#72] Now she was five hundred years old, and every man
who entered the city, they brought to her and she made him sleep
with her, and when he had done his work, she slew him and so had
she slain many men. When she saw Gharib, he pleased her mightily;
so she asked him, "What be thy name and Faith and whence comest
thou?" and he answered, "My name is Gharib King of Irak, and I am
a Moslem." Said she, "Leave this Creed and enter mine and I will
marry thee and make thee King." But he looked at her with eyes of
ire and cried, "Perish thou and thy faith!" Cried she, "Dost thou
blaspheme my idol, which is of red carnelian, set with pearls and
gems?" And she called out to her men, saying, "Imprison him in
the house of the idol; haply it will soften his heart." So they
shut him up in the domed shrine and locking the doors upon him,
went their way.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
they took Gharib, they jailed him in the idol's domed shrine; and
locking the doors upon him, went their way. As soon as they were
gone, Gharib gazed at the idol, which was of red carnelian,  with
collars of pearls and precious stones about its neck, and
presently he went close to it and lifting it up, dashed it on the
ground and brake it in bits; after which he lay down and slept
till daybreak. When morning morrowed, the Queen took seat on her
throne and said, "O men, bring me the prisoner." So they opened
the temple doors and entering, found the idol broken in pieces,
whereupon they buffeted their faces till the blood ran from the
corners of their eyes. Then they made at Gharib to seize him; but
he smote one of them with his fist and slew him, and so did he
with another and yet another, till he had slain five-and-twenty
of them and the rest fled and went in to Queen Jan Shah,
shrieking loudly. Quoth she, "What is the matter?" and quoth
they, "The prisoner hath broken thine idol and slain thy men,"
and told her all that had passed. When she heard this, she cast
her crown to the ground and said, "There is no worth left in
idols!" Then she mounted amid a thousand fighting-men and rode to
the temple, where she found Gharib had gotten him a sword and
come forth and was slaying men and overthrowing warriors. When
she saw his prowess, her heart was drowned in the love of him and
she said to herself, "I have no need of the idol and care for
naught save this Gharib, that he may lie in my bosom the rest of
my life." Then she cried to her men, "Hold aloof from him and
leave him to himself!"; then, going up to him she muttered
certain magical words, whereupon his arm became benumbed, his
forearm relaxed and the sword dropped from his hand. So they
seized him and pinioned him, as he stood confounded, stupefied.
Then the Queen returned to her palace, and seating herself on her
seat of estate, bade her people withdraw and leave Gharib with
her. When they were alone, she said to him, " O dog of the Arabs,
wilt thou shiver my idol and slay my people?" He replied, "O
accursed woman, had he been a god he had defended himself!" Quoth
she, "Stroke me and I will forgive thee all thou hast done." But
he replied, saying, "I will do nought of this." And she said, "By
the virtue of my faith, I will torture thee with grievous
torture!" So she took water and conjuring over it, sprinkled it
upon him and he became an ape. And she used to feed and water and
keep him in a (loses, appointing one to care for him; and in this
plight he abode two years. Then she called him to her one day and
said to him, "Wilt thou hearken to me?" And he signed to her with
his head, "Yes." So she rejoiced and freed him from the
enchantment. Then she brought him food and he ate and toyed with
her and kissed her, so that she trusted in him. When it was night
she lay down and said to him, "Come, do thy business." He
replied, " 'Tis well;" and, mounting on her breast, seized her by
the neck and brake it, nor did he arise from her till life had
left her. Then, seeing an open cabinet, he went in and found
there a sword of damascened[FN#73] steel and a targe of Chinese
iron; so he armed himself cap-à-pie and waited till the day. As
soon as it was morning, he went forth and stood at the gate of
the palace. When the Emirs came and would have gone in to do
their service to the Queen, they found Gharib standing at the
gate, clad in complete war-gear; and he said to them, "O folk,
leave the service of idols and worship the All-wise King, Creator
of Night and Day, the Lord of men, the Quickener of dry bones,
for He made all things and hath dominion over all." When the
Kafirs heard this, they ran at him, but he fell on them like a
rending lion and charged through them again and again, slaying of
them much people;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Kafirs fell upon Gharib, he slew of them much people; but, when
the night came, they overcame him by dint of numbers and would
have taken him by strenuous effort, when behold, there descended
upon the Infidels a thousand Marids, under the command of Zalzal,
who plied them with the keen sabre and made them drink the cup of
destruction, whilst Allah hurried their souls to Hell-fire, till
but few were left of the people of Jan Shah to tell the tale and
the rest cried out, "Quarter! Quarter!" and believed in the
Requiting King, whom no one thing diverteth from other thing, the
Destroyer of the Jabábirah[FN#74] and Exterminator of the
Akásirah, Lord of this world and of the next. Then Zalzal saluted
Gharib and gave him joy of his safety; and Gharib said to him,
"How knowest thou of my case?" and he replied, "O my lord, my
father kept me in prison two years, after sending thee to the
Valley of Fire; then he released me, and I abode with him another
year, till I was restored to favour with him, when I slew him and
his troops submitted to me. I ruled them for a year's space till,
one Night, I lay down to sleep, having thee in thought, and saw
thee in a dream, fighting against the people of Jan Shah;
wherefore I took these thousand Marids and came to thee." And
Gharib marvelled at this happy conjuncture. Then he seized upon
Jan Shah's treasures and those of the slain and appointed a ruler
over the city; after which the Marids took up Gharib and the
monies and he lay the same night in the Castle of Crystal. He
abode Zalzal's guest six months, when he desired to depart; so
Zalzal gave him rich presents and despatched three thousand
Marids, who brought the spoils of Karaj-city and added them to
those of Jan Shah. Then Zalzal loaded forty-thousand Marids with
the treasure and himself taking up Gharib, flew with his host
towards the city of Isbanir al-Madain where they arrived at
midnight. But as Gharib glanced around he saw the walls invested
on all sides by a conquering army,[FN#75] as it were the surging
sea, so he said to Zalzal, "O my brother, what is the cause of
this siege and whence came this army?" Then he alighted on the
terrace roof of his palace and cried out, saying, "Ho, Star o'
Morn! Ho, Mahdiyah!" Whereupon the twain started up from sleep in
amazement and said, "Who calleth us at this hour?" Quoth he, "
'Tis I, your lord, Gharib, the Marvellous One of the deeds
wondrous." When the Princesses heard their lord's voice, they
rejoiced and so did the women and the eunuchs. Then Gharib went
down to them and they threw themselves upon him and lullilooed
with cries of joy, so that all the palace rang again and the
Captains of the army awoke and said, "What is to do?" So they
made for the palace and asked the eunuchs, "Hath one of the
King's women given birth to a child?"; and they answered, "No;
but rejoice ye, for King Gharib hath returned to you." So they
rejoiced, and Gharib, after salams to the women came forth
amongst his comrades, who threw themselves upon him and kissed
his hands and feet, returning thanks to Almighty Allah and
praising Him. Then he sat down on his throne, with his officers
sitting about him, and questioned them of the beleaguering army.
They replied, "O King, these troops sat down before the city
three days ago and there are amongst them Jinns as well as men;
but we know not what they want, for we have had with them neither
battle nor speech." And presently they added, "The name of the
commander of the besieging army is Murad Shah and he hath with
him an hundred thousand horse and three thousand foot, besides
two hundred tribesmen of the Jinn." Now the manner of his coming
was wondrous.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the cause
of this army coming upon Isbanir city was wondrous. When the two
men, whom Sabur had charged to drown his daughter Fakhr Taj, let
her go, bidding her flee for her life, she went forth distracted,
unknowing whither to turn and saying, "Where is thine eye, O
Gharib, that thou mayst see my case and the misery I am in?"; and
wandered on from country to country, and valley to valley, till
she came to a Wady abounding in trees and streams, in whose midst
stood a strong-based castle and a lofty-builded as it were one of
the pavilions of Paradise. So she betook herself thither and
entering the fortalice, found it hung and carpeted with stuffs of
silk and great plenty of gold and silver vessels; and therein
were an hundred beautiful damsels. When the maidens saw Fakhr
Taj, they came up to her and saluted her, deeming her of the
virgins of 