the Jinn, and asked her of her case. Quoth she, "I am
daughter to the Persians' King;" and told them all that had
befallen her; which when they heard, they wept over her and
condoled with her and comforted her, saying, "Be of good cheer
and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for here shalt thou have meat
and drink and raiment, and we all are thy handmaids." She called
down blessings on them and they brought her food, of which she
ate till she was satisfied. Then quoth she to them, "Who is the
owner of this palace and lord over you girls?" and quoth they,
"King Salsál, son of Dal, is our master; he passeth a night here
once in every month and fareth in the morning to rule over the
tribes of the Jann." So Fakhr Taj took up her abode with them and
after five days she gave birth to a male child, as he were the
moon. They cut his navel cord and kohl'd his eyes then they named
him Murad Shah, and he grew up in his mother's lap. After a while
came King Salsal, riding on a paper white elephant, as he were a
tower plastered with lime and attended by the troops of the Jinn.
He entered the palace, where the hundred damsels met him and
kissed ground before him, and amongst them Fakhr Taj. When the
King saw her, he looked at her and said to the others, "Who is
yonder damsel?"; and they replied, "She is the daughter of Sabur,
King of the Persians and Turks and Daylamites." Quoth he, "Who
brought her hither?" So they repeated to him her story; whereat
he was moved to pity for her and said to her, "Grieve not, but
take patience till thy son be grown a man, when I will go to the
land of the Ajamis and strike off thy father's head from between
his shoulders and seat thy son on the throne in his stead." So
she rose and kissed his hands and blessed him. Then she abode in
the castle and her son grew up and was reared with the children
of the King. They used to ride forth together a-hunting and
birding and he became skilled in the chase of wild beasts and
ravening lions and ate of their flesh, till his heart became
harder than the rock. When he reached the age of fifteen, his
spirit waxed big in him and he said to Fakhr Taj, "O my mamma,
who is my papa?" She replied, "O my son, Gharib, King of Irak, is
thy father and I am the King's daughter, of the Persians," and
she told him her story. Quoth he, "Did my grandfather indeed give
orders to slay thee and my father Gharib?"; and quoth she, "Yes."
Whereupon he, "By the claim thou hast on me for rearing me, I
will assuredly go to thy father's city and cut off his head and
bring it into thy pre sence!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Murad
Shah son of Fakhr Taj thus bespake his mother, she rejoiced in
his speech. Now he used to go a-riding with two hundred Marids
till he grew to man's estate, when he and they fell to making
raids and cutting off the roads and they pushed their razzias
farther till one day he attacked the city of Shiraz and took it.
Then he proceeded to the palace and cut off the King's head, as
he sat on his throne, and slew many of his troops, whereupon the
rest cried "Quarter! Quarter!" and kissed his stirrups. Finding
that they numbered ten thousand horse, he led them to Balkh,
where he slew the King of the city and put his men to the rout
and made himself master of the riches of the place. Thence he
passed to Núrayn,[FN#76] at the head of an army of thirty-
thousand horse, and the Lord of Nurayn came out to him, with
treasure and tribute, and did him homage. Then he went on to
Samarcand of the Persians and took the city, and after that to
Akhlát[FN#77] and took that town also; nor was there any city he
came to but he captured it. Thus Murad Shah became the head of a
mighty host, and all the booty he made and spoils in the sundry
cities he divided among his soldiery, who loved him for his
velour and munificence. At last he came to Isbanir al-Madain and
sat down before it, saying, "Let us wait till the rest of my army
come up, when I will seize on my grandfather and solace my
mother's heart by smiting his neck in her presence." So he sent
for her, and by reason of this, there was no battle for three
days, when Gharib and Zalzal arrived with the forty-thousand
Marids, laden with treasure and presents. They asked concerning
the besiegers, but none could enlighten them beyond saying that
the host had been there encamped for three days without a fight
taking place. Presently came Fakhr Taj, and her son Murad Shah
embraced her saying, "Sit in thy tent till I bring thy father to
thee." And she sought succour for him of the Lord of the Worlds,
the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earths. Next morning,
as soon as it was day, Murad Shah mounted and rode forth, with
the two hundred Marids on his right hand and the Kings of men on
his left, whilst the kettle-drums beat to battle. When Gharib
heard this, he also took to horse and, calling his people to the
combat, rode out, with the jinn on his dexter hand and the men on
his sinistral. Then came forth Murad Shah, armed cap-à-pie and
crave his charger right and left, crying, "O folk, let none come
forth to me but your King. If he conquer me, he shall be lord of
both armies, and if I conquer him, I will slay him, as I have
slain others." When Gharib heard his speech, he said, "Avaunt, O
dog of the Arabs!" And they charged at each other and lunged with
lances, till they broke, then hewed at each other with swords,
till the blades were notched; nor did they cease to advance and
retire and wheel and career, till the day was half spent and
their horses fell down under them, when they dismounted and
gripped each other. Then Murad Shah seizing Gharib lifted him up
and strove to dash him to the ground; but Gharib caught him by
the ears and pulled him with his might, till it seemed to the
youth as if the heavens were. falling on the earth[FN#78] and he
cried out, with his heart in his mouth, saying, "I yield myself
to thy mercy, O Knight of the Age!" So Gharib bound him,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Gharib caught Murad Shah by the ears and well nigh tore them off
he cried, "I yield myself to thy mercy, O Knight of the Age!" So
Gharib bound him, and the Marids his comrades would have charged
and rescued him, but Gharib fell on them with a thousand Marids
and was about to smite them down, when they cried out "Quarter!
Quarter!" and threw away their arms. Then Gharib returned to his
Shahmiyánah which was of green silk, embroidered with red gold
and set with pearls and gems; and, seating himself on his throne,
called for Murad Shah. So they brought him, shuffling in his
manacles and shackles. When the prisoner saw him, he hung down
his head for shame; and Gharib said to him, "O dog of the Arabs,
who art thou that thou shouldst ride forth and measure thyself
against kings?" Replied Murad Shah, "O my lord, reproach me not,
for indeed I have excuse." Quoth Gharib, "What manner of excuse
hast thou?"; And quoth he, "Know, O my lord, that I came out to
avenge my mother and my father on Sabur, King of the Persians;
for he would have slain them; but my mother escaped and I know
not whether he killed my father or not." When Gharib heard these
words, he replied, "By Allah, thou art indeed excusable! But who
were thy father and mother and what are their names?" Murad Shah
said, "My sire was Gharib, King of Al-Irak, and my mother Fakhr
Taj, daughter of King Sabur of Persia." When Gharib heard this,
he gave a great cry and fell down fainting. They sprinkled rose-
water on him, till he came to himself, when he said to Murad
Shah, "Art thou indeed Gharib's son by Fakhr Taj?"; and he
replied, "Yes." Cried Gharib, "Thou art a champion, the son of a
champion. Loose my child!" And Sahim and Kaylajan went up to
Murad Shah and set him free. Then Gharib embraced his son and,
seating him beside himself, said to him, "Where is thy mother?"
"She is with me in my tent," answered Murad Shah; and Gharib
said, "Bring her to me." So Murad Shah mounted and repaired to
his camp, where his comrades met him, rejoicing in his safety,
and asked him of his case; but he answered, "This is no time for
questions." Then he went in to his mother and told her what had
passed whereat she was gladdened with exceeding gladness: so he
carried her to Gharib, and they two embraced and rejoiced in each
other. Then Fakhr Taj and Murad Shah islamised and expounded The
Faith to their troops, who all made profession with heart and
tongue. After this, Gharib sent for Sabur and his son Ward Shah,
and upbraided them for their evil dealing and expounded Al-Islam
to them; but they refused to profess wherefore he crucified them
on the gate of the city and the people decorated the town and
held high festival. Then Gharib crowned Murad Shah with the crown
of the Chosroës and made him King of the Persians and Turks and
Medes; moreover, he made his uncle Al-Damigh, King over Al-Irak,
and all the peoples and lands submitted themselves to Gharib.
Then he abode in his kingship, doing justice among his lieges,
wherefore all the people loved him, and he and his wives and
comrades ceased not from all solace of life, till there came to
them the Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer of Societies, and
extolled be the perfection of Him whose glory endureth for ever
and aye and whose boons embrace all His creatures! This is every
thing that hath come down to us of the history of Gharib and
Ajib. And Abdullah bin Ma'amar al Kaysi hath thus related the
tale of 




                    OTBAH[FN#79] AND RAYYA.



I went one year on the pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah, and
when I had accomplished my pilgrimage, I turned back for
visitation of the tomb of the Prophet, whom Allah bless and keep!
One night, as I sat in the garden,[FN#80] between the tomb and
the pulpit, I heard a low moaning in a soft voice; so I listened
to it and it said,

"Have the doves that moan in the lotus-tree * Woke grief in thy
     heart and bred misery?
Or doth memory of maiden in beauty deckt * Cause this doubt in
     thee, this despondency?
O night, thou art longsome for love-sick sprite * Complaining of
     Love and its ecstacy:
Thou makest him wakeful, who burns with fire * Of a love, like
     the live coal's ardency.
The moon is witness my heart is held * By a moonlight brow of the
     brightest blee:
I reckt not to see me by Love ensnared * Till ensnared before I
     could reck or see."


Then the voice ceased and not knowing whence it came to me I
abode perplexed; but lo! it again took up its lament and recited,

"Came Rayya's phantom to grieve thy sight * In the thickest gloom
     of the black-haired Night!
And hath love of slumber deprived those eyes * And the
     phantom-vision vexed thy sprite?
I cried to the Night, whose glooms were like * Seas that surge
     and billow with might, with might:
'O Night, thou art longsome to lover who * Hath no aid nor help
     save the morning light!'
She replied, 'Complain not that I am long: * 'Tis love is the
     cause of thy longsome plight!'"

Now, at the first of the couplets, I sprang up and made for the
quarter whence the sound came, nor had the voice ended repeating
them, ere I was with the speaker and saw a youth of the utmost
beauty, the hair of whose side face had not sprouted and in whose
cheeks tears had worn twin trenches.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Abdullah bin Ma'amar al-Kaysi thus continued:--So I sprang up and
made for the quarter whence the sound came, nor had the voice
ended repeating the verses, ere I was with the speaker and saw a
youth on whose side face the hair had not sprouted and in whose
cheeks tears had worn twin trenches. Quoth I to him, "Fair befal
thee for a youth!"; and quoth he, "And thee also! Who art thou?"
I replied, "Abdullah bin Ma'amar al-Kaysi;" and he said, "Dost
thou want aught?" I rejoined, "I was sitting in the garden and
naught hath troubled me this night but thy voice. With my life
would I ransom thee! What aileth thee?" He said, "Sit thee down."
So I sat down and he continued, "I am Otbah bin al-Hubáb bin
al-Mundhir bin al-Jamúh the Ansári.[FN#81] I went out in the
morning to the Mosque Al-Ahzáb[FN#82] and occupied myself there
awhile with prayer-bows and prostrations, after which I withdrew
apart, to worship privily. But lo! up came women, as they were
moons, walking with a swaying gait, and surrounding a damsel of
passing loveliness, perfect in beauty and grace, who stopped
before me and said, 'O Otbah, what sayst thou of union with one
who seeketh union with thee?' Then she left me and went away; and
since that time I have had no tidings of her nor come upon any
trace of her; and behold, I am distracted and do naught but
remove from place to place." Then he cried out and fell to the
ground fainting. When he came to himself, it was as if the damask
of his cheeks were dyed with safflower,[FN#83] and he recited
these couplets,

"I see you with my heart from far countrie * Would Heaven you
     also me from far could see
My heart and eyes for you are sorrowing; * My soul with you
     abides and you with me.
I take no joy in life when you're unseen * Or Heaven or Garden of
     Eternity."

Said I, "O Otbah, O son of my uncle, repent to thy Lord and crave
pardon for thy sin; for before thee is the terror of standing up
to Judgment." He replied, "Far be it from me so to do. I shall
never leave to love till the two mimosa-gatherers return."[FN#84]
I abode with him till daybreak, when I said to him, "Come let us
go to the Mosque Al-Ahzab." So we went thither and sat there,
till we had prayed the midday prayers, when lo! up came the
women; but the damsel was not among them. Quoth they to him, "O
Otbah, what thinkest thou of her who seeketh union with thee?" He
said, "And what of her?"; and they replied, "Her father hath
taken her and departed to Al-Samawah."[FN#85] I asked them the
name of the damsel and they said, "She is called Rayyá, daughter
of Al-Ghitríf al-Sulami."[FN#86] Whereupon Otbah raised his head
and recited these verses,

"My friends, Rayya hath mounted soon as morning shone, * And to
Samawah's wilds her caravan is gone.
My friends, I've wept till I can weep no more, Oh, say, * Hath
any one a tear that I can take on loan."

Then said I to him, "O Otbah, I have brought with me great
wealth, wherewith I desire to succour generous men; and by Allah,
I will lavish it before thee,[FN#87] so thou mayst attain thy
desire and more than thy desire! Come with me to the assembly of
the Ansaris." So we rose and went, till we entered their
assembly, when I salam'd to them and they returned my greeting
civilly. Then quoth I, "O assembly, what say ye of Otbah and his
father?": and they replied, "They are of the princes of the
Arabs." I continued, "Know that he is smitten with the calamity
of love and I desire your furtherance to Al-Samawah." And they
said, "To hear is to obey." So they mounted with us, the whole
party, and we rode till we drew near the place of the Banu
Sulaym. Now when Ghitrif heard of our being near, he hastened
forth to meet us, saying, "Long life to you, O nobles!"; whereto
we replied, "And to thee also! Behold we are thy guests." Quoth
he, "Ye have lighted down at a most hospitable abode and ample;"
and alighting he cried out, "Ho, all ye slaves, come down!" So
they came down and spread skin-rugs and cushions and slaughtered
sheep and cattle; but we said, "We will not taste of thy food,
till thou have accomplished our need." He asked, "And what is
your need?"; and we answered, "We demand thy noble daughter in
marriage for Otbah bin Hubab bin Mundhir the illustrious and well
born." "O my brethren," said he, "she whom you demand is owner of
herself, and I will go in to her and tell her." So he rose in
wrath[FN#88] and went in to Rayya, who said to him, "O my papa,
why do I see thee show anger?" And he replied, saying, "Certain
of the Ansaris have come upon me to demand thy hand of me in
marriage." Quoth she, "They are noble chiefs; the Prophet, on
whom be the choicest blessings and peace, intercedeth for them
with Allah. For whom among them do they ask me?" Quoth he, "For a
youth known as Otbah bin al-Hubab;" and she said, "I have heard
of Otbah that he performeth what he promised and findeth what he
seeketh." Ghitrif cried, "I swear that I will never marry thee to
him; no, never, for there hath been reported to me somewhat of
thy converse with him." Said she, "What was that? But in any
case, I swear that the Ansaris shall not be uncivilly rejected;
wherefore do thou offer them a fair excuse." "How so?" "Make the
dowry heavy to them and they will desist." "Thou sayst well,"
said he, and going out in haste, told the Ansaris, "The damsel of
the tribe[FN#89] consenteth; but she requireth a dowry worthy
herself. Who engageth for this?" "I," answered I. Then said he,
"I require for her a thousand bracelets of red gold and five
thousand dirhams of the coinage of Hajar[FN#90] and a hundred
pieces of woollen cloth and striped stuffs[FN#91] of Al-Yaman and
five bladders of ambergris." Said I, "Thou shalt have that much;
dost thou consent?"; and he said, "I do consent." So I despatched
to Al-Medinah the Illumined[FN#92] a party of the Ansaris, who
brought all for which I had become surety; whereupon they
slaughtered sheep and cattle and the folk assembled to eat of the
food. We abode thus forty days when Ghitrif said to us, "Take
your bride." So we sat her in a dromedary-litter and her father
equipped her with thirty camel-loads of things of price; after
which we farewelled him and journeyed till we came within a day's
journey of Al-Medinah the Illumined, when there fell upon us
horsemen, with intent to plunder, and methinks they were of the
Banu Sulaym, Otbah drove at them and slew of them much people,
but fell back, wounded by a lance-thrust, and presently dropped
to the earth. Then there came to us succour of the country
people, who drove away the highwaymen; but Otbah's days were
ended. So we said, "Alas for Otbah, oh!;" and the damsel hearing
it cast herself down from the camel and throwing herself upon
him, cried out grievously and repeated these couplets,

"Patient I seemed, yet Patience shown by me * Was but
     self-guiling till thy sight I see:
Had my soul done as due my life had gone, * Had fled before
     mankind forestalling thee:
Then, after me and thee none shall to friend * Be just, nor any
     soul with soul agree."

Then she sobbed a single sob and gave up the ghost. We dug one
grave for them and laid them in the earth, and I returned to the
dwellings of my people, where I abode seven years. Then I betook
me again to Al-Hijaz and entering Al-Medinah the Illumined for
pious visitation said in my mind, "By Allah, I will go again to
Otbah's tomb!" So I repaired thither, and, behold, over the grave
was a tall tree, on which hung fillets of red and green and
yellow stuffs.[FN#93] So I asked the people of the place, "How be
this tree called?"; and they answered, "The tree of the Bride and
the Bridegroom." I abode by the tomb a day and a night, then went
my way; and this is all I know of Otbah. Almighty Allah have
mercy upon him! And they also tell this tale of




                HIND, DAUGHTER OF AL-NU'MAN AND
                       AL-HAJJAJ.[FN#94]



It is related that Hind, daughter of Al-Nu'man, was the fairest
woman of her day, and her beauty and loveliness were reported to
Al-Hajjaj, who sought her in marriage and lavished much treasure
on her. So he took her to wife, engaging to give her a dowry of
two hundred thousand dirhams in case of divorce, and when he went
into her, he abode with her a long time. One day after this, he
went in to her and found her looking at her face in the mirror
and saying,

"Hind is an Arab filly purest bred, * Which hath been covered by
     a mongrel mule;
An colt of horse she throw by Allah! well; * If mule, it but
     results from mulish rule."[FN#95]

When Al-Hajjaj heard this, he turned back and went his way,
unseen of Hind; and, being minded to put her away, he sent
Abdullah bin Tahir to her, to divorce her. So Abdullah went in to
her and said to her, "Al-Hajjaj Abu Mohammed saith to thee: 'Here
be the two hundred thousand dirhams of thy contingent dowry he
oweth thee'; and he hath deputed me to divorce thee." Replied
she, "O Ibn Tahir, I gladly agree to this; for know that I never
for one day took pleasure in him; so, if we separate, by Allah, I
shall never regret him, and these two hundred thousand dirhams I
give to thee as a reward for the glad tidings thou bringest me of
my release from yonder dog of the Thakafites."[FN#96] After this,
the Commander of the Faithful, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, heard of
her beauty and loveliness, her stature and symmetry, her sweet
speech and the amorous grace of her glances and sent to her, to
ask her in marriage;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Prince of True Believers, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, hearing of the
lady's beauty and loveliness, sent to ask her in marriage; and
she wrote him in reply a letter, in which, after the
glorification of Allah and benediction of His Prophet, she said,
"But afterwards. Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that the dog
hath lapped in the vase." When the Caliph read her answer, he
laughed and wrote to her, citing his saying (whom may Allah bless
and keep!) "If a dog lap in the vessel of one of you, let him
wash seven times, once thereof with earth," and adding, "Wash the
affront from the place of use."[FN#97] With this she could not
gainsay him; so she replied to him, saying (after praise and
blessing), "O Commander of the Faithful I will not consent save
on one condition, and if thou ask me what it is, I reply that
Al-Hajjaj lead my camel to the town where thou tarriest barefoot
and clad as he is."[FN#98] When the Caliph read her letter, he
laughed long and loudly and sent to Al-Hajjaj, bidding him to do
as she wished. He dared not disobey the order, so he submitted to
the Caliph's commandment and sent to Hind, telling her to make
ready for the journey. So she made ready and mounted her litter,
when Al-Hajjaj with his suite came up to Hind's door and as she
mounted and her damsels and eunuchs rode around her, he
dismounted and took the halter of her camel and led it along,
barefooted, whilst she and her damsels and tirewomen laughed and
jeered at him and made mock of him. Then she said to her
tirewoman, "Draw back the curtain of the litter;" and she drew
back the curtain, till Hind was face to face with Al-Hajjaj,
whereupon she laughed at him and he improvised this couplet,

"Though now thou jeer, O Hind, how many a night * I've left thee
     wakeful sighing for the light."

And she answered him with these two,

"We reck not, an our life escape from bane, * For waste of wealth
     and gear that went in vain:
Money may be regained and rank re-won * When one is cured of
     malady and pain."

And she ceased not to laugh at him and make sport of him, till
they drew near the city of the Caliph, when she threw down a
dinar with her own hand and said to Al-Hajjaj, "O camel-driver, I
have dropped a dirham; look for it and give it to me." So he
looked and seeing naught but the dinar, said, "This is a dinar."
She replied, "Nay, 'tis a dirham." But he said, "This is a
dinar." Then quoth she, "Praise be Allah who hath given us in
exchange for a paltry dirham a dinar! Give it us." And Al-Hajjaj
was abashed at this. Then he carried her to the palace of the
Commander of the Faithful, and she went in to him and became his
favourite.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that men also
tell a tale anent




                KHUZAYMAH BIN BISHR AND IKRIMAH
                       AL-FAYYAZ.[FN#99]



There lived once, in the days of the Caliph Sulayman bin Abd
al-Malik[FN#100] a man of the Banu Asad, by name Khuzaymah bin
Bishr, who was famed for bounty and abundant wealth and
excellence and righteous dealing with his brethren. He continued
thus till times grew strait with him and he became in need of the
aid of those Moslem brethren on whom he had lavished favour and
kindness. So they succoured him a while and then grew weary of
him, which when he saw, he went in to his wife who was the
daughter of his father's brother, and said to her, "O my cousin,
I find a change in my brethren; wherefore I am resolved to keep
my house till death come to me." So he shut his door and abode in
his home, living on that which he had by him, till it was spent
and he knew not what to do. Now Ikrimah al-Raba'í, surnamed
Al-Fayyáz, governor of Mesopotamia,[FN#101] had known him, and
one day, as he sat in his Audience-chamber, mention was made of
Khuzaymah, whereupon quoth Ikrimah, "How is it with him?" And
quoth they, "He is in a plight past telling, and hath shut his
door and keepeth the house." Ikrimah rejoined, "This cometh but
of his excessive generosity: but how is it that Khuzaymah bin
Bishr findeth nor comforter nor requiter?" And they replied, "He
hath found naught of this." So when it was night, Ikrimah took
four thousand dinars and laid them in one purse; then, bidding
saddle his beast, he mounted and rode privily to Khuzaymah's
house, attended only by one of his pages, carrying the money.
When he came to the door, he alighted and taking the purse from
the page made him withdraw afar off; after which he went up to
the door and knocked. Khuzaymah came out to him, and he gave him
the purse, saying, "Better thy case herewith." He took it and
finding it heavy put it from his hand and laying hold of the
bridle of Ikrimah's horse, asked, "Who art thou? My soul be thy
ransom!" Answered Ikrimah, "O man I come not to thee at a time
like this desiring that thou shouldst know me." Khuzaymah
rejoined, "I will not let thee go till thou make thyself known to
me," whereupon Ikrimah said "I am hight Jabir Atharat
al-Kiram."[FN#102] Quoth Khuzaymah, "Tell me more." But Ikrimah
cried, "No," and fared forth, whilst Khuzaymah went in to his
cousin and said to her, "Rejoice for Allah hath sent us speedy
relief and wealth; if these be but dirhams, yet are they many.
Arise and light the lamp." She said, "I have not wherewithal to
light it." So he spent the night handling the coins and felt by
their roughness that they were dinars, but could not credit it.
Meanwhile Ikrimah returned to his own house and found that his
wife had missed him and asked for him, and when they told her of
his riding forth, she misdoubted of him, and said to him, "Verily
the Wali of Al-Jazirah rideth not abroad after such an hour of
the night, unattended and secretly, save to a wife or a
mistress." He answered, "Allah knoweth that I went not forth to
either of these." "Tell me then wherefore thou wentest forth?" "I
went not forth at this hour save that none should know it." "I
must needs be told." "Wilt thou keep the matter secret, if I tell
thee?" "Yes!" So he told her the state of the case, adding, "Wilt
thou have me swear to thee?" Answered she, "No, no, my heart is
set at ease and trusteth in that which thou hast told me." As for
Khuzaymah, soon as it was day he made his peace with his
creditors and set his affairs in order; after which he got him
ready and set out for the Court of Sulayman bin Abd al-Malik, who
was then sojourning in Palestine.[FN#103] When he came to the
royal gate, he sought admission of the chamberlain, who went in
and told the Caliph of his presence. Now he was renowned for his
beneficence and Sulayman knew of him; so he bade admit him. When
he entered, he saluted the Caliph after the usual fashion of
saluting[FN#104] and the King asked, "O Khuzaymah, what hath kept
thee so long from us?" Answered he, "Evil case," and quoth the
Caliph, "What hindered thee from having recourse to us?" Quoth
he, "My infirmity, O Commander of the Faithful!" "And why," said
Sulayman, "comest thou to us now?" Khuzaymah replied, "Know, O
Commander of the Faithful, that I was sitting one night late in
my house, when a man knocked at the door and did thus and thus;"
and he went on to tell him of all that had passed between Ikrimah
and himself from first to last. Sulayman asked, "Knowest thou the
man?" and Khuzaymah answered, "No, O Commander of the Faithful,
he was reserved[FN#105] and would say naught save, 'I am hight
Jabir Atharat al-Kiram.'" When Sulayman heard this, his heart
burned within him for anxiety to discover the man, and he said,
"If we knew him, truly we would requite him for his generosity."
Then he bound for Khuzaymah a banner[FN#106] and made him
Governor of Mesopotamia, in the stead of Ikrimah Al-Fayyaz; and
he set out for Al-Jazirah. When he drew near the city, Ikrimah
and the people of the place came forth to meet him and they
saluted each other and went on into the town, where Khuzaymah
took up his lodging in the Government-house and bade take
security for Ikrimah and that he should be called to
account.[FN#107] So an account was taken against him and he was
found to be in default for much money; whereupon Khuzaymah
required of him payment, but he said, "I have no means of paying
aught." Quoth Khuzaymah, "It must be paid;" and quoth Ikrimah, "I
have it not; do what thou hast to do." So Khuzaymah ordered him
to gaol.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Khuzaymah,
having ordered the imprisonment of Ikrimah Al-Fayyaz, sent to him
again to demand payment of the debt; but he replied, "I am not of
those who preserve their wealth at the expense of their honour;
do what thou wilt." Then Khuzaymah bade load him with irons and
kept him in prison a month or more, till confinement began to
tell upon him and he became wasted. After this, tidings of his
plight travelled to the daughter of his uncle who was troubled
with sore concern thereat and, sending for a freedwoman of hers,
a woman of abundant judgment, and experience, said to her, "Go
forthwith to the Emir Khuzaymah's gate and say, 'I have a counsel
for the Emir.' If they ask what it is, add, 'I will not tell it
save to himself'; and when thou enterest to him, beg to see him
in private and when private ask him, 'What be this deed thou hast
done? Hath Jabir Atharat al-Kiram deserved of thee no better
reward than to be cast into strait prison and hard bond of
irons?'" The woman did as she was bid, and when Khuzaymah heard
her words, he cried out at the top of his voice, saying, "Alas,
the baseness of it! Was it indeed he?" And she answered, "Yes."
Then he bade saddle his beast forthwith and, summoning the
honourable men of the city, repaired with them to the prison and
opening the door, went in with them to Ikrimah, whom they found
sitting in evil case, worn out and wasted with blows and misery.
When he looked at Khuzaymah, he was abashed and hung his head;
but the other bent down to him and kissed his face; whereupon he
raised his head and asked, "What maketh thee do this?" Answered
Khuzaymah, "The generosity of thy dealing and the vileness of my
requital." And Ikrimah said, "Allah pardon us and thee!" Then
Khuzaymah commanded the jailor to strike off Ikrimah's fetters
and clap them on his own feet; but Ikrimah said, "What is this
thou wilt do?" Quoth the other, "I have a mind to suffer what
thou hast suffered." Quoth Ikrimah, "I conjure thee by Allah, do
not so!" Then they went out together and returned to Khuzaymah's
house, where Ikrimah would have farewelled him and wended his
way; but he forbade him and Ikrimah said, "What is thy will of
me?" Replied Khuzaymah, "I wish to change thy case, for my shame
before the daughter of thine uncle is yet greater than my shame
before thee." So he bade clear the bath and entering with
Ikrimah, served him there in person and when they went forth be
bestowed on him a splendid robe of honour and mounted him and
gave him much money. Then he carried him to his house and asked
his leave to make his excuses to his wife and obtained her
pardon. After this he besought him to accompany him to the Caliph
who was then abiding at Ramlah[FN#108] and he agreed. So they
journeyed thither, and when they reached the royal quarters the
chamberlain went in and acquainted the Caliph Sulayman bin Abd
al-Malik with Khuzaymah's arrival, whereat he was troubled and
said, "What! is the Governor of Mesopotamia come without our
command? This can be only on some grave occasion." Then he bade
admit him and said, before saluting him, "What is behind thee, O
Khuzaymah?" Replied he, "Good, O Commander of the Faithful."
Asked Sulayman, "What bringeth thee?"; and he answered, saying,
"I have discovered Jabir Atharat al-Kiram and thought to gladden
thee with him, knowing thine excessive desire to know him and thy
longing to see him." "Who is he?" quoth the Caliph and quoth
Khuzaymah, "He is Ikrimah Al-Fayyaz." So Sulayman called for
Ikrimah, who approached and saluted him as Caliph; and the King
welcomed him and making him draw near his sitting-place, said to
him, "O Ikrimah, thy good deed to him hath brought thee naught
but evil," adding, "Now write down in a note thy needs each and
every, and that which thou desirest." He did so and the Caliph
commanded to do all that he required and that forthwith. Moreover
he gave him ten thousand dinars more than he asked for and twenty
chests of clothes over and above that he sought, and calling for
a spear, bound him a banner and made him Governor over Armenia
and Azarbiján[FN#109] and Mesopotamia, saying, "Khuzaymah's case
is in thy hands, an thou wilt, continue him in his office, and if
thou wilt, degrade him." And Ikrimah said, "Nay, but I restore
him to his office, O Commander of the Faithful." Then they went
out from him and ceased not to be Governors under Sulayman bin
Abd al-Malik all the days of his Caliphate. And they also tell a
tale of




           YUNUS THE SCRIBE AND THE CALIPH WALID BIN
                             SAHL.


There lived in the reign of the Caliph Hishám, [FN#110] son of
Abd al-Malik, a man called Yúnus the Scribe well-known to the
general, and he set out one day on a journey to Damascus, having
with him a slave-girl of surpassing beauty and loveliness, whom
he had taught all that was needful to her and whose price was an
hundred thousand dirhams. When they drew near to Damascus, the
caravan halted by the side of a lake and Yunus went down to a
quiet place with his damsel and took out some victual he had with
him and a leather bottle of wine. As he sat at meat, behold, came
up a young man of goodly favour and dignified presence, mounted
on a sorrel horse and followed by two eunuchs, and said to him,
"Wilt thou accept me to guest?" "Yes," replied Yunus. So the
stranger alighted and said, "Give me to drink of thy wine." Yunus
gave him to drink and he said, "If it please thee, sing us a
song." So Yunus sang this couplet extempore,

"She joineth charms were never seen conjoined in mortal dress: *
     And for her love she makes me love my tears and
     wakefulness."

At which the stranger rejoiced with exceeding joy and Yunus gave
him to drink again and again, till the wine got the better of him
and he said, "Bid thy slave-girl sing." So she improvised this
couplet,

"A houri, by whose charms my heart is moved to sore distress: *
     Nor wand of tree nor sun nor moon her rivals I confess!"

The stranger was overjoyed with this and they sat drinking till
nightfall, when they prayed the evening-prayer and the youth said
to Yunus, "What bringeth thee to our city?" He replied, "Quest of
wherewithal to pay my debts and better my case." Quoth the other,
"Wilt thou sell me this slave-girl for thirty thousand dirhams?"
Whereto quoth Yunus, "I must have more than that." He asked,
"Will forty thousand content thee?"; but Yunus answered, "That
would only settle my debts, and I should remain empty-handed."
Rejoined the stranger, "We will take her of thee of fifty
thousand dirhams[FN#111] and give thee a suit of clothes to boot
and the expenses of thy journey and make thee a sharer in my
condition as long as thou livest." Cried Yunus, "I sell her to
thee on these terms." Then said the young man, "Wilt thou trust
me to bring thee the money to-morrow and let me take her with me,
or shall she abide with thee till I pay down her price?" Whereto
wine and shame and awe of the stranger led Yunus to reply, "I
will trust thee; take her and Allah bless thee in her!" Whereupon
the visitor bade one of his pages sit her before him on his
beast, and mounting his own horse, farewelled of Yunus and rode
away out of sight. Hardly had he left him, when the seller
bethought himself and knew that he had erred in selling her and
said to himself, "What have I done? I have delivered my slave-
girl to a man with whom I am unacquainted, neither know I who he
is; and grant that I were acquainted with him, how am I to get at
him?" So he abode in thought till the morning, when he prayed the
dawn-prayers and his companions entered Damascus, whilst he sat,
perplexed and wotting not what to do, till the sun scorched him
and it irked him to abide there. He thought to enter the city,
but said in his mind, "If I enter Damascus, I cannot be sure but
that the messenger will come and find me not, in which case I
shall have sinned against myself a second sin." Accordingly he
sat down in the shade of a wall that was there, and towards the
wane of day, up came one of the eunuchs whom he had seen with the
young man, whereat great joy possessed Yunus and he said in
himself, "I know not that aught hath ever given me more delight
than the sight of this castrato." When the eunuch reached him, he
said to him, "O my lord, we have kept thee long waiting"; but
Yunus disclosed nothing to him of the torments of anxiety he had
suffered. Then quoth the castrato, "Knowest thou the man who
bought the girl of thee?"; and quoth Yunus, "No," to which the
other rejoined, "'Twas Walid bin Sahl,[FN#112] the Heir
Apparent." And Yunus was silent. Then said the eunuch, "Ride,"
and made him mount a horse he had with him and they rode till
they came to a mansion, where they dismounted and entered. Here
Yunus found the damsel, who sprang up at his sight and saluted
him. He asked her how she had fared with him who had bought her
and she answered, "He lodged me in this apartment and ordered me
all I needed." Then he sat with her awhile, till suddenly one of
the servants of the houseowner came in and bade him rise and
follow him. So he followed the man into the presence of his
master and found him yesternight's guest, whom he saw seated on
his couch and who said to him, "Who art thou?" "I am Yunus the
Scribe." "Welcome to thee, O Yunus! by Allah, I have long wished
to look on thee; for I have heard of thy report. How didst thou
pass the night?" "Well, may Almighty Allah advance thee!"
"Peradventure thou repentedest thee of that thou didst yesterday
and saidst to thyself: I have delivered my slave-girl to a man
with who I am not acquainted, neither know I his name nor whence
he cometh?" "Allah forbid, O Emir, that I should repent over her!
Had I made gift of her to the Prince, she were the least of the
gifts that are given unto him,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Yunus the Scribe said to Walid, "Allah forbid I should repent
over her! Had I made gift of her to the Prince, she were the
least of gifts that are given to him, nor indeed is she worthy of
his rank," Walid rejoined, "By Allah, but I repented me of having
carried her away from thee and said to myself, 'This man is a
stranger and knoweth me not, and I have taken him by surprise and
acted inconsiderately by him, in my haste to take the damsel!'
Dost thou recall what passed between us?" Quoth Yunus, "Yes!" and
quoth Walid, "Dost thou sell this damsel to me for fifty thousand
dirhams?" And Yunus said, "I do." Then the Prince called to one
of his servants to bring him fifty thousand dirhams and a
thousand and five hundred dinars to boot, and gave them all to
Yunus, saying, "Take the slave's price: the thousand dinars are
for thy fair opinion of us and the five hundred are for thy
viaticum and for what present thou shalt buy for thy people. Art
thou content?" "I am content," answered Yunus and kissed his
hands, saying, "By Allah, thou hast filled my eyes and my hands
and my heart!" Quoth Walid, "By Allah, I have as yet had no
privacy of her nor have I taken my fill of her singing. Bring her
to me!" So she came and he bade her sit, then said to her,
"Sing." And she sang these verses,

"O thou who dost comprise all Beauty's boons! * O sweet of
     nature, fain of coquetry!
In Turks and Arabs many beauties dwell; * But, O my fawn, in none
     thy charms I see.
Turn to thy lover, O my fair, and keep * Thy word, though but in
     visioned phantasy:
Shame and disgrace are lawful for thy sake * And wakeful nights
     full fill with joy and glee:
I'm not the first for thee who fared distraught; * Slain by thy
     love how many a many be!
I am content with thee for worldly share * Dearer than life and
     good art thou to me!"

When he heard this, he was delighted exceedingly and praised
Yunus for his excellent teaching of her and her fair education.
Then he bade his servants bring him a roadster with saddle and
housings for his riding, and a mule to carry his gear, and said
to him, "O Yunus, when it shall reach thee that command hath come
to me, do thou join me; and, by Allah, I will fill thy hands with
good and advance thee to honour and make thee rich as long as
thou livest!" So Yunus said, "I took his goods and went my ways;
and when Walid succeeded to the Caliphate, I repaired to him; and
by Allah, he kept his promise and entreated me with high honour
and munificence. Then I abode with him in all content of case and
rise of rank and mine affairs prospered and my wealth increased
and goods and farms became mine, such as sufficed me and will
suffice my heirs after me; nor did I cease to abide with Walid,
till he was slain, the mercy of Almighty Allah be on him!" And
men tell a tale concerning





               HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE ARAB GIRL.



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid was walking one day with Ja'afar the
Barmecide, when he espied a company of girls drawing water and
went up to them, having a mind to drink. As he drew near, one of
them turned to her fellows and improvised these lines,

"Thy phantom bid thou fleet, and fly * Far from the couch whereon
     I lie;
So I may rest and quench the fire, * Bonfire in bones aye flaming
     high;
My love-sick form Love's restless palm * Rolls o'er the rug
     whereon I sigh:
How 'tis with me thou wottest well * How long, then, union wilt
     deny?"

The Caliph marvelled at her elegance and eloquence.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Caliph, hearing the girl's verses, marvelled at her elegance and
eloquence, and said to her, "O daughter of nobles, are these
thine own or a quotation?" Replied she, "They are my very own,"
and he rejoined, "An thou say sooth keep the sense and change the
rhyme." So she said,

"Bid thou thy phantom distance keep * And quit this couch the
     while I sleep;
So I may rest and quench the flames * Through all my body rageful
     creep,
In love-sick one, whom passion's palms * Roll o'er the bed where
     grief I weep;
How 'tis with me thou wottest well; * All but thy union hold I
     cheap!"

Quoth the Caliph, "This also is stolen"; and quoth she, "Nay,
'tis my very own." He said, "If it be indeed thine own, change
the rhyme again and keep the sense." So she recited the
following,

"Unto thy phantom deal behest * To shun my couch the while I
     rest,
So I repose and quench the fire * That burns what lieth in my
     breast,
My weary form Love's restless palm * Rolls o'er with boon of
     sleep unblest.
How 'tis with me thou wottest well * When union's bought 'tis
     haply best!"

Quoth Al-Rashid, "This too is stolen"; and quoth she, "Not, so,
'tis mine." He said, "If thy words be true change the rhyme once
more." And she recited,

"Drive off the ghost that ever shows * Beside my couch when I'd
     repose,
 So I may rest and quench the fire * Beneath my ribs e'er flames
     and glows
 In love-sick one, whom passion's palms * Roll o'er the couch
     where weeping flows.
How 'tis with me thou wottest well * Will union come as union
     goes?"

Then said the Caliph, "Of what part of this camp art thou?"; and
she replied, "Of its middle in dwelling and of its highest in
tentpoles."[FN#113] Wherefore he knew that she was the daughter
of the tribal chief. "And thou," quoth she, "of what art thou
among the guardians of the horses?"; and quoth he, "Of the
highest in tree and of the ripest in fruit." "Allah protect thee,
O Commander of the Faithful!" said she, and kissing ground called
down blessings on him. Then she went away with the maidens of the
Arabs, and the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "There is no help for it
but I take her to wife." So Ja'afar repaired to her father and
said to him, "The Commander of the Faithful hath a mind to thy
daughter." He replied, "With love and goodwill, she is a gift as
a handmaid to His Highness our Lord the Commander of the
Faithful." So he equipped her and carried her to the Caliph, who
took her to wife and went in to her, and she became of the
dearest of his women to him. Furthermore, he bestowed on her
father largesse such as succoured him among Arabs, till he was
transported to the mercy of Almighty Allah. The Caliph, hearing
of his death, went in to her greatly troubled; and, when she saw
him looking afflicted, she entered her chamber and doffing all
that was upon her of rich raiment, donned mourning apparel and
raised lament for her father. It was said to her, "What is the
reason of this?"; and she replied, "My father is dead." So they
repaired to the Caliph and told him and he rose and going in to
her, asked her who had informed her of her father's death; and
she answered "It was thy face, O Commander of the Faithful!" Said
he, "How so?"; and she said, "Since I have been with thee, I
never saw thee on such wise till this time, and there was none
for whom I feared save my father, by reason of his great age; but
may thy head live, O Commander of the Faithful!" The Caliph's
eyes filled with tears and he condoled with her; but she ceased
not to mourn for her father, till she followed him--Allah have
mercy on the twain! And a tale is also told of




           AL-ASMA'I AND THE THREE GIRLS OF BASSORAH.



The Commander of the Faithful Harun Al-Rashid was exceeding
restless one night and rising from his bed, paced from chamber to
chamber, but could not compose himself to sleep. As soon as it
was day, he said, "Fetch me Al-Asma'i!"[FN#114] So the eunuch
went out and told the doorkeepers; these sent for the poet and
when he came, informed the Caliph who bade admit him and said to
him, "O Asma'i, I wish thee to tell me the best thou hast heard
of stories of women and their verses." Answered Al-Asma'i,
"Hearkening and obedience! I have heard great store of women's
verses; but none pleased me save three sets of couplets I once
heard from three girls."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Al-
Asma'i said to the Prince of True Believers, "Verily I have heard
much, but nothing pleased me save three sets of couplets
improvised by as many girls." Quoth the Caliph, "Tell me of
them," and quoth he, "Know then, O Commander of the Faithful,
that I once abode in Bassorah, and one day, as I was walking, the
heat was sore upon me and I sought for a siesta-place but found
none. However by looking right and left I came upon a porch swept
and sprinkled, at the upper end whereof was a wooden bench under
an open lattice-window, whence exhaled a scent of musk. I entered
the porch and sitting down on the bench, would have stretcht me
at full length when I heard from within a girl's sweet voice
talking and saying, 'O my sisters, we are here seated to spend
our day in friendly converse; so come, let us each put down an
hundred dinars and recite a line of verse; and whoso
extemporiseth the goodliest and sweetest line, the three hundred
dinars shall be hers.' 'With love and gladness,' said the others;
and the eldest recited the first couplet which is this,

'Would he come to my bed during sleep 'twere delight * But a
     visit on wake were delightsomer sight!'

Quoth the second,

'Naught came to salute me in sleep save his shade * But 'welcome,
     fair welcome,' I cried to the spright!'

Then said the youngest,

'My soul and my folk I engage for the youth * Musk-scented I see
     in my bed every night!'

Quoth I, 'An she be fair as her verse hath grace, the thing is
complete in every case.' Then I came down from my bench[FN#115]
and was about to go away, when behold, the door opened and out
came a slave-girl, who said to me, 'Sit, O Shaykh!' So I climbed
up and sat down again when she gave me a scroll, wherein was
written, in characters of the utmost beauty, with straight
Alifs,[FN#116] big-bellied Has, and rounded Waws, the following,
'We would have the Shaykh (Allah lengthen his days!) to know that
we are three maidens, sisters, sitting in friendly converse, who
have laid down each an hundred dinars, conditioning that whoso
recite the goodliest and sweetest couplet shall have the whole
three hundred dinars; and we appoint thee umpire between us: so
decide as thou seest best, and the Peace be on thee! Quoth I to
the girl, 'Here to me inkcase and paper.' So she went in and,
returning after a little, brought me a silvered inkcase and
gilded pens[FN#117] with which I wrote these couplets,

They talked of three beauties whose converse was quite * Like the
     talk of a man with experience dight:
Three maidens who borrowed the bloom of the dawn       * Making
     hearts of their lovers in sorriest plight.
They were hidden from eyes of the prier and spy        * Who
     slept and their modesty mote not affright;
So they opened whatever lay hid in their hearts        * And in
     frolicsome fun began verse to indite.
Quoth one fair coquette with her amorous grace         * Whose
     teeth for the sweet of her speech flashed bright:--
Would he come to my bed during sleep 'twere delight    * But a
     visit on wake were delightsomer sight! 
When she ended, her verse by her smiling was gilt:     * Then
     the second 'gan singing as nightingale might:--
Naught came to salute me in sleep save his shade       * But
     'welcome, fair welcome,' I cried to the spright!
But the third I preferred for she said in reply,       * With
     expression most apposite, exquisite:--
My soul and my folk I engage for the youth             * Musk-
     scented I see in my bed every night!
So when I considered their words to decide,            * And not
     make me the mock of the cynical wight;
I pronounced for the youngest, declaring her verse     * Of all
     verses be that which is nearest the right.'

Then I gave scroll to the slave-girl, who went upsatirs with it,
and behold, I heard a noise of dancing and clapping of hands and
Doomsday astir. Quoth I to myself, ''Tis no time of me to stay
here.' So I came down from the platform and was about to