 go away,
when the damsel cried out to me, 'Sit down, O Asma'i!' Asked I,
'Who gave thee to know that I was Al-Asma'i?' and she answered,
'O Shaykh, an thy name be unknown to us, thy poetry is not!' So I
sat down again and suddently the door opened and out came the
first damsel, with a dish of fruits and another of sweetmeats. I
ate of both and praised their fashion and would have ganged my
gait; but she cried out, 'Sit down, O Asma'i!' Wherewith I raised
my eyes to her and saw a rosy palm in a saffron sleeve, meseemed
it was the full moon rising splendid in the cloudy East. Then she
threw me a purse containing three hundred dinars and said to me,
'This is mine and I give it to thee by way of douceur in requital
of thy judgment.'" Quoth the Caliph, "Why didst thou decide for
the youngest?" and quoth Al-Asma'i, "O Commander of the Faithful,
whose life Allah prolong! the eldest said, 'I should delight in
him, if he visited my couch in sleep.' Now this is restricted and
dependent upon a condition which may befal or may not befal;
whilst, for the second, an image of dreams came to her in sleep,
and she saluted it; but the youngest's couplet said that she
actually lay with her lover and smelt his breath sweeter than
musk and she engaged her soul and her folk for him, which she had
not done, were he not dearer to her than her sprite." Said the
Caliph, "Thou didst well, O Asma'i." and gave him other three
hundred ducats in payment of his story. And I have heard a tale
concerning




            IBRAHIM OF MOSUL AND THE DEVIL.[FN#118]



Quoth Abu Ishak Ibrahim al-Mausili:--I asked Al-Rashid once to
give me a day's leave that I might be private with the people of
my household and my brethren, and he gave me leave for Saturday
the Sabbath. So I went home and betook myself to making ready
meat and drink and other necessaires and bade the doorkeepers
shut the doors and let none come in to me. However, presently, as
I sat in my sitting-chamber, with my women who were looking after
my wants, behold, there appeared an old man of comely and
reverend aspect,[FN#119] clad in white clothes and a shirt of
fine stuff with a doctor's turband on his head and a silver-
handled staff in his hand, and the house and porch were full of
the perfumes wherewith he was scented. I was greatly vexed at his
coming in to me and thought to turn away the doorkeepers; but he
saluted me after the goodliest fashion and I returned his
greeting and bade him be seated. So he sat down and began
entertaining me with stories of the Arabs and their verses, till
my anger left me and methought my servants had sought to pleasure
me by admitting a man of such good breeding and fine culture.
Then I asked him, "Art thou for meat?"; and he answered, "I have
no need of it." "And for drink?" quoth I, and quoth he, "That is
as thou wilt." So I drank off a pint of wine and poured him out
the like. Then said he, "O Abu Ishak, wilt thou sing us somewhat,
so we may hear of thine art that wherein thou excellest high and
low?" His words angered me; but I swallowed my anger and taking
the lute played and sang. "Well done, O Abu Ishak!"[FN#120] said
he; whereat my wrath redoubled and I said to myself, "Is it not
enough that he should intrude upon me, without my leave, and
importune me thus, but he must call me by name, as though he knew
not the right way to address me?" Quoth he, "An thou wilt sing
something more we will requite thee." I dissembled my annoyance
and took the lute and sang again, taking pains with what I sang
and rising thereto altogether, in consideration of his saying,
"We will requite thee."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Shaykh said to Abu Ishak, "If thou wilt sing something more
we will requite thee," I dissembled my annoyance (continued
Ibrahim) and, taking the lute, sang again with great attention to
my singing and rising altogether thereto, in consideration of his
saying, "We will requite thee." He was delighted, and cried,
"Well done, O my lord!"; presently adding, "Dost thou give me
leave to sing?" "As thou wilt," answered I, deeming him weak of
wit, in that he should think to sing in my presence, after that
which he had heard from me. So he took the lute and swept the
strings, and by Allah, I fancied they spoke in Arabic tongue,
with a sweet and liquid and murmurous voice; then he began and
sang these couplets,

"I bear a hurt heart, who will sell me for this * A heart whole
     and free from all canker and smart?
Nay, none will consent or to barter or buy * Such loss, ne'er
     from sorrow and sickness to part:
I groan wi' the groaning of wine-wounded men * And pine for the
     pining ne'er freeth my heart."

And by Allah, meseemed the doors and the walls and all that was
in the house answered and sang with him, for the beauty of his
voice, so that I fancied my very limbs and clothes replied to
him, and I abode amazed and unable to speak or move, for the
trouble of my heart. Then he sang these couplets,

"Culvers of Liwa![FN#121] to your nests return; * Your mournful
     voices thrill this heart of mine
Then back a-copse they flew, and well-nigh took * My life and
     made me tell my secret pine.
With cooing call they one who's gone, as though * Their breasts
     were maddened with the rage of wine:
Ne'er did mine eyes their like for culvers see * Who weep yet
     tear-drops never dye their eyne."

And also these couplets,

"O Zephyr of Najd, when from Najd thou blow, * Thy breathings
     heap only new woe on woe!
The turtle bespake me in bloom of morn * From the cassia-twig an
     the willow-bough
She moaned with the moaning of love-sick youth * And exposed
     love-secret I ne'er would show:
They say lover wearies of love when near * And is cured of love
     an afar he go:
I tried either cure which ne'er cured my love; * But that
     nearness is better than farness I know:[FN#122]
Yet,--the nearness of love shall no 'vantage prove * An whoso
     thou lovest deny thee of love."

Then said he, "O Ibrahim, sing this song after me, and preserving
the mode thereof in thy singing, teach it to thy slave-girls."
Quoth I, "Repeat it to me." But he answered, "There needs no
repetition; thou hast it by heart nor is there more to learn."
Then he suddenly vanished from my sight. At this I was amazed and
running to my sword drew it and made for the door of the Harim,
but found it closed and said to the women, "What have ye heard?"
Quoth they, "We have heard the sweetest of singing and the
goodliest." Then I went forth amazed, to the house-door and,
finding it locked, questioned the doorkeepers of the old man.
They replied, "What old man? By Allah, no one hath gone in to
thee this day!" So I returned pondering the matter, when, behold,
there arose from one of the corners of the house, a Vox et
praeterea nihil, saying, "O Abu Ishak, no harm shall befal thee.
'Tis I, Abú Murrah,[FN#123] who have been thy cup-companion this
day, so fear nothing!" Then I mounted and rode to the palace,
where I told Al-Rashid what had passed, and he said, "Repeat to
me the airs thou heardest from him." So I took the lute and
played and sang them to him; for, behold, they were rooted in my
heart. The Caliph was charmed with them and drank thereto, albeit
he was no confirmed wine-bibber, saying, "Would he would some day
pleasure us with his company, as he hath pleasured thee!"[FN#124]
Then he ordered me a present and I took it and went away. And men
relate this story anent




             THE LOVERS OF THE BANU UZRAH.[FN#125]



Quoth Masrur the Eunuch, "The Caliph Harun Al-Rashid was very
wakeful one night and said to me, 'See which of the poets is at
the door to-night.' So I went out and finding Jamíl bin Ma'amar
al-Uzrí[FN#126] in the antechamber, said to him, 'Answer the
Commander of the Faithful.' Quoth he, 'I hear and I obey,' and
going in with me, saluted the Caliph, who returned his greeting
and bade him sit down. Then he said to him, 'O, Jamil, hast thou
any of thy wonderful new stories to tell us?' He replied, 'Yes, O
Commander of the Faithful: wouldst thou fainer hear that which I
have seen with mine eyes or that which I have only heard?' Quoth
the Caliph, 'Tell me something thou hast actually beheld.' Quoth
Jamil, ''Tis well, O Prince of True Believers; incline thy heart
to me and lend me thine ears.' The Caliph took a bolster of red
brocade, purfled with gold and stuffed with ostrich-feathers and,
laying it under his thighs, propped up both elbows thereon; then
he said to Jamil, 'Now[FN#127] for thy tale, O Jamil!' Thereupon
he begun, 'Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that I was once
desperately enamoured of a certain girl and used to pay her
frequent visits.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph had propped his elbows upon the brocaded cushion, he said,
"Out with thy tale, O Jamil!" and the poet begun:--Know, O
Commander of the Faithful, I was desperately in love with a girl
and used often to visit her, because she was my desire and
delight of all the things of this world. After a while, her
people removed with her, by reason of scarcity of pasture, and I
abode some time without seeing her, till I grew restless for
desire and longed for her sight and the flesh[FN#128] urged me to
journey to her. One night, I could hold out no longer; so I rose
and saddling my she-camel, bound on my turban and donned my
oldest dress.[FN#129] Then I baldricked myself with my sword and
slinging my spear behind me, mounted and rode forth in quest of
her. I fared on fast till, one night, it was pitch dark and
exceeding black, yet I persisted in the hard task of climbing
down Wadys and up hills, hearing on all sides the roaring of
lions and howling of wolves and the cries of the wild beasts. My
reason was troubled thereat and my heart sank within me; but for
all that my tongue ceased not to call on the name of Almighty
Allah. As I went along thus, sleep overtook me and the camel
carried me aside out of my road, till, presently,
something[FN#130] smote me on the head, and I woke, startled and
alarmed, and found myself in a pasturage full of trees and
streams and birds on the branches, warbling their various speech
and notes. As the trees were tangled I alighted and, taking my
camel's halter in hand, fared on softly with her, till I got
clear of the thick growth and came out into the open country,
where I adjusted her saddle and mounted again, knowing not where
to go nor whither the Fates should lead me; but, presently,
peering afar into the desert, I espied a fire in its middle
depth. So I smote my camel and made for the fire. When I drew
near, I saw a tent pitched, and fronted by a spear stuck in the
ground, with a pennon flying[FN#131] and horses tethered and
camels feeding, and said in myself, "Doubtless there hangeth some
grave matter by this tent, for I see none other than it in the
desert." So I went up thereto and said, "Peace be with you, O
people of the tent, and the mercy of Allah and His Blessing!"
Whereupon there came forth to me a young man as youths are when
nineteen years old, who was like the full moon shining in the
East, with valour written between his eyes, and answered, saying,
"And with thee be the Peace, and Allah's mercy and His blessing!
O brother of the Arabs, methinks thou hast lost thy way?" Replied
I, "Even so, direct me right, Allah have mercy on thee!" He
rejoined, "O brother of the Arabs, of a truth this our land is
infested with lions and the night is exceeding dark and dreary,
beyond measure cold and gloomy, and I fear lest the wild beasts
rend thee in pieces; wherefore do thou alight and abide with me
this night in ease and comfort, and to-morrow I will put thee in
the right way." Accordingly, I dismounted and hobbled my she-
camel with the end of her halter;[FN#132] then I put off my heavy
upper clothes and sat down. Presently the young man took a sheep
and slaughtered it and kindled a brisk fire; after which he went
into the tent and bringing out finely powdered salt and spices,
fell to cutting off pieces of mutton and roasting them over the
fire and feeding me therewith, weeping at one while and sighing
at another. Then he groaned heavily and wept sore and improvised
these couplets,

"There remains to him naught save a flitting breath * And an eye
     whose babe ever wandereth.
There remains not a joint in his limbs, but what * Disease firm
     fixt ever tortureth.
His tears are flowing, his vitals burning; * Yet for all his
     tongue still he silenceth.
All foemen in pity beweep his woes; * Ah for freke whom the
     foeman pitieth!"

By this I knew, O Commander of the Faithful, that the youth was a
distracted lover (for none knoweth passion save he who hath
tasted the passion-savour), and quoth I to myself, "Shall I ask
him?" But I consulted my judgment and said, "How shall I assail
him with questioning, and I in his abode?" So I restrained myself
and ate my sufficiency of the meat. When we had made an end of
eating, the young man arose and entering the tent, brought out a
handsome basin and ewer and a silken napkin, whose ends were
purfled with red gold and a sprinkling-bottle full of rose-water
mingled with musk. I marvelled at his dainty delicate ways and
said in my mind, "Never wot I of delicacy in the desert." Then we
washed our hands and talked a while, after which he went into the
tent and making a partition between himself and me with a piece
of red brocade, said to me, "Enter, O Chief of the Arabs, and
take thy rest; for thou hast suffered more of toil and travel
than sufficeth this night and in this thy journey." So I entered
and finding a bed of green brocade, doffed my dress and passed a
night such as I had never passed in my life.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Six Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Jamil
spoke, saying:--Never in my life passed I a night like that. I
pondered the young man's case, till the world was dark and all
eyes slept, when I was aroused by the sound of a low voice, never
heard I a softer or sweeter. I raised the curtain which hung
between us and saw a damsel (never beheld I a fairer of face), by
the young man's side and they were both weeping and complaining,
one to other of the pangs of passion and desire and of the excess
of their longing for union.[FN#133] Quoth I, "By Allah, I wonder
who may be this second one! When I entered this tent, there was
none therein save this young man." And after reflection I added,
"Doubtless this damsel is of the daughters of the Jinn and is
enamoured of this youth; so they have secluded themselves with
each other in this solitary place." Then I considered her closely
and behold, she was a mortal and an Arab girl, whose face, when
she unveiled, shamed the shining sun, and the tent was lit up by
the light of her countenance. When I was assured that she was his
beloved, I bethought me of lover-jealousy; so I let drop the
curtain and covering my face, fell asleep. As soon as it was dawn
I arose and donning my clothes, made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed
such prayers as are obligatory and which I had deferred. Then I
said, "O brother of the Arabs, wilt thou direct me into the right
road and thus add to thy favours?" He replied, "At thy leisure, O
chief of the Arabs, the term of the guest-rite is three
days,[FN#134] and I am not one to let thee go before that time."
So I abode with him three days, and on the fourth day as we sat
talking, I asked him of his name and lineage. Quoth he "As for my
lineage, I am of the Banu Odhrah; my name is such an one, son of
such an one and my father's brother is called such an one." And
behold, O Commander of the Faithful, he was the son of my
paternal uncle and of the noblest house of the Banú Uzrah. Said
I, "O my cousin, what moved thee to act on this wise, secluding
thyself in the waste and leaving thy fair estate and that of thy
father and thy slaves and handmaids?" When he heard my words, his
eyes filled with tears and he replied, "Know, O my cousin, that I
fell madly in love of the daughter of my father's brother,
fascinated by her, distracted for her, passion-possessed as by a
Jinn, wholly unable to let her out of my sight. So I sought her
in marriage of her sire, but he refused and married her to a man
of the Banu Odhrah, who went in to her and carried her to his
abiding-place this last year. When she was thus far removed from
me and I was prevented from looking on her, the fiery pangs of
passion and excess of love-longing and desire drove me to forsake
my clan[FN#135] and friends and fortune and take up my abode in
this desert, where I have grown used to my solitude." I asked,
"Where are their dwellings?" and he answered, "They are hard by,
on the crest of yonder hill; and every night, at the dead time,
when all eyes sleep, she stealeth secretly out of the camp,
unseen of any one, and I satisfy my desire of her converse and
she of mine.[FN#136] So I abide thus, solacing myself with her a
part of the night, till Allah work out that which is to be
wrought; either I shall compass my desire, in spite[FN#137] of
the envious, or Allah will determine for me and He is the best of
determinators." Now when the youth told me his case, O Commander
of the Faithful, I was concerned for him and perplexed by reason
of my jealousy for his honour; so I said to him, "O son of my
uncle, wilt thou that I point out to thee a plan and suggest to
thee a project, whereby (please Allah) thou shalt find perfect
welfare and the way of right and successful issue whereby the
Almighty shall do away from thee that thou dreadest?" He replied,
"Say on, O my cousin"; and quoth I, "When it is night and the
girl cometh, set her on my she-camel which is swift of pace, and
mount thou thy steed, whilst I bestride one of these dromedaries.
So will we fare on all night and when the morrow morns, we shall
have traversed wolds and wastes, and thou wilt have attained thy
desire and won the beloved of thy heart. The Almighty's earth is
wide, and by Allah, I will back thee with heart and wealth and
sword."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Jamil
advised the elopement and night journey, promising his aid as
long as he lived, the youth accepted and said, "O cousin, wait
till I take counsel with her, for she is quick-witted and prudent
and hath insight into affairs." So (continued Jamil) when the
night darkened and the hour of her coming arrived, and he
awaiting her at the appointed tide, she delayed beyond her usual
time, and I saw him go forth the door of the tent and opening his
mouth, inhale the wafts of breeze that blew from her quarter, as
if to snuff her perfume, and he repeated these two couplets:--

"Breeze of East who bringest me gentle air * From the place of
     sojourn where dwells my fair:
O Breeze, of the lover thou bearest sign, * Canst not of her
     coming some signal bear?"

Then he entered the tent and sat weeping awhile; after which he
said to me, "O my cousin, some mischance must have betided the
daughter of mine uncle, or some accident must have hindered her
from coming to me this night," presently adding, "But abide where
thou art, till I bring thee the news." And he took sword and
shield and was absent a while of the night, after which he
returned, carrying something in hand and called aloud to me. So I
hastened to him and he said, "O my cousin, knowest thou what hath
happened?" I replied, "No, by Allah!" Quoth he, "Verily, I am
distraught concerning my cousin this night; for, as she was
coming to me, a lion met her in the way and devoured her, and
there remaineth of her but what thou seest." So saying, he threw
down what he had in his hand, and behold, it was the damsel's
turband and what was left of her bones. Then he wept sore and
casting down his bow,[FN#138] took a bag and went forth again
saying, "Stir not hence till I return to thee, if it please
Almighty Allah." He was absent a while and presently returned,
bearing in his hand a lion's head, which he threw on the ground
and called for water. So I brought him water, with which he
washed the lion's mouth and fell to kissing it and weeping; and
he mourned for her exceedingly and recited these couplets,

"Ho thou lion who broughtest thyself to woe, * Thou art slain and
     worse sorrows my bosom rend!
Thou hast reft me of fairest companionship, * Made her home
     Earth's womb till the world shall end.
To Time, who hath wrought me such grief, I say, * 'Allah grant in
     her stead never show a friend!'"

Then said he to me, "O cousin, I conjure thee by Allah and the
claims of kindred and consanguinity[FN#139] between us, keep thou
my charge. Thou wilt presently see me dead before thee; whereupon
do thou wash me and shroud me and these that remain of my
cousin's bones in this robe and bury us both in one grave and
write thereon these two couplets,

'On Earth surface we lived in rare ease and joy * By fellowship
     joined in one house and home.
But Fate with her changes departed us, * And the shroud conjoins
     us in Earth's cold womb.'"

Then he wept with sore weeping and, entering the tent, was absent
awhile, after which he came forth, groaning and crying out. Then
he gave one sob and departed this world. When I saw that he was
indeed dead, it was grievous to me and so sore was my sorrow for
him that I had well-nigh followed him for excess of mourning over
him. Then I laid him out and did as he had enjoined me, shrouding
his cousin's remains with him in one robe and laying the twain in
one grave. I abode by their tomb three days, after which I
departed and continued to pay frequent pious visits[FN#140] to
the place for two years. This then is their story, O Commander of
the Faithful! Al-Rashid was pleased with Jamil's story and
rewarded him with a robe of honour and a handsome present. And
men also tell a tale concerning




                THE BADAWI AND HIS WIFE.[FN#141]



Caliph Mu'áwiyah was sitting one day in his palace[FN#142] at
Damascus, in a room whose windows were open on all four sides,
that the breeze might enter from every quarter. Now it was a day
of excessive heat, with no breeze from the hills stirring, and
the middle of the day, when the heat was at its height, and the
Caliph saw a man coming along, scorched by the heat of the ground
and limping, as he fared on barefoot. Mu'awiyah considered him
awhile and said to his courtiers, "Hath Allah (may He be extolled
and exalted!) created any miserabler than he who need must hie
abroad at such an hour and in such sultry tide as this?" Quoth
one of them, "Haply he seeketh the Commander of the Faithful;"
and quoth the Caliph, "By Allah, if he seek me, I will assuredly
give to him, and if he be wronged, I will certainly succour him.
Ho, boy! Stand at the door, and if yonder wild Arab seek to come
in to me, forbid him not therefrom." So the page went out and
presently the Arab came up to him and he said, "What dost thou
want?" Answered the other, "I want the Commander of the
Faithful," and the page said, "Enter." So he entered and saluted
the Caliph,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
page allowed him to enter, the Badawi saluted the Caliph, who
said to him, "Who art thou?" Replied the Arab, "I am a man of the
Banú Tamím."[FN#143] "And what bringeth thee here at this
season?" asked Mu'awiyah; and the Arab answered, "I come to thee,
complaining and thy protection imploring." "Against whom?"
"Against Marwan bin al-Hakam,[FN#144] thy deputy," replied he,
and began reciting,

"Mu'áwiyah,[FN#145] thou gen'rous lord, and best of men that be;
     * And oh, thou lord of learning, grace and fair humanity,
Thee-wards I come because my way of life is strait to me: * O
     help! and let me not despair thine equity to see.
Deign thou redress the wrong that dealt the tyrant whim of him *
     Who better had my life destroyed than made such wrong to
     dree.
He robbed me of my wife Su'ad and proved him worst of foes, *
     Stealing mine honour 'mid my folk with foul iniquity;
And went about to take my life before th' appointed day * Hath
     dawned which Allah made my lot by destiny's decree."

Now when Mu'awiyah heard him recite these verses, with the fire
flashing from his mouth, he said to him, "Welcome and fair
welcome, O brother of the Arabs! Tell me thy tale and acquaint me
with thy case." Replied the Arab, "O Commander of the Faithful, I
had a wife whom I loved passing dear with love none came near;
and she was the coolth of mine eyes and the joy of my heart; and
I had a herd of camels, whose produce enabled me to maintain my
condition; but there came upon us a bad year which killed off
hoof and horn and left me naught. When what was in my hand failed
me and wealth fell from me and I lapsed into evil case, I at once
became abject and a burden to those who erewhile wished to visit
me; and when her father knew it, he took her from me and abjured
me and drove me forth without ruth. So I repaired to thy deputy,
Marwan bin al-Hakam, and asked his aid. He summoned her sire and
questioned him of my case, when he denied any knowledge of me.
Quoth I, 'Allah assain the Emir! An it please him to send for the
woman and question her of her father's saying, the truth will
appear.' So he sent for her and brought her; but no sooner had he
set eyes on her than he fell in love with her; so, becoming my
rival, he denied me succour and was wroth with me, and sent me to
prison, where I became as I had fallen from heaven and the wind
had cast me down in a far land. Then said Marwan to her father,
'Wilt thou give her to me to wife, on a present settlement of a
thousand dinars and a contingent dowry of ten thousand
dirhams,[FN#146] and I will engage to free her from yonder wild
Arab!' Her father was seduced by the bribe and agreed to the
bargain; whereupon Marwan sent for me and looking at me like an
angry lion, said to me, 'O Arab, divorce Su'ad.' I replied, 'I
will not put her away;' but he set on me a company of his
servants, who tortured me with all manner of tortures, till I
found no help for it but to divorce her. I did so and he sent me
back to prison, where I abode till the days of her purification
were accomplished, when he married her and let me go. So now I
come hither in thee hoping and thy succour imploring and myself
on thy protection throwing." And he spoke these couplets,

"Within my heart is fire       * Whichever flameth higher;
Within my frame are pains      * For skill of leach too dire.
Live coals in vitals burn      * And sparks from coal up spire:
Tears flood mine eyes and down * Coursing my cheek ne'er tire:
Only God's aid and thine       * I crave for my desire!"

Then he was convulsed,[FN#147] and his teeth chattered and he
fell down in a fit, squirming like a scotched snake. When
Mu'awiyah heard his story and his verse, he said, "Marwan bin al-
Hakam hath transgressed against the laws of the Faith and hath
violated the Harim of True Believers!"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Caliph Mu'awiyah heard the wild Arab's words, he said, "The
son of Al-Hakam hath indeed transgressed against the laws of the
Faith and hath violated the Harim of True Believers," presently
adding, "O Arab, thou comest to me with a story, the like whereof
I never heard!" Then he called for inkcase and paper and wrote to
Marwan as follows, "Verily it hath reached me that thou
transgresseth the laws of the Faith with regard to thy lieges.
Now it behoveth the Wali who governeth the folk to keep his eyes
from their lusts and stay his flesh from its delights." And after
he wrote many words, which (quoth he who told me the tale) I
omit, for brevity's sake, and amongst them these couplets,

"Thou wast invested (woe to thee!)[FN#148] with rule for the
     unfit; * Crave thou of Allah pardon for thy foul adultery.
Th' unhappy youth to us is come complaining 'mid his groans * And
     asks for redress for parting-grief and saddened me through
     thee. 
An oath have I to Allah sworn shall never be forsworn; * Nay,
     for I'll do what Faith and Creed command me to decree.
An thou dare cross me in whate'er to thee I now indite * I of
     thy flesh assuredly will make the vulture free.
Divorce Su'ad, equip her well, and in the hottest haste * With
     Al-Kumayt and Ziban's son, hight Nasr, send to me."

Then he folded the letter and, sealing it with his seal,
delivered it to Al-Kumayt[FN#149] and Nasr bin Zibán (whom he
was wont to employ on weighty matters, because of their
trustiness) who took the missive and carried it to Al-Medinah,
where they went in to Marwan and saluting him delivered to him
the writ and told him how the case stood. He read the letter
and fell a-weeping; but he went in to Su'ad (as 'twas not in
his power to refuse obedience to the Caliph) and, acquainting
her with the case, divorced her in the presence of Al-Kumayt
and Nasr; after which he equipped her and delivered her to
them, together with a letter to the Caliph wherein he
versified as follows,

"Hurry not, Prince of Faithful Men! with best of grace thy vow
     * I will accomplish as 'twas vowed and with the gladdest
     gree.
I sinned not adulterous sin when loved her I, then how * Canst
     charge me with advowtrous deed or any villainy?
Soon comes to thee that splendid sun which hath no living peer
     * On earth, nor aught in mortal men of Jinns her like
     shalt see."

This he sealed with his own signet and gave to the messengers
who returned with Su'ad to Damascus and delivered to Mu'awiyah
the letter, and when he had read it he cried, "Verily, he hath
obeyed handsomely, but he exceedeth in his praise of the
woman." Then he called for her and saw beauty such as he had
never seen, for comeliness and loveliness, stature and
symmetrical grace; moreover, he talked with her and found her
fluent of speech and choice in words. Quoth he, "Bring me the
Arab." So they fetched the man, who came, sore disordered for
shifts and changes of fortune, and Mu'awiyah said to him, "O
Arab, an thou wilt freely give her up to me, I will bestow
upon thee in her stead three slave girls, high-bosomed maids
like moons, with each a thousand dinars; and I will assign
thee on the Treasury such an annual sum as shall content thee
and enrich thee." When the Arab heard this, he groaned one
groan and swooned away, so that Mu'awiyah thought he was dead;
and, as soon as he revived, the Caliph said to him, "What
aileth thee?" The Arab answered, "With heavy heart and in sore
need have I appealed to thee from the injustice of Marwan bin
al-Hakam; but to whom shall I appeal from thine injustice?"
And he versified in these couplets,

"Make me not (Allah save the Caliph!) one of the betrayed *
     Who from the fiery sands to fire must sue for help and
     aid:
Deign thou restore Su'ád to this afflicted heart distraught, *
     Which every morn and eve by sorest sorrow is waylaid:
Loose thou my bonds and grudge me not and give her back to me;
     * And if thou do so ne'er thou shalt for lack of thanks
     upbraid!"

Then said he, "By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, wert
thou to give me all the riches contained in the Caliphate, yet
would I not take them without Su'ad." And he recited this
couplet,

"I love Su'ád and unto all but hers my love is dead, * Each
     morn I feel her love to me is drink and daily bread."

Quoth the Caliph, "Thou confessest to having divorced her and
Marwan owned the like; so now we will give her free choice. An
she choose other than thee, we will marry her to him, and if
she choose thee, we will restore her to thee." Replied the
Arab, "Do so." So Mu'awiyah said to her, "What sayest thou, O
Su'ad? Which does thou choose; the Commander of the Faithful,
with his honour and glory and dominion and palaces and
treasures and all else thou seest at this command, or Marwin
bin al-Hakam with his violence and tyranny, or this Arab, with
his hunger and poverty?" So she improvised these couplets,

"This one, whom hunger plagues, and rags unfold, * Dearer than
     tribe and kith and kin I hold;
Than crownèd head, or deputy Marwán, * Or all who boast of
     silver coins and gold."

Then said she, "By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I will
not forsake him for the shifts of Fortune or the perfidies of
Fate, there being between us old companionship we may not
forget, and love beyond stay and let; and indeed 'tis but just
that I bear with him in his adversity, even as I shared with
him in prosperity." The Caliph marvelled at her wit and love
and constancy and, ordering her ten thousand dirhams,
delivered her to the Arab, who took his wife and went
away.[FN#150] And they likewise tell a tale of




                   THE LOVERS OF BASSORAH.



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid was sleepless one night; so he sent
for Al-Asma'i and Husayn al-Khalí'a[FN#151] and said to them,
"Tell me a story you twain and do thou begin, O Husayn." He
said, "'Tis well, O Commander of the Faithful;" and thus
began: Some years ago, I dropped down stream to Bassorah, to
present to Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Rabí'í[FN#152] a Kasidah
or elegy I had composed in his praise; and he accepted it and
bade me abide with him. One day, I went out to
Al-Mirbad,[FN#153] by way of Al-Muháliyah;[FN#154] and, being
oppressed by the excessive heat, went up to a great door, to
ask for drink, when I was suddenly aware of a damsel, as she
were a branch swaying, with eyes languishing, eye brows arched
and finely pencilled and smooth cheeks rounded clad in a shift
the colour of a pomegranate flower, and a mantilla of
Sana'á[FN#155] work; but the perfect whiteness of her body
overcame the redness of her shift, through which glittered two
breasts like twin granadoes and a waist, as it were a roll of
fine Coptic linen, with creases like scrolls of pure white
paper stuffed with musk [FN#156] Moreover, O Prince of True
Believers, round her neck was slung an amulet of red gold that
fell down between her breasts, and on the plain of her
forehead were browlocks like jet.[FN#157] Her eyebrows joined
and her eyes were like lakes; she had an aquiline nose and
thereunder shell like lips showing teeth like pearls.
Pleasantness prevailed in every part of her; but she seemed
dejected, disturbed, distracted and in the vestibule came and
went, walking upon the hearts of her lovers, whilst her
legs[FN#158] made mute the voices of their ankle rings; and
indeed she was as saith the poet,

"Each portion of her charms we see * Seems of the whole a
     simile"

I was overawed by her, O Commander of the Faithful, and drew
near her to greet her, and behold, the house and vestibule and
highways breathed fragrant with musk. So I saluted her and she
returned my salaam with a voice dejected and heart depressed
and with the ardour of passion consumed. Then said I to her,
"O my lady, I am an old man and a stranger and sore troubled
by thirst. Wilt thou order me a draught of water, and win
reward in heaven?" She cried, "Away, O Shaykh, from me! I am
distracted from all thought of meat and drink."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
damsel said, "O Shaykh, I am distracted from all thought of
meat and drink." Quoth I (continued Husayn), "By what ailment,
O my lady?" and quoth she, "I love one who dealeth not justly
by me and I desire one who of me will none. Wherefore I am
afflicted with the wakefulness of those who wake star gazing."
I asked, "O my lady, is there on the wide expanse of earth one
to whom thou hast a mind and who to thee hath no mind?"
Answered she, "Yes; and this for the perfection of beauty and
loveliness and goodliness wherewith he is endowed." "And why
standeth thou in this porch?" enquired I. "This is his road,"
replied she, "and the hour of his passing by." I said, "O my
lady, have ye ever foregathered and had such commerce and
converse as might cause this passion?" At this she heaved a
deep sigh; the tears rained down her cheeks, as they were dew
falling upon roses, and she versified with these couplets,

"We were like willow boughs in garden shining * And scented
     joys in happiest life combining;
Whenas one bough from other self would rend * And oh! thou
     seest this for that repining!"

Quoth I, "O maid, and what betideth thee of thy love for this
man?"; and quoth she, "I see the sun upon the walls of his
folk and I think the sun is he; or haply I catch sight of him
unexpectedly and am confounded and the blood and the life fly
my body and I abide in unreasoning plight a week or e'en a
se'nnight." Said I, "Excuse me, for I also have suffered that
which is upon thee of love longing and distraction of soul and
wasting of frame and loss of strength; and I see in thee
pallor of complexion and emaciation, such as testify of the
fever fits of desire. But how shouldst thou be unsmitten of
passion and thou a sojourner in the land of Bassorah?" Said
she, "By Allah, before I fell in love of this youth, I was
perfect in beauty and loveliness and amorous grace which
ravished all the Princes of Bassorah, till he fell in love
with me." I asked, "O maid, and who parted you?"; and she
answered, "The vicissitudes of fortune, but the manner of our
separation was strange; and 'twas on this wise. One New Year's
day I had invited the damsels of Bassorah and amongst them a
girl belonging to Siran, who had bought her out of Oman for
four score thousand dirhams. She loved me and loved me to
madness and when she entered she threw herself upon me and
well nigh tore me in pieces with bites and pinches.[FN#159]
Then we withdrew apart, to drink wine at our ease, till our
meat was ready[FN#160] and our delight was complete, and she
toyed with me and I with her, and now I was upon her and now
she was upon me. Presently, the fumes of the wine moved her to
strike her hand on the inkle of my petticoat trousers, whereby
it became loosed, unknown of either of us, and my trousers
fell down in our play. At this moment he came in unobserved
and, seeing me thus, was wroth at the sight and made off, as
the Arab filly hearing the tinkle of her bridle."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
maiden said to Husayn al-Khali'a, "When my lover saw me
playing, as I described to thee, with Siran's girl, he went
forth in anger. And 'tis now, O Shaykh, three years ago, and
since then I have never ceased to excuse myself to him and
coax him and crave his indulgence, but he will neither cast a
look at me from the corner of his eye, nor write me a word nor
speak to me by messenger nor hear from me aught." Quoth I,
"Harkye maid, is he an Arab or an Ajam?"; and quoth she, "Out
on thee! He is of the Princes of Bassorah." "Is he old or
young?" asked I; and she looked at me laughingly and answered,
"Thou art certainly a simpleton! He is like the moon on the
night of its full, smooth checked and beardless, nor is there
any defect in him except his aversion to me." Then I put the
question, "What is his name?" and she replied, "What wilt thou
do with him?" I rejoined, "I will do my best to come at him,
that I may bring about reunion between you." Said she, "I will
tell thee on condition that thou carry him a note;" and I said
"I have no objection to that." Then quoth she, "His name is
Zamrah bin al-Mughayrah, hight Abú al-Sakhá,[FN#161] and his
palace is in the Mirbad." Therewith she called to those within
for inkcase and paper and tucking up[FN#162] her sleeves,
showed two wrists like broad rings of silver. She then wrote
after the Basmalah as follows, "My lord, the omission of
blessings[FN#163] at the head of this my letter shows mine
insufficiency, and know that had my prayer been answered, thou
hadst never left me; for how often have I prayed that thou
shouldest not leave me, and yet thou didst leave me! Were it
not that distress with me exceedeth the bounds of restraint,
that which thy servant hath forced herself to do in writing
this writ were an aidance to her, despite her despair of thee,
because of her knowledge of thee that thou wilt fail to
answer. Do thou fulfil her desire, my lord, of a sight of thee
from the porch, as thou passest in the street, wherewith thou
wilt quicken the dead soul in her. Or, far better for her
still than this, do thou write her a letter with thine own
hand (Allah endow it with all excellence!), and appoint it in
requital of the intimacy that was between us in the nights of
time past, whereof thou must preserve the memory. My lord, was
I not to thee a lover sick with passion? An thou answer my
prayer, I will give to thee thanks and to Allah praise; and so
The Peace!"[FN#164] Then she gave me the letter and I went
away. Next morning I repaired to the door of the Viceroy
Mohammed bin Sulayman, where I found an assembly of the
notables of Bassorah, and amongst them a youth who adorned the
gathering and surpassed in beauty and brightness all who were
there; and indeed the Emir Mohammed set him above himself. I
asked who he was and behold, it was Zamrah himself: so I said
in my mind, "Verily, there hath befallen yonder unhappy one
that which hath befallen her[FN#165]!" Then I betook myself to
the Mirbad and stood waiting at the door of his house, till he
came riding up in state, when I accosted him and invoking more
than usual blessings on him, handed him the missive. When he
read it and understood it he said to me, "O Shaykh, we have
taken other in her stead. Say me, wilt thou see the
substitute?" I answered, "Yes." Whereupon he called out a
woman's name, and there came forth a damsel who shamed the two
greater lights; swelling breasted, walking the gait of one who
hasteneth without fear, to whom he gave the note, saying, "Do
thou answer it." When she read it, she turned pale at the
contents and said to me, " O old man, crave pardon of Allah
for this that thou hast brought." So I went out, O Commander
of the Faithful, dragging my feet and returning to her asked
leave to enter. When she saw me, she asked, "What is behind
thee?"; and I answered, "Evil and despair." Quoth she, "Have
thou no concern of him. Where are Allah and His
power?"[FN#166] Then she ordered me five hundred dinars and I
took them and went away. Some days after I passed by the place
and saw there horsemen and footmen. So I went in and lo! these
were the companions of Zamrah, who were begging her to return
to him; but she said, "No, by Allah, I will not look him in
the face!" And she prostrated herself in gratitude to Allah
and exultation over Zamrah's defeat. Then I drew near her, and
she pulled out to me a letter, wherein was written, after the
Bismillah, "My lady, but for my forbearance towards thee
(whose life Allah lengthen!) I would relate somewhat of what
betided from thee and set out my excuse, in that thou
transgressedst against me, whenas thou west manifestly a
sinner against thyself and myself in breach of vows and lack
of constancy and preference of another over us; for, by Allah,
on whom we call for help against that which was of thy free
will, thou didst transgress against the love of me; and so The
Peace!" Then she showed me the presents and rarities he had
sent her, which were of the value of thirty thousand dinars. I
saw her again after this, and Zamrah had married her. Quoth
Al-Rashid, "Had not Zamrah been beforehand with us, I should
certainly have had to do with her myself."[FN#167] And men
tell the tale of




           ISHAK OF MOSUL AND HIS MISTRESS AND THE
                        DEVIL.[FN#168]



Quoth Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Mausili: I was in my house one
night in the winter time, when the clouds had dispread
themselves and the rains poured down in torrents, as from the
mouths of water skins, and the folk forbore to come and go
about the ways for that which was therein of rain and slough.
Now I was straitened in breast because none of my brethren
came to me nor could I go to them, by reason of the mud and
mire; so I said to my servant, "Bring me wherewithal I may
divert myself." Accordingly he brought me meat and drink, but
I had no heart to eat, without some one to keep me company,
and I ceased not to look out of window and watch the ways till
nightfall, when I bethought myself of a damsel belonging to
one of the sons of Al-Mahdi,[FN#169] whom I loved and who was
skilled in singing and playing upon instruments of music, and
said to myself, "Were she here with us to night, my joy would
be complete and my night would be abridged of the melancholy
and restlessness which are upon me." At this moment one
knocked at the door, saying, "Shall a beloved enter in who
standeth at the door?" Quoth I to myself, "Meseems the plant
of my desire hath fruited." So I went to the door and found my
mistress, with a long green skirt[FN#170] wrapped about her
and a kerchief of brocade on her head, to fend her from the
rain. She was covered with mud to her knees and all that was
upon her was drenched with water from gargoyles[FN#171] and
house spouts; in short, she was in sorry plight. So I said to
her, "O my mistress, what bringeth thee hither through all
this mud?" Replied she, "Thy messenger came and set forth to
me that which was with thee of love and longing, so that I
could not choose but yield and hasten to thee." I marvelled at
this And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel came and knocked at Ishak's door, he went forth to her
and cried, 'O my lady, what bringeth thee hither through all
this mud?"; and she replied, "Thy messenger came and set forth
to me that which was with thee of love and longing, so that I
could not choose but yield and hasten to thee." I marvelled at
this, but did not like to tell her that I had sent no
messenger; wherefore I said, "Praised be Allah for that He
hath brought us together, after all I have suffered by the
mortification of patience! Verily, hadst thou delayed an hour
longer, I must have run to thee, because of my much love for
thee and longing for thy presence." Then I called to my boy
for water, that I might better her plight, and he brought a
kettle full of hot water such as she wanted. I bade pour it
over her feet, whilst I set to work to wash them myself; after
which I called for one of my richest dresses and clad her
therein after she had doffed the muddy clothes. Then, as soon
as we were comfortably seated, I would have called for food,
but she refused and I said to her, "Art thou for wine?"; and
she replied, "Yes." So I fetched cups and she asked me, "Who
shall sing?" "I, O my princess!" "I care not for that;" "One
of my damsels?" "I have no mind to that either!" "Then sing
thyself." "Not I!" "Who then shall sing for thee?" I enquired,
and she rejoined, "Go out and seek some one to sing for me."
So I went out, in obedience to her, though I despaired of
finding any one in such weather and fared on till I came to
the main street, where I suddenly saw a blind man striking the
earth with his staff and saying, "May Allah not requite with
weal those with whom I was! When I sang, they listened not,
and when I was silent, they made light of me." So I said to
him, "Art thou a singer?" and he replied, "Yes." Quoth I,
"Wilt thou finish thy night with us and cheer us with thy
company?"; and quoth he, "If it be thy will, take my hand." So
I took his hand and, leading him to my house, said to the
damsel, "O my mistress, I have brought a blind singer, with
whom we may take our pleasure and he will not see us." She
said, "Bring him to me." So I brought him in and invited him
to eat. He ate but a very little and washed his hands, after
which I brought him wine and he drank three cupsful. Then he
said to me, "Who art thou?"; and I replied, "I am Ishak bin
Ibrahim al-Mausili." Quoth he, "I have heard of thee and now I
rejoice in thy company;" and I, "O my lord, I am glad in thy
gladness." He said, "O Ishak, sing to me." So I took the lute
by way of jest, and cried, "I hear and I obey." When I had
made an end of my song, he said to me, "O Ishak, thou comest
nigh to be a singer!" His words belittled me in mine own eyes
and I threw the lute from my hand, whereupon he said, "Hast
thou not with thee some one who is skilled in singing?" Quoth
I, "I have a damsel with me;" and quoth he "Bid her sing." I
asked him, "Wilt thou sing, when thou hast had enough of her
singing?"; and he answered "Yes." So she sang and he said,
"Nay, thou hast shown no art." Whereupon she flung the lute
from her hand in wrath and cried, "We have done our best: if
thou have aught, favour us with it by way of an alms." Quoth
he, "Bring me a lute hand hath not touched." So I bade the
servant bring him a new lute and he tuned it and preluding in
a mode I knew not began to sing, improvising these couplets,

"Clove through the shades and came to me in night so dark and
     sore * The lover weeting of herself 'twas trysting tide
     once more:
Naught startled us but her salaam and first of words she said
     * 'May a beloved enter in who standeth at the door!'"

When the girl heard this, she looked at me askance and said,
"What secret was between us could not thy breast hold for one
hour, but thou must discover it to this man?" However, I swore
to her that I had not told him and excused myself to her and
fell to kissing her hands and tickling her breasts and biting
her cheeks, till she laughed and, turning to the blind man,
said to him, "Sing, O my lord!" So he took the lute and sang
these two couplets,

"Ah, often have I sought the fair; how often fief and fain *
     My palming felt the finger ends that bear the varied
     stain!
And tickled pouting breasts that stand firm as pomegranates
     twain * And bit the apple of her cheek kissed o'er and
     o'er again."

So I said to her, "O my princess, who can have told him what
we were about?" Replied she, "True," and we moved away from
him. Presently quoth he, "I must make water;" and quoth I, "O
boy, take the candle and go before him." Then he went out and
tarried a long while. So we went in search of him, but could
not find him; and behold, the doors were locked and the keys
in the closet, and we knew not whether to heaven he had flown
or into earth had sunk. Wherefore I knew that he was Iblis and
that he had done me pimp's duty, and I returned, recalling to
my self the words of Abu Nowas in these couplets,

"I marvel in Iblis such pride to see * Beside his low intent
     and villainy:
He sinned to Adam who to bow refused, * Yet pimps for all of
     Adam's progeny,"

And they tell a tale concerning




                  THE LOVERS OF AL-MEDINAH.



Quoth Ibrahim the father of Ishak,[FN#172] I was ever a
devoted friend to the Barmecide family. And it so happened to
me one day, as I sat at home quite alone, a knock was heard at
the door; so my servant went out and returned, saying, "A
comely youth is at the door, asking admission." I bade admit
him and there came in to me a young man, on whom were signs of
sickness, and he said, "I have long wished to meet thee, for I
have need of thine aid." "What is it thou requirest?" asked I.
Whereupon he pulled out three hundred dinars and laying them
before me, said, "I beseech thee to accept these and compose
me an air to two couplets I have made." Said I, "Repeat them
to me;"--and Shahr