azad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when the youth came in to Ibrahim and placed the gold in his
hands, saying, "Prithee accept it and compose me an air to two
couplets," he replied, "Recite them to me," whereupon he
recited,

"By Allah, glance of mine! thou hast opprest * My heart, so
     quench the fire that burns my breast
Blames me the world because in him[FN#173] * I live Yet cannot
     see him till in shroud I rest."

Accordingly, quoth Ibrahim, I set the verses to an air
plaintive as a dirge and sang it to him; whereupon he swooned
away and I thought that he was dead. However, after a while,
he came to himself, and said to me, "Repeat the air." But I
conjured him by Allah to excuse me, saying, "I fear lest thou
die." "Would Heaven it were so!" replied he and ceased not
humbly to importune me, till I had pity on him and repeated
it; whereupon he cried out with a grievous cry and fell into a
fit worse than before and I doubted not but that he was dead;
but I sprinkled rose water on him till he revived and sat up.
I praised Allah for his recovery and laying the ducats before
him, said, "Take thy money and depart from me." Quoth he, "I
have no need of the money and thou shalt have the like of it,
if thou wilt repeat the air." My breast broadened at the
mention of the money and I said, "I will repeat it, but on
three conditions: the first, that thou tarry with me and eat
of my victual, till thou regain strength; the second, that
thou drink wine enough to hearten thy heart, and the third,
that thou tell me thy tale." He agreed to this and ate and
drank; after which he said, "I am of the citizens of
Al-Medinah and I went forth one day a pleasuring with my
friends; and, following the road to Al-Akík,[FN#174] saw a
company of girls and amongst them a damsel as she were a
branch pearled with dew with eyes whose sidelong glances were
never withdrawn till they had stolen away his soul who looked
on them. The maidens rested in the shade till the end of the
day, when they went away leaving in my heart wounds slow to
heal. I returned next morning to scent out news of her, but
found none who could tell me of her; so I sought her in the
streets and markets, but could come on no trace of her;
wherefore I fell ill of grief and told my case to one of my
kinsmen, who said to me, 'No harm shall befall thee: the days
of spring are not yet past and the skies show sign of
rain,[FN#175] whereupon she will go forth, and I will go out
with thee, and do thou thy will.' His words comforted my heart
and I waited till al-Akik ran with water, when I went
forthwith my friends and kinsmen and sat in the very same
place where I first saw her. We had not been seated long
before up came the women, like horses running for a wager; and
I whispered to a girl of my kindred, 'Say to yonder damse--
‘Quoth this man to thee, He did well who spoke this couplet,

'She shot my heart with shaft, then turned on heel * And
     flying dealt fresh wound and scarring wheel.'

So she went to her and repeated my words, to which she replied
saying, 'Tell him that he said well who answered in this
couplet,

'The like of whatso feelest thou we feel; * Patience!
     perchance swift cure our hearts shall heal.'

I refrained from further speech for fear of scandal and rose
to go away. She rose at my rising, and I followed and she
looked back at me, till she saw I had noted her abode. Then
she began to come to me and I to go to her, so that we
foregathered and met often, till the case was noised abroad
and grew notorious and her sire came to know of it. However I
ceased not to meet her most assiduously and complained of my
condition to my father, who assembled our kindred and repaired
to ask her in marriage for me, of her sire, who cried, 'Had
this been proposed to me before he gave her a bad name by his
assignations, I would have consented; but now the thing is
notorious and I am loath to verify the saying of the folk.' "
Then (continued Ibrahim) I repeated the air to him and he went
away, after having acquainted me with his abode, and we became
friends. Now I was devoted to the Barmecides; so next time
Ja'afar bin Yahya sat to give audience, I attended, as was my
wont, and sang to him the young man's verses. They pleased him
and he drank some cups of wine and said, "Fie upon thee whose
song is this?" So I told him the young man's tale and he bade
me ride over to him and give him assurances of the winning of
his wish. Accordingly I fetched him to Ja'afar who asked him
to repeat his story. He did so and Ja'afar said, "Thou art now
under my protection: trust me to marry thee to her." So his
heart was comforted and he abode with us. When the morning
morrowed Ja'afar mounted and went in to Al-Rashid, to whom he
related the story. The Caliph was pleased with it and sending
for the young man and myself, commanded me to repeat the air
and drank thereto. Then he wrote to the Governor of Al-Hijaz,
bidding him despatch the girl's father and his household in
honour able fashion to his presence and spare no expense for
their outfit. So, in a little while, they came and the Caliph,
sending for the man, commanded him to marry his daughter to
her lover; after which he gave him an hundred thousand dinars,
and the father went back to his folk. As for the young man, he
abode one of Ja'afar's cup companions till there happened what
happened[FN#176] whereupon he returned with his household to
al-Medinah; may Almighty Allah have mercy upon their souls one
and all! And they also tell, O auspicious King, a tale of




               AL-MALIK AL-NASIR AND HIS WAZIR.



There was given to Abú Ámir bin Marwán,[FN#177] a boy of the
Christians, than whom never fell eyes on a handsomer. Al-Nasir
the conquering Soldan saw him and said to Abu Amir, who was
his Wazir, "Whence cometh this boy?" Replied he, "From Allah;"
whereupon the other, "Wilt thou terrify us with stars and make
us prisoner with moons?" Abu Amir excused himself to him and
preparing a present, sent it to him with the boy, to whom he
said, "Be thou part of the gift: were it not of necessity, my
soul had not consented to give thee away." And he wrote with
him these two couplets,

"My lord, this full moon takes in Heaven of thee new birth; *
     Nor can deny we Heaven excelleth humble earth:
Thee with my soul I please and oh! the pleasant case! * No man
     e'er saw I who to give his soul prefer'th."

The thing pleased Al-Nasir and he requited him with much
treasure and the Minister became high in favour with him.
After this, there was presented to the Wazir a slave girl, one
of the loveliest women in the world, and he feared lest this
should come to the King's ears and he desire her, and the like
should happen as with the boy. So he made up a present still
costlier than the first and sent it with her to the King,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir Abu Amir, when presented with the beautiful slave girl,
feared lest it come to the Conquering King's ears and that the
like should happen as with the boy, so he made up a present
still costlier than the first and sent it with her to his
master, accompanying it with these couplets,

"My lord, this be the Sun, the Moon thou hadst before; * So
     the two greater lights now in thy Heaven unite:
Conjunction promising to me prosperity, * And Kausar draught
     to thee and Eden's long delight.
Earth shows no charms, by Allah, ranking as their third, * Nor
     King who secondeth our Conquering King in might."

Wherefore his credit redoubled with al-Nasir; but, after a
while, one of his enemies maligned him to the King, alleging
that there still lurked in him a hot lust for the boy and that
he ceased not to desire him, whenever the cool northern
breezes moved him, and to gnash his teeth for having given him
away. Cried the King, "Wag not thou thy tongue at him, or I
will shear off thy head." However, he wrote Abu Amir a letter,
as from the boy. to the following effect: "O my lord, thou
knowest that thou wast all and one to me and that I never
ceased from delight with thee. Albeit I am with the Sultan,
yet would I choose rather solitude with thee, but that I fear
the King's majesty: wherefore devise thou to demand me of
him." This letter he sent to Abu Amir by a little foot page,
whom he enjoined to say, "This is from such an one: the King
never speaketh to him." When the Wazir read the letter and
heard the cheating message, he noted the poison
draught[FN#178] and wrote on the back of the note these
couplets,

"Shall man experience-lectured ever care * Fool-like to thrust
     his head in lion's lair?
I'm none of those whose wits to love succumb * Nor witless of
     the snares my foes prepare:
Wert thou my sprite, I'd give thee loyally; * Shall sprite,
     from body sundered, backwards fare?"

When al-Nasir knew of this answer, he marvelled at the Wazir's
quickness of wit and would never again lend ear to aught of
insinuations against him. Then said he to him, "How didst thou
escape falling into the net?" And he replied, "Because my
reason is unentangled in the toils of passion." And they also
tell a tale of




           THE ROGUERIES OF DALILAH THE CRAFTY AND
                HER DAUGHTER ZAYNAB THE CONEY-
                       CATCHER.[FN#179]



There lived in the time of Harun al-Rashid a man named Ahmad 
al-Danaf and another Hasan Shúmán[FN#180] hight, the twain
past-masters in fraud and feints, who had done rare things in
their day;  wherefore the Caliph invested them with caftans of
honour and  made them Captains of the Watch for Baghdad (Ahmad
of the  right hand and Hasan of the left hand); and appointed
to each of  them a stipend of a thousand dinars a month and
forty stalwart  men to be at their bidding. Moreover to
Calamity Ahmad was  committed the watch of the district
outside the walls. So Ahmad  and Hasan went forth in company
of the Emir Khalid, the Wali  or Chief of Police, attended
each by his forty followers on horse-back, and preceded by the
Crier, crying aloud and saying, "By  command of the Caliph!
None is captain of the watch of  the right hand but Ahmad al-
Danaf and none is captain of the  watch of the left hand but
Hasan Shuman, and both are to  be obeyed when they bid and are
to be held in all honour and  worship." Now there was in the
city an old woman called Dalílah  the Wily, who had a daughter
by name Zaynab the Coney-catcher.  They heard the proclamation
made and Zaynab said to Dalilah,  "See, O my mother, this
fellow, Ahmad al-Danaf! He came  hither from Cairo, a
fugitive, and played the double-dealer in  Baghdad, till he
got into the Caliph's company and is now become  captain of
the right hand, whilst that mangy chap Hasan Shuman  is
captain of the left hand, and each hath a table spread morning 
and evening and a monthly wage of a thousand dinars; whereas 
we abide unemployed and neglected in this house, without
estate  and without honour, and have none to ask of us." Now
Dalilah's  husband had been town-captain of Baghdad with a
monthly wage  of one thousand dinars; but he died leaving two
daughters, one  married and with a son by name Ahmad al-
Lakít[FN#181] or Ahmad the  Abortion; and the other called
Zaynab, a spinster. And this  Dalilah was a past mistress in
all manner of craft and trickery and  double dealing; she
could wile the very dragon out of his den  and Iblis himself
might have learnt deceit of her. Her father[FN#182]  had also
been governor of the carrier-pigeons to the Caliph with a 
solde of one thousand dinars a month. He used to rear the
birds  to carry letters and messages, wherefore in time of
need each was  dearer to the Caliph than one of his own sons.
So Zaynab said  to her mother, "Up and play off some feint and
fraud that may  haply make us notorious"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn  of day and ceased saying her permitted
say. 

     When it was the Six Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night, 

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Zaynab  thus addressed her dam, "Up and play off some feint
and fraud  which may haply make us notorious in Baghdad, so
perchance we  shall win our father's stipend for ourselves."
Replied the old  trot, "As thy head liveth, O my daughter, I
will play off higher-class rogueries in Baghdad than ever
played Calamity Ahmad or  Hasan the Pestilent." So saying, she
rose and threw over her  face the Lisam-veil and donned
clothes such as the poorer Sufis  wear, petticoat-trousers
falling over her heels, and a gown of  white wool with a broad
girdle. She also took a pitcher[FN#183] and  filled it with
water to the neck; after which she set three dinars in  the
mouth and stopped it up with a plug of palm-fibre. Then she 
threw round her shoulder, baldrick-wise, a rosary as big as a
load  of firewood, and taking in her hand a flag, made of
parti-coloured  rags, red and yellow and green, went out,
crying, "Allah! Allah!"  with tongue celebrating the praises
of the Lord, whilst her heart  galloped in the Devil's race-
course, seeking how she might play  some sharping trick upon
town. She walked from street to street,  till she came to an
alley swept and watered and marble-paved,  where she saw a
vaulted gateway, with a threshold of alabaster,  and a Moorish
porter standing at the door, which was of sandalwood  plated
with brass and furnished with a ring of silver for  knocker.
Now this house belonged to the Chief of the Caliph's 
Serjeant-ushers, a man of great wealth in fields, houses and
allowances,  called the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarík, or Evil of
the Way,  and therefor called because his blow forewent his
word. He was  married to a fair damsel, Khátún[FN#184] hight,
whom he loved and who  had made him swear, on the night of his
going in unto her, that  he would take none other to wife over
her nor lie abroad for a  single night. And so things went on
till one day, he went to the  Divan and saw that each Emir had
with him a son or two. Then  he entered the Hammam-bath and
looking at his face in the  mirror, noted that the white hairs
in his beard overlay its black,  and he said in himself, "Will
not He who took thy sire bless thee  with a son?" So he went
in to his wife, in angry mood, and she  said to him, "Good
evening to thee"; but he replied, "Get thee  out of my sight:
from the day I saw thee I have seen naught of  good." "How
so?" quoth she. Quoth he, "On the night of my  going in unto
thee, thou madest me swear to take no other wife  over thee,
and this very day I have seen each Emir with a son  and some
with two. So I minded me of death[FN#185]; and also that to 
me hath been vouchsafed neither son nor daughter and that 
whoso leaveth no male hath no memory. This, then, is the 
reason of my anger, for thou art barren; and knowing thee is
like  planing a rock." Cried she, "Allah's name upon thee.
Indeed,  I have worn out the mortars with beating wool and
pounding  drugs,[FN#186] and I am not to blame; the barrenness
is with thee, for  that thou art a snub-nosed mule and thy
sperm is weak and  watery and impregnateth not neither getteth
children." Said he,  "When I return from my journey, I will
take another wife;" and  she, "My luck is with Allah!" Then he
went out from her and  both repented of the sharp words spoken
each to other. Now as  the Emir's wife looked forth of her
lattice, as she were a Bride of  the Hoards[FN#187] for the
jewellery upon her, behold, there stood  Dalilah espying her
and seeing her clad in costly clothes and  ornaments, said to
herself, "'Twould be a rare trick, O Dalilah, to  entice
yonder young lady from her husband's house and strip her  of
all her jewels and clothes and make off with the whole lot." 
So she took up her stand under the windows of the Emir's
house,  and fell to calling aloud upon Allah's name and
saying, "Be  present, O ye Walis, ye friends of the Lord!"
Whereupon every  woman in the street looked from her lattice
and, seeing a matron  clad, after Sufi fashion, in clothes of
white wool, as she were a  pavilion of light, said, "Allah
bring us a blessing by the aidance  of this pious old person,
from whose face issueth light!" And  Khatun, the wife of the
Emir Hasan, burst into tears and said to  her handmaid, "Get
thee down, O Makbúlah, and kiss the hand of  Shaykh Abú Alí,
the porter, and say to him, 'Let yonder  Religious enter to my
lady, so haply she may get a blessing of  her.'" So she went
down to the porter and kissing his hand, said  to him, "My
mistress telleth thee, 'Let yonder pious old woman  come in to
me, so may I get a blessing of her'; and belike her 
benediction may extend to us likewise."--And Shahrazad 
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

            When it was the Seven Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the 
handmaid went down and said to the porter, "Suffer yonder 
Religious enter to my lady so haply she may get a blessing of 
her, and we too may be blessed, one and all," the gate-keeper 
went up to Dalilah and kissed her hand, but she forbade him, 
saying, "Away from me, lest my ablution be made null and 
void.[FN#188] Thou, also, art of the attracted God-wards and
kindly  looked upon by Allah's Saints and under His especial
guardianship.  May He deliver thee from this servitude, O Abu
Ali!"  Now the Emir owed three months' wage to the porter who
was  straitened thereby, but knew not how to recover his due
from his  lord; so he said to the old woman, "O my mother,
give me to  drink from thy pitcher, so I may win a blessing
through thee."  She took the ewer from her shoulder and
whirled it about in air,  so that the plug flew out of its
mouth and the three dinars fell to  the ground. The porter saw
them and picked them up, saying in  his mind, "Glory to God!
This old woman is one of the Saints that  have hoards at their
command! It hath been revealed to her of  me that I am in want
of money for daily expenses; so she hath  conjured me these
three dinars out of the air." Then said he to  her, "Take, O
my aunt, these three dinars which fell from thy  pitcher;" and
she replied, "Away with them from me! I am of  the folk who
occupy not themselves with the things of the world,  no never!
Take them and use them for thine own benefit, in  lieu of
those the Emir oweth thee." Quoth he, "Thanks to Allah  for
succour! This is of the chapter of revelation!" Thereupon  the
maid accosted her and kissing her hand, carried her up to her 
mistress. She found the lady as she were a treasure, whose 
guardian talisman had been loosed; and Khatun bade her 
welcome and kissed her hand. Quoth she, "O my daughter, I 
come not to thee save for thy weal and by Allah's will." Then 
Khatun set food before her; but she said, "O my daughter, I
eat  naught except of the food of Paradise and I keep
continual fast  breaking it but five days in the year. But, O
my child, I see thee  chagrined and desire that thou tell me
the cause of thy concern."  "O my mother," replied Khatun, "I
made my husband swear, on  my wedding-night, that he would
wive none but me, and he saw  others with children and longed
for them and said to me, 'Thou art  a barren thing!' I
answered, 'Thou art a mule which begetteth  not'; so he left
me in anger, saying, 'When I come back from my  journey, I
will take another wife,' for he hath villages and lands  and
large allowances, and if he begat children by another, they 
will possess the money and take the estates from me." Said 
Dalilah, "O my daughter, knowest thou not of my master, the 
Shaykh Abú al-Hamlát,[FN#189] whom if any debtor visit, Allah 
quitteth him his debt, and if a barren woman, she conceiveth?" 
Khatun replied, "O my mother, since the day of my wedding I 
have not gone forth the house, no, not even to pay visits of 
condolence or congratulation." The old woman rejoined, "O my 
child, I will carry thee to him and do thou cast thy burden on 
him and make a vow to him: haply when thy husband shall 
return from his journey and lie with thee thou shalt conceive
by  him and bear a girl or a boy: but, be it female or male,
it shall  be a dervish of the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat." Thereupon
Khatun  rose and arrayed herself in her richest raiment, and
donning all  her jewellery said, "Keep thou an eye on the
house," to her  maid, who replied, "I hear and obey, O my
lady." Then she  went down and the porter Abu Ali met her and
asked her,  "Whither away, O my lady?" "I go to visit the
Shaykh Abu  al-Hamlat;" answered she; and he, "Be a year's
fast incumbent  on me! Verily yon Religious is of Allah's
saints and full of  holiness, O my lady, and she hath hidden
treasure at her  command, for she gave me three dinars of red
gold and divined  my case, without my asking her, and knew
that I was in want."  Then the old woman went out with the
young lady Khatun,  saying to her, "Inshallah, O my daughter,
when thou hast visited  the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat, there shall
betide thee solace of soul  and by leave of Almighty Allah
thou shalt conceive, and thy  husband the Emir shall love thee
by the blessing of the Shaykh  and shall never again let thee
hear a despiteful word." Quoth  Khatun, "I will go with thee
to visit him, O my mother!" But  Dalilah said to herself,
"Where shall I strip her and take her  clothes and jewellery,
with the folk coming and going?" Then  she said to her, "O my
daughter, walk thou behind me, within  sight of me, for this
thy mother is a woman sorely burdened;  everyone who hath a
burden casteth it on me and all who have  pious
offerings[FN#190] to make give them to me and kiss my hand." 
So the young lady followed her at a distance, whilst her
anklets  tinkled and her hair-coins[FN#191] clinked as she
went, till they reached  the bazar of the merchants.
Presently, they came to the shop of a  young merchant, by name
Sídí Hasan who was very handsome[FN#192]  and had no hair on
his face. He saw the lady approaching and  fell to casting
stolen glances at her, which when the old woman  saw, she
beckoned to her and said, "Sit down in this shop,  till I
return to thee." Khatun obeyed her and sat down in the  shop-
front of the young merchant, who cast at her one glance of 
eyes that cost him a thousand sighs. Then the old woman 
accosted him and saluted him, saying, "Tell me, is not thy 
name Sidi Hasan, son of the merchant Mohsin?" He replied, 
"Yes, who told thee my name?" Quoth she, "Folk of good  repute
direct me to thee. Know that this young lady is my  daughter
and her father was a merchant who died and left her  much
money. She is come of marriageable age and the wise  say,
'Offer thy daughter in marriage and not thy son'; and all  her
life she hath not come forth the house till this day. Now a 
divine warning and a command given in secret bid me wed her 
to thee; so, if thou art poor, I will give thee capital and
will  open for thee instead of one shop two shops." Thereupon
quoth  the young merchant to himself, "I asked Allah for a
bride, and  He hath given me three things, to wit, coin,
clothing, and coynte."  Then he continued to the old trot, "O
my mother, that where-to thou directest me is well; but this
long while my mother  saith to me, 'I wish to marry thee,' but
I object replying, 'I will  not marry except on the sight of
my own eyes.'" Said Dalilah,  "Rise and follow my steps, and I
will show her to thee, naked."[FN#193]  So he rose and took a
thousand dinars, saying in himself,  "Haply we may need to buy
somewhat"--And Shahrazad  perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

        When it was the Seven Hundred and First Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
old woman said to Hasan, son of Mohsin the merchant, "Rise  up
and follow me, and I will show her naked to thee." So he  rose
and took with him a thousand dinars, saying in himself, 
"Haply we may need to buy somewhat or pay the fees for 
drawing up the marriage contract." The old woman bade him 
walk behind the young lady at a distance but within shot of
sight  and said to herself, "Where wilt thou carry the young
lady and  the merchant that thou mayest strip them both whilst
his shop  is still shut?" Then she walked on and Khatun after
her,  followed by the young merchant, till she came to a
dyery, kept  by a master dyer, by name Hajj Mohammed, a man of
ill-repute;  like the colocasia[FN#194] seller's knife cutting
male and female, and  loving to eat both figs and
pomegranates.[FN#195] He heard the tinkle of  the ankle rings
and, raising his head, saw the lady and the young  man.
Presently the old woman came up to him and, after  salaming to
him and sitting down opposite him, asked him, "Art  thou not
Hajj Mohammed the dyer?" He answered, "Yes, I am  he: what
dost thou want?" Quoth she, "Verily, folks of fair  repute
have directed me to thee. Look at yonder handsome girl,  my
daughter, and that comely beardless youth, my son; I brought 
them both up and spent much money on both of them. Now,  thou
must know that I have a big old ruinous house which I have 
shored up with wood, and the builder saith to me, 'Go and 
live in some other place, lest belike it fall upon thee; and
when  this is repaired return hither.' So I went forth to seek
me a  lodging, and people of worth directed me to thee, and I
wish to  lodge my son and daughter with thee." Quoth the dyer
in his  mind, "Verily, here is fresh butter upon cake come to
thee." But  he said to the old woman, "'Tis true I have a
house and saloon  and upper floor; but I cannot spare any part
thereof, for I want it  all for guests and for the indigo-
growers my clients." She replied,  "O my son, 'twill be only
for a month or two at the most, till our  house be repaired,
and we are strange folk. Let the guest-chamber  be shared
between us and thee, and by thy life, O my son, an thou 
desire that thy guests be ours, we will welcome them and eat
with  them and sleep with them." Then he gave her the keys,
one big  and one small and one crooked, saying to her "The big
key is  that of the house, the crooked one that of the saloon
and the little  one that of the upper floor." So Dalilah took
the keys and fared  on, followed by the lady who forwent the
young merchant, till  she came to the lane wherein was the
house. She opened the  door and entered, introducing the
damsel to whom said she, "O  my daughter, this (pointing to
the saloon) is the lodging of the  Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat; but
go thou into the upper floor and  loose thy outer veil and
wait till I come to thee." So she went  up and sat down.
Presently appeared the young merchant, whom  Dalilah carried
into the saloon, saying, "Sit down, whilst I fetch  my
daughter and show her to thee." So he sat down and the old 
trot went up to Khatun who said to her, "I wish to visit the 
Shaykh, before the folk come." Replied the beldame, "O my 
daughter, we fear for thee." Asked Khatun, "Why so?" and 
Dalilah answered, "Because here is a son of mine, a natural
who  knoweth not summer from winter, but goeth ever naked. He
is  the Shaykh's deputy and, if he saw a girl like thee come
to visit  his chief, he would snatch her earrings and tear her
ears and rend  her silken robes.[FN#196] So do thou doff thy
jewellery and clothes and  I will keep them for thee, till
thou hast made thy pious visitation."  Accordingly the damsel
did off her outer dress and jewels and  gave them to the old
woman, who said, "I will lay them for thee  on the Shaykh's
curtain, that a blessing may betide thee." Then  she went out,
leaving the lady in her shift and petticoat-trousers,  and hid
the clothes and jewels in a place on the staircase; after 
which she betook herself to the young merchant, whom she found 
impatiently awaiting the girl, and he cried, "Where is thy 
daughter, that I may see her?" But she smote palm on breast 
and he said "What aileth thee?" Quoth she, "Would there  were
no such thing as the ill neighbour and the envious! They  saw
thee enter the house with me and asked me of thee; and I 
said, 'This is a bridegroom I have found for my daughter.' So 
they envied me on thine account and said to my girl, 'Is thy
mother  tired of keeping thee, that she marrieth thee to a
leper?' There-upon I swore to her that she should not see thee
save naked."  Quoth he, "I take refuge with Allah from the
envious," and baring  his fore-arm, showed her that it was
like silver. Said she, "Have  no fear; thou shalt see her
naked, even as she shall see thee  naked;" and he said, "Let
her come and look at me. Then he  put off his pelisse and
sables and his girdle and dagger and the  rest of his raiment,
except his shirt and bag-trousers, and would  have laid the
purse of a thousand dinars with them, but Dalilah  cried,
'Give them to me, that I may take care of them." So she  took
them and fetching the girl's clothes and jewellery shouldered 
the whole and locking the door upon them went her ways.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her 
permitted say.

       When it was the Seven Hundred and Second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
the old woman had taken the property of the young merchant and 
the damsel and wended her ways, having locked the door upon 
them, she deposited her spoils with a druggist of her
acquaintance  and returned to the dyer, whom she found
sitting, awaiting her.  Quoth he, "Inshallah, the house
pleaseth thee?"; and quoth she,  "There is a blessing in it;
and I go now to fetch porters to carry  hither our goods and
furniture. But my children would have me  bring them a panade
with meat; so do thou take this dinar and  buy the dish and go
and eat the morning meal with them." Asked  the dyer, "Who
shall guard the dyery meanwhile and the people's  goods that
be therein?"; and the old woman answered, "Thy  lad!" "So be
it," rejoined he, and taking a dish and cover, went  out to do
her bidding. So far concerning the dyer who will again  be
mentioned in the tale; but as regards the old woman, she 
fetched the clothes and jewels she had left with the druggist
and  going back to the dyery, said to the lad, "Run after thy
master,  and I will not stir hence till you both return." "To
hear is to  obey," answered he and went away, while she began
to collect all  the customers' goods. Presently, there came up
an ass-driver, a  scavenger, who had been out of work for a
week and who was an  Hashish-eater to boot; and she called
him, saying, "Hither, O  donkey-boy!" So he came to her and
she asked, "Knowest thou  my son the dyer?"; whereto he
answered, "Yes, I know him."  Then she said, "The poor fellow
is insolvent and loaded with  debts, and as often as he is put
in prison, I set him free. Now  we wish to see him declared
bankrupt and I am going to return  the goods to their owners;
so do thou lend me thine ass to carry  the load and receive
this dinar to its hire. When I am gone, take  the handsaw and
empty out the vats and jars and break them, so  that if there
come an officer from the Kází's court, he may find  nothing in
the dyery." Quoth he, "I owe the Hajj a kindness  and will do
something for Allah's love." So she laid the things  on the
ass and, the Protector protecting her, made for her own 
house; so that she arrived there in safety and went in to her 
daughter Zaynab, who said to her, "O my mother, my heart bath 
been with thee! What hast thou done by way of roguery?" 
Dalilah replied, "I have played off four tricks on four
wights; the  wife of the Serjeant-usher, a young merchant, a
dyer and an ass-driver, and have brought thee all their spoil
on the donkey-boy's  beast." Cried Zaynab, "O my mother, thou
wilt never more be  able to go about the town, for fear of the
Serjeant-usher, whose  wife's raiment and jewellery thou hast
taken, and the merchant  whom thou hast stripped naked, and
the dyer whose customers'  goods thou hast stolen and the
owner of the ass." Rejoined the  old woman, "Pooh, my girl! I
reck not of them, save the donkey-boy, who knoweth me."
Meanwhile the dyer bought the meat-panade and set out for the
house, followed by his servant with the  food on head. On his
way thither, he passed his shop, where he  found the donkey-
boy breaking the vats and jars and saw that  there was neither
stuff nor liquor left in them and that the dyery  was in
ruins. So he said to him, "Hold thy hand, O ass-driver;"  and
the donkey-boy desisted and cried, "Praised be Allah for thy 
safety, O master! Verily my heart was with thee." "Why so?" 
"Thou art become bankrupt and they have filed a docket of
thine  insolvency." "Who told thee this?" "Thy mother told me,
and  bade me break the jars and empty the vats, that the
Kazi's officers  might find nothing in the shop, if they
should come." "Allah  confound the far One!"[FN#197] cried the
dyer; "My mother died long  ago." And he beat his breast,
exclaiming, "Alas, for the loss of  my goods and those of the
folk!" The donkey-boy also wept  and ejaculated, "Alas, for
the loss of my ass!"; and he said to  the dyer, "Give me back
my beast which thy mother stole from  me." The dyer laid hold
of him by the throat and fell to buffeting  him, saying,
"Bring me the old woman;" whilst the other buffeted  him in
return saying, "Give me back my beast." So they beat  and
cursed each other, till the folk collected around them--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her 
permitted say.

        When it was the Seven Hundred and Third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
dyer caught hold of the donkey-boy and the donkey-boy caught 
hold of the dyer and they beat and cursed each other till the
folk  collected round them and one of them asked, "What is the
matter,  O Master Mohammed?" The ass-driver answered, "I will
tell  thee the tale," and related to them his story, saying,
"I deemed I  was doing the dyer a good turn; but, when he saw
me he beat his  breast and said, 'My mother is dead.' And now,
I for one require  my ass of him, it being he who hath put
this trick on me, that he  might make me lose my beast." Then
said the folk to the dyer,  "O Master Mohammed, dost thou know
this matron, that thou  didst entrust her with the dyery and
all therein?" And he  replied, "I know her not; but she took
lodgings with me to-day,  she and her son and daughter." Quoth
one, "In my judgment,  the dyer is bound to indemnify the ass-
driver." Quoth another,  "Why so?" "Because," replied the
first, "he trusted not the old  Woman nor gave her his ass
save only because he saw that the  dyer had entrusted her with
the dyery and its contents." And a  third said, "O master,
since thou hast lodged her with thee, it  behoveth thee to get
the man back his ass." Then they made for  the house, and the
tale will come round to them again. Mean-while, the young
merchant remained awaiting the old woman's  coming with her
daughter, but she came not nor did her daughter;  whilst the
young lady in like manner sat expecting her return  with leave
from her son, the God-attended one, the Shaykh's  deputy, to
go in to the holy presence. So weary of waiting, she  rose to
visit the Shaykh by herself and went down into the saloon, 
where she found the young merchant, who said to her, "Come 
hither! where is thy mother, who brought me to marry thee?" 
She replied, "My mother is dead, art thou the old woman's son, 
the ecstatic, the deputy of the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat?" Quoth 
he, "The swindling old trot is no mother of mine; she hath 
cheated me and taken my clothes and a thousand dinars." Quoth 
Khatun, "And me also hath she swindled for she brought me to 
see the Shaykh Abu al-Hamlat and in lieu of so doing she hath 
stripped me." Thereupon he, "I look to thee to make good my 
clothes and my thousand dinars;" and she, "I look to thee to 
make good my clothes and jewellery." And, behold, at this 
moment in came the dyer and seeing them both stripped of their 
raiment, said to them, "Tell me where your mother is." So the 
young lady related all that had befallen her and the young 
merchant related all that had betided him, and the Master-dyer 
exclaimed, "Alas, for the loss of my goods and those of the
folk!";  and the ass-driver ejaculated, "Alas, for my ass!
Give me, O  dyer, my ass!" Then said the dyer, "This old woman
is a  sharper. Come forth, that I may lock the door." Quoth
the  young merchant, "'Twere a disgrace to thee that we should
enter  thy house dressed and go forth from it undressed." So
the dyer  clad him and the damsel and sent her back to her
house where we  shall find her after the return of her
husband. Then he shut the  dyery and said to the young
merchant, "Come, let us go and  search for the old woman and
hand her over to the Wali,[FN#198] the  Chief of Police." So
they and the ass-man repaired to the house  of the master of
police and made their complaint to him. Quoth  he, "O folk,
what want ye?" and when they told him he rejoined,  "How many
old women are there not in the town! Go ye and  seek for her
and lay hands on her and bring her to me, and I will  torture
her for you and make her confess." So they sought for  her all
round the town; and an account of them will presently be 
given.[FN#199] As for old Dalilah the Wily, she said, "I have
a mind to  play off another trick," to her daughter who
answered, "O my  mother, I fear for thee;" but the beldam
cried, "I am like the bean  husks which fall, proof against
fire and water." So she rose, and  donning a slave-girl's
dress of such as serve people of condition,  went out to look
for some one to defraud. Presently she came to  a by-street,
spread with carpets and lighted with hanging lamps,  and heard
a noise of singing-women and drumming of tambourines.  Here
she saw a handmaid bearing on her shoulder a boy, clad in 
trousers laced with silver and a little Abá-cloak of velvet,
with a  pearl embroidered Tarbush-cap on his head, and about
his neck a  collar of gold set with jewels. Now the house
belonged to the  Provost of the Merchants of Baghdad, and the
boy was his son.  He had a virgin daughter, to boot, who was
promised in marriage,  and it was her betrothal they were
celebrating that day. There  was with her mother a company of
noble dames and singing-women, and whenever she went upstairs
or down, the boy clung  to her. So she called the slave-girl
and said to her, "Take thy  young master and play with him,
till the company break up."  Seeing this, Dalilah asked the
handmaid, "What festivities are  these in your mistress's
house;" and was answered "She celebrates  her daughter's
betrothal this day, and she hath singing-women  with her."
Quoth the old woman to herself, "O Dalilah, the  thing to do
is to spirit away this boy from the maid,"--And  Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her  permitted
say. 

       When it was the Seven Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the 
old trot said to herself, "O Dalilah, the thing to do is to
spirit  away this boy from the maid!" she began crying out, "O 
disgrace! O ill luck!" Then pulling out a brass token,
resembling  a dinar, she said to the maid, who was a
simpleton, "Take  this ducat and go in to thy mistress and say
to her, 'Umm  al-Khayr rejoiceth with thee and is beholden to
thee for thy  favours, and on the day of assembly she and her
daughters will  visit thee and handsel the tiring-women with
the usual gifts.'"  Said the girl, "O my mother, my young
master here catcheth hold  of his mamma, whenever he seeth
her;" and she replied "Give  him to me, whilst thou goest in
and comest back." So she gave  her the child and taking the
token, went in; whereupon Dalilah  made off with the boy to a
by-lane, where she stripped him of his  clothes and jewels,
saying to herself, "O Dalilah, 'twould indeed  be the finest
of tricks, even as thou hast cheated the maid and  taken the
boy from her, so now to carry on the game and pawn  him for a
thousand dinars." So she repaired to the jewel-bazar,  where
she saw a Jew goldsmith seated with a cage full of jewellery 
before him, and said to herself, "'Twould be a rare trick to 
chouse this Jew fellow and get a thousand gold pieces worth of 
jewellery from him and leave the boy in pledge for it."
Presently  the Jew looked at them and seeing the boy with the
old woman,  knew him for the son of the Provost of the
Merchants. Now the  Israelite was a man of great wealth, but
would envy his neighbour  if he sold and himself did not sell;
so espying Dalilah, he said to  her, "What seekest thou, O my
mistress?" She asked, "Art  thou Master Azariah[FN#200] the
Jew?" having first enquired his name  of others; and he
answered, "Yes." Quoth she, "This boy's  sister, daughter of
the Shahbandar of the Merchants, is a promised  bride, and to-
day they celebrate her betrothal; and she hath need  of
jewellery. So give me two pair of gold ankle-rings, a brace of 
gold bracelets, and pearl ear-drops, with a girdle, a poignard
and  a seal-ring." He brought them out and she took of him a
thousand  dinars' worth of jewellery, saying, "I will take
these ornaments on  approval; and whatso pleaseth them, they
will keep and I will  bring thee the price and leave this boy
with thee till then." He  said, "Be it as thou wilt!" So she
took the jewellery and made  off to her own house, where her
daughter asked her how the trick  had sped. She told her how
she had taken and stripped the  Shahbandar's boy, and Zaynab
said, "Thou wilt never be able to  walk abroad again in the
town." Meanwhile, the maid went in  to her mistress and said
to her, "O my lady, Umm al-Khayr  saluteth thee and rejoiceth
with thee and on assembly-day she  will come, she and her
daughters, and give the customary  presents." Quoth her
mistress, "Where is thy young master?"  Quoth the slave-girl,
"I left him with her lest he cling to thee,  and she gave me
this, as largesse for the singing-women." So  the lady said to
the chief of the singers, "Take thy money;" and  she took it
and found it a brass counter; whereupon the lady cried  to the
maid, "Get thee down, O whore, and look to thy young  master."
Accordingly, she went down and finding neither boy  nor old
woman, shrieked aloud and fell on her face. Their joy was 
changed into annoy, and behold, the Provost came in, when his 
wife told him all that had befallen and he went out in quest
of the  child, whilst the other merchants also fared forth and
each sought  his own road. Presently, the Shahbandar, who had
looked every-where, espied his son seated, naked, in the Jew's
shop and said to  tile owner, "This is my son." "'Tis well,"
answered the Jew. So  he took him up, without asking for his
clothes, of the excess of his  joy at finding him; but the Jew
laid hold of him, saying, "Allah  succour the Caliph against
thee!"[FN#201] The Provost asked, "What  aileth thee, O Jew?";
and he answered, "Verily the old woman  took of me a thousand
dinars' worth of jewellery for thy daughter,  and left this
lad in pledge for the price; and I had not trusted  her, but
that she offered to leave the child whom I knew for thy  Son."
Said the Provost, "My daughter needeth no jewellery, give  me
the boy's clothes." Thereupon the Jew shrieked out, "Come  to
my aid, O Moslems!" but at that moment up came the dyer  and
the ass-man and the young merchant, who were going about, 
seeking the old woman, and enquired the cause of their jangle. 
So they told them the case and they said, "This old woman is a 
cheat, who hath cheated us before you." Then they recounted to 
them how she had dealt with them, and the Provost said, "Since 
I have found my son, be his clothes his ransom! If I come upon 
the old woman, I will require them of her." And he carried the 
child home to his mother, who rejoiced in his safety. Then the 
Jew said to the three others "Whither go ye?"; and they 
answered, "We go to look for her." Quoth the Jew, "Take me 
with you," presently adding, "Is there any one of you knoweth 
her?" The donkey-boy cried, "I know her;" and the Jew said, 
"If we all go forth together, we shall never catch her; for
she will  flee from us. Let each take a different road, and be
our rendezvous  at the shop of Hajj Mas'úd, the Moorish
barber." They  agreed to this and set off, each in a different
direction. Presently,  Dalilah sallied forth again to play her
tricks and the ass-driver  met her and knew her. So he caught
hold of her and said to  her, "Woe to thee! Hast thou been
long at this trade?" She  asked, "What aileth thee?"; and he
answered, "Give me back  my ass." Quoth she, "Cover what Allah
covereth, O my son!  Dost thou seek thine ass and the people's
things?" Quoth he,  "I want my ass; that's all;" and quoth
she, "I saw that thou  wast poor: so I deposited thine ass for
thee with the Moorish  barber. Stand off, whilst I speak him
fair, that he may give thee  the beast." So she went up to the
Maghrabi and kissed his hand  and shed tears. He asked her
what ailed her and she said, "O  my son, look at my boy who
standeth yonder. He was ill and  exposed himself to the air,
which injured his intellect. He used  to buy asses and now, if
he stand he saith nothing but, My ass!  if he sit he crieth,
My ass! and if he walk he crieth, My ass!  Now I have been
told by a certain physician that his mind is  disordered and
that nothing will cure him but drawing two of his  grinders
and cauterising him twice on either temple. So do thou  take
this dinar and call him to thee, saying, 'Thine ass is with 
me.'" Said the barber, "May I fast for a year, if I do not
give him  his ass in his fist!" Now he had with him two
journeymen, so he  said to one of them "Go, heat the irons."
Then the old woman  went her way and the barber called to the
donkey-boy,[FN#202] saying,  "Thine ass is with me, good
fellow! come and take him, and as  thou livest, I will give
him into thy palm." So he came to him  and the barber carried
him into a dark room, where he knocked  him down and the
journeymen bound him hand and foot. Then  the Maghrabi arose
and pulled out two of his grinders and fired  him on either
temple; after which he let him go, and he rose and  said, "O
Moor, why hast thou used me with this usage?" Quoth  the
barber, "Thy mother told me that thou hadst taken cold whilst 
ill, and hadst lost thy reason, so that, whether sitting or
standing  or walking, thou wouldst say nothing but My ass! So
here is  thine ass in thy fist." Said the other, "Allah
requite thee for  pulling out my teeth." Then the barber told
him all that the old  woman had related and he exclaimed,
"Allah torment her!"; and  the twain left the shop and went
out, disputing. When the barber  returned, he found his booth
empty, for, whilst he was absent, the  old woman had taken all
that was therein and made off with it to  her daughter, whom
she acquainted with all that had befallen and  all she had
done. The barber, seeing his place plundered, caught  hold of
the donkey-boy and said to him, "Bring me thy mother"  But he
answered, saying, "She is not my mother; she is a sharper  who
hath cozened much people and stolen my ass." And lo! at  this
moment up came the dyer and the Jew and the young  merchant,
and seeing the Moorish barber holding on to the ass-driver who
was fired on both temples, they said to him, "What  hath
befallen thee, O donkey-boy?" So he told them all that  had
betided him and the barber did the like; and the others in 
turn related to the Moor the tricks the old woman had played 
them. Then he shut up his shop and went with them to the 
office of the Police-master to whom they said, "We look to 
thee for our case and our coin."[FN#203] Quoth the Wali, "And
how  many old women are there not in Baghdad! Say me, doth any 
of you know her?" Quoth the ass-man, "I do; so give me ten  of
thine officers." He gave them half a score archers and they 
all five went out, followed by the sergeants, and patrolled
the  city, till they met the old woman, when they laid hands
on her  and carrying her to the house of the Chief of Police,
stood waiting  under his office windows till he should come
forth. Presently,  the warders fell asleep, for excess of
watching with their chief,  and old Dalilah feigned to follow
their example, till the ass-man  and his fellows slept
likewise, when she stole away from them  and, going in to the
Wali's Harim, kissed the hand of the mistress  of the house
and asked her "Where is the Chief of Police?"  The lady
answered, "He is asleep; what wouldst thou with  him?" Quoth
Dalilah, "My husband is a merchant of chattels  and gave me
five Mamelukes to sell, whilst he went on a journey.  The
Master of Police met me and bought them of me for a  thousand
dinars and two hundred for myself, saying, 'Bring  them to my
house.' So I have brought them."--And  Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her  permitted say. 

        When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
old woman, entering the Harim of the Police-Master, said to
his  wife, "Verily the Wali bought of me five slaves for one
thousand  ducats and two hundred for myself, saying, 'Bring
them to my  quarters.' So I have brought them." Hearing the
old woman's  story she believed it and asked her, "Where are
the slaves?"  Dalilah replied, "O my lady, they are asleep
under the palace  window"; whereupon the dame looked out and
seeing the Moorish  barber clad in a Mameluke habit and the
young merchant as he  were a drunken Mameluke[FN#204] and the
Jew and the dyer and the ass-driver as they were shaven
Mamelukes, said in herself, "Each  of these white slaves is
worth more than a thousand dinars." So  she opened her chest
and gave the old woman the thousand ducats,  saying, "Fare
thee forth now and come back anon; when my  husband waketh, I
will get thee the other two hundred dinars from  him."
Answered the old woman, "O my lady, an hundred of them  are
thine, under the sherbert-gugglet whereof thou
drinkest,[FN#205] and  the other hundred do thou keep for me
against I come back,"  presently adding, "Now let me out by
the private door." So she  let her out, and the Protector
protected her and she made her way  home to her daughter, to
whom she related how she had gotten a  thousand gold pieces
and sold her five pursuers into slavery,  ending with, "O my
daughter, the one who troubleth me most is  the ass-driver,
for he knoweth me." Said Zaynab, "O my mother,  abide quiet
awhile and let what thou hast done suffice thee, for the 
crock shall not always escape the shock." When the Chief of 
Police awoke, his wife said to him, "I give thee joy of the
five  slaves thou hast bought of the old woman." Asked he,
"What  slaves?" And she answered, "Why dost thou deny it to
me?  Allah willing, they shall become like thee people of
condition."  Quoth he, "As my head liveth, I have bought no
slaves! Who  saith this?" Quoth she, "The old woman, the
brokeress, from  whom thou boughtest them; and thou didst
promise her a  thousand dinars for them and two hundred for
herself." Cried  he, "Didst thou give her the money?" And she
replied, "Yes;  for I saw the slaves with my own eyes, and on
each is a suit of  clothes worth a thousand dinars; so I sent
out to bid the sergeants  have an eye to them." The Wali went
out and, seeing the five  plaintiffs, said to the officers,
"Where are the five slaves we bought  for a thousand dinars of
the old woman?" Said they, "There  are no slaves here; only
these five men, who found the old woman,  and seized her and
brought her hither. We fell asleep, whilst  waiting for thee,
and she stole away and entered the Harim.  Presently out came
a maid and asked us, 'Are the five with you  with whom the old
woman came?'; and we answered, 'Yes.'"  Cried the Master of
Police, "By Allah, this is the biggest of  swindles!"; and the
five men said, "We look to thee for our  goods." Quoth the
Wali, "The old woman, your mistress, sold  you to me for a
thousand gold pieces." Quoth they, "That were  not allowed of
Allah; we are free-born men and 