may not be  sold, and we
appeal from thee to the Caliph." Rejoined the Master  of
Police, "None showed her the way to the house save you, and I 
will sell you to the galleys for two hundred dinars apiece."
Just  then, behold, up came the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarik who,
on his  return from his journey, had found his wife stripped
of her clothes  and jewellery and heard from her all that had
passed; whereupon  quoth he, "The Master of Police shall
answer me this" and  repairing to him, said "Dost thou suffer
old women to go round  about the town and cozen folk of their
goods? This is thy duty  and I look to thee for my wife's
property." Then said he to the  five men, "What is the case
with you?" So they told him their  stories and he said, "Ye
are wronged men," and turning to the  Master of Police, asked
him, "Why dost thou arrest them?"  Answered he, "None brought
the old wretch to my house save  these five, so that she took
a thousand dinars of my money and  sold them to my women."
Whereupon the five cried, "O Emir  Hasan, be thou our advocate
in this cause." Then said the Master  of Police to the Emir,
"Thy wife's goods are at my charge and I  will be surety for
the old woman. But which of you knoweth  her?" They cried, "We
all know her: send ten apparitors with  us, and we will take
her." So he gave them ten men, and the ass-driver said to
them, "Follow me, for I should know her with blue 
eyes."[FN#206] Then they fared forth and lo! they meet old
Dalilah  coming out of a by-street: so they at once laid hands
on her and  brought her to the office of the Wali who asked
her, "Where are  the people's goods?" But she answered,
saying, "I have neither  gotten them nor seen them." Then he
cried to the gaoler, "Take  her with thee and clap her in gaol
till the morning;" but he replied,  "I will not take her nor
will I imprison her lest she play a trick  on me and I be
answerable for her." So the Master of Police  mounted and rode
out with Dalilah and the rest to the bank of the  Tigris,
where he bade the lamp-lighter crucify her by her hair.  He
drew her up by the pulley and bound her on the cross; after 
which the Master of Police set ten men to guard her and went 
home. Presently, the night fell down and sleep overcame the 
watchmen. Now a certain Badawi had heard one man say to a 
friend, "Praise be to Allah for thy safe return! Where hast
thou  been all this time?" Replied the other, "In Baghdad
where I  broke my fast on honey-fritters."[FN#207] Quoth the
Badawi to himself  "Needs must I go to Baghdad and eat honey-
fritters therein"; for  in all his life he had never entered
Baghdad nor seen fritters of the  sort. So he mounted his
stallion and rode on towards Baghdad,  saying in his mind,
"'Tis a fine thing to eat honey-fritters! On the  honour of an
Arab, I will break my fast with honey-fritters and  naught
else!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and  ceased to
say her permitted say. 

        When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
wild  Arab mounted horse and made for Baghdad saying in his
mind,  "'Tis a fine thing to eat honey-fritters! On the honour
of an  Arab I will break my fast with honey-fritters and
naught else;"  and he rode on till he came to the place where
Dalilah was  crucified and she heard him utter these words. So
he went up  to her and said to her, "What art thou?" Quoth
she, "I throw  myself on thy protection, O Shaykh of the
Arabs!" and quoth  lie, "Allah indeed protect thee! But what
is the cause of thy  crucifixion?" Said she, "I have an enemy,
an oilman, who frieth  fritters, and I stopped to buy some of
him, when I chanced to spit  and my spittle fell on the
fritters. So he complained of me to the  Governor who
commanded to crucify me, saying, 'I adjudge  that ye take ten
pounds of honey-fritters and feed her therewith  upon the
cross. If she eat them, let her go, but if not, leave her 
hanging.' And my stomach will not brook sweet things." Cried 
the Badawi, "By the honour of the Arabs, I departed not the 
camp but that I might taste of honey-fritters! I will eat them 
for thee." Quoth she, "None may eat them, except he be hung 
up in my place." So he fell into the trap and unbound her; 
whereupon she bound him in her stead, after she had stripped
him  of his clothes and turband and put them on; then covering
herself  with his burnouse and mounting his horse, she rode to
her house,  where Zaynab asked her, "What meaneth this
plight?"; and she  answered, "They crucified me;" and told her
all that had befallen  her with the Badawi. This is how it
fared with her; but as regards  the watchmen, the first who
woke roused his companions and they  saw that the day had
broken. So one of them raised his eyes  and cried, "Dalilah."
Replied the Badawi, "By Allah! I have  not eaten all night.
Have ye brought the honey-fritters?" All  exclaimed, "This is
a man and a Badawi, and one of them  asked him, "O Badawi,
where is Dalilah and who loosed her?"  He answered, "'Twas I;
she shall not eat the honey-fritters against  her will; for
her soul abhorreth them." So they knew that the  Arab was
ignorant of her case, whom she had cozened, and said  to one
another, "Shall we flee or abide the accomplishment of that 
which Allah hath written for us?" As they were talking, up
came  the Chief of Police, with all the folk whom the old
woman had  cheated, and said to the guards, "Arise, loose
Dalilah." Quoth  the Badawi, "We have not eaten to-night. Hast
thou brought the  honey-fritters?" Whereupon the Wali raised
his eyes to the cross  and seeing the Badawi hung up in the
stead of the old woman,  said to the watchmen, "What is this?"
"Pardon, O our lord!"  "Tell me what hath happened" "We were
weary with watching  with thee on guard and , 'Dalilah is
crucified.' So we fell  asleep, and when we awoke, we found
the Badawi hung up in her  room; and we are at thy mercy." "O
folk, Allah's pardon be  upon you! She is indeed a clever
cheat!" Then they unbound  the Badawi, who laid hold of the
Master of Police, saying, "Allah  succour the Caliph against
thee! I look to none but thee for my  horse and clothes!" So
the Wali questioned him and he told  him what had passed
between Dalilah and himself. The magistrate  marvelled and
asked him, "Why didst thou release her?";  and the Badawi
answered, "I knew not that she was a felon."  Then said the
others, "O Chief of Police, we look to thee in the  matter of
our goods; for we delivered the old woman into thy  hands and
she was in thy guard; and we cite thee before the  Divan of
the Caliph." Now the Emir Hasan had gone up to the  Divan,
when in came the Wali with the Badawi and the five others, 
saying, "Verily, we are wronged men!" "Who hath wronged  you?"
asked the Caliph; so each came forward in turn and told  his
story, after which said the Master of Police, "O Commander  of
the Faithful, the old woman cheated me also and sold me these 
five men as slaves for a thousand dinars, albeit they are
free-born."  Quoth the Prince of True Believers, "I take upon
myself all that  you have lost"; adding to the Master of
Police, "I charge thee  with the old woman." But he shook his
collar, saying, "O Commander  of the Faithful, I will not
answer for her; for, after I had  hung her on the cross, she
tricked this Badawi and, when he loosed  her, she tied him up
in her room and made off with his clothes and  horse." Quoth
the Caliph, "Whom but thee shall I charge with  her?"; and
quoth the Wali, "Charge Ahmad al-Danaf, for he  hath a
thousand dinars a month and one-and-forty followers, at a 
monthly wage of an hundred dinars each." So the Caliph said, 
"Harkye, Captain Ahmad!" "At thy service, O Commander of  the
Faithful," said he; and the Caliph cried, "I charge thee to 
bring the old woman before us." Replied Ahmad, "I will answer 
for her." Then the Caliph kept the Badawi and the five with
him,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying  her permitted say. 

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventh Night, 

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
the Caliph said to Calamity Ahmad, "I charge thee to bring the 
old woman before us," he said, "I will answer for her O
Commander  of the Faithful!" Then the Caliph kept the Badawi
and  the five with him, whilst Ahmad and his men went down to
their  hall,[FN#208] saying to one another, "How shall we lay
hands on her,  seeing that there are many old women in the
town?" And quoth  Ahmad to Hasan Shuman, "What counsellest
thou?" Whereupon  quoth one of them, by name Ali Kitf al-
Jamal,[FN#209] to Al-Danaf, "Of  what dost thou take counsel
with Hasan Shuman? Is the Pestilent  one any great shakes?"
Said Hasan, "O Ali, why dost thou  disparage me? By the Most
Great Name, I will not company  with thee at this time!"; and
he rose and went out in wrath.  Then said Ahmad, "O my braves,
let every sergeant take ten men,  each to his own quarter and
search for Dalilah." All did his  bidding, Ali included, and
they said, "Ere we disperse let us agree  to rendezvous in the
quarter Al-Kalkh." It was noised abroad  in the city that
Calamity Ahmad had undertaken to lay hands on  Dalilah the
Wily, and Zaynab said to her, "O my mother, an thou  be indeed
a trickstress, do thou befool Ahmad al-Danaf and his 
company." Answered Dalilah, "I fear none save Hasan Shuman;" 
and Zaynab said, "By the life of my browlock, I will assuredly 
get thee the clothes of all the one-and-forty." Then she
dressed  and veiled herself and going to a certain druggist,
who had a  saloon with two doors, salamed to him and gave him
an ashrafi  and said to him, "Take this gold piece as a
douceur for thy saloon  and let it to me till the end of the
day." So he gave her the  keys and she fetched carpets and so
forth on the stolen ass and  furnishing the place, set on each
raised pavement a tray of meat  and wine. Then she went out
and stood at the door, with her  face unveiled and behold, up
came Ali Kitf al-Jamal and his  men. She kissed his hand; and
he fell in love with her, seeing  her to be a handsome girl,
and said to her, "What dost thou  want?" Quoth she, "Art thou
Captain Ahmad al-Danaf?";  and quoth he, "No, but I am of his
company and my name is  Ali Camel-shoulder." Asked she,
"Whither fare you?"; and he  answered, "We go about in quest
of a sharkish old woman, who  hath stolen folk's good, and we
mean to lay hands on her. But  who art thou and what is thy
business?" She replied, "My  father was a taverner at Mosul
and he died and left me much  money. So I came hither, for
fear of the Dignities, and asked  the people who would protect
me, to which they replied, 'None  but Ahmad al-Danaf.'" Said
the men, "From this day forth,  thou art under his
protection"; and she replied, "Hearten me  by eating a bit and
drinking a sup of water."[FN#210] They consented  and
entering, ate and drank till they were drunken, when she 
drugged them with Bhang and stripped them of their clothes and 
arms; and on like wise she did with the three other
companions.  Presently, Calamity Ahmad went out to look for
Dalilah, but  found her not, neither set eyes on any of his
followers, and went  on till he came to the door where Zaynab
was standing. She  kissed his hand and he looked on her and
fell in love with her.  Quoth she, "Art thou Captain Ahmad al-
Danaf?"; and quoth he,  "Yes: who art thou?" She replied, "I
am a stranger from  Mosul. My father was a vintner at that
place and he died and  left me much money wherewith I came to
this city, for fear of the  powers that be, and opened this
tavern. The Master of Police  hath imposed a tax on me, but it
is my desire to put myself under  thy protection and pay thee
what the police would take of me, for  thou hast the better
right to it." Quoth he, "Do not pay him  aught: thou shalt
have my protection and welcome." Then quoth  she, "Please to
heal my heart and eat of my victual," So he  entered and ate
and drank wine, till he could not sit upright, when  she
drugged him and took his clothes and arms. Then she loaded 
her purchase on the Badawi's horse and the donkey-boy's ass
and  made off with it, after she had aroused Ali Kitf al-
Jamal. Camel-shoulder awoke and found himself naked and saw
Ahmad and his  men drugged and stripped: so he revived them
with the counter-drug and they awoke and found themselves
naked. Quoth Calamity  Ahmad, "O lads, what is this? We were
going to catch her,  and lo! this strumpet hath caught us! How
Hasan Shuman will  rejoice over us! But we will wait till it
is dark and then go away."  Meanwhile Pestilence Hasan said to
the hall-keeper, "Where are  the men?"; and as he asked, up
they came naked; and he recited  these two couplets[FN#211], 

"Men in their purposes are much alike, * But in their issues
     difference comes to light:
Of men some wise are, others simple souls; * As of the stars
     some dull, some pearly bright. 

Then he looked at them and asked, "Who hath played you this 
trick and made you naked?"; and they answered, "We went in 
quest of an old woman, and a pretty girl stripped us." Quoth 
Hasan, "She hath done right well." They asked, "Dost thou 
know her?"; and he answered, "Yes, I know her and the old trot 
too." Quoth they, "What shall we say to the Caliph?"; and 
quoth he, "O Danaf, do thou shake thy collar before him, and
he  will say, 'Who is answerable for her'; and if he ask why
thou  hast not caught her; say thou, 'We know her not; but
charge  Hasan Shuman with her.' And if he give her into my
charge, I  will lay hands on her." So they slept that night
and on the  morrow they went up to the Caliph's Divan and
kissed ground  before him. Quoth he, "Where is the old woman,
O Captain  Ahmad?" But he shook his collar. The Caliph asked
him why  he did so, and he answered, "I know her not; but do
thou charge  Hasan Shuman to lay hands on her, for he knoweth
her and her  daughter also." Then Hasan interceded for her
with the Caliph,  saying, "Indeed, she hath not played off
these tricks, because she  coveted the folk's stuff, but to
show her cleverness and that of her  daughter, to the intent
that thou shouldst continue her husband's  stipend to her and
that of her father to her daughter. So an thou  wilt spare her
life I will fetch her to thee." Cried the Caliph,  "By the
life of my ancestors, if she restore the people's goods, I 
will pardon her on thine intercession!" And said the
Pestilence,  "Give me a pledge, O Prince of True Believers!"
Whereupon  Al-Rashid gave him the kerchief of pardon. So Hasan
repaired  to Dalilah's house and called to her. Her daughter
Zaynab  answered him and he asked her, "Where is thy mother?" 
"Upstairs," she answered; and he said, "Bid her take the
people's  goods and come with me to the presence of the
Caliph; for I  have brought her the kerchief of pardon, and if
she will not come  with a good grace, let her blame only
herself." So Dalilah came  down and tying the kerchief about
her neck gave him the people's  goods on the donkey-boy's ass
and the Badawi's horse. Quoth  he, "There remain the clothes
of my Chief and his men"; and  quoth she, "By the Most Great
Name, 'twas not I who stripped  them!" Rejoined Hasan, "Thou
sayst sooth, it was thy daughter  Zaynab's doing, and this was
a good turn she did thee." Then he  carried her to the Divan
and laying the people's goods and stuff  before the Caliph,
set the old trot in his presence. As soon as he  saw her, he
bade throw her down on the carpet of blood, whereat  she
cried, "I cast myself on thy protection, O Shuman."' So he 
rose and kissing the Caliph's hands, said, "Pardon, O
Commander  of the Faithful! Indeed, thou gavest me the
kerchief of pardon."  Said the Prince of True Believers, "I
pardon her for thy sake:  come hither, O old woman; what is
thy name?" "My name is  Wily Dalilah," answered she, and the
Caliph said "Thou art  indeed crafty and full of guile."
Whence she was dubbed Dalilah  the Wily One. Then quoth he,
"Why hast thou played all these  tricks on the folk and
wearied our hearts?" and quoth she, "I did  it not of lust for
their goods, but because I had heard of the  tricks which
Ahmad al-Danaf and Hasan Shuman played in  Baghdad and said to
myself, 'I too will do the like.' And now  I have returned the
folk their goods." But the ass-driver rose  and said "I invoke
Allah's law[FN#212] between me and her; for it  sufficed her
not to take my ass, but she must needs egg on the  Moorish
barber to tear out my eye-teeth and fire me on both 
temples."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and  ceased
to say her permitted say. 

       When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the 
donkey-boy rose and cried out, "I invoke Allah's law between
me  and her; for it sufficed her not to take my ass, but she
must needs  egg on the barber to tear out my eye-teeth and
fire me on both  temples;" thereupon the Caliph bade give him
an hundred  dinars and ordered the dyer the like, saying, "Go;
set up thy  dyery again." So they called down blessings on his
head and  went away. The Badawi also took his clothes and
horse and  departed, saying, "'Tis henceforth unlawful and
forbidden me to  enter Baghdad and eat honey-fritters." And
the others took their  goods and went away. Then said the
Caliph, "Ask a boon of  me, O Dalilah!"; and she said,
"Verily, my father was governor  of the carrier-pigeons to
thee and I know how to rear the birds;  and my husband was
town-captain of Baghdad. Now I wish to  have the reversion of
my husband and my daughter wisheth to  have that of her
father." The Caliph granted both their requests  and she said,
"I ask of thee that I may be portress of thy Khan."  Now he
had built a Khan of three stories, for the merchants to  lodge
in, and had assigned to its service forty slaves and also
forty  dogs he had brought from the King of the
Sulaymániyah,[FN#213] when  he deposed him; and there was in
the Khan a cook-slave, who  cooked for the chattels and fed
the hounds for which he let make  collars. Said the Caliph, "O
Dalilah, I will write thee a patent  of guardianship of the
Khan, and if aught be lost therefrom, thou  shalt be
answerable for it. "'Tis well," replied she; "but do  thou
lodge my daughter in the pavilion over the door of the Khan, 
for it hath terraced roofs, and carrier-pigeons may not be
reared to  advantage save in an open space." The Caliph
granted her this  also and she and her daughter removed to the
pavilion in question,  where Zaynab hung up the one-and-forty
dresses of Calamity  Ahmad and his company. Moreover, they
delivered to Dalilah  the forty pigeons which carried the
royal messages, and the Caliph  appointed the Wily One
mistress over the forty slaves and charged  them to obey her.
She made the place of her sitting behind the  door of the
Khan, and every day she used to go up to the Caliph's  Divan,
lest he should need to send a message by pigeon-post and  stay
there till eventide whilst the forty slaves stood on guard at 
the Khan; and when darkness came on they loosed the forty 
dogs that they might keep watch over the place by night. Such 
were the doings of Dalilah the Wily One in Baghdad and much 
like them were 




The Adventures of Mercury Ali of Cairo.[FN#214] 



Now as regards the works of Mercury 'Alí; there lived once at 
Cairo,[FN#215] in the days of Saláh the Egyptian, who was
Chief of the  Cairo Police and had forty men under him, a
sharper named Ali,  for whom the Master of Police used to set
snares and think that  he had fallen therein; but, when they
sought for him, they found  that he had fled like zaybak, or
quicksilver, wherefore they dubbed  him Ali Zaybak or Mercury
Ali of Cairo. Now one day, as he  sat with his men in his
hall, his heart became heavy within him  and his breast was
straitened. The hall-keeper saw him sitting  with frowning
face and said to him, "What aileth thee, O my  Chief? If thy
breast be straitened take a turn in the streets of  Cairo, for
assuredly walking in her markets will do away with  thy irk."
So he rose up and went out and threaded the streets  awhile,
but only increased in cark and care. Presently, he came  to a
wine-shop and said to himself, "I will go in and drink myself 
drunken." So he entered and seeing seven rows of people in 
the shop, said, "Harkye, taverner! I will not sit except by 
myself." Accordingly, the vintner placed him in a chamber
alone  and set strong pure wine before him whereof he drank
till he lost  his senses. Then he sallied forth again and
walked till he came  to the road called Red, whilst the people
left the street clear  before him, out of fear of him.
Presently, he turned and saw a  water-carrier trudging along,
with his skin and gugglet, crying out  and saying, "O
exchange! There is no drink but what raisins  make, there is
no love-delight but what of the lover we take and  none
sitteth in the place of honour save the sensible
freke[FN#216]!" So  he said to him, "Here, give me to drink!"
The water-carrier  looked at him and gave him the gugglet
which he took and  gazing into it, shook it up and lastly
poured it out on the ground.  Asked the water-carrier, "Why
dost thou not drink?"; and he  answered, saying, "Give me to
drink." So the man filled the cup  a second time and he took
it and shook it and emptied it on the  ground; and thus he did
a third time. Quoth the water-carrier,  "An thou wilt not
drink, I will be off." And Ali said, "Give me  to drink." So
he filled the cup a fourth time and gave it to him;  and he
drank and gave the man a dinar. The water-carrier looked  at
him with disdain and said, belittling him, "Good luck to thee! 
Good luck to thee, my lad! Little folk are one thing and great 
folk another!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and 
ceased saying her permitted say, 

       When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninth Night, 

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
water-carrier receiving the dinar, looked at the giver with
disdain  and said "Good luck to thee! Good luck to thee!
Little folk  are one thing and great folk another." Now when
Mercury Ali  heard this, he caught hold of the man's gaberdine
and drawing on  him a poignard of price, such an one as that
whereof the poet  speaketh in these two couplets,

"Watered steel-blade, the world perfection calls, * Drunk with
     the viper poison foes appals,
Cuts lively, burns the blood whene'er it falls; * And picks up
     gems from pave of marble halls;"[FN#217]

cried to him, "O Shaykh, speak reasonably to me! Thy water-
skin is worth if dear three dirhams, and the gugglets I
emptied on  the ground held a pint or so of water." Replied
the water-carrier  "'Tis well," and Ali rejoined, "I gave thee
a golden ducat: why,  then dost thou belittle me? Say me, hast
thou ever seen any  more valiant than I or more generous than
I?" Answered the  water-carrier; "I have indeed, seen one more
valiant than thou  and eke more generous than thou; for,
never, since women bare  children, was there on earth's face a
brave man who was not  generous." Quoth Ali, "And who is he
thou deemest braver and  more generous than I?" Quoth the
other, "Thou must know  that I have had a strange adventure.
My father was a Shaykh  of the Water-carriers who give drink
in Cairo and, when he died,  he left me five male camels, a
he-mule, a shop and a house; but  the poor man is never
satisfied; or, if he be satisfied he dieth.  So I said to
myself, 'I will go up to Al-Hijaz'; and, taking a  string of
camels, bought goods on tick, till I had run in debt for  five
hundred ducats, all of which I lost in the pilgrimage. Then  I
said in my mind, 'If I return to Cairo the folk will clap me
in  jail for their goods.' So I fared with the pilgrims-
caravan of  Damascus to Aleppo and thence I went on to
Baghdad, where I  sought out the Shaykh of the Water-carriers
of the city and  finding his house I went in and repeated the
opening chapter of  the Koran to him. He questioned me of my
case and I told  him all that had betided me, whereupon he
assigned me a shop  and gave me a water-skin and gear. So I
sallied forth a-morn  trusting in Allah to provide, and went
round about the city. I  offered the gugglet to one, that he
might drink; but he cried, 'I  have eaten naught whereon to
drink; for a niggard invited me  this day and set two gugglets
before me; so I said to him, 'O  son of the sordid, hast thou
given me aught to eat that thou  offerest me drink after it?'
Wherefore wend thy ways, O water-carrier, till I have eaten
somewhat: then come and give me to  drink.' Thereupon I
accosted another and he said, 'Allah  provide thee!' And so I
went on till noon, without taking hansel,  and I said to
myself, 'Would Heaven I had never come to  Baghdad!'
Presently, I saw the folk running as fast as they could;  so I
followed them and behold, a long file of men riding two and 
two and clad in steel, with double neck-rings and felt bonnets
and  burnouses and swords and bucklers. I asked one of the
folk  whose suite this was, and he answered, 'That of Captain
Ahmad  al-Danaf.' Quoth I, 'And what is he?' and quoth the
other, 'He  is town-captain of Baghdad and her Divan, and to
him is  committed the care of the suburbs. He getteth a
thousand dinars a  month from the Caliph and Hasan Shuman hath
the like. More-over, each of his men draweth an hundred dinars
a month; and  they are now returning to their barrack from the
Divan.' And lo!  Calamity Ahmad saw me and cried out, 'Come
give me drink.' So  I filled the cup and gave it him, and he
shook it and emptied it  out, like unto thee; and thus he did
a second time. Then I filled  the cup a third time and he took
a draught as thou diddest; after  which he asked me, 'O water-
carrier, whence comest thou?' And  I answered, 'From Cairo,'
and he, 'Allah keep Cairo and her  citizens! What may bring
thee thither?' So I told him my story  and gave him to
understand that I was a debtor fleeing from debt  and
distress. He cried, 'Thou art welcome to Baghdad'; then he 
gave me five dinars and said to his men, 'For the love of
Allah be  generous to him.' So each of them gave me a dinar
and Ahmad  said to me, 'O Shaykh, what while thou abidest in
Baghdad thou  shalt have of us the like every time thou givest
us to drink.'  Accordingly, I paid them frequent visits and
good ceased not to  come to me from the folk till, one day,
reckoning up the profit I  had made of them, I found it a
thousand dinars and said to  myself, 'The best thing thou
canst do is to return to Egypt.' So I  went to Ahmad's house
and kissed his hand, and he said, 'What  seekest thou?' Quoth
I, 'I have a mind to depart'; and I repeated  these two
couplets,

'Sojourn of stranger, in whatever land, * Is like castle based
     upon the wind:
The breaths of breezes level all he raised. * And so on
     homeward-way's the stranger's mind.' 

I added, 'The caravan is about to start for Cairo and I wish
to  return to my people.' So he gave me a she-mule and an
hundred  dinars and said to me, 'I desire to send somewhat by
thee, O  Shaykh! Dost thou know the people of Cairo?' 'Yes,'
answered  I";--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to  say her permitted say.

        When it was the Seven Hundred and Tenth Night,

She pursued, It bath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Ahmad al-Danaf had given the water-carrier a she-mule and an 
hundred dinars and said to him, "I desire to send a trust by
thee.  Dost thou know the people of Cairo?" "I answered (quoth
the  water-carrier), 'Yes'; and he said, 'Take this letter and
carry it to  Ali Zaybak of Cairo and say to him, 'Thy Captain
saluteth thee  and he is now with the Caliph.' So I took the
letter and journeyed  back to Cairo, where I paid my debts and
plied my water-carrying  trade; but I have not delivered the
letter, because I know  not the abode of Mercury Ali." Quoth
Ali, "O elder, be of  good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear: I am that Ali,  the first of the lads of Captain Ahmad:
here with the letter!"  So he gave him the missive and he
opened it and read these two  couplets,

"O adornment of beauties to thee write I * On a paper that
     flies as the winds go by:
Could I fly, I had flown to their arms in desire, * But a bird
     with cut wings; how shall ever he fly?"

"But after salutation from Captain Ahmad al-Danaf to the 
eldest of his sons, Mercury Ali of Cairo. Thou knowest that I 
tormented Salah al-Din the Cairene and befooled him till I
buried  him alive and reduced his lads to obey me, and amongst
them  Ali Kitf al-Jamal; and I am now become town-captain of 
Baghdad in the Divan of the Caliph who hath made me over-seer
of the suburbs. An thou be still mindful of our covenant, 
come to me; haply thou shalt play some trick in Baghdad which 
may promote thee to the Caliph's service, so he may appoint
thee  stipends and allowances and assign thee a lodging, which
is what  thou wouldst see and so peace be on thee." When Ali
read this  letter, he kissed it and laying it on his head,
gave the water-carrier ten dinars; after which he returned to
his barracks and  told his comrades and said to them, "I
commend you one to  other." Then he changed all his clothes
and, donning a travelling  cloak and a tarboosh, took a case,
containing a spear of bamboo-cane, four-and-twenty cubits
long, made in several pieces, to fit  into one another. Quoth
his lieutenant, "Wilt thou go a journey  when the treasury is
empty?"; and quoth Ali, "When I reach  Damascus I will send
you what shall suffice you." Then he set  out and fared on,
till he overtook a caravan about to start,  whereof were the
Shah-bandar, or Provost of the Merchants, and  forty other
traders. They had all loaded their beasts, except  the
Provost, whose loads lay upon the ground, and Ali heard his 
caravan-leader, who was a Syrian, say to the muleteers, "Bear
a  hand, one of you!" But they reviled him and abused him. 
Quoth Ali in himself, "None will suit me so well to travel 
withal as this leader." Now Ali was beardless and well-
favoured;  so he went up to and saluted the leader who
welcomed him and  said, "What seekest thou?" Replied Ali, "O
my uncle, I see  thee alone with forty mule-loads of goods;
but why hast thou not  brought hands to help thee?" Rejoined
the other, "O my son, I  hired two lads and clothed them and
put in each one's pocket  two hundred dinars; and they helped
me till we came to the  Dervishes' Convent,[FN#218] when they
ran away." Quoth Ali, "Whither  are you bound?" and quoth the
Syrian, "to Aleppo," when  Ali said, "I will lend thee a
hand." Accordingly they loaded  the beasts and the Provost
mounted his she-mule and they set out  he rejoicing in Ali;
and presently he loved him and made  much of him and on this
wise they fared on till nightfall, when  they dismounted and
ate and drank. Then came the time of  sleep and Ali lay down
on his side and made as if he slept;  whereupon the Syrian
stretched himself near him and Ali rose  from his stead and
sat down at the door of the merchant's  pavilion. Presently
the Syrian turned over and would have  taken Ali in his arms,
but found him not and said to himself,  "Haply he hath
promised another and he hath taken him;  but I have the first
right and another night I will keep him."  Now Ali continued
sitting at the door of the tent till nigh upon  daybreak, when
he returned and lay down near the Syrian, who  found him by
his side, when he awoke, and said to himself, "If  I ask him
where he hath been, he will leave me and go away."  So he
dissembled with him and they went on till they came to  a
forest, in which was a cave, where dwelt a rending lion. Now 
whenever a caravan passed, they would draw lots among 
themselves and him on whom the lot fell they would throw to 
the beast. So they drew lots and the lot fell not save upon
the  Provost of the Merchants. And lo! the lion cut off their
way  awaiting his prey, wherefore the Provost was sore
distressed  and said to the leader, "Allah disappoint the
fortunes[FN#219] of the far  one and bring his journey to
naught! I charge thee, after my  death, give my loads to my
children." Quoth Ali the Clever  One, "What meaneth all this?"
So they told him the case and  he said, "Why do ye run from
the tom-cat of the desert? I  warrant you I will kill him." So
the Syrian went to the Provost  and told him of this and he
said, "If he slay him, I will give him  a thousand dinars,"
and said the other merchants, "We will  reward him likewise
one and all." With this Ali put off  his mantle and there
appeared upon him a suit of steel; then he  took a chopper of
steel[FN#220] and opening it turned the screw; after  which he
went forth alone and standing in the road before the  lion,
cried out to him. The lion ran at him, but Ali of Cairo  smote
him between the eyes with his chopper and cut him in  sunder,
whilst the caravan-leader and the merchants looked on.  Then
said he to the leader, "Have no fear, O nuncle!" and the 
Syrian answered, saying, "O my son, I am thy servant for all 
future time." Then the Provost embraced him and kissed him 
between the eyes and gave him the thousand dinars, and each of 
the other merchants gave him twenty dinars. He deposited all 
the coin with the Provost and they slept that night till the
morning,  when they set out again, intending for Baghdad, and
fared on  till they came to the Lion's Clump and the Wady of
Dogs, where  lay a villain Badawi, a brigand and his tribe,
who sallied forth on  them. The folk fled from the highwaymen,
and the Provost said,  "My monies are lost!"; when, lo! up
came Ali in a buff coat  hung with bells, and bringing out his
long lance, fitted the pieces  together. Then he seized one of
the Arab's horses and mounting  it cried out to the Badawi
Chief, saying, "Come out to fight me  with spears!" Moreover
he shook his bells and the Arab's mare  took fright at the
noise and Ali struck the Chief's spear and broke  it. Then he
smote him on the neck and cut off his head.[FN#221] When the 
Badawin saw their chief fall, they ran at Ali, but he cried
out, saying,  "Allaho Akbar--God is Most Great!"--and, falling
on them  broke them and put them to flight. Then he raised the
Chief's head  on his spear-point and returned to the
merchants, who rewarded  him liberally and continued their
journey, till they reached  Baghdad. Thereupon Ali took his
money from the Provost and  committed it to the Syrian
caravan-leader, saying, "When thou  returnest to Cairo, ask
for my barracks and give these monies to  my deputy." Then he
slept that night and on the morrow he  entered the city and
threading the streets enquired for Calamity  Ahmad's quarters;
but none would direct him thereto.[FN#222] So he  walked on,
till he came to the square Al-Nafz, where he saw  children at
play, and amongst them a lad called Ahmad al-Lakít,[FN#223] 
and said to himself, "O my Ali, thou shalt not get news of
them  but from their little ones." Then he turned and seeing a
sweet-meat-seller bought Halwá of him and called to the
children; but  Ahmad al-Lakit drove the rest away and coming
up to him, said,  "What seekest thou?" Quoth Ali, "I had a son
and he died and  I saw him in a dream asking for sweetmeats:
wherefore I have  bought them and wish to give each child a
bit." So saying, he  gave Ahmad a slice, and he looked at it
and seeing a dinar  sticking to it, said "Begone! I am no
catamite: seek another  than I." Quoth Ali, "O my son, none
but a sharp fellow taketh  the hire, even as he is a sharp one
who giveth it. I have sought  all day for Ahmad al-Danaf's
barrack, but none would direct me  thereto; so this dinar is
thine an thou wilt guide me thither."  Quoth the lad, "I will
run before thee and do thou keep up with  me, till I come to
the place, when I will catch up a pebble with  my foot[FN#224]
and kick it against the door; and so shalt thou know it." 
Accordingly he ran on and Ali after him, till they came to the 
place, when the boy caught up a pebble between his toes and 
kicked it against the door so as to make the place known.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her 
permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Ahmad the Abortion had made known the place, Ali laid hold of 
him and would have taken the dinar from him, but could not; so 
he said to him, "Go: thou deservest largesse for thou art a
sharp  fellow, whole of wit and stout of heart. Inshallah, if
I become a  captain to the Caliph, I will make thee one of my
lads." Then  the boy made off and Ali Zaybak went up to the
door and knocked;  whereupon quoth Ahmad al-Danaf, "O
doorkeeper, open the  door; that is the knock of Quicksilver
Ali the Cairene." So he  opened the door and Ali entered and
saluted with the salam  Ahmad who embraced him, and the Forty
greeted him. Then  Calamity Ahmad gave him a suit of clothes,
saying, "When the  Caliph made me captain, he clothed my lads
and I kept this suit[FN#225]  for thee." Then they seated him
in the place of honour and  setting on meat they ate well and
drink they drank hard and  made merry till the morning, when
Ahmad said to Ali, "Beware  thou walk not about the streets of
Baghdad, but sit thee still in  this barrack." Asked Ali, "Why
so? Have I come hither to be  shut up? No, I came to look
about me and divert myself."  Replied Ahmad, "O my son, think
not that Baghdad be like  Cairo. Baghdad is the seat of the
Caliphate; sharpers abound  therein and rogueries spring
therefrom as worts spring out of  earth." So Ali abode in the
barrack three days when Ahmad  said to him, "I wish to present
thee to the Caliph, that he  may assign thee an allowance."
But he replied, "When the  time cometh." So he let him go his
own way. One day, as  Ali sat in the barrack, his breast
became straitened and his soul  troubled and he said in
himself, "Come, let us up and thread the  ways of Baghdad and
broaden my bosom." So he went out and  walked from street to
street, till he came to the middle bazar,  where he entered a
cook-shop and dined;[FN#226] after which he went out  to wash
his hands. Presently he saw forty slaves, with felt  bonnets
and steel cutlasses, come walking, two by two; and last of all 
came Dalilah the Wily, mounted on a she-mule, with a gilded 
helmet which bore a ball of polished steel, and clad in a coat
of  mail, and such like. Now she was returning from the Divan
to  the Khan of which she was portress; and when she espied
Ali,  she looked at him fixedly and saw that he resembled
Calamity  Ahmad in height and breadth. Moreover, he was clad
in a striped  Abá-cloak and a burnous, with a steel cutlass by
his side and  similar gear, while valour shone from his eyes,
testifying in favour  of him and not in disfavour of him. So
she returned to the Khan  and going in to her daughter,
fetched a table of sand, and struck  a geomantic figure,
whereby she discovered that the stranger's  name was Ali of
Cairo and that his fortune overcame her fortune  and that of
her daughter. Asked Zaynab, "O my mother, what  hath befallen
thee that thou hast recourse to the sand-table?"  Answered
Dalilah, "O my daughter, I have seen this day a young  man who
resembleth Calamity Ahmad, and I fear lest he come to  hear
how thou didst strip Ahmad and his men and enter the Khan  and
play us a trick, in revenge for what we did with his chief and 
the forty; for methinks he has taken up his lodging in Al-
Danaf's  barrack." Zaynab rejoined, "What is this? Methinks
thou hast  taken his measure." Then she donned her fine
clothes and went  out into the streets. When the people saw
her, they all made love  to her and she promised and sware and
listened and coquetted and  passed from market to market, till
she saw Ali the Cairene coming,  when she went up to him and
rubbed her shoulder against him.  Then she turned and said
"Allah give long life to folk of  discrimination!" Quoth he,
"How goodly is thy form! To whom  dost thou belong?"; and
quoth she, "To the gallant[FN#227] like thee;"  and he said,
"Art thou wife or spinster?" "Married," said she.  Asked Ali,
"Shall it be in my lodging or thine?[FN#228] and she 
answered, "I am a merchant's daughter and a merchant's wife 
and in all my life I have never been out of doors till to-day,
and  my only reason was that when I made ready food and
thought to  eat, I had no mind thereto without company. When I
saw thee,  love of thee entered my heart: so wilt thou deign
solace my soul  and eat a mouthful with me?" Quoth he, "Whoso
is invited, let  him accept." Thereupon she went on and he
followed her from  street to street, but presently he
bethought himself and said,  "What wilt thou do and thou a
stranger? Verily 'tis said,  'Whoso doth whoredom in his
strangerhood, Allah will send him  back disappointed.' But I
will put her off from thee with fair  words." So he said to
her, "Take this dinar and appoint me a  day other than this;"
and she said, "By the Mighty Name, it  may not be but thou
shalt go home with me as my guest this very  day and I will
take thee to fast friend." So he followed her till  she came
to a house with a lofty porch and a wooden bolt on the  door
and said to him, "Open this lock."[FN#229] Asked he "Where is 
the key?"; and she answered, "'Tis lost." Quoth he, "Whoso 
openeth a lock without a key is a knave whom it behoveth the
ruler  to punish, and I know not how to open doors without
keys?"[FN#230]  With this she raised her veil and showed him
her face, whereat he  took one glance of eyes that cost him a
thousand sighs. Then she  let fall her veil on the lock and
repeating over it the names of the  mother of Moses, opened it
without a key and entered. He  followed her and saw swords and
steel-weapons hanging up; and she  put off her veil and sat
down with him. Quoth he to himself,  "Accomplish what Allah
bath decreed to thee," and bent over her,  to take a kiss of
her cheek; but she caught the kiss upon her palm,  saying,
"This beseemeth not but by night." Then she brought a  tray of
food and wine, and they ate and drank; after which she  rose
and drawing water from the well, poured it from the ewer over 
his hands, whilst he washed them. Now whilst they were on this 
wise, she cried out and beat upon her breast, saying, "My
husband  had a signet-ring of ruby, which was pledged to him
for five  hundred dinars, and I put it on; but 'twas too large
for me, so I  straitened it with wax, and when I let down the
bucket,[FN#231] that  ring must have dropped into the well. So
turn thy face to the  door, the while I doff my dress and go
down into the well and  fetch it." Quoth Ali, "'Twere shame on
me that thou shouldst  go down there I being present; none
shall do it save I." So he  put off his clothes and tied the
rope about himself and she let him  down into the well. Now
there was much water therein and she  said to him, "The rope
is too short; loose thyself and drop down."  So he did himself
loose from the rope and dropped into the  water, in which he
sank fathoms deep without touching bottom;  whilst she donned
her mantilla and taking his clothes, returned to  her mother--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and  ceased to say her
permitted say. 

      When is was the Seven Hundred and Twelfth Night, 

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali 
of Cairo was in the well, Zaynab donned her mantilla and,
taking  his clothes, returned to her mother and said, "I have
stripped Ali  the Egyptian and cast him into the Emir Hasan's
well, whence  alas for his chance of escaping!"[FN#232]
Presently, the Emir Hasan,  the master of the house, who had
been absent at the Divan, came  home and, finding the door
open, said to his Syce, "Why didst  thou not draw the bolt?"
"O my lord," replied the groom,  "indeed I locked it with my
own hand." The Emir cried, "As  my head liveth, some robber
hath entered my house!" Then he  went in and searched, but
found none and said to the groom,  "Fill the ewer, that I may
make the Wuzu-ablution." So the  man lowered the bucket into
the well but, when he drew it up, he  found it heavy and
looking down, saw something therein sitting;  whereupon he let
it fall into the water and cried out, saying, "O  my lord, an
Ifrit came up to me out of the well!" Replied the  Emir, "Go
and fetch four doctors of the law, that they may read  the
Koran over him, till he go away." So he fetched the doctors 
and the Emir said to them, "Sit round this well and exorcise
me  this Ifrit." They did as he bade them; after which the
groom and  another servant lowered the bucket again and Ali
clung to it and  hid himself under it patiently till he came
near the top, when he  sprang out and landed among the
doctors, who fell a-cuffing one  another and crying out,
"Ifrit! Ifrit!" The Emir looked at Ali  and seeing him a young
man, said to him, "Art thou a thief?"  "No," replied Ali;
"Then what dost thou in the well?" asked  the Emir; and Ali
answered, "I was asleep and dreamt a wet  dream;[FN#233] so I
went down to the Tigris to wash myself and dived,  whereupon
the current carried me under the earth and I came up  in this
well." Quoth the other, "Tell the truth."[FN#234] So Ali told 
him all that had befallen him, and the Emir gave him an old 
gown and let him go. He returned to Calamity Ahmad's lodging 
and related to him all that had passed. Quoth Ahmad, "Did I 
not warn thee that Baghdad is full of women who play tricks
upon  men?" And quoth Ali Kitf al-Jamal, "I conjure thee by
the  Mighty Name, tell me how it is that thou art the chief of
the lads  of Cairo and yet hast been stripped by a girl?" This
was  grievous to Ali and he repented him of not having
followed  Ahmad's advice. Then the Calamity gave him another
suit of  clothes and Hasan Shuman said to him, "Dost thou know
the  young person?" "No," replied Ali; and Hasan rejoined, 
"'Twas Zaynab, the daughter of Dalilah the Wily, the portress
of  the Caliph's Khan; and hast thou fallen into her toils, O
Ali?"  Quoth he, "Yes," and quoth Hasan, "O Ali, 'twas she who
took  thy Chief's clothes and those of all his men." "This is
a disgrace  to you all!" "And what thinkest thou to do?" "I
purpose to  marry her." "Put away that thought far from thee,
and console thy  heart of her." "O Hasan, do thou counsel me
how I shall do to  marry her." "With all my heart: if thou
wilt drink from my  hand and march under my banner, I will
bring thee to thy will of  her." "I will well." So Hasan made
Ali put off his clothes;  and, taking a cauldron heated
therein somewhat as it were pitch,  wherewith he anointed him
and he became like unto a blackamoor  slave. Moreover, he
smeared his lips and cheeks and pencilled  his eyes with red
Kohl.[FN#235] Then he clad him in a slave's habit and  giving
him a tray of kabobs and wine, said to him, "There is a  black
cook in the Khan who requires from the bazar only meat;  and
thou art now become his like; so go thou to him civilly and 
accost him in friendly fashion and speak to him in the blacks' 
lingo, and salute him, saying, ''Tis long since we met in the 
beer-ken.' He will answer thee, 'I have been too busy: on my 
hands be forty slaves, for whom I cook dinner and supper,
besides  making ready a tray for Dalilah and the like for her
daughter  Zaynab and the dogs' food.' And do thou say to him,
'Come, let  us eat kabobs and lush swipes.'[FN#236] Then go
with him into the  saloon and make him drunken and question
him of his service,  how many dishes and what dishes he hath
to cook, and ask him of  the dogs' food and the keys of the
kitchen and the larder; and he  will tell thee; for a man,
when he is drunken, telleth all he would  conceal were he
sober. When thou hast done this drug him and  don his clothes
and sticking the two knives in thy girdle, take the 
vegetable-basket and go to the market and buy meat and greens, 
with which do thou return to the Khan and enter the kitchen
and  the larder and cook the food. Dish it up and put Bhang in
it, so  as to drug the dogs and the slaves and Dalilah and
Zaynab and  lastly serve up. When all are asleep, hie thee to
the upper  chamber and bring away every suit of clothes thou
wilt find  hanging there. And if thou have a mind to marry
Zaynab, bring  with thee also the forty carrier-pigeons." So
Ali went to the  Khan and going in to the cook, saluted him
and said, "'Tis long  since I have met thee in the beer-ken."
The slave replied, "I  have been busy cooking for the slaves
and the dogs." Then he  took him and making him drunken,
questioned him of his work.  Quoth the kitchener, "Every day I
cook five dishes for dinner  and the like for supper; and
yesterday they sought of me a sixth  dish,[FN#237] yellow
rice,[FN#238] and a seventh, a mess of cooked pomegranate 
seed." Ali asked, "And what is the order of thy service?" and 
the slave answered, "First I serve up Zaynab's tray, next
Dalilah's;  then I feed the slaves and give the dogs their
sufficiency of meat,  and the least that satisfies them is a
pound each." But, as fate  would have it, he forgot to ask him
of the keys. Then he drugged  him and donned his clothes;
after which he took the basket and  went to the market. There
he bought meat and greens.--And  Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her  permitted say. 

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ali
of  Cairo, after drugging the cook-slave with Bhang, took the
two  knives which he stuck in his belt and, carrying the
vegetable-basket, went to the market where he bought meat and
greens;  and, presently returning to the Khan, he saw Dalilah
seated at the  gate, watching those who went in and came out,
and the forty  slaves with her, armed. So he heartened his
heart and entered;  but Dalilah knew him and said to him,
"Back, O captain of  thieves! Wilt thou play a trick on me in
the Khan?" Thereupon  he (dressed as a slave) turned and said
to her, "What sayest thou,  O portress?" She asked, "What hast
thou done with the slave,  our cook?; say me if thou hast
killed or drugged him?" He  answered, "What cook? Is there
here another slave-cook than  I?" She rejoined, "Thou liest,
thou art Mercury Ali the Cairene."  And he said to her, in
slaves' patois, "O portress, are the Cairenes  black or white?
I will slave for you no longer." Then said the  slaves to him,
"What is the matter with thee, O our cousin?"  Cried Dalilah,
"This is none of your uncle's children, but Ali  Zaybak the
Egyptian; and meseems he hath either drugged your  cousin or
killed him." But they said, "Indeed this is our cousin 
Sa'adu'llah the cook;" and she, "Not so, 'tis Mercury Ali, and 
he hath dyed his skin." Quoth the sharper, "And who is Ali? I 
am Sa'adu'llah." Then she fetched unguent of proof, with which 
she anointed Ali's forearm and rubbed it; but the black did
not  come off; whereupon quoth the slaves "Let him go and
dress us  our dinner." Quoth Dalilah, "If he be indeed your
cousin, he  knoweth what you sought of him yesternight[FN#239]
and how many  dishes he cooketh every day." So they asked him
of this and he  said, "Every day I cook you five dishes for
the morning and the  like for the evening meal, lentils and
rice and broth and stew[FN#240] and  sherbet of roses; and
yesternight ye sought of me a sixth dish and  a seventh, to
wit yellow rice and cooked pomegranate seed." And  the slaves
said "Right!" Then quoth Dalilah, "In with him and  if he know
the kitchen and the larder, he is indeed your cousin;  but, if
not, kill him." Now the cook had a cat which he had  brought
up, and whenever he entered the kitchen it would stand  at the
door and spring to his back, as soon as he went in. So,  when
Ali entered, the cat saw him and jumped on his shoulders;  but
he threw it off and it ran before him to the door of the
kitchen  and stopped there. He guessed that this was the
kitchen door; so  he took the keys and seeing one with traces
of feathers thereon,  knew it for the kitchen key and
therewith opened the door. Then  he entered and setting down
the greens, went out again, led by the  cat, which ran before
him and stop