ped at another door. He guessed  that this was the
larder and seeing one of the keys marked with  grease, knew it
for the key and opened the door therewith; where-upon quoth
the slaves, "O Dalilah, were he a stranger, he had not  known
the kitchen and the larder, nor had he been able to
distinguish  the keys thereof from the rest; verily, he is our
cousin  Sa'adu'llah." Quoth she, "He learned the places from
the cat and  distinguished the keys one from the other by the
appearance: but  this cleverness imposeth not upon me." Then
he returned to the  kitchen where he cooked the dinner and,
carrying Zaynab's tray up  to her room, saw all the stolen
clothes hanging up; after which he  went down and took Dalilah
her tray and gave the slaves and the  dogs their rations. The
like he did at sundown and drugged  Dalilah's food and that of
Zaynab and the slaves. Now the doors  of the Khan were opened
and shut with the sun. So Ali went  forth and cried out,
saying, "O dwellers in the Khan, the watch  is set and we have
loosed the dogs; whoso stirreth out after this  can blame none
save himself." But he had delayed the dogs'  supper and put
poison therein; consequently when he set it before  them, they
ate of it and died while the slaves and Dalilah and  Zaynab
still slept under Bhang. Then he went up and took all the 
clothes and the carrier-pigeons and, opening the gate made off
to  the barrack of the Forty, where he found Hasan Shuman the 
Pestilence who said to him, "How hast thou fared?" Thereupon 
he told him what had passed and he praised him. Then he 
caused him to put off his clothes and boiled a decoction of
herbs  wherewith he washed him, and his skin became white as
it was;  after which he donned his own dress and going back to
the Khan,  clad the cook in the habit he had taken from him
and made him smell  to the counter-drug; upon which the slave
awoke and going forth  to the greengrocer's, bought vegetables
and returned to the Khan.  Such was the case with Al-Zaybak of
Cairo; but as regards Dalilah  the Wily, when the day broke,
one of the lodgers in the Khan came  out of his chamber and,
seeing the gate open and the slaves drugged  and the dogs
dead, he went in to her and found her lying drugged,  with a
scroll on her neck and at her head a sponge steeped in the 
counter-drug. He set the sponge to her nostrils and she awoke
and  asked, "Where am I?" The merchant answered, "When I came 
down from my chamber I saw the gate of the Khan open and the 
dogs dead and found the slaves and thee drugged." So she took
up  the paper and read therein these words, "None did this
deed save  Ali the Egyptian." Then she awoke the slaves and
Zaynab by  making them smell the counter-Bhang and said to
them, "Did I not  tell you that this was Ali of Cairo?";
presently adding to the slaves,  "But do ye conceal the
matter." Then she said to her daughter,  "How often have I
warned thee that Ali would not forego his  revenge? He hath
done this deed in requital of that which  thou diddest with
him and he had it in his power to do with thee  other than
this thing; but he refrained therefrom out of courtesy  and a
desire that there should be love and friendship between us." 
So saying, she doffed her man's gear and donned woman's
attire[FN#241]  and, tying the kerchief of peace about her
neck, repaired to Ahmad  al-Danaf's barrack. Now when Ali
entered with the clothes and  the carrier-pigeons, Hasan
Shuman gave the hall-keeper the price  of forty pigeons and he
bought them and cooked them amongst  the men. Presently there
came a knock at the door and Ahmad  said, "That is Dalilah's
knock: rise and open to her, O hall-keeper." So he admitted
her and--And Shahrazad perceived  the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say. 

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Fourteenth Night, 

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Dalilah was admitted, Hasan asked her, "What bringeth thee 
hither, O ill-omened old woman? Verily, thou and thy brother 
Zurayk the fishmonger are of a piece!"; and she answered, "O 
captain I am in the wrong and this my neck is at thy mercy;
but  tell me which of you it was that played me this trick?"
Quoth  Calamity Ahmad, "'Twas the first of my lads." Rejoined
Dalilah,  "For the sake of Allah intercede with him to give me
back the  carrier-pigeons and what not, and thou wilt lay me
under great  obligation." When Hasan heard this he said,
"Allah requite thee,  O Ali! Why didst thou cook the
pigeons?"; and Ali answered,  "I knew not that they were
carrier-pigeons." Then said Ahmad,  "O hall-keeper bring us
the cooked pigeons." So he brought them  and Dalilah took a
piece and tasting it, said, "This is none of the  carrier-
pigeons' flesh, for I fed them on grains of musk and their 
meat is become even as musk." Quoth Shuman, "An thou desire 
to have the carrier-pigeons, comply with Ali's will." Asked
she  "What is that?" And Hasan answered, "He would have thee 
marry him to thy daughter Zaynab." She said, "I have not 
command over her except of affection"; and Hasan said to Ali
the  Cairene "Give her the pigeons." So he gave them to her,
and she  took them and rejoiced in them. Then quoth Hasan to
her,  "There is no help but thou return us a sufficient
reply"; and  Dalilah rejoined, "If it be indeed his wish to
marry her, it availed  nothing to play this clever trick upon
us: it behoveth him rather  to demand her in marriage of her
mother's brother and her  guardian, Captain Zurayk, him who
crieth out, saying, 'Ho! a  pound of fish for two farthings!'
and who hangeth up in his shop  a purse containing two
thousand dinars." When the Forty heard  this, they all rose
and cried out, saying, "What manner of blather  is this, O
harlot? Dost thou wish to bereave us of our brother  Ali of
Cairo?" Then she returned to the Khan and said to her 
daughter, "Ali the Egyptian seeketh thee in marriage." Whereat 
Zaynab rejoiced, for she loved him because of his chaste
forbearance  towards her,[FN#242] and asked her mother what
had passed. So  she told her, adding, "I made it a condition
that he should demand  thy hand of thine uncle, so I might
make him fall into destruction."  Meanwhile Ali turned to his
fellows and asked them,  "What manner of man is this Zurayk?";
and they answered, "He  was chief of the sharpers of Al-Irak
land and could all but pierce  mountains and lay hold upon the
stars. He would steal the Kohl  from the eye and, in brief, he
had not his match for roguery; but  he hath repented his sins
and foresworn his old way of life and  opened him a
fishmonger's shop. And now he hath amassed two  thousand
dinars by the sale of fish and laid them in a purse with 
strings of silk, to which he hath tied bells and rings and
rattles of  brass, hung on a peg within the doorway. Every
time he openeth  his shop he suspendeth the said purse and
crieth out, saying,  'Where are ye, O sharpers of Egypt, O
prigs of Al-Irak, O  tricksters of Ajam-land? Behold, Zurayk
the fishmonger hath  hung up a purse in front of his shop, and
whoso pretendeth to  craft and cunning, and can take it by
sleight, it is his.' So the long  fingered and greedy-minded
come and try to take the purse, but  cannot; for, whilst he
frieth his fish and tendeth the fire, he layeth  at his feet
scone-like circles of lead; and whenever a thief thinketh  to
take him unawares and maketh a snatch at the purse he casteth 
at him a load of lead and slayeth him or doeth him a damage.
So  O Ali, wert thou to tackle him, thou wouldst be as one who 
jostleth a funeral cortége, unknowing who is dead;[FN#243] for
thou art no  match for him, and we fear his mischief for thee.
Indeed, thou  hast no call to marry Zaynab, and he who leaveth
a thing alone  liveth without it." Cried Ali, "This were
shame, O comrades;  needs must I take the purse: but bring me
a young lady's habit."  So they brought him women's clothes
and he clad himself therein  and stained his hands with Henna,
and modestly hung down his  veil. Then he took a lamb and
killing it, cut out the long  intestine[FN#244] which he
cleaned and tied up below; moreover he filled  it with the
blood and bound it between his thighs; after which he  donned
petticoat-trousers and walking boots. He also made  himself a
pair of false breasts with birds' crops and filled them  with
thickened milk and tied round his hips and over his belly a 
piece of linen, which he stuffed with cotton, girding himself
over  all with a kerchief of silk well starched. Then he went
out,  whilst all who saw him exclaimed, "What a fine pair of
hind  cheeks!" Presently he saw an ass-driver coming, so he
gave  him a dinar and mounting, rode till he came to Zurayk's
shop,  where he saw the purse hung up and the gold glittering 
through it. Now Zurayk was frying fish, and Ali said, "O  ass-
man, what is that smell?" Replied he, "It's the smell  of
Zurayk's fish." Quoth Ali, "I am a woman with child and  the
smell harmeth me; go, fetch me a slice of the fish." So the 
donkey-boy said to Zurayk, "What aileth thee to fry fish so
early  and annoy pregnant women with the smell? I have here
the wife  of the Emir Hasan Sharr al-Tarik, and she is with
child; so give  her a bit of fish, for the babe stirreth in
her womb. O Protector,  O my God, avert from us the mischief
of this day!" Thereupon  Zurayk took a piece of fish and would
have fried it, but the fire  had gone out and he went in to
rekindle it. Meanwhile Ali  dismounted and sitting down,
pressed upon the lamb's intestine till  it burst and the blood
ran out from between his legs. Then he  cried aloud, saying,
"O my back! O my side!" Whereupon the  driver turned and
seeing the blood running, said, "What aileth  thee, O my
lady?" Replied Ali, "I have miscarried"; where-upon Zurayk
looked out and seeing the blood fled affrighted  into the
inner shop. Quoth the donkey-driver, "Allah torment  thee, O
Zurayk! The lady hath miscarried and thou art no  match for
her husband. Why must thou make a stench so early  in the
morning? I said to thee, 'Bring her a slice,' but thou 
wouldst not." Thereupon, he took his ass and went his way and, 
as Zurayk still did not appear, Ali put out his hand to the
purse;  but no sooner had he touched it than the bells and
rattles and  rings began to jingle and the gold to chink.
Quoth Zurayk, who  returned at the sound, "Thy perfidy hath
come to light, O gallows-bird! Wilt thou put a cheat on me and
thou in a woman's habit?  Now take what cometh to thee!" And
he threw a cake of lead  at him, but it went agley and lighted
on another; whereupon the  people rose against Zurayk and said
to him, "Art thou a trades-man or a swashbuckler? An thou be a
tradesman, take down thy  purse and spare the folk thy
mischief." He replied, "Bismillah,  in the name of Allah! On
my head be it." As for Ali, he made  off to the barrack and
told Hasan Shuman what had happened,  after which he put off
his woman's gear and donning a groom's  habit which was
brought to him by his chief took a dish and five  dirhams.
Then he returned to Zurayk's shop and the fishmonger  said to
him, "What dost thou want, O my master?"[FN#245] He showed 
him the dirhams and Zurayk would have given him of the fish 
in the tray, but he said, "I will have none save hot fish." So
he  set fish in the earthen pan and finding the fire dead,
went in to  relight it; whereupon Ali put out his hand to the
purse and  caught hold of the end of it. The rattles and rings
and bells  jingled and Zurayk said, "Thy trick hath not
deceived me. I  knew thee for all thou art disguised as a
groom by the grip of  thy hand on the dish and the dirhams."--
And Shahrazad  perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. 

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Ali of Egypt put out his hand to the purse, the bells and
rings  jingled and Zurayk said, "Thy trick hath not deceived
me for  all thou comest disguised as a groom I knew thee by
the grip of  thy hand on the dish and the dirhams!" So saying,
he threw the  lead at him, but he avoided it and it fell into
the pan full of  hot fish and broke it and overturned it, fat
and all, upon the  breast and shoulders of the Kazi, who was
passing. The oil ran  down inside his clothes to his privy
parts and he cried out, "O  my privities! What a sad pickle
you are in! Alas, unhappy I!  Who hath played me this trick?"
Answered the people, "O  our lord, it was some small boy that
threw a stone into the  pan: but for Allah's word, it had been
worse." Then they  turned and seeing the loaf of lead and that
it was Zurayk who  had thrown it, rose against him and said to
him, "O Zurayk,  this is not allowed of Allah! Take down the
purse or it shall  go ill for thee." Answered he, "I will take
it down, Inshallah!"  Meanwhile Ali returned to the barrack
and told his comrades  who cried, "Where is the purse?", all
that had passed and they  said, "Thou hast exhausted two-
thirds of his cunning." Then  he changed his groom's dress for
the garb of a merchant and  going out, met a snake-charmer,
with a bag of serpents and a  wallet containing his kit to
whom said he, "O charmer, come  and amuse my lads, and thou
shalt have largesse." So he  accompanied him to the barrack,
where he fed him and drugging him  with Bhang, doffed his
clothes and put them on. Then he took  the bags and repairing
to Zurayk's shop began to play the reed-pipe. Quoth Zurayk,
"Allah provide thee!" But Ali pulled  out the serpents and
cast them down before him; whereat the  fishseller, who was
afraid of snakes, fled from them into the  inner shop.
Thereupon Ali picked up the reptiles and, thrusting  them back
into the bag, stretched out his hand and caught hold  of the
end of the purse. The rings again rang and the bells and 
rattles jangled, and Zurayk cried, "Wilt thou never cease to
play  me tricks? Now thou feignest thyself a serpent-charmer!"
So  saying, he took up a piece of lead, and hurled it at Ali;
but it  missed him and fell on the head of a groom, who was
passing  by, following his master, a trooper, and knocked him
down.  Quoth the soldier, "Who felled him?"; and the folk
said,  "'Twas a stone fell from the roof." So the soldier
passed on  and the people, seeing the piece of lead, went up
to Zurayk  and cried to him, "Take down the purse!"; and he
said,  "Inshallah, I will take it down this very night!" Ali
ceased  not to practice upon Zurayk till he had made seven
different  attempts but without taking the purse. Then he
returned the  snake-charmer his clothes and kit and gave him
due benevolence;  after which he went back to Zurayk's shop
and heard  him say, "If I leave the purse here to-night, he
will dig through  the shop-wall and take it; I will carry it
home with me." So  he arose and shut the shop; then he took
down the purse and  putting it in his bosom set out home, till
he came near his  house, when he saw a wedding in a
neighbour's lodging and  said to himself, "I will hie me home
and give my wife the purse  and don my fine clothes and return
to the marriage." And Ali  followed him. Now Zurayk had
married a black girl, one of the  freed women of the Wazir
Ja'afar and she had borne him a son,  whom he named Abdallah,
and he had promised her to spend the  money in the purse on
the occasion of the boy's circumcision and  of his marriage-
procession. So he went into his house and, as he  entered, his
wife saw that his face was overcast and asked him,  "What hath
caused thy sadness?" Quoth he, "Allah hath  afflicted me this
day with a rascal who made seven attempts to get  the purse,
but without avail;" and quoth she, "Give it to me, that  I may
lay it up against the boy's festival-day." (Now Ali, who  had
followed him lay hidden in a closet whence he could see and 
hear all.) So he gave her the purse and changed his clothes,
saying,  "Keep the purse safely, O Umm Abdallah, for I am
going to  the wedding." But she said, "Take thy sleep awhile."
So he lay  down and fell asleep. Presently, Ali rose and going
on tiptoe to  the purse, took it and went to the house of the
wedding and stood  there, looking on at the fun. Now
meanwhile, Zurayk dreamt  that he saw a bird fly away with the
purse and awaking in affright,  said to his wife, "Rise; look
for the purse." So she looked and  finding it gone, buffeted
her face and said, "Alas the blackness of  thy fortune, O Umm
Abdallah! A sharker hath taken the purse."  Quoth Zurayk, "By
Allah it can be none other than rascal Ali  who hath plagued
me all day! He hath followed me home and  seized the purse;
and there is no help but that I go and get it  back." Quoth
she, "Except thou bring it, I will lock on thee  the door and
leave thee to pass the night in the street." So  he went up to
the house of the wedding, and seeing Ali looking  on, said to
himself, "This is he who took the purse; but he lodgeth  with
Ahmad al-Danaf." So he forewent him to the barrack and, 
climbing up at the back, dropped down into the saloon, where
he  found every one asleep. Presently there came a rap at the
door  and Zurayk asked, "Who is there!" "Ali of Cairo,"
answered the  knocker; and Zurayk said, "Hast thou brought the
purse?" So Ali thought it was Hasan Shuman and replied, "I
have brought  it;[FN#246] open the door." Quoth Zurayk,
"Impossible that I open to  thee till I see the purse; for thy
chief and I have laid a wager  about it." Said Ali, "Put out
thy hand." So he put out his hand  through the hole in the
side-door and Ali laid the purse in it;  whereupon Zurayk took
it and going forth, as he had come in,  returned to the
wedding. Ali stood for a long while at the door,  but none
opened to him; and at last he gave a thundering knock  that
awoke all the men and they said, "That is Ali of Cairo's 
peculiar rap." So the hall-keeper opened to him and Hasan 
Shuman said to him, "Hast thou brought the purse?" Replied 
Ali, "Enough of jesting, O Shuman: didst thou not swear that 
thou wouldest not open to me till I showed thee the purse, and 
did I not give it thee through the hole in the side door? And 
didst thou not say to me, 'I am sworn never to open the door
till  thou show me the purse?'" Quoth Hasan? "By Allah, 'twas
not  I who took it, but Zurayk!" Quoth Ali, "Needs must I get
it  again," and repaired to the house of the wedding, where he
heard  the buffoon[FN#247] say, "Bravo,[FN#248] O Abu
Abdallah! Good luck to thee  with thy son!" Said Ali, "My luck
is in the ascendant," and  going to the fishmonger's lodging,
climbed over the back wall of  the house and found his wife
asleep. So he drugged her with  Bhang and clad himself in her
clothes. Then he took the child in  his arms and went round,
searching, till he found a palm-leaf  basket containing
buns,[FN#249] which Zurayk of his niggardliness, had  kept
from the Greater Feast. Presently, the fishmonger returned 
and knocked at the door, whereupon Ali imitated his wife's
voice  and asked, "Who is at the door?" "Abu Abdallah,"
answered  Zurayk and Ali said, "I swore that I would not open
the door to  thee, except thou broughtest back the purse."
Quoth the fish-monger, "I have brought it." Cried All, "Here
with it into my  hand before I open the door;" and Zurayk
answered, saying, "Let  down the basket and take it therein."
So Sharper Ali let down  the basket and the other put the
purse therein, whereupon Ali  took it and drugged the child.
Then he aroused the woman and  making off by the back way as
he had entered, returned with the  child and the purse and the
basket of cakes to the barrack and  showed them all to the
Forty, who praised his dexterity. There-upon he gave them
cakes, which they ate, and made over the boy  to Hasan Shuman,
saying, "This is Zurayk's child; hide it by  thee." So he hid
it and fetching a lamb, gave it to the hall-keeper  who cooked
it whole, wrapped in a cloth, and laid it out shrouded  as it
were a dead body. Meanwhile Zurayk stood awhile, waiting  at
the door, then gave a knock like thunder and his wife said to 
him, "Hast thou brought the purse?" He replied, "Didst thou 
not take it up in the basket thou diddest let down but now?";
and  she rejoined, "I let no basket down to thee, nor have I
set eyes  on the purse." Quoth he, "By Allah the sharper hath
been  beforehand with me and hath taken the purse again!" Then
he  searched the house and found the basket of cakes gone and
the  child missing and cried out, saying, "Alas, my child!"
Where-upon the woman beat her breast and said, "I and thee to
the  Wazir, for none hath killed my son save this sharper, and
all  because of thee." Cried Zurayk, "I will answer for him."
So he  tied the kerchief of truce about his neck and going to
Ahmad  al-Danaf's lodging, knocked at the door. The hall-
keeper admitted him and as he entered Hasan Shuman asked him,
"What  bringeth thee here?" He answered, "Do ye intercede with
Ali  the Cairene to restore me my child and I will yield to
him the  purse of gold." Quoth Hasan, "Allah requite thee, O
Ali! Why  didst thou not tell me it was his child?" "What hath
befallen  him?" cried Zurayk, and Hasan replied, "We gave him
raisins to  eat, and he choked and died and this is he." Quoth
Zurayk  "Alas, my son! What shall I say to his mother?" Then
he  rose and opening the shroud, saw it was a lamb barbecued
and  said, "Thou makest sport of me, O Ali!" Then they gave
him  the child and Calamity Ahmad said to him, "Thou didst
hang up  the purse, proclaiming that it should be the property
of any sharper  who should be able to take it, and Ali hath
taken it; so 'tis the  very property of our Cairene." Zurayk
answered "I make him  a present of it;" but Ali said to him,
"Do thou accept it on  account of thy niece Zaynab." And
Zurayk replied, "I accept it."  Then quoth the Forty, "We
demand of thee Zaynab in marriage  for Ali of Cairo;" but
quoth he, "I have no control over her save  of kindness."
Hasan asked, "Dost thou grant our suit?"; and he  answered,
"Yes, I will grant her in marriage to him who can avail  to
her mahr or marriage-settlement." "And what is her dowry?" 
enquired Hasan; and Zurayk replied, "She hath sworn that none 
shall mount her breast save the man who bringeth her the robe
of  Kamar, daughter of Azariah the Jew and the rest of her
gear."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to 
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when 
Zurayk replied to Shuman, "She hath sworn that none shall 
ride astraddle upon her breast save the man who bringeth her 
the clothes of Kamar, daughter of Azariah the Jew and her 
crown and girdle and pantoufle[FN#250] of gold," Ali cried,
"If I do  not bring her the clothes this very night, I
renounce my claim to  her." Rejoined Zurayk, "O Ali, thou art
a dead man if thou play  any of thy pranks on Kamar." "Why
so?" asked Ali and the  other answered, "Her father, Jew
Azariah, is a skilful, wily,  perfidious magician who hath the
Jinn at his service. He owneth  without the city a castle,
whose walls are one brick of gold and  one of silver and which
is visible to the folk only whilst he is  therein: when he
goeth forth, it disappeareth. He brought his  daughter this
dress I speak of from an enchanted treasure, and  every day he
layeth it in a charger of gold and, opening the  windows of
the palace, crieth out, 'Where are the sharpers of  Cairo, the
prigs of Al-Irak, the master-thieves of Ajam-land?  Whoso
prevaileth to take this dress, 'tis his.' So all the long-
fingered ones essayed the adventure, but failed to take it,
and he  turned them by his magic into apes and asses." But Ali
said, "I  will assuredly take it, and Zaynab shall be
displayed therein."[FN#251]  So he went to the shop of the Jew
and found him a man of stern  and forbidding aspect, seated
with scales and stone-weights and  gold and silver and nests
of drawers and so forth before him, and  a she-mule tethered
hard by. Presently he rose and shutting his  shop, laid the
gold and silver in two purses, which he placed in a  pair of
saddle-bags and set on the she-mule's back. Then he  mounted
and rode till he reached the city-outskirts followed, with-out
his knowledge, by Ali, when he took out some dust from a 
pocket-purse and, muttering over it, sprinkled it upon the
air. No  sooner had he done this than sharper Ali saw a castle
which had  not its like, and the Jew mounted the steps upon
his beast which  was a subject Jinni; after which he
dismounted and taking the  saddle-bags off her back, dismissed
the she-mule and she vanished.  Then he entered the castle and
sat down. Presently, he arose and  opening the lattices, took
a wand of gold, which he set up in the  open window and,
hanging thereto a golden charger by chains of  the same metal,
laid in it the dress, whilst Ali watched him from  behind the
door, and presently he cried out, saying, "Where are  the
sharpers of Cairo? Where are the prigs of Al-Irak, the 
master-thieves of the Ajam-land? Whoso can take this dress by 
his sleight, 'tis his!" Then he pronounced certain magical
words  and a tray of food spread itself before him. He ate and
conjured  a second time, whereupon the tray disappeared; and
yet a third  time, when a table of wine was placed between his
hands and he  drank. Quoth Ali, "I know not how I am to take
the dress  except if he be drunken." Then he stole up behind
the Jew  whinger in grip; but the other turned and conjured,
saying to his  hand, "Hold with the sword;" whereupon Ali's
right arm was held  and abode half-way in the air hending the
hanger. He put out his  left hand to the weapon, but it also
stood fixed in the air, and so  with his right foot, leaving
him standing on one foot. Then the  Jew dispelled the charm
from him and Ali became as before.  Presently Azariah struck a
table of sand and found that the thief's  name was Mercury Ali
of Cairo; so he turned to him and said,  "Come nearer! Who art
thou and what dost thou here?" He  replied, "I am Ali of
Cairo, of the band of Ahmad al-Danaf. I  sought the hand of
Zaynab, daughter of Dalilah the Wily, and  she demanded thy
daughter's dress to her dowry; so do thou give  it to me and
become a Moslem, an thou wouldst save thy life."  Rejoined the
Jew, "After thy death! Many have gone about to  steal the
dress, but failed to take it from me; wherefore an thou  deign
be advised, thou wilt begone and save thyself; for they only 
seek the dress of thee, that thou mayst fall into destruction;
and  indeed, had I not seen by geomancy that thy fortune
overrideth  my fortunes I had smitten thy neck." Ali rejoiced
to hear that  his luck overcame that of the Jew and said to
him, "There is no  help for it but I must have the dress and
thou must become a True  Believer." Asked the Jew, "Is this
thy will and last word," and  Ali answered, "Yes." So the Jew
took a cup and filling it with  water, conjured over it and
said to Ali, "Come forth from this  shape of a man into the
form of an ass." Then he sprinkled him  with the water and
straightway he became a donkey, with hoofs  and long ears, and
fell to braying after the manner of asinines.  The Jew drew
round him a circle which became a wall over  against him, and
drank on till the morning, when he said to Ali,  "I will ride
thee to-day and give the she-mule a rest." So he  locked up
the dress, the charger, the rod and the charms in a 
cupboard[FN#252] and conjured over Ali, who followed him. Then
he  set the saddle-bags on his back and mounting, fared forth
of the  Castle, whereupon it disappeared from sight and he
rode into  Baghdad, till he came to his shop, where he
alighted and emptied  the bags of gold and silver into the
trays before him. As for Ali,  he was tied up by the shop-
door, where he stood in his asinine  form hearing and
understanding all that passed, without being  able to speak.
And behold, up came a young merchant with  whom fortune had
played the tyrant and who could find no easier  Way of earning
his livelihood than water-carrying. So he brought  his wife's
bracelets to the Jew and said to him, "Give me the  price of
these bracelets, that I may buy me an ass." Asked the  Jew,
"What wilt thou do with him?"; and the other answered,  "O
master, I mean to fetch water from the river on his back, and 
earn my living thereby." Quoth the Jew, "Take this ass of
mine."  So he sold him the bracelets and received the ass-
shaped Ali of  Cairo in part payment and carried him home.
Quoth Ali to himself,  "If the Ass-man clap the pannel on thee
and load thee with  water-skins and go with thee half a score
journeys a day he will  ruin thy health and thou wilt die."
So, when the water-carrier's  wife came to bring him his
fodder, he butted her with his head  and she fell on her back;
whereupon he sprang on her and smiting  her brow with his
mouth, put out and displayed that which his  begetter left
him. She cried aloud and the neighbours came to  her
assistance and beat him and raised him off her breast. When 
her husband the intended water-carrier came home, she said to 
him, "Now either divorce me or return the ass to his owner."
He  asked, "What hath happened?"; and she answered, "This is a 
devil in the guise of a donkey. He sprang upon me, and had not 
the neighbours beaten him off my bosom he had done with me a 
foul thing." So he carried the ass back to the Jew, who said 
to him, "Wherefore hast thou brought him back?" and he 
replied, "He did a foul thing with my wife." So the Jew gave 
him his money again and he went away; and Azariah said to Ali, 
"Hast thou recourse to knavery, unlucky wretch that thou art,
in  order that"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and 
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when  the water-carrier brought back the ass, its Jew owner
returned to  him the monies and turning to Ali of Cairo said,
"Hast thou  recourse to knavery, unlucky wretch that thou art,
in order that  he may return thee to me? But since it pleaseth
thee to be an  ass, I will make thee a spectacle and a
laughing stock to great and  small." Then he mounted him and
rode till he came without the  city, when he brought out the
ashes in powder and conjuring over  it sprinkled it upon the
air and immediately the Castle appeared.  He entered and
taking the saddle-bags off the ass's back set up the rod and
hung to it the charger wherein were the clothes  proclaiming
aloud, "Where be the clever ones of all quarters who  may
avail to take this dress?" Then he conjured as before and 
meat was set before him and he ate and then wine when he
drank;  after which he took a cup of water and muttering
certain words  thereover, sprinkled it on the ass Ali, saying,
"Quit this form and  return to thy former shape." Ali
straightway became a man once  more and Azariah said to him,
"O Ali, take good advice and be  content with my mischief.
Thou hast no call to marry Zaynab  nor to take my daughter's
dress, for 'tis no easy matter for thee:  so leave greed and
'twill be better for thee; else will I turn thee  into a bear
or an ape or set on thee an Ifrit, who will cast thee  behind
the Mountain Kaf." He replied, "I have engaged to take  the
dress and needs must I have it and thou must Islamise or I 
will slay thee." Rejoined the Jew, "O Ali, thou art like a
walnut;  unless it be broken it cannot be eaten." Then he took
a cup of  water and conjuring over it, sprinkled Ali with
somewhat thereof,  saying, "Take thou shape of bear;"
whereupon he instantly  became a bear and the Jew put a collar
about his neck, muzzled him  and chained him to a picket of
iron. Then he sat down and ate  and drank, now and then
throwing him a morsel of his orts and  emptying the dregs of
the cup over him, till the morning, when he  rose and laid by
the tray and the dress and conjured over the  bear, which
followed him to the shop. There the Jew sat down  and emptied
the gold and silver into the trays before Ali, after  binding
him by the chain; and the bear there abode seeing and 
comprehending but not able to speak. Presently up came a man 
and a merchant, who accosted the Jew and said to him, "O
Master,  wilt thou sell me yonder bear? I have a wife who is
my cousin  and is sick; and they have prescribed for her to
eat bears' flesh  and anoint herself with bears' grease." At
this the Jew rejoiced  and said to himself, "I will sell him
to this merchant, so he may  slaughter him and we be at peace
from him." And Ali also said in  his mind, "By Allah, this
fellow meaneth to slaughter me; but  deliverance is with the
Almighty." Then said the Jew, "He is a  present from me to
thee." So the merchant took him and carried  him into the
butcher, to whom he said, "Bring thy tools and  company me."
The butcher took his knives and followed the merchant  to his
house, where he bound the beast and fell to sharpening his 
blade: but, when he went up to him to slaughter him, the bear 
escaped from his hands and rising into the air, disappeared
from sight between heaven and earth; nor did he cease flying
till he  alighted at the Jew's castle. Now the reason thereof
was on this  wise. When the Jew returned home, his daughter
questioned him  of Ali and he told her what had happened;
whereupon she said,  "Summon a Jinni and ask him of the youth,
whether he be indeed  Mercury Ali or another who seeketh to
put a cheat on thee." So  Azariah called a Jinni by
conjurations and questioned him of Ali;  and he replied, "'Tis
Ali of Cairo himself. The butcher hath  pinioned him and
whetted his knife to slaughter him." Quoth the  Jew, "Go,
snatch him up and bring him hither, ere the butcher cut  his
throat." So the Jinni flew off and, snatching Ali out of the 
butcher's hands, bore him to the palace and set him down
before  the Jew, who took a cup of water and conjuring over
it, sprinkled  him therewith, saying, "Return to thine own
shape." And he  straightway became a man again as before. The
Jew's daughter  Kamar,[FN#253] seeing him to be a handsome
young man, fell in love with  him and he fell in love with
her; and she said to him, "O unlucky  one, why dost thou go
about to take my dress, enforcing my father  to deal thus with
thee?" Quoth he, "I have engaged to get it for  Zaynab the
Coney-catcher, that I may wed her therewith." And  she said,
"Others than thou have played pranks with my father to  get my
dress, but could not win to it," presently adding, "So put 
away this thought from thee." But he answered, "Needs must I 
have it, and thy father must become a Moslem, else I will slay 
him." Then said the Jew, "See, O my daughter, how this 
unlucky fellow seeketh his own destruction," adding, "Now I
will  turn thee into a dog." So he took a cup graven with
characters  and full of water and conjuring over it, sprinkled
some of it upon  Ali, saying, "Take thou form of dog."
Whereupon he straight-way became a dog, and the Jew and his
daughter drank together  till the morning, when the father
laid up the dress and charger  and mounted his mule. Then he
conjured over the dog, which  followed him, as he rode towards
the town, and all dogs barked at  Ali[FN#254] as he passed,
till he came to the shop of a broker, a seller of  second-hand
goods, who rose and drove away the dogs, and Ali  lay down
before him. The Jew turned and looked for him, but finding him
not, passed onwards. Presently, the broker shut up  his shop
and went home, followed by the dog, which, when his  daughter
saw enter the house, she veiled her face and said, "O my 
papa, dost thou bring a strange man in to me?" He replied, "O 
my daughter, this is a dog." Quoth she, "Not so, 'tis Ali the 
Cairene, whom the Jew Azariah hath enchanted;" and she turned 
to the dog and said to him, "Art not Ali of Cairo?" And he 
signed to her with his head, "Yes." Then her father asked her, 
"Why did the Jew enchant him?"; and she answered, "Because  of
his daughter Kamar's dress; but I can release him." Said the 
broker, "An thou canst indeed do him this good office, now is
the  time," and she, "If he will marry me, I will release
him." And  he signed to her with his head, "Yes."  So she took
a cup of  water, graven with certain signs and conjuring over
it, was about  to sprinkle Ali therewith, when lo and behold!
she heard a great  cry and the cup fell from her hand. She
turned and found that it  was her father's handmaid, who had
cried out; and she said to  her, "O my mistress, is't thus
thou keepest the covenant between  me and thee? None taught
thee this art save I, and thou didst  agree with me that thou
wouldst do naught without consulting  me and that whoso
married thee should marry me also, and that  one night should
be mine and one night thine." And the broker's  daughter said,
"'Tis well." When the broker heard the maid's  words, he asked
his daughter, "Who taught the maid?"; and  she answered, "O my
papa, enquire of herself." So he put the  question and she
replied, "Know, O my lord, that, when I was  with Azariah the
Jew, I used to spy upon him and listen to him,  when he
performed his gramarye; and when he went forth to his  shop in
Baghdad, I opened his books and read in them, till I  became
skilled in the Cabbala-science. One day, he was warm  with
wine and would have me lie with him, but I objected, saying, 
'I may not grant thee this except thou become a Moslem.' He 
refused and I said to him, 'Now for the Sultan's
market.'[FN#255] So he  sold me to thee and I taught my young
mistress, making it a  condition with her that she should do
naught without my counsel,  and that whoso might wed her
should wed me also, one night  for me and one night for her."
Then she took a cup of water and  conjuring over it, sprinkled
the dog therewith; saying, "Return  thou to form of man." And
he straightway was restored to his  former shape; whereupon
the broker saluted him with the salam  and asked him the
reason of his enchantment. So Ali told him  all that had
passed--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day  and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighteenth Night, 

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
broker, having saluted Ali of Cairo with the salam, asked him
the  reason of his enchantment and what had befallen him; and
he  answered by telling him all that had passed, when the
broker said  to him, "Will not my daughter and the handmaid
suffice thee?"  but he answered, "Needs must I have Zaynab
also."  Now  suddenly there came a rap at the door and the
maid said, "Who  is at the door?"  The knocker replied,
"Kamar, daughter of  Azariah the Jew; say me, is Ali of Cairo
with you?" Replied  the broker's daughter, "O thou daughter of
a dog! If he be  with us, what wilt thou with him? Go down, O
maid, and open  to her."  So the maid let her in, and when she
looked upon  Ali and he upon her, he said,  "What bringeth
thee hither  O dog's daughter?"  Quoth she, "I testify that
there is no  god but the God and I testify that Mohammed is
the Apostle  of God." And, having thus Islamised, she asked
him, "Do men  in the Faith of Al-Islam give marriage portions
to women or  do women dower men?"  Quoth he, "Men endow
women."  "Then," said she, "I come and dower myself for thee, 
bringing thee, as my marriage-portion, my dress together with 
the rod and charger and chains and the head of my father,  the
enemy of thee and the foeman of Allah." And she threw  down
the Jew's head before him.  Now the cause of her  slaying her
sire was as follows.  On the night of his turning  Ali into a
dog, she saw, in a dream, a speaker who said to her,  "Become
a Moslemah." She did so; and as soon as she awoke  next
morning she expounded Al-Islam to her father who  refused to
embrace the Faith; so she drugged him with Bhang  and killed
him. As for Ali, he took the gear and said to the  broker,
"Meet we to-morrow at the Caliph's Divan, that I may  take thy
daughter and the handmaid to wife." Then he set out 
rejoicing, to return to the barrack of the Forty. On his way
he  met a sweetmeat seller, who was beating hand upon hand and
saying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah,  the Glorious, the Great! Folk's labour hath waxed
sinful and  man is active only in fraud!" Then said he to Ali,
"I conjure  thee, by Allah, taste of this confection!"  So Ali
took a piece  and ate it and fell down senseless, for there
was Bhang therein;  whereupon the sweetmeat-seller seized the
dress and the charger  and the rest of the gear and thrusting
them into the box where  he kept his sweetmeats hoisted it up
and made off. Presently he  met a Kazi, who called to him,
saying, "Come hither, O sweet-meat seller!" So he went up to
him and setting down his sack  laid the tray of sweetmeats
upon it and asked, "What dost thou  want?" "Halwá and
dragées,[FN#256]" answered the Kazi and, taking  some in his
hand, said, "Both of these are adulterated." Then  he brought
out sweetmeats from his breast-pocket[FN#257] and gave them 
to the sweetmeat-seller, saying, "Look at this fashion; how 
excellent it is! Eat of it and make the like of it." So he ate 
and fell down senseless, for the sweetmeats were drugged with 
Bhang, whereupon the Kazi bundled him into the sack and made 
off with him, charger and chest and all, to the barrack of the 
Forty. Now the Judge in question was Hasan Shuman and the 
reason of this was as follows. When Ali had been gone some 
days in quest of the dress and they heard no news of him, 
Calamity Ahmad said to his men, "O lads, go and seek for your 
brother Ali of Cairo." So they sallied forth in quest of him
and  among the rest Hasan Shuman the Pestilence, disguised in
a Kazi's  gear.  He came upon the sweetmeat-seller and,
knowing him  for Ahmad al-Lakit[FN#258] suspected him of
having played some trick  upon Ali; so he drugged him and did
as we have seen. Mean-while, the other Forty fared about the
streets and highways  making search in different directions,
and amongst them Ali  Kitf al-Jamal, who espying a crowd, made
towards the people  and found the Cairene Ali lying drugged
and senseless in their  midst. So he revived him and he came
to himself and seeing the  folk flocking around him asked,
"Where am I?"  Answered  Ali Camel-shoulder and his comrades,
"We found thee lying here  drugged but know not who drugged
thee." Quoth Ali, "'Twas  a certain sweetmeat-seller who
drugged me and took the gear  from me; but where is he gone?"
Quoth his comrades, "We  have seen nothing of him; but come,
rise and go home with  us." So they returned to the barrack,
where they found Ahmad  al-Danaf, who greeted Ali and enquired
if he had brought the  dress.  He replied, "I was coming
hither with it and other  matters, including the Jew's head,
when a sweetmeat-seller met  me and drugged me with Bhang and
took them from me." Then  he told him the whole tale ending
with, "If I come across that  man of goodies again, I will
requite him."  Presently Hasan  Shuman came out of a closet
and said to him, "Hast thou gotten  the gear, O Ali?" So he
told him what had befallen him and  added, "If I know whither
the rascal is gone and where to  find the knave, I would pay
him out. Knowest thou whither  he went?" Answered Hasan, "I
know where he is," and  opening the door of the closet, showed
him the sweetmeat-seller  within, drugged and senseless.  Then
he aroused  him and he opened his eyes and finding himself in
presence of  Mercury Ali and Calamity Ahmad and the Forty,
started up and  said, "Where am I and who hath laid hands on
me?" Replied  Shuman, "'Twas I laid hands on thee;" and Ali
cried, "O  perfidious wretch, wilt thou play thy pranks on
me?" And he  would have slain him: but Hasan said to him,
"Hold thy hand  for this fellow is become thy kinsman."  "How
my kinsman?"  quoth Ali; and quoth Hasan, "This is Ahmad al-
Lakit son of  Zaynab's sister." Then said Ali to the prisoner,
"Why didst thou  thus, O Lakit?" and he replied, "My
grandmother, Dalilah the  Wily, bade me do it; only because
Zurayk the fishmonger fore-gathered with the old woman and
said, 'Mercury Ali of Cairo is  a sharper and a past master in
knavery, and he will certainly slay  the Jew and bring hither
the dress.'  So she sent for me and  said to me, 'O Ahmad,
dost thou know Ali of Cairo?' Answered  I, 'Indeed I do and
'twas I directed him to Ahmad al-Danaf's  lodging when he
first came to Baghdad.' Quoth she, 'Go and set  thy nets for
him, and if he have brought back the gear, put a  cheat on him
and take it from him.' So I went round about the  highways of
the city, till I met a sweetmeat-seller and buying his 
clothes and stock-in-trade and gear for ten dinars, did what
was  done." Thereupon quoth Ali, "Go back to thy grandmother
and  Zurayk, and tell them that I have brought the gear and
the Jew's  head and tell them to meet me to-morrow at the
Caliph's Divan, there to receive Zaynab's dowry." And Calamity
Ahmad  rejoiced in this and said, "We have not wasted our
pains in  rearing thee, O Ali!"  Next morning Ali took the
dress, the  charger, the rod and the chains of gold, together
with the head of  Azariah the Jew mounted on a pike, and went
up, accompanied  by Ahmad al-Danaf and the Forty, to the
Divan, where they  kissed ground before the Caliph--And
Shahrazad perceived  the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali 
the Cairene went up to the Caliph's Divan, accompanied by his 
uncle Ahmad al-Danaf and his lads they kissed ground before
the  Caliph who turned and seeing a youth of the most valiant
aspect,  enquired of Calamity Ahmad concerning him and he
replied, "O  Commander of the Faithful, this is Mercury Ali
the Egyptian  captain of the brave boys of Cairo, and he is
the first of my lads."  And the Caliph loved him for the
valour that shone from between  his eyes, testifying for him
and not against him. Then Ali rose;  and, casting the Jew's
head down before him, said, "May thine  every enemy be like
this one, O Prince of True Believers!"  Quoth Al-Rashid,
"Whose head is this?"; and quoth Ali, "'Tis  the head of
Azariah the Jew." "Who slew him?" asked the  Caliph. So Ali
related to him all that had passed, from first to  last, and
the Caliph said, "I had not thought thou wouldst kill  him,
for that he was a sorcerer." Ali replied, "O Commander of  the
Faithful, my Lord made me prevail to his slaughter." Then  the
Caliph sent the Chief of Police to the Jew's palace, where he 
found him lying headless; so he laid the body on a
bier,[FN#259] and  carried it to Al-Rashid, who commanded to
burn it. Whereat,  behold, up came Kamar and kissing the
ground before the Caliph,  informed him that she was the
daughter of Jew Azariah and that  she had become a Moslemah.
Then she renewed her profession of Faith before the Commander
of the Faithful and said to him  "Be thou my intercessor with
Sharper Ali that he take me to  wife." She also appointed him
her guardian to consent to her  marriage with the Cairene, to
whom he gave the Jew's palace and  all its contents, saying,
"Ask a boon of me." Quoth Ali, "I beg  of thee to let me stand
on thy carpet and eat of thy table;" and  quoth the Caliph, "O
Ali, hast thou any lads?" He replied, "I  have forty lads; but
they are in Cairo." Rejoined the Caliph,  "Send to Cairo and
fetch them hither," presently adding, "But,  O Ali, hast thou
a barrack for them?" "No," answered Ali;  and Hasan Shuman
said, "I make him a present of my barrack  with all that is
therein, O Commander of the Faithful."  However, the Caliph
retorted, saying, "Thy lodging is thine own, O  Hasan;" and he
bade his treasurer give the court architect ten  thousand
dinars, that he might build Ali a hall with four daises  and
forty sleeping-closets for his lads. Then said he, "O Ali, 
hast thou any further wish, that we may command its
fulfilment?".  and said Ali, "O King of the age, be thou my
intercessor with  Dalilah the Wily that she give me her
daughter Zaynab to wife  and take the dress and gear of
Azariah's girl in lieu of dower."  Dalilah accepted the
Caliph's intercession and accepted the  charger and dress and
what not, and they drew up the marriage  contracts between Ali
and Zaynab and Kamar, the Jew's daughter  and the broker's
daughter and the handmaid. Moreover, the  Caliph assigned him
a solde with a table morning and evening,  and stipends and
allowances for fodder; all of the most liberal.  Then Ali the
Cairene fell to making ready for the wedding  festivities and,
after thirty days, he sent a letter to his comrades in  Cairo,
wherein he gave them to know of the favours and honours  which
the Caliph had bestowed upon him and said, "I have  married
four maidens and needs must ye come to the wedding."  So,
after a reasonable time the forty lads arrived and they held 
high festival; he homed them in his barrack and entreated them 
with the utmost regard and presented them to the Caliph, who 
bestowed on them robes of honour and largesse. Then the
tiring-women displayed Zaynab before Ali in the dress of the
Jew's  daughter, and he went in unto her and found her a pearl 
unthridden and a filly by all save himself unridden. Then he 
went in unto the three other maidens and found them
accomplished  in beauty and loveliness. After this it befel
that Ali of Cairo was  one night on guard by the Caliph who
said to him, "I wish thee  O Ali, to tell me all that hath
befallen thee from first to last with  Dalilah the Wily and
Zaynab the Coney-catcher and Zurayk the  Fishmonger." So Ali
related to him all his adventures and the  Commander of the
Faithful bade record them and lay them up in  the royal
muniment-rooms. So they wrote down all that had  befallen him
and kept it in store with other histories for the  people of
Mohammed the Best of Men. And Ali and his wives  and comrades
abode in all solace of life, and its joyance, till there  came
to them the Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer of Societies; 
and Allah (be He extolled and exalted!) is All-
knowing![FN#260] And  also men relate the tale of 




             ARDASHIR AND HAYAT AL-NUFUS.[FN#261]



There was once in the city of Shíráz a mighty King called Sayf
al-A'azam Shah, who had grown old, without being blessed with
a son. So he summoned the physicists and physicians and said
to them, "I am now in years and ye know my case and the state
of the kingdom and its ordinance; and I fear for my subjects
after me; for that up to this present I have not been
vouchsafed a son." Thereupon they replied, "We will compound
thee a somewhat of drugs wherein shall be efficacy, if it
please Almighty Allah!" So they mixed him drugs, which he used
and knew his wife carnally, and she conceived by leave of the
Most High Lord, who saith to a thing, "Be," and it becometh.
When her months were accomplished, she gave birth to a male
child like the moon, whom his father named Ardashir,[FN#262]
and he grew up and throve and applied himself to the study of
learning and letters, till he attained the age of fifteen. Now
there was in Al-Irak a King called Abd al-Kádir who had a
daughter, by name Hayát al-Nufús, and she was like the rising
full moon, but she had an hatred for men and the folk very
hardly dared name mankind in her presence. The Kings of the
Chosroës had sought her in marriage of her sire; but, when he
spoke with her thereof, she said, "Never will I do this; and
if thou force me thereto, I will slay myself." Now Prince
Ardashir heard of her fame and fell in love with her and told
his father who, seeing his case, took pity on him and promised
him day by day that he should marry her. So he despatched his
Wazir to demand her in wedlock, but King Abd al-Kadir refused,
and when the Minister returned to King Sayf al-A'azam and
acquainted him with what had befallen his mission and the
failure thereof, he was wroth with exceeding wrath and cried,
"Shall the like of me send to one of the Kings on a
requisition and he accomplish it not?" Then he bade a herald
make proclamation to his troops, bidding them bring out the
tents and equip them for war with all diligence, though they
shou