ld borrow money for the necessary expenses; and he said,
"I will on no wise turn back, till I have laid waste King Abd
al-Kadir's dominions and slain his men and plundered his
treasures and blotted out his traces!" When the report of this
reached Ardashir he rose from his carpet-bed, and going in to
his father, kissed ground[FN#263] between his hands and said,
"O mighty King, trouble not thyself with aught of this
thing"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when report of this reached the Prince he went in to his sire
the King and, kissing ground between his hands, said, "O
mighty King, trouble not thy soul with aught of this thing and
levy not thy champions and armies neither spend thy monies.
Thou art stronger than he, and if thou loose upon him this thy
host, thou wilt lay waste his cities and dominions and spoil
his good and slay his strong men and himself; but when his
daughter shall come to know what hath befallen her father and
his people by reason of her, she will slay herself, and I
shall die on her account; for I can never live after her; no,
never." Asked the King, "And what then thinkest thou to do, O
my son?" and the Prince answered, "I will don a merchant's
habit and cast about how I may win to the Princess and compass
my desire of her." Quoth Sayf al-A'azam, "Art thou determined
upon this?"; and quoth the Prince, "Yes, O my sire;" whereupon
the King called to his Wazir, and said to him, "Do thou
journey with my son, the core of my heart, and help him to win
his will and watch over him and guide him with thy sound
judgment, for thou standest to him even in my stead." "I hear
and obey," answered the Minister; and the King gave his son
three hundred thousand dinars in gold and great store of
jewels and precious stones and goldsmiths' ware and stuffs and
other things of price. Then Prince Ardashir went in to his
mother and kissed her hands and asked her blessing. She
blessed him and, forthright opening her treasures, brought out
to him necklaces and trinkets and apparel and all manner of
other costly objects hoarded up from the time of the bygone
Kings, whose price might not be evened with coin. Moreover, he
took with him of his Mamelukes and negro-slaves and cattle all
that he needed for the road and clad himself and the Wazir and
their company in traders' gear. Then he farewelled his parents
and kinsfolk and friends; and, setting out, fared on over
wolds and wastes all hours of the day and watches of the
night; and whenas the way was longsome upon him he improvised
these couplets,

"My longing bred of love with mine unease for ever grows; *
     Nor against all the wrongs of time one succourer arose:
When Pleiads and the Fishes show in sky the rise I watch, * As
     worshipper within whose breast a pious burning glows:
For Star o' Morn I speer until at last when it is seen, * I'm
     madded with my passion and my fancy's woes and throes:
I swear by you that never from your love have I been loosed; *
     Naught am I save a watcher who of slumber nothing knows!
Though hard appear my hope to win, though languor aye
     increase, * And after thee my patience fails and ne'er a
     helper shows;
Yet will I wait till Allah shall be pleased to join our loves;
     * I'll mortify the jealous and I'll mock me of my foes."

When he ended his verse he swooned away and the Wazir
sprinkled rose-water on him, till the Prince came to himself,
when the Minister said to him, "O King's son, possess thy soul
in patience; for the consequence of patience is consolation,
and behold, thou art on the way to whatso thou wishest." And
he ceased not to bespeak him fair and comfort him till his
trouble subsided; and they continued their journey with all
diligence. Presently, the Prince again became impatient of the
length of the way and bethought him of his beloved and recited
these couplets,

"Longsome is absence, restlessness increaseth and despite; *
     And burn my vitals in the blaze my love and longings
     light:
Grows my hair gray from pains and pangs which I am doomed bear
     * For pine, while tear-floods stream from eyes and sore
     offend my sight:
I swear, O Hope of me, O End of every wish and will, * By Him
     who made mankind and every branch with leafage dight,
A passion-load for thee, O my Desire, I must endure, * And
     boast I that to bear such load no lover hath the might.
Question the Night of me and Night thy soul shall satisfy *
     Mine eyelids never close in sleep throughout the livelong
     night."

Then he wept with sore weeping and 'plained of that he
suffered for stress of love-longing; but the Wazir comforted
him and spoke him fair, promising him the winning of his wish;
after which they fared on again for a few days, when they drew
near to the White City, the capital of King Abd al-Kadir, soon
after sunrise. Then said the Minister to the Prince, "Rejoice,
O King's son, in all good; for see, yonder is the White City,
that which thou seekest." Whereat the Prince rejoiced with
exceeding joy and recited these couplets,

"My friends, I yearn in heart distraught for him; * Longing
     abides and with sore pains I brim:
I mourn like childless mother, nor can find       * One to
     console me when the light grows dim;
Yet when the breezes blow from off thy land,      * I feel
     their freshness shed on heart and limb;
And rail mine eyes like water-laden clouds,       * While in a
     tear-sea shed by heart I swim."

Now when they entered the White City they asked for the
Merchants' Khan, a place of moneyed men; and when shown the
hostelry they hired three magazines and on receiving the
keys[FN#264] they laid up therein all their goods and gear.
They abode in the Khan till they were rested, when the Wazir
applied himself to devise a device for the Prince,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Prince and the Minister alighted at the Khan and lodged their
goods in the ground-floor magazines and there settled their
servants. Then they tarried awhile till they had rested, when
the Wazir arose and applied himself to devise a device for the
Prince, and said to him, "I have bethought me of somewhat
wherein, methinks, will be success for thee, so it please
Almighty Allah." Quoth Ardashir, "O thou Wazir of good
counsel, do what cometh to thy mind, and may the Lord direct
thy rede aright!" Quoth the Minister, "I purpose to hire thee
a shop in the market-street of the stuff-sellers and set thee
therein; for that all, great and small, have recourse to the
bazar and, meseems, when the folk see thee with their own eyes
sitting in the shop their hearts will incline to thee and thou
wilt thus be enabled to attain thy desire, for thou art fair
of favour and souls incline to thee and sight rejoiceth in
thee." The other replied, "Do what seemeth good to thee." So
the Wazir forthright began to robe the Prince and himself in
their richest raiment and, putting a purse of a thousand
dinars in his breast-pocket, went forth and walked about the
city, whilst all who looked upon them marvelled at the beauty
of the King's son, saying, "Glory be to Him who created this
youth 'of vile water[FN#265]'! Blessed be Allah excellentest
of Creators!" Great was the talk anent him and some said,
"This is no mortal, 'this is naught save a noble
angel'";[FN#266] and others, "Hath Rizwan, the door-keeper of
the Eden-garden, left the gate of Paradise unguarded, that
this youth hath come forth." The people followed them to the
stuff- market, where they entered and stood, till there came
up to them an old man of dignified presence and venerable
appearance, who saluted them, and they returned his salam.
Then the Shaykh said to them, "O my lords, have ye any need,
that we may have the honour of accomplishing?"; and the Wazir
asked him, "Who art thou, O elder?" He answered, "I am the
Overseer of the market." Quoth the Wazir, "Know then, O
Shaykh, that this youth is my son and I wish to hire him a
shop in the bazar, that he may sit therein and learn to sell
and buy and take and give, and come to ken merchants' ways and
habits." "I hear and I obey," replied the Overseer and brought
them without stay or delay the key of a shop, which he caused
the brokers sweep and clean. And they did his bidding. Then
the Wazir sent for a high mattress, stuffed with ostrich-down,
and set it up in the shop, spreading upon it a small
prayer-carpet, and a cushion fringed with broidery of red
gold. Moreover he brought pillows and transported thither so
much of the goods and stuffs that he had brought with him as
filled the shop. Next morning the young Prince came and
opening the shop, seated himself on the divan, and stationed
two Mamelukes, clad in the richest of raiment before him and
two black slaves of the goodliest of the Abyssinians in the
lower part of the shop. The Wazir enjoined him to keep his
secret from the folk, so thereby he might find aid in the
winning of his wishes; then he left him and charging him to
acquaint him with what befel him in the shop, day by day
returned to the Khan. The Prince sat in the shop till night as
he were the moon at its fullest, whilst the folk, hearing tell
of his comeliness, flocked to the place, without errand, to
gaze on his beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect
grace and glorify the Almighty who created and shaped him,
till none could pass through that bazar for the excessive
crowding of the folk about him. The King's son turned right
and left, abashed at the throng of people that stared at him,
hoping to make acquaintance with some one about the court, of
whom he might get news of the Princess; but he found no way to
this, wherefore his breast was straitened. Meanwhile, the
Wazir daily promised him the attainment of his desire and the
case so continued for a time till, one morning, as the youth
sat in the shop, there came up an old woman of respectable
semblance and dignified presence clad in raiment of
devotees[FN#267] and followed by two slave-girls like moons.
She stopped before the shop and, having considered the Prince
awhile, cried, "Glory be to God who fashioned that face and
perfected that figure!" Then she saluted him and he returned
her salam and seated her by his side. Quoth she, "Whence
cometh thou, O fair of favour?"; and quoth he, "From the parts
of Hind, O my mother; and I have come to this city to see the
world and look about me." "Honour to thee for a visitor! What
goods and stuffs hast thou? Show me something handsome, fit
for Kings." "If thou wish for handsome stuffs, I will show
them to thee; for I have wares that beseem persons of every
condition." "O my son, I want somewhat costly of price and
seemly to sight; brief, the best thou hast." "Thou must needs
tell me for whom thou seekest it, that I may show thee goods
according to the rank of the requiter." "Thou speakest sooth,
O my son," said she. "I want somewhat for my mistress, Hayat
al-Nufus, daughter of Abd al-Kadir, lord of this land and King
of this country." Now when Ardashir heard his mistress's name,
his reason flew for joy and his heart fluttered and he gave no
order to slave or servant, but, putting his hand behind him,
pulled out a purse of an hundred dinars and offered it to the
old woman, saying, "This is for the washing of thy clothes."
Then he again put forth his hand and brought out of a wrapper
a dress worth ten thousand dinars or more and said to her,
"This is of that which I have brought to your country." When
the old woman saw it, it pleased her and she asked, "What is
the price of this dress, O perfect in qualities?" Answered he,
"I will take no price for it!" whereupon she thanked him and
repeated her question; but he said, "By Allah, I will take no
price for it. I make thee a present of it, an the Princess
will not accept it and 'tis a guest-gift from me to thee.
Alham- dolillah--Glory be to God--who hath brought us
together, so that, if one day I have a want, I shall find in
thee a helper to me in winning it!" She marvelled at the
goodliness of his speech and the excess of his generosity and
the perfection of his courtesy and said to him, "What is thy
name, O my lord?" He replied, "My name is Ardashir;" and she
cried, "By Allah this is a rare name! Therewith are Kings'
sons named, and thou art in a guise of the sons of the
merchants!" Quoth he, "Of the love my father bore me, he gave
me this name, but a name signifieth naught;" and quoth she in
wonder, "O my son, take the price of thy goods." But he swore
that he would not take aught. Then the old lady said to him,
"O my dear one, Truth (I would have thee know) is the greatest
of all things and thou hadst not dealt thus generously by me
but for a special reason: so tell me thy case and thy secret
thought; belike thou hast some wish to whose winning I may
help thee." Thereupon he laid his hand in hers and, after
exacting an oath of secrecy, told her the whole story of his
passion for the Princess and his condition by reason thereof.
The old woman shook her head and said, "True; but O my son,
the wise say, in the current adage, 'An thou wouldest be
obeyed, abstain from ordering what may not be made'; and thou,
my son, thy name is Merchant, and though thou hadst the keys
of the Hidden Hoards, yet wouldst thou be called naught but
Merchant. An thou wouldst rise to high rank, according to thy
station, then seek the hand of a Kazi's daughter or even an
Emir's; but why, O my son, aspirest thou to none but the
daughter of the King of the age and the time, and she a clean
maid, who knoweth nothing of the things of the world and hath
never in her life seen anything but her palace wherein she
dwelleth? Yet, for all her tender age, she is intelligent,
shrewd, vivacious, penetrating, quick of wit, sharp of act and
rare of rede: her father hath no other child and she is dearer
to him than his life and soul. Every morning he cometh to her
and giveth her good-morrow, and all who dwell in the palace
stand in dread of her. Think not, O my son, that any dare
bespeak her with aught of these words; nor is there any way
for me thereto. By Allah, O my son, my heart and vitals love
thee and were it in my power to give thee access to her, I
would assuredly do it; but I will tell thee somewhat, wherein
Allah may haply appoint the healing of thy heart, and will
risk life and goods for thee, till I win thy will for thee."
He asked, "And what is that, O my mother?" and she answered,
"Seek of me the daughter of a Wazir or an Emir, and I will
grant thy request; but it may not be that one should mount
from earth to heaven at one bound." When the Prince heard
this, he replied to her with courtesy and sense, "O my mother,
thou art a woman of wit and knowest how things go. Say me doth
a man, when his head irketh him, bind up his hand?" Quoth she,
"No, by Allah, O my son"; and quoth he, "Even so my heart
seeketh none but her and naught slayeth me but love of her. By
Allah, I am a dead man, and I find not one to counsel me
aright and succour me! Allah upon thee, O my mother, take pity
on my strangerhood and the streaming of my tears!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Ardashir, the King's son said to the old woman, "Allah upon
thee, O my mother, take pity on my strangerhood and the
streaming of my tears." Replied she, "By Allah, O my son, thy
words rend my heart, but my hand hath no cunning wherewith to
help thee." Quoth he, "I beseech thee of thy favour, carry her
a letter and kiss her hands for me." So she had compassion on
him and said, "Write what thou wilt and I will bear it to
her." When he heard this, he was ready to fly for joy and
calling for ink-case and paper, wrote these couplets,

"O Hayát al-Núfus, be gen'rous, and incline * To one who
     loving thee for parting's doomed to pine.
I was in all delight, in gladsomest of life, * But now I am
     distraught with sufferings condign.
To wakefulness I cling through longsomeness of night * And
     with me sorrow chats[FN#268] through each sad eye of
     mine;
Pity a lover sad, a sore afflicted wretch, * Whose eyelids
     ever ulcered are with tearful brine;
And when the morning comes at last, the real morn, * He finds
     him drunken and distraught with passion's wine."

Then he folded the scroll and kissing it, gave it to the old
woman; after which he put his hand to a chest and took out a
second purse containing an hundred dinars, which he presented
to her, saying, "Divide this among the slave-girls." She
refused it and cried, "By Allah, O my son, I am not with thee
for aught of this!"; however, he thanked her and answered,
"There is no help but that thou accept of it." So she took it
and kissing his hands, returned home; and going in to the
Princess, cried, "O my lady, I have brought thee somewhat the
like whereof is not with the people of our city, and it cometh
from a handsome young man, than whom there is not a goodlier
on earth's face!" She asked "O my nurse, and whence cometh the
youth?" and the old woman answered, "From the parts of Hind;
and he hath given me this dress of gold brocade, embroidered
with pearls and gems and worth the Kingdom of Chosroes and
Caesar." Thereupon she opened the dress and the whole palace
was illuminated by its brightness, because of the beauty of
its fashion and the wealth of unions and jewels wherewith it
was broidered, and all who were present marvelled at it. The
Princess examined it and, judging it to be worth no less than
a whole year's revenue of her father's kingdom, said to the
old woman, "O my nurse, cometh this dress from him or from
another?"[FN#269] Replied she, "From him;" and Hayat al-Nufus
asked, "Is this trader of our town or a stranger?" The old
woman answered, "He is a foreigner, O my lady, newly come
hither; and by Allah he hath servants and slaves; and he is
fair of face, symmetrical of form, well mannered, open-handed
and open-hearted, never saw I a goodlier than he, save
thyself." The King's daughter rejoined, "Indeed this is an
extraordinary thing, that a dress like this, which money
cannot buy, should be in the hands of a merchant! What price
did he set on it, O my nurse?" Quoth she, "By Allah, he would
set no price on it, but gave me back the money thou sentest by
me and swore that he would take naught thereof, saying, ''Tis
a gift from me to the King's daughter; for it beseemeth none
but her; and if she will not accept it, I make thee a present
of it.'" Cried the Princess, "By Allah, this is indeed
marvellous generosity and wondrous munificence! But I fear the
issue of his affair, lest haply[FN#270] he be brought to
necessity. Why didst thou not ask him, O my nurse, if he had
any desire, that we might fulfil it for him?" The nurse
replied, "O my lady, I did ask him, and he said to me, 'I have
indeed a desire'; but he would not tell me what it was.
However, he gave me this letter and said, 'Carry it to the
Princess.'" So Hayat al-Nufus took the letter and opened and
read it to the end; whereupon she was sore chafed; and lost
temper and changing colour for anger she cried out to the old
woman, saying, "Woe to thee, O nurse! What is the name of this
dog who durst write this language to a King's daughter? What
affinity is there between me and this hound that he should
address me thus? By Almighty Allah, Lord of the well Zemzem
and of the Hatim Wall,[FN#271] but that I fear the Omnipotent,
the Most High, I would send and bind the cur's hands behind
him and slit his nostrils, and shear off his nose and ears and
after, by way of example, crucify him on the gate of the bazar
wherein is his booth!" When the old woman heard these words,
she waxed yellow; her side-muscles[FN#272] quivered and her
tongue clave to her mouth; but she heartened her heart and
said, "Softly, O my lady! What is there in his letter to
trouble thee thus? Is it aught but a memorial containing his
complaint to thee of poverty or oppression, from which he
hopeth to be relieved by thy favour?" Replied she, "No, by
Allah, O my nurse, 'tis naught of this; but verses and
shameful words! However, O my nurse, this dog must be in one
of three cases: either he is Jinn-mad, and hath no wit, or he
seeketh his own slaughter, or else he is assisted to his wish
of me by some one of exceeding puissance and a mighty Sultan.
Or hath he heard that I am one of the baggages of the city,
who lie a night or two with whosoever seeketh them, that he
writeth me immodest verses to debauch my reason by talking of
such matters?" Rejoined the old woman, "By Allah, O my lady,
thou sayst sooth! But reck not thou of yonder ignorant hound,
for thou art seated in thy lofty, firm-builded and
unapproachable palace, to which the very birds cannot soar
neither the wind pass over it, and as for him, he is clean
distraught. Wherefore do thou write him a letter and chide him
angrily and spare him no manner of reproof, but threaten him
with dreadful threats and menace him with death and say to
him, 'Whence hast thou knowledge of me, that thou durst write
me, O dog of a merchant, O thou who trudgest far and wide all
thy days in wilds and wolds for the sake of gaining a dirham
or a dinar? By Allah, except thou awake from thy sleep and put
off thine intoxication, I will assuredly crucify thee on the
gate of the market-street wherein is thy shop!'" Quoth the
Princess, "I fear lest he presume, if I write to him"; and
quoth the nurse, "And pray what is he and what is his rank
that he should presume to us? Indeed, we write him but to the
intent that his presumption may be cut off and his fear
magnified." And she ceased not craftily to persuade her, till
she called for ink-case and paper and wrote him these
couplets,

"O thou who claimest to be prey of love and ecstasy; * Thou,
     who for passion spendest nights in grief and saddest
     gree: 
Say, dost thou (haughty one!) desire enjoyment of the moon? *
     Did man e'er sue the moon for grace whate'er his lunacy?
I verily will counsel thee with rede the best to hear: * Cut
     short this course ere come thou nigh sore risk, nay
     death, to dree!
If thou to this request return, surely on thee shall fall *
     Sore punishment, for vile offence a grievous penalty.
Be reasonable then, be wise, hark back unto thy wits; *
     Behold, in very truth I speak with best advice to thee:
By Him who did all things that be create from nothingness; *
     Who dressed the face of heaven with stars in brightest
     radiancy:
If in the like of this thy speech thou dare to sin again! *
     I'll surely have thee crucified upon a trunk of tree."

Then she rolled up the letter and gave it to the old woman who
took it and, repairing to Ardashir's shop, delivered it to
him, --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
old woman took that letter from Hayat al-Nufus she fared forth
till she found the youth who was sitting in his shop and gave
it to him, saying, "Read thine answer and know that when she
perused thy paper she was wroth with exceeding wrath; but I
soothed her and spake her fair, till she consented to write
thee a reply." He took the letter joyfully but, when he had
read it and understood its drift, he wept sore, whereat the
old woman's heart ached and she cried, "O my son, Allah never
cause thine eyes to weep nor thy heart to mourn! What can be
more gracious than that she should answer thy letter when thou
hast done what thou diddest?" He replied, "O my mother what
shall I do for a subtle device? Behold, she writeth to me,
threatening me with death and crucifixion and forbidding me
from writing to her; and I, by Allah, see my death to be
better than my life; but I beg thee of thy grace[FN#273] to
carry her another letter from me." She said, "Write and I
warrant I'll bring thee an answer. By Allah, I will assuredly
venture my life to win for thee thy wish, though I die to
pleasure thee!" He thanked her and kissing her hands, wrote
these verses,

"Do you threaten me wi' death for my loving you so well? *
     When Death to me were rest and all dying is by Fate?
And man's death is but a boon, when so longsome to him grows *
     His life, and rejected he lives in lonest state:
Then visit ye a lover who hath ne'er a soul to aid; * For on
     pious works of men Heaven's blessing shall await.
But an ye be resolved on this deed then up and on; * I'm in
     bonds to you, a bondsman confined within your gate:
What path have I whose patience without you is no more? * How
     is this, when a lover's heart in stress of love is
     strait?
O my lady show me ruth, who by passion am misused; * For all
     who love the noble stand for evermore excused."

He then folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman,
together with two purses of two hundred dinars, which she
would have refused, but he conjured her by oath to accept of
them. So she took them both and said, "Needs must I bring thee
to thy desire, despite the noses of thy foes." Then she
repaired to the palace and gave the letter to Hayat al-Nufus
who said, "What is this, O my nurse? Here are we in a
correspondence and thou coming and going! Indeed, I fear lest
the matter get wind and we be disgraced." Rejoined the old
woman, "How so, O my lady? Who dare speak such word?" So she
took the letter and after reading and understanding it she
smote hand on hand, saying "Verily, this is a calamity which
is fallen upon us, and I know not whence this young man came
to us!" Quoth the old woman, "O my lady, Allah upon thee,
write him another letter; but be rough with him this time and
say to him, 'An thou write me another word after this, I will
have thy head struck off.'" Quoth the Princess, "O my nurse, I
am assured that the matter will not end on such wise; 'twere
better to break off this exchange of letters; and, except the
puppy take warning by my previous threats, I will strike off
his head." The old woman said, "Then write him a letter and
give him to know this condition." So Hayat al-Nufus called for
pen-case and paper and wrote these couplets,

'Ho, thou heedless of Time and his sore despight! * Ho, thou
     heart whom hopes of my favours excite!
Think O pride-full! would'st win for thyself the skies? *
     Would'st attain to the moon shining clear and bright?
I will burn thee with fire that shall ne'er be quenched, * Or
     will slay thee with scymitar's sharpest bite!
Leave it, friend, and 'scape the tormenting pains, * Such as
     turn hair- partings[FN#274] from black to white.
Take my warning and fly from the road of love; * Draw thee
     back from a course nor seemly nor right!"

Then she folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, who
was puzzled and perplexed by the matter. She carried it to
Ardashir, and the Prince read the letter and bowed his head to
the earth, making as if he wrote with his finger and speaking
not a word. Quoth the old woman, "How is it I see thee silent
stay and not say thy say?"; and quoth he, "O my mother, what
shall I say, seeing that she doth but threaten me and
redoubleth in hard- heartedness and aversion?" Rejoined the
nurse, "Write her a letter of what thou wilt: I will protect
thee; nor let thy heart be cast down, for needs must I bring
you twain together." He thanked her for her kindness and
kissing her hand, wrote these couplets,

"A heart, by Allah! never soft to lover-wight, * Who sighs for
     union only with his friends, his sprite!
Who with tear-ulcered eyelids evermore must bide, * When
     falleth upon earth first darkness of the night:
Be just, be gen'rous, lend thy ruth and deign give alms * To
     love-molested lover, parted, forced to flight!
He spends the length of longsome night without a doze; *
     Fire-brent and drent in tear-flood flowing infinite:
Ah; cut not off the longing of my fondest heart * Now
     disappointed, wasted, flutt'ring for its blight."

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman,
together with three hundred dinars, saying, "This is for the
washing of thy hands." She thanked him and kissed his hands,
after which she returned to the palace and gave the letter to
the Princess, who took it and read it and throwing it from her
fingers, sprang to her feet. Then she walked, shod as she was
with pattens of gold, set with pearls and jewels, till she
came to her sire's palace, whilst the vein of anger started
out between her eyes, and none dared ask her of her case. When
she reached the palace, she enquired for the King, and the
slave-girls and concubines replied to her, "O my lady, he is
gone forth a-hunting and sporting." So she returned, as she
were a rending lioness, and bespake none for the space of
three hours, when her brow cleared and her wrath cooled. As
soon as the old woman saw that her irk and anger were past,
she went up to her and, kissing ground between her hands,
asked her, "O my lady, whither went those noble steps?" The
Princess answered, "To the palace of the King my sire." "And
could no one do thine errand?" enquired the nurse. Replied the
Princess, "No, for I went to acquaint him of that which hath
befallen me with yonder cur of a merchant, so he might lay
hands on him and on all the merchants of his bazar and crucify
them over their shops nor suffer a single foreign merchant to
tarry in our town." Quoth the old woman, "And was this thine
only reason, O my lady, for going to thy sire?"; and quoth
Hayat al-Nufus, "Yes, but I found him absent a-hunting and
sporting and now I await his return." Cried the old nurse, "I
take refuge with Allah, the All hearing, the All knowing!
Praised be He! O my lady, thou art the most sensible of women
and how couldst thou think of telling the King these fond
words, which it behoveth none to publish?" Asked the Princess,
"And why so?" and the nurse answered, "Suppose thou had found
the King in his palace and told him all this tale and he had
sent after the merchants and commanded to hang them over their
shops, the folk would have seen them hanging and asked the
reason and it would have been answered them, 'They sought to
seduce the King's daughter.'" --And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
old woman said to the Princess, "Suppose thou had told this to
the King and he had ordered the merchants to be hanged, would
not folk have seen them and have asked the cause of the
execution when the answer would have been, 'They sought to
seduce the King's daughter?' Then would they have dispread
divers reports concerning thee, some saying, 'She abode with
them ten days, away from her palace, till they had taken their
fill of her'; and other some in otherguise: for woman's
honour, O my lady, is like ourded milk, the least dust fouleth
it; and like glass, which, if it be cracked, may not be
mended. So beware of telling thy sire or any other of this
matter, lest thy fair fame be smirched, O mistress mine, for
'twill never profit thee to tell folk aught; no, never! Weigh
what I say with thy keen wit, and if thou find it not just, do
whatso thou wilt." The Princess pondered her words, and seeing
them to be altogether profitable and right, said, "Thou
speaketh sooth, O my nurse; but anger had blinded my
judgment." Quoth the old woman, "Thy resolve to tell no one is
pleasing to the Almighty; but something remaineth to be done:
we must not let the shamelessness of yonder vile dog of a
merchant pass without notice. Write him a letter and say to
him 'O vilest of traders, but that I found the King my father
absent, I had straightway commanded to hang thee and all thy
neighbours. But thou shalt gain nothing by this; for I swear
to thee, by Allah the Most High, that an thou return to the
like of this talk, I will blot out the trace of thee from the
face of earth!' And deal thou roughly with him in words, so
shalt thou discourage him in this attempt and arouse him from
his heedlessness." "And will these words cause him to abstain
from his offending?" asked the Princess; and the old woman
answered, "How should he not abstain? Besides, I will talk
with him and tell him what hath passed." So the Princess
called for ink-case and paper and wrote these couplets,

"To win our favours still thy hopes are bent;    * And still
     to win thy will art confident!
Naught save his pride-full aim shall slay a man; * And he by
     us shall die of his intent
 Thou art no lord of might, no chief of men,     * Nabob or
     Prince or Soldan Heaven-sent;
And were this deed of one who is our peer,       * He had
     returned with hair for fear white-sprent:
Yet will I deign once more excuse thy sin        * So from
     this time thou prove thee penitent."

Then she gave the missive to the old woman, saying, "O my
nurse, do thou admonish this puppy lest I be forced to cut off
his head and sin on his account." Replied the old woman, "By
Allah, O my lady, I will not leave him a side to turn on!"
Then she returned to the youth and, when salams had been
exchanged, she gave him the letter. He read it and shook his
head, saying, "Verily, we are Allah's and unto him shall we
return!" adding, "O my mother, what shall I do? My fortitude
faileth me and my patience palleth upon me!" She replied, "O
my son, be long- suffering: peradventure, after this Allah
shall bring somewhat to pass. Write that which is in thy mind
and I will fetch thee an answer, and be of good cheer and keep
thine eyes cool and clear; for needs must I bring about union
between thee and her,-- Inshallah!" He blessed her and wrote
to the Princess a note containing these couplets,

"Since none will lend my love a helping hand, * And I by
     passion's bale in death low-lain,
I bear a flaming fire within my heart * By day and night nor
     place of rest attain,
How cease to hope in thee, my wishes' term? * Or with my
     longings to be glad and fain?
The Lord of highmost Heaven to grant my prayer * Pray I, whom
     love of lady fair hath slain;
And as I'm clean o'erthrown by love and fear, * To grant me
     speedy union deign, oh deign!"

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman,
bringing out at the same time a purse of four hundred dinars.
She took the whole and returning to the palace sought the
Princess to whom she gave the letter; but the King's daughter
refused to take it and cried, "What is this?" Replied the old
woman, "O my lady, this is only the answer to the letter thou
sentest to that merchant dog." Quoth Hayat al-Nufus, "Didst
thou forbid him as I told thee?"; and quoth she, "Yes, and
this is his reply." So the Princess took the letter and read
it to the end; then she turned to the old woman and exclaimed,
"Where is the result of thy promise?" "O my lady, saith he not
in his letter that he repenteth and will not again offend,
excusing himself for the past?" "Not so, by Allah!: on the
contrary, he increaseth." "O my lady, write him a letter and
thou shalt presently see what I will do with him." "There
needeth nor letter nor answer." "I must have a letter that I
may rebuke him roughly and cut off his hopes." "Thou canst do
that without a letter." "I cannot do it without the letter."
So Hayat al-Nufus called for pen-case and paper and wrote
these verses,

"Long have I chid thee but my chiding hindereth thee not * How
     often would my verse with writ o' hand ensnare thee, ah!
Then keep thy passion hidden deep and ever unrevealed, * And
     if thou dare gainsay me Earth shall no more bear thee,
     ah!
And if, despite my warning, thou dost to such words return, *
     Death's Messenger[FN#275] shall go his rounds and dead
     declare thee, ah!
Soon shall the wold's fierce chilling blast o'erblow that
     corse o' thine; * And birds o' the wild with ravening
     bills and beaks shall tear thee, ah!
Return to righteous course; perchance that same will profit
     thee; * If bent on wilful aims and lewd I fain forswear
     thee, ah!"

When she had made an end of her writing this, she cast the
writ from her hand in wrath, and the old woman picked it up
and went with it to Ardashir. When he read it to the last he
knew that she had not softened to him, but only redoubled in
rage against him and that he would never win to meet her, so
he bethought himself to write her an answer invoking Allah's
help against her. Thereupon he indited these couplets,

"O Lord, by the Five Shaykhs, I pray deliver me * From love,
     which gars me bear such grief and misery.
Thou knowest what I bear for passion's fiery flame; * What
     stress of sickness for that merciless maid I dree.
She hath no pity on the pangs to me decreed; * How long on
     weakly wight shall last her tyranny?
I am distraught for her with passing agonies * And find no
     friend, O folk! to hear my plaint and plea.
How long, when Night hath drooped her pinions o'er the world,
     * Shall I lament in public as in privacy?
For love of you I cannot find forgetfulness; * And how forget
     when Patience taketh wings to flee?
O thou wild parting-bird[FN#276] say is she safe and sure *
     From shift and change of time and the world's cruelty?"

Then he folded the scroll and gave it to the old woman, adding
a purse of five hundred dinars; and she took it and carried it
to the Princess, who read it to the end and learned its
purport. Then, casting it from her hand, she cried, "Tell me O
wicked old woman, the cause of all that hath befallen me from
thee and from thy cunning and thine advocacy of him, so that
thou hast made me write letter after letter and thou ceasest
not to carry messages, going and coming between us twain, till
thou hast brought about a correspondence and a connection.
Thou leavest not to say, 'I will ensure thee against his
mischief and cut off from thee his speech'; but thou speakest
not thus save only to the intent that I may continue to write
thee letters and thou to fetch and carry between us, evening
and morning, till thou ruin my repute. Woe to thee! Ho,
eunuchs, seize her!" Then Hayat al-Nufus commanded them to
beat her, and they lashed her till her whole body flowed with
blood and she fainted away, whereupon the King's daughter
caused her slave-women to drag her forth by the feet and cast
her without the palace and bade one of them stand by her head
till she recovered, and say to her, "The Princess hath sworn
an oath that thou shalt never return to and re-enter this
palace; and she hath commanded to slay thee without mercy an
thou dare return hither." So, when she came to herself, the
damsel told her what the King's daughter said and she
answered, "Hearkening and obedience." Presently the
slave-girls fetched a basket and a porter whom they caused
carry her to her own house; and they sent after her a
physician, bidding him tend her assiduously till she
recovered. He did what he was told to do and as soon as she
was whole she mounted and rode to the shop of Ardashir who was
concerned with sore concern for her absence and was longing
for news of her. As soon as he saw her, he sprang up and
coming to meet her, saluted her; then he noticed that she was
weak and ailing; so he questioned her of her case and she told
him all that had befallen her from her nursling. When he heard
this, he found it grievous and smote hand upon hand, saying,
"By Allah, O my mother, this that hath betided thee
straiteneth my heart! But, what, O my mother, is the reason of
the Princess's hatred to men?" Replied the old woman, "Thou
must know O my son, that she hath a beautiful garden, than
which there is naught goodlier on earth's face and it chanced
that she lay there one night. In the joyance of sleep, she
dreamt a dream and 'twas this, that she went down into the
garden, where she saw a fowler set up his net and strew corn
thereabout, after which he withdrew and sat down afar off to
await what game should fall into it. Ere an hour had passed
the birds flocked to pick up the corn and a male
pigeon[FN#277] fell into the net and struggled in it, whereat
all the others took fright and fled from him. His mate was
amongst them, but she returned to him after the shortest
delay; and, coming up to the net, sought out the mesh wherein
his foot was entangled and ceased not to peck at it with her
bill, till she severed it and released her husband, with whom
she flew away. All this while, the fowler sat dozing, and when
he awoke, he looked at the net and found it spoilt. So he
mended it and strewed fresh grain, then withdrew to a distance
and sat down to watch it again. The birds soon returned and
began to pick up the corn, and among the rest the pair of
pigeons. Presently, the she-pigeon fell into the net and
struggled to get free; whereupon all the other birds flew
away, and her mate, whom she had saved, fled with the rest and
did not return to her. Meantime, sleep had again overcome the
fowler; and, when he awoke after long slumbering, he saw the
she-pigeon caught in the net; so he went up to her and freeing
her feet from the meshes, cut her throat. The Princess
startled by the dream awoke troubled, and said, 'Thus do men
with women, for women have pity on men and throw away their
lives for them, when they are in difficulties; but if the Lord
decree against a woman and she fall into calamity, her mate
deserteth her and rescueth her not, and wasted is that which
she did with him of kindness. Allah curse her who putteth her
trust in men, for they ill requite the fair offices which
women do them!' And from that day she conceived an hatred to
men." Said the King's son, "O my mother, doth she never go out
into the highways?"; and the old woman replied, "Nay, O my
son; but I will tell thee somewhat wherein, Allah willing,
there shall be profit for thee. She hath a garden which is of
the goodliest pleasaunces of the age; and every year, at the
time of the ripening of the fruits, she goeth thither and
taketh her pleasure therein only one day, nor layeth the night
but in her pavilion. She entereth the garden by the private
wicket of the palace which leadeth thereto; and thou must know
that it wanteth now but a month to the time of her going
forth. So take my advice and hie thee this very day to the
keeper of that garden and make acquaintance with him and gain
his good graces, for he admitteth not one of Allah's creatures
into the garth, because of its communication with the
Princess's palace. I will let thee know two days beforehand of
the day fixed for her coming forth, when do thou repair to the
garden, as of thy wont, and make shift to night there. When
the King's daughter cometh be thou hidden in some place or
other";--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
old woman charged the King's son, saying, "I will let thee
know two days beforehand of the King's daughter going down to
the garden: do thou hide thee in some place or other; and,
when thou espiest her, come forth and show thyself to her.
When she seeth thee, she will fall in love with thee; for thou
art fair to look upon and love covereth all things. So keep
thine eyes cool and clear[FN#278] and be of good cheer, O my
son, for needs must I bring about union between thee and her."
The young Prince kissed her hand and thanked her and gave her
three pieces of Alexandrian silk and three of satin of various
colours, and with each piece, linen for shifts and stuff for
trousers and a kerchief for the turband and fine white cotton
cloth of Ba'albak for the linings, so as to make her six
complete suits, each handsomer than its sister. Moreover, he
gave her a purse containing six hundred gold pieces and said
to her, "This is for the tailoring." She took the whole and
said to him, "O my son, art thou not pleased to acquaint me
with thine abiding-place and I also will show thee the way to
my lodging?" "Yes," answered he and sent a Mameluke with her
to note her home and show her his own house. Then he rose and
bidding his slaves shut the shop, went back to the Wazir, to
whom he related all that had passed between him and the old
woman, from first to last. Quoth the Minister, "O my son,
should the Princess Hayat al-Nufus come out and look upon thee
and thou find no favour with her what wilt thou do?" Quoth
Ardashir, "There will be nothing left but to pass from words
to deeds and risk my life with her; for I will snatch her up
from amongst her attendants and set her behind me on a swift
horse and make for the wildest of the wold. If I escape, I
shall have won my wish and if I perish, I shall be at rest
from this hateful life." Rejoined the Minister, "O my son,
dost thou think to do this thing and live? How shall we make
our escape, seeing that our country is far distant, and how
wilt thou deal thus with a King of the Kings of the Age, who
hath under his hand an hundred thousand horse, nor can we be
sure but that he will despatch some of his troops to cut off
our way? Verily, there is no good in this project which no
wise man would attempt." Asked Ardashir, "And how then shall
we do, O Wazir of good counsel? For unless I win her I am a
dead man without a chance." The Minister answered, "Wait till
to-morrow when we will visit this garden and note its
condition and see what betideth us with the care-taker." So
when the morning morrowed they took a thousand dinars in a
poke and, repairing to the garden, found it compassed about
with high walls and strong, rich in trees and rill-full leas
and goodly fruiteries. And indeed its flowers breathed perfume
and its birds warbled amid the bloom as it were a garden of
the gardens of Paradise. Within the door sat a Shaykh, an old
man on a stone bench and they saluted him. When he saw them
and noted the fairness of their favour, he rose to his feet
after returning their salute, and said, "O my lords, perchance
ye have a wish which we may have the honour of satisfying?"
Replied the Wazir, "Know, O elder, that we are strangers and
the heat hath overcome us: our lodging is afar off at the
other end of the city; so we desire of thy courtesy that thou
take these two dinars and buy us somewhat of provaunt and open
us meanwhile the door of this flower-garden and seat us in
some shaded place, where there is cold water, that we may cool
ourselves there, against thy return with the provision, when
we will eat, and thou with us, and then, rested and refreshed,
we shall wend our ways." So saying, he pulled out of his pouch
a couple of dinars and put them into the keeper's hand. Now
this care-taker was a man aged three-score and ten, who had
never in all his life possessed so much money: so, when he saw
the two dinars in his hand, he was like to fly for joy and
rising forthwith opened the garden gate to the Prince and the
Wazir, and made them enter and sit down under a
wide-spreading, fruit-laden, shade-affording tree, saying,
"Sit ye here and go no further into the garden, for it hath a
privy door communicating with the palace of the Princess Hayat
al-Nufus." They replied, "We will not stir hence." Whereupon
he went out to buy what they had ordered and returned after
awhile, with a porter bearing on his head a roasted lamb and
bread. They ate and drank together and talked awhile, till,
presently, the Wazir, looking about him in all corners right
and left, caught sight of a lofty pavilion at the farther end
of the garden; but it was old and the plaster was peeled from
its walls and its buttresses were broken down. So he said to
the Gardener, "O Shaykh, is this garden thine own or dost thou
hire it?"; and he replied, "I am neither owner nor tenant of
the garden, only its care-taker." Asked the Minister, "And
what is thy wage?" whereto the old man answered, "A dinar a
month," and quoth the Wazir, "Verily they wrong thee,
especially an thou have a family." Quoth the elder, "By Allah,
O my lord, I have eight children and I"-- The Wazir broke in,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! Thou makest me bear thy grief my poor
fellow! What wouldst thou say of him who should do thee a good
turn, on account of this family of thine?" Replied the old
man, "O my lord, whatsoever good thou dost shall be garnered
up for thee with God the Most High!" Thereupon said the Wazir,
"O Shaykh, thou knowest this garden of thine to be a goodly
place; but the pavilion yonder is old and ruinous. Now I mean
to repair it and stucco it anew and paint it handsomely, so
that it will be the finest thing in the garth; and when the
owner comes and finds the pavilion restored and beautified, he
will not fail to question thee concerning it. Then do thou
say, 'O my lord, at great expense I set it in repair, for that
I saw it in ruins and none could make use of it nor could
anyone sit therein.' If he says, 'Whence hadst thou the money
for this?' reply, 'I spent of my own money upon the stucco,
thereby thinking to whiten my face with thee and hoping for
thy bounties.' And needs must he recompense thee fairly over
the extent of thine expenses. To-morrow I will bring builders
and plasterers and painters to repair this pavilion and will
give thee what I promised thee." Then he pulled out of his
poke a purse of five hundred dinars and gave it to the
Gardener, saying, "Take these gold pieces and expend them upon
thy family and let them pray for me and for this my son."
Thereupon the Prince asked the Wazir, "What is the meaning of
all this?" and he answered, "Thou shalt presently see the
issue thereof."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Wazir gave five hundred ducats to the old Gardener,
saying, "Take these gold pieces and expend them upon thy
family and let them pray for this my son," the old man looked
at the gold and his wits fled; so he fell down at the Wazir's
feet, kissing them and invoking blessings on him and his son;
and when they went away, he said to them, "I shall expect you
to-morrow: for by Allah Almighty, there must be no parting
between us, night or day." Next morning the Wazir went to the
Prince's shop and sent for the syndic of the builders; then he
carried him and his men to the garth, where the Gardener
rejoiced in their sight. He gave them the price of
rations[FN#279] and what was needful to the work- men for the
restoration of the pavilion, and they repaired it and stucco'd
it and decorated it. Then said the Minister to the painters,
"Harkye, my masters, listen to my words and apprehend my wish
and my aim. Know that I have a garden like this, where I was
sleeping one night among the nights and saw in a dream a
fowler set up nets and sprinkle corn thereabout. The birds
flocked to pick up the grain, and a cock-bird fell into the
net, whereupon the others took fright and flew away, and
amongst the rest his mate; but, after awhile, she returned
alone and picked at the mesh that held his feet, till she set
him free and they flew away together. Now the fowler had
fallen asleep and, when he awoke, he found the net empty; so
he mended it and strewing fresh grain sat down afar off,
waiting for game to fall into that snare. Presently the birds
assembled again to pick up the grains, and amongst the rest
the two pigeons. By-and-by, the hen-bird fell into the net,
when all the other birds took fright at her and flew away, and
her husband flew with them and did not return; whereupon the
fowler came up and taking the quarry, cut her throat. Now,
when her mate flew away with the others, a bird of raven
seized him and slew him and ate his flesh and drank his blood,
and I would have you pourtray me the presentment of this my
dream, even as I have related it to you, in the liveliest
colours, laying the fair scene in this rare garden, with its
walls and trees and ri