lls, and dwell especially on the fowler
and the falcon. If ye do this I have set forth to you and the
work please me, I will give you what shall gladden your
hearts, over and above your wage." The painters, hearing these
words, applied themselves with all diligence to do what he
required of them and wrought it out in masterly style; and
when they had made an end of the work, they showed it to the
Wazir who, seeing his so-called dream set forth as it
was[FN#280] was pleased and thanked them and rewarded them
munificently. Presently, the Prince came in, according to his
custom, and entered the pavilion, unweeting what the Wazir had
done. So when he saw the portraiture of the fowler and the
birds and the net and beheld the male pigeon in the clutches
of the hawk, which had slain him and was drinking his blood
and eating his flesh, his understanding was confounded and he
returned to the Minister and said, "O Wazir of good counsel, I
have seen this day a marvel which, were it graven with
needle-gravers on the eye-corners would be a warner to whoso
will be warned?" Asked the Minister, "And what is that, O my
lord?"; and the Prince answered, "Did I not tell thee of the
dream the Princess had and how it was the cause of her hatred
for men?" "Yes," replied the Wazir; and Ardashir rejoined, "By
Allah, O Minister, I have seen the whole dream pourtrayed in
painting, as I had eyed it with mine own eyes; but I found
therein a circumstance which was hidden from the Princess, so
that she saw it not, and 'tis upon this that I rely for the
winning of my wish." Quoth the Wazir, "And what is that, O my
son?"; and quoth the Prince, "I saw that, when the male bird
flew away; and, leaving his mate entangled in the net, failed
to return and save her, a falcon pounced on him and slaying
him, ate his flesh and drank his blood. Would to Heaven the
Princess had seen the whole of the dream and had beheld the
cause of his failure to return and rescue her!" Replied the
Wazir, "By Allah, O auspicious King, this is indeed a rare
thing and a wonderful!" And the King's son ceased not to
marvel at the picture and lament that the King's daughter had
not beheld the dream to its end, saying in himself, "Would she
had seen it to the last or might see the whole over again,
though but in the imbroglio of sleep!" Then quoth the Wazir to
him, "Thou saidst to me, 'Why wilt thou repair the pavilion?';
and I replied, 'Thou shalt presently see the issue thereof.'
And behold, now its issue thou seest; for it was I did this
deed and bade the painters pourtray the Princess's dream thus
and paint the male bird in the pounces of the falcon which
eateth his flesh and drinketh his blood; so that when she
cometh to the pavilion, she will behold her dream depicted and
see how the cock-pigeon was slain and excuse him and turn from
her hate for men." When the Prince heard the Wazir's words, he
kissed his hands and thanked him, saying, "Verily, the like of
thee is fit to be Minister to the most mighty King, and, by
Allah, an I win my wish and return to my sire, rejoicing, I
will assuredly acquaint him with this, that he may redouble in
honouring thee and advance thee in dignity and hearken to
thine every word." So the Wazir kissed his hand and they both
went to the old Gardener and said, "Look at yonder pavilion
and see how fine it is!" And he replied, "This is all of your
happy thought." Then said they, "O elder, when the owners of
the place question thee concerning the restoration of the
pavilion, say thou, ''Twas I did it of my own monies'; to the
intent that there may betide thee fair favour and good
fortune." He said, "I hear and I obey"; and the Prince
continued to pay him frequent visits. Such was the case with
the Prince and the Wazir; but as regards Hayat al-Nufus, when
she ceased to receive the Prince's letters and messages and
when the old woman was absent from her, she rejoiced with joy
exceeding and concluded that the young man had returned to his
own country. One day, there came to her a covered tray from
her father; so she uncovered it and finding therein fine
fruits, asked her waiting-women, "Is the season of these
fruits come?" Answered they, "Yes." Thereupon she cried,
"Would we might make ready to take our pleasure in the
flower-garden!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

   When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Princess, after receiving the fruit from her sire, asked, "Is
the season of these fruits set in?"; and they answered, "Yes!"
Thereupon she cried, "Would we might make ready to take our
pleasure in the flower-garden!" "O my lady," they replied,
"thou sayest well, and by Allah, we also long for the garden!"
So she enquired, "How shall we do, seeing that every year it
is none save my nurse who taketh us to walk in the garden and
who pointeth out to us the various trees and plants; and I
have beaten her and forbidden her from me? Indeed, I repent me
of what was done by me to her, for that, in any case, she is
my nurse and hath over me the right of fosterage. But there is
no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great!" When her handmaids heard this, they all sprang up;
and, kissing the ground between her hands, exclaimed, "Allah
upon thee, O my lady, do thou pardon her and bid her to the
presence!"; and quoth she, "By Allah, I am resolved upon this;
but which of you will go to her, for I have prepared her a
splendid robe of honour?" Hereupon two damsels came forward,
by name Bulbul and Siwad al-'Ayn, who were comely and graceful
and the principals among the Princess's women, and her
favourites. And they said, "We will go to her, O King's
daughter!"; and she said, "Do what seemeth good to you." So
they went to the house of the nurse and knocked at the door
and entered; and she, recognising the twain, received them
with open arms and welcomed them. When they had sat awhile
with her, they said to her, "O nurse, the Princess pardoneth
thee and desireth to take thee back into favour." She replied,
"This may never be, though I drink the cup of ruin! Hast thou
forgotten how she put me to shame before those who love me and
those who hate me, when my clothes were dyed with my blood and
I well nigh died for stress of beating, and after this they
dragged me forth by the feet, like a dead dog, and cast me
without the door? So by Allah, I will never return to her nor
fill my eyes with her sight!" Quoth the two girls, "Disappoint
not our pains in coming to thee nor send us away unsuccessful.
Where is thy courtesy uswards? Think but who it is that cometh
in to visit thee: canst thou wish for any higher of standing
than we with the King's daughter?" She replied, "I take refuge
with Allah: well I wot that my station is less than yours;
were it not that the Princess's favour exalted me above all
her women, so that, were I wroth with the greatest of them,
she had died in her skin of fright." They rejoined, "All is as
it was and naught is in anywise changed. Indeed, 'tis better
than before, for the Princess humbleth herself to thee and
seeketh a reconciliation without intermediary." Said the old
woman, "By Allah, were it not for your presence and
intercession with me, I had never returned to her; no, not
though she had commanded to slay me!" They thanked her for
this and she rose and dressing herself accompanied them to the
palace. Now when the King's daughter saw her, she sprang to
her feet in honour, and the old woman said, "Allah! Allah! O
King's daughter, say me, whose was the fault, mine or thine?"
Hayat al-Nufus replied, "The fault was mine, and 'tis thine to
pardon and forgive. By Allah, O my nurse, thy rank is high
with me and thou hast over me the right of fosterage; but thou
knowest that Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) hath allotted
to His creatures four things, disposition, life, daily bread
and death; nor is it in man's power to avert that which is
decreed. Verily, I was beside myself and could not recover my
senses; but, O my nurse, I repent of what deed I did." With
this, the crone's anger ceased from her and she rose and
kissed the ground before the Princess, who called for a costly
robe of honour and threw it over her, whereat she rejoiced
with exceeding joy in the presence of the Princess's slaves
and women. When all ended thus happily, Hayat al-Nufus said to
the old woman, "O my nurse, how go the fruits and growths of
our garth?"; and she replied, "O my lady, I see excellent
fruits in the town; but I will enquire of this matter and
return thee an answer this very day." Then she withdrew,
honoured with all honour and betook herself to Ardashir, who
received her with open arms and embraced her and rejoiced in
her coming, for that he had expected her long and longingly.
She told him all that had passed between herself and the
Princess and how her mistress was minded to go down into the
garden on such a day.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
old woman betook herself to the Prince and told him all that
had passed between herself and the Princess Hayat al-Nufus;
and how her mistress was minded to go down into the garden on
such a day and said to him, "Hast thou done as I bade thee
with the Warder of the garden and hast thou made him taste of
thy bounties?" He replied, "Yes, and the oldster is become my
good friend: my way is his way and he would well I had need of
him." Then he told her all that had happened and of the
dream-paintings which the Wazir had caused to be limned in the
pavilion; especially of the fowler, the net and the falcon:
whereat she joyed with great joy and said, "Allah upon thee,
do thou set thy Minister mid- most thy heart, for this that he
hath done pointeth to the keenness of his wit and he hath
helped thee to the winning thy wish. So rise forthright, O my
son, and go to the Hammam-bath and don thy daintiest dress,
wherein may be our success. Then fare thou to the Gardener and
make shift to pass the night in the garden, for though he
should give the earth full of gold none may win to pass into
it, whilst the King's daughter is therein. When thou hast
entered, hide thee where no eye may espy thee and keep
concealed till thou hear me cry, 'O Thou whose boons are
hidden, save us from that we fear!' Then come forth from thine
ambush and walk among the trees and show thy beauty and
loveliness which put the moons to shame, to the intent that
Princess Hayat al-Nufus may see thee and that her heart and
soul may be filled with love of thee; so shalt thou attain to
thy wish and thy grief be gone." "To hear is to obey," replied
the young Prince and gave her a purse of a thousand dinars,
which she took and went away. Thereupon Ardashir fared
straight for the bath and washed; after which he arrayed
himself in the richest of robes of the apparel of the Kings of
the Chosroes and girt his middle with a girdle wherein were
conjoined all manner precious stones and donned a turband
inwoven with red gold and purfled with pearls and gems. His
cheeks shone rosy-red and his lips were scarlet; his eyelids
like the gazelle's wantoned; like a wine-struck wight in his
gait he swayed; beauty and loveliness garbed him, and his
shape shamed the bowing of the bough. Then he put in his
pocket a purse containing a thousand dinars and, repairing to
the flower-garden, knocked at the door. The Gardener opened to
him and rejoicing with great joy salamed to him in most
worshipful fashion; then, observing that his face was
overcast, he asked him how he did. The King's son answered,
"Know, O elder, that I am dear to my father and he never laid
his hand on me till this day, when words arose between us and
he abused me and smote me on the face and struck me with his
staff and drave me away. Now I have no friend to turn to and I
fear the perfidy of Fortune, for thou knowest that the wrath
of parents is no light thing. Wherefore I come to thee, O
uncle, seeing that to my father thou art known, and I desire
of thy favour that thou suffer me abide in the garden till the
end of the day, or pass the night there, till Allah grant good
understanding between myself and my sire." When the old man
heard these words he was concerned anent what had occurred and
said, "O my lord, dost thou give me leave to go to thy sire
and be the means of reconciliation between thee and him?"
Replied Ardashir, "O uncle, thou must know that my father is
of impatient nature, and irascible; so an thou proffer him
reconciliation in his heat of temper he will make thee no
answer; but when a day or two shall have passed, his heat will
soften. Then go thou in to him and thereupon he will relent."
"Hearkening and obedience," quoth the Gardener; "But, O my
lord, do thou come with me to my house, where thou shalt night
with my children and my family and none shall reproach this to
us." Quoth Ardashir, "O uncle, I must be alone when I am
angry."[FN#281] The old man said, "It irketh me that thou
shouldst lie solitary in the garden, when I have a house." But
Ardashir said, "O uncle, I have an aim in this, that the
trouble of my mind may be dispelled from me and I know that in
this lies the means of regaining his favour and softening his
heart to me." Rejoined the Gardener, "I will fetch thee a
carpet to sleep on and a coverlet wherewith to cover thee;"
and the Prince said, "There is no harm in that, O uncle." So
the keeper rose and opened the garden to him, and brought him
the carpet and coverlet, knowing not that the King's daughter
was minded to visit the garth. On this wise fared it with the
Prince; but as regards the nurse, she returned to the Princess
and told her that the fruits were kindly ripe on the garden
trees; whereupon she said, "O my nurse, go down with me
to-morrow into the garden, that we may walk about in it and
take our pleasure,--Inshallah; and send meanwhile to the
Gardener, to let him know what we purpose." So she sent to the
Gardener to say, "The Princess will visit the parterre
to-morrow, so leave neither water-carriers nor tree-tenders
therein, nor let one of Allah's creatures enter the garth."
When word came to him, he set his water-ways and channels in
order and, going to Ardashir, said to him, "O my lord, the
King's daughter is mistress of this garden; and I have only to
crave thy pardon, for the place is thy place and I live only
in thy favours, except that my tongue is under thy
feet.[FN#282] I must tell thee that the Princess Hayat
al-Nufus hath a mind to visit it to-morrow at the first of the
day and hath bidden me leave none therein who might look upon
her. So I would have thee of thy favour go forth of the garden
this day, for the Queen will abide only in it till the time of
mid-afternoon prayer and after it shall be at thy service for
se'nnights and fortnights, months and years." Ardashir asked,
"O elder, haply we have caused thee some mishap?"; and the
other answered, "By Allah, O my lord, naught hath betided me
from thee but honour!" Rejoined the Prince, "An it be so,
nothing but all good shall befal thee through us; for I will
hide in the garden and none shall espy me, till the King's
daughter hath gone back to her palace." Said the Gardener, "O
my lord, an she espy the shadow of a man in the garden or any
of Allah's male creatures she will strike off my head;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. 

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when the Gardener said to the Prince, "An the King's daughter
espy the shadow of a man in her garden, she will strike off my
head;" the youth replied, "Have no fear, I will on no wise let
any see me. But doubtless to-day thou lackest of
spending-money for thy family." Then he put his hand to his
purse and pulled out five hundred ducats, which he gave to him
saying, "Take this gold and lay it out on thy family, that thy
heart may be at ease concerning them." When the Shaykh looked
upon the gold, his life seemed a light thing to him[FN#283]
and he suffered the Prince to tarry where he was, charging him
straitly not to show himself in the garden. Then he left him
loitering about. Meanwhile, when the eunuchs went in to the
Princess at break of day, she bade open the private wicket
leading from the palace to the parterres and donned a royal
robe, embroidered with pearls and jewels and gems, over a
shift of fine silk purfled with rubies. Under the whole was
that which tongue refuseth to explain, whereat was confounded
the brain and whose love would embrave the craven's strain. On
her head she set a crown of red gold, inlaid with pearls and
gems and she tripped in pattens of cloth of gold, embroidered
with fresh pearls[FN#284] and adorned with all manner precious
stones. Then she put her hand upon the old woman's shoulder
and commanded to go forth by the privy door; but the nurse
looked at the garden and, seeing it full of eunuchs and
handmaids walking about, eating the fruits and troubling the
streams and taking their ease of sport and pleasure in the
water said to the Princess, "O my lady, is this a garden or a
madhouse?" Quoth the Princess, "What meaneth thy speech, O
nurse?"; and quoth the old woman, "Verily the garden is full
of slave-girls and eunuchs, eating of the fruits and troubling
the streams and scaring the birds and hindering us from taking
our ease and sporting and laughing and what not else; and thou
hast no need of them. Wert thou going forth of thy palace into
the highway, this would be fitting, as an honour and a ward to
thee; but, now, O my lady, thou goest forth of the wicket into
the garden, where none of Almighty Allah's creatures may look
on thee." Rejoined the Princess, "By Allah, O nurse mine, thou
sayst sooth! But how shall we do?"; and the old woman said,
"Bid the eunuchs send them all away and keep only two of the
slave-girls, that we may make merry with them. So she
dismissed them all, with the exception of two of her handmaids
who were most in favour with her. But when the old woman saw
that her heart was light and that the season was pleasant to
her, she said to her, "Now we can enjoy ourselves aright: so
up and let us take our pleasance in the garden." The Princess
put her hand upon her shoulder and went out by the private
door. The two waiting-women walked in front and she followed
them laughing at them and swaying gracefully to and fro in her
ample robes; whilst the nurse forewent her, showing her the
trees and feeding her with fruits; and so they fared on from
place to place, till they came to the pavilion, which when the
King's daughter beheld and saw that it had been restored, she
asked the old woman, "O my nurse, seest thou yonder pavilion?
It hath been repaired and its walls whitened." She answered,
"By Allah, O my lady, I heard say that the keeper of the
garden had taken stuffs of a company of merchants and sold
them and bought bricks and lime and plaster and stones and so
forth with the price; so I asked him what he had done with all
this, and he said, 'I have repaired the pavilion which lay in
ruins,' presently adding, 'And when the merchants sought their
due of me, I said to them, 'Wait 'till the Princess visit the
garden and see the repairs and they satisfy her; then will I
take of her what she is pleased to bestow on me, and pay you
what is your due.' Quoth I, 'What moved thee to do this
thing?'; and quoth he, 'I saw the pavilion in ruins, the
coigns thrown down and the stucco peeled from the walls, and
none had the grace to repair it; so I borrowed the coin on my
own account and restored the place; and I trust in the King's
daughter to deal with me as befitteth her dignity.' I said,
'The Princess is all goodness and generosity and will no doubt
requite thee.' And he did all this but in hopes of thy
bounty." Replied the Princess, "By Allah, he hath dealt nobly
in rebuilding it and hath done the deed of generous men! Call
me my purse-keeperess." The old woman accordingly fetched the
purse-keeperess, whom the Princess bade give the Gardener two
thousand dinars; whereupon the nurse sent to him, bidding him
to the presence of the King's daughter. But when the messenger
said to him, "Obey the Queen's order," the Gardener felt
feeble and, trembling in every joint, said in himself,
"Doubtless, the Princess hath seen the young man, and this day
will be the most unlucky of days for me." So he went home and
told his wife and children what had happened and gave them his
last charges and farewelled them, while they wept for and with
him. Then he presented himself before the Princess, with a
face the colour of turmeric and ready to fall flat at full
length. The old woman remarked his plight and hastened to
forestall him, saying "O Shaykh, kiss the earth in
thanksgiving to Almighty Allah and be constant in prayer to
Him for the Princess. I told her what thou didst in the matter
of repairing the ruined pavilion, and she rejoiceth in this
and bestoweth on thee two thousand dinars in requital of thy
pains; so take them from the purse-keeperess and kiss the
earth before the King's daughter and bless her and wend thy
way." Hearing these words he took the gold and kissed the
ground before Hayat al-Nufus, calling down blessings on her.
Then he returned to his house, and his family rejoiced in him
and blessed him[FN#285] who had been the prime cause of this
business.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Care-taker took the two thousand ducats from the Princess
and returned to his house, all his family rejoiced in him and
blessed him who had been the prime cause of this business.
Thus it fared with these; but as regards the old woman, she
said to the Princess, "O my lady, this is indeed become a fine
place! Never saw I a purer white than its plastering nor
properer than its painting! I wonder if he have also repaired
it within: else hath he made the outside white and left the
inside black. Come, let us enter and inspect." So they went
in, the nurse preceding, and found the interior painted and
gilded in the goodliest way. The Princess looked right and
left, till she came to the upper end of the estrade, when she
fixed her eyes upon the wall and gazed long and earnestly
thereat; whereupon the old woman knew that her glance had
lighted on the presentment of her dream and took the two
waiting-women away with her, that they might not divert her
mind. When the King's daughter had made an end of examining
the painting, she turned to the old woman, wondering and
beating hand on hand, and said to her, "O my nurse, come, see
a wondrous thing which were it graven with needle-gravers on
the eye corners would be a warner to whoso will be warned."
She replied, "And what is that, O my lady?"; when the Princess
rejoined, "Go, look at the upper end of the estrade, and tell
me what thou seest there." So she went up and considered the
dream-drawing: then she came down, wondering, and said, "By
Allah, O my lady, here is depicted the garden and the fowler
and his net and the birds and all thou sawest in thy dream;
and verily, nothing but urgent need withheld the male pigeon
from returning to free his mate after he had fled her, for I
see him in the talons of a bird of raven which hath
slaughtered him and is drinking his blood and rending his
flesh and eating it; and this, O my lady, caused his tarrying
to return and rescue her from the net. But, O my mistress, the
wonder is how thy dream came to be thus depicted, for, wert
thou minded to set it forth in painture, thou hadst not
availed to portray it. By Allah, this is a marvel which should
be recorded in histories! Surely, O my lady, the angels
appointed to attend upon the sons of Adam, knew that the
cock-pigeon was wronged of us, because we blamed him for
deserting his mate; so they embraced his cause and made
manifest his excuse; and now for the first time we see him in
the hawk's pounces a dead bird." Quoth the Princess, "O my
nurse, verily, Fate and Fortune had course against this bird,
and we did him wrong." Quoth the nurse, "O my mistress, foes
shall meet before Allah the Most High: but, O my lady, verily,
the truth hath been made manifest and the male pigeon's excuse
certified to us; for had the hawk not seized him and drunk his
blood and rent his flesh he had not held aloof from his mate,
but had returned to her, and set her free from the net; but
against death there is no recourse, nor, O my lady, is there
aught in the world more tenderly solicitous than the male for
the female, among all creatures which Almighty Allah hath
created. And especially 'tis thus with man; for he starveth
himself to feed his wife, strippeth himself to clothe her,
angereth his family to please her and disobeyeth and denieth
his parents to endow her. She knoweth his secrets and
concealeth them and she cannot endure from him a single
hour.[FN#286] An he be absent from her one night, her eyes
sleep not, nor is there a dearer to her than he: she loveth
him more than her parents and they lie down to sleep in each
other's arms, with his hand under her neck and her hand under
his neck, even as saith the poet,

'I made my wrist her pillow and I lay with her in litter; *
     And I said to Night 'Be long!' while the full moon showed
     glitter:
Ah me, it was a night, Allah never made its like; * Whose
     first was sweetest sweet and whose last bitt'rest
     bitter!'[FN#287]

Then he kisseth her and she kisseth him; and I have heard of a
certain King that, when his wife fell sick and died, he buried
himself alive with her, submitting himself to death, for the
love of her and the strait companionship which was between
them. Moreover, a certain King sickened and died, and when
they were about to bury him, his wife said to her people: 'Let
me bury myself alive with him: else will I slay myself and my
blood shall be on your heads.' So, when they saw she would not
be turned from this thing, they left her, and she cast herself
into the grave with her dead husband, of the greatness of her
love and tenderness for him." And the old woman ceased not to
ply the Princess with anecdotes of conjugal love between men
and women, till there ceased that which was in her heart of
hatred for the sex masculine; and when she felt that she had
succeeded in renewing in her the natural inclination of woman
to man, she said to her, "'Tis time to go and walk in the
garden." So they fared forth from the pavilion and paced among
the trees. Presently the Prince chanced to turn and his eyes
fell on Hayat al-Nufus; and when he saw the symmetry of her
shape and the rosiclearness of her cheeks and the blackness of
her eyes and her exceeding grace and her passing loveliness
and her excelling beauty and her prevailing elegance and her
abounding perfection, his reason was confounded and he could
not take his eyes off her. Passion annihilated his right
judgment and love overpassed all limits in him; his vitals
were occupied with her service and his heart was aflame with
the fire of repine, so that he swooned away and fell to the
ground. When he came to himself, she had passed from his sight
and was hidden from him among the trees;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Prince Ardashir, who lay hid in the garden, saw the Princess
and her nurse walking amongst the trees, he swooned away for
very love-longing. When he came to himself Hayat al-Nufus had
passed from his sight and was hidden from him among the trees;
so he sighed from his heart-core and improvised these
couplets,

"Whenas mine eyes behold her loveliness, * My heart is torn
     with love's own ecstasy.
I wake o'erthrown, castdown on face of earth * Nor can the
     Princess[FN#288] my sore torment see.
She turned and ravished this sad Love-thrall'd sprite; *
     Mercy, by Allah, ruth; nay, sympathy!
O Lord, afford me union, deign Thou soothe * My soul, ere
     grave-niche house this corse of me;
I'll kiss her ten times ten times, and times ten * For lover's
     wasted cheek the kisses be!"

The old woman ceased not to lead the Princess a-pleasuring
about the garden, till they reached the place where the Prince
lay ambushed, when, behold she said, "O Thou whose bounties
are hidden, vouchsafe us assurance from that we fear!" The
King's son hearing the signal, left his lurking-place and,
surprised by the summons, walked among the trees, swaying to
and fro with a proud and graceful gait and a shape that shamed
the branches. His brow was crowned with pearly drops and his
cheeks red as the afterglow, extolled be Allah the Almighty in
that He hath created! When the King's daughter caught sight of
him, she gazed a long while on him and noticed his beauty and
grace and loveliness and his eyes that wantoned like the
gazelle's, and his shape that outvied the branches of the
myrobalan; wherefore her wits were confounded and her soul
captivated and her heart transfixed with the arrows of his
glances. Then she said to the old woman, "O my nurse, whence
came yonder handsome youth?"; and the nurse asked, "Where is
he, O my lady?" "There he is," answered Hayat al-Nufus; "near
hand, among the trees." The old woman turned right and left,
as if she knew not of his presence, and cried, "And pray, who
can have taught this youth the way into this garden?" Quoth
Hayat al-Nufus, "Who shall give us news of the young man?
Glory be to Him who created men! But say me, dost thou know
him, O my nurse?" Quoth the old woman, "O my lady, he is the
young merchant who wrote to thee by me." The Princess (and
indeed she was drowned in the sea of her desire and the fire
of her passion and love-longing) broke out, "O my nurse, how
goodly is this youth! Indeed he is fair of favour. Methinks,
there is not on the face of earth a goodlier than he!" Now
when the old woman was assured that the love of him had gotten
possession of the Princess, she said to her, "Did I not tell
thee, O my lady, that he was a comely youth with a beaming
favour?" Replied Hayat al-Nufus, "O my nurse, King's daughters
know not the ways of the world nor the manners of those that
be therein, for that they company with none, neither give they
nor take they. O my nurse, how shall I do to bring about a
meeting and present myself to him, and what shall I say to him
and what will he say to me?" Said the old woman, "What device
is left me? Indeed, we were confounded in this matter by thy
behaviour"; and the Princess said, "O my nurse, know thou that
if any ever died of passion, I shall do so, and behold, I look
for nothing but death on the spot by reason of the fire of my
love-longing." When the old woman heard her words and saw the
transport of her desire for him, she answered, "O my lady, now
as for his coming to thee, there is no way thereto; and indeed
thou art excused from going to him, because of thy tender age;
but rise with me and follow me. I will accost him: so shalt
thou not be put to shame, and in the twinkling of an eye
affection shall ensue between you." The King's daughter cried,
"Go thou before me, for the decree of Allah may not be
rejected." Accordingly they went up to the place where
Ardashir sat, as he were the full moon at its fullest, and the
old woman said to him, "See O youth, who is present before
thee! 'Tis the daughter of our King of the age, Hayat
al-Nufus: bethink thee of her rank and appreciate the honour
she doth thee in coming to thee and rise out of respect for
her and stand before her." The Prince sprang to his feet in an
instant and his eyes met her eyes, whereupon they both became
as they were drunken without wine. Then the love of him and
desire redoubled upon the Princess and she opened her arms and
he his, and they embraced; but love-longing and passion
overcame them and they swooned away and fell to the ground and
lay a long while without sense. The old woman, fearing
scandalous exposure, carried them both into the pavilion, and,
sitting down at the door, said to the two waiting-women,
"Seize the occasion to take your pleasure in the garden, for
the Princess sleepeth." So they returned to their diversion.
Presently the lovers revived from their swoon and found
themselves in the pavilion, whereat quoth the Prince, "Allah
upon thee, O Princess of fair ones, is this vision or
sleep-illusion?" Then the twain embraced and intoxicated
themselves without wine, complaining each to other of the
anguish of passion; and the Prince improvised these couplets,

"Sun riseth sheen from her brilliant brow, * And her cheek
     shows the rosiest afterglow:
And when both appear to the looker-on, * The skyline star
     ne'er for shame will show:
An the leven flash from those smiling lips, * Morn breaks and
     the rays dusk and gloom o'erthrow.
And when with her graceful shape she sways, * Droops leafiest
     Ban-tree[FN#289] for envy low:
Me her sight suffices; naught crave I more: * Lord of Men and
     Morn, be her guard from foe!
The full moon borrows a part of her charms; * The sun would
     rival but fails his lowe.
Whence could Sol aspire to that bending grace? * Whence should
     Luna see such wit and such mind-gifts know?
Who shall blame me for being all love to her, * 'Twixt accord
     and discord aye doomed to woe:
'Tis she won my heart with those forms that bend * What shall
     lover's heart from such charms defend?"

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prince had made an end of his verses, the Princess strained
him to her bosom and kissed him on the mouth and between the
eyes; whereupon his soul returned to him and he fell to
complaining to her of that he had endured for stress of love
and tyranny of longing and excess of transport and distraction
and all he had suffered for the hardness of her heart. Hearing
those words she kissed his hands and feet and bared her
head,[FN#290] whereupon the gloom gathered and the full moons
dawned therein. Then said she to him, "O my beloved and term
of all my wishes, would the day of estrangement had never been
and Allah grant it may never return between us!" And they
embraced and wept together, whilst she recited these couplets,

"O who shamest the Moon and the sunny glow: * Thou whose
     slaught'ring tyranny lays me low;
With the sword of a look thou hast shorn my heart, * How
     escape thy sword-glance fatal of blow?
Thus eke are thine eyebrows a bow that shot * My bosom with
     shafts of fiercest lowe:
From thy cheeks' rich crop cometh Paradise; * How, then, shall
     my heart the rich crop forego?
Thy graceful shape is a blooming branch, * And shall pluck the
     fruits who shall bear that bough.
Perforce thou drawest me, robst my sleep; * In thy love I
     strip me and shameless show:[FN#291]
Allah lend thee the rays of most righteous light, * Draw the
     farthest near and a tryst bestow:
Then have ruth on the vitals thy love hath seared, * And the
     heart that flies to thy side the mo'e!"

And when she ended her recitation, passion overcame her and
she was distraught for love and wept copious tears, rain-like
streaming down. This burnt the Prince's heart and he in turn
became troubled and distracted for love of her. So he drew
nearer to her and kissed her hands and wept with sore weeping
and they ceased not from lover-reproaches and converse and
versifying, until the call to mid-afternoon prayer (nor was
there aught between them other than this), when they bethought
them of parting and she said to him, "O light of mine eyes and
core of my heart, the time of severance has come between us
twain: when shall we meet again?" "By Allah," replied he (and
indeed her words shot him as with shafts), "to mention of
parting I am never fain!" Then she went forth of the pavilion,
and he turned and saw her sighing sighs would melt the rock
and weeping shower-like tears; whereupon he for love was
sunken in the sea of desolation and improvised these couplets,

"O my heart's desire! grows my misery * From the stress of
     love, and what cure for me?
By thy face, like dawn when it lights the dark, * And thy hair
     whose hue beareth night-tide's blee,
And thy form like the branch which in grace inclines * To
     Zephyr's[FN#292] breath blowing fain and free,
By the glance of thine eyes like the fawn's soft gaze, * When
     she views pursuer of high degree,
And thy waist down borne by the weight of hips, * These so
     heavy and that lacking gravity,
By the wine of thy lip-dew, the sweetest of drink, * Fresh
     water and musk in its purity,
O gazelle of the tribe, ease my soul of grief, * And grant me
     thy phantom in sleep to see!"

Now when she heard his verses in praise of her, she turned
back to him and embracing him, with a heart on fire for the
anguish of severance, fire which naught save kisses and
embraces might quench, cried, "Sooth the byword saith,
Patience is for a lover and not the lack thereof. There is no
help for it but I contrive a means for our reunion." Then she
farewelled him and fared forth, knowing not where she set her
feet, for stress of her love; nor did she stay her steps till
she found herself in her own chamber. When she was gone,
passion and love-longing redoubled upon the young Prince and
the delight of sleep was forbidden him, and the Princess in
her turn tasted not food and her patience failed and she
sickened for desire. As soon as dawned the day, she sent for
the nurse, who came and found her condition changed and she
cried, "Question me not of my case; for all I suffer is due to
thy handiwork. Where is the beloved of my heart?" "O my lady,
when did he leave thee? Hath he been absent from thee more
than this night?" "Can I endure absence from him an hour?
Come, find some means to bring us together speedily, for my
soul is like to flee my body." "O my lady, have patience till
I contrive thee some subtle device, whereof none shall be
ware." "By the Great God, except thou bring him to me this
very day, I will tell the King that thou hast corrupted me,
and he will cut off thy head!" "I conjure thee, by Allah, have
patience with me, for this is a dangerous matter!" And the
nurse humbled herself to her, till she granted her three days'
delay, saying, "O my nurse, the three days will be three years
to me; and if the fourth day pass and thou bring him not, I
will go about to slay thee." So the old woman left her and
returned to her lodging, where she abode till the morning of
the fourth day, when she summoned the tirewomen of the town
and sought of them fine dyes and rouge for the painting of a
virgin girl and adorning; and they brought her cosmetics of
the best. Then she sent for the Prince and, opening her chest,
brought out a bundle containing a suit of woman's apparel,
worth five thousand dinars, and a head-kerchief fringed with
all manner gems. Then said she to him, "O my son, hast thou a
mind to foregather with Hayat al-Nufus?"; and he replied,
"Yes." So she took a pair of tweezers and pulled out the hairs
of his face and pencilled his eyes with Kohl.[FN#293] Then she
stripped him and painted him with Henna[FN#294] from his nails
to his shoulders and from his insteps to his thighs and
tattooed[FN#295] him about the body, till he was like red
roses upon alabaster slabs. After a little, she washed him and
dried him and bringing out a shift and a pair of
petticoat-trousers made him put them on. Then she clad him in
the royal suit aforesaid and, binding the kerchief about his
head, veiled him and taught him how to walk, saying, "Advance
thy left and draw back thy right." He did her bidding and
forewent her, as he were a Houri faring abroad from Paradise.
Then said she to him, "Fortify thy heart, for thou art going
to the King's palace, where there will without fail be guards
and eunuchs at the gate; and if thou be startled at them and
show doubt or dread, they will suspect thee and examine thee,
and we shall both get into grievous trouble and haply lose our
lives: wherefore an thou feel thyself unable to this, tell
me." He answered, "In very sooth this thing hath no terrors
for me, so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear." Then she went out preceding him till the twain came to
the palace-gate, which was full of eunuchs. She turned and
looked at him, as much as to say, "Art thou troubled or no?"
and finding him all unchanged, went on. The chief eunuch
glanced at the nurse and knew her but, seeing a damsel
following her, whose charms confounded the reason, he said in
his mind, "As for the old woman, she is the nurse; but as for
the girl who is with her there is none in our land resembleth
her in favour or approacheth her in fairness save the Princess
Hayat al-Nufus, who is secluded and never goeth out. Would I
knew how she came into the streets and would Heaven I wot
whether or no 'twas by leave of the King!" Then he rose to
learn somewhat concerning her and well nigh thirty castratos
followed him; which when the old woman saw, her reason fled
for fear and she said, "Verily, we are Allah's and to Him we
shall return! Without recourse we are dead folk this
time."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when the old nurse saw the head of the eunuchry and his
assistants making for her she was in exceeding fear and cried,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! Verily we are God's and unto him we shall
return; without recourse we be dead folk this time." When the
head eunuch heard her speak thus, fear gat hold upon him, by
reason of that which he knew of the Princess's violence and
that her father was ruled by her, and he said to himself,
"Belike the King hath commanded the nurse to carry his
daughter forth upon some occasion of hers, whereof she would
have none know; and if I oppose her, she will be wroth with me
and will say, 'This eunuch fellow stopped me, that he might
pry into my affairs.' So she will do her best to kill me, and
I have no call to meddle in this matter." So saying, he turned
back, and with him the thirty assistants who drove the people
from the door of the palace; whereupon the nurse entered and
saluted the eunuchs with her head, whilst all the thirty stood
to do her honour and returned her salam. She led in the Prince
and he ceased not following her from door to door, and the
Protector protected them, so that they passed all the guards,
till they came to the seventh door: it was that of the great
pavilion, wherein was the King's throne, and it communicated
with the chambers of his women and the saloons of the Harim,
as well as with his daughter's pavilion. So the old woman
halted and said, "Here we are, O my son, and glory be to Him
who hath brought us thus far in safety! But, O my son, we
cannot foregather with the Princess except by night; for night
enveileth the fearful." He replied, "True, but what is to be
done?" Quoth she, "Hide thee in this black hole," showing him
behind the door a dark and deep cistern, with a cover thereto.
So he entered the cistern, and she went away and left him
there till ended day, when she returned and carried him into
the palace, till they came to the door of Hayat al-Nufus's
apartment. The old woman knocked and a little maid came out
and said, "Who is at the door?" Said the nurse, "'Tis I,"
whereupon the maid returned and craved permission of her lady,
who said, "Open to her and let her come in with any who may
accompany her." So they entered and the nurse, casting a
glance around, perceived that the Princess had made ready the
sitting-chamber and ranged the lamps in row and lighted
candles of wax in chandeliers of gold and silver and spread
the divans and estrades with carpets and cushions. Moreover,
she had set on trays of food and fruits and confections and
she had perfumed the place with musk and aloes-wood and
ambergris. She was seated among the lamps and the tapers and
the light of her face outshone the lustre of them all. When
she saw the old woman, she said to her, "O nurse, where is the
beloved of my heart?"; and the other replied, "O my lady, I
cannot find him nor have mine eyes espied him, but I have
brought thee his own sister; and here she is." Cried the
Princess, "Art thou Jinn-mad? What need have I of his sister?
Say me, an a man's head irk him, doth he bind up his hand?"
The old woman answered, "No, by Allah, O my lady! But look on
her, and if she pleases thee, let her be with thee." Then she
uncovered the Prince's face, whereupon Hayat al-Nufus knew him
and running to him, pressed him to her bosom, and he pressed
her to his breast. Then they both fell down in a swoon and lay
without sense a long while. The old woman sprinkled rose-water
upon them till they came to themselves, when she kissed him on
the mouth more than a thousand times and improvised these
couplets,

"Sought me this heart's dear love at gloom of night; * I rose
     in honour till he sat forthright,
And said, 'O aim of mine, O sole desire * In such night-visit
     hast of guards no fright?'
Replied he, 'Yes, I feared much, but Love * Robbed me of all
     my wits and reft my sprite.'
We clipt with kisses and awhile clung we, * For here 'twas
     safe; nor feared we watchman-wight:
Then rose we parting without doubtful deed * And shook out
     skirts where none a stain could sight."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
her lover visited Hayat al-Nufus in her palace, the twain
embraced and she improvised some happy couplets beseeming the
occasion. And when she had ended her extempore lines she said,
"Is it indeed true that I see thee in my abode and that thou
art my cup-mate and my familiar?" Then passion grew on her and
love was grievous to her, so that her reason well-nigh fled
for joy and she improvised these couplets,

"With all my soul I'll ransom him who came to me in gloom * Of
     night, whilst I had waited long to see his figure loom;
And naught aroused me save his weeping voice of tender tone *
     And whispered I, 'Fair fall thy foot and welcome and well
     come!'
His cheek I kissed a thousand times, and yet a thousand more;
     * Then clipt and clung about his breast enveiled in
     darkling room.
And cried, 'Now verily I've won the aim of every wish * So
     praise and prayers to Allah for this grace now best
     become.'
Then slept we even as we would the goodliest of nights * Till
     morning came to end our night and light up earth with
     bloom."

As soon as it was day, she made him enter a place in her
apartment unknown to any and he abode there till nightfall,
when she brought him out and they sat in converse and carouse.
Presently he said to her, "I wish to return to my own country
and tell my father what hath passed between us, that he may
equip his Wazir to demand thee in marriage of thy sire." She
replied, "O my love, I fear, an thou return to thy country and
kingdom, thou wilt be distracted from me and forget the love
of me; or that thy father will not further thy wishes in this
matter and I shall die. Meseems the better rede were that thou
abide with me and in my hand-grasp, I looking on thy face, and
thou on mine, till I devise some plan, whereby we may escape
together some night and flee to thy country; for I have cut
off my hopes from my own people and I despair of them." He
rejoined, "I hear and obey;" and they fell again to their
carousal and conversing. He tarried with her thus for some
time till, one night, the wine was pleasant to them and they
lay not down nor did they sleep till break of day. Now it
chanced that one of the Kings sent her father a present, and
amongst other things, a necklace of union jewels,
nine-and-twenty grains, to whose price a King's treasures
might not suffice. Quoth Abd al-Kadir, "This riviere beseemeth
none but my daughter Hayat al-Nufus;" and, turning to an
eunuch, whose jaw-teeth the Princess had knocked out for
reasons best known to herself,[FN#296] he called to him and
said, "Carry the necklace to thy lady and say to her, 'One of
the Kings hath sent thy father this, as a present, and its
price may not be paid with money; put it on thy neck.'" The
slave took the necklace, saying in himself, "Allah Almighty
make it the last thing she shall put on in this world, for
that she deprived me of the benefit of my grinder-teeth!"; and
repairing to the Princess's apartment, found the door locked
and the old woman asleep before the threshold. He shook her,
and she awoke in affright and asked, "What dost thou want?";
to which he answered, "The King hath sent me on an errand to
his daughter." Quoth the nurse, "The key is not here, go away,
whilst I fetch it;" but quoth he, "I cannot go back to the
King without having done his commandment." So she went away,
as if to fetch the key; but fear overtook her and she sought
safety in flight. Then the eunuch awaited her awhile; then,
finding she did not return, he feared that the King would be
angry at his delay; so he rattled at the door and shook it,
whereupon the bolt gave way and the leaf opened. He entered
and passed on, till he came to the seventh door and walking in
to the Princess's chamber found the place splendidly furnished
and saw candles and flagons there. At this spectacle he
marvelled and going close up to the bed, which was curtained
by a hanging of silk, embroidered with a net-work of jewels,
drew back the curtain from before the Princess and saw her
sleeping with her arms about the neck of a young man handsomer
than herself; whereat he magnified Allah Almighty, who had
created such a youth of vile water, and said, "How goodly be
this fashion for one who hateth men! How came she by this
fellow? Methinks 'twas on his account that she knocked out my
back teeth!" Then he drew the curtain and made for the door;
but the King's daughter awoke in affright and seeing the
eunuch, whose name was Kafur, called to him. He made her no
answer: so she came down from the bed on the estrade; and
catching hold of his skirt laid it on her head and kissed his
feet, saying, "Veil what Allah veileth!" Quoth he, "May Allah
not veil thee nor him who would veil thee! Thou didst knock
out my grinders and saidst to me, 'Let none make mention to me
aught of men and their ways!'" So saying, he disengaged
himself from her grasp and running out, locked the door on
them and set another eunuch to guard it. Then he went in to
the King who said to him "Hast thou given the necklace to
Hayat al-Nufus?" The eunuch replied, "By Allah, thou deservest
altogether a better fate;" and the King asked, "What hath
happened? Tell me quickly;" whereto he answered, "I will not
tell thee, save in private and between our eyes," but the King
retorted, saying, "Tell me at once and in public." Cried the
eunuch, "Then grant me immunity." So the King threw him the
kerchief of immunity and he said, "O King, I went into the
Princess Hayat al-Nufus and found her asleep in a carpeted
chamber and on her bosom was a young man. So I locked the door
upon the two and came back to thee." When the King heard these
words he started up and taking a sword in his hand, cried out
to the Rais of the eunuchs, saying, "Take thy lads and go to
the Princess's chamber and bring me her and him who is with
her as they twain lie on the bed; but cover them both
up."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the King commanded the head eunuch to take his lads and to
fetch and set before him Hayat al-Nufus and him who was with
her, the 