chief and his men entered the Princess's apartment
where he found her standing up, dissolved in railing tears,
and the Prince by her side; so he said to them, "Lie down on
the bed, as thou wast and let him do likewise." The King's
daughter feared for her lover[FN#297] and said to him, "This
is no time for resistance." So they both lay down and the
eunuchs covered them up and carried the twain into the King's
presence. Thereupon Abd al-Kadir pulled off the coverings and
the Princess sprang to her feet. He looked at her and would
have smitten her neck: but the Prince threw himself on the
father's breast, saying, "The fault was not hers but mine
only: kill me before thou killest her." The King made at him,
to cut him down, but Hayat al-Nufus cast herself on her father
and said, "Kill me not him; for he is the son of a great King,
lord of all the land in its length and breadth." When the King
heard this, he turned to the Chief Wazir, who was a
gathering-place of all that is evil, and said to him, "What
sayst thou of this matter, O Minister?" Quoth his Wazir, "What
I say is that all who find themselves in such case as this
have need of lying, and there is nothing for it but to cut off
both their heads, after torturing them with all manner of
tortures." Hereupon the King called his sworder of vengeance,
who came with his lads, and said to him, "Take this gallows
bird and strike off his head and after do the like with this
harlot and burn their bodies, and consult me not about them a
second time." So the headsmen put his hand to her back, to
take her; but the King cried out at him and cast at him
somewhat he hent in hand, which had well-nigh killed him,
saying, "O dog, how durst thou show ruth to those with whom I
am wroth? Put thy hand to her hair and drag her along by it,
so that she may fall on her face." Accordingly he haled her by
her hair and the Prince in like manner to the place of blood,
where he tore off a piece of his skirt and therewith bound the
Prince's eyes putting the Princess last, in the hope that some
one would intercede for her. Then, having made ready the
Prince he swung his sharp sword three times (whilst all the
troops wept and prayed Allah to send them deliverance by some
intercessor), and raised his hand to cut off Ardashir's head
when, behold, there arose a cloud of dust, that spread and
flew till it veiled the view. Now the cause thereof was that
when the young Prince had delayed beyond measure, the King,
his sire, had levied a mighty host and had marched with it in
person to get tidings of his son. Such was his case; but as
regards King Abd al-Kadir, when he saw this, he said, "O
wights, what is the meaning of yonder dust that dimmeth
sights?" The Grand Wazir sprang up and went out to reconnoitre
and found behind the cloud men like locusts, of whom no count
could be made nor aught avail of aid, filling the hills and
plains and valleys. So he returned with the report to the
King, who said to him, "Go down and learn for us what may be
this host and the cause of its marching upon our country. Ask
also of their commander and salute him for me and enquire the
reason of his coming. An he came in quest of aught, we will
aid him, and if he have a blood-feud with one of the Kings, we
will ride with him; or, if he desire a gift, we will handsel
him; for this is indeed a numerous host and a power uttermost,
and we fear for our land from its mischief." So the Minister
went forth and walked among the tents and troopers and
body-guards, and ceased not faring on from the first of the
day till near sundown, when he came to the warders with gilded
swords in tents star-studded. Passing these, he made his way
through Emirs and Wazirs and Nabobs and Chamberlains, to the
pavilion of the Sultan, and found him a mighty King. When the
King's officers saw him, they cried out to him, saying, "Kiss
ground! Kiss ground!"[FN#298] He did so and would have risen,
but they cried out at him a second and a third time. So he
kissed the earth again and again and raised his head and would
have stood up, but fell down at full length for excess of awe.
When at last he was set between the hands of the King he said
to him, "Allah prolong thy days and increase thy sovranty and
exalt thy rank, O thou auspicious King! And furthermore, of a
truth, King Abd al-Kadir saluteth thee and kisseth the earth
before thee and asketh on what weighty business thou art come.
An thou seek to avenge thee for blood on any King, he will
take horse in thy service; or, an thou come in quest of aught,
wherein it is in his power to help thee, he standeth up at thy
service on account thereof." So Ardashir's father replied to
the Wazir, saying, "O messenger, return to thy lord and tell
him that the most mighty King Sayf al-A'azam Shah, Lord of
Shiraz, had a son who hath been long absent from him and news
of him have not come and all traces of him have been cut off.
An he be in this city, he will take him and depart from you;
but, if aught have befallen him or any mischief have ensued to
him from you, his father will lay waste your land and make
spoil of your goods and slay your men and seize your women.
Return, therefore, to thy lord in haste and tell him this, ere
evil befal him." Answered the Minister, "To hear is to obey!"
and turned to go away, when the Chamberlains cried out to him,
saying, "Kiss ground! Kiss ground!" So he kissed the ground a
score of times and rose not till his life-breath was in his
nostrils.[FN#299] Then he left the King's high court and
returned to the city, full of anxious thought concerning the
affair of this King and the multitude of his troops, and going
in to King Abd al-Kadir, pale with fear and trembling in his
side-muscles, acquainted him with that had befallen him; --And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir returned from the court of the Great King, pale with
fear and with side-muscles quivering for dread exceeding; and
acquainted his lord with that had befallen him. Hereat
disquietude and terror for himself and for his people laid
hold upon him and he said to the Minister, "O Wazir, and who
is this King's son?" Replied the other, "'Tis even he whom
thou badest put to death, but praised be Allah who hastened
not his slaughter! Else had his father wasted our lands and
spoiled our good." Quoth the King "See now thy corrupt
judgment, in that thou didst counsel us to slay him! Where is
the young man, the son of yonder magnanimous King?" And quoth
the Wazir, "O mighty King, thou didst command him be put to
death." When the King heard this, he was clean distraught and
cried out from his heart's core and in-most of head, saying,
"Woe to you! Fetch me the Heads- man forthright, lest death
fall on him!" So they fetched the Sworder and he said, "0 King
of the Age, I have smitten off his head even as thou badest
me." Cried Abd al-Kadir "O dog, an this be true, I will
assuredly send thee after him." The Heads- man replied, "O
King, thou didst command me to slay him without consulting
thee a second time." Said the King, "I was in my wrath; but
speak the truth, ere thou lose thy life;" and said the
Sworder, "O King, he is yet in the chains of life." At this
Abd al-Kadir rejoiced and his heart was set at rest; then he
called for Ardashir, and when he came, he stood up to receive
him and kissed his mouth, saying, "O my son, I ask pardon of
Allah Almighty for the wrong I have done thee, and say thou
not aught that may lower my credit with thy sire, the Great
King." The Prince asked "O King of the Age, and where is my
father?" and the other answered, "He is come hither on thine
account." Thereupon quoth Ardashir, "By thy worship, I will
not stir from before thee till I have cleared my honour and
the honour of thy daughter from that which thou laidest to our
charge; for she is a pure virgin. Send for the midwives and
let them examine her before thee. An they find her maidenhead
gone, I give thee leave to shed my blood; and if they find her
a clean maid, her innocence of dishonour and mine also will be
made manifest." So he summoned the midwives, who examined the
Princess and found her a pure virgin and so told the King,
seeking largesse of him. He gave them what they sought,
putting off his royal robes to bestow on them, and in like
manner he was bountiful to all who were in the Harim. And they
brought forth the scent-cups and perfumed all the Lords of
estate and Grandees; and not one but rejoiced with exceeding
joy. Then the King threw his arms about Ardashir's neck and
entreated him with all worship and honour, bidding his chief
eunuchs bear him to the bath. When he came out, he cast over
his shoulders a costly robe and crowned him with a coronet of
jewels; he also girt him with a girdle of silk, purfled with
red gold and set with pearls and gems, and mounted him on one
of his noblest mares, with selle and trappings of gold inlaid
with pearls and jewels. Then he bade his Grandees and Captains
mount on his service and escort him to his father's presence;
and charged him tell his sire that King Abd al-Kadir was at
his disposal, hearkening to and obeying him in whatso he
should bid or forbid. "I will not fail of this," answered
Ardashir and farewelling him, repaired to his father who, at
sight of him, was transported for delight and springing up,
advanced to meet him and embraced him, whilst joy and gladness
spread among all the host of the Great King. Then came the
Wazirs and Chamberlains and Captains and guards and kissed the
ground before the Prince and rejoiced in his coming: and it
was a great day with them for enjoyment, for the King's son
gave leave to those of King Abd al-Kadir's officers who had
accompanied him and others of the townsfolk, to view the
ordinance of his father's host, without let or stay, so they
might know the multitude of the Great King's troops and the
might of his empire. And all who had seen him selling stuffs
in the linendrapers' bazar marvelled how his soul could have
consented thereto, considering the nobility of his spirit and
the loftiness of his dignity; but it was his love and
inclination to the King's daughter that to this had
constrained him. Meanwhile, news of the multitude of her
lover's troops came to Hayat al-Nufus, who was still jailed by
her sire's commandment, till they knew what he should order
respecting her, whether pardon and release or death and
burning; and she looked down from the terrace-roof of the
palace and, turning towards the mountains, saw even these
covered with armed men. When she beheld all those warriors and
knew that they were the army of Ardashir's father, she feared
lest he should be diverted from her by his sire and forget her
and depart from her, whereupon her father would slay her. So
she called a handmaid that was with her in her apartment by
way of service, and said to her, "Go to Ardashir, son of the
Great King, and fear not. When thou comest into his presence,
kiss the ground before him and tell him what thou art and say
to him, 'My lady saluteth thee and would have thee to know
that she is a prisoner in her father's palace, awaiting his
sentence, whether he be minded to pardon her or put her to
death, and she beseecheth thee not to forget her or forsake
her; for to-day thou art all-powerful; and, in whatso thou
commandest, no man dare cross thee. Wherefore, an it seem good
to thee to rescue her from her sire and take her with thee, it
were of thy bounty, for indeed she endureth all these trials
for thy sake. But, an this seem not good to thee, for that thy
desire of her is at an end, still speak to thy sire, so haply
he may intercede for her with her father and he depart not,
till he have made him set her free and taken surety from and
made covenant with him, that he will not go about to put her
to death nor work her aught of harm. This is her last word to
thee, may Allah not desolate her of thee, and so The
Peace!'"[FN#300]--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

   When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
bondmaid sent by Hayat al-Nufus made her way to Ardashir and
delivered him her lady's message, which when he heard, he wept
with sore weeping and said to her, "Know that Hayat al-Nufus
is my mistress and that I am her slave and the captive of her
love. I have not forgotten what was between us nor the
bitterness of the parting day; so do thou say to her, after
thou hast kissed her feet, that I will speak with my father of
her, and he shall send his Wazir, who sought her aforetime in
marriage for me, to demand her hand once more of her sire, for
he dare not refuse. So, if he send to her to consult her, let
her make no opposition; for I will not return to my country
without her." Then the handmaid returned to Hayat al-Nufus;
and, kissing her hands, delivered to her the message, which
when she heard, she wept for very joy and returned thanks to
Almighty Allah. Such was her case; but as regards Ardashir, he
was alone with his father that night and the Great King
questioned him of his case, whereupon he told him all that had
befallen him, first and last. Then quoth the King, "What wilt
thou have me do for thee, O my son? An thou desire Abd
al-Kadir's ruin, I will lay waste his lands and spoil his
hoards and dishonour his house." Replied Ardashir, "I do not
desire that, O my father, for he hath done nothing to me
deserving thereof; but I wish for union with her; wherefore I
beseech thee of thy favour to make ready a present for her
father (but let it be a magnificent gift!) and send it to him
by thy Minister, the man of just judgment." Quoth the King, "I
hear and consent;" and sending for the treasures he had laid
up from time past, brought out all manner precious things and
showed them to his son, who was pleased with them. Then he
called his Wazir and bade him bear the present with
him[FN#301] to King Abd al-Kadir and demand his daughter in
marriage for Ardashir, saying, "Accept the present and return
him a reply." Now from the time of Ardashir's departure, King
Abd al-Kadir had been troubled and ceased not to be heavy at
heart, fearing the laying waste of his reign and the spoiling
of his realm; when behold, the Wazir came in to him and
saluting him, kissed ground before him. He rose up standing
and received him with honour; but the Minister made haste to
fall at his feet and kissing them cried, "Pardon, O King of
the Age! The like of thee should not rise to the like of me,
for I am the least of servants' slaves. Know, O King, that
Prince Ardashir hath acquainted his father with some of the
favours and kindnesses thou hast done him, wherefore he
thanketh thee and sendeth thee in company of thy servant who
standeth before thee, a present, saluting thee and wishing
thee especial blessings and prosperities." Abd al-Kadir could
not believe what he heard of the excess of his fear, till the
Wazir laid the present before him, when he saw it to be such
gift as no money could purchase nor could one of the Kings of
the earth avail to the like thereof; wherefore he was
belittled in his own eyes and springing to his feet, praised
Almighty Allah and glorified Him and thanked the Prince. Then
said the Minister to him, "O noble King, give ear to my word
and know that the Great King sendeth to thee, desiring thine
alliance, and I come to thee seeking and craving the hand of
thy daughter, the chaste dame and treasured gem Hayat
al-Nufus, in wedlock for his son Ardashir, wherefore, if thou
consent to this proposal and accept of him, do thou agree with
me for her marriage-portion." Abd al-Kadir hearing these words
replied, "I hear and obey. For my part, I make no objection,
and nothing can be more pleasurable to me; but the girl is of
full age and reason and her affair is in her own hand. So be
assured that I will refer it to her and she shall choose for
herself." Then he turned to the chief eunuch and bade him go
and acquaint the Princess with the event. So he repaired to
the Harim and, kissing the Princess's hands, acquainted her
with the Great King's offer adding, "What sayest thou in
answer?" "I hear and I obey," replied she.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
chief eunuch of the Harim having informed the Princess how she
had been demanded in marriage by the Great King and having
heard her reply, "I hear and I obey," returned therewith to
the King and gave him this answer, whereat he rejoiced with
exceeding joy and, calling for a costly robe of honour, threw
it over the Wazir's shoulders. Furthermore, he ordered him ten
thousand dinars and bade him carry the answer to the Great
King and crave leave for him to pay him a visit. "Hearing and
obeying," answered the Minister; and, returning to his master,
delivered him the reply and Abd al-Kadir's message, and
repeated all their talk, whereat he rejoiced greatly and
Ardashir was transported for delight and his breast broadened
and he was a most happy man. King Sayf al-A'azam also gave
King Abd al-Kadir leave to come forth to visit him; so, on the
morrow, he took horse and rode to the camp of the Great King,
who came to meet him and saluting him, seated him in the place
of honour, and gave him welcome; and they two sat whilst
Ardashir stood before them. Then arose an orator of the King
Abd al-Kadir's court and pronounced an eloquent discourse,
giving the Prince joy of the attainment of his desire and of
his marriage with the Princess, a Queen among King's
daughters. When he sat down the Great King caused bring a
chest full of pearls and gems, together with fifty thousand
dinars, and said to King Abd al-Kadir, "I am my son's deputy
in all that concerneth this matter." So Abd al-Kadir
acknowledged receipt of the marriage-portion and amongst the
rest, fifty thousand dinars for the nuptial festivities; after
which they fetched the Kazis and the witnesses, who wrote out
the contract of marriage between the Prince and Princess, and
it was a notable day, wherein all lovers made merry and all
haters and enviers were mortified. They spread the
marriage-feasts and banquets and lastly Ardashir went in unto
the Princess and found her a jewel which had been hidden, an
union pearl unthridden and a filly that none but he had
ridden, so he notified this to his sire. Then King Sayf
al-A'azam asked his son, "Hast thou any wish thou wouldst have
fulfilled ere we depart?"; and he answered, "Yes, O King, know
that I would fain take my wreak of the Wazir who entreated us
on evil wise and the eunuch who forged a lie against us." So
the King sent forthright to Abd al-Kadir, demanding of him the
Minister and the castrato, whereupon he despatched them both
to him and he commanded to hang them over the city gate. After
this, they abode a little while and then sought of Abd
al-Kadir leave for his daughter to equip her for departure. So
he equipped her and mounted her in a Takhtrawan, a travelling
litter of red gold, inlaid with pearls and gems and drawn by
noble steeds. She carried with her all her waiting-women and
eunuchs, as well as the nurse, who had returned, after her
flight, and resumed her office. Then King Sayf al-A'azam and
his son mounted and Abd al-Kadir mounted also with all the
lords of his land, to take leave of his son-in-law and
daughter; and it was a day to be reckoned of the goodliest of
days. After they had gone some distance, the Great King
conjured Abd al-Kadir to turn back; so he farewelled him and
his son, after he had strained him to his breast and kissed
him between the eyes and thanked him for his grace and favours
and commended his daughter to his care. Then he went in to the
Princess and embraced her; and she kissed his hands and they
wept in the standing-place of parting. After this he returned
to his capital and Ardashir and his company fared on, till
they reached Shiraz, where they celebrated the marriage-
festivities anew. And they abode in all comfort and solace and
joyance of life, till there came to them the Destroyer of
delights and Severer of societies; the Depopulator of palaces
and the Garnerer of graveyards. And men also relate the tale
of




             JULNAR THE SEA-BORN AND HER SON KING
                    BADR BASIM OF PERSIA.



There was once in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, in Ajam-land a King Shahrimán[FN#302] hight, whose
abiding place was Khorásán. He owned an hundred concubines,
but by none of them had he been blessed with boon of child,
male or female, all the days of his life. One day, among the
days, he bethought him of this and fell lamenting for that the
most part of his existence was past and he had not been
vouchsafed a son to inherit the kingdom after him, even as he
had inherited it from his fathers and forebears; by reason
whereof there betided him sore cark and care and chagrin
exceeding. As he sat thus one of his Mamelukes came in to him
and said, "O my lord, at the door is a slave girl with her
merchant, and fairer than she eye hath never seen." Quoth the
King, "Hither to me with merchant and maid!"; and both came in
to him. Now when Shahriman beheld the girl, he saw that she
was like a Rudaynian lance,[FN#303] and she was wrapped in a
veil of gold-purfled silk. The merchant uncovered her face,
whereupon the place was illumined by her beauty and her seven
tresses hung down to her anklets like horses' tails. She had
Nature kohl'd eyes, heavy hips and thighs and waist of
slenderest guise, her sight healed all maladies and quenched
the fire of sighs, for she was even as the poet cries, 

"I love her madly for she is perfect fair, * Complete in
     gravity and gracious way;
Nor overtall nor overshort, the while * Too full for trousers
     are those hips that sway:
Her shape is midmost 'twixt o'er small and tall; * Nor long to
     blame nor little to gainsay:
O'erfall her anklets tresses black as night * Yet in her face
     resplends eternal day."

 The King seeing her marvelled at her beauty and loveliness,
her symmetry and perfect grace and said to the merchant, "O
Shaykh, how much for this maiden?" Replied the merchant, "O my
lord, I bought her for two thousand diners of the merchant who
owned her before myself, since when I have travelled with her
three years and she hath cost me, up to the time of my coming
hither, other three thousand gold pieces; but she is a gift
from me to thee." The King robed him with a splendid robe of
honour and ordered him ten thousand ducats, whereupon he
kissed his hands, thanking him for his bounty and beneficence,
and went his ways. Then the King committed the damsel to the
tire women, saying, "Amend ye the case of this maiden[FN#304]
and adorn her and furnish her a bower and set her therein."
And he bade his chamberlains carry her everything she needed
and shut all the doors upon her. Now his capital wherein he
dwelt  was called the White City and was seated on the sea
shore; so they lodged her in a chamber, whose latticed
casements overlooked the main.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
after taking the maiden, committed her to the tire women
bidding them amend her case and set her in a bower, and
ordered his chamberlains to shut all the doors upon her when
they had lodged her in a chamber whose latticed casements
overlooked the main. Then Shahriman went in to her; but she
spake not to him neither took any note of him.[FN#305] Quoth
he, 'Twould seem she hath been with folk who have not taught
her manners." Then he looked at the damsel and saw her
surpassing beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect
grace, with a face like the rondure of the moon at its full or
the sun shining in the sheeny sky. So he marvelled at her
charms of favour and figure and he praised Allah the Creator
(magnified be His might!), after which he walked up to her and
sat him down by her side; then he pressed her to his bosom and
seating her on his thighs, sucked the dew of her lips' which
he found sweeter than honey. Presently he called for trays
spread with richest viands of all kinds and ate and fed her by
mouthfuls, till she had enough; yet she spoke not one word.
The King began to talk to her and asked her of her name; but
she abode still silent and uttered not a syllable nor made him
any answer, neither ceased to hang down her head groundwards,
and it was but the excess of her beauty and loveliness and the
amorous grace that saved her from the royal wrath. Quoth he to
himself, "Glory be to God, the Creator of this girl! How
charming she is, save that she speaketh not! But perfection
belongeth only to Allah the Most High." And he asked the slave
girls whether she had spoken, and they said, "From the time of
her coming until now she hath not uttered a word nor have we
heard her address us." Then he summoned some of his women and
concubines and bade them sing to her and make merry with her,
so haply she might speak. Accordingly they played before her
all manner instruments of music and sports and what not and
sang, till the whole company was moved to mirth, except the
damsel, who looked at them in silence, but neither laughed nor
spoke. The King's breast was straitened; thereupon he
dismissed the women and abode alone with that damsel: after
which he doffed his clothes and disrobing her with his own
hand, looked upon her body and saw it as it were a silvern
ingot. So he loved her with exceeding love and falling upon
her, took her maidenhead and found her a pure virgin; whereat
he rejoiced with excessive joy and said in himself, "By Allah,
'tis a wonder that a girl so fair of form and face should have
been left by the merchants a clean maid as she is!"[FN#306]
Then he devoted himself altogether to her, heeding none other
and forsaking all his concubines and favourites, and tarried
with her a whole year as it were a single day. Still she spoke
not till, one morning he said to her (and indeed the love of
her and longing waxed upon him), "O desire of souls, verily
passion for thee is great with me, and I have forsaken for thy
sake all my slave girls and concubines and women and
favourites and I have made thee my portion of the world and
had patience with thee a whole year; and now I beseech
Almighty Allah, of His favour, to soften thy heart to me, so
thou mayst speak to me. Or, an thou be dumb, tell me by a
sign, that I may give up hope of thy speech. I pray the Lord
(extolled be He!) to vouchsafe me by thee a son child, who
shall inherit the kingdom after me; for I am old and lone and
have none to be my heir. Wherefore, Allah upon thee, an thou
love me, return me a reply." The damsel bowed her head awhile
in thought, and presently raising it, smiled in his face,
whereat it seemed to him as if lightning filled the chamber.
Then she said, "O magnanimous liege lord, and valorous lion,
Allah hath answered thy prayer, for I am with child by thee
and the time of my delivery is near at hand, though I know not
if the unborn babe be male or female.[FN#307] But, had I not
conceived by thee, I had not spoken to thee one word." When
the King heard her speech, his face shone with joy and
gladness and he kissed her head and hands for excess of
delight, saying Alhamdolillah--laud to Lord--who hath
vouchsafed me the things I desired!, first, thy speech, and
secondly, thy tidings that thou art with child by me." Then he
rose up and went forth from her and, seating himself on the
throne of his kingship, in an ecstasy of happiness, bade his
Wazir distribute to the poor and needy and widows and others
an hundred thousand dinars, by way of thank offering to Allah
Most High and alms on his own account. The Minister did as
bidden by the King who, returning to the damsel, sat with her
and embraced and pressed her to his breast, saying, "O my
lady, my queen, whose slave I am, prithee what was the cause
of this thy silence? Thou hast been with me a whole year,
night and day, waking and sleeping, yet hast not spoken to me
till this day." She replied, "Hearken, O King of the Age, and
know that I am a wretched exile, broken hearted and far parted
from my mother and my family and my brother." When the King
heard her words, he knew her desire and said, "As for thy
saying that thou art wretched, there is for such speech no
ground, inasmuch as my kingdom and good and all I possess are
at thy service and I also am become thy bondman; but, as for
thy saying, 'I am parted from my mother and brother and
family', tell me where they are and I will send and fetch them
to thee." There' upon she answered, "Know, then, O auspicious
King, that I am called Julnár[FN#308] the Sea born and that my
father was of the Kings of the Main. He died and left us his
reign, but while we were yet unsettled, behold, one of the
other Kings arose against us and took the realm from our
hands. I have a brother called Sálih, and my mother also is a
woman of the sea; but I fell out with my brother 'The Pious'
and swore that I would throw myself into the hands of a man of
the folk of the land. So I came forth of the sea and sat down
on the edge of an island in the moonshine[FN#309], where a
passer by found me and, carrying me to his house, besought me
of love liesse; but I smote him on the head, so that he all
but died; whereupon he carried me forth and sold me to the
merchant from whom thou hadst me, and this was a good man and
a virtuous; pious, loyal and generous. Were it not that thy
heart loved me and that thou promotedest me over all thy
concubines, I had not remained with thee a single hour, but
had cast myself from this window into the sea and gone to my
mother and family; but I was ashamed to fare themwards, being
with child by thee; for they would have deemed evilly of me
and would not have credited me, even although I swore to them,
an I told them that a King had bought me with his gold and
made me his portion of the world and preferred me over all his
wives and every thing that his right hand possessed. This then
is my story and--the Peace!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Seven Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Julnar[FN#310] the Sea-born, answering the question of King
Shahriman, told him her past from first to last, the King
thanked her and kissed her between the eyes, saying, "By
Allah, O my lady and light of mine eyes" I cannot bear to be
parted from thee one hour; and given thou leave me, I shall
die forthright. What then is to be done?" Replied she "O my
lord, the time of my delivery is at hand and my family needs
must be present, that they may tend me; for the women of the
land know not the manner of child bearing of the women of the
sea, nor do the daughters of the ocean know the manner of the
daughters of the earth; and when my people come, I shall be
reconciled to them and they will be reconciled to me." Quoth
the King, "How do the people of the sea walk therein, without
being wetted?"; and quoth she, "O King of the Age, we walk in
the waters with our eyes open, as do ye on the ground, by the
blessing of the names graven upon the seal-ring of Solomon
Davidson (on whom be peace!). But, O King, when my kith and
kin come, I will tell them how thou boughtest me with thy
gold, and hast entreated me with kindness and benevolence. It
behoveth that thou confirm my words to them and that they
witness thine estate with their own eyes and they learn that
thou art a King, son of a King." He rejoined, "O my lady, do
what seemeth good to thee and what pleaseth thee and I will
consent to thee in all thou wouldst do." The damsel continued,
yes, we walk in the sea and see what is therein and behold the
sun, moon, stars and sky, as it were on the surface of earth
and this irketh us naught. Know also that there be many
peoples in the main and various forms and creatures of all
kinds that are on the land, and that all that is on the land
compared with that which is in the main is but a very small
matter." And the King marvelled at her words. Then she pulled
out from her bosom two bits of Comorin lign-aloes and,
kindling fire in a chafing dish, chose somewhat of them and
threw it in, then she whistled a loud whistle and spake words
none understood. Thereupon arose a great smoke and she said to
the King, who was looking on, "O my lord, arise and hide
thyself in a closet, that I may show thee my brother and
mother and family, whilst they see thee not; for I design to
bung them hither, and thou shalt presently espy a wondrous
thing and shalt marvel at the several creatures and strange
shapes which Almighty Allah hath created." So he arose without
stay or delay and entering a closet, fell a-watching what she
should do. She continued her fumigations and conjurations till
the sea foamed and frothed turbid and there rose from it a
handsome young man of a bright favour, as he were the moon at
its full, with brow flower-white, cheeks of ruddy light and
teeth like the marguerite. He was the likest of all creatures
to his sister and the tongue of the case spoke in his praise
these two couplets,

"The full moon groweth perfect once a month * But thy face
     each day we see perfected.
And the full moon dwelleth in single sign, * But to thee all
     hearts be a dwelling stead."

After him there came forth of the sea an ancient dame with
hair speckled gray and five maidens, as they were moons,
bearing a likeness to the damsel hight Julnar. The King looked
upon them as they all walked upon the face of the water, till
they drew near the window and saw Julnar, whereupon they knew
her and went in to her. She rose to them and met them with joy
and gladness, and they embraced her and wept with sore
weeping. Then said they to her, "O Julnar, how couldst thou
leave us four years, and we unknowing of thine abiding place?
By Allah the world hath been straitened upon us for stress of
severance from thee, and we have had no delight of food or
drink; no, not for one day, but have wept with sore weeping
night and day for the excess of our longing after thee!" Then
she fell to kissing the hands of the youth her brother and her
mother and cousins, and they sat with her awhile, questioning
her of her case and of what had betided her, as well as of her
present estate. "Know," replied she, "that, when I left you, I
issued from the sea and sat down on the shore of an island,
where a man found me and sold me to a merchant, who brought me
to this city and sold me for ten thousand diners to the King
of the country, who entreated me with honour and forsook all
his concubines and women and favourites for my sake and was
distracted by me from all he had and all that was in his
city." Quoth her brother, "Praised be Allah, who hath reunited
us with thee! But now, O my sister, 'tis my purpose that thou
arise and go with us to our country and people." When the King
heard these words, his wits fled him for fear lest the damsel
accept her brother's words and he himself avail not to stay
her, albeit he loved her passionately, and he became
distracted with fear of losing her. But Julnar answered, "By
Allah, O my brother, the mortal who bought me is lord of this
city and he is a mighty King and a wise man, good and generous
with extreme generosity. Moreover, he is a personage of great
worth and wealth and hath neither son nor daughter. He hath
entreated me with honour and done me all manner of favour and
kindness; nor, from the day of his buying me to this time have
I heard from him an ill word to hurt my heart: but he hath
never ceased to use me courteously; doing nothing save with my
counsel, and I am in the best of case with him and in the
perfection of fair fortune. Furthermore, were I to leave him,
he would perish; for he cannot endure to be parted from me an
hour; and if I left him, I also should die, for the excess of
the love I bear him, by reason of his great goodness to me
during the time of my sojourn with him; for, were my father
alive, my estate with him would not be like my estate with
this great and glorious and puissant potentate. And verily, ye
see me with child by him and praise be to Allah, who hath made
me a daughter of the Kings of the sea, and my husband the
mightiest of the Kings of the land, and Allah, in very sooth,
he hath compensated me for whatso I lost."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Julnar
the Sea born told her brother all her tale, adding "Allah hath
not cut me off, but hath compensated me for whatso I lost. Now
this King hath no issue, male or female, so I pray the
Almighty to vouchsafe me a son who shall inherit of this
mighty sovran that which the Lord hath bestowed upon him of
lands and palaces and possessions." Now when her brother and
the daughters of her uncle heard this her speech, their eyes
were cooled thereby and they said, 'O Julnar, thou knowest thy
value with us and thou wottest the affection we bear thee and
thou art certified that thou art to us the dearest of all
creatures and thou art assured that we seek but ease for thee,
without travail or trouble. Wherefore, an thou be in unease,
arise and go with us to our land and our folk but, an thou be
at thine ease here, in honour and happiness, this is our wish
and our will; for we desire naught save thy welfare in any
case.''[FN#311] Quoth she, "By Allah, I am here in the utmost
ease and solace and honour and grace!" When the King heard
what she said, he joyed with a heart set at rest and thanked
her silently for this; the love of her redoubled on him and
entered his heart core and he knew that she loved him as he
loved her and that she desired to abide with him, that she
might see his child by her. Then Julnar bade her women lay the
tables and set on all sorts of viands, which had been cooked
in kitchen under her own eyes, and fruits and sweetmeats,
whereof she ate, she and her kinsfolk. But, presently, they
said to her, "O Julnar, thy lord is a stranger to us, and we
have entered his house, without his leave or weeting. Thou
hast extolled to us his excellence and eke thou hast set
before us of his victual whereof we have eaten; yet have we
not companied with him nor seen him, neither hath he seen us
nor come to our presence and eaten with us, so there might be
between us bread and salt." And they all left eating and were
wroth with her, and fire, issued from their mouths, as from
cressets; which when the King saw, his wits fled for excess of
fear of them. But Julnar arose and soothed them and going to
the closet where was the King her lord, said to him, "O my
lord, hast thou seen and heard how I praised thee and extolled
thee to my people and hast thou noted what they said to me of
their desire to carry me away with them?" Quoth he, "I both
heard and saw: May the Almighty abundantly requite thee for
me! By Allah, I knew not the full measure of thy fondness
until this blessed hour, and now I doubt not of thy love to
me!" Quoth she, "O my lord, is the reward of kindness aught
but kindness? Verily, thou hast dealt generously with me and
hast entreated me with worship and I have seen that thou
lovest me with the utmost love, and thou hast done me all
manner of honour and kindness and preferred me above all thou
lovest and desirest. So how should my heart be content to
leave thee and depart from thee, and how should I do thus
after all thy goodness to me? But now I desire of thy courtesy
that thou come and salute my family, so thou mayst see them
and they thee and pure love and friendship may be between you;
for know, O King of the Age, that my brother and mother and
cousins love thee with exceeding love, by reason of my praises
of thee to them, and they say, 'We will not depart from thee
nor go to our homes till we have foregathered with the King
and saluted him.' For indeed they desire to see thee and make
acquaintance with thee." The King replied, "To hear is to
obey, for this is my very own wish." So saying, he rose and
went in to them and saluted them with the goodliest
salutation; and they sprang up to him and received him with
the utmost worship, after which he sat down in the palace and
ate with them; and he entertained them thus for the space of
thirty days. Then, being desirous of returning home, they took
leave of the King and Queen and departed with due permission
to their own land, after he had done them all possible honour.
Awhile after this, Julnar completed the days of her pregnancy
and the time of her delivery being come, she bore a boy, as he
were the moon at its full, whereat the utmost joy betided the
King, for that he had never in his life been vouchsafed son or
daughter. So they held high festival and decorated the city
seven days, in the extreme of joy and jollity: and on the
seventh day came Queen Julnar's mother, Faráshah
hight,[FN#312] and brother and cousins, whenas they knew of
her delivery.--And Shahrazad perceived the light of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Julnar was brought to bed and was visited by her people, the
King received them with joy at their coming and said to them,
"I said that I would not give my son a name till you should
come and name him of your knowledge." So they named him Badr
Básim,[FN#313] and all agreed upon this name. Then they showed
the child to his uncle Salih, who took him in his arms and
arising began to walk about the chamber with him in all
directions right and left. Presently he carried him forth of
the palace and going down to the salt sea, fared on with him,
till he was hidden from the King's sight. Now when Shahriman
saw him take his son and disappear with him in the depth of
the sea, he gave the child up for lost and fell to weeping and
wailing; but Julnar said to him, "O King of the Age, fear not,
neither grieve for thy son, for I love my child more than thou
and he is with my brother, so reck thou not of the sea neither
fear for him drowning. Had my brother known that aught of harm
would betide the little one, he had not done this deed; and he
will presently bring thee thy son safe, Inshallah--an it
please the Almighty." Nor was an hour past before the sea
became turbid and troubled and King Salih came forth and flew
from the sea till he came up to them with the child lying
quiet and showing a face like the moon on the night of
fulness. Then, looking at the King he said, "Haply thou
fearedst harm for thy son, whenas I plunged into the sea with
him?" Replied the father, "Yes, O my lord, I did indeed fear
for him and thought he would never be saved therefrom."
Rejoined Salih, "O King of the land, we pencilled his eyes
with an eye powder we know of and recited over him the names
graven upon the seal-ring of Solomon David son (on whom be the
Peace!), for this is what we use to do with children newly
born among us; and now thou needst not fear for him drowning
or suffocation in all the oceans of the world, if he should go
down into them; for, even as ye walk on the land, so walk we
in the sea." Then he pulled out of his pocket a casket, graven
and sealed and, breaking open the seals, emptied it; whereupon
there fell from it strings of all manner jacinths and other
jewels, besides three hundred bugles of emerald and other
three hundred hollow gems, as big as ostrich eggs, whose light
dimmed that of sun and moon. Quoth Salih, "O King of the Age,
these jewels and jacinths are a present from me to thee. We
never yet brought thee a gift, for that we knew not Julnar's
abiding place neither had we of her any tidings or trace; but
now that we see thee to be united with her and we are all
become one thing, we have brought thee this present; and every
little while we will bring thee the like thereof, Inshallah!
for that these jewels and jacinths are more plentiful with us
than pebbles on the beach and we know the good and the bad of
them and their whereabouts and the way to them, and they are
easy to us." When the King saw the jewels, his wits were
bewildered and his sense was astounded and he said, "By Allah,
one single gem of these jewels is worth my realm!" Then he
thanked for his bounty Salih the Sea born and, looking towards
Queen Julnar, said, "I am abashed before thy brother, for that
he hath dealt munificently by me and bestowed on me this
splendid gift, which the folk of the land were unable to
present." So she thanked her brother for his deed and he said,
"O King of the Age, thou hast the prior claim on us and it
behoves us to thank thee, for thou hast entreated our sister
with kindness and we have entered thy dwelling and eaten of
thy victual; and the poet saith[FN#314],

'Had I wept before she did in my passion for Saada, * I had
     healed my soul before repentance came.
But she wept before I did: her tears drew mine; and I said, *
     The merit belongs to the precedent.'"

"And" (resumed Salih the Pious) "if we stood on our faces in
thy service, O King of the Age, a thousand years, yet had we
not the might to requite thee, and this were but a scantling
of thy due." The King thanked him with heartiest thanks and
the Merman and Merwomen abode with him forty days' space, at
the end of which Salih arose and kissed the ground before his
brother in law, who asked ' What wantest thou, O Salih?" He
answered, "O King of the Age, indeed thou hast done us
overabundant favours, and we crave of thy bounties that thou
deal charitably with us and grant us permission to depart; for
we yearn after our people and country and kinsfolk and our
homes; so will we never forsake thy service nor that of my
sister and my nephew; and by Allah, O King of the Age, 'tis
not pleasant to my heart to part from thee; but how shall we
do, seeing that we have been reared in the sea and that the
sojourn of the shore liketh us not?" When the King heard these
words he rose to his feet and farewelled Salih the Sea born
and his mother and his cousins, and all wept together, because
of parting and presently they said to him, "Anon we will be
with thee again, nor will we forsake thee, but will visit thee
every few days." Then they flew off and descending into the
sea, disappeared from sight.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
relations of Julnar the Sea-born farewelled the King and her,
weeping together because of parting; then they flew off and
descending into the depths disappeared from sight. After this
King Shahriman showed the more kindness to Julnar and honoured
her with increase of honour; and the little one grew up and
flourished, whilst his maternal uncle and grandam and cousins
visited the King every few days and abode with him a month or
two months at a time. The boy ceased not to increase in beauty
and loveliness with increase of years, till he attained the
age of fifteen and was unique in his perfection and symmetry.
He learnt writing and Koran reading; history, syntax and
lexicography; archery, spearplay and horsemanship and what not
else behoveth the sons of Kings; nor was there one of the
children of the folk of the city, men or women, but would talk
of the youth's charms, for he was of surpassing beauty and
perfection, even such an one as is praised in the saying of
the poet,[FN#315]

"The whiskers write upon his cheek, with ambergris on pearl, *
     Two lines, as 'twere with jet upon an apple, line for
     line.
Death harbours in his languid eye and slays with every glance,
     * And in his cheek is drunkenness, and not in any wine."

And in that of another,

"Upsprings from table of his lovely cheeks[FN#316]* A growth
     like broidery my wonder is:
As 'twere a lamp that burns through night hung up * Beneath
     the gloom[FN#317] in chains of ambergris."

And indeed the King loved him with exceeding love, and
summoning his Wazir and Emirs and the Chief Officers of state
and Grandees of his realm, required of them a binding oath
that they would make Badr Basim King over them after his sire;
and they sware the oath gladly, for the sovran was liberal to
the lieges, pleasant in parley and a very compend of goodness,
saying naught but that wherein was advantage for the people.
On the morrow Shahriman mounted, with all his troops and Emirs
and Lords, and went forth into the city and returned. When
they drew near the palace, the King dismounted, to wait upon
his son who abode on horseback, and he and all the Emirs and
Grandees bore the saddlecloth of honour before him, each and
every of them bearing it in his turn, till they came to the
vestibule of the palace, where the Prince alighted and his
father and the Emirs embraced him and seated him on the throne
of Kingship, whilst they (including his sire) stood before
him. Then Badr Basim judged the people, deposing the unjust
and promoting the just and continued so doing till near upon
noon, when he descended from the throne and went in to his
mother, Julnar the Sea-born, with the crown upon his head, as
he were the moon. When she saw him, with the King standing
before him, she rose and kissing him, gave him joy of the
Sultanate and wished him and his sire length of life and
victory over their foes. He sat with her and rested till the
hour of mid afternoon prayer, when he took horse and repaired,
with the Emirs before him, to the Maydan plain, where he
played at arms with his father and his lords, till night fall,
when he returned to the palace, preceded by all the folk. He
rode forth thus every day to the tilting ground, returning to
sit and judge the people and do justice between earl and
churl; and thus he continued doing a whole year, at the end of
which he began to ride out a-hunting and a-chasing and to go
round about in the cities and countries under his rule,
proclaiming security and satisfaction and doing after the
fashion of Kings; and he was unique among the people of his
day for glory and valour and just dealing among the subjects.
And it chanced that one day the old King fell sick and his
fluttering heart forebode him of translation to the Mansion of
Eternity. His sickness grew upon him till he was nigh upon
death, when he called his son and commended his mother and
subjects to his care and caused all the Emirs and Grandees
once more swear allegiance to the Prince and assured himself
of them by strongest oaths; after which he lingered a few days
and departed to the mercy of Almighty Allah. His son and widow
and all the Emirs and Wazirs and Lords mourned over him, and
they built him a tomb and buried him therein. They ceased not
ceremonially to mourn for him a whole month, till Salih and
his mother and cousins arrived and condoled with their
grieving for the King and said, "O Julnar, though the King be
dead, yet hath he left this noble and peerless youth, and not
dead is whoso leaveth the like of him, the rending lion and
the shining moon."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Salih
brother of Julnar and her mother and cousins said to her,
"Albeit the King be dead, yet hath he left behind him as
successor this noble and peerless youth, the rending lion and
the shining moon." Thereupon the Grandees and notables of the
Empire went in to King Badr Basim and said to him, "O King,
there is no harm in mourning for the late sovran: but over-
mourning beseemeth none save women; wherefore occupy thou not
thy heart and our hearts with mourning for thy sire; inasmuch
as he hath left thee behind him, and whoso leaveth the like of
thee is not dead." Then they comforted him and diverted him
and lastly carried him to the bath. When he came out of the
Hammam, he donned a 