live in
thine absence? An I knew where thy soul abideth, I would never
cease whilst I live, to hold it in mine embrace and would keep
it as my right eye.' Whereupon said he to me, 'What time I was
born, the astrologers predicted that I should lose my soul at
the hands of the son of a king of mankind. So I took it and
set it in the crop of a sparrow, and shut up the bird in a
box. The box I set in a casket, and enclosing this in seven
other caskets and seven chests, laid the whole in a
alabastrine coffer,[FN#424] which I buried within the marge of
yon earth-circling sea; for that these parts are far from the
world of men and none of them can win hither. So now see I
have told thee what thou wouldst know, and do thou tell none
thereof, for it is a secret between me and thee.'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Daulat Khatun acquainted Sayf al-Muluk with the whereabouts of
the soul of the Jinni who had carried her off and repeated to
him his speech ending with, "And this is a secret between me
and thee!" "I rejoined," quoth she, "'To whom should I tell
it, seeing that none but thou cometh hither with whom I may
talk thereof?' adding, 'By Allah, thou hast indeed set thy
soul in the strongest of strongholds to which none may gain
access! How should a man win to it, unless the impossible be
fore-ordained and Allah decree like as the astrologers
predicted?' Thereupon the Jinni, 'Peradventure one may come,
having on his finger the seal-ring of Solomon son of David (on
the twain be peace!) and lay his hand with the ring on the
face of the water, saying, 'By the virtue of the names
engraven upon this ring, let the soul of such an one come
forth!' Whereupon the coffer will rise to the surface and he
will break it open and do the like with the chests and
caskets, till he come to the little box, when he will take out
the sparrow and strangle it, and I shall die.'" Then said Sayf
al-Muluk, "I am the King's son of whom he spake, and this is
the ring of Solomon David-son on my finger: so rise, let us go
down to the sea-shore and see if his words be leal or
leasing!" Thereupon the two walked down to the sea-shore and
the Princess stood on the beach, whilst the Prince waded into
the water to his waist and laying his hand with the ring on
the surface of the sea, said, "By the virtue of the names and
talismans engraven on this ring, and by the might of Sulayman
bid Dáúd (on whom be the Peace!), let the soul of Hatim the
Jinni, son of the Blue King, come forth!" Whereat the sea
boiled in billows and the coffer of alabaster rose to the
surface. Sayf al-Muluk took it and shattered it against the
rock and broke open the chests and caskets, till he came to
the little box and drew thereout the sparrow. Then the twain
returned to the castle and sat down on the throne; but hardly
had they done this, when lo and behold! there arose a
dust-cloud terrifying and some huge thing came flying and
crying, "Spare me, O King's son, and slay me not; but make me
thy freedman, and I will bring thee to thy desire!" Quoth
Daulat Khatun, "The Jinni cometh; slay the sparrow, lest this
accursed enter the palace and take it from thee and slaughter
me and slaughter thee after me." So the Prince wrung the
sparrow's neck and it died, whereupon the Jinni fell down at
the palace-door and became a heap of black ashes. Then said
Daulat Khatun, "We are delivered from the hand of yonder
accursed; what shall we do now?"; and Sayf al-Muluk replied,
"It behoveth us to ask aid of Allah Almighty who hath
afflicted us; belike He will direct us and help us to escape
from this our strait." So saying, he arose and pulling
up[FN#425] half a score of the doors of the palace, which were
of sandal-wood and lign-aloes with nails of gold and silver,
bound them together with ropes of silk and floss[FN#426]-silk
and fine linen and wrought of them a raft, which he and the
Princess aided each other to hale down to the sea-shore. They
launched it upon the water till it floated and, making it fast
to the beach, returned to the palace, whence they removed all
the chargers of gold and saucers of silver and jewels and
precious stones and metals and what else was light of load and
weighty of worth and freighted the raft therewith. Then they
embarked after fashioning two pieces of wood into the likeness
of paddles and casting off the rope-moorings, let the raft
drift out to sea with them, committing themselves to Allah the
Most High, who contenteth those that put their trust in Him
and disappointeth not them who rely upon Him. They ceased not
faring on thus four months until their victual was exhausted
and their sufferings waxed severe and their souls were
straitened; so they prayed Allah to vouchsafe them deliverance
from that danger. But all this time when they lay down to
sleep, Sayf al-Muluk set Daulat Khatun behind him and laid a
naked brand at his back, so that, when he turned in sleep the
sword was between them.[FN#427] At last it chanced one night,
when Sayf al-Muluk was asleep and Daulat Khatun awake, that
behold, the raft drifted landwards and entered a port wherein
were ships. The Princess saw the ships and heard a man, he
being the chief and head of the captains, talking with the
sailors; whereby she knew that this was the port of some city
and that they were come to an inhabited country. So she joyed
with exceeding joy and waking the Prince said to him, "Ask the
captain the name of the city and harbour." Thereupon Sayf
al-Muluk arose and said to the captain, "O my brother, how is
this harbour hight and what be the names of yonder city and
its King?" Replied the Captain, "O false face![FN#428] O
frosty beard! an thou knew not the name of this port and city,
how camest thou hither?" Quoth Sayf al-Muluk, "I am a stranger
and had taken passage in a merchant ship which was wrecked and
sank with all on board; but I saved myself on a plank and made
my way hither; wherefore I asked thee the name of the place,
and in asking is no offence." Then said the captain, "This is
the city of 'Amáriyah and this harbour is called Kamín
al-Bahrayn."[FN#429] When the Princess heard this she rejoiced
with exceeding joy and said, "Praised be Allah!" He asked,
"What is to do?"; and she answered, "O Sayf al-Muluk, rejoice
in succour near hand; for the King of this city is my uncle,
my father's brother."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Daulat Khatun said to Sayf al-Muluk, "Rejoice in safety near
hand; for the King of this city is my uncle, my father's
brother and his name is 'Ali al-Mulúk,"[FN#430] adding, "Say
thou then to the captain, 'Is the Sultan of the city, Ali
al-Muluk, well?'" He asked but the captain was wroth with him
and cried, "Thou sayest, 'I am a stranger and never in my life
came hither.' Who then told thee the name of the lord of the
city?" When Daulat Khatun heard this, she rejoiced and knew
him for Mu'ín al-Dín,[FN#431] one of her father's captains.
Now he had fared forth in search of her, after she was lost
and finding her not, he never ceased cruising till he came to
her uncle's city. Then she bade Sayf al-Muluk say to him, "O
Captain Mu'in al-Din, come and speak with thy mistress!" So he
called out to him as she bade, whereat he was wroth with
exceeding wrath and answered, "O dog, O thief, O spy, who art
thou and how knowest thou me?" Then he said to one of the
sailors, "Give me an ash[FN#432]-stave, that I may go to
yonder plaguing Arab and break his head." So he tookt he stick
and made for Sayf al-Muluk, but, when he came to the raft, he
saw a something, wondrous, beauteous, which confounded his
wits and considering it straitly he made sure that it was
Daulat Khatun sitting there, as she were a slice of the moon;
whereat he said to the Prince, "Who is that with thee?"
Replied he, "A damsel by name Daulat Khatun." When the captain
heard the Princess's name and knew that she was his mistress
and the daughter of his King, he fell down in a fainting-fit,
and when he came to himself, he left the raft and whatso was
thereon and riding up to the palace, craved an audience of the
King; whereupon the chamberlain went in to the presence and
said, "Captain Mu'in al-Din is come to bring thee good news;
so bid he be brought in." The King bade admit him; accordingly
he entered and kissing ground[FN#433] said to him, "O King,
thou owest me a gift for glad tidings; for thy brother's
daughter Daulat Khatun hath reached our city safe and sound,
and is now on a raft in the harbour, in company with a young
man like the moon on the night of its full." When the King
heard this, he rejoiced and conferred a costly robe of honour
on the captain. Then he straightway bade decorate the city in
honour of the safe return of his brother's daughter, and
sending for her and Sayf al-Muluk, saluted the twain and gave
them joy of their safety; after which he despatched a
messenger to his brother, to let him know that his daughter
was found and was with him. As soon as the news reached Taj
al-Muluk he gat him ready and assembling his troops set out
for his brother's capital, where he found his daughter and
they rejoiced with exceeding joy. He sojourned with his
brother a week, after which he took his daughter and Sayf
al-Muluk and returned to Sarandib, where the Princess
foregathered with her mother and they rejoiced at her safe
return; and held high festival and that day was a great day,
never was seen its like. As for Sayf al-Muluk, the King
entreated him with honour and said to him, "O Sayf al-Muluk,
thou hast done me and my daughter all this good for which I
cannot requite thee nor can any requite thee, save the Lord of
the three Worlds; but I wish thee to sit upon the throne in my
stead and rule the land of Hind, for I offer thee of my throne
and kingdom and treasures and servants, all this in free gift
to thee." Whereupon Sayf al-Muluk rose and kissing the ground
before the King, thanked him and answered, "O King of the Age,
I accept all thou givest me and return it to thee in freest
gift; for I, O King of the Age, covet not sovranty nor
sultanate nor desire aught but that Allah the Most High bring
me to my desire." Rejoined the King, "O Sayf al-Muluk these my
treasures are at thy disposal: take of them what thou wilt,
without consulting me, and Allah requite thee for me with all
weal!" Quoth the Prince, "Allah advance the King! There is no
delight for me in money or in dominion till I win my wish: but
now I have a mind to solace myself in the city and view its
thoroughfares and market-streets." So the King bade bring him
a mare of the thoroughbreds, saddled and bridled; and Sayf
al-Muluk mounted her and rode through the streets and markets
of the city. As he looked about him right and left, lo! his
eyes fell on a young man, who was carrying a tunic and crying
it for sale at fifteen dinars: so he considered him and saw
him to be like his brother Sa'id; and indeed it was his very
self, but he was wan of blee and changed for long strangerhood
and the travails of travel, so that he knew him not. However,
he said to his attendants, "Take yonder youth and carry him to
the palace where I lodge, and keep him with you till my return
from the ride when I will question him." But they understood
him to say, "Carry him to the prison," and said in themselves
"Haply this is some runaway Mameluke of his." So they took him
and bore him to the bridewell, where they laid him in irons
and left him seated in solitude, unremembered by any.
Presently Sayf al-Muluk returned to the palace, but he forgot
his brother Sa'id, and none made mention of him. So he abode
in prison, and when they brought out the prisoners, to cut
ashlar from the quarries they took Sa'id with them, and he
wrought with the rest. He abode a month's space, in this
squalor and sore sorrow, pondering his case and saying in
himself, "What is the cause of my imprisonment?"; while Sayf
al-Muluk's mind was diverted from him by rejoicing and other
things; but one day, as he sat, he bethought him of Sa'id and
said to his Mamelukes, "Where is the white slave I gave into
your charge on such a day?" Quoth they, "Didst thou not bid us
bear him to the bridewell?"; and quoth he, "Nay, I said not
so; I bade you carry him to my palace after the ride." Then he
sent his Chamberlains and Emirs for Sa'id and they fetched him
in fetters, and loosing him from his irons set him before the
Prince, who asked him, "O young man, what countryman art
thou?"; and he answered, "I am from Egypt and my name is
Sa'id, son of Faris the Wazir." Now hearing these words Sayf
al-Muluk sprang to his feet and throwing himself off the
throne and upon his friend, hung on his neck, weeping aloud
for very joy and saying, "O my brother, O Sa'id, praise be
Allah for King Asim." Then they embraced and shed tears
together and all who were present marvelled at them. After
this Sayf al-Muluk bade his people bear Sa'id to the
Hammam-bath: and they did so. When he came out, they clad him
in costly clothing and carried him back to Sayf al-Muluk who
seated him on the throne beside himself. When King Taj
al-Muluk heard of the reunion of Sayf al-Muluk and his brother
Sa'id, he joyed with you exceeding and came to them, and the
three sat devising of all that had befallen them in the past
from first to last. Then said Sa'id, "O my brother, O Sayf
al-Muluk, when the ship sank with all on board I saved myself
on a plank with a company of Mamelukes and it drifted with us
a whole month, when the wind cast us, by the ordinance of
Allah Almighty, upon an island. So we landed and entering
among the trees took to eating of the fruits, for we were
anhungred. Whilst we were busy eating, there fell on us
unawares, folk like Ifrits[FN#434] and springing on our
shoulders rode us[FN#435] and said to us, 'Go on with us; for
ye are become our asses.' So I said to him who had mounted me,
'What art thou and why mountest thou me?' At this he twisted
one of his legs about my neck, till I was all but dead, and
beat upon my back the while with the other leg, till I thought
he had broken my backbone. So I fell to the ground on my face,
having no strength left in me for famine and thirst. From my
fall he knew that I was hungry and taking me by the hand, led
me to a tree laden with fruit which was a pear-tree[FN#436]
and said to me, 'Eat thy fill of this tree.' So I ate till I
had enough and rose to walk against my will; but, ere I had
fared afar the creature turned and leaping on my shoulders
again drove me on, now walking, now running and now trotting,
and he the while mounted on me, laughing and saying, 'Never in
my life saw I a donkey like unto thee!' We abode thus for
years till, one day of the days, it chanced that we saw there
great plenty of vines, covered with ripe fruit; so we gathered
a quantity of grape-bunches and throwing them into a pit, trod
them with our feet, till the pit became a great water-pool.
Then we waited awhile and presently returning thither, found
that the sun had wroughten on the grape-juice and it was
become wine. So we used to drink it till we were drunken and
our faces flushed and we fell to singing and dancing and
running about in the merriment of drunkenness;[FN#437]
whereupon our masters said to us, 'What is it that reddeneth
your faces and maketh you dance and sing?' We replied, 'Ask us
not, what is your quest in questioning us hereof?' But they
insisted, saying, 'You must tell us so that we may know the
truth of the case,' till we told them how we had pressed
grapes and made wine. Quoth they, 'Give us to drink thereof';
but quoth we, 'The grapes are spent.' So they brought us to a
Wady, whose length we knew not from its breadth nor its
beginning from its end wherein were vines each bunch of grapes
on them weighing twenty pounds[FN#438] by the scale and all
within easy reach, and they said, 'Gather of these.' So we
gathered a mighty great store of grapes and finding there a
big trench bigger than the great tank in the King's garden we
filled it full of fruit. This we trod with our feet and did
with the juice as before till it became strong wine, which it
did after a month; whereupon we said to them, ''Tis come to
perfection; but in what will ye drink it?' And they replied,
'We had asses like unto you; but we ate them and kept their
heads: so give us to drink in their skulls.' We went to their
caves which we found full of heads and bones of the Sons of
Adam, and we gave them to drink, when they became drunken and
lay down, nigh two hundred of them. Then we said to one
another, 'Is it not enough that they should ride us, but they
must eat us also? There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! But we will ply them
with wine, till they are overcome by drunkenness, when we will
slay them and be at rest from them.' Accordingly, we awoke
them and fell to filling the skulls and gave them to drink,
but they said, 'This is bitter.' We replied, 'Why say ye 'tis
bitter? Whoso saith thus, except he drink of it ten times, he
dieth the same day.' When they heard this, they feared death
and cried to us, 'Give us to drink the whole ten times.' So we
gave them to drink, and when they swallowed the rest of the
ten draughts they waxed drunken exceedingly and their strength
failed them and they availed not to mount us. Thereupon we
dragged them together by their hands and laying them one upon
another, collected great plenty of dry vine-stalks and
branches and heaped it about and upon them: then we set fire
to the pile and stood afar off, to see what became of
them."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

   When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sa'id
continued, "When we set fire to the pile wherein were the
Ghuls, I with the Mamelukes stood afar off to see what became
of them; and, as soon the fire was burnt out, we came back and
found them a heap of ashes, wherefore we praised Allah
Almighty who had delivered us from them. Then we went forth
about the island and sought the sea-shore, where we parted and
I and two of the Mamelukes fared on till we came to a thick
copse full of fruit and there busied ourselves with eating,
and behold, presently up came a man tall of stature, long of
beard and lengthy of ear, with eyes like cressets, driving
before him and feeding a great flock of sheep.[FN#439] When he
saw us he rejoiced and said to us, 'Well come, and fair
welcome to you! Draw near me that I may slaughter you an ewe
of these sheep and roast it and give you to eat.' Quoth we,
'Where is thine abode?' And quoth he, 'Hard by yonder
mountain; go on towards it till ye come to a cave and enter
therein, for you will see many guests like yourselves; and do
ye sit with them, whilst we make ready for you the
guest-meal.' We believed him so fared on, as he bade us, till
we came to the cavern, where we found many guests, Sons of
Adam like ourselves, but they were all blinded;[FN#440] and
when we entered, one said, 'I'm sick'; and another, 'I'm
weak.' So we cried to them, 'What is this you say and what is
the cauase of your sickness and weakness?' They asked, 'Who
are ye?'; and we answered, 'We are guests.' Then said they,
'What hath made you fall into the hands of yonder accursed?
But there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great! This is a Ghul who devoureth the Sons
of Adam and he hath blinded us and meaneth to eat us.' Said
we, 'And how did he blind you?' and they replied, 'Even as he
will blind yourselves anon.' Quoth we, 'And how so?' And quoth
they, 'He will bring you bowls of soured milk[FN#441] and will
say to you, 'Ye are weary with wayfare: take this milk and
drink it.' And when ye have drunken thereof, ye will become
blind like us.' Said I to myself, 'There is no escape for us
but by contrivance.' So I dug a hole in the ground and sat
over it. After an hour or so in came the accursed Ghul with
bowls of milk, whereof he gave to each of us, saying, 'Ye come
from the desert and are athirst: so take this milk and drink
it, whilst I roast you the flesh.' I took the cup and carried
it to my mouth but emptied it into the hole; then I cried out,
'Alas! my sight is gone and I am blind!' and clapping my hand
to my eyes, fell a-weeping and a-wailing, whilst the accursed
laughed and said, 'Fear not, thou art now become like mine
other guests.' But, as for my two comrades, they drank the
milk and became blind. Thereupon the Ghul arose and stopping
up the mouth of the cavern came to me and felt my ribs, but
found me lean and with no flesh on my bones: so he tried
another and finding him fat, rejoiced. Then he slaughtered
three sheep and skinned them and fetching iron spits, spitted
the flesh thereon and set them over the fire to roast. When
the meat was done, he placed it before my comrades who ate and
he with them; after which he brought a leather-bag full of
wine and drank thereof and lay down prone and snored. Said I
to myself, 'He's drowned in sleep: how shall I slay him?' Then
I bethought me of the spits and thrusting two of them into the
fire, waited till they were as red-hot coals: whereupon I
arose and girded myself and taking a spit in each hand went up
to the accursed Ghul and thrust them into his eyes, pressing
upon them with all my might. He sprang to his feet for sweet
life and would have laid hold of me; but he was blind. So I
fled from him into the inner cavern, whilst he ran after me;
but I found no place of refuge from him nor whence I might
escape into the open country, for the cave was stopped up with
stones; wherefore I was bewildered and said to the blind men,
'How shall I do with this accursed?' Replied one of them, 'O
Sa'id, with a run and a spring mount up to yonder
niche[FN#442] and thou wilt find there a sharpened scymitar of
copper: bring it to me and I will tell thee what to do.' So I
clombed to the niche and taking the blade, returned to the
blind man, who said to me, 'Smite him with the sword in his
middle, and he will die forthright.' So I rushed after the
Ghul, who was weary with running after me and felt for the
blind men that he might kill them and, coming up to him smote
him with the sword a single stroke across his waist and he
fell in twain. then he screamed and cried out to me, 'O man,
an thou desire to slay me, strike me a second stroke.'
Accordingly, I was about to smite him another cut; but he who
had directed me to the niche and the scymitar said, 'Smite him
not a second time, for then he will not die, but will live and
destroy us.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sa'id
continued, "Now when I struck the Ghul with the sword he cried
out to me, 'O man, an thou desire to slay me, strike me a
second stroke!" I was about so to do when he who had directed
me to the scymitar said, 'Smite him not a second time, for
then he will not die but will live and destroy us!' So I held
my hand as he bade me, and the Ghul died. Then said the blind
man to me, 'Open the mouth of the cave and let us fare forth;
so haply Allah may help us and bring us to rest from this
place.' And I said, 'No harm can come to us now; let us rather
abide here and repose and eat of these sheep and drink of this
wine, for long is the land.' Accordingly we tarried there two
months, eating of the sheep and of the fruits of the island
and drinking the generous grape-juice till it so chanced one
day, as we sat upon the beach, we caught sight of a ship
looming large in the distance; so we made signs for the crew
and holla'd to them. They feared to draw near, knowing that
the island was inhabited by a Ghul[FN#443] who ate Adamites,
and would have sheered off; but we ran down to the marge of
the sea and made signs to them, with our turband-ends and
shouted to them, whereupon one of the sailors, who was sharp
of sight, said to the rest, "Harkye, comrades, I see these men
formed lke ourselves, for they have not the fashion of Ghuls.'
So they made for us, little by little, till they drew near us
in the dinghy[FN#444] and were certified that we were indeed
human beings, when they saluted us and we returned their salam
and gave them the glad tidings of the slaying of the accursed,
wherefore they thanked us. Then we carried to the ship all
that was in the cave of stuffs and sheep and treasure,
together with a viaticum of the island-fruits, such as should
serve us days and months, and embarking, sailed on with a fair
breeze three days; at the end of which the wind veered round
against us and the air became exceeding dark; nor had an hour
passed before the wind drave the craft on to a rock, where it
broke up and its planks were torn asunder.[FN#445] However,
the Great God decreed that I should lay hold of one of the
planks, which I bestrode, and it bore me along two days, for
the wind had fallen fair again, and I paddled with my feet
awhile, till Allah the Most High brought me safe ashore and I
landed and came to this city, where I found myself a stranger,
solitary, friendless, not knowing what to do; for hunger was
sore upon me and I was in great tribulation. Thereupon I, O my
brother, hid myself and pulling off this my tunic, carried it
to the market, saying in my mind, 'I will sell it and live on
its price, till Allah accomplish to me whatso he will
accomplish.' Then I took the tunic in my hand and cried it for
sale, and the folk were looking at it and bidding for it,
when, O my brother, thou camest by and seeing me commandedst
me to the palace; but thy pages arrested and thrust me into
the prison and there I abode till thou bethoughtest thee of me
and badst bring me before thee. So now I have told thee what
befel me, and Alhamdolillah--Glorified be God--for reunion!"
Much marvelled the two Kings at Sa'id's tale and Taj al-Muluk
having made ready a goodly dwelling for Sayf al-Muluk and his
Wazir, Daulat Khatun used to visit the Prince there and thank
him for his favours and talk with him. One day, he met her and
said to her, "O my lady, where is the promise thou madest me,
in the palace of Japhet son of Noah, saying, 'Were I with my
people, I would make shift to bring thee to thy desire?'" And
Sa'id said to her, "O Princess, I crave thine aid to enable
him to win his will." Answered she, "Yea, verily; I will do my
endeavour for him, that he may attain his aim, if it please
Allah Almighty." And she turned to Sayf al-Muluk and said to
him, "Be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear."
Then she rose and going in to her mother, said to her, "Come
with me forthright and let us purify ourselves and make
fumigations[FN#446] that Badi'a al-Jamal and her mother may
come and see me and rejoice in me." Answered the Queen, "With
love and goodly gree;" and rising, betook herself to the
garden and burnt off these perfumes which she always had by
her; nor was it long before Badi'a al-Jamal and her mother
made their appearance. The Queen of Hind foregathered with the
other Queen and acquainted her with her daughter's safe
return, whereat she rejoiced; and rejoiced in each other. Then
they pitched the pavilions[FN#447] and dressed dainty viands
and made ready the place of entertainment; whilst the two
Princesses withdrew to a tent apart and ate together and drank
and made merry; after which they sat down to converse, and
Badi'a al-Jamal said, "What hath befallen thee in thy
strangerhood?" Replied Daulat Khatun, "O my sister how sad is
severance and how gladsome is reunion; ask me not what hath
befallen me! Oh, what hardships mortals suffer!" cried she,
"How so?" and the other said to her, "O my sister, I was
inmured in the High-builded Castle of Japhet son of Noah,
whither the son of the Blue King carried me off, till Sayf
al-Muluk slew the Jinni and brought me back to my sire;" and
she told her to boot all that the Prince had undergone of
hardships and horrors before he came to the Castle.[FN#448]
Badi'a al-Jamal marvelled at her tale and said, "By Allah, O
my sister, this is the most wondrous of wonders! This Sayf
al-Muluk is indeed a man! But why did he leave his father and
mother and betake himself to travel and expose himself to
these perils?" Quoth Daulat Khatun, "I have a mind to tell
thee the first part of his history; but shame of thee
hindereth me therefrom." Quoth Badi'a al-Jamal, "Why shouldst
thou have shame of me, seeing that thou art my sister and my
bosom-friend and there is muchel a matter between thee and me
and I know thou willest me naught but well? Tell me then what
thou hast to say and be not abashed at me and hide nothing
from me and have no fear of consequences." Answered Daulat
Khatun, "By Allah, all the calamities that have betided this
unfortunate have been on thine account and because of thee!"
Asked Badi'a al-Jamal, "How so, O my sister?"; and the other
answered, "Know that he saw thy portrait wrought on a tunic
which thy father sent to Solomon son of David (on the twain be
peace!) and he opened it not neither looked at it, but
despatched it, with other presents and rarities to Asim bin
Safwan, King of Egypt, who gave it, still unopened, to his son
Sayf al-Muluk. The Prince unfolded the tunic, thinking to put
it on, and seeing thy portrait, became enamoured of it;
wherefore he came forth in quest of thee, and left his folk
and reign and suffered all these terrors and hardships on
thine account."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

   When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Daulat
Khatun related to Badi'a al-Jamal the first part of Sayf
al-Muluk's history; how his love for her was caused by the
tunic whereon her presentment was wrought; how he went forth,
passion-distraught, in quest of her; how he forsook his people
and his kingdom for her sake and how he had suffered all these
terrors and hardships on her account. When Badi'a al-Jamal
hear this, she blushed rosy red and was confounded at Daulat
Khatun and said, "Verily this may never, never be; for man
accordeth not with the Jann." Then Daulat Khatun went on to
praise Sayf al-Muluk and extol his comeliness and courage and
cavalarice, and ceased not repeating her memories of his
prowess and his excellent qualities till she ended with
saying, "For the sake of Almighty Allah and of me, O sister
mine, come and speak with him, though but one word!" But
Badi'a al-Jamal cried, "By Allah, O sister mine, this that
thou sayest I will not hear, neither will I assent to thee
therein;" and it was as if she heard naught of what the other
said and as if no love of Sayf al-Muluk and his beauty and
bearing and bravery had gotten hold upon her heart. Then
Daulat Khatun humbled herself and said, "O Badi'a al-Jamal, by
the milk we have sucked, I and thou, and by that which is
graven on the seal-ring of Solomon (on whom be peace!) hearken
to these my words for I pledged myself in the High-builded
Castle of Japhet, to show him thy face. So Allah upon thee,
show it to him once, for the love of me, and look thyself on
him!" And she ceased not to weep and implore her and kiss her
hands and feet, till she consented and said, "For thy sake I
will show him my face once and he shall have a single glance."
With that Daulat Khatun's heart was gladdened and she kissed
her hands and feet. Then she went forth and fared to the great
pavilion in the garden and bade her slave-women spread it with
carpets and set up a couch of gold and place the wine-vessels
in order; after which she went into Sayf al-Muluk and to his
Wazir Sa'id, whom she found seated in their lodging, and gave
the Prince the glad tidings of the winning of his wish,
saying, "Go to the pavilion in the garden, thou and thy
brother, and hide yourselves there from the eyes of men so
none in the palace may espy you, till I come to you with
Badi'a al-Jamal." So they rose and repaired to the appointed
pavilion, where they found the couch of gold set and furnished
with cushions, and meat and wine ready served. So they sat
awhile, whilst Sayf al-Muluk bethought him of his beloved and
his breast was straitened and love and longing assailed him:
wherefore he rose and walked forth from the vestibule of the
pavilion. Sa'id would have followed him, but he said to him,
"O my brother, follow me not, but sit in thy stead till I
return to thee." So Sa'id abode seated, whilst Sayf al-Muluk
went down into the garden, drunken with the wine of desire and
distracted for excess of love-longing and passion-fire:
yearning agitated him and transport overcame him and he
recited these couplets,

"O passing Fair[FN#449] I have none else but thee; * Pity this
     slave in thy love's slavery!
Thou art my search, my joy and my desire! * None save thyself
     shall love this heart of me:
Would Heaven I knew thou knewest of my wails * Night-long and
     eyelids oped by memory.
Bid sleep to soourn on these eyen-lids * Haply in vision I thy
     sight shall see.
Show favour then to one thus love-distraught: * Save him from
     ruin by thy cruelty!
Allah increase thy beauty and thy weal; * And be thy ransom
     every enemy!
So shall on Doomsday lovers range beneath * Thy flag, and
     beauties 'neath thy banner be."

Then he wept and recited these also,

"That rarest beauty ever bides my foe * Who holds my heart and
     lurks in secresy:
Speaking, I speak of nothing save her charms * And when I'm
     dumb in heart-core woneth she."

Then he wept sore and recited the following,

"And in my liver higher flames the fire; * You are my wish and
     longsome still I yearn:
To you (none other!) bend I and I hope * (Lovers long-
     suffering are!) your grace to earn;
And that you pity me whose frame by Love * Is waste and weak
     his heart with sore concern:
Relent, be gen'rous, tender-hearted, kind: * From you I'll
     ne'er remove, from you ne'er turn!"

Then he wept and recited these also,

"Came to me care when came the love of thee, * Cruel sleep
     fled me like thy cruelty:
Tells me the messenger that thou are wroth: * Allah forfend
     what evils told me he!"

Presently Sa'id waxed weary of awaiting him and going forth in
quest of him, found him walking in the garden, distraught and
reciting these two couplets,

"By Allah, by th' Almighty, by his right[FN#450] * Who read
     the Koran-Chapter 'Fátír[FN#451] hight;
Ne'er roam my glances o'er the charms I see; * Thy grace, rare
     beauty, is my talk by night."

So he joined him and the twain walked about the garden
together solacing themselves and ate of its fruits. Such was
their case;[FN#452] but as regards the two Princesses, they
came to the pavilion and entering therein after the eunuchs
had richly furnished it, according to command, sat down on the
couch of gold, beside which was a window that gave upon the
garden. The castratos then set before them all manner rich
meats and they ate, Daulat Khatun feeding her foster-sister by
mouthfuls,[FN#453] till she was satisfied; when she called for
divers kinds of sweetmeats, and when the neutrals brought
them, they ate what they would of them and washed their hands.
After this Daulat Khatun made ready wine and its service,
setting on the ewers and bowls and she proceeded to crown the
cups and give Badi'a al-amal to drink, filling for herself
after and drinking in turn. The Badi'a al-Jamal looked from
the window into the garden and gazed upon the fruits and
branches that were therein, till her glance fell on Sayf
al-Muluk, and she saw him wandering about the parterres,
followed by Sa'id, and she heard him recite verses, raining
the while railing tears. And that glance of eyes cost her a
thousand signs,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
when Badi'a al-Jamal caught sight of Sayf al-Muluk as he
wandered about the garden, that glance of eyes cost her a
thousand sighs, and she turned to Daulat Khatun and said to
her (and indeed the wine sported with her senses), "O my
sister, who is that young man I see in the garden, distraught,
love-abying, disappointed, sighing?" Quoth the other, "Dost
thou give me leave to bring him hither, that we may look on
him?"; and quoth the other, "An thou can avail to bring him,
bring him." So Daulat Khatun called to him, saying "O King's
son, come up to us and bring us thy beauty and thy
loveliness!" Sayf al-Muluk recognised her voice and came up to
into the pavilion; but no sooner had he set eyes on Badi'a
al-Jamal, than he fell down in a swoon; whereupon Daulat
Khatun sprinkled on him a little rose-water and he revived.
Then he rose and kissed ground before Badi'a al-Jamal who was
amazed at his beauty and loveliness; and Daulat Khatun said to
her, "Know, O Princess, that this is Sayf al-Muluk, whose hand
saved me by the ordinance of Allah Almighty and he it is who
hath borne all manner burthens on thine account: wherefore I
would have thee look upon him with favour." Hearing this
Badi'a al-Jamal laughed and said, "And who keepeth faith, that
this youth should do so? For there is no true love in men."
Cried Sayf al-Muluk, "O Princess, never shall lack of faith be
in me, and all men are not created alike." And he wept before
her and recited these verses,

"O thou, Badi'a 'l-Jamál, show thou some clemency * To one
     those lovely eyes opprest with witchery!
By rights of beauteous hues and tints thy cheeks combine * Of
     snowy white and glowing red anemone,
Punish not with disdain one who is sorely sick * By long, long
     parting waste hath waxed this frame of me:
This is my wish, my will, the end of my desire, * And Union is
     my hope an haply this may be!"

Then he wept with violent weeping; and love and longing got
the mastery over him and he greeted her with these couplets,

"Peace be to you from lover's wasted love, * All noble hearts
     to noble favour show:
Peace be to you! Ne'er fail your form my dreams; * Nor hall
     nor chamber the fair sight forego!
Of you I'm jealous: none may name your name: * Lovers to
     lovers aye should bend thee low:
So cut not off your grace from him who loves * While sickness
     wastes and sorrows overthrow.
I watch the flowery stars which frighten me; * While cark and
     care mine every night foreslow.
Nor Patience bides with me nor plan appears: * What shall I
     say when questioned of my foe?
God's peace be with you in the hour of need, * Peace sent by
     lover patient bearing woe!"

Then for the excess of his desire and ecstasy he repeated
these coupletes also,

"If I to aught save you, O lords of me, incline; * Ne'er may I
     win of you my wish, my sole design!
Who doth comprise all loveliness save only you? * Who makes
     the Doomsday dawn e'en now before these eyne?
Far be it Love find any rest, for I am one * Who lost for love
     of you this heart, these vitals mine."

When he had made an end of his verses, he wept with sore
weeping and she said to him, "O Prince, I fear to grant myself
wholly to thee lest I find in thee nor fondness nor affection;
for oftentimes man's fidelity is small and his perfidy is
great and thou knowest how the lord Solomon, son of David (on
whom be the Peace!), took Bilkis to his love but, whenas he
saw another fairer than she, turned from her thereto." Sayf
al-Muluk replied, "O my eye and O my soul, Allah hath not made
all men alike, and I, Inshallah, will keep my troth and die
beneath thy feet. Soon shalt thou see what I will do in
accordance with my words, and for whatso I say Allah is my
warrant." Quoth Badi'a al-Jamal, "Sit and be of good heart and
swear to me by the right of thy Faith and let us covenant
together that each will not be false to other; and whichever
of us breaketh faith may Almighty Allah punish!" At these
words he sat down and set his hand in her hand and they sware
each to other that neither of them would ever prefer to the
other any one, either of man or of the Jann. Then they
embraced for a whole hour and wept for excess of their joy,
whilst passion overcame Sayf al-Muluk and he recited these
couplets,

"I weep for longing love's own ardency * To her who claims the
     heart and soul of me.
And sore's my sorrow parted long from you, * And short's my
     arm to reach the prize I see;
And mourning grief for what my patience marred * To blamer's
     eye unveiled my secresy;
And waxed strait that whilome was so wide * Patience nor force
     remains nor power to dree.
Would Heaven I knew if God will ever deign to join * Our
     lives, and from our cark and care and grief set free!"

After this mutual troth-plighting, Sayf al-Muluk arose and
walked in the garden and Badi'a al-Jamal arose also and went
forth also afoot followed by a slave-girl bearing somewhat of
food and a flask[FN#454] of wine. The Princess sat down and
the damsel set the meat and wine before her: nor remained they
long ere they were joined by Sayf al-Muluk, who was received
with greeting and the two embraced and sat them down.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
having provided food and wine, Badi'a al-Jamal met Sayf
al-Muluk with greetings, and the twain having embraced and
kissed sat them down awhile to eat and drink. Then said she to
him, "O King's son, thou must now go to the garden of Iram,
where dwelleth my grandmother, and seek her consent to our
marriage. My slave-girl Marjánah will convey thee thither and
as thou farest therein thou wilt see a great pavilion of red
satin, lined with green silk. Enter the pavilion heartening
thyself and thou wilt see inside it an ancient dame sitting on
a couch of red gold set with pearls and jewels. Salute her
with respect and courtesy: then look at the foot of the couch,
where thou wilt descry a pair of sandals[FN#455] of cloth
interwoven with bars of gold, embroidered with jewels. Take
them and kiss them and lay them on thy head[FN#456]; then put
them under thy right armpit and stand before the old woman, in
silence and with thy head bowed down. If she ask thee, 'Who
art thou and how camest thou hither and who led thee to this
land? And why hast thou taken up the sandals?' make her no
answer, but abide silent till Marjanah enter, when she will
speak with her and seek to win her aproof for thee and cause
her look on thee with consent; so haply Allah Almight may
incline her heart to thee and she may grant thee thy wish."
Then she called the handmaid Marjanah hight and said to her,
"As thou lovest me, do my errand this day and be not
neglectful therein! An thou acccomplish it, thou shalt be a
free woman for the sake of Allah Almighty, and I will deal
honourably by thee with gifts and there shall be none dearer
to me than thou, nor will I discover my secrets to any save
thee. So, by my love for thee, fulfil this my need and be not
slothful therein." Replied Marjanah, "O my lady and light of
mine eyes, tell me what is it thou requirest of me, that I may
accomplish it with both mine eyes." Badi'a rejoined, "Take
this mortal on thy shoulders and bear him to the bloom-garden
of Iram and the pavilion of my grandmother, my father's
mother, and be careful of his safety. When thou hast brought
him into her presence and seest him take the slippers and do
them homage, and hearest her ask him, saying, 'Whence art thou
and by what road art come and who led thee to this land, and
why hast thou taken up the sandals and what is thy need that I
give heed to it?' do thou come forward in haste and salute her
with the salam and say to her, 'O my lady, I am she who
brought him hither and he is the King's son of Egypt.[FN#457]
'Tis he who went to the High-builded Castle and slew the son
of the Blue King and delivered the Princess Daulat Khatun from
the Castle of Japhet son of Noah and brought her back safe to
her father: and I have brought him to thee, that he may give
thee the glad tidings of her safety: so deign thou be gracious
to him.' Then do thou say to her, 'Allah upon thee! is not
this young man handsome, O my lady?' She will reply, 'Yes';
and do thou rejoin, 'O my lady, indeed he is complete in
honour and manhood and valour and he is lord and King of Egypt
and compriseth all praiseworthy qualities.' An she ask thee,
'What is his need?' do thou make answer, 'My lady saluteth
thee and saith to thee, how long shall she sit at home, a maid
and unmarried? Indeed, the time is longsome upon her for she
is as a magazine wherein wheat is heaped up.[FN#458] What then
is thine intent in leaving her without a mate and why dost
thou not marry her in thy lifetide and that of her mother,
like other girls?' If she say, 'How shall we do to marry her?
An she have any one in mind, let her tell us of him, and we
will do her will as far as may be!" do thou make answer, 'O my
lady, thy daughter saith to thee, 'Ye were minded aforetime to
marry me to Solomon (on whom be peace!) and portrayed him my
portrait on a tunic. But he had no lot in me; so he sent the
tunic to the King of Egypt and he gave it to his son, who saw
my portrait figured thereon and fell in love with me;
wherefore he left his father and mother's realm and turning
away from the world and whatso is therein, went forth at a
venture, a wanderer, love-distraught, and hath borne the
utmost hardships and honours for my sake of me.' Now thou
seest his beauty and loveliness, and thy daughter's heart is
enamoured of him; so if ye have a mind to marry her, marry her
to this young man and forbid her not from him for he is young
and passing comely and King of Egypt, nor wilt thou find a
goodlier than he; and if ye will not give her to him, she will
slay herself and marry none neither man nor Jinn.'" "And,"
continued Badi'a al-Jamal, "Look thou, O Marjanah, ma
mie,[FN#459] how thou mayst do with my grandmother, to win her
consent, and beguile her with soft words, so haply she may do
my desire." Quoth the damsel, "O my lady, upon my head and
eyes will I serve thee and do what shall content thee." Then
she took Sayf al-Muluk on her shoulders and said to him, "O
King's son, shut thine eyes." He did so and she flew up with
him into the welkin; and after awhile she said to him, "O
King's son, open thine eyes." He opened them and found himself
in a garden, which was none other than the garden of Iram; and
she showed him the pavilion and said, "O Sayf al-Muluk, enter
therein!" Thereupon he pronounced the name of Allah Almighty
and entering cast a look upon the garden, when he saw the old
Queen sitting on the couch, attended by her waiting women. So
he drew near her with courtesy and reverence and taking the
sandals bussed them and did as Badi'a al-Jamal had enjoined
him. Quoth the ancient dame, "Who art thou and what is thy
country; whence comest thou and who brought thee hither and
what may be thy wish? Wherefore dost thou take the sandals and
kiss them and when didst thou ask of me a favour which I did
not grant?" With this in came Marjanah[FN#460] and saluting
her reverently and worshipfully, repeated to her what Badi'a
al-Jamal had told her; which when the old Queen heard, she
cried out at her and was wroth with her and said, "How shall
there be accord between man and Jinn?"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.






End of Vol. 7






                   Arabian Nights, Volume 7
                          Footnotes


[FN#1] Mayyafarikin, whose adjective for shortness is
"Fárikí": the place is often mentioned in The Nights as the
then capital of Diyár Bakr, thirty parasangs from Násibín, the
classical Nisibis, between the upper Euphrates and Tigris.

[FN#2] This proportion is singular to moderns but
characterised Arab and more especially Turcoman armies.

[FN#3] Such is the bathos caused by the Saja'-assonance: in
the music of the Arabic it contrasts strangely with the
baldness of translation. The same is the case with the Koran
beautiful in the original and miserably dull in European
languages, it is like the glorious style of the "Anglican
Version" by the side of its bastard brothers in Hindostani or
Marathi; one of these marvels of stupidity translating the
"Lamb of God" by "God's little goat.

[FN#4] This incident is taken from the Life of Mohammed who,
in the "Year of Missions" (A. H. 7) sent letters to foreign
potentates bidding them embrace Al-Islam, and, his seal being
in three lines, Mohammed|Apostle|of Allah, Khusrau Parwíz
(=the Charming) was offended because his name was placed below
Mohammed's. So he tore the letter in pieces adding, says
Firdausi, these words:--

          Hath the Arab's daring performed such feat,
          Fed on camel's milk and the lizard's meat, 
          That he cast on Kayánian crown his eye?
          Fie, O whirling world! on thy faith and fie!

Hearing of this insult Mohammed exclaimed, "Allah shall tear
his kingdom!" a prophecy which was of course fulfilled, or we
should not have heard of it. These lines are horribly
mutilated in the Dabistan (iii. 99).

[FN#5] This "Taklíd" must not be translated "girt on the
sword." The Arab carries his weapon by a baldrick or bandoleer
passed over his right shoulder. In modern days the " Majdal"
over the left shoulder supports on the right hip a line of
Tatárif or brass cylinders for cartridges: the other cross-
belt (Al-Masdar) bears on the left side the Kharízah or
bullet-pouch of hide; and the Hizám or waist-belt holds the
dagger and extra cartridges. (Pilgrimage iii. 90.) 

[FN#6] Arab. "Bab," which may mean door or gate. The plural
form (Abwáb) occurs in the next line, meaning that he
displayed all manner of martial prowess.

[FN#7] Arab. "Farrásh" (also used in Persian), a man of
general utility who pitches tents, speeps the floors.
administers floggings, etc. etc. (Pilgrimage iii. 90.) 

[FN#8] i.e. the slogan-cry of "Allaho Akbar," which M. C.
Barbier de Meynard compares with the Christian "Te Deum."

[FN#9] The Anglo-Indian term for the Moslem rite of killing
animals for food. (Pilgrimage i. 377.) 

[FN#10] Arab. "tawílan jiddan" a hideous Cairenism in these
days; but formerly used by Al-Mas'údí and other good writers.

[FN#11] Arab. " 'Ajwah," enucleated dates pressed together
into a solid mass so as to be sliced with a knife like cold
pudding. The allusion is to the dough-idols of the Hanífah
tribe, whose eating their gods made the saturnine Caliph Omar
laugh.

[FN#12] Mr. Payne writes "Julned." In a fancy name we must not
look for grammar, but a quiescent lám (l) followed by nún (n)
is unknown to Arabic while we find sundry cases of "lan"
(fath'd lám and nún), and Jalandah means noxious or injurious.
In Oman also there was a dynasty called Julándah. for which
see Mr. Badger (xiii. and passim).

[FN#13] Doubtless for Jawan-mard--un giovane, a brave See vol.
iv., p. 208.

[FN#14] Mr. Payne transposes the distichs, making the last
first. I have followed the Arabic order finding it in the Mac.
and Bul. Edits. (ii. 129).

[FN#15] Al-Irak like Al-Yaman may lose the article in verse.

[FN#16] Arab. "Ka'ka'at": hence Jabal Ka'ka'án, the higher
levels in Meccah, of old inhabited by the Jurhamites and so
called from their clashing and jangling arms; whilst the
Amalekites dwelt in the lower grounds called Jiyád from their
generous steeds. (Pilgrimage iii. 191.)

[FN#17] Al-Shara', a mountain in Arabia.

[FN#18] See vol. vi., 249. "This (mace) is a dangerous weapon
when struck on the shoulders or unguarded arm: I am convinced
that a blow with it on a head armoured with a salade (cassis
cælata, a light iron helmet) would stun a man" (says La
Brocquière). 

[FN#19] Oman, which the natives pronounce "Amán," is the
region best known by its capital Maskat. These are the Omana
Moscha and Omanum Emporium of Ptolemy and the Periplus. Ibn
Batutah writes Ammán, but the best dictionaries give "Oman."
(