ing
that he could not speak the language, or that His Royal Highness
could not speak his, approached His Majesty timidly.  The latter
stepped forward, slapped the actor heartily on the back and said:
"Booth, this is as fine a performance as I saw your father give
twenty years ago."

The question as to whether an actor should feel his part or control
his emotions, has been an argument which has interested the dramatic
profession for many years, since it was first promulgated by the
French writer Diderot, and afterwards ably discussed by Henry Irving
and Coquelin.  Of course, we all feel that no matter how violent
the actor's stress of emotion is, he must control his resources
with absolute restraint and poise.  Sometimes, however, an actor
feels he is under the sway of his part in an unusual degree and
comes to the conviction, through his excitement, that he has given
a greater performance than usual.  So Booth, one night at his own
theater, seeing his beloved daughter in a box, and desiring to
impress her with his work, played with, as he felt, a degree of
emotion that made him realize that he had given an unusually powerful
interpretation.  At the end of the play, his daughter ran back to
him and said:  "Why, dad, what is the matter with you?"  And Booth,
awaiting her approval, said:  "Matter?"  "Why you gave the worst
performance I ever witnessed," she said.  This control of one's
resources and the check upon one's feelings was indicated at another
time during a performance of Booth, of "Richelieu," as told to me
by the actor's friend, the late Laurence Hutton, the writer.  Mr.
Hutton and Mr. Booth were sitting in the latter's dressing room at
Booth's Theater.  Booth was, as usual, smoking his beloved pipe.
When he heard his cue, he arose, and walked with Hutton to the
prompter's entrance, where, giving his pipe to his friend, said:
"Larry, will you keep the pipe going until I come off?"  Booth
entered on the scene; then came the big moment in the play when the
nobles and the weak King had assembled to defy the power of the
Cardinal; and Richelieu launches (as Booth always did with thrilling
effect) the terrifying curse of Rome--a superb bit of oratorical
eloquence.  At the conclusion, the house shouted its wild and
demonstrative approval, and when the curtain dropped on this uproar
for the last time, Booth approached Hutton at the prompter's entrance
saying, in his usual quiet voice:  "Is the pipe still going, Larry?"

No actor we have ever known has inspired so much genuine affection--I
may say almost idolatry--as the simple Edwin Booth aroused in the
hearts of his friends and his fellow-workers.  In the beautiful
Players' Club House, which he bequeathed to the dramatic profession,
he presented also his own valuable theatrical library, numbering
several thousand memorable works on the stage; and no one event
greater than this gift to his fellow-players has ever occurred in
the dramatic profession.

[signed]Daniel Frohman





God of My Faith




A Play for Pacifists in One Act


"If the God of my faith be a liar
 Who is it that I shall trust?"


The People in the Play

Nelson Dartrey

Dermod Gilruth


The action passes in Dartrey's Chambers in the late Spring of
Nineteen Hundred and Fifteen.

(The lowering of the Curtain momentarily will denote the passing
of several days.)





God of My Faith




The curtain discloses a dark oak room

NELSON DARTREY is seated at a writing table studying maps.  He is
a man in the early thirties, prematurely worn and old.  His face
is burned a deep brick color and is sharpened by fatigue and loss
of blood.  His hair is sparse, dry and turning gray.  Around the
upper part of his head is a bandage covered largely by a black
skull-cap.  Of over average height the man is spare and muscular.
The eye is keen and penetrating:  his voice abrupt and authoritative.
An occasional flash of humor brings an old-time twinkle to the one
and heartiness to the other.  He is wearing the undress uniform of
a major in the British army.

The door bell rings.

With an impatient ejaculation he goes into the passage and opens
the outer door.  Standing outside cheerfully humming a tune is a
large, forceful, breezy young man of twenty-eight.  He is DERMOD
GILRUTH.  Splendid in physique, charming of manner, his slightly-marked
Dublin accent lends a piquancy to his conversation.  He has all
the ease and poise of a traveled, polished young man of breeding.
Dartrey's face brightens as he holds out a welcoming hand.

DARTREY

Hello, Gil.

GILRUTH

(Saluting him as he laughs genially) May I come into officers'
quarters?

DARTREY

I'm glad to have you.  I'm quite alone with yours on my hands.  (He
brings Gilruth into the room and wheels a comfortable leather arm
chair in front of him) Sit down.

GILRUTH

Indeed I will not.  Look at your desk there.  I'll not interrupt
your geography for more than a minute.

DARTREY

(Forces him into the chair)  I'm glad to get away from it.  Why,
you look positively boyish.

GILRUTH

And why not?  I am a boy. (Chuckles)

DARTREY

What are you so pleased with yourself about?

GILRUTH

The greatest thing in the world for youth and high-spirits.  I'm
going to be married next week.

DARTREY

(Incredulously)  You're not?

GILRUTH

I tell you I am.

DARTREY

Don't be silly.

GILRUTH

What's silly about it?

DARTREY

Oh, I don't know.

GILRUTH

Of course you don't know.  You've never tried it.

DARTREY

I should think not.

GILRUTH

Well, I'm going to and I want you to father me.  Stand up beside
me and see me through.  Will you?

DARTREY

If you want me to.

GILRUTH

Well, I do want you to.

DARTREY

All right.

GILRUTH

You don't mind now?

DARTREY

My dear chap.  It's charming of you to think of me.

GILRUTH

I've known you longer than any one over here.  And I like you
better.  So there you are.

DARTREY

(Laughing)  Poor old Dermod!  Well, well!

GILRUTH

There's nothing to laugh at, or "well, well" about.

DARTREY

Do I know the---?

GILRUTH

(Shakes his head)  She's never been over before.  Everything will
be new to her.  I tell you it's going to be wonderful.  I've planned
out the most delightful trip through Ireland--she's Irish, too.

DARTREY

Is she?

GILRUTH

But, like me, born in America.  She's crazy to see the old country.

DARTREY

She couldn't have a better guide.

GILRUTH

(Enthusiastically)  She's beautiful, she's brilliant:  she's
good--she's everything a man could wish.

DARTREY

That's the spirit.  Will you make your home over here?

GILRUTH

No.  We'll stay till the autumn.  Then I must go back to America.
But some day when all this fighting is over and people talk
of something besides killing each other I want to have a home in
Ireland.

DARTREY

I suppose most of you Irishmen in America want to do that?

GILRUTH

Indeed they do not.  Once they get out to America and do well they
stay there and become citizens.  My father did.  Do you think he'd
live in Ireland now?  Not he.  He talks all the time about Ireland
and the hated Sassenachs--that's what he calls you English--and
he urges the fellows at home in the old country to fight for their
rights.  But since he made his fortune and became an American
citizen the devil a foot has he ever put on Irish soil.  He's always
going, but he hasn't go there yet.  And as for living there?  Oh,
no, America is good enough for him, because his interests are
there.  I want to live in Ireland because my heart is there.  So
was my poor mother's.

(Springing up) Now I'm off.  You don't know how happy you make me
by promising to be my best man.

DARTREY

My dear fellow--

GILRUTH

And just wait until you see her.  Eyes you lose yourself in.  A
voice soft as velvet.  A brain so nimble that wit flows like music
from her tongue.  Poetry too.  She dances like thistledown and
sings like a thrush.  And with all that she's in love with me.

DARTREY

I'm delighted.

GILRUTH

I want her to meet you first.  A snug little dinner before the
wedding.  She's heard so much against the English I want her to
see the best specimen they've got.

(Dartrey laughs heartily)  I tell you if you pass muster with her
you have the passport to Kingdom come.  (Laughing as well as he
grips Dartrey's hand)  Good-by.

DARTREY

(As they walk to the door)  When will it be?

GILRUTH

Next Tuesday.  I'll ring you up and give you the full particulars.

DARTREY

In church?

GILRUTH

Church!  Cathedral!  His Eminence will officiate.

DARTREY

Topping.

GILRUTH

Well, you see, we Irish only marry once.  So we make an occasion
of it.

DARTREY

Splendid.  I'll look forward to it.

GILRUTH

(Looking at the bandage)  Is your head getting all right?

DARTREY

Oh, dear, yes.  It's quite healed up.  I'll have this thing off
in a day or two.  (Touching the bandage)  I expect to be back in
a few weeks.

GILRUTH

(Anxiously)  Again?

DARTREY

Yes.

GILRUTH

If ever a man had done his share, you have.

DARTREY

They need me.  They need us all.

GILRUTH

The third time.

DARTREY

There are many who have done the same.

GILRUTH

(Shudders)  How long will it last?

DARTREY

Until the Hun is beaten.

GILRUTH

Years, eh?

DARTREY

It looks like it.  We've hardly begun yet.  It will take a year to
really get the ball rolling.  Then things will happen.  Tell me.
How do they feel in America?  Frankly.

GILRUTH

All the people who matter are pro-Ally.

DARTREY

Are you sure?

GILRUTH

I'm positive.

DARTREY

Are you?  Come, now.

GILRUTH

Why, of course I am.

DARTREY

They may be pro-Ally, but they're not pro-English.

GILRUTH

That's true.  Many of them are not.  But if ever the test comes,
they will be.

DARTREY

(Shakes his head doubtfully)  I wonder.  It seems a pity not to
bury all the Bunker-Hill and Boston-tea-chest prejudices.

GILRUTH

You're right there.

DARTREY

Why your boys and girls are taught in their school-books to hate
us.

GILRUTH

In places they are.  Now that I know the English a little I have
been agitating to revisit them.  It all seems so damned cheap and
petty for a big country to belittle a great nation through the
mouth of children.

DARTREY

There's no hatred like family hatred.  After all we're cousins,
speaking the same tongue and with pretty much the same outlook.

GILRUTH

There's one race in America that holds back as strongly as it can
any better understanding between the two countries, and that's
my race--the Irish.  And well I know it.  I was brought up on it.
There are men to-day, men of position too, in our big cities who
have openly said they want to see England crushed in this war.

DARTREY

So I've heard.  It would be a sorry day for the rest of civilization,
and particularly America, if we were.

GILRUTH

You can't convince them of that.  They carry on the prejudices
and hatred of generations.  I have accused some of them of being
actively pro-German; of tinkering with German money to foster
revolution in Ireland.

DARTREY

Do you believe that?

GILRUTH

I do.  Thank God there are not many of them.  I have accused them
of taking German money and then urging the poor unfortunate poets and
dreamers to do the revolting while they are safely three thousand
miles away.  I don't know of many who are willing to cross the water
and do it themselves.  Talking and writing seditious articles is
safe.  Take my own father.  He says frankly that he doesn't want
Germany to win because he hates Germans.  Most Irishmen do.  Besides
they've done my father some very dirty tricks.  But all the same
he wants to see England lose.  All the doubtful ones I know, who
don't dare come out in the open, speak highly of the French and are
silent when English is mentioned.  I blame a great deal of that on
your Government.  You take no pains to let the rest of the world
know what England is doing.  You and I know that without the
British fleet America wouldn't rest as easy as she does to-day, and
without the little British army the Huns would have been in Paris
and Calais months ago.  We know that, and so do many others.  But
the great mass of people, particularly the Irish, cry all the time,
"What is England doing?"  Your government should see to it that
they know what she's doing.

DARTREY

It's not headquarters' way.

GILRUTH

I know it isn't.  And the more's the pity.  Another thing where
you went all wrong.  Why not have let Asquith clear up the Irish
muddle?  Why truckle to a handful of disloyal North of Ireland
traitors?  If the Government had court martialed the ring-leaders,
tried the rest for treason and put the Irish Government in Dublin,
why, man, three-quarters of the male population of the South of
Ireland would be in the trenches now.

DARTREY

Don't let us get into that.  I was one of the officers who mutinied.
I would rather resign my commission than shoot down loyal subjects.

GILRUTH

(Hotly)  Loyal?  Loyal!  When they refused to carry out their
Government's orders?  When they deny justice to a long suffering
people?  Loyal!  Don't prostitute the word.

DARTREY

(Angrily)  I don't want to---

GILRUTH

(Going on vehemently)  It's just that kind of pig-headed ignorance
that has kept the two countries from understanding each other.  Why
shouldn't Ireland govern herself.  South Africa does.  Australia
does.  And when you're in trouble they leap to your flag.  Yet
there is a country a few miles from you that sends the best of her
people to your professions and they invariably get to the top of
them.  Irishmen have commanded your armies and Ireland has given
you admirals for your fleet and at least one of us has been your
Lord Chief Justice.  Yet, by God, they can't be trusted to govern
themselves.  I tell you the English treatment of Ireland makes her
a laughing-stock of the world.

DARTREY

(Opens the door, then turns and looks straight at Gilruth)  My head
bothers me.  Will you kindly---

GILRUTH

(All contrition)  I'm so sorry.  I didn't mean to blaze out.  Do
forgive me like a good fellow.  It's an old sore of mine and
sometimes it makes me wince.  It did just now.  Don't be mad with
me.

(The sound of a boy's voice calling newspapers is heard faintly in
the distance; then the hoarse tones of a man shouting indistinctly;
then a chorus of men and boys comes nearer and nearer calling
of some calamity.  Dartrey hurries out through the outer door.
Gilruth stands ashamed.  He does not want to leave his friend in
bad blood.  He would like to put things right before going.  He
waits for Dartrey to come back.

In a few minutes Dartrey walks through the outer doorway and into
the room.  He is very white, very agitated and his face is set and
determined.  He is reading a special edition of an evening paper
with great "scare" head lines.

The sound of the voices crying the news in the street grows fainter
and fainter.

Dartrey stops in front of Gilruth and tries to speak; nothing
coherent comes from his lips.  He thrusts the paper into Gilruth's
hands and watches his face as he reads.

Gilruth reads it once slowly, then rapidly.  He stands immovable
staring at the news-sheet.  It slips from his fingers and he cowers
down, stooping at the shoulders, glaring at the floor.)

DARTRY

(Almost frenzied)  Now will your country come in?  Now will they
fight for civilization?  A hundred of her men, women and children
done to death.  Is that war?  Or is it murder?  Already men are
reading in New York and Washington of the sinking of that ship and
the murder of their people.  What are they going to do?  What are
YOU going to do?

GILRUTH

(Creeps unsteadily to the door; standing himself with a hand on the
lock; his back is to the room.  He speaks in a strange, far-off,
quavering voice)

She was on the LUSITANIA!  Mona.  She was on it.  Mona was on it.

(Creeps out through the street door and disappears)

(Dartrey looks after him)

(The curtain falls and rises again in a few moments.  Several days
have elapsed.  Dartrey, in full uniform, is busily packing his
regimental kit.  The bandage has been removed from his head.  The
telephone bell rings.  Dartrey answers it)

DARTREY

Yes.  Yes.  Who is it?  Oh!  Do.  Yes.  No.  Not at all.  Come up.
All right.

(Replaces the receiver and continues packing)

(In a few moments the door-bell rings.  Dartrey opens the outer
door and brings Gilruth into the room.  He is in deep mourning; is
very white and broken.  He seems grievously ill.  Dartrey looks at
him commiseratingly.  He is sensitive about speaking)

GILRUTH

(Faintly)  Put up with me for a bit?  Will you?

(Dartrey just puts his hand on the man's shoulder)

(Gilruth sinks wearily and lifelessly into a chair)

She is buried.

DARTREY

What?

GILRUTH

(Nods)  She is buried.  In Kensal Green.  Half an hour ago.

DARTREY

(In a whisper)  They found her?

GILRUTH

(Nods again)  Picked up by some fishermen.

DARTREY

Queenstown?

GILRUTH

A few miles outside.  I went there that night and stayed there
until--until she--they found her.

(Covers his face.  Dartrey puts his arm around him and presses his
shoulder)

I wandered round there for days.  Wasn't so bad while it was light.
People to talk to.  All of us on the same errand.  Searching.
Searching.  Hoping--some of them.  I didn't.  I knew from the first.
I KNEW.  It was horrible at night alone.  I had to try and sleep
sometimes.  They'd wake me when the bodies were brought in.  Hers
came toward dawn one morning.  Three little babies, all twined in
each others arms, lying next to her.  Three little babies.  Cruel
that.  Wasn't it?

(Waits as he thinks; then he goes on dully; evenly, with no emotion)

Fancy!  She'd been out in the water for days and nights.  All alone.
Tossed about.  Days and nights.  She! who'd never hurt a soul.
Couldn't.  She was always laughing and happy.  Drifting about.  All
alone.  Quite peaceful she looked.  Except--except--

(Covers his eyes and groans.  In a little while he looks up at
Dartrey and touches his left eye)

This.  Gone.  Gulls.

(Dartrey draws his breath in sharply and turns a little away)

In a few hours the cuts opened.  The salt-water had kept them
closed.

DARTREY

Cuts?

GILRUTH

(Nods)  Her head.  And her face.  Cuts.  Blood after all that time.

(He clenches and unclenches his hands nervously and furiously.  He
gets up slowly, walks over to the fireplace, shivers, then braces
himself trying to shake off the horror of his thoughts.  Then he
begins to speak brokenly and tremblingly endeavoring to moisten
his lips with a dry tongue)

Never saw anything to equal the kindness of those poor peasants.
They gave the clothes from their bodies; the blankets from their
beds.  And took nothing.  Not a thing.  "We're all in this," they
said.  "We're doing our best.  It's little enough."  That's what
they sayd.  Pretty find the Irish of Queenstown.  Eh?

(Dartrey nods.  He does not trust himself to speak)

A monument.  That's what the Irish peasants of Queenstown should
have.  A monument.  Never slept, some of them.  Wrapped the soaking
woman in their shawls--and the little children.  Took off their
wet things and gave them dry, warm ones.  Fed them with broths they
cooked themselves.  Spent their poor savings on brandy for them.
Stripped the clothes off their own backs for them to travel in when
they were well enough to go.  And wouldn't take a thing.  Great
people the Irish of Queenstown.  Nothing much the matter with them.
A monument.  That's what they should have.  And poetry.

(Thinks for a while, then goes on)

Laid out the bodies too; just as reverently as if they were their
own people.  They laid her out.  And prayed over her.  And watched
with me over her until she was put into the--.  Such a tiny shell
it was, too.  She had no father or mother or brother or sisters.
I was all she had.  That's why I buried her here.  Kensal Green.
She'll rest easy there.

(He walks about distractedly.  Suddenly he stops and with his hands
extended upwards as if in prayer, he cries)

Out of my depths I cry to Thee.  I call on you to curse them.
Curse the Prussian brutes made in Your likeness, but with hearts
as the lowest of beasts.  Curse them.  May their hopes wither.  May
everything they set their hearts on rot.  Send them pestilence,
disease and every foul torture they have visited on Your people.
Send the Angel of Death to rid the earth of them.  May their souls
burn in hell for all eternity.

(Quickly to Dartrey)

and if there is a god they will.  But is there a good God that such
things can be and yet no sign from Him?  Listen.  I didn't believe
in war.  I reasoned against it.  I shouted for Peace.  And thousands of
cravens like me.  I thought God was using this universal slaughter
for a purpose.  When His end was accomplished He would cry to
the warring peoples "Stop!"  It was His will, I thought, that out
of much evil might come permanent good.  That was my faith.  It
has gone.  How can there be a good God to look down on His people
tortured and maimed and butchered?  The women whose lives were devoted
to Him, defiled.  His temples looted, filled with the filth of the
soldiery, and then destroyed.  And yet no sign.  Oh, no.  My faith
is gone.  Now I want to murder and torture and massacre the foul
brutes....  I'm going out, Dartrey.  In any way.  Just a private.
I'll dig, carry my load, eat their rations.  Vermin:  mud:  ache
in the cold and scorch in the heat.  I will welcome it.  Anything
to stop the gnawing here, and the throbbing here.

(Beating at his head and heart)

Anything to find vent for my hatred.

(Moving restlessly about)

I'm going through Ireland first.  Every town and village.  It's
our work now.  It's Irishmen's work.  All the Catholics will be in
now.  No more "conscientious-objecting."  They can't.  It's a war
on women and little children.  All right.  No Irish-Catholic will
rest easy; eat, sleep and go his days round after this.  The call
has gone out.  America too.  She'll come in.  You watch.  She can't
stay out.  She's founded on Liberty.  She'll fight for it.  You
see.  It's clean against unclean.  Red blood against black filth.
Carrion.  Beasts.  Swine.

(Drops into a chair mumbling incoherently.  Takes a long breath;
looks at Dartrey)

I'm selling out everything back home.

DARTREY

Why?

GILRUTH

I'm not going back.  I'm bringing everything over here.  England,
France, Russia, Belgium, Serbia--they can have it.  All of it.
They've suffered.  Only now do I know how much.  Only now.

(Fiercely)  I want to tear them--tear them as they've torn me.  As
they mangled her.

(Grits his teeth and claws with his fingers)  Tear them--that's
what I want to do.  May I live to do it.  May the war never end
until every dirty Prussian is rotting in his grave.  Then a quick
end for me, too.  I've nothing now.  Nothing.

(Gets up again wearily and dejectedly; all the blazing passion
burnt out momentarily)

This was to have been my wedding-day; our wedding-day.  Now she's
lying there, done to death by Huns.  A few days ago all youth and
freshness and courage and love.  Lying disfigured in her little coffin.
I know what you meant now by wanting to go back for a third time.
I couldn't understand it the other day.  It seemed that every one
should hate war.  But you've seen them.  You know them.  And you
want to destroy them.  That's it.  Destroy....  The call is all
over the world by now.  Civilization will be in arms....  To hell
with your Pacifists.  It's another name for cowards.  They'd lose
those nearest them:  the honor of their women; the liberty of their
people--and never strike a blow.  To hell with them.  It's where
they should be.  I was one of them.  No more.  Wherever I meet them
I'll spit in their faces.  They disgrace the women they were born
of; the country they claim....  To hell with them.

DARTREY

(Tries to soothe him)  You must try and get some grip on yourself.

GILRUTH

(His fingers ceaselessly locking and unlocking)  I'll be all right.
It's a relief to talk to you.  (Sees the preparations for Dartrey's
departure)  Are you off?

DARTREY

Yes.  To-night.

GILRUTH

I envy you now.  I wish I were going.  But I will soon.  Ireland
first.  I must have my say there.  What will the "Sinn Feiners"
say to the LUSITANIA murder?  I want to meet some of them.  What
are our wrongs of generations to this horror?  All humanity is at
stake here.  I'll talk to them.  I must.  They'll have to do something
now or go down branded through the generations as Pro-German.  Can
a man have a worse epitaph?  No decent Irishman will bear that;
every loyal Irishman must loathe them....  I'll talk to them--soul
to soul....  Sorry, Dartrey.  You have your own sorrow....  Good
of you to put up with me.  Now I'll go....

(Goes to the door, stops, takes out wallet)

Just one thing.  If it won't bother you.

(Tapping some papers)

I've mentioned you here....  If I don't come through--see to a few
things for me.  Will you?  They're not much.  Will you?

DARTREY

Of course I will.

GILRUTH

(Simply)  Thank you.  You've always been decent to me....  Dartrey.
To-day!  You would have been my best man--and she's--

DARTREY

(Shaking him by the shoulders)  Come, my man.  Pull up.

GILRUTH

I will.  I'll be all right.  In a little while I'll be along out
there.  I hope I server under you.  (Grips his hand)  Good-by.

DARTREY

Keep in touch with me.

GILRUTH

All right.

(Passes out, opens and closes the outer door behind him and disappears
in the street.  Dartrey resumes his preparations)


The End of the Play

[signed]J. Hartley Manners





To France




For the third time in history it has fallen to the lot of France to
stem the Barbarian tide.  Once before upon the Marne, Aetius with
a Gallic Army stopped the Hun under Attila.  Three hundred years
later Charles Martel at Tours saved Europe from becoming Saracen,
just as in September, 1914, more than eleven centuries later,
General Joffre with the citizen soldiery of France upon that same
Marne saved Europe from the heel of the Prussianized Teuton, the
reign of brute force and the religion of the Moloch State.  These
were among the world's "check battles."  Yet the flood of barbarism
was only checked at the Marne, not broken; again the flood arose
and pressed on to be stopped once more at Verdun--the Gateway of
France--in the greatest of human conflicts yet seen.

America was a spectator, but not an indifferent one.  Once again
mere momentary material interest counseled abstention; precedent
was invoked to justify isolation and indifference.  The timid,
the ignorant, the disloyal, those to whom physical life was more
precious than the dictates of conscience, counseled "peace and
prosperity."  Many began to wonder if America had a soul and was
indeed worth saving as the policy of "Terrorism" on land followed
that of "Terrorism" on the high seas seemed to leave us indifferent.
Yet the same spirit, as of yore, dominated the nation.  The people
of America at last understood that it was not any particular rule
of law, but the existence of law itself, divine and human, that
was involved in the Fate of France.

The task confronting this nation is a stupendous one.  Let there
be no illusion.  The war may well be long and painful, beyond
expression, but the past few weeks have taught us that the nation
will bear the strain with that same courage and enduring perseverance
as in the past, following the example of the Fathers and inspired by
the traditions of the American Revolution, this people will stand
like a stone wall with our splendid Ally of old and of to-day--France--and
from Great Britain from whence came our institutions, to end forever
the Hohenzollern system of blood and iron so that a better future
may come to Europe and America, one in which peace may be builded upon
a guaranty of justice and law--a world order in which fundamental
moral postulates and human rights may never again be set at defiance at
the behest of mere material force, however scientifically organized.

To France has fallen the honor of checking, to Britain the burden
of containing by sea and land, to America now comes the duty of
finally overthrowing that common enemy of democratic institutions
and ordered liberty, the foe whose morality knows no truth, whose
philosophy admits no check upon the "will to power."

In France the traveler passing along the roads to the northeast
leading to Lorraine may see at every cross-road a great index
finger pointing to the single word VERDUN.  To many thousands,
nay, hundreds of thousands of men passing over these roads in the
five fateful months of critical battle, these six letters spelled
mutilation and death, yet the word was an inspiration to heroism
in every home of France, and from every corner of the land men
followed that great index finger pointing, as it did indeed, to
the modern Calvary.

To-day at every cross-road must we here in America set up a great
index hand with the words "TO FRANCE."  To France, land of suffering
humanity, in whose devastated fields again must be saved the same
principles for which Americans fought at Bunker Hill, at Saratoga,
at Yorktown, at Gettysburg and in the Wilderness; to France, where
the fate of the world is still pending; to France, which has again
checked the Huns of the modern world as it did those of the ancient;
to France, the manhood of this nation must now be directed, to
save the heritage of the American Revolution and the Civil War, to
preserve the dearest conquests of the Christian civilization; to
France will our men go by the thousands, hundreds of thousands, if
need be by the million, to prove that the soul of America is more
completely intent upon battling for the right than ever before,
intent that slavery in another but far subtler and more dangerous
form may not prevail upon the earth.

It was Washington who gave as the watchword of the day in those
soul-trying hours that preceded the birth of our nation the immortal
and prophetic phrase, "America and France--United Forever."

[signed]Frederick Coudert THE END.





Ce Que Disent Nos Morts




Il n'est pas besoin de rappeler le souvenir de ceux qui nous furent
chers et ne sont plus, a notre peuple qui passe, non sans raison,
pour celebrer avec ferveur le culte des morts.  N'est-ce pas
en France, au dix-neuvieme siecle, qu'est nee cette philosophie
qui met au rang des premiers devoirs de l'homme la reconnaissance
envers les generations qui nous ont precedes dans la tombe, en nous
laissant le fruit de leurs pensees et de leurs travaux?  Certes la
religion des ancetres est de tous les temps et de tous les climats;
elle est meme chez certains peuples orientaux la religion unique;
mais en quel pas les liens entre les morts et les vivants sont-ils
plus forts qu'en France, les deuils plus solennels a la fois et plus
intimes?  Chez nous, d'ordinaire, les defunts aimes et veneres ne
quittent pas tout entiers le foyer ou ils vecu; ils y respirent
dans le coeur de ceux qui demeurent; ils y sont imites, consultes,
ecoutes.

Je me rappelle trop confusement pour en faire usage ici une scene
tres belle d'une vieille chanson de geste, GIRART DE ROUSILLON,
je crois, ou l'on voit une fille de roi contempler, la nuit, apres
une bataille, la plaine ou gisent les guerriers innombrables tomber
pour sa querelle.  "Elle eut voulu, dit le poete, les embrasser
tous."  Et, du fond de mes tres lointains souvenirs, cette royale
fille m'apparait comme une image de notre France pleurant aujourd'hui
la fleur de sa race abondamment moissonnee.

Aussi n'est-ce pas pour exhorter mes concitoyens a commemorer en ce
jour nos morts selon un usage immemorial, que j'ecris ces lignes,
mais pour honorer avec notre peuple tout entier ceux qui lui ont
sacrifie leur vie at pour mediter la lecon qu'ils nous donnent du
fond de leur demeures profondes.

Et tout d'abord, a la memoire des notres, associons pieusement la
memoire des braves qui ont verse leur sang sous tous les etendards
de l'Alliance, depuis les canaux de l'Yser jusqu'aux rives de la
Vistule, depuis les montagnes du Frioul jusqu'aux defiles de la
Morava, et sur les vastes mers.

Puis, offrons les fleurs les plus nobles palmes aux innocentes
victimes d'une atroce cruaute, aux femmes, aux enfants martyrs, a
cette jeune infirmiere anglaise, coupable seulement de generosite
et dont l'assassinat a souleve d'indignation tout l'univers.

Et nos morts, nos morts bien aimes!  Que la patrie reconnaissante
ouvre assez grand son coeur pour les contenir tous, les plus humbles
comme les plus illustres, les heros tombes avec gloire a qui l'on
prepare des monuments de marbre et de bronze et qui vivront dans
l'histoire, et les simples qui rendirent leur dernier souffle en
pensant au champ paternel.

Que tous ceux dont le sang coula pour la patrie soient benis!
Ils n'ont pas fait en vain le sacrifice de leur vie.  Glorieusement
frappes en Artois, en Champagne, en Argonne, ils ont arrete l'envahisseur
qui n'a pu faire un pas de plus en avant sur la terre sacree qui
les recouvre.  Quelques-uns les pleurent, tous les admirent, plus
d'un les envie.  Ecoutons les.  Tendons l'oreille:  ils parlent.
Penchons-nous sur cette terre bouleversee par la mitraille ou
beaucoup d'entre eux dorment dans leurs vetements ensanglantes.
Agenouillons-nous dans le cimetiere, au bords des tombes fleuries
de ceux qui sont revenus dans le doux pays, et la, entendons le
souffle imperceptible et puissant qu'ils melent, la nuit, au murmure
du vent et au bruissement des feuilles qui tombent.  Efforcons-nous
de comprendre leur parole sainte.  Ils disent:

FRERES, vivez, combattez, achevez notre ouvrage.  Apportez la victoire
et la paix a nos ombres consolees.  Chassez l'etranger qui a deja
recule devant nous, et ramenez vos charrues dans les champs qui
nous avons imbibes de notre sang.

Ainsi parlent nos morts.  Et ils disent encore:

FRANCAIS, aimez-vous les uns les autres d'un amour fraternal et,
pour prevaloir contre l'ennemi, mettez en commun vos biens et vos
pensees.  Que parmi vous les plus grands et les plus forts soient
les serviteurs des faibles.  Ne marchandez pas plus vos richesses
que votre sang a la patrie.  Soyez tous egaux par la bonne volonte.
Vous le devez a vos morts.

VOUS nous devez d'assurer, a notre exemple, par le sacrifice de
vous-memes, le triomphe de la plus sainte des causes.  Freres, pour
payer votre dette envers nous, il vous faut vaincre, et il vous
faut faire plus encore:  il vois faut meriter de vaincre.

Nos morts nous ordonnent de vivre et de combattre en citoyens d'un
peuple libre, de marcher resolument dans l'ouragan de fer vers la
paix qui se levera comme une belle aurore sur l'Europe affranchie
des menaces de ses tyrans, et verra renaetre, faibles et timides
encore, la JUSTICE et L'HUMANITE etouffees par le crime de l'Allemagne.

Voila ce qu'inspirent nos morts a un Francais que le detachement
des vanites et le progres de l'age rapprochent d'eux.

[signed]Anatole France





What our Dead Say to Us




There is no need to recall to the minds of our people those who
were dear to us and have passed hence, for they are celebrating--and
with good cause--the anniversaries of their deaths.  Was it not in
France, in the 19th century, that there was born that philosophy
which placed in the rank of the foremost duties of mankind gratitude
towards those generations who have preceded us to the grave, and
have left us the fruits of their thoughts and of their labors?
Indeed, ancestral worship prevails in all climes and at all periods;
in fact, with certain Oriental nations it is the only religion.
But in what country is the link between the dead and the living
so strong as it is in France--the rites at the same time so solemn
and so intimate?  With us, as a rule, our dead, beloved and venerated,
never entirely depart from the homes in which they have dwelt, but
take up their abode in the hearts of the living who imitate them,
consult them, pay heed to them.

I recollect, too vaguely to make full use of it here, a beautiful
scene from the heroic song, "Girart de Roussillon," I think it
is, where one is shown a king's daughter, one night after a battle
gazing across the battlefield where lay the innumerable warriors
who had fallen in the fight.  "She felt a desire," said the poet,
"to embrace them all."  And from the depths of my far-away memories
this apparition of the daughter of a royal house arises before me
as an image of our France to-day, weeping for the flower of our
race so abundantly cut down.

My object in writing these lines is not to exhort my fellow-citizens
to commemorate to-day our noble dead, according to immemorial
custom, but to honor as a united people those who have sacrificed
their lives for their country and to meditate upon the lesson that
comes to us from their scattered burial places.

First, with the memory of our own, let us with all piety associate
the memory of those brave ones who have shed their blood under all
the Allies' standards, from the streams of the Yser to the banks
of the Vistule; from the mountains of Frioul to the defiles of
Morava, and on the vast seas.

Then, let us offer our choicest flowers of memory to the innocent
victims of an atrocious cruelty, to the women, the child martyrs,
to that young English nurse, guilty only of generosity, whose
assassination aroused the indignation of the entire universe.

And our dead, our beloved dead!  May a grateful country open wide
enough its great heart to contain them all, the humblest as well
as the most illustrious, the heroes fallen with glory to whom
have been erected monuments of bronze and marble, who will live in
history, and those simple ones who drew their last breath thinking
of the green fields of home.

Blessed be all those whose blood has been shed for their country!
Not in vain have they sacrificed their lives.  At the glorious
encounter at Artois, Champagne, and Argonne they repulsed the
invader who could not advance one step farther on the ground made
sacred by their fallen bodies.  Some weep for them, all admire them,
more than one envies them.  Let us listen to them.  They speak.
Let us make every effort to hear them.  Let us prostrate ourselves
on this ground, torn up by shot and shell, where many of them sleep
in their blood-dyed garments.  Let us kneel in the cemetery at the
foot of the flower-strewn graves of those who were brought back to
their country, and there listen to the whispers, scarcely audible
but powerful, which mingle through the night with the murmur of
the breeze and the rustle of the falling leaves.  Let us make every
effort to understand their inspired words.  They say:

BROTHERS, live, fight, accomplish our work.  Win victory and peace
for the sake of your dead.  Drive out the intruder who has already
retreated before us, and bring back your plows into the fields now
saturated with our blood.

Thus speak our dead.  And they say, further:

FRENCHMEN, love one another with brotherly love, and, in order
that you may prevail against the enemy, put into common use your
possessions and your ideas.  Let the greatest and strongest among
you serve the weak.  Be as willing to give your money as your blood
for your country.  Be willing that perfect equality shall exist
amongst you.  You owe this to your dead.  Because of our example,
you owe us the assurance that by your self-sacrifice ours will be
the triumph in this holiest of all causes.  Brothers, in order to
pay your debt to us you must conquer, and you must do still more:
you must deserve to conquer.

Our dead demand that we shall live and fight as citizens of a free
country; that we shall march resolutely through the hurricane of
steel toward Peace, which shall arise like a beautiful aurora over
Europe freed from the menace of her tyrants, and shall see reborn,
though weak and timid, Justice and Humanity, for the time being
crushed through the crime of Germany.

Thus are the French, detached from the vanities and progress of
the age, drawn nearer to our dead and inspired by them.

Anatole France Translation by E. M. Pope.





The Transports




Poetical version of Sully Prud'homme's "Les Berceaux"


The long tide lifts each might boat   Asleep and nodding on the dock,
Of the little cradles they take no note   Which the tender-hearted
mothers rock.

But time brings round the Day of Good-Byes   For it's women's fate
to weep and endure, While curious men attempt the skies   And follow
wherever horizons lure.

Yet the mighty boats on that morning tide   When they flee away
from the dwindling lands Will feel the clutch of mother hands   And
the soul of the far-off cradleside.

[signed]Robert Hughes





La Priere Du Poilu




(Written in the Trenches, before Verdun, December, 1915)


Et alors, le poilu, levant la tete derriere son parapet, se mit,
dans la nuit froide de decembre, a fixer une etoile qui brillait au
ciel d'un feu etrange.  Son cerveau commenca a remeur de lointaines
pensees; son coeur se fit plus leger, comme s'il voulait monter
vers l'astre; ses levres fremirent doucement pour laisser passer
une priere:

"O Etoile, murmura-t-il, je n'ai pas besoin de ta lueur, car je
connais ma route!  Elle a pu me paraitre sombre au debut, quand mes
yeux n'etaient point accoutumes a ses rudes contours; mais, depuis
un an, elle est pour moi eblouissante de clarte.  On a beau me
l'allonger chaque jour, on n'arrivera pas a me l'obscurcir.  On a
beau y multiplier les ronces et les pierres, apres lesquelles je
laisse de ma chair et de mon sang, on n'arrivera pas a m'y arreter.
Je sais que j'irai jusqu'au bout.  Je vois devant moi la victoire....
Mais, la-bas, derriere moi, il y a une foule qui parfois s'inquiete
dans les tenebres.  Au moment ou la vieille anne va tourner sur ses
gonds vermoulus, elle repasse en son esprit agite les evenements
qui la marquerent.  Elle songe aux peuplades barbares d'Orient que
le Germain a entraenees derriere son char:  Turcs et Bulgares, Kurdes
et Malissores, et elle oublie les grandes nations qui s'enrolerent
sous la banniere de la civilisation.  Elle songe aux territoires
que foule la lorde botte tudesque, et elle oublie les empires que
nous detenons en gages:  ici, l'ouest et l'est Africains, grands
comme quatre fois toute l'Allemagne, avec leurs 5000 kilometres de
voies ferrees et leurs mines de diamants; la, ces eles d'Oceanie et
cette forteresse d'Asie:  Kiao-Tcheou, que le kaiser avait proclame
la perle de ses colonies.  Elle s'alarme de toutes les pailles que,
dans sa course desordonnee, ramasse l'Allemagne et ne voit pas les
poutres enormes qui soutiennent la France....  Nous autres, qui
sommes la poutre, nous savons mieux, nous voyons mieux.

"O Etoile, apprends a ceux qui ne sont pas dans la tranchee la
confiance!...

"Le passe est la qui enseigne l'avenir.  Chaque fois qu'une armee
quelconque, prise de la folie de l'espace, a voulu s'enfoncer dans
les terres lointaines et abandonner le berceau ou elle puisait sa
force et ses vivres, elle est morte de langueur et d'epuisement,
elle s'est effritee comme la pierre qu'on arrache de l'assemblage
solide des maisons, elle n'est pas plus revenue que ne reviennent
les grains de poussiere qu'emporte le vent....  Voici plus d'un
siecle que des legions ont tente la conquete de l'Egypte et ces
legions etaient les plus magnifiques du monde.  Elles avaient des
chefs qui s'appelaient Desaix, Kleber et Bonaparte; mais elles
n'avaient pas la maitrise de la mer et rien ne revint des sables
brulants du desert.  Voici un siecle aussi qu'une armee la plus
formidable d'Europe, conduite par le plus fameux conquerant qu'ait
connu l'univers, tenta de submerger l'immense empire russe; mais
l'empire etait trop grand pour la grande armee et rien ne revint
des solitudes glacees de la steppe....  Puisse, de meme, aller
loin, toujours plus loin, l'armee allemande deja decimee, haletante,
epuisee!  Puisse-t-elle pousser jusqu'au Tigre, jusqu'a l'Euphrate,
jusqu'a l'Inde!...

"O Etoile, apprends a ceux qui ne sont pas dans la tranchee,
l'Histoire!...

"Certes ces nuits d'hiver sont longues.  Et tous tes scintillements,
Etoile, ne valent pas le sourire de la femme aimee au logis.
Cependant, tu as quelque chose de la femme, puisque tant d'hommes
te suivent aveuglement:  tu en as la grace et l'eclat; et toi, au
moins, nul couturier boche ne t'habilla jamais!...  Tu possedes
meme des vertus que ne possede pas toujours la femme:  tu as la
patience et le calme.  Les nuages ont beau s'interposer entre tes
adorateurs et toi, l'aurore a beau chaque matin eteindre tes feux,
tu t'inclines devant la loi supreme de la nature et nulle revolte
ne vint jamais de toi....  Tache d'inspirer ta soumission a tes
soeurs terrestres qui, dans les villes, attendent le retour des
guerriers.

"O Etoile, apprends a celles qui ne sont pas dans les tranchees,
la Discipline!...

"Que tous, que toutes sachent qu'il y a quelque chose au-dessus
du Nombre, au-dessus de la Force, au-dessus meme du Courage:  et
c'est la Perseverance....  Il y eut, une fois, un match de lutte
qui restera a jamais celebre dans l'histoire du sport:  celui de
Sam Mac Vea contre Joe Jeannette.  Le premier, trapu, massif, tout
en muscles:  un colosse noir du plus beau noir.  Le second, plus
leger, plus harmonieux, tout en nerfs:  un metis jaune du plus beau
cuivre.  Le combat fut epique:  il se poursuivit pendant quarantedeux
rounds et dura trois heures.  Au troisieme round, puis au septieme,
Sam Mac Vea jetait Joe Jeannette a terre et sa victoire ne paraissait
plus faire de doute.  Cependant, Joe Jeannette peu a peu revint a
la vie, se cramponna, se defendit, vecut sur ses nerfs, puis attaqua
a son tour.  Au quarante-deuxieme round, epaule contre epaule,
haletants, ruisselants de sang, ils se portaient les derniers coups;
mais le ressort de Sam Mac Vea etait casse et, devant l'assurance
de son adversaire, il se sentit vaincu...  Alors on vit le grand
geant noir lever les bras et s'ecrouler en disant:  I GUESS I CAN
NOT....  (Je crois que je ne peux pas...)  Ainsi, bientot peut-etre,
verrons-nous s'ecrouler l'Allemagne, en avouant:  "Je ne peux
pas...."

"O Etoile, apprends a ceux qui ne sont pas dans la tranchee, la
Boxe!..."

[signed]Stephane Lauzanne





The Prayer of "Le Poilu"




Then "Le Poilu" standing, in the cold December night, behind
the breastworks, fixed his gaze upon a star that was shining with
a strange brilliance in the sky above.  His mind was stirred with
thoughts of far away things.  His heart grew lighter, as though it
yearned to reach the star; his lips trembled, and softly he breathed
a prayer.

"O Star," he murmured, "I need not thy glimmering light, for I
know my way.  The road may have appeared dark at first when my eyes
were unaccustomed to its sharp turns, but for a year it has been
divinely illumined for me.  Even if it grew longer each day, it will
never seem dark again.  Although torn by thorns and cut by stones,
nothing can make me turn back.  I know that I shall go on, steadfast
to the end.  I behold before me Victory....  But there,--behind
me, is a multitude sorely troubled in the darkness.

"Now, as the old year revolves on its rusty hinges, those who wait
at home live over in their troubled hearts the events which marked
its passing.  They think of the barbarous hordes of the Orient
which the German has caught in his train; Turks and Bulgarians,
Kurds and Malissores, and they overlook the great nations enrolled
under the banner of civilization.  They brood over lands ground
under the iron heel of the Teuton and overlook the Empires that we
hold; here, West and East Africa, four times as large as all Germany,
with their thousands of miles of railroads and their diamond mines;
there, the Islands of Oceania and the fortress of Asia:  Kiao-Tcheou,
which the Kaiser has proclaimed the pearl of his colonies.  They
are alarmed at the chaff that Germany gathers in her lawless course
and they do not see the mighty girders that stay France.  But we
who are the girders, we know better, we see farther.

"O Star, teach those who are not in the trenches....  Confidence!

"By the light of the past we behold the future.  Whenever an army,
seized with the frenzy of conquest, has forced its way into a far
land, abandoning the cradle whence it drew its life and strength,
it has wasted away, it has perished from utter exhaustion.  Like
stones loosened from a solid wall, it has disintegrated.  Like the
grain of dust which the wind has blow away, it has vanished never
to return.

"More than a century ago legions attempted the conquest of Egypt.
They were the most magnificent in the world.  Their chiefs bore
the names of Desaix, Kleber and Bonaparte.  But they had not the
mastery of the seas, and returned not from the burning sands of the
desert....  Think also of the time when the most formidable army
of Europe, led by the greatest conqueror the world has ever known,
tried to overwhelm the vast Russian Empire.  But the empire was
mightier than the Great Army, and it returned not from the glacial
solitude of the steppes....  So let it go far, ever farther on,
that German army already decimated, panting, exhausted; let it
reach the Tigris, the Euphrates, even far off India!  It will not
return.

"O Star, teach those who are not in the trenches....  History!

"Truly the winter nights are long, and all the rays, O Star, are
not worth the smile of the loved woman at the hearth.  And yet,
thou hast something of woman, since so many men follow thee blindly:
thou hast her grace and splendor.  [No German couturier will ever
clothe you!]  Thou hast even virtues that women do not possess,
for thou art patient and calm.  Clouds come between thy worshipers
and thee, dawn each morning extinguishes thy light, yet dost thou
bow before the supreme law of nature without a murmur.  I pray
thee inspire with submission thy sisters of the earth; teach them
calmly and patiently to await the return of their warriors.

"O Star, teach those who are not in the trenches....  Discipline!

"Would that all men, that all women might know that there is
something above Numbers, above Force, above even Courage, and that
is PERSEVERANCE!  A few years ago there was a boxing match between
Sam Mac Vea and Joe Jeannette that will remain famous in the history
of the sport.  Mac Vea was a heavy weight, strong, all muscle:  a
veritable black giant.  Joe Jeannette, light, well proportioned,
all nerve:  a mongrel of the best sort.  The match was epic.  It
went on for forty-two rounds and lasted three hours.  At the third
round, and again in the seventh, Sam Mac Vea threw Joe Jeannette,
and his victory seemed assured.  But little by little Joe Jeannette
revived, pulled himself together, defended himself, and through
sheer nerve, began to attack.  At the forty-second round, shoulder
to shoulder, panting, dripping wet and covered with blood they
struck the last blow.  The resources of Sam Mac Vea were exhausted,
and through the very assurance of his adversary he felt himself
beaten....  Suddenly the great giant lifted his arms and gave way,
saying:  'I guess I cannot.'...

"Thus shall we soon see Germany fall to the earth, saying brokenly,
'I cannot.'...

"O Star, teach those who are not in the trenches...to be game!"

Stephane Lauzanne

Translation by Madame Carlo Polifeme.




A Tribute to England




It may be said of this war, as the master mind of all the ages said
of adversity, that "its uses are sweet," even though they be as a
precious jewel shining in the head of an ugly and venomous toad.
While the world-war has brutalized men, it has as a moral paradox
added immeasurably to the sum of human nobility.  Its epic grandeur
is only beginning to reveal itself, and in it the human soul has
reached the high water marker of courage and honor.

The war has enriched our language with many new expressions, but
none more beautiful than that of "Somewhere in France."  To all noble
minds, while it sounds the abysmal depths of tragic suffering, it
rises to the sublimest heights of heroic self-sacrifice.

The world has paid its tribute to the immortal valor of France,
and no words could pay the debt of appreciation which civilization
owes to this heroic nation; but has there been due recognition of
the equal valor and the like spirit of self-sacrifice which has
characterized Great Britain in this titanic struggle?

When the frontier of Belgium was crossed, England staked the existence
of its great empire upon the issue of the uncertain struggle.  It
had, as figures go in this war, only a small army.  If it had been
niggard