e to-morrow's
bridegroom.  There were fourteen hours to live through before he
could even see Helen, for the time of the marriage had been fixed
for eleven o'clock.

Sherston was not looking forward to the actual ceremony--no man ever
does; and though it was to be a war wedding, a great many people,
as he was ruefully aware, had been bidden to the ceremony.  But
it was comfortable to know that none of the guests had been asked
to go back to the house from which he and his bride were to start
for Sussex at one o'clock, in the motor which was Mrs. Pomeroy's
marriage gift to her daughter.

Suddenly Sherston discovered the he was very hungry!  He had lunched
at Cadogan Square at a quarter to two, but he had felt too inwardly
excited in that queer atmosphere of tears and laughter, of trousseau
and wedding presents, to eat.

Even the least earthly of Romantics cannot forget for long the
claims of the flesh, and so, smiling a little wryly in the darkness,
he now told himself that the best thing he could do was to go out
and get some supper.  Acquainted with all the eating houses in the
region, he was glad indeed that after to-night he would never have
to enter one again.

Pulling down the green blind in front of him, Sherston walked
across the room and pulled down the blind of the other window, for
the London lighting orders had become much stricter of late.  Then
he turned on the electric light switch, took up his hat and stick,
and went out into the little lobby.

Before him was a narrow aperture which opened straight on to the
steep, short flight of steps connecting his chambers with the stone
staircase of the big old house.  This latter-like set of steps had
a door top and bottom, but the lower door, which gave on to the
landing, was generally left open.  Turning out the light in the
lobby, Sherston put his left hand on the banister and slid down in
the darkness, taking the dozen steps as it were in one stride.

As he reached the bottom he suddenly became aware that the door
before him, that giving on the landing, was shut, and that some
one, almost certainly a child--for there was not room on the mat
for a full-grown person--was crouching down just within the door.

Sherston felt sharply, perhaps unreasonably, irritated.  Known
in the neighborhood as open-handed and kindly, it had sometimes
happened, but generally only in wintry weather, that he had come
home to find some poor waif lying in wait for him.  Man, woman or
child who had wandered in, maybe, before the big door downstairs
was closed, or who, if still blessed with some outer semblance of
gentility, had managed cunningly to get past the Cerberus who lived
in the basement, and whose duty it was to open the front door,
after eight at night, to non-residents.

He felt in his pocket for a half-a-crown, and then, pretending
still to be unaware that there was any one there, he fumbled for
the spring lock.

The door burst open--he saw before him the shaft of glimmering
whiteness shed by the skylight, for since the Zeppelin raid of the
month before, the staircase was always left in darkness--and the
figure of his unknown guest rolled over, picked itself up, and
stood revealed, a woman, not a child, as he had at first thought.
And then a feeling of sick, shrinking fear came over Sherston, for
there fell on his ears the once horribly familiar accents--plaintive,
wheedling, falsely timorous--of his dead wife's voice....

"Is that you, Shirley?  I didn't know that you was at home.  The
windows were all dark, and--"  In an injured tone this:  "I've been
waiting here ever so long for you to come in!"

The wraith-like figure before him was only too clearly flesh and
blood, and, as he stepped forward, it moved quickly across, and
stood, barring his way, on the top stone step of the big staircase.

Sherston remained silent.  He could think of nothing to say.  But
his mind began to work with extraordinary rapidity and lucidity.

There was only one thing to do, here and now.  That was to give
the woman standing there a little money--not much--and tell her to
come back again the next day.  Having thus got rid of her--he knew
that on no account must she be allowed to stay here the night--he
must go at once to Mr. Pomeroy and tell him of this terrible, hitherto
unimaginable, calamity.  He told himself that it would be, if not
exactly easy, then certainly possible to arrange a divorce.

Determinedly, in these tense, terrible moments, he refused to let
himself face the coming anguish and dismay of the morrow.  It was
just a blow, straight between the eyes from fate--that fate who he
had foolishly thought had been kind.

"Well?  Are you going to let me stand here all night?"

"No, of course not.  Wait a minute--I'm thinking."  He spoke in a
quick, hoarse tone, a tone alas! which Kitty at one time in their
joint lives had come to associate with deep feeling on his part,
in those days when she used to come and tell the lonely man of her
sorrows, of her temptations, and of her vague, upward aspirations....

She lurched a little towards him.  Everything was going far better
than she could have hoped; why, Sherston did not seem angry, hardly
annoyed, at her unheralded return!

Suddenly he felt her thin, strong arms closing round his body, in
a horrible vice-like grip--

"Don't touch me!" he cried fiercely; and making a greater physical
effort than he would have thought himself capable of, he shook
himself violently free.

He saw her reel backwards and fall, with a queer grotesque movement,
head over heels down the stone steps.  The dull thud her body made
as she fell on the half landing echoed up and down the bare well
of the staircase.

Sherston's heart smote him.  He had not meant to do THAT.  Then
he reminded himself bitterly that drunkards always fall soft.  She
could not have hurt herself much, falling that little way.

He waited a few moments; then, as she made no effort to raise
herself, he walked down, slowly, unwillingly, towards her.  From
the little he could see in the dim light cast from above, Kitty
was lying very oddly, all in a heap, her head against the wall.

He knelt down by her side.

"Kitty," he said quietly.  "Try and get up.  I'm sorry if I hurt
you, but you took me by surprise.  I--I--"

But there came no word, no moan even, in answer.

He felt for her limp hand, and held it a moment, but it lay in his,
inertly.  Filled with a queer, growing fear, he struck a match,
bent down, and saw, for the first time that night, her face.  It
looked older, incredibly older, than when he had last seen it, five
years ago!  The hair near the temples had turned gray.  Her eyes
were wide open--and even as he looked earnestly into her face,
her jaw suddenly dropped.  He started back with an extraordinary
feeling of mingled fear and repugnance.

Striking match after match as he went, he rushed up again into his
chambers, and looked about for a hand mirror....  He failed to find
one, and at last he brought down his shaving glass.

With shaking hands he laid it close against that hideous, gaping
mouth, for five long dragging minutes.  The glass remained clear,
untarnished.

Putting a great constraint on himself, he forced himself to move
her head.  And the truth came to him!  In that strange short fall
Kitty had broken her neck.  For the second time he was free.  But
this time her death, instead of cutting a knot, bound him as with
cords of twisted steel to shame, and yes, to deadly peril.

Slowly he got up from his knees.  Unless he went and jumped over
the parapet of the Embankment into the river--a possibility which
he grimly envisaged for a few moments--he knew that the only thing
to do was to go off at once for the police, and make, as the saying
is, a clean breast of it.  After all he was innocent--innocent of
even a secret desire of encompassing Kitty's death.  But would it
be possible to make even the indifferent, when aware of all the
circumstances, believe that?  Yes, there was one such human being--and
as he thought of her his heart glowed with gratitude to God for
having made her known to him.  Helen would believe him, Helen would
understand everything--and nothing else really mattered.  It was
curious how the thought of Helen, which had been agony an hour ago,
now filled him with a kind of steadfast comfort.


As Sherston turned to go down the staircase, there came the distant
sound of the bursting of a motor tire, and the unhappy man started
violently.  His nerves were now in pieces, but he remembered, as
he went down the stone steps, to feel in one of his pockets, to be
sure he had what he so seldom used, a card-case on him.

On reaching the front door he was surprised to find it open, and
to see just within the hall, their white caps and pale faces dimly
illumined by the little light that glimmered in from outside, two
trained nurses with bags in their hands.  They were talking eagerly,
and took no notice of him as he passed.

For a moment Sherston wondered whether he ought to tell them of
the terrible accident which had just happened upstairs--but after
a momentary hesitation he decided that it would be better to go
straight off to the Police Station.  Already his excited brain saw
a nurse standing in the witness-box at a trial where he himself
stood in the dock on a charge of murder.  So, past the two whispering
women, he hurried out into the darkness.

Even in the grievous state of mental distress in which he now found
himself, Sherston noticed that the street lamps were turned so low
that there only shone out, under their green shades, pallid spots
of light.  And as he stumbled across the curb of the pavement, he
told himself, with irritation, that that was really rather absurd!
More accidents proceeded from the absence of light than were ever
likely to be caused by the Zeppelins.

Perforce walking warily, he hastened towards the Strand.  There
was less traffic than usual, fewer people, too, on the pavement,
but it was just after nine o'clock, the quietest time of the evening.

Suddenly a huge column of flame shot up some thirty yards in front
of him, and then (it seemed to all to happen in a moment) a line of
men, police, and special constables, spread across the thoroughfare
in which he now was, barring off the Strand.

Sherston quickened his footsteps.  For a moment his own disturbed
and fearsome thoughts were banished by the extraordinary and exciting
sight before him.  Higher and higher mounted the pillar of fire,
throwing a sinister glare on the buildings, high and low, new and
old, round about it.  "Good Heavens!" he exclaimed involuntarily.
"Is that the Lyceum on fire?"  A policeman near whom he was now
standing, turned round and said shortly, "Can't say, I'm sure,
sir."

He witnessed in the next few minutes a strange scene of confusion,
of hurrying and scurrying hither and thither.  Where there had
been almost pitch darkness, was now a glittering, brilliant bath
of light, in which the figures of men and women, moving swiftly to
and fro, appeared like animated silhouettes.  But even as he stared
before him at the extraordinary Hogarthian vision, the roadway and
the pavements of the Strand became strangely and suddenly deserted,
while he began to hear the hoot, hoot of the fire-engines galloping
to the scene of the disaster.  Before him the line of police and
of special constables remained unbroken, and barred his further
progress.

"I don't want to go past the theater," he whispered urgently.  "I
only want to get to Bow Street, as quickly as possible, on a very
important matter."  He slipped the half-crown he had meant to give
the waif he had taken Kitty to be, into a policeman's hand, and
though the man shook his head he let him through.

Sherston shot down the Strand, to his left.  Almost filling up the
steep, lane-like street which leads down to the Savoy Hotel, were
rows of ambulances, groups of nurses, and Red Cross men, and absorbed
though he was once more in his own sensations, and the thought of
the terrible ordeal that lay in front of him, Sherston yet found
himself admiring the quickness with which they had been rushed
hither.

On he went, and crossed the empty roadway.  How strange that so
little attention was being paid to the fire!  Instead of a hurrying
mob of men and women, the Strand was now extraordinarily empty,
both of people and of vehicles, and now and again he could hear
the sound of knocking, of urgent knocking, as if some one who has
been locked out, and is determined to be let in.

He strode quickly along, feeling his way somewhat, for apart from
the reflection of the red sky, it was pitch dark in the side streets,
and soon he stood before the Police Station.  The big old-fashioned
building was just within the outer circle of light cast by the huge
fire whose fierceness seemed to increase rather than diminish, and
Sherston suddenly espied an Inspector standing half in the open
door.  "I've some very urgent business," he said hurriedly.  "Could
you come inside for a moment, and take down a statement?"

"What's your business about?" said the man sharply, and in the
wavering light Sherston thought his face looked oddly distraught
and pale.

"There's a woman lying dead at No. 19 Peter the Great Terrace,"
began Sherston curtly--

The man bent forward.  "There's many women already lying dead about
here, sir, and likely to be more--babies and children too--before
we're through with this hellish business!" he said grimly.  "If
she's dead, poor thing, we can do nothing for her.  But if you
think there's any life left in her--well, you'll find plenty of
ambulances, as well as doctors and nurses, down Strand way.  But
if I was you, I'd wait a bit before going back.  They're still
about--" and even as he uttered the word "about" he started back
into the shelter of the building, pulling Sherston roughly in with
him as he did so, and there came a loud, dull report, curiously
analogous to that which a quarter of an hour ago--it seemed hours
rather than minutes--Sherston had taken for the bursting of a
motor tire.  But this time the sound was at once followed by that
of shattered glass, and of falling masonry.

"Good God!" he cried.  "What's that?"

"A goodish lot of damage this time, I should think," said the
Inspector thoughtfully.  "Though they're doing wonderfully little
considering how they--"

"THEY?"

"Zeppelins, of course, sir!  Why didn't you guess that?  They say
there're two over us if not three."  Then in a voice, so changed,
so charged with relief, that his own mother would not have known
it for the same, the man exclaimed, "Look up, sir--there they are!
And they're off--the hellish things!"  And Sherston throwing up
his head, did indeed see what looked to his astonished eyes like
two beautiful golden trout swimming across the sky just above him.

As he stood awestruck, fascinated at the astounding sight, he also
saw what looked like a falling star shoot down from one of the
Zeppelins, and again there fell on his ears that strange explosive
thud.

The man by his side uttered a stifled oath.  "There's another--let's
hope it's the last in this district!" he exclaimed.  "See!  They're
off down the river now!"

Even as he said the words the space in front of the Police Station
was suddenly filled with a surging mass of people, men, women,
even children, making their way Strandward, to see all that there
was to see, now that the immediate danger was past.

"If I were you, sir, I think I'd stay here quietly a bit, till
the crowd has thinned, and been driven back.  I take it you can't
do that poor woman of whom you spoke just now any good--I take it
she's dead, sir?" the Inspector spoke very feelingly.

"Yes, she certainly is dead," said Sherston dully.

"Well, I must be going now, but if you like to stay here a while,
I'm sure you're welcome, sir."

"No," said Sherston.  "I think I'll go out and see whether I can
do anything to help."

The two passed out into the roadway, and took their place among the
slowly moving people there, the Inspector make a way for himself
and his companion through the excited, talkative, good-humored
Cockney crowd.  "There it is!  Can't you see it?  Up there just
like a little yellow worm."  "There's naught at all!  You've got
the cobble-wobbles!" and then a ripple of laughter.

Sherston was borne along with the human stream, and with that stream
he suddenly found himself stopped at the westward end of Wellington
Street.  Over the heads of the people before him--they were, oddly
enough, mostly women--he could see the column of flame still burning
steadily upwards, and scarcely affected at all by the huge jets of
water now playing on it.

It seemed to start from the ground, a massive pillar of fire, and
all round it was an empty space--a zone no human being could approach
for fear of being at once roasted and shriveled up to death.  "The
bomb got down to the big gas main," observed a voice close to him.
"It'll be days before they get THAT fire under!"

He, Sherston, felt marvelously calm.  This strange, awful visitation
had made for him a breathing space in which to reconsider what he
had better do, and suddenly he decided that he would go and consult
Mr. Pomeroy.  But before doing that he must force himself to go
back and fetch certain documents which fortunately he had kept....

He made his way, with a great deal of difficulty--for it was as
if all London had by now flocked to this one afflicted area--by
a circuitous way to the Strand.  Tramping through a six-inch-deep
flood of broken glass he made his way by the Embankment and the
Waterloo Bridge steps to the upper level, that leading to, and
past, Peter the Great Terrace.

A vast host was now westward from over the river, and he felt the
electric currents of joyous excitement, retrospective fear, and,
above all, of eager, almost ferocious, curiosity, linking up rapidly
about him.  The rough and ready cordon of special constables seemed
powerless to dam the human tide, and caught in that tide's eddies,
Sherston struggled helplessly.

"Let me through," he shouted at last.  "I MUST get through!"

"You can't get through just here--there's a house been struck in
Peter the Great Terrace!  'Twas the last bomb did it!"

Sherston uttered a groan--Ah!  If only that were true!  But he had
just now glanced up and seen the row of big substantial eighteenth
century houses, of which his was the end one, solidly outlined
against the star-powdered sky, though every pane of glass had been
blown out.

Then some one turned round.  "It's the corner house been struck.
Bomb fell right through the skylight.  They've sent for the firemen
to see what damage was done.  You can't see anything from this
side."

THROUGH THE SKYLIGHT?

Sherston was a powerful man.  He forced his way, he did not know
how, blindly, to the very front of the crowd.

Yes, there were two firemen standing by the low, sunk-in door, that
door through which he had come and gone hundreds, nay thousands, of
times, in his life.  So much was true, but everything else was as
usual.  "I live here," he said hoarsely.  "Will you let me through?"

The fireman shook his head.  "No, sir.  I can't let any one through.
And if I did 'twould be no good.  The staircase is clean gone--a
great big stone staircase, too!  It's all in bits, just like a lot
of rubble.  The front of the house ain't touched, but the center
and behind--well, sir, you never did see such a sight!"

"Any one hurt?" asked Sherston in a strangled tone.  He felt a
most extraordinary physical sensation of lightness--of--of--was it
dissolution?--sweep over his mind and body.  He heard as in a far
away dream the answer to his question.

"There was no one in the house at all, from what we can make out.
The caretaker had a lucky escape, or he'd be buried alive by now,
but he and his missus had already gone out to see the sights."

A moment later the fireman was holding Sherston in his big brawny
arms, and shouting, "An ambulance this way--send a long a nurse
please--gentleman's fainted!"  The crowd parted eagerly, respectfully.
"Poor feller!" exclaimed one woman in half piteous, half furious
tones.  "Those damned Germans--they've gone and destroyed the poor
chap's little all.  I heard him explaining just now as what he
lived here!"

[signed]Maid Belloc Lowndes





A Canadian Soldier's Dominion Day at Shorncliffe




"Is there a holiday next Thursday?" inquired a Canadian officer of
an English confrere.

"A holiday?  Not that I know of.  Why should there be?"

"Why?  Because it's Dominion Day."

"Dominion Day?" blankly echoed the English Officer.

"Yes!  Did you never hear of it, you benighted Islander?"

"I really am afraid not," replied the English Officer, convicted
by the Canadian's tone of nothing less than crime.  "Just what is
it?"

"Perhaps you have never heard of Canada?"

"Well, RATHER, we hear something of Canada these days."

Then, as the light began to break in on his darkened soul, "Ah, I
see, that is your Canadian National Day, is it not?"

"It is.  And the question is, 'Are we going to have a holiday?'"

"Well, you see the King specially requested that there be no holiday
on his birthday."

"The King's birthday!  Oh, that's right--but this is different,
you see."

The Englishman looked mildly surprised.

"Oh, the King's all right," continued the Canadian, answering
the other's look, "we think a lot of him these days.  But--you
know--Dominion Day--"

"I hope you may get it, old chap, but I fancy we are in for the
usual grind."

The Canadian officer had little objection to the grind nor had
his men.  The Canadians eat up work.  But somehow it did not seem
right that the 1st of July slide past without celebration of any
kind.  He had memories of that day, of its early morning hours when
a kid he used to steal down stairs to let off a few firecrackers
from his precious bunch just to see how they would go.  Latterly he
had not cared for the fireworks part of it except for the Kiddies.
But somehow he was conscious of a new interest in Canada's birthday.
Perhaps because Canada was so far away and the Kiddies would be
wanting some one to set off their crackers.  It was good to be in
England, the beautiful old motherland, but it was not Canada and
it did not seem right that Canada's birthday should be allowed to
pass unmarked.  So too through the Commandant of the Shorncliffe
Camp, a right good Canadian he.

"I have arranged a Tattoo for the evening," he announced in
conversation with the Canadian Officer the day before the First.

"What about a holiday, Colonel?"  The Commandant shook his head.

"Well, then, a half-holiday?"

"No.  At least," remembering the officer's ancestry and that he
was a Canadian Highlander, "not officially, whateffer."

"Shall I get a rope for the Tug of War, do you think?"

"I think," replied the Commandant slowly with a wink in his left
eye, "you might get the rope."

This was sufficient encouragement for the 43rd to go on with and
so the rope was got and vaulting pole and standards with  other
appurtenances of a day of sports.  And the preparations went bravely
on.  So also went on the Syllabus which for Dominion Day showed,
Company Drill, Instruction Classes, Lectures, Physical for the
forenoon, Bayonet fighting and Route marching for the afternoon.

"All right, let her go," and so the fields and plains, the lanes and
roads are filled with Canadian soldiers celebrating their Dominion
Day, drilling, bayonet fighting, route marching, while overhead
soars thrumming the watchful airship, Britain's eye.  For Britain
has a business on hand.  Just yonder stretches the misty sea where
unsleeping lie Britain's men of war.  Beyond the sea bleeding
Belgium has bloodsoaked ground crying to Heaven long waiting but
soon at length to hear.  And France fiercely, proudly proving her
right to live an independent nation.  And Germany.  Germany! the
last word in intellectual power, in industrial achievement, in
scientific research, aye and in infamous brutality!  Germany, the
might modern Hun, the highly scienced barbarian of this twentieth
Century, more bloody than Attila, more ruthless than his savage
hordes.  Germany doomed to destruction because freedom is man's
inalienable birthright, man's undying passion.  Germany! fated to
execration by future generations for that she ahs crucified the
Son of God afresh and put Him to an open shame.  Germany! for the
balking of whose insolent and futile ambition, and for the crushing of
whose archaic military madness we Canadians are tramping on this
Dominion Day these English fields and these sweet English lanes 5,000
miles from our Western Canada which dear land we can not ever see
again if this monstrous threatening cloud be not removed forever
from our sky.  For this it is that 100,000 Canadian citizens have
left their homes with 500,000 eager more to follow if needed, other
sons of the Empire knit in one firm resolve that once more Freedom
shall be saved for the race as by their sires in other days.

But the Tattoo is on--the ground chosen is the little plateau within
the lines of the 43rd just below the Officer's tents, flanked on
one side by a sloping grassy hill on the other by a row of ancient
trees shading a little hidden brook that gurgles softly to itself
all day long.  On the sloping hill the soldiers of the various
battalions lie stretched at ease in khaki colored kilts and trews,
caps and bonnets, except the men of the 43rd who wear the dark
blue Glengarry.  In the center of the plateau a platform invites
attention and on each side facing it rows of chairs for officers
and their friends, among the latter some officers' wives, happy
creatures and happy officers to have them so near and not 5,000
miles away.

The Commandant has been called away on a sad business, a soldier's
funeral, hence the Junior Major of the 43rd as chairman of that
important and delicately organized Committee of the Bandmasters and
Pipe Majors of the various battalions is in charge of the program.
Major Grassie is equal to the occasion, quiet, ready resourceful.
With him associated is Major Watts, Adjutant of the 9th, as
Musical Director; in peaceful times organist and choir master of
a Presbyterian congregation in Edmonton far away.

Bang!  Bang!  Bang!
Bang!  Bang!  Bang!

The drums in the distance begin to throb and from the eastern side
of the plain march in the band of the 9th playing their regimental
march, "Garry Owen," none the less.  From the west the band of the
11th, then that of the 12th, finally (for the 43rd Band is away
on leave, worse luck) the splendid Band of the 49th, each playing
its own Regimental march which is taken up by the bands already
in position.  Next comes the massed buglers of all the regiments,
their thrilling soaring notes rising above the hills, and take their
stand beside the bands already in place.  Then a pause, when from
round the hill shoulder rise wild and weird sounds.  The music of
the evening, to Scottish hearts and ears, has begun.  It is the
fine pipe band of the 42nd Royal Highlanders from Montreal, khaki
clad, kilts and bonnets, and blowing proudly and defiantly their
"Wha saw the Forty-twa."  Again a pause and from the other side
of the hill gay with tartan and blue bonnets, their great blooming
drones gorgeous with flowing streamers and silver mountings, in
march the 43rd Camerons.  "Man, would Alex Macdonald be proud of
his pipes to-day," says a Winnipeg Highlander for these same pipes
are Alex's gift to the 43rd, and harkening to these great booming
drones I agree.

Ah these pipes!  These Highland pipes!  Truly as one of them said,
"Pipers are no just like other people!"  Blowing their "Pilrock
of Donald Dhu" they swing into line, mighty and magnificent.  Last
comes the brave little pipe band of the 49th.  This battalion has
one Scotch company from Edmonton, which insisted on bringing its
pipe band along.  Why not?  "The Blue Bonnets" is their tune and
finely they ring it out.  Now they are all in place, Bands, Bugle
and Pipes.  The massed Bands strike up our National Song, and all
the soldiers spring to their feet and sing "Oh, Canada."  A little
high but our hearts were in it.  And so the program goes on.  Single
bands and massed bands with solos from French Horns, Trombones and
Cornets, varied delightfully with the Highland Fling by Pipe Major
Johnson of the 42nd, and the Sword Dance by Piper Reid of the 43rd
followed by an encore, the "Shean Rheubs" which I defy any mere
Sassenach to pronounce or to dance, at least as Piper Heid of the
twinkling feet danced it that night.  For he did it "in the style
of Willie Maclennan," as a piper said, "the best of his day and
they have not matched him yet."  The massed pipe bands play "The
79th's Farewell at Gibraltar."  Forty-one pipers and every man
blowing his best.  "Aye man, it is grand hearing you," said a man
from the north.  Colonel Moore of the 9th, on a minute's warning,
makes a fine speech instinct with patriotic sentiment and calls for
three cheers for Canada.  He got three and a tiger and "a tiger's
pup."  Major Grassie in another speech neat and to the point thanks
those who had helped to celebrate our Dominion Day and once more
calls for cheers and gets them.  Then the "First Post" warns us that
we are soldiers and under orders.  The massed bands play "Nearer
My God to Thee."  Full and tender the long drawn notes of the
great hymn rise and fall on the evening air, the soldiers joining
reverently.  The Chaplain of the 43rd congratulates the Commandment
upon the happy suggestion of a Tattoo, the Chairman upon his very
successful program and all the Company upon a very happy celebration of
our national holiday--then a word about our Day and all it stands
for, a word about our Empire, our Country, our Kiddies at home,
another word of thanks to the Committee for the closing hymn so
eminently appropriate to their present circumstances and then God
bless our King, God bless our Empire, God bless our Great Cause
and God bless our dear Canada.  Good night.

The "Last Post" sounds.  Its piercing call falls sharp and startling
upon the silent night.  Long after we say "Good night" that last
long-drawn note high and clear with its poignant pathos lingers in
our hearts.  The Dominion Day celebration is over.

[signed]Ralph Connor





Simple as Day




It was among the retorts and test-tubes of his physical laboratory
that we were privileged to interview the Great Scientist.  His
back was towards us when we entered.  With characteristic modesty
he kept it so for some time after our entry.  Even when he turned
round and saw us his face did not react off us as we should have
expected.

He seemed to look at us, if such a thing were possible, without
seeing us, or, at least, without wishing to see us.

We handed him our card.

He took it, read it, dropped it into a bowlful of sulphuric acid,
and then, with a quiet gesture of satisfaction, turned again to
his work.

We sat for some time behind him.  "This then," we thought to
ourselves (we always think to ourselves when we are left alone)
"is the man, or rather is the back of the man, who has done more"
(here we consulted the notes given us by our editor) "to revolutionize
our conception of atomic dynamics than the back of any other man."

Presently the Great Scientist turned towards us with a sigh that
seemed to our ears to have a note of weariness in it.  Something,
we felt, must be making him tired.

"What can I do for you?" he said.

"Professor," we answered, "we have called upon you in response to
an overwhelming demand on the part of the public--"

The Great Scientist nodded.

"--to learn something of your new researches and discoveries in--"
(here we consulted a minute card which we carried in our pocket)
"--in radio-active-emanations which are already becoming--" (we
consulted our card again) "--a household word--"

The professor raised his hand as if to check us--

"I would rather say," he murmured, "helio-radio-active--"

"So would we," we admitted, "much rather--"

"After all," said the Great Scientist, "helium shares in the most
intimate degree the properties of radium.  So, too, for the matter
of that," he added in afterthought, "do thorium, and borium!"

"Even borium!" we exclaimed, delighted, and writing rapidly in our
note book.  Already we saw ourselves writing up as our headline,
"Borium Shares Properties of Thorium."

"Just what is it," said the Great Scientist, "that you want to
know?"

"Professor," we answered, "what our journal wants is a plain and
simple explanation, so clear that even our readers can understand
it, of the new scientific discoveries in radium.  We understand
that you possess more than any other man the gift of clear and
lucid thought--"

The Professor nodded.

"--and that you are able to express yourself with greater simplicity
than any two men now lecturing."

The Professor nodded again.

"Now, then," we said, spreading our notes on our knee, "go at it.
Tell us, and through us, tell a quarter of a million anxious readers
just what all these new discoveries are about."

"The whole thing," said the Professor, warming up to his work as
he perceived from the motions of our face and ears our intelligent
interest, "is simplicity itself.  I can give it to you in a word--"

"That's it," we said.  "Give it to us that way."

"It amounts, if one may boil it down to a phrase--"

"Boil it, boil it," we interrupted.

"--amounts, if one takes the mere gist of it--"

"Take it," we said, "take it."

"--amounts to the resolution of the ultimate atom."

"Ha!" we exclaimed.

"I must ask you first to clear your mind," the Professor continued,
"of all conception of ponder able magnitude."

We nodded.  We had already cleared our minds of this.

"In fact," added the Professor, with what we thought a quiet note
of warning in his voice, "I need hardly tell you that what we are
dealing with must be regarded as altogether ultra-microscopic."

We hastened to assure the professor that, in accordance with the
high standards of honor represented by our journal, we should of
course regard anything that he might say as ultra-microscopic and
treat it accordingly.

"You say, then," we continued, "that the essence of the problem is
the resolution of the atom.  Do you think you can give us any idea
of what the atom is?"

The professor looked at us searchingly.

We looked back at him, openly and frankly.  The moment was critical
for our interview.  Could he do it?  Were we the kind of person
that he could give it to?  Could we get it if he did?

"I think I can," he said.  "Let us begin with the assumption that
the atom is an infinitesimal magnitude.  Very good.  Let us grant,
then, that though it is imponderable and indivisible it must have
a spatial content?  You grant me this?"

"We do," we said, "we do more than this, we GIVE it to you."

"Very well.  If spatial, it must have dimension:  if dimension--form:
let us assume 'ex hypothesi' the form to be that of a spheroid and
see where it leads us."

The professor was now intensely interested.  He walked to and from
in his laboratory.  His features worked with excitement.  We worked
ours, too, as sympathetically as we could.

"There is no other possible method in inductive science," he added,
"than to embrace some hypothesis, the most attractive that one can
find, and remain with it--"

We nodded.  Even in our own humble life after our day's work we
had found this true.

"Now," said the Professor, planting himself squarely in front of
us, "assuming a spherical form, and a spatial content, assuming the
dynamic forces that are familiar to us and assuming--the thing is
bold, I admit--"

We looked as bold as we could.

"--assuming that the IONS, or NUCLEI of the atom--I know no better
word--"

"Neither do we," we said.

"--that the nuclei move under the energy of such forces what have
we got?"

"Ha!" we said.

"What have we got?  Why, the simplest matter conceivable.  The forces
inside our atom--itself, mind you, the function of a circle--mark
that--"

We did.

"--becomes merely a function of pi!"

The Great Scientist paused with a laugh of triumph.

"A function of pi!" we repeated with delight.

"Precisely.  Our conception of ultimate matter is reduced to that
of an oblate spheroid described by the revolution of an ellipse on
its own minor axis!"

"Good heavens!" we said, "merely that."

"Nothing else.  And in that case any further calculation becomes
a mere matter of the extraction of a root."

"How simple," we murmured.

"Is it not?" said the Professor.  "In fact, I am accustomed,
in talking to my class, to give them a very clear idea, by simply
taking as our root F,--F being any finite constant--"

He looked at us sharply.  We nodded.

"And raising F to the log of infinity;--I find they apprehend it
very readily."

"Do they?" we murmured.  Ourselves we felt as if the Log of Infinity
carried us to ground higher than what we commonly care to tread
on.

"Of course," said the Professor, "the Log of Infinity is an Unknown."

"Of course," we said, very gravely.  We felt ourselves here in the
presence of something that demanded our reverence.

"But still," continued the Professor, almost jauntily, "we can
handle the Unknown just as easily as anything else."

This puzzled us.  We kept silent.  We thought it wiser to move on
to more general ground.  In any case, our notes were now nearly
complete.

"These discoveries, then," we said, "are absolutely revolutionary."

"They are," said the Professor.

"You have now, as we understand, got the atom--how shall we put
it?--got it where you want it."

"Not exactly," said the Professor with a sad smile.

"What do you mean?" we asked.

"Unfortunately our analysis, perfect though it is, stops short.
We have no synthesis."

The Professor spoke as in deep sorrow.

"No synthesis," we moaned.  We felt it was a cruel blow.  But in
any case our notes were now elaborate enough.  We felt that our
readers could do without synthesis.  We rose to go.

"Synthetic dynamics," said the Professor, taking us by the coat,
"is only beginning--"

"In that case--" we murmured, disengaging his hand--

"But wait, wait," he pleaded, "wait for another fifty years--"

"We will," we said, very earnestly, "but meantime as our paper goes
to press this afternoon we must go now.  In fifty years we will
come back."

"Oh, I see, I see," said the Professor, "you are writing all this
for a newspaper.  I see."

"Yes," we said, "we mentioned that at the beginning."

"Ah!" said the Professor, "did you?  Very possibly.  Yes."

"We Propose," we said, "to feature the article for next Saturday."

"Will it be long?" he asked.

"About two columns," we answered.

"And how much," said the Professor in a hesitating way, "do I have
to pay you to put it in?"

"How much which?" we asked.

"How much do I have to pay?"

"Why, Professor," we begin quickly.  Then we checked ourselves.
After all was it right to undeceive him, this quiet, absorbed man
of science with his ideals, his atoms and his emanations?  No, a
hundred times no.  Let him pay a hundred times.

"It will cost you," we said very firmly, "ten dollars."

The Professor began groping among his apparatus.  We knew that he
was looking for his purse.

"We should like also very much," we said, "to insert your picture
along with the article--"

"Would that cost much?" he asked.

"No, that is only five dollars."

The Professor had meantime found his purse.

"Would it be all right," he began, "--that is, would you mind if
I pay you the money now?  I am apt to forget."

"Quite all right," we answered.  We said good-by very gently and
passed out.  We felt somehow as if we had touched a higher life.
"Such," we murmured, as we looked about the ancient campus, "are
the men of science:  are there, perhaps, any others of them round
this morning that we might interview?"

[signed]Stephen Leacock





The Epic Standpoint in the War




After more than three years of the War, we are only now beginning
to see it, as it is, in its epic immensity.  On the eastern front
it has been too far from us; on the western front it has been too
near us, and we have been too much a part of it, to get any sight
at all of that series of monotonous and monstrous battles, a series
punctuated only by names:  Liege, Antwerp, Mons, Ypres, Verdun and
Arras.  And if nothing had happened besides the Titanic conflict
of material armaments I believe that we should not yet be anywhere
near realizing its vastness and its significance.

If we are aware of it now it is because, in the last few months, three
events have happened which are of another order:  the abdication
of Constantine, King of Greece, the Russian Revolution, and the
coming of America into the War.

These three events have adjusted and cleared our vision by giving
us the true perspective and the scale.

From the standpoint of individuals, even of those few who have lost
nothing personally, who are alive and safe, who have never been
near the trenches, never watched an air-raid, or so much as seen
the inside of a hospital, the War is a monstrous and irreparable
tragedy.

But from the epic standpoint, it would not have mattered if all the
civilians in Great Britain had been starved to death by submarines,
or burned alive in our beds, so long as the freedom of one country,
even a small country like Greece, was secured forever, let alone
the freedom of a great country like Russia--and let alone the saving
of America's soul.

For that is what it comes to.

Somewhere about the sad middle of the War, an American woman, who
is one of the finest American poets, discussed the War with me.
She deplored America's attitude in not coming in with us.

I said, politely and arrogantly, "Why should she?  It isn't HER
War.  She'll do us more good by keeping out of it."

The poet--who would not have called herself a patriot--answered,
"I am not thinking of YOUR good.  I am thinking of the good of
America's soul."

Since August 4th, 1914, England has been energetically engaged
in saving her own soul.  Heaven knows we needed salvation!  But,
commendable as our action was and is, the fact remains that it
was our own soul that we were saving.  We thought, and we cared,
nothing about America's soul.

In the beginning of the War, when it seemed certain that America
would not come in, we were glad to think that America's body
was untouched, that, while all Europe rolled in blood, so vast
a territory was still at peace, and that the gulf of the Atlantic
kept American men, American women and children, safe from the horror
and agony of war.  This was a comparatively righteous attitude.

Then we found that it was precisely the Atlantic that gave Americans
a taste of our agony and horror.  The Atlantic was no safe place for
the American men and women and children who traveled so ingenuously
over it.

And when for a long time we wondered whether America would or would
not come in, we were still glad; but it was another gladness.  We
said to ourselves that we did not want America to come in.  We
wanted to win the War without her, even if it took us a little
longer.  For by that time we had begun to look on the War as our
and our Allies' unique possession.  to fight in it was a privilege
and a glory that we were not inclined to share.

"America," we said, "is very much better employed in making munitions
for US.  Let her go on making them.  Let her help our wounded;
let her feed Belgium for us; but let her not come in now and bag
the glory when it is we who have borne the burden and heat of the
battle."

And this attitude of ours was not righteous.  It was egoistic; it was
selfish; it was arrogant.  We handed over to America the material
role and hung on tight to the spiritual glory.  It was as if we
had asked ourselves, in our arrogance, whether America was able
to drink of the cup that we drank of, and to be baptized with the
baptism of blood which we were baptized withal?

We had left off thinking even of America's body, and we were not
thinking at all about her soul.

Then, only a few months ago, she came in, and we were glad.  Most
of us were glad because we knew that her coming in would hasten
the coming of peace.  But I think that some of us were glad because
America had saved, before everything, her immortal soul.

And by our gladness we knew more about ourselves then than we had
suspected.  We know that, under all our arrogance and selfishness,
there was a certain soreness caused by America's neutrality.

We did not care much about Spain's or Scandinavia's or Holland's
neutrality, though the Dutch and Scandinavian navies might have
helped enormously to tighten the blockade; but we felt America's
neutrality as a wrong done to our own soul.  We were vulnerable
where her honor was concerned.  And this, though we knew that she
was justified in holding back; for her course was not a straight
and simple one like ours.  No Government on earth has any right
to throw prudence to the winds, and force war on a country that is
both divided and unprepared.

Yet we were vulnerable, as if our own honor were concerned.

That is why, however much we honor the men that America sends out
now, and will yet sent out, to fight with us, we honor still more
her first volunteers who came in of their own accord, who threw
prudence to every wind that blows, and sent themselves out, to
fight and to be wounded and to die in the ranks of the Allies.  It
may be that some of them loved France more than England.  No matter;
they had good cause to love her, since France stands for Freedom;
and it was Freedom that they fought for, soldiers in the greatest
War of Independence that has ever been.

The coming in of America has not placed upon England a greater or
more sacred obligation than was hers before:--to see to it that
this War accomplishes the freedom, not only of Belgium and Russia
and Poland and Serbia and Roumania, but of Ireland also, and of
Hungary, and, if Germany so wills it, of Germany herself.  It is
inconceivable that we should fail; but, if we did fail, we should
now have to answer to the soul and conscience of America as to our
own conscience and our own soul.

[signed]May Sinclair





Eleutherios Venizelos and the Greek Spirit




Eleutherios Venizelos, the foremost statesman of Greece, the man to
whom in fact she owes that growth in territory and influence that
has come as a result of the first and second Balkanic wars, continues
to exert paramount influence in the solution of the Eastern question,
in spite of the we believe mistaken policy of the Triple Entente
which permitted King Constantine of Greece for so long a period
of time to prevent the direct application of the power of Greece
to and in the successful termination of the war against Germany.
Venizelos has never lost faith in the mission of Greece in the
eastern Mediterranean.  He insists that a balance of power in the
Balkans will prevent an all powerful Bulgaria from selling herself
and her neighbors to the Pan-German octopus which has stretched
its tentacles toward Constantinople and on to the Persian Gulf.

Manfully defending the rights of the Greeks in Macedonia and Asia
Minor as he for long years supported those of the Greeks in Crete,
he demands no aggrandizement of territory by right of conquest, but
only the legitimate control and administration of lands that have
been for ages inhabited by men of Greek blood, of Greek religion,
and (until efforts were made to enforce other speech) of Greek
language.  He hates as only Greeks can hate, oppression of all
sorts whether by Turk or Bulgarian or Teuton, and desires to see
democratic principles finally established the world over.  Holding
this attitude, he could hardly bring himself to believe that King
Constantine could really be abridging the constitutional right of
the Greeks to control their own external as well as their domestic
policy.  When fully convinced that this was the King's intention,
Venezelos cast the die that gave Greek freedom a new birth
in Thessaloniki and the Islands.  This movement tardily supported
though it was by the entente, has at last borne fruit in a United
Greece which will do her share in making the East as well as the
West safe for Democracy.  The people that fought so nobly in the
revolution of 1821 will know how to give a good account of itself
under the leadership of a sane, courageous and farsighted statesman
like Venizelos.

The passage which I have chosen to translate is from the closing
words of the speech delivered before the Greek Chamber of Deputies
October 21, 1915.  In the first portion of the speech Venizelos
defends the policy of the participation in the campaign against
the Dardanelles, which he had in vain advocated, and the support
of Serbia as against Bulgaria in accordance with the defensive
alliance concluded with that country.

"I must now once more, and for the last time declare to the
Government which to-day occupies these seats, that it assumes the
very heaviest of responsibilities before the Nation, in under-taking
once more to administer the Government of Greece and to direct its
fortunes in this, the most critical period of its national existence,
with those antiquated conceptions which, if they had prevailed
in 1912, would have kept Greece within her old narrowly confined
borders.  These old ideas have been radically condemned not only
by the will of men, but by the very force of circumstances.

"It is most natural, Gentlemen, that with those conceptions under
which that older political world of Greece acted, a political world
which even to-day by its voting majority controls these seats of
Government, it is natural, I repeat, that such a Government should
be unable to adapt itself to the great, the colossal problems which
have risen since Greece, ceasing to be a small state, and enlarging
its territories, has taken a position in the Mediterranean which,
while exceptionally imposing, is at the same time peculiarly subject
to envy, and is on this account especially dangerous.

"How dare you, with those old conceptions assume the responsibility
for the course which you have taken, a course which departs widely
from the truth, from the traditional policy of that older Greek
Government, which realized that it is impossible to look for any
really successful Greek policy which runs counter to the power that
controls the sea.

"How is it possible that you can wish to impose on the country
such conceptions in the face of the repeatedly expressed opinion
of the representatives of the people, and with the actual results
of the recent past before you, a past which, with the sincerity that
distinguishes you, my dear fellow-citizens, you have not hesitated
to condemn, in order to show clearly that in your heart of hearts
you would regard us as better off if we were within the old boundaries
of 1912!

"But, sirs, the life of individuals and the life of Nations are
governed by one and the same law, the law of perpetual struggle.
This struggle, which is even keener between nations than between
men, is regulated among men by the internal laws of the country,
by the penal code, the police and in general the whole organization
of the state, which, insofar as it is able, defends the weak against
the strong.  Although we have to confess that this organization
falls far short of perfection, it does at any rate tend gradually
toward the attainment of its ultimate ideal.  But in the struggle
of nations, where there exists an international law, the pitiful
failure of which you have come to know, not only in the immediate
past, but especially during this European war, you must perceive
that it is impossible for small nations to progress and expand
without a perpetual struggle.  May I carry this argument one step
further and say that this growth and expansion of Greece is not
destined to satisfy moral requirements alone or to realize the
national and patriotic desire to fulfill obligations toward our
enslaved brothers, but it is actually a necessary pre-requisite to
the continued life of the state.

"From certain points of view I might have recognized in accordance
with the conceptions of my worthy fellow-citizen that if it had
been a matter of continuing to have Turkey as our neighbor in our
northern frontier, as she formerly was, we could have continued
to live on for many years, especially if we could have brought
ourselves to endure from her from time to time wi