thout complaint
certain humiliations and indignities.  But now that we have expanded
and become a rival to other Christian powers, against whom, in case
of defeat in war, we can expect no effective intervention on the
part of other nations, from that moment, Gentlemen, the establishment
of Greece as a self-sufficing state, able to defend itself against
its enemies, is for her a question of life and death.

"Unfortunately, after our successful wars, while we were developing
our new territories and organizing this Greater Greece into a model
new state, as far as lay within our power, we did not have time
to secure at once for the people all the advantages and all the
benefits that should result from extending our frontiers.  Our
unfortunate people up to the present has seen only sacrifices to
which it has been subjected for the sake of extending the boundaries
of the state.  It has experienced the moral satisfaction of having
freed its brothers, and the national gratification of belonging
to a state which is greater than it was before.  From the material
point of view however, from the point of view of economic advantage,
it has not yet been able to clearly discern what profit it has
obtained from the enlargement of the state.  It is natural then that
to-day as well, we can only hold before our people the sacrifices
that are once more required of it.  These sacrifices, Gentlemen,
according to my personal convictions which are as firmly held
as--humanly speaking--convictions can be, these sacrifices, as
I see them, are destined to create a great and powerful Greece,
which will bring about not an extension of the state by conquest,
but a natural return to those limits within which Hellenism has
been active even from prehistoric times.

"These sacrifices are to create, I insist, a great, a powerful,
a wealthy Greece, able to develop within its boundaries a live
industrialism competent, from the interests which it would represent,
to enter into commercial treaties with other states on equal terms,
and able finally to protect Greek citizens anywhere on earth:  for
the Greek could then proudly say, 'I am a Greek,' with the knowledge
that, happen what may, the state is ready and able to protect him,
no matter where he may be, just as all other great and powerful
states do, and that he will not be subjected to prosecution and be
forced to submit to, the lack of protection as is the Greek subject
to-day.

"When you take all these things into account, Gentlemen, you will
understand why I said a few moments ago, that I and the whole
liberal party are possessed by a feeling of deepest sadness because
by your policy, you are leading Greece, involuntarily, to be sure,
but none the less certainly, to her ruin.  You will induce her to
carry on war perforce, under the most difficult conditions and on
the most disadvantageous terms.

"The opportunity to create a great and powerful Greece, such an
opportunity as comes to a race only once in thousands of years,
you are thus allowing to be lost forever."

(Translation, with Notes, by CARROLL N. BROWN)





A Tribute to Italy




Even now, few Americans understand the great service which Italy
has done to the Allied Cause.  We have expected some sensational
military achievements, being ourselves unable to realize the immense
difficulty of the military tasks which confronted the Italians.  The
truth is that the Terrain over which they have fought is incredibly
difficult.  By the sly drawing of the frontier when in 1866 Austria
ceded Venetia to the Italians, every pass, every access, from Italy
into Austria was left in the hands of the Austrians.  Some of those
passes are so intricate and narrow that an Austrian regiment could
defend them against an army.  And yet, in two years' fighting
the Italians have advanced and have astonished the world by their
exploits in campaigning above the line of perpetual snow and among
crags as unpromising as church steeples.

On lower levels they have captured Gorizia, a feat unparalleled by
any thus far accomplished by the English and French on the West.
The defense of Verdun remains, of course, the supreme and sublime
achievement of defensive action, but the taking of Gorizia is thus
far the most splendid work of the Allied offensive.

I do not propose, however, to speak in detail of the Italians'
military service.  Suffice it to say that they have proved themselves
excellent fighters who combine the rare qualities of dash and
endurance.  I wish to speak of the vital contribution Italy has
made from the beginning of the War to the Great Cause--the cause
of Democracy and of Civilization.

When Italy at the end of July, 1914, refused to join Austria and
Germany she announced to the world that the war which the Teutons
planned was an aggressive war, and by this announcement she stamped
on the Pan-German crimes that verdict which every day since has
confirmed and which will be indelibly written on the pages of
history.

For Italy was a partner of Germany and Austria in the Triple Alliance
and she knew from inside evidence that the Teutonic Powers were
not acting on the defensive.  Accordingly, her decision had the
greatest significance, and when before the actual outbreak of the
war she privately informed France that she had no intention of
attacking that country she relieved the French of great suspense.
If Italy had joined the Teutons the French would have been required
to guard their southeastern frontier by a large force, perhaps
not less than a million men, which were now set free to oppose the
German attack in the north.

The world did not understand why Italy waited until May, 1915, before
declaring war on Austria, but the reason was plain.  Exhausted by
their war in Tripoli the Italians had neither munitions nor food
and their soldiers even lacked uniforms.  It took nine months,
therefore, to prepare for war.  Another year passed before Italy
could undertake to face Germany; for the Germans had so thoroughly
honeycombed Italy's commerce, industry and finances that it took
two years for the Italians to oust the Germans and to train men to
replace them.

By these delays, which seemed to the outside world suspicious,
Italy did another service.  If she had plunged in prematurely as
the Allies and her friends besought her to do she would have been
speedily overwhelmed.  Imagine what a blow that would have been
to the Allied Cause, especially coming so early in the War.  Her
prudence saved Europe this disaster.  Had Northern Italy become enslaved
the Teutonic forces could have threatened France on the southeast,
and with Genoa as a port they could have made the Mediterranean
much more perilous for the Allied ships and transportation.  It is
not for the United States, a country of over one hundred million
population, and yet checked if not intimidated by a small body of
German plotters and their accomplices, to look scornfully on Italy's
long deferred entrance into the War.  The Pro-German element in Italy
was relatively stronger than here and the elements which composed
it--the Blacks, the Germanized financiers and business men, many
nobles and the Vatican--openly opposed making war on the Kaiser.
In spite of all these difficulties, in spite of the very great
danger she ran, because if the Germans win they threaten to restore
the Papal temporal power, and the Austrians, Italy stood by the
Allies.

For her to be untrue tot he cause of Democracy would be almost
unthinkable; the great men who made her a united nation were all
in different ways apostles of Democracy.  Mazzini was its preacher;
Garibaldi fought for it on many fields, in South America, in Italy
and in France; Victor Emmanuel was the first democratic sovereign
in Europe in the nineteenth century; Cavour, beyond all other
statesmen of his age, believed in Liberty, religious, social and
political and applied it to his vast work of transforming thirty
million Italians out of Feudalism, and the stunting effects of
autocracy into a nation of democrats.

It was impossible also for Italy, the ancient home of Civilization,
the mother of arts and refinement, to accept the standard of the
Huns which the Germans embraced and imposed upon their allies.
The conflict between the Germans and the Italians was instinctive,
temperamental.  For a thousand years it took the form of a struggle
between the German Emperors and the Italian Popes for mastery.  The
Germans strove for political domination, for temporal power; the
Italians strove, at least in ideal, in order that the spiritual
should not be the vassal of the physical.  It was soul force against
brute force.  Looking at it as deeply as possible we see that the
Italians, a race sprung out of ancient culture, mightily affected
but not denatured by Christianity, repudiated the Barbarian ideals
of Teutonism.  Men whose ancestors had worshiped Jupiter and Apollo,
and who were themselves worshipping the Christian God, Madonna and
the great saints, had no spiritual affinity with men whose ancestors
could conceive of no Deities higher than Thor, Odin and the other
rough, crude, and unmannered denizens of the Northern Walhalla.  So
Italy stood by Civilization.  Her risk was great, but great shall
be her guerdon in the approval of her own conscience and the
gratitude of posterity.

[signed] William Roscoe Thayer

Sept. 1, 1917.





Al Generale Cadorna




"Io ho quel che ho donato."


Questo che in Te si compie anno di sorte,
  l'Italia l'alza in cima della spada
  mirando al segno; e la sua rossa strada
  ne brilla insino alle sue alpine porte.
Tu tendi la potenza della morte
  come un arco tra il Vodice e l'Hermada;
  varchi l'Isonzo indomito ove guada
  la tua Vittoria col tuo pugno forte.
Giovine sei, rinato dalla terra
  sitibonda, balzato su dal duro
  Carso col fiore dei tuio fanti imberbi.
Questo, che in te si compie, anno di guerra
  splenda da te, avido del futuro,
  e al domani terribile ti serbi.

Gabriele D'Annunzio





To General Cadorna On his 69th birthday, September 11, 1917




"What I have given, that have I"


This fateful year which thou fulfillest so,
  Our Italy, her cherisht goal in sight,
  Exalts upon her sword; and gleameth bright
  Her ruddy pathway to the gates of snow.
The power of death thou bendest like a bow
  'Twixt Vodice and bleak Hermada's height;
  And Victory, guided by thy hand of might,
  Thro' wild Isonzo forth doth fording go.
Reborn from lands of drought, a youth art thou,
  Upheaved by rugged Carso suddenly
  With all the lads of thine advancing throng.
This bloody year which thou fulfillest now,
  O may it, onward pressing, shine with thee
  And keep thee for the fearful morrow strong!

Poetical Version by

[signed] C.H. Grangent





The Voice of Italy




In the great turmoil of nations it rings with a tone peculiarly
true: for Italy is the country that found herself confronted,
at the outbreak of the great war, by perhaps the most perplexing
situation of any of the present allies.  If she had chosen to
follow the way which lay open and easy before her, the war would
have long since been decided in favor of the Central Powers.  Italy
had entered the Triple Alliance as a clean contract, for an honest
defensive purpose.  It was never intended for a weapon of aggression.
When Austria and Germany decided upon the outrage to Serbia that
was the cause of the conflagration, they did not consult Italy
about it, knowing well that Italy would not have consented; in
fact, would have denounced it to the world.   But they hoped that
by surprising her with the "fait accompli," she would have to yield
and follow.  Italy chose the long hard trail instead, incredibly long,
inconceivably hard, but morally right, and it has been made clear
once more in the history of humanity, that "Latin" and "barbaric"
are two incompatible terms.

True enough, Italy felt in her own heart the cry of her long-oppressed
children from Istria, the Trentino and Dalmatia ringing just as
loud as that of the children of Belgium and the women of Serbia;
but who can blame her if history had it so, that the sudden outrage
on other nations was but the counterpart of the long-continued
provocation to the Italian nationality, when in the Italian
provinces subject to Austrian rule, the mere singing of a song in
the mother-language brought women to jail and children to fustigation;
and a bunch of white, red and green flowers might cause an indictment
of high treason?  National aspirations and international honor
equally called forth to Italy, and Italy leaped forth in answer as
soon as she could make her way clear to the fight.  She took it up
where the political pressure brought to bear upon her in the name
of European peace in 1866 had compelled the fathers of the present
leaders to retire from combat.

General Luigi Cadorna leads the offensive of 1917 where his father
Count Raffaele Cadoran found it stopped by diplomatic arrangements
in 1866; Garibaldi's nephew avenges on the Col di Lana his "obbedisco"
from the Trentino; Francesco Pecori-Giraldi's son repels from
Asiago the sons of those Austrians who wounded him at Montanara and
imprisoned him at Mantova.  Gabriele d'Annunzio, mature in years
and wonderfully youthful in spirit, takes up the national ideals of
the great master Giosue Carducci (who died before he could see the
dream of his life realized with the reunion of Trento and Trieste,
Istria and the Italian cities of Dalmatia, to the Motherland); and
becomes the speaker of the nation expectant in Genoa and assembled
in Rome to decree the end of the strain of Italian neutrality which
has to its credit the magnificent rebellion to the unscrupulous
intrigues of Prince von Bulow, and the releasing of five hundred
thousand French soldiers from the frontier of Savoy to help in the
battle of the Marne.

In D'Annunzio's "Virgins of the Rocks" the protagonist expresses
his belief that oratory is a weapon of war, and that it should be
unsheathed, so to speak, in all its brilliancy only with the definite
view of rousing people to action.  Surely no man ever had a better
chance of wielding the brilliant weapon than D'Annunzio, in his
triumphal progress through Italy during that fateful month of May,
1915, when he uttered against neutralism and pacifism, germanophilism
and petty parliamentarism, the "quo usque tandem" of the newest
Italy.

Nor can we forget how Premier Antonio Salandra in his memorable
speech from the Capitol, expressed the living and the fighting
spirit of Italy, a spirit of strength and humanity, when he said:
"I cannot answer in kind the insult that the German chancellor
heaps upon us:  the return to the primordial barbaric stage is so
much harder for us, who are twenty centuries ahead of them in the
history of civilization."  To support his, came the quiet utterances
of Sonnino (whose every word is a statement of Italian right and
a crushing indictment of Austro-German felony) "proclaiming still
once the firm resolution of Italy, to continue to fight courageously
with all her might, and at any sacrifice, until her most sacred
national aspirations are fulfilled alongside with such general
conditions of independence, safety and mutual respect between nations
as can alone form the basis of a durable peace, and represent the
very "raison d'etre" of the contract that binds us with our Allies."

This is the voice of right:  the voice of victory which upholds it
is registered frequently in the admirable war-bulletins of General
Cadorna, than which nothing more Caesarian has been written in the
Latin world since the days of Caesar.  The simple words follow with
which the taking of Gorizia was announced to the nation.


"August ninth.

..."Trenches and dugouts have been found, full of enemy corpses:
everywhere arms and ammunition and material of all kinds were
abandoned by the routed opponent.  Toward dusk, sections of the
brigades Casale and Pavia, waded through the Isonzo, bridges having
been destroyed by he enemy, and settled strongly on the left bank.
A column of cavalry and 'bersaglieri ciclisti' was forthwith started
in pursuit beyond the river."


Now, the voice of Italy is thundering down from the Stelvio to the
sea, echoed by forty thousand shells a day on the contested San
Gabriele:  a mighty thing indeed, the voice of Italy at war; a
thing of which all Italians may well feel proud.  And yet, there
is another thing of which they are perhaps even prouder in the
depths of the national heart:  the voice of the children of Italy
"redeemed."  All along the re-claimed land, from Darzo to Gorizia,
sixteen thousand children of Italian speech and of Italian blood,
for whom Italian schools and Italian teachers have been provided
even under the increasing menace of the Austrian aircraft or gunfire,
join daily and enthusiastically in the refrain which the soldiers
of Italy are enforcing, but a few miles ahead:


"Va fuora d'Italia, va fuora ch'e' l'ora,
  va fuora d'Italia, va fuora, stranier!"
[From the Inno di Garibaldi:  
"Get out of Italy, it's high time;
 get out of Italy, stranger, get out!"]

[signed] Amy Bernardy





Japan's Ideals and Her Part in the Struggle




The people of the world, whether engaged in open resistance to
German rapacity, or as onlookers, do well to see, as indeed they
have seen since its beginning, that modern civilization is at
stake.  On every continent, Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and
both the Americas, recognition of this great fact was instinctive.
It was obvious everywhere that, if Germany with its sinister aims,
shamelessly avowed, and its terrible methods, relentlessly carried
out, was to prevail, all the progress that had been made out of
her barbarism and savagery would not only be imperiled but lost.

It was clear that humanity would have to begin anew its weary
struggle out of the difficulties it had slowly overcome.  Everything
of a high order that had been done from the beginning, under great,
devoted, far-seeing religious leaders, and by unknown millions who
had fought for liberty, would have to be given up.  Recognition
of the potency of peaceful methods in government and industry; the
contribution of the individual to his own progress and that of
mankind; the gradual triumph of an ordered freedom over tyranny and
anarchy; all the achievements, that have gradually made the world
over, would have had to be undertaken again, and that, too, without
the free contribution from every quarter, which, in the varied history
of men, had assured the one great triumph which is civilization.
The dream of individual and national conquest--the cause of so much
suffering and bloodshed--was again to be repeated.  This attack
has demanded thus far, as it will demand until the end, the united
efforts of practically all the people of the earth in order to defeat
this the most desperate attempt at conquest, undertaken under the
most favorable conditions, and after the most perfect preparation
known to history.  If hesitation or treachery had arisen at any
important point the well-laid plot would have succeeded.

Nothing in the history of Europe, or of all the peoples that sprang
from it in other parts of the world, is more creditable to humanity
than the united resistance which this attempt aroused.  All that it
meant was attacked without mercy or shame.  Its religious teachings
and practices, the result of many centuries of growth and experience
were defied by one of the nations professing the same creed.  Its
political development, the result of a struggle under which
industry, family, and social growth had proceeded in regular order
was defied.  Its humane policies were to be replaced by the dictates
of might--mercilessly executed.  Its small peoples were to be
crushed, and its greater ones reduced to the status of vassals.
In a word, all its civilization was to be thrown away.

But, at the first cry of alarm every threatened people rose as
if by magic.  No surprise was effective, no lack of preparation
deterred, no peril brought hesitation.  One by one, all jealousies
were dissipated, all past differences were forgotten, the common
danger was recognized, and they united, as humanity had never done
before, in that resistance to German ambitions which the world now
sees as its one great event, past or present.

If this threat to civilization was thus met by Europe how much more
serious was the aspect which it presented to us in Japan!  We were
more than mere participators in this civilization.  We had grafted
upon our own life, old, balanced, remote, isolated, the creator
of great traditions, the newer and different ideas of Europe,
assimilating the best of them without losing these that were strong
and potent among our own.  They had been fused into our life and,
in the process, had enabled us to make an enlarged contribution
to human progress.  We had become so much a part of the world that
nothing in it was alien to us.  We had always known, even from
the earliest times, what out people were, what they meant and what
they could do.  We were in no wise ignorant of our own powers and
achievements but this new knowledge was akin to the addition of a
new sense.

When this threat against mankind came we also saw instinctively
that it was even more of a peril to us than to Europe.  We saw that
civilization was not a thing of continents, or nations, or races,
but of mankind, that in the evolution of human forces, men were
one in purpose and need.  If Europe was to be crushed, it was only
a question of time until all that Europe had done for the world
in America, or the Antipodes, or in the islands of the sea, would
follow it.  Then would come our turn, then all Asia would be thrown
into tyranny's crucible, and the world must begin anew.  It was
not a mere diplomatic alliance that drew us into the contest.  Our
own struggles had not been those of aggression; but it was easy to
see what ruthless conquest meant even if it seemed to be far away.
Therefore, we acted promptly and we hope with efficiency and have
since carried on the work in the sphere allotted to us by nature
with a devotion that has never flagged.  It has been our duty not
to reason why, but to help in saving the world without bargains,
or dickerings, or suggestions, thus bearing our part in the rescue
of civilization from its perils.

As we see our duty, and the duty of the world, only one thing is
left to do.  It is to fight out this war which neither we nor any
other people or nation, other than the aggressors, have sought.
It must be fought to the end without wavering, without thought of
national or individual advantages.  The victors are to be victors
for civilization and the world, not for themselves.  The contest
upon which we are unitedly engaged will not only end this war; upon
its result will depend the extinction of all wars of aggression.
No opportunity must ever come again for any nation or people, or
any combination of nations or peoples, however, strong or numerous,
to seek that universal domination shown by experience to be
impossible, which, if it were possible, would mean the destruction
of human progress.

We are proud to be associated with America as Allies in so great a
cause.  Our duty thus keeps pace with our obligation and both are
guided by our highest desires.  We, like you, have enlisted until
the war is settled and settled right; you, like ourselves, have no
favors to ask, both merely ask that they may live their own lives,
settle their own problems, smooth out their common differences or
difficulties, and do their best, along with all other peoples, to
make the world a better, not a worse, place to live in.

[signed] K. Ishii





Tropical Interlude




I  Tropical Morning


In the mornings--Oh, the tropical mornings
When the bells are all so dizzily calling one to prayer!--
All my thought was to watch from a nook in my window
Indian girls from the river with flowers in their hair.

Some bore
Fresh eggs in wicker boxes
For the grocery store;
Others, baskets of fruit; and some,
The skins of mountain cats and foxes
Caught in traps at home.

They all passed so stately by, they all walked so gracefully,
Balancing their bodies on lithe unstable hips,
As if music moved them that swelled in their bosoms
And was pizzicatti at their finger-tips.


II  Tropical Rain


The rain, in Nicaragua, it is a witch they say;
She puts the world into her bag and blows the skies away;
And so, in every home, the little children gather,
Run up like little animals and kneel beside the Mother,
So frightened by the thunder that they can hardly pray.

"Sweet Jesu, you that stilled the storm in Galilee,
Pity the homeless now, and the travelers by sea;
Pity the little birds that have no nest, that are forlorn;
Pity the butterfly, pity the honey bee;
Pity the roses that are so helpless, and the unsheltered corn,
And pity me...."

Then, when the rain is over and the children's prayer is said,
Oh, joy of swaying palm-trees with the rainbows overhead,
And the streets swollen like rivers, and the wet earth's smell,
And all the ants with sudden wings filling the heart with wonder,
And, afar, the tempest vanishing with a stifled thunder
In a glare of lurid radiance from the gaping mouth of hell!


III  Tropical Park


The park in Leon is but a garden
Where grass and roses grow together;
It has no ordinance, it has no warden
Except the weather.

The paths are made of sand so fine
That they are always smooth and neat;
Sunlight and moonlight make them shine,
And so one's feet

Seem always to tread on magic ground
That gleams, and that whispers curiously,
For sand, when you tread it, has the sound
Of the sea.

Sometimes the band, of a warm night,
Makes music in that little park,
And lovers haunt, beyond the bright
Foot-paths, the dark.

You can almost tell what they do and say
Listening to the sound of the sand,--
How warm lips whisper, and glances play,
And hand seeks hand.


IV  Tropical Town


Blue, pink and yellow houses, and, afar,
The cemetery, where the green trees are.

Sometimes you see a hungry dog pass by,
And there are always buzzards in the sky.
Sometimes you hear the big cathedral bell,
A blindman rings it; and sometimes you hear
A rumbling ox-cart that brings wood to sell.
Else nothing ever breaks the ancient spell
That holds the town asleep, save, once a year,
The Easter festival....
                     I come from there,
And when I tire of hoping, and despair
Is heavy over me, my thoughts go far,
Beyond that length of lazy street, to where
The lonely green trees and the white graves are.


V  Tropical House


When the winter comes, I will take you to Nicaragua--
You will love it there!
you will love my home, my house in Nicaragua,
So large and queenly looking, with a haughty air
That seems to tell the mountains, the mountains of Nicaragua,
"You may roar and you may tremble for all I care!"

It is shadowy and cool,
Has a garden in the middle where fruit trees grow,
And poppies, like a little army, row on row,
And jasmine bushes that will make you think of snow
They are so white and light, so perfect and so frail,
And when the wind is blowing they fly and flutter so.

The bath is in the garden, like a sort of pool,
With walls of honeysuckle and orchids all around;
The humming birds are always making a sleep sound;
In the night there's the Aztec nightingale;
But when the moon is up, in Nicaragua,
The moon of Nicaragua and the million stars,
It's the human heart that sings, and the heart of Nicaragua,
To the pleading, plaintive music of guitars!

[signed] Salomon De La Selva.





Latin America and the War




In common with many other parts of the world, even some of those
immediately involved, Latin America received the outbreak of the
European War with dismayed astonishment, with a feeling that it
could not be true, with mental confusion as to the real causes and
objects of the conflict.  A survey of newspapers from Mexico to
Cape Horn during August, 1914, to the end of that year shows plainly
that for several months public opinion had not cleared up, that the
conflict seemed to be a frightful blunder, a terrific misunderstanding,
that might have been avoided, and for which no one nation in
particular was to blame.

The deep love of Latin America for Latin Europe undoubtedly
meant great sympathy for France; England, too, the great investor
in and developer of South America, was watched with good feeling;
but Germany has done much for Latin America commerce and shipping
facilities, a work performed with skillfully regulated tact, and
very many sections of the southern republics were loath to believe
that a nation so friendly and so industriously commercial had
deliberately planned the war.

But as time went on evidence accumulated; the martyrdom of Belgium
and Northern France, the use of poisonous gas, the instigation of
revolts in the colonies of the Entente Allies, the sinking of the
"Lusitania," the shooting of Nurse Cavell, and above all the proofs
of the enormous military preparations of Germany, slowly convinced
Latin America that a great scheme had long been perfected; the book
of Tannenburg which showed huge tracts of South America as part of
the future world dominion of Germany was seen to be no crazy dream
of an individual but the revelation of a widely held Teutonic ideal.
Many incidents occurring in the United States and Canada, such as
explosions and fires in factories of war materials, exposure of spies
and diplomatic intrigue, demonstrated a callous abuse of American
hospitality which the more southerly lands took to heart as
lessons; their dawning perception of the network of German effort
was further clarified by the floods of Teutonic propaganda which
covered every Latin American Republic and which was in many instances
speedily ridiculed by the keen-witted native press.

Frank in their expression of opinion, no sooner had Latin Americans
resolved in their own minds the questions of responsibility for
the war than they gave utterance to their opinions; journals avowed
themselves pro-Ally, large subscriptions were raised in many sections
for the relief of the European sufferers, particularly Belgium,
and a number of young men joined the Entente armies.  In Brazil,
which was always supposed to have a German bias on account of her
large German colonies, some of the foremost publicists and writers
voluntarily formed the "Liga pelos Alliados" (League in favor of
the Allies) with the famous orator, Ruy Barbosa, at its head, and
the prince of Brazilian poets, Olavo Bilac, as one of its most
active members; the League was organized early in 1915 and its
meetings were characterized by the warmest pro-Ally utterances;
many members of the Brazilian Congress joined it, and I never heard
any Administrative protest on the score of neutrality.

Later in the same year Bilac, who is the object of fervent admiration,
for Latin America often pays more attention to her poets than to
her politicians, showed that he foresaw the entry of his country
into the conflict by a passionate appeal to the youth of Brazil
to fortify themselves with military discipline, in 1916 repeating
his "call to arms" in a tour throughout that great country.  By
this time the whole of Latin America was lined up, the overwhelming
mass of press and people declaring pro-Ally, and especially
pro-French, sympathies, while the few ranged in the opposite camp
generally had special reasons for their choice, consisting of some
individual Germanic link.  The fact of the prevalence of pro-Ally
feeling, long before any of the American countries became politically
aligned is, I think, a remarkable tribute to the response of Latin
America to the weight of genuine evidence; no propaganda was made
by any one of the Allied governments, and the solidification of
public opinion was due to Latin American feeling and not to outside
pressure.

When, in April of this year, the United States was driven to a
breach with Germany on account of the torpedoing of her ships and
loss of her citizens' lives, she was the greatest material sufferer
from German submarine aggression; if Latin America in general
maintained at that date, and still in some sections maintains,
diplomatic relations with the Central Powers, it is largely because
they have endured no specific injury at German hands.  Few Latin
American States possess a merchant marine traversing the sea danger
zones.  But the entry of the United States was regarded with warm
approval; her cause was acknowledged to be just and the Latin
American press reflects nothing but admiration for her step.  The
Republics of Cuba, Panama, Guatemala, Honduras, and in an informal
manner, Costa Rica, as well as the more or less American-controlled
Nicaragua, Haiti and Santo Domingo, quickly aligned themselves
with the United States, with whose fortunes their own are closely
connected.

Brazil, revoking her decree of neutrality in June, 1917, was perhaps
influenced to some degree by the action of the United States, but
she had her own specific reason in the sinking of three of her merchant
vessels by German submarines; Brazil possesses an enterprising and
good mercantile marine, has been carrying coffee and frozen meat
to Europe during the war and her ships have thus been constantly
exposed to risk.  The sinking of her vessels raised a storm of anger,
the popular voice warmly supporting the acts of the government.
Nor is the alignment of Brazil a mere declaration; she has taken
over the forty-six German and Austrian ships lying in her ports,
and much of this tonnage, totaling 300,000 tons, is already in
service after three years' idleness, two of the vessels having been
handed over to the use of the Allies.  Brazil is also taking over
the patrol of a big strip of the south-western Atlantic with fifteen
units of her excellent navy.

Bolivia was another South American country which quickly followed
the United States in breaking relations with Germany, and this was
done not because Bolivia had suffered at the hands of the Teutonic
powers but because she "wishes to show her sympathy with the United
States and felt it the duty of every democracy to ally itself with
the cause of justice."  With no coast and therefore no mercantile
marine, Bolivia is however greatly interested in the shipments of
rubber and minerals which she sends abroad and some of which have
been sent to the bottom of the sea by torpedoes; her sympathies
with the Entente Allies are undoubted.

On October 6 relations with Germany were broken by Peru, the
determining factor being the torpedoing of the Peruvian vessel
"Lorton;" on October 7 the National Assembly of Uruguay voted for
a break with Germany, thus completing the attitude which she had
frankly declared many months previously, when she protested against
Germany's methods in submarine warfare.  Paraguay, although still
formally neutral, has expressed her sympathy with the United States.


Before I pass to a few quotations from Latin American sources on
the subject of their spirit, it is well to look across the seas
to the Mother Countries, whose sentiments and actions have more
effect upon Latin America than is always remembered.  There is, for
instance, no doubt that the entry of Portugal into the war on the
side of her ancient ally, England, profoundly affected the Brazilian
mind; the friendship between England and Portugal dates from 1147,
and an unbroken political treaty has lasted since 1386--the longest
in history;

[An English poet wrote in the Fourteenth Century:
  "Portingallers with us have troth in hand
   Whose marchindise cometh much into England.
   They are our friends with their commodities
   And we English passen into their countries."]

Brazil as the child of Portugal inherited the English good feeling,
her independence from the Mother Country was effected without any
prolonged bitterness, and with the actual assistance of England.
When, then, Brazil saw the people sprung from the cradle of her
race fighting side by side with the ancient friend of both she was
deeply stirred.  Portuguese merchants prosper in large numbers in
Brazil, Portuguese news daily fills space in the Brazilian newspapers;
the cry of that great Portuguese, Theophilo Braga, found echoes in
many a gallant Brazilian heart:

"And with what arms shall Portugal engage,
 So little as she is, in such great feats?
 They call on her to play a leading part
 Who know that in the Lusitanian heart
    Love beats!"

In a corresponding degree there seems to be little doubt that the
neutral attitude which Spain has maintained is partly responsible
for the neutrality of several South American countries; they do not
forget the bloody years of struggle before they attained independence
from Spain, but they are wise enough to differentiate between the
policy of Ferdinand VII and the heart of Spain.  Dr. Belisario
Porras, the ex-President of Panama, and a distinguished scholar
and writer said in May, 1917:

"For us of Central and South America, Iberianism is a matter
of sentiment, affection and veneration, not a matter of politics.
Spain is our Mother Country, whence we came, where the names we
bear are also borne, where the memories and ashes of our ancestors
are guarded, of whose deeds we are proud, whose tongue we speak,
whose religion we share, whose heroic character and customs we
admire....  Spain is our pole star, the star to which we raise our
eyes when we are despairing and when we face a sacrifice for God,
for a woman, a child, or our country."

Spain has had, of course, up to the present, no direct national
injury to resent; she has on the other hand several reasons for
remaining politically neutral and can at present do so with honor;
although she is weak and poor, still exhausted by the long conflicts
of her past, without resources, without any notable strength in army
or navy, she is serving as an indispensable channel of communication.
She, as well as many South American countries, can best aid the
world by concentrating upon production; in addition to this, she
is, in company with Holland, rendering excellent service in feeding
unhappy Belgium, replacing American workers.

Spain is not intellectually neutral or unmindful of the effect of
her attitude upon Latin America, and this is shown by the number of
newspapers on the Allies' side, as "La Epoca" and "La Correspondencia
de Espana."  An immediate response was given to the pro-Ally
utterances of the Conde de Romanones, who said on April 17:

"Spain is the depository of the spiritual patrimony of a great
race.  She has historical aspirations to preside over the moral
confederation of all the nations of our blood, and this hope will
be definitely destroyed if, at a moment so decisive for the future
as this, Spain and her children are shown to be spiritually divorced."

If Spain fails in leadership the love of Latin America for France
will be the more emphasized, is the conclusion one draws from the
speeches and writings of Ibero-America.  The degree to which South
America feels herself involved in the fate of France is displayed
in such dicta as this of Victor Viana, a Brazilian writer:

"In the great Latin family, France is the educator, the leader,
the example, the pride.  Thus Brazil, in common with all Latin
countries, seeing in France the reservoir of mental energy, constantly
renewed by her splendid intellectuals, has as much interest in the
victory of French arms as France herself.  The overthrow of France
would have produced a generation of unbelievers and skeptics,
and we, in another clime and a new country, should not have been
able to escape this influence, because we share all the movements
of French thought.  The reaction of French energy which created
the present generation spread throughout Brazil new sentiments of
patriotism....  The entire world, except naturally the combatants
on the other side, recognize the justice of the cause of France, which
is the cause of all the other Allies, of Belgium which sacrificed
herself, of England which pledges her all to save the right, of
the United States, of the entire Americas."


While I have been writing these notes the political situation of
Argentina in regard to the war has suddenly crystallized; extending
over several months there has been a series of submarine attacks
upon vessels of Argentina, indignant protests in each case being
met by apologies and promises of indemnity on the part of Germany.
There has been much irritation in spite of these promises, cumulative
irritation, which however might have remained submerged had it not
been for the revelations of the acts of Count Luxburg, which have
made the expression "spurlos versekt" a byword.  This exhibition
of callous plotting against Argentine lives immediately resulted
in the handing of passports to the German Ambassador to Argentina,
and during the third week in September both houses of Congress voted
by large majorities for a severance of relations with Germany.  That
this step was not, at the moment, consummated, was due to President
Irigoyen's wish to accept the satisfaction offered by Germany; but
the sentiments of Argentina as a whole have been fully demonstrated.

Their action plainly showed the temper of the Argentine people,
who have certainly never been unsympathetic to the Entente Allies'
cause although they have shown some restiveness under rather
tactless attempts on the part of a section of the United States
press to tutor them into line.  The best thought of Argentina has all
along been with the Allies and this is exemplified by an article,
"Neutrality Impossible," widely published and applauded in June
of this year by the brilliant Argentine writer and poet Leopoldo
Lugones:

"Inevitably War knocks at our door.  We are compelled to make a
decision.  Either we must respect the integrity of our past in the
name of the American solidarity which is the law of life and honor
for all the nations of the continent, revealing at the same time
intelligence with regard to our own future, or we must submit
ourselves, grossly cowardly, to the terrorism of despots."


CUBA


The United States broke relations with Germany on April 6.  On
April 7 Dr. Jose Manuel Cortina, speaking before the Cuban House
of Representatives, when the decree of war against Germany was
passed, said:

"We have resolved to give our unanimous and definite consent to
the proposition submitted to the House to declare a state of war
between the Republic of Cuba and the German Empire, and to join,
in this great conflagration of the world, our efforts to those of
the United States of North America.  We fight in this conflict,
which will decide the trend of all morality and civilization in
the universe, united tot he great republic which in a day not long
distant drew her sword and fired her guns over Cuban fields and
seas in battle for our liberty and sovereignty.  We go to fight as
brothers beside that great people who have been ever the friends
and protectors of Cuba, who aided us during the darkest days of
our tragic history, in moments when opposed by enormous strength,
we had nearly disappeared from the face of the earth, when we had
no other refuge, no other loyal and magnanimous friend than the
great North American people."


HAITI


Speech of the President of Haiti, M. Philippe Sudre Dartiguenave,
on May 12, previous to Haiti's breach with Germany:

"What cause could be more holy than that defended at this moment,
with unanimous and admirable enthusiasm by the people of the
United States, by Cuba, by a great deal of Latin America, in moral
cooperation with the Entente Powers!  At Savannah, we fought with
the soldiers of Washington for the independence of the country of
Franklin, of Lincoln, of John Brown....  At the cry of distress
of Bolivar, did we not throw ourselves into the South America's
struggle for independence?  The task before us in this supreme moment
is worthy, glorious, because it is that of international justice,
the liberty of nations, of civilization, of all Humanity."


CENTRAL AMERICA


As we have seen above, four of the Central American Republics have
aligned themselves with the United States since her entry into
the war, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Honduras breaking off diplomatic
relations with Germany very shortly after the definite action of
the United States was known, the statement of Don Joaquin Mendez
representing the prevalent feeling:  "The rupture has aligned Guatemala
'ipso facto' with those who are the defenders of the modern ideas
of democracy and freedom."  Small in size and limited in resources,
it is not likely that any active part will be taken by Central
America in the war; she is removed from the most dangerous zones
and will not suffer, it is to be hoped, more than the inevitable
and temporary economic embarrassments due to dislocation of the
world's industrial systems.  But her spirit is reflected in such
announcements as this notice from the front page of a little daily
paper published in S. Pedro Sula, Honduras:

"This periodical is Latin and as such professes its sympathy in
favor of the Allied nations now struggling so nobly in defense of
Liberty with, as their aim, the establishment of a lasting peace
which will render impossible the future development of schemes of
conquest."

The position of Costa Rica, informally aligned with the Allies and
the United States, is peculiar in that she cannot formalize her
position until her new government has received the recognition of
these countries.  Don Ricardo Fernandez Guardia, the foremost writer
of Costa Rica, says that, "The fact that we have offered the use of
our ports, since April 9, 1917, to the navy of the United States,
undoubtedly constitutes a breach of neutrality, and in consequence
Costa Rica considers herself as enlisted in the ranks of the Allies
'de facto.'  There is an overwhelming sentiment of sympathy with
the Allies both on the part of the government and the great majority
of the people of Costa Rica."

Panama, immediately following the news of the United States' breach
with Germany, declared herself "ready to do all within her power
to protect the Panama Canal"; Uruguay, although making no breach of
relations with the Central Powers, supported United States action
and denounced submarine warfare as carried on by Germany; Paraguay,
too, expressed her sympathy with the United States which she said
"was forced to enter the war to establish the rights of neutrals."

Thus the only Latin American nations which have rigidly preserved
a neutral attitude are Mexico, whose own internal problems form an
entirely sufficient reason; Ecuador, Venezuala and Colombia.  They
are still political neutrals, but no one who knows the Latin soul
can doubt that there is in each of these lands a strong feeling
of admiration for the vindication of Latin elasticity which France
and Italy and Portugal have show, and for the dogged might of England
whose naval skill has prevented the strangulation of the commerce
of the world; in this matter all these lands are interested, since
all are raw-material producers shipping their products abroad.  This
sentiment was concisely expressed by Ruy Barbosa, the Brazilian
orator, when on August 5 the "Liga pelos Alliados" held a meeting
of "homage to England" on the third anniversary of her entry into
the war, and he declared it "an honor and pleasure to salute the
great English nation to whom we owe in this war the liberty of the
seas and the annihilation of German methods upon the ocean, without
which European resistance to the German attack and the preservation
of the independence of the American continent would be impossible."

Nothing would, I think, be more improper than that any nation
should be urged to enter the war against her own feelings; but for
those who have taken or may yet take that step there is one very
high consideration which cannot be forgotten--the effect upon the
national spirit of To-morrow of a gallant and decisive attitude
Today.  Who has more finely expressed this sense of the formation
of the heritage of ideas than the modern Portuguese poet Quental?

Even as the winds the pinewood cones down cast
Upon the ground and scatter by their blowing
And one by one, down to the very last,
The seeds along the mountain ridge are sowing.
Even so, by winds of time, ideas are strewn
Little by little, though none see them fly--
And thus in all the fields of life are sown
The vast plantations of posterity.

["Odes Modernas, by Anthero de Quental, translated by George Young.]

[signed] Lilian E. Elliott.

October 20, 1917.





Drill




Williams College, April, 1917


One! two, three, four!
One! two, three, four!
One, two!...
It is hard to keep in time
Marching through
The rutted slime
With no drum to play for you.
One! two, three, four!
And the shuffle of five hundred feet
Till the marching line is neat.

Then the wet New England valley
With the purple hills around
Takes us gently, musically,
With a kindly heart and willing,
Thrilling, filling with the sound
Of our drilling.

Battle fields are far away.
All the world about me seems
The fulfillment of my dreams.
God, how good it is to be
Young and glad to-day!

One! two, three, four!
One, two, three!...

Now, as never before,
From the vastness of the sky,
Falls on me the sense of war.
Now, as never before,
Comes the feeling that to die
Is no duty vain and sore.
Something calls and speaks to me:
Cloud and hill and stream and tree;
Something calls and speaks to me,
From the earth, familiarly.
I will rise and I will go,
As the rivers flow to sea,
As the sap mounts up the tree
That the flowers may blow--
God, my God,
All my soul is out of me!

God, my God,
Your world is much too beautiful! I feel
My senses melt and reel,
And my heart aches as if a sudden steel
Had pierced me through and through.
I cannot bear
This vigorous sweetness in your air;
The sunlight smites me heavy blow on blow,
My soul is black and blue
And blind and dizzy.  God, my mortal eyes
Cannot resist the onslaught of your skies!
I am no wind, I cannot rise and go
Tearing in madness to the woods and sea;
I am no tree,
I cannot push the earth and lift and grow;
I am no rock
To stand unmovable against this shock.
Behold me now, a too desirous thing,
Passionate lover of your ardent Spring,
Held in her arms too fast, too fiercely pressed
Against her thundering breast
That leaps and crushes me!

One! two, three, four!
One! two, three, four!
One, two, three!...

So it shall be
In Flanders or in France.  After a long
Winter of heavy burdens and loud war,
I will forget, as I do now, all things
Except the perfect beauty of the earth.
Strangely familiar, I will hear a song,
As I do now, above the battle roar,
That will set free my pent imaginings
And quiet all surprise.
My body will seem lighter than the air,
Easier to sway than a green stalk of corn;
Heaven shall bend above me in its mirth
With flutter of blue wings;
And singing, singing, as to-day it sings,
The earth will call to me, will call and rise
And take me to its bosom there to bear
My mortal-feeble being to new birth
Upon a world, this world, like me reborn,
Where I shall be
Alive again and young again and glad and free.

One! two, three, four!
One! two, three, four!
One, two, three!...

All the world about me seems
The fulfillment of my dreams.

[signed] Salomon De La Selva.





The People's Struggle




"Let no free country be alien to the freedom of another country."


"Portugal is going solemnly to affirm on the field of battle her
adhesion to this precept, though uttered by German lips.  In defense
of it, Portuguese will fight side by side with Englishmen, as they
fought with them at Aljubarrota, side by side with Frenchmen, who
fought with them at Montes Claros.  Were it necessary to appeal
to a motive less disinterested than the noble ideal proclaimed by
Schiller, we have this:  the payment of an ancient debt to which
our honor binds us.  Let us go forward to defend territories of
those who defended ours, let us maintain the independence of nations
who contributed to the salvation of our own independence.

"But the objective is a higher one, I repeat.  This has been made
quite clear within the last few months, through the revolution in
Russia, the participation of the United States, and the solidarity,
more or less effective, of all the democracies.  It is the people's
struggle for right, for liberty, for civilization against the d