led to such active
participation she will find means to hold up the hands of those
more actively engaged, and in countless ways will she be able to
mitigate the evils of this most terrible of all wars, and not least
of all because of the gift of piety with which Almighty God has so
generously endowed her.  Her unceasing prayers will ascend to the
throne of God for those engaged in this terrible struggle, and
mercies and blessings will be drawn down upon multitudes of people
whom she has never seen.

I bid Godspeed to The Militia of Mercy, and I hope that every
American woman who can will take part in this most womanly and most
patriotic work.

[signed] J. Cardinal Gibbons





Joan of Arc--Her Heritage




I saw in Orleans three years ago the celebration of the 487th
Anniversary of the deliverance of the ancient city by Joan of Arc.

The flower of the French army passed before me, the glorious
sunlight touching sword and lance and bayonet tip until they formed
a shimmering fretwork of steel.  Then came the City Fathers in
democratic dress--and following them, the dignitaries of the Church,
in purple and crimson and old lace, and a host of choir boys singing
Glory to God in the Highest, and finally in his splendid scarlet
robe, a cardinal symbolical of power and majesty and dominion.

In whose honor was all this gorgeous pageantry?  In honor of a simple
peasant girl, who saw or thought she saw visions--it is perfectly
immaterial whether she did or not--and who heard or fancied she
heard--it matters not--voices calling to her out of the silences
of the night to go forth and save France.  Soldiers and clergy and
populace, Catholics and Protestants and pagans united in paying
homage to the courage of a woman.  And I thought as I watched
the brilliant spectacle in the shadow of the old cathedral, that
thousands of women in the twentieth century in England and America,
and France and Germany and all the Nations are serving in a different
way, it is true, from the way in which Joan of Arc served France,
but none the less effectively.  Aye, even more so, as they go forth
clad not in mail, but in Christian love to help mankind.  In the
very forefront of this shining host are the trained nurses, following
the standard uplifted by Florence Nightingale.

When I see a trained nurse in her attractive cap and gown I always
feel that a richer memory, a finer intention has been read into
life.  Wherever they go they carry healing with them.

To maintain this army of militant good will and helpfulness, and
to increase it as occasion requires is an obligation so imperative
that it cannot be evaded.

Never was it as urgent as it is to-day, that there should be generous
response to the appeal for nurses.

If we are often discouraged in our philanthropic work, it is not
because we consider what we are doing in a detached way, independent
of its world relationships.  If we could only realize that we are
part of the mighty army composed of all nationalities and races
and creeds, an army of life, not of death, marching past disease
and suffering and misery and sin, we would be inspired to wage the
conflict with greater vigor, until our vision of the world freed
from suffering, was realized.

When the realization comes, it will not come with shouting and
tumult, but will come quietly and beautifully as the sun makes its
triumphant progress through the heavens, gradually conquering the
night until at last the earth is flooded with glorious warmth and
light and all the formless shapes that loved darkness rather than
light silently steal away and are forgotten.

John Lewis Griffiths

Note:  Although the above selection was part of an address delivered in
London in 1911, its truth is more apparent today than ever before.





Things Which Cannot Be Shaken




There are season in life when everything seems to be shaking.  Old
landmarks are crumbling.  Venerable foundations are upheaved in a
night, and are scattered abroad as dust.  Guiding buoys snap their
moorings, and go drifting down the channel.  Institutions which
promised to outlast the hills collapse like a stricken tent.
Assumptions in which everybody trusted burst like air-balloons.
Everything seems to lose its base, and trembles in uncertainty and
confusion.

Such seasons are known in our personal life.  One day our
circumstances appear to share the unshaken solidity of the planet,
and our security is complete.  And then some undreamed-of antagonism
assaults our life.  We speak of it as a bolt from the blue!
Perhaps it is some stunning disaster in business.  Or perhaps death
has leaped into our quiet meadows.  Or perhaps some presumptuous
sin has suddenly revealed its foul face in the life of one of our
children.  And we are "all at sea!"  Our little, neat hypotheses
crumple like withered leaves.  Our accustomed roads are all broken
up, our conventional ways of thinking and feeling, and the sure
sequences on which we have depended vanish in a night.  It is
experiences like these which make the soul cry out with the psalmist,
in bewilderment and fear,--"My foot slippeth!"  His customary
foothold had given way.  The ground was shaking beneath him.  The
foundations trembled.

And such seasons are known in the life of nations.  An easy-going
traditionalism can be overturned in a single blast.  Conventional
standards, which seemed to have the fixedness of the stars are
blown to the winds.  Political and economic safeguards go down like
wooden fences before an angry sea.  The customary foundations of
society are shaken.  We must surely have had such experiences as
these during the past weeks and months.  What was unthinkable has
become a commonplace.  The impossible has happened.  Our working
assumptions are in ruins.  Common securities have vanished.  And
on every side men and women are whispering the question,--Where
are we?  We are all staggered!  And everywhere men and women, in
their own way, are whispering the confession of the psalmist,--"My
foot slippeth!"

Well, where are we?  Amid all these violations of our ideals, and
the quenching of our hopes, in this riot of barbarism and unutterable
sorrow, where are we?  Where can we find a footing?  Where can
we stay our souls?  Where can we set our feet as upon solid rock?
Amid the many things which are shaking what things are there which
cannot be shaken?

"Things which cannot be shaken."  Let us begin here:  THE SUPREMACY
OF SPIRITUAL FORCES CANNOT BE SHAKEN.  The obtrusive circumstances
of the hour shriek against that creed.  Spiritual forces seem to
be overwhelmed.  We are witnessing a perfect carnival of insensate
materialism.  The narratives which fill the columns of the daily
press reek with the fierce spectacle of labor and achievement.
And yet, in spite of all this appalling outrage upon the sense, we
must steadily beware of becoming the victims of the apparent and
the transient.  Behind the uncharted riot there hides a power whose
invisible energy is the real master of the field.  The ocean can
be lashed by the winds into indescribable fury, and the breakers
may rise and fall in crushing weight and disaster; and yet behind
and beneath all the wild phenomena there is a subtle, mystical
force which is exerting its silent mastery even at the very height
of the storm.  We must discriminate between the phenomenal and
the spiritual, between the event of the hour and the drift of the
year, between the issue of a battle and the tendency of a campaign.
All of which means that "While we look at the things which are seen,
we are also to look at the things which are not seen."  Well, look
at them.

THE POWER OF TRUTH can never be shaken.  The force of disloyalty
may have its hour of triumph, and treachery may march for a season
to victory after victory; but all the while truth is secretly
exercising her mastery, and in the long run the labor of falsehood
will crumble into ruin.  There is no permanent conquest for a lie.
You can no more keep the truth interred than you could keep the
Lord interred in Joseph's tomb.  You cannot bury the truth, you
cannot strangle her, you cannot even shake her!  You may burn up
the records of the truth, but you cannot impair the truth itself!
When the records are reduced to ashes truth shall walk abroad as
an indestructible angel and minister of the Lord!  "He shall give
His angels charge over thee," and truth is one of His angels, and
she cannot be destroyed.

There was a people in the olden days who sought to find security
in falsehood, and to construct a sovereignty by the aid of broken
covenants.  Let me read to you their boasts as it is recorded
by the prophet Isaiah:  "We have made a covenant with death, and
with hell are we at agreement:  when the overflowing scourge shall
pass through, it shall not come unto us, for we have made lies our
refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves."  And so they
banished truth.  But banished truth is not vanquished truth.  Truth
is never idle; she is ever active and ubiquitous, she is forever
and forever our antagonist or our friend.  "Therefore thus saith the
Lord God...your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand...and the hail shall sweep away
the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding-places."
Thus said the Lord!  We may silence a fort, but we cannot paralyze
the truth.  Amid all the material convulsions of the day the
supremacy of truth remains unshaken.  "The mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it."

"Things which cannot be shaken!"  What is there which cannot be
shaken?  THE PASSION OF FREEDOM is one of the rarest of spiritual
flames, and it can not be quenched.  Make your appeal to history.
Again and again militarism has sought to crush it, but it has
seemed to share the very life of God.  Brutal inspirations have
tried to smother it, but it has breathed an indestructible life.
Study its energy in the historical records of the Book or in annals
of a wider field.  Study the passion of freedom amid the oppressions
of Egypt, or in the captivity of Babylon, or in the servitude of
Rome.  How does the passion express itself?  "If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, may my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, and may
my right hand forget her cunning!"  Study it in the glowing pages
of the history of this country, that breath of free aspiration which
no power of armament, and no menace of material strength was ever
able to destroy.  The mightiest force in all those days was not
the power of threat, and powder, and sword, but that breath of
invincible aspiration which was the very breath of God.  And when
we gaze upon stricken Belgium to-day, and look upon her sorrows,
and her smitten fields, and her ruined cities, and her desolate
homes, we can firmly and confidently proclaim that the breath
of that divinely planted aspiration, her passion of freedom, will
prove to be mightier than all the materialistic strength and all
the prodigious armaments which seem to have laid her low.  It is
a reality which cannot be shaken.

There are other spiritual forces which we might have named, and which
would have manifested the same incontestable supremacy:  there is
the energy of meekness, that spirit of docility which communes with
the Almighty in hallowed and receptive awe:  there is the boundless
vitality of love which lives on through midnight after midnight,
unfainting and unspent:  there is the inexhaustible energy of faith
which hold on and out amid the massed hostilities of all its foes.
You cannot defeat spirits like these, you cannot crush and destroy
them.  You cannot hold them under, for their supremacy shares the
holy sovereignty of the eternal God.  "Not by might, nor by power,
but by my Spirit, saith the Lord;" and these spirits, the spirit
of truth, the spirit of freedom, the spirit of meekness and love,
are in fellowship with the divine Spirit, and therefore shall they
remain unshaken.

[signed]J.H. Jowett





Somewhere in France




"Somewhere in France"--the day is tranquil, the sky unvexed, the
green earth without a wound as I write; yet "somewhere in France"
the day is torn with clamors, the sky is soiled with man's mounting
hatred of man, and long, open wounds lie cruelly across the disputed
earth.  "Somewhere in France"--my mind goes back to remembered
scenes:  the crowd blocking the approach to a depot; white faces
and staring eyes, eyes that alternately fear and hope, and in the
crush a tickling gray line of returning PERMISSIONAIRES.  "Somewhere
in France"--on such a perfect day as this I see a little village
street nestled among the trees, and hear the sound of the postman's
reluctant feet tapping over the cobblestones--the postman that comes
with the relentlessness of Fate--and at every house the horror of
the black envelope.  "Somewhere in France" the great immemorial
cathedrals and the dotted, cool, moss-covered churches are filled
with supplicating women and the black-framed, golden locks of
children lifting their eyes before the Great Consoler as the sun
breaks through the paling candle-flames.  "Somewhere in France"--in
its crowded stations I remember a proud womanhood, gray in
the knowledge of sorrow, speeding its young sons and speaking the
Spartan words.  "Somewhere in France," in its thousand hospitals,
the ministering white-clad angels are moving in their long vigils,
calm, smiling, inspired.  "Somewhere in France"--I see again
imperishable fragments of remembered emotions; the women working
in the vineyards of Champagne, careless of fate or the passing
shells; the orphan children playing in the ruins of Rheims; a laughing
child in bombarded Arras running out to pick up an exploded shell,
a child in whom daily habits has brought fear into contempt; a
skeleton of a church in far-flung Bethany, that still lives in a
sea of fire, where a black-coated priest of the unflinching faith
was holding his mass among kneeling men before an altar hidden in
the last standing corner from which the shredded ruins had been
swept.

"Somewhere in France"--I remember the volcanic earth, the strewn
ruin of all things, the prostrate handiwork of man mingled with
the indignant bowels of the earth, and from a burrowed hole a POILU
laughing out at us in impertinent greeting, with a gaiety which is
more difficult than courage.

"Somewhere in France"--in bombarded Arras, was it not?--I remember
an old woman, a very old woman, leaning on her cane as she peered
from her cellar door within a hundred yards of the smoldering cathedral.
I wonder if she still lives, for Arras will be struggling back to
life now.

"Somewhere in France"--what thronged memories troop at these liberating
words!  And yet, through all the passing drama of remembered little
things, what I see always before my eyes is the spiritual rise of
Verdun.  Verdun, heroic sister of the Marne; Verdun, the battling
heart of France--whose stained slopes are anointed by the blood
of a million men.  Verdun!  The very name has the upward fury and
descending shock of an attacking wave dying against an immemorial
shore.  To have seen it as I was privileged to see it in that
historic first week of August, 1915, at the turning of the tide,
at the moment of the retaking of Fleury and Thiaumont, was to have
stood between two great spectacles:  the written page of a defense
such as history has never seen, and the future, glowing with the
unquenchable fire of undying France.  When I think of the flaming
courage of that heroic race, my imagination returns always to the
vision of that defense--not the patient fortitude before famine of
Paris, Sebastopol or Mafeking, but that miracle of patience and
calm in the face of torrential rains of steel which for months
swept the human earth in such a deluge as never before had been
sent in punishment upon the world.  This was no adventure such as
that gambling with fate which in all times and in all forms has
stirred the spirit of man.  Regiment after regiment marched down into
the maw of hell, into the certainty of death.  They went forward,
not to dare, but to die, in that sublimest spirit of exultation
and sacrifice of which humanity is capable, that the children of
France might live free and unafraid, Frenchmen in a French land.
They went in regiment after regiment, division after division--living
armies to replace the ghostly armies that had held until they died.
Days without nights, weeks without a breathing spell--five months
and more.  They lie there now, the human wall of France, that no
artillery has ever mastered or ever will, to prove that greater
than all the imagined horror of man's instinct of destruction,
undaunted before the new death that rocks the earth beneath him
and pollutes the fair vision of the sky above, the spirit of man
abides superior.  Death is but a material horror; the will to live
free is the immortal thing.

[signed] Owen Johnson





The Associated Press




It is worth while to explain how the world's news is gathered and
furnished in a newspaper issued at one cent a copy.  First, as
to the foreign news, which is, of course, the most difficult to
obtain and the most expensive.  In normal times there are the four
great agencies which, with many smaller and tributary agencies,
are covering the whole world.  These four agencies are, as above
noted, the Reuter Telegram Company, Ltd., of London, which assumes
responsibility for the news of the great British Empire, including
the home land, every colony except Canada, and the Suzerain,
or allied countries, as Egypt, Turkey, and even China and Japan;
and the Agency Havas of Paris, taking care of the Latin countries,
France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, Switzerland and South
America as well as Northern Africa; and the Wolff Agency of Berlin,
reporting the happening in the Teutonic, Scandinavian, and Slav
nations.  These three organizations are allied with The Associated
Press in an exclusive exchange arrangement.  Subordinate to these
agencies is a smaller one in almost every nation, having like
exchange agreements with the larger companies.

Thus it happens that there is not a place of moment in the habitable
globe that is not provided for.  Moreover, there is scarcely a
reporter on any paper in the world who does not, in a sense, become
a representative of all these four agencies.  Not only are there
these alliances, but in every important capital of every country, and
in a great many of the other larger cities abroad there are "A.P."
men, trained by long experience in its offices in this country.
This is done because, first, the organization is naturally anxious
to view every country with American eyes; and, second, because a
number of the agencies spoken of are under the influence of their
Governments and, therefore, not always trustworthy.  They are relied
upon for a certain class of news, as for instance, accidents by
flood and field, where there is no reason for any misrepresentation
on their part.  But where it is a question which may involve national
pride or interest, or where there is a possibility of partisanship
or untruthfulness, the "A.P." men are trusted.

Now, assume that a fire has broken out in Benares, the sacred
city of the Hindus, on the banks of the Ganges, and a hundred or a
thousand people have lost their lives.  Not far away, at Allahabad
or at Calcutta, is a daily paper, having a correspondent at Benares,
who reports the disaster fully.  Some one on this paper sends the
story, or as much of it as is of general rather than local interest,
to the agent of the Reuter Company at Calcutta, Bombay, or Madras;
and thence it is cabled to London and Hongkong, and Sydney and
Tokio.  At each of these places there are Associated Press men,
one of whom picks it up and forwards it to New York.

The wide world is combed for news, and an incredibly short time
is delivered and printed everywhere.  When Pope [Leo] XIII died in
Rome the fact was announced by an Associated Press dispatch in the
columns of a San Francisco paper in nine minutes from the instant
when he breathed his last.  And this message was repeated back to
London, Paris, and Rome, and gave those cities the first information
of the event.  When Port Arthur was taken by the Japanese in the
war of 1896 it came to us in New York in fifty minutes, although
it passed through twenty-seven relay offices.  Few of the operators
transmitting it knew what the dispatch meant.  But they understood
the Latin letters, and sent it on from station to station, letter
by letter.

When Peary came back from his great discovery in the Arctic Sea
he reached Winter Harbor, on the coast of Labrador, and from there
sent me a wireless message that he had nailed the Stars and Stripes
to the North Pole.  This went to Sydney, on Cape Breton Island,
and was forwarded thence by cable and telegraph to New York.

The organization is cooperative in its character.  As a condition
of membership, each one belonging agrees to furnish to his
fellow-members, either directly or through the Association, and
to them exclusively, the news of his vicinage, as gathered by him
for his own paper.  This constitutes the large fountain from which
our American news supply is drawn.  But, as in the case of the
foreign official agencies, if there be danger that an individual
member is biased, or if the matter be one of high importance, our
own trained and salaried staff men do the reporting.  For this
purpose, as well as for administrative work, there is a bureau in
every leading city.

For the collection and interchange of this information we lease
from the various telephone and telegraph companies, and operate with
our own employees, something like fifty thousand miles of wires,
stretching out in every direction through the country and touching
every important center.  To reach smaller cities, the telephone
is employed.  Everywhere in every land, and every moment of every
day, there is ceaseless vigil for news.

People frequently ask what it costs thus to collect the news of the
world.  And we cannot answer.  Our annual budget is between three
and four million dollars.  But this makes no account of the work
done by the individual papers all over the world in reporting the
matters and handling the news over to the agencies.  Neither can
we estimate the number of men and women engaged in this fashion.
It is easy to measure the cost of certain specific events; as, for
instance, we expended twenty-eight thousand dollars to report the
Martinique disaster.  And the Russo-Japanese war cost us over three
hundred thousand dollars.

Such is an outline of our activities in what we call normal times.
But these are not normal times.  When the great European war broke
on us, eighteen months ago, all of the processes of civilization
seemed to go down in an hour.  And we suffered in common with
others.  Our international relations for the exchange of news were
instantly dislocated.  We had been able to impress the governments
abroad with the value of an impartial and unpurchasable news service,
as opposed to the venal type of journalism, which was too common
on the European continent. And in our behalf they had abolished
their censorships.  They had accorded us rules assuring us great
rapidity in the transmission of our messages over their government
telegraph lines.  They had opened the doors of their chancelleries
to our correspondents, and told them freely the news as it developed.

All the advantages ceased.  The German news agency was prohibited
from holding any intercourse with the English, French, or Russian
organizations.  Simultaneously, like commerce was interdicted in
the other countries.  The virtue of impartial news-gathering at
once ceased to be quoted at par.  Everywhere, in all of the warring
lands the Biblical rule that "he that is not with me is against me,"
became the controlling view.  Government telegrams were obviously
very important and there was no time to consider anywhere any of
the promised speed in sending our dispatches.  Finally, censorships
were imposed.  This was quite proper in principle.  Censorships are
always necessary in time of war.  But it is desirable, from every
point of view, that they be intelligent, and that is not always
the case.

Nevertheless, we have fared pretty well in the business of reporting
this war.  We have made distinct progress in teaching the belligerents
that we hold no brief for any one of them, and, while each would
much rather have us plead his cause, they are coming to see why we
cannot and ought not do so.  And our men are everywhere respected
and accorded as large privileges as, perhaps, in the light of the
tension of the hour, could be reasonably asked.

[signed] Melville E. Stone





Pan and the Pot-Hunter




They are not many who are privileged to learn that the forces of the
Wilderness are as gods, distributing benefits, and, from such as
have earned them, taking even handed reprisals.  Only the Greeks of
all peoples realized this in its entirety, and them the gods repaid
with the pure joy of creation which is the special prerogative of
gods.

But Greenhow had heard nothing of the Greeks save as a symbol of
all unintelligibility, and of the gods not at all.  His stock was
out of England by way of the Tennessee mountains, drifting Pacific
coastward after the war of the Rebellion, and he was a Pot Hunter
by occasion and inclination.  The occasion he owned to being born
in one of the bays of the southerly Sierras where the plentitude
of wild life reduced pot hunting to the degree of easy murder.

A Pot Hunter, you understand, is a business man.  He is out for
what he can get, and regards game laws as an interference with the
healthful interactions of competition.  Greenhow potted quail in
the Temblors where by simply rolling out of his blanket he could
bag two score at a shot as they flocked, sleek and stately blue,
down the runways to the drinking places.  He took pronghorn at
Castac with a repeating rifle and a lure of his red necktie held
aloft on a cleaning rod, and packed them four to a mule-back down
the Tejon to Summerfield.  He shot farrow does and fished out of
season, and had never heard of the sportsmanly obligation to throw
back the fingerlings.  Anything that made gunning worth while to
the man who came after you was, by Greenhow's reckoning, a menace
to pot hunting.

There were Indians in those parts who could have told him
better--notable hunters who never shot swimming deer nor does with
fawn nor any game unaware; who prayed permission of the Wuld before
they went to hunt, and left offal for their little brothers of the
Wilderness.  Indians know.  But Greenhow, being a business man,
opined that Indians were improvident, and not being even good at
his business, fouled the waters where he camped, left man traces
in his trails and neglected to put out his fires properly.

Whole hillsides where the deer had browsed were burnt off bare as
your hand in the wake of the pot hunter.  Thus in due course, though
Greenhow laid it to the increasing severity of game laws framed in
the interests of city sportsmen, who preferred working hard for
their venison to buying it comfortably in the open market, pot
hunting grew so little profitable that he determined to leave it
off altogether an become a Settler.  Not however until he had earned
the reprisal of the gods, of whom in a dozen years he had not even
become aware.

In the Spring of the year the Tonkawanda irrigation district was
opened, he settled himself on a spur of San Jacinto where it plunges
like a great dolphin in the green swell of the camissal, and throws
up a lacy foam of chaparral along its sides.  Below him, dotted
over the flat reach of the mesa, the four square clearings of the
Homesteaders showed along the line of the great canal, keen and
blue as the cutting edge of civilization.  There was a deep-soil
level under the nose of San Jacinto--rabbits used to play there
until Greenhow took to potting them for his breakfast--and a stream
bubbled from under the hill to waste in the meadow.

Greenhow built a shack under a live oak there and fancied himself
in the character of a proprietor.  He reckoned that in the three
years before his vineyard came into bearing, he could pot-hunt in
the hills behind his clearing for the benefit of the Homesteaders.

It was altogether a lovely habitation.  Camise grew flush with the
meadow and the flanks of San Jacinto shivered and sparkled with
the wind that turned the thousand leaves of the chaparral.  Under
the wind one caught at times the slow deep chuckle of the water.
Greenhow should have been warned by that.  In just such tones the
ancient Greeks had heard the great god Pan laughing in the woods
under Parnassus,--which was Greek indeed to the Pot Hunter.

Greenhow was thirty-four when he took out his preemption papers
and planted his first acre of vines.  For reasons best known to
the gods, the deer kept well away from that side of the San Jacinto
that year.  Greenhow enlarged the meadow and turned up ground for
a garden; he became acquainted with his neighbors and learned that
they had prejudices in favor of game regulations, also that one of
them had a daughter.  She had white, even teeth that flashed when
she laughed; the whole effect of her was as sound and as appetizing
as a piece of ripe fruit.  Greenhow told her that the prospect of
having a home of his own was an incentive such as pot-hunting held
out to no man.  He looked as he said it, a very brother to Nimrod,
for as yet the Pot had not marked him.

He stood straight; his eyes had the deep, varying blueness of lake
water.  Little wisps and burrs, odors of the forest clung about
his clothing; a beard covered his slack, formless mouth.  When he
told the Homesteader's daughter how the stars went by on heather
planted headlands and how the bucks belled the does at the bottom
of deep canons in October, she heard in it the call of the trail
and young Adventure.  Times when she would see from the level of
her father's quarter section the smoke of the Pot Hunter's cabin
rising blue against the glistening green of the live oak, she thought
that life might have a wilder, sweeter tang there about the roots
of the mountain.

In his second Spring when the camissal foamed all white with bloom
and the welter of yellow violets ran in the grass under it like
fire, Greenhow built a lean-to to his house and made the discovery
that the oak which jutted out from the barranca behind it was of
just the right height from the ground to make a swing for a child,
which caused him a strange pleasant embarrassment.

"Look kind o' nice to see a little feller playin' round," he
admitted to himself, and the same evening went down to call on the
Homesteader's daughter.

That night the watchful guardians of the Wild sent the mule-deer
to Harry the man who had been a pot-hunter.  A buck of three years
came down the draw by the watercourse and nibbled the young shoots
of the vines where he could reach them across the rabbit proof
fencing that the settler had drawn about his planted acres.  Not
that the wire netting would have stopped him; this was merely the
opening of the game.  Three days later he spent the night in the
kitchen garden and cropped the tips of the newly planted orchard.
After that the two of them put in nearly the whole of the growing
season dodging one another through the close twigged manzanita,
lilac, laurel and mahogany that broke upward along the shining
bouldered coasts of San Jacinto.  the chaparral at this season took
all the changes of the incoming surf, blue in the shadows, darkling
green about the heads of the gulches, or riffling with the white
under side of wind-lifted leaves.  Once its murmurous swell had
closed over them, the mule-deer would have his own way with the
Pot Hunter.  Often after laborious hours spent in repairing the
garden, the man would hear his enemy coughing in the gully behind
the house, and take up his rifle to put in the rest of the day
snaking through the breathless fifteen foot cover, only to have
a glimpse of the buck at last dashing back the late light from
glittering antlers as he bounded up inaccessible rocky stairs.  This
was the more exasperating since Greenhow had promised the antlers
to the Homesteader's daughter.

When the surface of the camissal had taken on the brown tones
of weed under sea water and the young clusters of the grapes were
set--for this was the year the vineyard was expected to come into
bearing--the mule-deer disappeared altogether from that district,
and Greenhow went back hopefully to rooting the joint grass out
of the garden.  But about the time he should have been rubbing the
velvet off his horns among the junipers of the high ridges, the
mule-deer came back with two of his companions and fattened on
the fruit of the vineyard.  They went up and down the rows ruining
with selective bites the finest clusters.  During the day they
lay up like cattle under the quaking aspens beyond the highest,
wind-whitened spay of the chaparral, and came down to feast day by
day as the sun ripened the swelling amber globules.  They slipped
between the barbs of the fine wired fence without so much as changing
a leg or altering their long, loping stride; and what they left
the quail took.

In pattering droves of hundreds they trekked in from the camise
before there was light enough to shoot by, and nipped once and
with precision at the ripest in every bunch.  Afterward they dusted
themselves in the chaparral and twitted the proprietor with soft
contented noises.  At the end of the October rut the deer came
back plentifully to the Tonkawanda District, and Greenhow gave up
the greater part of the rainy season to auditing his account with
them.  He spent whole days scanning the winter colored slope for
the flicker and slide of light on a hairy flank that betrayed his
enemy, or, rifle in hand, stalking a patch of choke cherry and
manzanita within which the mule-deer could snake and crawl for
hours by intricacies of doubling and back tracking that yielded
not a square inch of target and no more than the dust of his final
disappearance.  Wood gatherers heard at times above their heads
the discontented whine of deflected bullets.  Windy mornings the
quarry would signal from the high barrens by slow stiff legged
bounds that seemed to invite the Pot Hunter's fire, and at the end
of a day's tracking among the punishing stubs of the burnt district,
Greenhow returning would hear the whistling cough of the mule-deer
in the ravine not a rifle shot from the house.

In the meantime rabbits burrowed under the wire netting to bark
his young trees, and an orchardist who held the job of ditch tender
along the Tonkawanda, began to take an interest in the Homesteader's
daughter.  Seldom any smoke went up now from the cabin under the
Dolphin's nose.  Occasionally there rose a blue thread of it far up
on the thinly forested crest of San Jacinto where the buck, bedded
in the low brush between the bosses of the hills, kept a look out
across the gullies from which Greenhow attempted to ambuscade him.
Day by day the man would vary the method of approach until almost
within rifle range, and then the wind would change or there would
be the click of gravel underfoot, or the scrape of a twig on stiff
overalls, and suddenly the long oval ears would slope forward, the
angular lines flow into grace and motion and the game would begin
again.

Greenhow killed many deer that season and got himself under suspicion
of the game warden, but never THE deer; and a very subtle change
came over him, such a change as marks the point at which a man
leaves off being hunter to become the hunted.  He began to sense,
with vague reactions of resentment, the personality of Power.

It was about the end of the rains that the DITCH TENDER who was
also an orchardist, took the Homesteader's daughter to ride on his
unoccupied Sunday afternoon.  He had something to say to her which
demanded the wide, uninterrupted space of day.  They went up toward
the roots of the mountain between the green dikes of the chaparral,
and he was so occupied with watching the pomegranate color of her
cheeks and the nape of her neck where the sun touched it, that
he failed to observe that it was she who turned the horses into
the trail that led off the main road toward the shack of the Pot
Hunter.  The same change that had come over the man had fallen on
his habitation.  through the uncurtained window they saw heaps of
unwashed dishes and the rusty stove, and along the eaves of the
lean-to, a row of antlers bleaching.

"There's really no hope for a man," said the ditch tender, "once
he gets THAT habit.  It's worse than drink."

"Perhaps," said the Homesteader's daughter, "if he had any one at
home who cared..."  She was looking down at the bindweed that had
crept about the roots of a banksia rose she had once given the Pot
Hunter out of her own garden, and she sighed, but the ditch tender
did not notice that either.  He was thinking this was so good an
opportunity for what he had to say that he drew the horses toward
the end of the meadow where the stream came in, and explained to
her particularly just what it meant to a man to have somebody at
home who cared.

The Homesteader's daughter leaned against the oak as she listened,
and lifted up her clear eyes with a light in them that was like a
flash out of the deep, luminous eye of day, which caused the ditch
tender the greatest possible satisfaction.  He did not think it
strange, immediately he had her answer, to hear the titter of the
leaves of the lilac and the sudden throaty chuckle of the water.

"I am so happy," laughed the ditch tender, "that I fancy the whole
world is laughing with me."


All this was not so long as you would imagine to look at the Pot
Hunter.  As time went on the marking of the pot came out on him
very plainly.  He acquired the shifty, sidelong gait of the meaner
sort of predatory creatures.  His clothes, his beard, his very
features have much the appearance that his house has, as if the
owner of it were distant on another occupation, and the camise has
regained a considerable portion of his clearing.  Owing to the
vigilance of the game warden his is not a profitable business;
also he is in disfavor with the homesteaders along the Tonkawanda
who credit him with the disappearance of the mule-deer, once
plentiful in that district.  A solitary specimen is occasionally
met by sportsmen along the back of San Jacinto, exceedingly gun
wary.  But if Greenhow had known a little more about the Greeks it
might all have turned out quite differently.

[signed] Mary Austin





Men of the Sea




The afternoon sun etched our shadows on the whitewashed wall behind
us.  Acres of grain and gorse turned the moorland golden under a
windy blue sky.  In front of us the Bay of Biscay burned sapphire
to the horizon.

"You men of the sea," I said, "attain a greater growth of soul than
do we whose roots are in the land.  You are men of wider spiritual
vision, of deeper capacity than are we."

The coastguard's weather-beaten visage altered subtly.

"How can that be, Monsieur?  Our sins stalk us like vast red shadows.
We live violently, we men of the sea."

"But you really LIVE--spiritually and physically.  You attain a
spiritual growth, a vision, an understanding, a depth seldom reached
by us:--a wide kindness, a charity, a noble humanity outside the
circumference of our experience."

He said, looking seaward out of vague, sea-gray eyes:  "We drink
too deeply.  We love too often.  We men of the sea have great need
of intercession and of prayer."

"Not YOU."

"There was a girl at Rosporden....  And one at Bannalec....  And
others...from the ends of the earth to the ends of it...We Icelanders
drank deep.  And afterwards...in the China seas...."

His gray Breton eyes brooded on the flowing sapphire of the sea;
the low sun painted his furrowed face red.

"Not one among you but lays down his life for others as quietly
and simply as he fills his pipe.  From the rocking mizzen you look
down calmly upon the world of men tossing with petty and complex
passions--look down with the calm, kindly comprehension of a mature
soul which has learned something of Immortal toleration.  The
scheme of things is clearer to you than to us; your pity, wiser;
our faith more logical."

"We are children," he muttered, "we men of the sea."

I have tried to say so--in too many words," said I.

My dog looked up at me, then with a slight sigh settled himself
again beside the game bag and tucked his nose under his flank.  On
the whitewashed walls of the ancient, ruined fort behind us our
shadows towered in the red sunset.

I turned and looked at the roofless, crumbling walls, then at the
coast where jeweled surf tumbled, stained with crimson.

These shores had been washed with a redder stain in years gone
by:  these people were forever stamped with the eradicable scar
of suffering borne by generations dead.  The centuries had never
spared them.

And, as I brooded there, watching two peasants, father and son,
grubbing out the gorse below us to make a place for future wheat,
the rose surf beyond seemed full of little rosy children and showy
women, species of the endless massacres that this sad land had
endlessly endured.

"They struck you hard and deep," I said, thinking of the past.

"Deep, Monsieur," he replied, understanding me.  "Deep as your
people's hatred."

"Oh, poor ca"--he made a vague gesture.  "The dead are dead," he
said, leaning over and opening my game bag to look into it and sort
and count the few braces of partridge, snipe and widgeon.

Presently, from below, the peasants at work in the gorse, shouted
up to us something that I did not understand.

They were standing close together, leaning on mattock and spade,
grouped around something in the gorse.

"What do they say?" I asked.

"They have found a soldier's body."

"A body?"

"Long dead, Monsieur.  The skeleton of one of these who scourged
this coast in the old days."

He rose and started leisurely down through the flowering gorse.  I
followed, and my dog followed me.

In the shallow excavation there lay a few bones and shreds and bits
of tarnished metal.

I stooped and picked up a button and a belt buckle.  The royal arms
and the Regimental number were decipherable on the brasses.  One
of the peasants said:

"In Quimper lives a rich man who pays for relics.  God, in his
compassion, sends us poor men these bones."

The coastguard said:  "God sends them to you for decent internment.
Not to sell."

"But," retorted the peasant, "these bones and bits of brass belonged
to one of those who came here with fire and sword.  Need we respect
our enemies who slew without pity young and old?  And these bones
are very ancient."

"The living must respect the dead, Jean Le Locard."

"I am poor," muttered Le Locard.  "We Bretons are born to misery
and sorrow.  Life is very hard.  Is it any harm if I sell these
bones and brasses to a rich man, and buy a little bread for my wife
and little ones?"

The coastguard shook his head gravely:  "We Bretons may go hungry
and naked, but we cannot traffic in death.  Here lies a soldier,
a hundred years hidden under the gorse.  Nevertheless--"

He touched his cap in salute.  Slowly the peasants lifted their
caps and stood staring down at the bones, uncovered.

"Make a grave," said the coastguard simply.  He pointed up at the
old graveyard on the cliff above us.  Then, touching my elbow, he
turned away with me toward the little hamlet across the moors.

"Let us find the Cure," he murmured.  "We men of the sea should
salute the death God sends with the respect we owe to all His gifts
to man."

Our three gigantic shadows led us back across the moor,--my dog,
myself, and the gray-eyed silent man who knew the sea,--and something
perhaps, of the sea's Creator:--and much of his fellow men.

[signed] Robert W. Chambers





Jim--A Soldier of the King




We were machine gunners of the British Army stationed "Somewhere
in France" and had just arrived at our rest billets, after a weary
march from the front line sector.

The stable we had to sleep in was an old, ramshackle affair,
absolutely over-run with rats.  Great, big, black fellows, who used
to chew up our leather equipment, eat our rations, and run over
out bodies at night.  German gas had no effect on these rodents;
in fact, they seemed to thrive on it.

The floor space would comfortably accommodate about twenty men lying
down, but when thirty-three, including equipment, were crowded into
it, it was nearly unbearable.

The roof and walls were full of shell holes.  When it rained, a
constant drip, drip, drip was in order.  We were so crowded that if
a fellow was unlucky enough (and nearly all of us in this instance
were unlucky) to sleep under a hole, he had to grin and bear it.
It was like sleeping beneath a shower bath.

At one end of the billet, with a ladder leading up to it, was a sort
of grain bin, with a door in it.  This place was the headquarters
of our guests, the rats.  Many a stormy cabinet meeting was held
there by them.  Many a boot was thrown at it during the night
to let them know that Tommy Atkins objected to the matter under
discussion.  Sometimes one of these missiles would ricochet, and
land on the upturned countenance of a snoring Tommy, and for about
half an hour even the rats would pause in admiration of his flow
of language.

On the night in question we flopped down in our wet clothes, and
were soon asleep.  As was usual, No. 2 gun's crew were together.

The last time we had rested in this particular village, it was
inhabited by civilians, but now it was deserted.  An order had
been issued, two days previous to our arrival, that all civilians
should move farther back of the line.

I had been asleep about two hours when I was awakened by Sailor
Bill shaking me by the shoulder.  He was trembling like a leaf,
and whispered to me:

"Wake up, Yank, this ship's haunted.  There's some one aloft who's
been moaning for the last hour.  Sounds like the wind in the rigging.
I ain't scared of humans or Germans, but when it comes to messin'
in with spirits it's time for me to go below.  Lend your ear and
cast your deadlights on that grain locker, and listen."

I listened sleepily for a minute or so, but could hear nothing.
Coming to the conclusion that Sailor Bill was dreaming things, I
was again soon asleep.

Perhaps fifteen minutes had elapsed when I was rudely awakened.

"Yank, for God's sake, come aboard and listen!"  I listened and
sure enough, right out of that grain bin overhead came a moaning
and whimpering, and then a scratching against the door.  My hair
stood on end.  Blended with the drip, drip of the rain, and the
occasional scurrying of a rat overhead, that noise had a super-natural
sound.  I was really frightened; perhaps my nerves were a trifle
unstrung from our recent tour in the trenches.

I awakened "Ikey" Honney, while Sailor Bill roused "Happy" Houghton
and "Hungry" Foxcroft.

Hungry's first words were, "What's the matter, breakfast ready?"

In as few words as possible, we told them what had happened.  By
the light of the candle I had lighted, their faces appeared as
white as chalk.  Just then the whimpering started again, and we
were frozen with terror.  The tension was relieved by Ikey's voice:

"I admint I'm afraid of ghosts, but that sounds like a dog to me.
Who's going up the ladder to investigate?"

No one volunteered.

I had an old deck of cards in my pocket.  Taking them out, I
suggested cutting, the low man to go up the ladder.  They agreed.
I was the last to cut.  I got the ace of clubs.  Sailor Bill was
stuck with the five of diamonds.  Upon this, he insisted that it
should be the best two out of three cuts, but we overruled him,
and he was unanimously elected for the job.

With a "So long, mates, I'm going aloft," he started toward the
ladder, with the candle in his hand, stumbling over the sleeping
forms of many.  Sundry grunts, moans, and curses followed in his
wake.

As soon as he started to ascend the ladder, a "tap-tap-tap" could
be heard from the grain bin.  We waited in fear and trembling the
result of his mission.  Hungry was encouraging him with "Cheero,
mate, the worst is yet to come."

After many pauses, Bill reached the top of the ladder and opened
the door.  We listened with bated breath.  Then he shouted:

"Blast my deadlights, if it ain't a poor dog!  Come alongside mate,
you're on a lee shore, and in a sorry plight."

Oh, what a relief those words were to us.

With the candle in one hand and a dark object under his arm, Bill
returned and deposited in our midst the sorriest-looking specimen
of a cur dog you ever set eyes on.  It was so weak it couldn't
stand.  But that look in its eyes--just gratitude, plain gratitude.
Its stump of a tail was pounding against my mess tin and sounded
just like a message in the Morse code.  Happy swore that it was
sending S O S.

We were a lot of school children, every one wanting to help and
making suggestions at the same time.  Hungry suggested giving it
something to eat, while Ikey wanted to play on his infernal jew's
harp, claiming it was a musical dog.  Hungry's suggestion met our
approval, and there was a general scramble for haversacks.  All we
could muster was some hard bread and a big piece of cheese.

His nibs wouldn't eat bread, and also refused the cheese, but not
before sniffling it for a couple of minutes.  I was going to throw
the cheese away, but Hungry said he would take it.  I gave it to
him.

We were in a quandary.  It was evident that the dog was starving
and in a very weak condition.  Its coat was lacerated all over,
probably from the bites of rats.  That stump of a tail kept sending
S O S against my mess tin.  Every tap went straight to our hearts.
We would get something to eat for that mutt if we were shot for
it.

Sailor Bill volunteered to burglarize the quartermaster's stores
for a can of unsweetened condensed milk, and left on his perilous
venture.  He was gone about twenty minutes.  During his absence,
with the help of a bandage and a capsule of iodine, we cleaned the
wounds made by the rats.  I have bandaged many a wounded Tommy,
but never received the amount of thanks that that dog gave with
its eyes.

Then the billet door opened and Sailor Bill appeared.  He looked
like the wreck of the HESPERUS, uniform torn, covered with dirt
and flour, and a beautiful black eye, but he was smiling, and in
his hand he carried the precious can of milk.

We asked no questions, but opened the can.  Just as we were going
to pour it out, Happy butted in and said it should be mixed with
water; he ought to know, because his sister back in Blighty had
a baby, and she always mixed water with its milk.  We could not
dispute this evidence, so water was demanded.  We could not use
the water in our water bottles, as it was not fresh enough for our
new mate.  Happy volunteered to get some from the well--that is, if
we would promise not to feed his royal highness until he returned.
We promised, because Happy had proved that he was an authority on
the feeding of babies.  By this time the rest of the section were
awake and were crowding around us, asking numerous questions, and
admiring our newly found friend.  Sailor Bill took this opportunity
to tell of his adventures while in quest of the milk.

"I had a fair wind, and the passage was good until I came alongside
the quartermaster's shack, then the sea got rough.  The porthole
was battened down, and I had to cast it loose.  When I got aboard,
I could hear the wind blowing through the rigging of the supercargo
(quartermaster sergeant snoring), so I was safe.  I set my course
due north to the ration hold, and got my grappling irons on a cask
of milk, and came about on my homeward-bound passage, but something
was amiss with my wheel, because I ran nose on into him, caught him
on the rail, amidships.  Then it was repel boarders, and it started
to blow big guns.  His first shot put out my starboard light, and
I keeled over.  I was in the trough of the sea, but soon righted,
and then it was a stern chase, with me in the lead.  Getting into
the open sea, I made a port tack and have to in this cove with the
milk safely in tow."

Most of us didn't know what he was talking about, but surmised
that he had gotten into a mix-up with the quartermaster sergeant.
This surmise proved c