orrect.

Just as Bill finished his narration, a loud splash was heard, and
Happy's voice came to us.  It sounded very far off:

"Help, I'm in the well!  Hurry up, I can't swim!"  Then a few
unintelligible words intermixed with blub! blub! and no more.

We ran to the well, and way down we could hear an awful splashing.
Sailor Bill yelled down, "Look out below; stand from under; bucket
coming!"  With that he loosed the windlass.  In a few seconds a
spluttering voice from the depths yelled up to us, "Haul away!"

It was hard work, hauling him up.  We had raised him about ten
feet from the water, when the handle of the windlass got loose from
our grip, and down went the bucket and Happy.  A loud splash came
to us, and grabbing the handle again, we worked like Trojans.  A
volley of curses came from that well which would have shocked Old
Nick himself.

When we got Happy safely out, he was a sight worth seeing.  He
did not even notice us.  Never said a word, just filled his water
bottle from the water in the bucket, and went back to the billet.  We
followed.  My mess tin was still sending S O S.

Happy, though dripping wet, silently fixed up the milk for the
dog.  In appetite, the canine was close second to Hungry Foxcroft.
After lapping up all he could hold, our mascot closed his eyes and
his tail ceased wagging.  Sailor Bill took a dry flannel shirt from
his pack, wrapped the dog in it, and informed us:

"Me and my mate are going below, so the rest of you lubbers batten
down and turn in."

We all wanted the honor of sleeping with the dog, but did not dispute
Sailor Bill's right to the privilege.  By this time the bunch were
pretty sleepy and tired, and turned in without much coaxing, as it
was pretty near daybreak.

Next day we figured out that perhaps one of the French kiddies had
put the dog in the grain bin, and, in the excitement of packing up
and leaving, had forgotten he was there.

Sailor Bill was given the right to christen our new mate.  He
called him "Jim."  In a couple of days Jim came around all right,
and got very frisky.  Every man in the section loved that dog.

Sailor Bill was court-martialed for his mix-up with the quartermaster
sergeant, and got seven days field punishment No. 1.  This meant
that two hours each day for a week he would be tied to the wheel
of a limber.  During those two-hour periods Jim would be at Bill's
feet, and no matter how much we coaxed him with choice morsels
of food, he would not leave until Bill was untied.  When Bill was
loosed, Jim would have nothing to do with him--just walked away
in contempt.  Jim respected the king's regulations, and had no use
for defaulters.

At a special meeting held by the section, Jim had the oath
of allegiance read to him.  He barked his consent, so we solemnly
swore him in as a soldier of the Imperial British Army, fighting
for king and country.  Jim made a better soldier than any one of
us, and died for his king and country.  Died without a whimper of
complaint.

From the village we made several trips to the trenches; each time
Jim accompanied us.  The first time under fire he put the stump of
his tail between his legs, but stuck to his post.  When "carrying
in" if we neglected to give Jim something to carry, he would make
such a noise barking that we soon fixed him up.

Each day Jim would pick out a different man of the section to follow.
He would stick to the man, eating and sleeping with him until the
next day, and then it would be some one's else turn.  When a man
had Jim with him, it seemed as if his life were charmed.  No matter
what he went through, he would come out safely.  We looked upon
Jim as a good-luck sign, and believe me, he was.

Whenever it came Ikey Honney's turn for Jim's company, he was
over-joyed, because Jim would sit in dignified silence, listening
to the jew's-harp.  Honney claimed that Jim had a soul for music,
which was more than he would say about the rest of us.

Once, at daybreak, we had to go over the top in an attack.  A man
in the section named Dalton was selected by Jim as his mate in this
affair.

The crew of gun No. 2 were to stay in the trench for over-head fire
purposes, and, if necessary, to help repel a probably counter-attack
by the enemy.  Dalton was very merry, and hadn't the least fear or
misgiving as to his safety, because Jim would be with him through
it all.

In the attack, Dalton, closely followed by Jim, had gotten about
sixty yards into No Man's Land, when Jim was hit in the stomach by
a bullet.  Poor old Jim toppled over, and lay still.  Dalton turned
around, and, just as he did so, we saw him throw up his hands and
fall face forward.

Ikey Honney, who was No. 3 on our gun, seeing Jim fall, scrambled
over the parapet, and through that rain of shells and bullets,
raced to where Jim was, picked him up, and, tucking him under his
arm, returned to our trench in safety.  If he had gone to rescue
a wounded man in this way he would have no doubt been awarded the
Victoria Cross.  but he only brought in poor bleeding, dying Jim.

Ikey laid him on the fire step alongside of our gun, but we could
not attend to him, because we had important work to do.  So he
died like a soldier, without a look of reproach for our heartless
treatment.  Just watched our every movement until his lights burned
out.  After the attack, what was left of our section gathered around
Jim's bloodstained body.  There wasn't a dry eye in the crowd.

Next day, we wrapped him in a small Union Jack belonging to Happy,
and laid him to rest, a soldier of the king.

We put a little wooden cross over his grave which read:

PRIVATE JIM
MACHINE-GUN COMPANY
KILLED IN ACTION
APRIL 10, 1916
A DOG WITH A MAN'S HEART

Although the section has lost lots of men, Jim is never forgotten.

[signed] Arthur Guy Empey





Heel and Toe




That man--it could only have been a man--who invented the Klinger
darning and mending machine struck a blow at marriage.  Martha
Eggers, bending over her work in the window of the Elite Hand
Laundry (washing delivered same day if left before 8 A.M.) never
quite evolved this thought in her mind.  When one's job is that
of darning six bushels of socks a day, not to speak of drifts of
pajamas and shirts, there remains very little time for philosophizing.

The window of the Elite Hand Laundry was a boast.  On a line strung
from side to side hung snowy, creaseless examples of the ironer's
art.  Pale blue tissue paper, stuffed into the sleeves and front
of lace and embroidery blouses cunningly enhanced their immaculate
virginity.  White pique skirts, destined to be grimed by the sands
of beach and tee, dangled like innocent lambs before the slaughter.
Just behind this starched and glistening ambush one glimpsed the
bent head and the nimble fingers of Martha Eggers, first aid to
the unwed.

As she sat weaving, in and out, in and out, she was a twentieth
century version of any one of the Fates, with the Klinger darner
and mender substituted for distaff and spindle.  There was something
almost humanly intelligent in the workings of Martha's machine.
Under its glittering needle she would shove a sock whose heel bore
a great, jagged, gaping wound.  Your home darner, equipped only with
mending egg, needle, and cotton, would have pronounced it fatal.
But Martha's modern methods of sock surgery always saved its life.
In and out, back and forth, moved the fabric under the needle.
And slowly, the wound began to heal.  Tack, tack, back and forth.
The operation was completed.

"If I see you many more Mondays," Martha would say, grimly, tossing
it into the heap at her side, "there won't be anything left of
the original cloth.  I should think people would realize that this
laundry darns socks, but it doesn't manufacture 'em."

Before the advent of the ingenious mending machine I suppose more
men than would care to admit it married largely because they grew
so tired of seeing those eternal holes grinning back at them from
heel and toe, and of feeling for absent buttons in a hastily donned
shirt.  The Elite laundry owed much of its success to the fact that
it advertised alleviation for these discomforts.

If you had known Martha as I know her you would have found a certain
pathos in the thought of this spare spinster performing for legions
of unknown unseen men those homely, intimate tasks that have long
been the duty of wife or mother.  For Martha had no men-folks.
Martha was one of those fatherless, brotherless, husbandless women
who, because of their state, can retain their illusions about men.
She had never known the tragedy of setting forth a dinner only to
have hurled at her that hateful speech beginning with, "I had that
for lunch."  She had never seen a male, collarless, bellowing about
the house for his laundry.  She had never beheld that soul-searing
sight--a man in his trousers and shirt, his suspenders dangling,
his face lathered, engaged in the unbecoming rite of shaving.

Her knowledge of the home habits of the male biped she gleaned from
the telltale hints of the inanimate garments that passed through
her nimble hands.  She could even tell character and personality
from deductions gathered at heel and toe.  She knew, for example,
that F.C. (in black ink) was an indefatigable fox trotter and she
dubbed him Ferdy Cahn, though his name, for all she knew, might
have been Frank Callahan.  The dancing craze, incidentally, had
added mountainous stacks to Martha's already heaped up bins.

The Elite Laundry served every age and sex.  But Martha's department
was, perforce, the unwed male section.  No self-respecting wife
or mother would allow laundry-darned hose or shirts to reflect on
her housekeeping habits.  And what woman, ultra-modern though she
be, would permit machine-mended stockings to desecrate her bureau
drawers?  So it was that Martha ministered, for the most part, to
those boarding house bachelors living within delivery-wagon proximity
to the Elite Laundry.

It was early in May that Martha first began to notice the white
lisle socks marked E.G.  She picked them from among the great heap
at her work table because of the exquisite fineness of the darning
that adorned them.  It wasn't merely darning.  It was embroidery.
It was weaving.  It was cobweb tapestry.  It blended in with the
original fabric so intimately that it required an expert eye to
mark where darning finished and cloth began.  Martha regarded it
with appreciation unmarred by envy, as the artisan eye regards the
work of the artist.

"That's his mother's darning," she thought, as she smoothed it with
one work-scarred finger.  "And she doesn't live here in Chicago.  No,
sir!  It takes a small town mother to have the time and patience for
that kind of work.  She's the kind whose kitchen smells of ginger
cookies on Saturday mornings.  And I'll bet if she ever found a
moth in the attic she'd call the fire department.  He's her only
son.  And he's come to the city to work.  And his name--his name
is Eddie."

And Eddie he remained for the months that followed.

Now, there was nothing uncanny in Martha Eggers' deduction
that a young man who wears white hose, miraculously darned, is a
self-respecting young man, brought up by a worshiping mother who
knows about ginger cookies and winter underwear, and whose Monday
washing is fragrant with the clean-smelling scent of green grass
and sunshine.  But it was remarkable that she could pick this one
needle from the haystack of socks and shirts that towered above
her.  She ran her hand through hundreds of garments in the day's
work.  Some required her attention.  Some were guiltless of rent
or hole.  She never thought of mating them.  That was the sorter's
work.  But with Eddie's socks it was different.  They had not, as
yet, required the work of her machine needle.  She told her self,
whimsically, that when the time came to set her crude work next
to the masterly effects produced by the needle of Eddie's ma every
fiber in her would shrink from the task.  Of course Martha did not
put it in just that way.  But the thought was there.  And bit by
bit, week by week, month by month, the life, and aims, and ambitions,
and good luck and misfortunes of this country boy who had come
to the call of the city, were unfolded before the keen eye of the
sparse spinster who sat stitching away in the window of the Elite
Laundry.

For a long, long time the white hose lacked reinforcements, so
that they began to grow thin from top to toe.  Martha feared that
they would go to pieces in one irremediable catastrophe, like the
one-hoss shay.  Evidently Eddie's job did not warrant unnecessary
expenditures.  Then the holes began to appear.  Martha tucked
them grimly under the glittering needle of the Klinger darner and
mender but at the first incision she snapped the thread, drew out
the sock, and snipped the stitches.

"His ma'd have a fit.  I'll just roll 'em up, and take 'em home
with me to-night and darn 'em by hand."  She laughed at herself,
a little shame-faced laugh, but tender, too.

She did darn them that night, in the twilight, and in the face
of the wondering contempt of Myrt.  Myrt dwelt across the hall in
five-roomed affluence with her father and mother.  She was one of
the ten stenographers employed by the Slezak Film Company.  There
existed between the two women an attraction due to the law of
opposites.  Myrt was nineteen.  She earned twelve dollars a week.
She knew all the secrets of the moving picture business, but even
that hideous knowledge had left her face unscarred.  Myrt's twelve
was expended wholly upon the embellishment of Myrt.  Myrt was one
of those asbestos young women upon whom the fires of life leave no
mark.  She regarded Martha Eggers, who dwelt in one room, in the
rear, across the hall, with that friendly contempt which nineteen,
cruelly conscious of its charms, bestows upon plain forty.

She strolled into Martha Eggers' room now to find that lady
intent upon a white sock, darning needle in hand.  She was working
in the fast-fading light that came through her one window.  Myrt,
kimono-clad, stared at her in unbelief.

"Well, I've heard that when actors get a day off they go to the
theater.  I suppose it's the same idea.  I should think you'd get
enough darning and mending from eight A. M. to six P. M. without
dragging it home with you."

"I'm doing it for a friend," said Martha, her head bent over her
work.

"What's his name?"

"Eddie."

"Eddie what?"

Martha blushed, pricked her finger, bent lower.  "Eddie--Eddie
Grant."

At the end of the next six weeks every pair of Eddie Grant's hose,
heel and toe, bore the marks of Martha's workmanship.  Then, quite
suddenly, they ceased to appear.  Had he gone back home, defeated?
Had he moved to another neighborhood?  Had he invested in a fresh
supply of haberdashery?  On Tuesday of the seventh week E. G.'s
white hose appeared once more.  Martha picked them from among the
heap.  Instantly she knew.  Clumsily, painstakingly, they had been
darned by a hand all unaccustomed to such work.  A masculine hand,
as plucky as it was awkward.

"Why, the poor kid!  The poor little kid!  Lost his job for six
weeks, and did his own washing and mending."

That night she picked out the painfully woven stitches and replaced
them with her own exquisite workmanship.

Eddie's new job was evidently a distinct advance.  The old socks
disappeared altogether.  They had been darned until each one resembled
a mosaic.  In their place appeared an entirely new set, with nothing
but the E. G. inked upon them by the laundry to distinguish them
from hundreds of others.  Sometimes Martha missed them entirely.
then, suddenly, E. G. blossomed into silk, with clocking up the side,
and Martha knew that he was in love.  She found herself wondering
what kind of girl she was, and whether the woman in the little
town that was Back Home to Eddie would have approved of her.  One
day there appeared a pair of lovesick lavenders, but they never
again bloomed.  Evidently she was the kind of a girl who would be
firm about those.  Then, for a time--for two long weeks--E. G.'s
hose were black; somber, mournful, unrelieved black.  They had
quarreled.  After that they brightened.  They became numerous,
and varied.  There was about them something triumphant, ecstatic.
They rose to a paean.

"They're engaged," Martha told herself.  "I hope she's the right
kind of a girl for Eddie."

Then, as they sobered down and even began to require some of Martha's
expert workmanship she knew that it was all right.  "She's making
him save up."

Six months later the Elite Laundry knew E. G. no more.

Myrt, strolling into Martha's room one evening, as was her wont,
found that severe-faced lady suspiciously red-eyed.  Even Myrt,
the unimaginative, sensed that some unhappiness had Martha in its
grip.

"What's the matter?"

"Oh, I don't know.  Kinda lonesome, I guess.  What's the news down
at your place?"

"News!  Nothing ever happens in our office.  Honestly, some days
I think I'll just drop dead, it's so slow.  I took three hours
dictation from Hubbell this morning.  He's writing the 'Dangers of
Dora' series, and I almost go to sleep over it.  He's got her now
where she's chained in the cave with the tide coming up, on a deserted
coast, and nobody for miles around.  I was tickled to death when
old Slezak called me away to fill out the contract blanks for him
and Willie Kaplan.  Kaplan's signed up with the Slezak's for three
years at a million and a half a year.  He stood over me while I
was filling it out--him and his brother Gus--as if I was going to
put something over on 'em when they weren't looking."

"My land!  How exciting!  It must be wonderful working in a place
like that."

Myrt yawned, and stretched her round young arms high above her
head.

"I don't see anything exciting about it.  Of course it isn't as bad
as your job, sitting there all day, sewing and mending.  It isn't
even as if you were sewing on new stuff, like a dressmaker, and
really making something out of it.  I should think you'd go crazy,
it's so uninteresting."

Martha turned to the window, so that her face was hidden from Myrt.
"Oh, I don't know.  Darning socks isn't so bad.  Depends on what
you see in 'em."

"See in 'em!" echoed Miss Myrtle Halperin.  "See!  Well for the
love of heaven what can you see in mending socks, besides holes!"

Martha didn't answer.  Myrt, finding things dull, took herself
off, languidly.  At the door she turned and looked back on the
stiff little figure seated in the window with its face to the gray
twilight.

"What's become of your friend What's-his-name that you used to darn
socks for at home?  Grant, wasn't it?  Eddie Grant?"

"That was it," answered Martha.  "He's married.  He and his wife,
they've got to visit Eddie's folks back home, on their wedding trip.
I miss him something terrible.  He was just like a son to me."

[signed] Edna Ferber





Those Who Went First




A distant bugle summoned them by day,
A far flame beckoned them across the night.
They rose--they flung accustomed things away,--
The habit of old days and new delight.
They heard--they saw--they turned them over-seas,--
Oh, Land of ours, rejoice in such as these!

This was no call that sounded at their door,
No wild torch flaming in their window space,--
yet the quick answer went from shore to shore,
The swift feet hastened to the trysting place,
Laughing, they turned to death from peace and ease,--
Oh, Land of ours, be proud of such as these!

High hearts--great hearts--whose valor strikes for us
Out of the awful Dissonance of war
This perfect note,--in you the chivalrous
YOUNG SEEKERS OF THE GRAIL RE-LIVE ONCE MORE,--
Acclaimed of men, or fallen where none sees,
Oh, Land of ours, be glad of such as these!

[signed]Theodosia Garrison





A Summer's Day




Once I wrote a story of a woman's day in Paris, a Perfect Day.  It
had to do with the buying of all the lovely trappings that are the
entrappings of the animal which Mr. Shaw believes woman endlessly
pursues.  One of the animals was in the story, and there was food
and moonlight, music and adventure.

I never sold that marvelous tale.  For years it has peeked out
at me from a certain pigeon hole in my desk with the anguish of
a prisoner in the Black Hole of Calcutta, and with as little hope
for its liberation into the glad air of a free press.  Yet it is
with me now in Paris.  In that last distracted moment of packing,
when all sense of what is needed has left one, it was thrust into
a glove case like contraband cigarettes.  There may have been some
idea of remolding it with a few deceiving touches--make a soldier
of the hero probably--but with the "love interest" firmly remaining.
There was only one Perfect Day to a woman, I thought.

That was some weeks ago.  I am now writing on the back of that
romance for lack of paper, writing of another day, wondering as
I work if the present day's adventures will have any quality that
might hold the reader's eye.  I dare not ask for the reader's heart
when love does not stalk through the pages.

Paris is now an entrenched camp but one is not awakened by bugles,
and the beat of drums is unheard as the troops march through the
city.  It was the regular "blump-blump" of military boots past
my window which possibly aroused me into activity, although the
companies crossing from station to cantonment no longer turn the
head of the small boy as he rolls his hoop along the Champs Elysees.
This troubles me, and I always go to the curb to watch them when
I am in the street.

There was an instant's hesitation before I pulled up the refractory
Venetian blind--the right rope so eager to rise, the left so
indifferent to its improvement--an instant's dread.  I was afraid
"they" would be hopping about even this early in the morning,
hopping, hopping--the jerking gait of the mutilated--the little
broken waves of a sea of "horizon blue."  But they must have been
just getting their faces washed at the Salon, where once we went
to see pictures and now find compositions more dire than the newest
schools of painting.

On the other side the stretch of chestnuts, the taxicabs, returned
to their original mission, were already weaving about in their
effort to exterminate each other.  Battling at the Marne had been
but a slight deviation in their mode of procedure, yet when a cab
recently ran down and killed a bewildered soldier impeded by a
crutch strange to him, Paris raised its voice in a new cry of rage.
Beyond the Champs Elysees, far beyond, rose the Eiffel tower.
Capable, immune so far from the attacks of the enemy, its very
outlines seem to have taken on a great importance.  Once the giant
toy of a people who frolicked, it now serves in its swift mission
as the emblem of a race more gigantic than we had conceived.

It is not a relieving thought to such of us as still can play, that
spirit, whether in the bosom of the boulevardier or his country
cousin playing bowls in the cool of the evening, is the same that
projects itself brilliantly across the battlefield; that the flash
of a woman's eye as she invites a conquest is the flame upon the
alter when sacrifice is needed; that the very gaiety which makes
one laugh is a force to endure the deepest pits that have been
dug for mankind.  Even as I continually struggle with a lump in my
throat which I often think should remain with me forever, I dare
claim that of all the necessitous qualities in life the spirit
of play must be the last to leave a race.  Its translation to the
gravities of living needs no bellows for the coaxing of the fire.
It is ever burning upon the hearth of the happy heart.

The gilded statuary of the bridge of Alexander III, like flaming
beacons in the sun's rays, waved us out and on to the Invalides to
see the weekly awarding of medals.  It is presumably the gay event
of the week as the band plays, and there is some color in the throngs
who surge along the colonnades to look into the court of honor.
A portion of the great space is now accommodating huge shattered
cannon and air craft of the enemy, their massiveness suggesting, as
the little glittering medals are pinned upon the soldiers' breasts,
that it is not so easy to be a hero and go a-capturing.

By the judicious wavings of famous autographs we were permitted the
upper balcony to sketch the heroic ones within the hollow square
formed by soldiers and marines.  Directly beneath us stood the
band with the brassard of the red cross on their arms, for they
are still the stretcher bearers at the front.  In the center of
the square was a little group of men, seventy perhaps but the space
was vast.  Some were standing, some seated with stiff stumps of
legs sticking out queerly.  Here and there a nurse stood by a blind
man, and there were white oblong gaps in the line which designated
the beds of the paralyzed.

I had set my teeth and said that I must stand it when across the
courtyard like a liquid stream of some spilled black portion came the
mothers and the wives, who were to wear the ribbon their soldiers
had earned in exchange for their lives.  Or should there be little
sons or daughters they received this wondrous emblem of their fathers'
sacrifice.  We could see the concerted white lift of handkerchiefs
to the eyes of the black line of women as the general bestowed the
honors.  But the little children were tranquil.

With the beginning of the distribution the band, for which I had
longed that it might give a glow to the war, swung into a blare of
triumph.  It was the first note of music we had heard in France.
And as we all expressed our emotion with abandonment throughout
the enlivening strains of "The Washington Post," I appreciated the
infinite wisdom of marching drumless through the streets--of the
divine lack of the bugles' song.  For music, no matter its theme,
makes happy only those who are already happy.  To those who suffer
it urges an unloosening of their grief--and grief must not go abroad
in France.

There was an end to the drama.  The guard of honor marched through
the porte, banners flying.  It was a happy ending, I suppose,
though one might not think so by the triumphal chariots that entered
the court to bear away the heroes--chariots with that red emblem
emblazoned upon a white disc which would have mystified an early
Caesar.  But my thoughts were not entirely with the chief actors
in the play, rather with the squad of soldiers who had surrounded
them, the supers who would have enjoyed medals, too, and upon whom
opportunity had not smiled; whose epic of brave deeds may never
be read, and who, by chance, may go legless yet ribbonless up the
Champs Elysees.

"They" were hopping up the Avenue when we crossed it again, yet we
all went on about our daily tasks as one passes the blind man on
the corner of Sixth Avenue and Thirty-third Street.  He may receive
a penny, a twang of the heart strings, but he must be passed
to go into the shop.  My list was in my purse bearing but a faint
resemblance to the demands of other years.  I thought as I took it
out what confusion of mind would have been my portion had I found
it in my purse three summers ago, in what state of madness could
any one prepare for a day in Paris such a program as:  "Gloves,
Hospital 232, furs, workshop for blind, shell combs, see my baby
at Orphelinat, hair nets, cigarettes to my soldier, try on gowns,
funeral of Am. airman," and on and on through each day's great
accomplishment to the long quiet night.

Yet to buy freely and even frivolously in France need harass nothing
more soulful than a letter of credit, and it was with less of guilt
than of fear that I entered the courtyard of my furrier.  I turned
the button ever so gently with the same dread in my heart that I
had suffered in going back to all of my shop keepers of previous
summers.  Would he still be there?  Two years is a long time, and
he was a young man.  But he was there, wounded in the chest but at
work in the expectation of being recalled.  He did not want to go
back, but of course if he was needed--

And I must lay stress on the magnificence of this hope that he might
not have to return to the trenches.  I have found many who do not
want to go back.  Fierce partisans of French courage deny this,
reading in my contention a lack of bravery, but to me it is valor
of a glorious color.  For they do return without resentment, and,
what is more difficult in this day of monumental deeds and minute
bickerings, without criticism.

Like most of the men who came out of the trenches he had very
little to say about them.  It amused him to hear that my new fur
coat purchased in America is of so fleeting a dye that I must dart
into the subway whenever the sun shines.  He was laughing quietly
as he wished me a cloudy winter upon my descending the broad stone
steps into the empty, echoing courtyard.  The unexpected appreciation
of my doubtful humor set me musing over the possibility of a duty
new to Americans.  It is the French who have stood for gaiety.  We
have warmed ourselves in their quick wit.  Perhaps it is time for
us to do our little clownish best to set them laughing.

Having made the resolve I failed meanly to put it into execution.
I knew I was going to fail as the motor stopped before the great
house in the rue Daru--the lordly house of exquisitely tinted walls
although the colors are not seen by those who dwell within.  There
is a paved COUR beyond the high wall with great steps leading up
to the hotel.  At the right are the stables, where delicate fabrics
are woven--the workmen with heads erect; where are special looms
for those who, by the sad demands of this war, are denied hands as
well as their two eyes.  At the left is another building and here
the men play in a gymnasium, even fence with confidence.  In an
anteroom is a curious lay figure that the most sensitive of the
students may learn massage--it is the blind in Japan who give their
understanding fingers to this work--and in the rooms above is a
printing press, silent for lack of funds, but ready to give a paper
of his own to the sightless.  Only, at "The Light House" they will
not accept that a single one of their guests is without vision.
"Ah GUARDIENNE," cried one of the students to the American woman
who has established our Light House methods over there, "you do not
see the unevenness of this fabric for your eyes are in your way."

I was standing in the room where the plan of the house is set upon
a table.  It is the soldier's first lesson that he may know the
turns and steps, and run about without the pitiful outstretching
of arms.  There were other callers upon the GUARDIENNE.  A blind
graduate who had learned to live (which means to work) had returned
with his little old father, and both were telling her that he had
enough orders for his sweaters from the "Trois Quartiers" to keep him
occupied for two years.  The family felt that he was established--so
there was nothing more to fear.  And then because we were all happy
over it the old man and the woman and myself began to cry noiselessly.
Only the blind boy remained smiling through the choking silence.

I went to the window and glared down into the gardens where other
soldiers were studying at little tables with a professor for each,
and I asked myself why, in this great exigency, I was not being
funny and paying my debt to France.  But there was nothing to be
funny about.  The thing that dried my tears was the recollection
of the blind asylum of my youth, where the "inmates" never learned
to walk without groping, where we were shown hideous bead furniture,
too small for dolls, which was the result of their eager but misspent
lives.

There was a gown to be ordered before noon and as I drove back
through the Faubourg St. Honore I found myself looking fondly,
thirstily into the shop windows, lifting my free eyes to the charming
vagaries of old buildings, and again I made a vow although it had
nothing to do with humor.  On my dressing table rests a cushion of
brocade and I shall carry it about as one who may yield to temptation
carries a pledge, for the card which is attached chants out to
me whenever my eyes rest upon it:  "Soldat Pierre.  Aveugle de la
guerre.  Blesse a Verdun."  And as long as Soldier Pierre.  Blind
from the war.  Wounded at Verdun can go on weaving his fabrics I pray
that I may carry whatever burden may be mine with the unrebellious
spirit.

Ah well!  The robe took its place in the curriculum of my new
Parisian day.  It was to be a replica in color of that worn by the
head of the house--her one of mourning was so bravely smart--for
the business must go on and only the black badge of glory in
fashionable form show itself in the gay salon.  "Yes, we must go
on," she said, "though every wife may give her mate.  It is of an
enormity to realize before one dies that he can be done without--that
there are enough little ones to keep France alive and we women in
the meantime can care for the country.  Our men may die glad in
that thought, but I think there must be a little of grief, too.
It is sad not to be needed.  Yes, Madame, blue for you where mine
is black, and in place of the crepe something very brilliant.  It
is only Americans that we can make gay now, and it keeps the women
in the sewing room of good cheer to work in colors.  Too dear you
think?  Ah, no, Madame, observe the model!"

Conscious that she had taken the basest advantage of my sympathy,
and glad that she had done so I went to dejeuner with a feeling
that I had deserved it which I might not otherwise have enjoyed.
We were lunching at the restaurant on the Seine which felt for
a short time the upheaval of war.  Among the first called to the
front had been the proprietor, and the august deputies whose custom
it was to take their midday meal at this famous eating place had
suffered from an unevenness of the cuisine.  He is back at his
establishment now, an ammunition maker on the night shift and the
excellent and watchful patron at noon.

Our guests came promptly, for France still eats, although, if I can
say anything so anomalous, does not stop to do so.  The war talk
continues albeit one carries it more lightly through a meal.  A
French officer arrived in the only automobile of his garage which
the government had not commandeered.  We looked down upon it stealthily
that we might not give offense to his chauffeur, for the car is a
Panhard in the last of its teens--which holds no terrors to a woman
but is a gloomy age for a motor.  An American architect from our
Clearing House bowed over my hand a little more Gallic in these
days than the Gaul himself.  He has a right to the manners of the
country.  He had come over at the beginning of the war for a month
and is determined to stick it out if he never builds another railway
station.  "To see the troops march through the Arc de Triomphe!" is
the cry of the Americans, but the French do not express themselves
so dramatically.

There is drama enough, though, even in the filing of papers at
every American relief society.  That and the new sensation of work
serves to hold the dilettante of our country to his long task.
"This is the president's office," you will be told in a hushed voice
outside some stately door.  Then one discovers in Mr. President
a playmate of Mayfair or Monte Carlo or Taormina who may never
previously have used a desk except as a support for the signing of
checks.

Our friend had been engaged that morning upon the re-ticketing of
the Lafayette Kits which had come back from the front because there
was no longer a Gaspard to receive them.  I put this down that
any young girl of our country who does not hear from "her soldier"
may understand the silence.  And sometimes the poilu is a little
confused, writing a charming letter of thanks to "Monsieur Lafayette"
himself.

A man takes coffee at dejeuner but finishes his cigar en route
to work.  We were at the edge of Paris before the Illustrator had
thrown his away.  We were not in the car of ancient lineage but in
that relic of other days a real automobile without the great white
letters of the army upon its sides and bonnet.  Yet we were going
into the heart of the Army.  We would not be among the derelicts
of battle that afternoon but with men sound of mind and body, and
the thought was grateful that there would be nothing to anguish
over.  We were to visit two cantonments, rough barracks, in one of
which the men gathered after their "permission" for a re-equipment;
while at the second one were those soldiers who had become
separated from their regiments, and who were sent there until the
companies--if they existed--could be found, and the "isolated"
again dispatched to the front.

I had anticipated a very relieving afternoon.  The sun shone, the
long road led to open country, and many circling aeroplanes over
an aviation field nearby gave the air of a fete.  Only the uniforms
of the English and American women who are attached to each of these
many cantonments suggested any necessitous combating of the grim
reaper.

Yet they are not nurses of the body but of the spirit.  From modest
little vine covered sheds erected in each ugly open space they
disperse good cheer augmented by coffee and cigarettes (and such
small comforts as we Americans send them) after the regulation army
rations are served by the commissary.  They hear the men's stores,
comfort the unhappy ones, chaff the gloomy ones, and when they have
a moment's breathing space write letters to such of those as have
asked for a correspondent.

One of these women--an American--was intent upon this occupation
at the first canteen we visited.  She admitted that she was tired
but she must answer her letters.  She was rather grave about it,
"I write to sixty-eight," she said, "and I'll tell you why.  At
least I will tell you a little of it and you can read the rest.  I
was on night duty.  There is always one of us here.  The men have
just come from visiting their homes and some of them are blue and
cannot sleep.  Rude to us?  Oh, never!  I had written letters almost
all night and it was time to make the morning coffee, yet there was
still one to do.  I was tempted to put it aside.  I didn't remember
the man, but he had sent me a word of thanks.  Well, somehow I did
answer it between the moment of filling the cauldron and getting
ready for the day.  Here is his reply--it came this morning--"

Translating crudely from the letter I read aloud to our little
circle:  "Dear Madame, you have saved my life.  I have no friends
and no people left for I am from the invaded districts, so on one
writes me.  To-day I was on duty as the officer came into our trench
with the mail.  He called my name.  He gave me permission to leave
the listening post to receive your valued letter.  While at his
side a shell tore up entirely my post.  I think you, Madame, that
I am spared to fight for France--"

I regarded her with longing.  She had been the controller of a
destiny.  I suppose we are all that when we bend our best efforts,
but seldom are we so definitely apprised of the reward of untiring
duty.

A petty officer passed by the shack with a paper in his hands.
There were no sounding trumpets, but the men recognized the paper
and rose from the ground where they had been lounging to hear him
read the list of those who were to return immediately to the front.
As the names were called each one summoned turned without comment
or exclamation or expletive, picked up his kit dumped in a corner,
slung on the heavy equipment, saw that the huge loaf of bread was
secure--the extra shoes--refilled his canteen and moved over to
the barred gate.  Occasionally one shook hands with a comrade and
all saluted the women of the little flower-bedecked hut.  An order
was given and the gate was opened.  They filed out into the dusty
road on their march to the railway station.  The gate was closed.
A little hill rose higher than the ground of the barracks and we could
see them once again--stout little men in patched uniforms--bending
unresistingly under their burdens, the heavy steel helmets gleaming
but faintly in the sun.  Another detachment entered the barracks.

It was coffee time now.  The soldiers were lingering politely about
with their tin cups in hand--not too expectantly, so as to assure
the ladies that if by any chance there was no coffee they would not
be disappointed.  The gentlewoman in attendance had recently come
from a canteen near the front where soup is made and often eight
thousand bowls of it served in a day.  The skin of her arms and
hands is, I fear, permanently unlovely from the steam of the great
kettles--or perhaps I should say permanently lovely now that one
knows the cause of the branding.  I offered to pour in her place
and she assented.

The men came up to the little bar.  I began to pour.  I had thought
I was about to do them a service.  I knew with the first cup that
it was they who were doing me one.  All the unrest and misery of
my idle if observing days in France was leaving me.  I was pushing
back the recollection with the sweetness of physical effort.  I
was at work.  There is no living in France--or anywhere now--unless
one is at work.  I served and served and urged fresh cups upon them.
They thought I was generous--I could not tell them that I had not
known a happy instant till this coffee pouring time.  I had not
recognized that it was toiling with the hands that would bring a
surcease to the beating of queries at my bewildered brain.  There
are no answers to this war.  One can only labor for it and so,
strangely, forget it.

Late that afternoon I had a cup of tea in a ground floor room of
a big Parisian hotel which has been freely assigned to an American
woman for the least known of all our relief work.  I had come that
I might argue with her into giving up her long task for a brief
rest.  My contention was to have been that she could stop at any
time as her work is never recognized.  I found her doing up a parcel
of excellent garments for a man and three women.  They were to be
assigned to the family of a respected painter of the Latin Quarter.
They will never know who is the middleman, and it has chanced that
she has dined in company with her day's donation.

As I observed her tired tranquility I felt my argument growing
pointless.  Whether it was coffee or the unacknowledged dispenser
of clothing to the uncrying needy it was service, and though my arm
muscles ached I could understand that it is the idle boy in Paris
which does not rest at night.

And so I come tot he last sheet of the romance which is serving
so humbly my war-time needs.  There is space for the dinner and
the closing in of the gentle night thanks to the repeated, fervid
declarations of the lovers on the other side of the paper.  We
had been with the men that afternoon.  We were among the officers
that evening.  We dined at one of the great restaurants which has
timorously reopened its doors to find eager families ready to feast
honored sons.  At one table sat three generations, the father of
the boy concealing his pride with a Gallic interest in the menu,
but the grandfather futilely stabbed the snails as his gleaming old
eyes kept at attention upon the be-medalled lad.  Pretty women, too,
were there, subdued in costuming but with that amiable acceptance
of their position which is not to be found among the more eager
"lost ones" of other countries.  And I enjoyed some relief in their
evidence once more, and some inward and scarcely to-be-expressed
solace in the thought that those soldiers who henceforth must go
disfigured through a fastidious world can every buy companionship.

There was a theater attached to the restaurant.  Through the glass
doors we could see an iridescence of scant costumes, but the audience
was light, and we ourselves preferred, as a more satisfactory ending
to our day, to walk quietly toward the Arc de Triomphe which is
waiting, waiting for fresh glories.  On the other side of this last
sheet of paper my lovers had so walked together.  But upon looking
over their passionate adventures I have discovered, at last, why
the romance has never found a market.  On one side and then on the
other I have read and reread the two experiences.  Yes, I find the
LOVE-story curiously lacking in love.

[signed] Louise Closser Hale





Children of War




Not for a transient victory, or some
  Stubborn belief that we alone are right;
  Not for a code or conquest do we fight,
But for the crowded millions still to come.

This, unborn generations, is your war,
  Although it is our blood that pays the price.
  Be worthy, children, of our sacrifice,
And dare to make your lives worth fighting for.

We give up all we love that you may loathe
  Intrigue and darkness, that you may disperse
  The ranks of ugly tyrannies and, worse,
The sodden languor and complacent sloth.

Do not betray us, then, but come to be
  Creation's crowning splendor, not its slave;
  Knowing our lives were spent to keep you brave,
And that our deaths were meant to make you free. 

[signed] Louis Untermeyer

Courtesy "Collier's Weekly."





Khaki-Boy




Where the torrent of Broadway leaps highest in folly and the nights
are riddled with incandescent tire and chewing gum signs; jazz
bands and musical comedies to the ticket speculators' tune of five
dollars a seat, My Khaki-Boy, covered with the golden hoar of three
hundred Metropolitan nights rose to the slightly off key grand
finale of its eighty-first matinee, curtain slithering down to
the rub-a-dud-dub of a score of pink satin drummer boys with slim
ankles and curls; a Military Sextette of the most blooded of Broadway
ponies; a back ground of purple eye-lidded privates enlisted from
the ranks of Forty-Second Street; a three hundred and fifty dollar
a week sartorial sergeant in khaki and spotlight, embracing a ninety
pound ingenue in rhinestone shoulder-straps.  The tired business
man and his lady friend, the Bronx and his wife, Adelia Ohio, Dead
heads, Bald heads, Sore heads, Suburbanites, Sybarites; the poor
dear public making exit sadder than wiser.

On the unpainted side of the down slithering curtain, a canvas
mountain-side was already rumbling rearward on castors.  An overhead
of foliage jerked suddenly higher, revealed a vista of brick wall.
A soldiers' encampment, tents and all, rolled up like a window shade.
The ninety pound ingenue, withholding her silver-lace flouncings
from the raw edges of moving landscape, high-stepped to a rearward
dressing room; the khaki clad hero brushing past her and the pink
satin drummer boys for first place down a spiral staircase.

Miss Blossom De Voe, pinkest of satin drummer boys, withdrew
an affronted elbow, the corners of her mouth quivering slightly,
possibly of their own richness.  They were dewy, fruit-like lips,
as if Nature were smiling with them at her own handiwork.

"Say, somebody around here better look where he's going or mama's
khaki-boy will be calling for an arnica high-ball.  What does he
think I yam, the six o'clock subway rush?"

Miss Elaine Vavasour wound down the spiral ahead of Miss De Voe,
the pink satin blouse already in the removing.

"Go suck a quince Blos.  It's good for crazy bone and fallen arch."

"If you was any funnier, Elaine, you'd float," said Miss De Voe
withdrawing a hair pin as she wound downward, an immediate avalanche
of springy curls released.

Beneath the stage of the Gotham Theater a corridor of dressing rooms
ran the musty subterranean length of the sub cellar.  A gaseous
gloomy dampness here; this cave of the purple lidded, so far below
the level of reality.

At the door of Miss De Voe's eight by ten, shared by four, dressing
room, one of the back drop of privates, erect, squarebacked, head
thrown up by the deep-dipping cap vizor, emerged at sight of her,
lifted hat revealing a great permanent wave of hair that could only
be born not bought.

"H'lo, Hal."

"Hello, Blossum."

"Whose hot water bottle did you come to borrow?"

"Hot water bottle?"

"Yeh, you look like you got the double pneumonia and each one of
the pneumonia's got the tooth ache.  Who stole your kite, ikkie
boy?"

Mr. Hal Sanderson flung up a fine impatient head, the permanent
hair-wave lifting,

"We'll can the comedy, Blossum," he said.

She lowered to a mock curtsey, mouth skewed to control laughter,
arms akimbo.

"We will now sing psalm twenty-three."

"Come to supper with me, Blos?  You been dodging me pretty steady
here lately."

She clapped her hand to her brow, plastering a curl there.

"Migaw, I am now in the act of dropping thirty cents and ten cents
tip into my Pig Bank.  Will I go to supper with him?  Say, darling,
will the Hudson flow by Grant's monument to-night at twelve?  On
a Saturday matinee he asks me to supper with a question mark."

"Honest, Bloss, you'd hand a fellow a ha ha if he invited you to
his funeral."

She sobered at that, leaning against the cold plastered wall,
winding one of the shining curls about her fore finger.

"What's the matter--Hal?"

He handed her a torn newspaper sheet, blue penciled.

She took it but did not glance down.

"Drafted?"

"Yes," he said.

The voice of a soubrette trilling snatches of her topical song as
she creamed off her make-up, came to them through the sulky gloom
of the corridor.  Behind the closed door of Miss De Voe's dressing
room, the gabble of the pink satin ponies was like hash in the
chopping.  Overhead, moving scenery created a remote sort of thunder.
She stood looking up at him, her young mouth parted.

"I--oh, Hal--well--well, whatta you know about that--Hal
Sanderson--drafted."

He stepped closer, the pallor coming out stronger in his face,
enclosed her wrist, pressing it.

"Grover's drafted too."

"Grover--too?"

"He's three thousand and one.  Ten numbers before me."

Her irises were growing, blackening.

"Well, whatta you know about that?  Grover White, the world's dancing
tenor, and Hal Sanderson the world dancing tenor's understudy,
drafted!  The little tin soldiers are covered with rust and Uncle
Sam is going to--"

"Hurry, Bloss, get into your duds.  I want to talk.  Hurry.  We'll
eat over at Ramy's."

She turned but flung out an arm, grasping now his wrist.

"I--oh, Hal--I--I just never was so--so sad and so--so glad!"

The door opened to a slit enclosing her.  In his imitation uniform,
hand on empty carriage belt, Mr. Hal Sanderson stood there a moment,
his face whitening, tightening.


In Ramy's glorified basement, situated in one of the Forties which
flow like tributaries into the heady waters of Broadway, one may
dine from soup to nuts, raisins and regrest for one hour and sixty
cents.  In Ramy's, courses may come and courses may go, but the
initiated one holds on to his fork forever.  Here red wine flows
like water, being ninety-nine per cent., just that.

Across a water tumbler of ruby contents, Miss Blossom De Voe, the
turbulent curls all piled up beneath a slightly dusty but highly
effective amethyst velvet hat, regarded Mr. Sanderson, her perfect
lips trembling as it were, against an actual nausea of the spirit
which seemed to pull at them.

"Whadda you putting things up to me for, Hal?  You're old enough
to know your own business."

Blue shaved, too correct in one of Broadway's black and white checked
Campus Suits, his face as cleanly chiseled and thrust forward as a
Discobolus, Mr. Sanderson patted an open letter spread out on the
table cloth between them, his voice rising carefully above the din
of diners.

"There's fellows claiming exemption every hour of the day that
ain't got this much to show, Bloss.  I was just wise enough to see
these things and get ready for 'em."

"You ain't your mother's sole support.  What about them snapshots
of the two farms of hers out in Ohio you gave me?"

"But I got to be in this country to take charge of her affairs for
her--my mother's old, honey--ain't I the one to manager for her?
Only child and all that.  Honest, Bloss, you need a brick house."

"Well, that old lawyer that wrote that letter has been doing it
all the time, why all of a sudden should you--"

He cast his eyes ceilingward, flopping his hands down loosely to
the table in an attitude of mock exhaustion.

"Oh, Lord, Bloss, lemme whistle it, maybe you can catch on the.
Brains, honey, little Hal's brains is what got that letter there
written.  I seen this coming from the minute conscription was in
the air.  Little Hal seen it coming, and got out his little hatchet