.
Try to prove that I ain't the sole one to take charge of my mother's
affairs.  Try to prove it.  That's what I been fixing for myself
these two months, try to--"

"Sh-h-h-h, Charley--"

"Brains is what done it,--every little thing of my mother's is in
my care.  I fixed it.  Now little Blossy-blossum will you be good?"

He regarded her with cocked head and face receptive for her approval.
"Now will you be good!"

She sat loosely, meeting his gaze, but her face as relaxed as her
attitude.  A wintry stare had set in.

"Oh," she said, "I see."  And turned away her head.

He reached closer across the table, regardless of the conglomerate
diners about, felt for her hand which lay limp and cold beside her
plate, and which she withdrew.

"Darling," he said, straining for her gaze.

"Don't, Hal."

"Darling, don't you see?  It's fate knocking at our door.  There's
not a chance rover can get exemption.  He ain't eve got a fifth
cousin or a flat-foot!"

"Maybe he could claim exemption on dandruff."

"I'm serious, honey.  It's going to be one of those cases where
an understudy wakes up to find himself famous.  I can't fail if I
get this chance, Bloss.  It's the moment I have been drudging for,
for five solid years.  I never was in such voice as now, I never
was so fit.  Not an ounce of fat.  Not a song in the part I don't
know backwards.  I tell you it's the hand of fate, Bloss, giving
us a hand-out.  I can afford now, darling, to make good with you.
On three fifty a week I can ask a little queen like you to double
up with me.  From thirty-five to three fifty!  I tell you honey,
we're made.  I'm going to dress my little dolly in cloth of gold
and silver fox.  I'm going to perch her in the suite de luxe of
the swellest hotel in town.  I'm--"

She pushed back from the table, turning more broadly from him.

"Don't," she said pressing her kerchief against her lips.

"Why--why what's the matter, Bloss?  Why--why, what's the matter?"

"Don't talk to me for a minute," she said, still in profile; "I'll
be all right, only don't talk."

"Why, Bloss, you--sick?"

She shook her head.  "No.  No."

"You ain't getting cold feet now that we got the thing before us--in
our hand?"

"I dunno.  I dunno.  I--don't want nothing.  That's all, nothing
but to be left alone."

He sucked his lips inward, biting at them.

"Don't--don't think I ain't noticed, Bloss, that you--you ain't
been the same--that you been different--for weeks.  Sometimes I
think maybe you're going cold on--on this long engagement stuff.
That's why this thing is breaking just right for us, honey.  I
felt you slippin' a little.  I'm ready now, Peaches, we can't go
taxi-cabbing down for that license none too soon to suit me."

She shook her head, beating softly with one small fist into her
other palm.

"No, Hal," she said, her mouth tightening and drawing down.

"Why--why, Bloss!"

Suddenly she faced him, her hands both fists now, and coming down
with a force that shivered the china.

"You--you ain't a man, you ain't.  You ain't a man, you--you're
a slacker!  You're a slacker, that's what you are, and Gawd, how
I--how I hate a slacker!"

"Bloss--why, girl--you--you're cra---"

"Oh, I've known it.  Deep down inside of me I've known it since
the day we found ourselves in the mess of this war.  I knew it,
and all those months kept kidding myself that maybe--you--wasn't."

"You--"

"Thought maybe when you'd read the newspapers enough and heard the
khaki-boys on the street corners enough, and listened to--to your
country pleading enough that--that you'd rise up to show you was
a man.  I knew all these months down inside of me that you was a
slacker, but I kept hopin'.  Gawd how I kept hopin'."

"You--you can't talk to me that way!  You're---"

"Can't I!  Ha!  Anybody can talk any old way to a slacker he wants
to and then not say enough.  You ain't got no guts you--you're
yellow, that's what you are, you--"

"Blossum!"

"You, sneaking up to me with trumped up exemption stuff when your
country's talking her great heart out for men to stand by 'er!
Gawd!  If I was a man--If was a man she wouldn't have to ask me
twice, but before I went marching off I'd take time off to help the
street cleaning department wipe up a few streets with the slackers
I found loafing around under a government they were afraid to fight
for.  I'd show 'em.  I'd show 'em if a government is good enough
to live under it's good enough to fight under.  I'd show 'em."

"If you was a man, Blossum, you'd eat those words.  By God, you'd
eat 'em.  I'm no coward--I--"

"I know you're not, Hal--that's why I--I--"

"I got the right to decide for myself if I want to fight when I
don't know what I'm fighting for.  This ain't my war, this ain't
America's war.  Before I fight in it I want a darn sight to know
what I'm fighting for, and not all the street corner rah rah stuff
has told me yet.  I ain't a bull to go crazy with a lot of red
waved in my face.  I've got no blood to spill in the other fellow's
battle.  I'm---"

"No, but you--"

"I'm at a point in my life that I've worked like a dog to reach.
Let the fellows that love the hero stuff give up their arms and
their legs and the breath that's in them for something they don't
know the meaning of.  Because some big-gun of a Emperor out in
Austria was assassinated, I ain't going to bleed to death for it.
It's us poor devils that get the least out of the government that
right away are called on to give the most, it's us---"

"Hal, ain't--ain't you ashamed!"

"No.  I ain't ashamed and I ain't afraid.  You know it ain't because
I'm afraid.  I've licked more fellows in my time than most fellows
can boast.  I--I got the Fifty-fifth Street fire rescue medal to my
credit if anybody should ask you.  I--I--ask anybody from my town
if any kid in it ever licked me.  But I ain't going to fight when
I ain't got a grudge against no man.  Call that being a coward if
you like, but then you and me don't speak the same language."

Her silence seemed to give off an icy vapor.

"That's what they all say," she said.  "It's like hiding behind a
petticoat, hiding behind a defense like that.  Sure you ain't got
a grudge.  Maybe you don't know what it's all about--God knows who
does.  Nobody can deny that.  There ain't nothing reasonable about
war, if there was there wouldn't be none.  That talk don't get you
nowheres.  The proposition is that we're at war, whatever you or
anybody else may think of it."

"That's just it--we didn't have no say-so."

"Just the same, Hal Sanderson, this great big grand country of ours
is at war, and needs you.  It ain't what you think any more that
counts.  Before we was in war you could talk all you wanted, but
now that we're IN, there's only one thing to do, only one, and not
all your fine talk about peace can change it.  One thing to do.
Fight!"

"No government can make me--"

"If you want peace now it's up to you to help make it, a new peace
and a grander peace, not go baying at the moon after a peace that
ain't no more."

"You better get a soap box.  If this is the way you got of trying
to get out of something you're sorry for, I'll let you off easier--you
don't need to try to---"

She regarded him with her lips quivering, a quick layer of tears
forming, trembling and venturing to the edge of her lashes.

"Hal--Hal--a--a fellow that I've banked on like I have you!  It
ain't that--you know it ain't.  I could have waited for ten times
this long.  It's only I--I'm ashamed, Hal.  Ashamed.  there ain't
been a single gap in the chorus from one of the men enlisting that
my heart ain't just dropped in my shoes like dough.  I never envied
a girl on my life the way I did Elaine Vavasour when she stood on
the curb at the Battery the other day crying and watching Charlie
Kirkpatrick go marching off.  Charlie was a pacifist, too, as long
as the country was out of war, and there was something to argue
about.  The minute the question was settled, he shut up, buckled
on his belt and went!  That's the kind of a pacifist to be.  The
kind of fellow that when he sees peace slipping, buckles on and
starts out for a new peace; a realer peace.  That's the kind of a
fellow I thought you--you---"

Her voice broke then abruptly, in a rain of tears, and she raised
the crook of her arm to her face with the gesture of a child.
"That--that's the kind of a fellow I--I---"

His cigarette discarded and curling up in a little column of smoke
between them, he sat regarding her, a heave surge of red rising
above the impeccable white of his collar into the roots of his hair.
It was as if her denouncement had come down in a welt across his
face.

"Nobody ever--nobody ever dared to talk like this to me before.
Nobody ever dared to call me a coward.  Nobody.  Because it ain't
so!"

"I know it ain't, Hal.  If it was could I have been so strong for
you all these months?  I knew the way you showed yourself in the
Fifty-fifth Street fire.  I read about it in the papers before I
ever knew you.  I--I know the way you mauled Ed Stein, twice your
size, the night he tried to--to get fresh with me.  I know you
ain't a slacker in your heart, Hal, but I--I couldn't marry a man
that got fake exemption.  Couldn't, no matter how it broke my heart
to see him go marching off!  Couldn't!  Couldn't!"

"That's what it means, Blossum--marching off!"

"I know it, but how--how could I marry a man that wasn't fit to
war his country's uniform even in a show.  I--I couldn't marry a
man like that if it meant the solid gold suite in the solid goldest
hotel in this town.  I couldn't marry a--a fake khaki-boy!"

"Ain't there no limit, Bloss, to the way you can make a fellow feel
like dirt under your feet?  My God! ain't there no limit?"

"There--there's nothing on earth can make a man of you, Hal, nothing
on God's earth but War!  Every once in a while there's some little
reason seems to spring up for there bein' a war.  You're one of them
reasons, Hal.  Down in my heart I know it that you'll come back,
and when I get a hunch it's a hunch!  Down in my heart I know it,
dear, that you'll come back to me.  But you'll come back a man,
you'll come back with the yellow streak pure gold, you'll-you'll
come back to me pure gold, dear.  I know it.  I know it."

His head was back as if his throat were open to the stroke of her
words, but there was that growing in his face which was enormous,
translucent, even apogean.

He tore up the paper between them, slowly, and in criss crosses.

"And you, Blossom?" he said, not taking his eyes, with their growing
lights, off her.

"Why, I'll be waiting, Hal," she said, the pink coming out to flood
her face, "I'll be waiting--Sweetheart."

[signed] Fannie Hurst





The Married Slacker




[This is a comic strip in three panels.  I'll do my best to describe
each panel and then put the text which comes beneath the panel.]

[Panel 1:  A man and woman sit at a meal with pictures of Washington
and Lincoln glowering from the wall in the man's full view behind
the woman.  The woman is reading a paper.  The man is listening,
but not looking at the woman, rather at his meal in front of him.
A maid brings coffee cups on a platter.]

SHE (reading)--"At 5:15, the barrage was raised, and the Americans
advanced to attack.  The long line moved forward like the steady
on-sweep of the tide--unwavering, irresistible, implacable."  Oh,
isn't it perfectly wonderful!  I knew our men would fight gloriously!
And just listen to this:

[Panel 2:  The images of Washington and Lincoln have doubled
in size and the eyes clearly glare at the man.  The man now shows
beads of sweat around his head and wears an expression of distress.
The woman continues to read the paper.  The maid departs the scene
having delivered the coffee cups.]

SHE (reading)--"The Germans fought desperately but the American
lines never wavered in their onward course.  Sometimes the broad
stretch of the battlefield was enveloped in great volumes of smoke,
but a moment later, as the air cleared, the same lines were to
be seen moving onward.  At 6:45, the sound of cheering was heard
amidst the din of the battle and a few moments later, the message
was sent back that the American troops had captured the great German
position."

[Panel 3:  The images of Washington and Lincoln are now almost
fully the size of the wall and marks of consternation and anger are
clear on their brows as they glare at the man.  The woman continues
to read the paper without looking up.  The man is fleeing the room
in great haste with his arms in the air.  He has knocked over his
chair in his haste and has bumped into the maid who was returning
with a coffee pot and biscuits.  The man's face is obscured by
raised hands and his overcoat, but he is clearly fleeing.]

SHE (reading)--"The American victory of yesterday may well mark
the beginning of the end of the war.  London and Paris are ringing
with the praises of the American soldiers.  President Wilson has
proclaimed a national holiday in celebration of the triumph, and
the American soldier has won imperishable glory as a fighting man."

[The last panel is signed] McCutcheon





Hymn for America




Air:  "Scots wha hae wi' Wallace bled"


Where's the man, in all the earth--
Man of want or man of worth--
Who shall now to rank or birth
  Knee of homage bend?
Though he war with chance or fate,
If his heart be free of hate,
If his soul with love be great,
  He shall be our friend.

Where's the man, of wealth or wage,
Dare be traitor to his age,
To the people's heritage
  Won by war and woe,--
Counting but as private good
All the gain of brotherhood
By the base so long withstood?
  He shall be our foe.

Where's the man that does not feel
Freedom as the common weal,
Duty's sword the only steel
  Can the battle end?
Comrades, chant in unison
Creed the noblest 'neath the sun:
"One for all and all for one,"
  Till each foe be friend.

[signed] Robert Underwood Johnson





The Breaking Out of the Flags




It is April,
And the snow lingers on the dark sides of evergreens;
The grass is brown and soggy
With only a faint, occasional overwash of green.
But under the leafless branches
The white bells of snowdrops are nodding and shaking
Above their green sheaths.
Snow, fir-trees, snowdrops--stem and flower--
Nature offers us only white and green
At this so early springtime.
But man gives more.

Man has unfurled a Nation's flags
Above the city streets;
He has flung a striped and starry symbol of bright colors
Down every curving way.
Blossoms of War,
Blossoms of Suffering,
Strange beautiful flowers of the New Year:
Flags!

Over door lintels and cornices,
Above peaked gables and flat mansard-roofs
Flutter the flags.
The avenues are arcaded with them,
The narrow alleys are bleached with stripes and stars.
For War is declared,
And the people gird themselves
Silently--sternly--
Only the flags make arabesques in the sunshine,
Twining the red of blood and the silver of achievement
Into a gay, waving pattern
Over the awful, unflinching Destiny
Of War.

The flags ripple and jar
To the tramp of marching men,
to the rumble of caissons over cobblestones.
From seaboard to seaboard
And beyond, across the green waves of the sea,
They flap and fly.
Men plant potatoes and click typewriters
In the shadow of them,
And khaki-clad soldiers
Lift their eyes to the garish red and blue
And turn back to their khaki tasks
Refreshed.

America,
The clock strikes.
The spring is upon us,
The seed of our forefathers
Quickens again in the soil,
And these flags are the small, early flowers
Of the solstice of our Hope!

Thru suffering to Peace!
Thru sacrifice to Security!
Red stripes,
Turn us not from our purpose,
Lead us up as by a ladder
To the deep blue quiet
Wherein are shining
The silver stars.

Soldiers, sailors, clerks, and office boys,
Men, and Women--but not children,
No!  Not children!
Let these march
With their paper caps and toy rifles
And feel only the panoply of War--
But the others,
Welded and forged,
Seared, melted, broken,
Molded without flaw,
Slowly, faithfully pursuing a Purpose,
A Purpose of Peace,

Even into the very flame of Death.
Over the city,
Over all the cities,
Flutter flags.
Flags of spring,
Flags of burgeoning,
Flags of fulfillment.

[signed] Amy Lowell





Our Day




London, April 20, 1917


It was the evening of our Day; that young April day when in
the solemn vastness of St. Paul's were held the services to mark
America's historic entrance into the Great World War.  Across the
mighty arch of the Chancel on either side hung the Stars and Stripes
and the Union Jack.

From the organ pealed those American songs to which half a century
ago, in another war for Freedom, men marched to battle, and, even
if by ways of defeat and death, to ultimate Victory.  How many there
were that April day for whom the sight of the Stars and Stripes was
blurred with tears.  How the familiar airs and simple words pained
us with the memory of our distant homes.  Perhaps for the first
time we understood the solemn significance of this dedication to
war of what we hardly knew was so unspeakably dear.

In the Crypt of St. Paul's, Mausoleum of England's greatest soldier
and sailor heroes, their ashes rest who once fought and conquered.
If it is given to those who have gone before to hear our human
appeal, perhaps the immortal spirits of Nelson, of Wellington, of
Kitchener, whose tragic fate is its unfulfilled destiny, may have
rested like an inspiration on that kindred nation offering the
sacrifice of all it holds most sacred to the cause of Divine Justice.

After the solemn benediction thousands streamed slowly out to mingle
with the multitudes gathered before the great Entrance where Queen
Anne in crown and scepter keeps majestic guard, and where in peaceful
days doves flit and flutter down to peck at the grain strewn about
her royal feet.

Stern and momentous times have passed over that old, gray Cathedral;
times of a Nation's grief and a Nation's rejoicing.  But of all such
days, in its centuries of existence, none has been so momentous for
the destiny of the Empire as that sunny April day.  And yet--and
yet--perhaps more touching, more solemn, even than the High
Service at St. Paul's, that which stirred Americans even more who
love England with only a lesser love, and made us realize as never
before what America stands for, joint defender now of the new
Civilization, was the silent symbol of her dedication to the Cause
of Human Freedom, for all London to see and on which, seeing, to
reflect.  It was the symbol of that for which Statesmen who were
also prophets, have lived and toiled.

It rose against the glowing West, never to be forgotten by those
who saw it at the close of Our Day, for it marked the new Epoch.

Now at last "Let the dead Past bury its Dead."

Along Whitehall, down Parliament Street, and where towards the left
Westminster Bridge spans its immortal river, stand the Houses of
Parliament, their delicate tracery of stonework etched against the
sunset sky.

Hurrying crowds, released from the day's toil, stopped here, as if
by a common impulse, to gaze upwards, and, gazing in silent wonder,
they saw such a sight as London has never seen before.  On the
highest pinnacle of the Victoria tower where the flag of another
nation has never before shared its proud eminence there floated
together from one flagstaff Old Glory and the Union Jack.

That was America's supreme consecration.

[signed] Annie E. Lane (Mrs. John Lane)





Pour La Patrie




They were brothers, Louis and Francois, standing in the presence of
the Prussian commander, looking hopelessly into his cold, unsmiling
eyes.  For the third time in as many days he was bargaining with
them for that which God had given them and they in turn had promised
to France:  their lives.

"Do not make the mistake of thinking that we exalt you for what
you may call courage, or that your country will sing your praises,"
said the general harshly.  "Your country will never know how or when
you die.  You have nothing to gain by dying, not even the credit
of dying."

Francois allowed his hot, dry eyes to sweep slowly around the group.
He was pale, his forehead wet.

"You are soldiers," said he, his voice low and steady.  "Is there
one among you who would do the thing we are asked to do?  If there is
one man here who will stand forth in the presence of his comrades
and say that he would betray Germany as you are asking us to
betray France,--if there is such a man among you, let him speak,
and the,--then I will do what you ask of me."

A dozen pairs of hard implacable eyes returned his challenge.  No
man spoke.  No man smiled.

"You do not even pretend," cried the little poilu.  "well, I too
am a soldier.  I am a soldier of France.  It is nothing to me that
I day to-day or to-morrow, or that my country knows when or how.
Take me out and shoot me," he shouted, facing the commander.  "I
am but one poor soldier.  I am one of millions.  What is my little
life worth to you?"

"Nothing," said the commander.  "Ten such as you would not represent
the worth of one German soldier."

"We say not so over there," said Francois boldly, jerking his thumb
in the direction of Pont-a-mousson.

And now for the first time the Prussians about him smiled.

"What is it, pray, that you do say over there?" inquired the general
mockingly.

"That the worst of the Frenchmen is worth five of your best," said
Francois, unafraid.  Why should he be afraid to speak the truth?
He was going to die.

"And one of your frog-eating generals is the equal of five of me,
I suppose?"  The commander's grim face relaxed into a smile.  "That
is good!  Ha-ha!  That is good!"

"So we say, excellency," said Francois simply.  "Our Papa Joffre--ah,
he is greater than all of you put in one."

The Prussian flushed.  His piggish eyes glittered.

"Your Papa Joffre!" he scoffed.

"He is greater than the Kaiser,--though I die for saying it," cried
the little poilu recklessly.

The commander turned his eyes from the white, impassioned face
of Francois and looked upon the quivering, ghastly visage of the
brother who stood beside him.  The fire that glowed in the eyes of
Francois was missing in those of Louis.

The grizzled Prussian smiled, but imperceptibly.  What he saw
pleased him.  Louis, the big one, the older of the two, trembled.
It was only by the supremest effort that he maintained a pitiable
show of defiance.  His face was haggard and blanched with fear;
there was a hunted, shifty look in his narrowed eyes.  The general's
smile developed.  It proffered comfort, consolation, encouragement.

"And you," he said, almost gently, "have not you profited by the
reflections of your three days of grace?  Are you as stubborn as
this mule of a brother, this foolish lad who spouts even poorer
French than I address to you?"

Francois shot a quick, appealing glance at his big brother's face.
There were tiny rivulets of slaver at the corners of Louis's mouth.

"Louis!" he cried out sharply.

Louis lifted his sagging shoulders.  "I have nothing to say," he
said thickly, and with the set of his jaws Francois breathed deeply
of relief.

"So!" said the general, shrugging his shoulders.  "I am sorry.  You
are young to die, you two.  To die on the field of battle,--ah,
that is noble!  To die with one's back to a wall, blindfolded, and
to be covered with earth so loosely that starving dogs may scratch
away to feast--But, no more.  You have decided.  You have had many
hours in which to consider the alternative.  You will be shot at
daybreak."

The slight figure of Francois straightened, his chin went up.  His
thin, dirt-covered hands were tightly clenched.

"For France!" he murmured, lifting his eyes above the head of the
Prussian.

A vast shudder swept over the figure of Louis, a hoarse gasp broke
through his lips.  The commander leaned forward, fixing him with
compelling eyes.

"For France!" cried Francois again, and once more Louis lifted his
head to quaver:

"For France!"

"Take them away," said the commander.  "But stay!  How old are
you?"  He addressed Francois.

"I am nineteen."

"And you?"

Louis's lips moved but no sound issued.

"My brother is twenty-one," said Francois, staring hard at Louis.

"He has a sweetheart who will grieve bitterly if he does not
return for her caresses, eh?  I thought so.  Oh, you French!  But
she will soon recover.  She will find another,--like that!  So!"
He snapped his fingers.  "She will not wait long, my good Louis.
Take them away!"

Louis's face was livid.  His chin trembled, his lips fell apart
slackly; he lowered his eyes after an instant's contact with the
staunch gaze of his brother.

"You have until sunrise to change your minds," said the Prussian,
turning on his heel.

"Sunrise," muttered Louis, his head twitching.

They were led from the walled-in garden and across the cobblestones
of the little street that terminated in a cul de sac just above.
Over the way stood the shattered remnants of a building that once
had been pointed to with pride by the simple villagers as the finest
shop in town.  The day was hot.  Worn-out German troopers sprawled
in the shade of the walls, sound asleep, their mouths ajar,--beardless
boys, most of them.

"Poor devils," said Francois, as he passed among them.  He too was
very young.

They were shoved through the wrecked doorway into the mortar-strewn
ruin, and, stumbling over masses of debris, came to the stone steps
that led to the cellar below.  Louis drew back with a groan.  He
had spent centuries in that foul pit.

"Not there--again!" he moaned.  He was whimpering feebly as he
picked himself up at the bottom of the steps a moment later.

"Dogs!" cried Francois, glaring upward and shaking his fist at the
heads projecting into the turquoise aperture above.  Far on high,
where the roof had been, gleamed the brilliant sky.  "Our general
will make you pay one of these days,--our GREAT general!"

Then he threw his arms about his brother's shoulders and--cried a
little too,--no in fear but in sympathy.

The trap door dropped into place, a heavy object fell upon it with
a thud, and they were in inky darkness.  There was no sound save
the sobs of the two boys, and later the steady tread of a man who
paced the floor overhead,--a man who carried a gun.

They had not seen, but they knew that a dead man lay over in the
corner near a window chocked by a hundred tons of brick and mortar.
He had died some time during the second century of their joint
occupance of the black and must hole.  On the 28th he had come in
with them, wounded.  It was now the 31st, and he was dead, having
lived to the age of nine score years and ten!  When they spoke to
their guards at the beginning of the third century, saying that
their companion was dead and should be carried away, the Germans
replied:

"There is time enough for that," and laughed,--for the Germans
could count the time by hours out there in the sunshine.  But that
is not why they laughed.

A hidden French battery in the wooded, rocky hills off to the
west had for days kept up a deadly, unerring fire upon the German
positions.  Shift as he would, the commander could not escape the
shells from those unseen, undiscovered guns.  They followed him
with uncanny precision.  His own batteries had searched in vain,
with thousands of shrieking shells, for the gadfly gunners.  They
could find him, but he could not find them.  For every shell he
wasted, they returned one that counted.

Three French scouts fell into his hands on the night of the 28th.
Two of them were still alive.  He had them up before him at once.

"On one condition will I spare your lives," said he.  And that
condition had been pounded into their ears with unceasing violence,
day and night, by officers high and low, since the hour of their
capture.  It was a very simple condition, declared the Germans.
Only a stubborn fool would fail to take advantage of the opportunity
offered.  The exact position of that mysterious battery,--that
was all the general demanded in return for his goodness in sparing
their lives.  He asked no more of them than a few, truthful words.

They had steadfastly refused to betray their countrymen.

Francois could not see his brother, but now and then he put out a
timid hand to touch the shaking figure.  He could not understand.
Why was it not the other way about?  Who was he to offer consolation
to the big and strong?

"Courage," he would say, and then stare hard ahead into the blackness.
"You are great and strong," he would add.  "It is I who am weak
and little, Louis.  I am the little brother."

"You have not so much to live for as I," Louis would mutter, over
and over again.

Their hour drew near.  "Eat this," persuaded Francois, pressing
upon Louis the hunk of bread their captors had tossed down to them.

"Eat?  God!  How can I eat?"

"Then drink.  It is not cold, but--"

"Let me alone!  Keep away from me!  God in heaven, why do they
leave that Jean Picard down here with us--"

"You have seen hundreds of dead men, Louis.  All of them were
heroes.  All of them were brave.  It was glorious to die as they
died.  Why should we be afraid of death?"

"But they died like men, not like rats.  They died smiling.  They
had no time to think."

And then he fell to moaning.  His teeth rattled.  He turned upon
his face and for many minutes beat upon the stone steps with his
clenched hands, choking out appeals to his Maker.

Francois stood.  His hot, unblinking eyes tried to pierce the darkness.
Tears of shame and pity for this big brother burnt their way out
and ran down his cheeks.  He was wondering.  He was striving to
put away the horrid doubt that was searing his soul:  the doubt of
Louis!

The dreary age wore on.  Louis slept!  The little brother sat with
his chin in his hands, his heart cold, his eyes closed.  He prayed.

Then came the sound of the heavy object being dragged away from
the door at the top of the steps.  They both sprang to their feet.
An oblong patch of drab, gray light appeared overhead.  Sunrise!

"Come!  It is time," called down a hoarse voice.  Three guns hung
over the edge of the opening.  They were taking no chances.

"Louis!" cried Francois sharply.

Louis straightened his gaunt figure.  The light from above fell
upon his face.  It was white,--deathly white,--but transfigured.
A great light flamed in his eyes.

"Have no fear, little brother," he said gently, caressingly.  He
clasped his brother's hand.  "We die together.  I have dreamed.
A vision came to me,--came down from heaven.  My dream was of our
mother.  She came to me and spoke.  So!  I shall die without fear.
Come!  Courage, little Francois.  We are her soldier boys.  She
gave us to France.  She spoke to me.  I am not afraid."

Glorified, rejoicing, almost unbelieving, Francois followed his
brother up the steps, there was comfort in the grip of Louis's
hand.

"This general of yours," began Louis, facing the guard, a sneer on
his colorless lips, his teeth showing, "he is a dog!  I shall say
as much to him when the guns are pointed at my breast."

The Germans stared.

"What has come over this one?" growled one of them.  "Last night
he was breaking."

"There is still a way to break him," said another, grinning.  "Hell
will be a relief to him after this hour."

"Canailes!" snarled Louis, and Francois laughed aloud in sheer joy!

"My good,--my strong brother!" he cried out.

"This Papa Joffre of yours," said the burliest German,--"he is
worse than a dog.  He is a toad."  He shoved the captives through
the opening in the wall.  "Get on!"

"The smallest sergeant in Germany is greater than your Papa Joffre,"
said another.  "What is it you have said, baby Frenchman?  One
frog-eater is worth five Germans?  Ho-ho!  You shall see."

"I--I myself," cried Francois hotly,--"I am nobler, braver, greater
than this beast you call master."

"Hold your tongue," said a third German, in a kindlier tone than
the others had employed.  "It can do you no good to talk like this.
Give in, my brave lads.  Tell everything.  I know what is before
you if you refuse to-day,--and I tremble.  He will surely break
you to-day."

They were crossing the narrow road.

"He is your master,--not ours," said Francois calmly.

Louis walked ahead, erect, his jaw set.  The blood leaped in
Francois' veins.  Ah, what a brave, strong fellow his brother was!

"He is the greatest commander in all the German armies," boasted
the burly sergeant.  "And, young frog-eater, he commands the finest
troops in the world.  Do you know that there are ten thousand iron
crosses in this God-appointed corps!  Have a care how you speak
of our general.  He is the Emperor's right hand.  He is the chosen
man of the Emperor."

"And of God," added another.

"Bah!" cried Francois, snapping his fingers scornfully.  "His is
worth no more than that to me!"

Francois was going to his death.  His chest swelled.

"You fool.  He is to the Emperor worth more than an entire army
corps,--yes, two of them.  The Emperor would sooner lose a hundred
thousand men than this single general."

"A hundred thousand men?" cried Francois, incredulously.  "That is
a great many men,--even Germans."

"Pigs," said Louis, between his teeth.

They now entered the little garden.  The Prussian commander was
eating his breakfast in the shelter of a tent.  The day was young,
yet the sun was hot.  Papers and maps were strewn over the top of
the long table at which he sat, gorging himself.  The guard and
the two prisoners halted a few paces away.  The general's breakfast
was not to be interrupted by anything so trivial as the affairs of
Louis and Francois.

"And that ugly glutton is worth more than a hundred thousand men,"
mused Francois, eyeing him in wonder.  "God, how cheap these boches
must be."

Staff officers stood outside the tent, awaiting and receiving
gruff orders from their superior.  Between gulps he gave out almost
unintelligible sounds, and one by one these officers, interpreting
them as commands, saluted and withdrew.

Francois gazed as one fascinated.  He WAS a great general, after
all.  Only a very great and powerful general could enjoy such
respect, such servile obedience as he was receiving from these
hulking brutes of men.

Directions were punctuated,--or rather indicated,--by the huge
carving-knife with which the general slashed his meat.  He pointed
suddenly with the knife, and, as he did so, the officer at whom
it was leveled, sprang into action, to do as he was bidden, as if
the shining blade had touched his quivering flesh.

Suddenly the great general pushed his bench back from the table,
slammed the knife and fork down among the platters, and barked:

"Well!"

His eyes were fastened upon the prisoners.  The guards shoved them
forward.

"Have you decided?  What is it to be,--life or death?"

He was in an evil humor.  That battery in the hills had found its
mark again when the sun was on the rise.

"Vive la France!" shouted Louis, raising his eye to heaven.

"vive la France!" almost screamed Francois.

"So be it!" roared the commander.  His gaze was fixed on Louis.
There was the one who would weaken.  Not that little devil of a
boy beside him.  He uttered a short, sharp command to an aide.

The torturing of Louis began....

"End it!" commanded the Prussian general after a while.  "The fool
will not speak!"

And the little of life that was left to the shuddering, sightless
Louis went out with a sigh--slipped out with the bayonet as it was
withdrawn from his loyal breast.

Turning to Francois, who had been forced to witness the mutilation
of his brother,--whose arms had been held and whose eyelids were
drawn up by the cruel fingers of a soldier who stood behind him,--he
said:

"Now YOU!  You have seen what happened to him!  It is your turn
now.  I was mistaken.  I thought that he was the coward.  Are you
prepared to go through even more than--Ah!  Good!  I thought so!
The little fire-eater weakens!"

Francois, shaken and near to dying of the horror he had witnessed,
sagged to his knees.  They dragged him forward,--and one of them
kicked him.

"I will tell!  I will tell!" he screamed.  "Let me alone!  Keep
your hands off of me!  I will tell, God help me, general!"

He staggered, white-faced and pitiful, to the edge of the table,
which he grasped with trembling, straining hands.

"Be quick about it," snarled the general, leaning forward eagerly.

Like a cat, Francois sprang.  He had gauged the distance well.  He
had figured it all out as he stood by and watched his brother die.

His fingers clutched the knife.

"I will!" he cried out in an ecstasy of joy.

To the hasp sank the long blade into the heart of the Prussian
commander.

Whirling, the French boy threw his arms on high and screamed into
the faces of the stupefied soldiers:

"Vive la France!  One hundred thousand men!  There they lie!  Ha-ha!
I--I, Francois Dupre,--I have sent them all to hell!  Wait for me,
Louis!  I am coming!"

The first words of the "Marseillaise" were bursting from his lips
when his uplifted face was blasted--

He crumpled up and fell.

[signed] George Barr McCutcheon





Sonnet




Thou art not lovelier than lilacs,--no,
Nor honeysuckle,--thou art not more fair
Than small white single poppies,--I can bear
Thy beauty; though I bend before thee, though
From left to right, not knowing where to go,
I turn my troubled eyes, nor here nor there
Find any refuge from thee, yet I swear
So has it been with mist,--with moonlight so.

Like him who day by day unto his draught
Of delicate poison adds him one drop more
Till he may drink unharmed the death of ten,
Even so, inured to beauty, who have quaffed
Each hour more deeply than the hour before,
I drink,--and live--what has destroyed some men.

[signed] Edna St. Vincent Millay





The Idiot




I


The change was not affected without whispering.  The spirit both
of the troops who were going back of the lines to rest and of those
who had zigzagged up through two miles of communication trenches
to take their places was excellent.

"What is the name of this country?" asked one of the new comers.

"If it had a name, that is all that remains.  We are somewhere in
Picardy.  The English are off there not very far.  Their cannon
have different voices from ours.  Good Luck!"

His gray, faded uniform seemed to melt into the night.  The New
Comer stepped on to the firing platform and poked his head over
the parapet.  A comrade pulled at his trousers leg.

"Come down, Idiot," he said, "Fritz is only twelve yards away."

The Idiot came down, sniffing the night air luxuriously.

"We are somewhere in Picardy," he said.  "I know without being
told.  It is like going home."

A sergeant approached, his body twisted sideways because the trench
was too narrow for his shoulders.

"Have you a watch?"

The Idiot had.

Under his coat, so that the enemy should not perceive the glow,
the sergeant flashed his electric torch and compared the watches.

"Yours leads by a minute," he said.  "The advance will be at four
o'clock.  there will be hot coffee at three.  Good luck."

He passed on, and the comrades drew a little closer together.  The
sergeant's words had made the Idiot very happy.

"In less than two hours!" he said.

"I thought there was something in the wind," said Paul Guitry.

"If we advanced only three kilometers," said the Idiot, "the village
in which I was born would be French again.  But there will be great
changes."

"You were born at Champ-de-Fer?"

"It is directly opposite us."

"You cannot know that."

"I feel it," said the Idiot.  "Wherever I have been stationed I have
felt it.  Sometimes I have asked an officer to look for Champ-de-Fer
on his field map, and when he has done so, I have pointed, and said
'Is it in that direction?' and always I have been right."

"Did your family remain in the village?"

"I don't know.  But I think so, for from the hour of the mobilization
until now, I have not heard from them."

"Since the hour of the mobilization," said Paul Guitry, "much water
has flowed under the bridges.  I had just been married.  My wife
is in Paris.  I have a little son now.  I saw them when I had my
eight days' leave.  And it seems that again I am to be a father.
It is very wonderful."

"I was going to be married," said the Idiot simply.

There was a short silence.

"If I had known," said Paul Guitry, "I would not have boasted of
my own happiness."

"I am not the only French soldier who has not heard from his
sweetheart since the mobilization," said the Idiot.  "It has been
hard," he said, "but by thinking of all the others, I have been
able to endure."

"She remained there at Champ-de-Fer?"

"She must have, or else she would have written to me."

Paul Guitry could not find anything to say.

"Soon," said the Idiot, "we shall be in Champ-de-Fer, and they will
tell me what has become of her."

"She will tell you herself," said Paul Guitry with a heartiness
which he did not feel.  The Idiot shrugged his shoulders.

"We have loved each other," he said, "even since we were little
children.  Do you know why I am called the Idiot?  It is because
I do not go with women, when I have the chance.  But I don't mind.
They cannot say that I am not a real man, for I have the military
medal and I have been mentioned twice in the orders of the day."

To Paul Guitry, a confirmed sinner as opportunity offered, the
Idiot's statement contained much psychic meat.

"It must be," he said, "that purity tempts some men, just as impurity
tempts others."

"It is even simpler," said the Idiot; but he did not explain.  And
there was a long silence.

Now and then Paul Guitry glanced at his companion's profile, for
the night was no longer inky black.  It was a simple direct young
face, not handsome, but full of dignity and kindness; the line of
the jaw had a certain sternness, and the wide and delicately molded
nostril indicated courage and daring.

Paul Guitry thought of his wife and of his little son, of his eight
days' leave, and of its consequences.  He tried to imagine how he
would feel, if for two years his wife had been in the hands of the
Germans.  Without meaning to, he spoke his thought aloud:

"Long since," he said, "I should have gone mad."

The Idiot nodded.

"They say," he said, "that in fifty years all this will be forgotten;
and that we French will feel friendly toward the Germans."

He laughed softly, a laugh so cold, that Paul Guitry felt as if
ice water had suddenly been spilled on his spine.

"Hell," he went on, "has no tortures which French men, and women,
and little children have not suffered.  You say that if you had
been in my boots you must long since have gone mad?  well, it is
because I have been able to think of all the others who are in my
boots that I have kept my sanity.  It has not been easy.  It is
not as if my imagination alone had been tortured.  Just as I have
the sense that my village is there--" he pointed with his sensitive
hand, "so I have the sense of what has happened there.  I KNOW that
she is alive," he concluded, "and that she would rather be dead."

There was another silence.  The Idiot's nostrils dilated and he
sniffed once or twice.

"The coffee is coming," he said.  "Listen.  If I am killed in the
advance, find her, will you--Jeanne Bergere?  And say what you can
to comfort her.  It doesn't matter what has happened, her love for
me is like the North Star--fixed.  When she knows that I am dead
she will wish to kill herself.  You must prevent that.  You must
show her how she can help France.  Aha!--The cannon!"

From several miles in the rear there rose suddenly a thudding percussive
cataract of sound.  The earth trembled like some frightened animal
that has been driven into a corner.

The Idiot leaped to his feet, his eyes joyously alight.

"It is the voice of God," he cried.

If indeed it was the voice of God, that other great voice which is
of Hell, made no answer.  The German guns were unaccountably silent.

On the stroke of four, the earth still trembling with the incessant
concussions of the guns, the French scrambled out of their trenches
and went forward.  But no sudden blast of lead and iron challenged
their temerity.  A few shells, but all from field pieces, fired
perfunctorily as it were, fell near them and occasionally among
them.  It looked as if Fritz wasn't going to fight.

The wire guarding the first line of German trenches had been so
torn and disrupted by the French cannon, that only here and there
an ugly strand remained to be cut.  The trench was empty.

"The Boche," said Paul Guitry, "has left nothing but his smell."

Rumor spread swiftly through the lines.  "We are not to be opposed.
Fritz has been withdrawn in the night.  His lines are too long.
He is straightening out his salients.  It is the beginning of the
end."

There was good humor and elation.  There was also a feeling of
admiration for the way in which Fritz had managed to retreat without
being detected.

The country over which the troops advanced was a rolling desert,
blasted, twisted, swept clear of all vegetation.  What the Germans
could not destroy they had carried away with them.  There remained
only frazzled stumps of trees, dead bodies and ruined engines of
war.

Paul Guitry and the Idiot came at last to the summit of a little
hill.  Beyond and below at the end of a long sweep of tortured and
ruined fields could be seen picturesquely grouped a few walls of
houses and one bold arch of an ancient bridge.

The Idiot blinked stupidly.  Then he laughed a short, ugly laugh.

"I had counted on seeing the church steeple.  But of course they
would have destroyed that."

"Is it Champ-de-Fer?" asked Guitry.

At that moment a dark and sudden smoke, as from ignited chemicals
began to pour upward from the ruined village.

"It was," said the Idiot, and once more the word was passed to go
forward.


II


They did not know what was going on in the world.  They had been
ordered into the cellars of the village, and told to remain there
for twenty-four hours.  They had no thought but to obey.

Into the same cellar with Jeanne Bergere had been herded four old
women, two old men, and a little boy whom a German surgeon (the day
the champagne had been discovered buried in the Notary's garden)
had strapped to a board and--vivisected.

Twenty-three of the twenty-four hours had passed (one of the old
men had a Waterbury watch) but only the little boy complained of
hunger and thirst.  He wanted to drink from the well in the corner
of the cellar; but they would not let him.  The well had supplied
good drinking water since the days of Julius Caesar, but shortly
after entering the cellar one of the old women had drunk from it,
and shortly afterward had died in great torment.  The little boy
kept saying:

"But maybe it wasn't the water which killed Madame Pigeon.  Only
let me try it and then we shall know for sure."

But they would not let him drink.

"It is not agreeable to live," said one of the old men, "but it
is necessary.  We are of those who will be called upon to testify.
The terms of peace will be written by soft-hearted statesmen; we
who have suffered must be on hand.  We must be on hand to see that
the Boche gets his deserts."

Jeanne Bergere spoke in a low unimpassioned voice:

"What would you do to them, father," she asked, "if you were God?"

"I do not know," said the old man.  "For I have experience only
of those things which give them pleasure.  Those who delight in
peculiar pleasures are perhaps immune to ordinary pains...."

"Surely," interrupted the little boy, "it was not the water that
killed Madame Pigeon."

"How peaceful she looks," said the old man.  "You would say the
stone face of a saint from the facade of a cathedral."

"It may be," said Jeanne Bergere, "that already God has opened His
mind to her, and that she knows of that vengeance, which we with
our small minds are not able to invent."

"I can only think of what they have done to us," said the old man.
"It does not seem as if there was anything left for us to do to
them.  Vengeance which does not give the Avenger pleasure is a poor
sort of vengeance.  Madame Simon..."

The old woman in question turned a pair of sheeny eyes towards the
speaker.

"Would it give you any particular pleasure to cut the breasts off
an old German woman?"

With a trembling hand Madame Simon flattened the bosom of her dress
to show that there was nothing beneath.

"It would give me no pleasure," she said, "but I shall show my
scars to the President."

"An eye for an eye--a tooth for a tooth," said the old man.  "That
is the ancient law.  But it does not work.  There is no justice in
exchanging a German eye and a French.  French eyes see beauty in
everything.  To the German eye the sense of beauty has been denied.
You cannot compare a beast and a man.  In the old days, when there
were wolves, it was the custom of the naive people of those days
to torture a wolf if they caught one.  They put him to death with
the same refinements which were requisitioned for human criminals.
This meant nothing to the wolf.  The mere fact that he had been
caught was what tortured him.  And so I think it will be with the
Germans when they find that they have failed.  They have built
up their power on the absurd hypothesis that they are men.  Their
punishment will be in discovering that they never were anything
but low animals and never could be."

"That is too deep for me," said the other man.  "They tied my
daughter to her bed, and afterward they set fire to her mattress."

"I wish," said Jeanne Bergere, "that they had set fire to my
mattress."

A violent concussion shook the cellar to its foundations.  Even
the face of the thirsty little boy brightened.

"It is one of ours," he said.

"To eradicate the lice which feed upon the Germans and the foul
smells which emanate from their bodies there is nothing so effective
as high explosives," said the old man.  He looked at his watch and
said:

"We have half an hour more."

At the end of that time, he climbed the cellar stair, pushed open
the door, and looked out.  Partly in the bright sunlight and partly
in the deep shadows, he resembled a painting by Rembrandt.

"I see no one," he said.  "There is a lot of smoke."

His eyes became suddenly wide open, fixed, round with a kind of
celestial astonishment.  This his old French heart stopped beating,
and he fell to the foot of the stair.  His companions thought that
he must have been shot.  They dared not move.

But it was no bullet or fragment of far-blown shell that had laid
the old man low.  He had seen in the smoke that whirled down the
village street, a little soldier in the uniform of France.  Pure
unadulterated joy had struck him dead.

Five minutes passed, and no one had moved except the little boy.
With furtive glances and trembling hands he had crept to the old
well in the corner and drunk a cup of the poisoned water.  Then he
crept back to his place.

The second old man now rose, drew a deep breath and climbed
the cellar stair.  For a time he stood blinking, and mouthing his
scattered teeth.  He was trying to speak and could not.

"What is it?" they called up to him.  "What has happened?"

He did not answer.  He made inarticulate sounds, and suddenly with
incredible speed, darted forward into the smoke and the sunlight.

A little hand cold and wet crept into Jeanne Bergere's.  She was
vexed.  She wished to go out of the cellar with the others; but the
little hand clung to her so tightly that she could not free herself.

Except for the old woman who had drunk from the well, and the old
man, all in a heap at the foot of the cellar stair, they were alone.
She and the little boy.

"It is true," said the little boy, "at least I think it is true
about the water...when...nobody was looking....  Please, please
stay with me, Jeanne Bergere."

"You drank when it was forbidden?  That was very naughty, Charlie....
Good God, what am I saying--you poor baby--you poor baby."  She
snatched him into her arms, and held him with a kind of tigerish
ferocity.

"It hurts," said Charlie.  "It hurts.  It hurts me all over.  It
hurts worse all the time."

"I will go for help," she said.  "Wait."

"Please do not go away."

"You want to die?"

The child nodded.

"If I grow up, I should not be a man," he said.  "You know what
the doctor did to me?"

"I know," she said briefly, "but you shan't die if I can help it."

She could not help it.  A few minutes after she had gone, his back
strongly arched became rigid.  His jaws locked a