nd he died in the
attitude of a wrestler making a bridge.

The village street was full of smoke and Frenchmen.  These were
methodically fighting the fires and hunting the ruins for Germans.
Jeanne Bergere seized one of the little soldiers by the elbow.

"Come quickly," she said, "there is a child poisoned!"

The Idiot turned, and she would have fallen if he had not caught
her.  She tore herself loose from his arms with a kind of ferocity.

"Come!  Come!" she cried, and she ran like a frightened animal back
to the cellar door, the Idiot close behind her.

The Idiot knelt by the dead child, and after feeling in vain for
any pulsation, straightened up and said:

"He is dead."

"He drank from the well," said Jeanne.  "We told him that it was
poisoned.  But he was so thirsty."

They tried to straighten the little boy, but could not.  The Idiot
rose to his feet, and looked at her for the first time.  He must
have made some motion with his hands, for she cried suddenly:

"Don't!  You mustn't touch me!"

"We have always loved each other," he said simply.

"You don't understand."

"What have you been through?  I understand.  Kiss me."

She held him at arm's length.

"Listen," she said.  "The old people would not leave the village,--your
father and mother...so I stayed.  At that time it was still supposed
that the Germans were human beings..."

"And my father and mother?" asked the Idiot.

"Some of the people went into the street to see the Germans enter
the village.  But we watched from a window in your father's house....
They were Uhlans, who came first.  They were so drunk that they
could hardly sit on their horses.  Their lieutenant took a sudden
fancy to Marie Lebrun, but when he tried to kiss her, she slapped
his face....  That seemed to sober him....  Old man Lebrun had
leapt forward to protect his daughter.

"'Are you her father?'" asked the Lieutenant.

"'Yes,'" said the old man.

"'Bind him,'" said the lieutenant, and then he gave an order and
some men went into the house and came out dragging a mattress....
They dragged it into the middle of the street....  They held old
man Lebrun so that he had to see everything...for some hours, as
many as wanted to....  Then the lieutenant stepped forward and shot
her through the head, and then he shot her father....  Your father
and mother hid me in the cellar of their house, as well as they
could....  But from the Germans nothing remains long hidden....
Your father and mother tried to defend me...tied them to their
bed...and...set fire to the house."

The Idiot's granite-gray face showed no new emotion.

"And you?"

She shook her head violently.

"What you cannot imagine," she said.  "I have forgotten....  There
have been so many....  No street-walker has ever been through what
I have been through....  There's nothing more to say...I wanted to
live...to bear witness against them....  For you and me everything
is finished..."

"Almost," said the Idiot.  "You talk as if you no longer loved me."

The granite-gray of his face had softened into the ruddy, sun-burned
coloring of a healthy young soldier, long in the field, and she
could not resist the strong arms that he opened to her.

"They have not touched your soul," said the Idiot.

[signed] Gouverneur Morris





Memories of Whitman and Lincoln




"When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd" --W. W.


Lilacs shall bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.
Spring hangs in the dew of the dooryards
These memories--these memories--
They hang in the dew for the bard who fetched
A sprig of them once for his brother
When he lay cold and dead....
And forever now when America leans in the dooryard
And over the hills Spring dances,
Smell of lilacs and sight of lilacs shall bring to her heart these brothers....
Lilacs shall bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Who are the shadow-forms crowding the night?
What shadows of men?
The stilled star-night is high with these brooding spirits--
Their shoulders rise on the Earth-rim, and they are great presences in heaven--
They move through the stars like outlined winds in young-leaved maples.
Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Deeply the nation throbs with a world's anguish--
But it sleeps, and I on the housetops
Commune with souls long dead who guard our land at midnight,
A strength in each hushed heart--
I seem to hear the Atlantic moaning on our shores with the plaint of the dying
And rolling on our shores with the rumble of battle....
I seem to see my country growing golden toward California,
And, as fields of daisies, a people, with slumbering up-turned faces
Leaned over by Two Brothers,
And the greatness that is gone.

Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Spring runs over the land,
A young girl, light-footed, eager...
For I hear a song that is faint and sweet with first love,
Out of the West, fresh with the grass and the timber,
But dreamily soothing the sleepers...
I listen:  I drink it deep.

Softly the Spring sings,
Softly and clearly:
"I open lilacs for the beloved,
Lilacs for the lost, the dead.
And, see, for the living, I bring sweet strawberry blossoms,
And I bring buttercups, and I bring to the woods anemones and blue bells...
I open lilacs for the beloved,
And when my fluttering garment drifts through dusty cities,
And blows on hills, and brushes the inland sea,
Over you, sleepers, over you, tired sleepers,
A fragrant memory falls...
I open love in the shut heart,
I open lilacs for the beloved."

Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Was that the Spring that sang, opening locked hearts,
And is remembrance mine?
For I know these two great shadows in the spacious night,
Shadows folding America close between them,
Close to the heart...
And I know how my own lost youth grew up blessedly in their spirit,
And how the morning song of the might bard
Sent me out from my dreams to the living America,
To the chanting seas, to the piney hills, down the railroad vistas,
Out into the streets of Manhattan when the whistles blew at seven,
Down to the mills of Pittsburgh and the rude faces of labor...
And I know how the grave great music of that other,
Music in which lost armies sang requiems,
And the vision of that gaunt, that great and solemn figure,
And the graven face, the deep eyes, the mouth,
O human-hearted brother,
Dedicated anew my undevoted heart
to America, my land.

Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Now in this hour I was suppliant for these two brothers,
And I said:  Your land has need:
Half-awakened and blindly we grope in the great world....
What strength may we take from our Past, What promise hold for our future?

And the one brother leaned and whispered:
"I put my strength in a book,
And in that book my love...
This, with my love, I give to America..."
And the other brother leaned and murmured:
  "I put my strength in a life,
  And in that life my love,
  This, with my love, I give to America."

Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Then my heart sang out:  This strength shall be our strength:
Yea, when the great hour comes, and the sleepers wake and are hurled back,
And creep down into themselves
There shall they find Walt Whitman
And there, Abraham Lincoln.

O Spring, go over this land with much singing
And open the lilacs everywhere,
Open them out with the old-time fragrance
Making a people remember that something has been forgotten, 
Something is hidden deep--strange memories--strange memories--
Of him that brought a sprig of the purple cluster
To him that was mourned of all...
And so they are linked together
While yet America lives...
While yet America lives, my heart,
Lilacs shall bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

[signed] James Oppenheim





Bred to the Sea




Ye who are bred to the sea, sons of the sons of seamen,
  In what faith do ye sail?  By what creed do ye hold?
Little we know of faiths, and we leave the creeds to the parsons.
  But we 'bide by the law of the sea which our father made of old.

Where is that sea law writ for mariners and for captains,
  That they may know the law by which they sail the sea?
We never saw it writ for sailormen or for masters;
  But 'tis laid with the keel of the ship.  What would you have?
      Let be.

Ye who went down tot he sea in ships and perished aforetime,
  In what faith did ye sail?  In what creed did ye die?
What is that law to which your lives were forfeit?
  What do ye teach your sons that they may not deny?

We kept the faith of our breed.  We died in the creed of seamen,
  As our sons, too, shall die:  the sea will have its way.
The law which bade us sail with death in smack and whaler,
  In tall ship and in open boat, is the seaman's law to-day.

The master shall rule his crew.  The crew shall obey the master.
  Ye shall work your ship while she fleets and ye can stand.
Though ye starve, and freeze, and drown, shipmate shall stand
      by shipmate.
  Ye shall 'bide by this law of seafaring folk, though ye never
      come to land.

Ye shall hold your lives in trust for those who need your succor:
  A flash of fire by night, a loom of smoke by day,
A rag to an oar shall be to you the symbol
  Of your faith, of your creed, of the law which sailormen obey.

Ye shall not count the odds, ye shall not weigh the danger,
  When life is to be saved from storm, from fire, from thirst.
Ye shall not leave your foe adrift and helpless;
  And when the boats go overside, 't is, "Women and children 
      first."

We kept this faith of our breed.  We died in this creed of seamen.
  We sealed our creed with our lives.  It shall endure alway.
The law which bade us sail with death in smack and whaler,
  In tall ship and in open boat, is the seaman's law to-day.

[signed] James W. Pryor.





Our Defenders

Across the fields of waving wheat
  And leagues of golden corn
The fragrance of the wild-rose bloom
  And elder-flower is borne;
But earth's appealing loveliness
  We do but half surmise,
For oh, the blur of battle-fields
  Is ever in our eyes.

The robin-red-breast and the wren,
  We cannot harken these
For dreadful thunder of the guns
  That echoes overseas;
And evermore our vision turns
  To those who follow far
The bright white light of Liberty
  Through the red fires of war.

Our thoughts are with the hero souls
  And hero hearts of gold
Who keep Old Glory's hallowed stars
  Untarnished as of old;
Who join their hands with hero hands
  In hero lands to save
The fearless forehead of the free
  The shameful brand of slave.

And through these days of strife and death,
  We know they shall not fail,
That Freedom shall not pass from earth
  Nor tyranny prevail;
Yea, those that now in anguish bow,
  We know that soon or late
They shall be lifted from beneath
  The iron heel of hate.

O brave defenders of the free,
  For you our tears of pride!
Lo, every drop of blood you shed
  Our hearts have sanctified!
And through these days of strife and death,
  These weary night-times through,
Our spirits watch with yours, our love
  It hovers over you.

[signed] Evaleen Stein





The Bomb




I


"You are late.  Billy's been howling the house down."

"All babies cry, big or little, now and then.  The nurse is with
Billy.  I--" Nellie Cameron paused to smooth a quiver out of her
voice--"I am not late."

"You are not?" Joseph Cameron, bewildered, laid his paper upon his
knees and squinted up at his wife.

"No, Joe, I am not."  As if it absorbed her, and no one could
have said that it did not, for she kept house beautifully, Nellie
straightened an etching; the quietly she walked out of the room.

She went into their bedroom and closed the door.  After a while
Cameron, watching warily, saw her come into the hall again in a
peach-colored dress that he particularly liked her in; saw her go
down the hall, away from him--and she had a very good back--to the
nursery door, the warm, cheerful firelight falling full upon her
face, her hands, her softly glowing dress.  Billy, their only son,
just learning to walk, toddled to meet her.  Cameron saw the chubby
hands rumple her skirts, saw Nellie stoop and swing him high with
her firm arms, the drop him to his place upon her breast.  The
door close, the hall was shadowy again, the apartment as still as
a place marked "To Let."

The dinner was on time and excellent; Nellie, decorative and
chatty, was promptly in her place.  Dinner over, they went to the
sitting-room for their coffee.  The apartment was very high up, the
windows looking over the tree-tops of the Drive, across the Hudson
tot he Jersey shore.  It was March, and the shore lights wavered
in gusts of rain that threatened to turn to snow.  The room was
warm; Cameron was suffocating; Nellie was serenely unaware.  She
had eaten well, from her soup through her cheese.  There are times
when, to a man, a woman's appetite is the last straw.  She was
tired, she said, but at her ease, and never prettier.

"Going out to-night, Joey?"

"Yes.  Bridge hand around at Gordon's.  Want a talk with Gordon
about a matter of business."

"I like to have things to do in the afternoon, but when night
comes"--Nellie smothered a contented yawn--"I love getting into
something comfy, and just buzzing round our own lamp."

"I must own that I have never found afternoon diversions to be
diverting."  To save him he could not keep his voice good-natured.
He had had a grind of a day, and was dog-tired; it seemed to him
she ought to know it and talk about it.

"Yes?" Nellie mused.  "It was amusing at the club to-day--the
Non-descripts."  She laughed softly.  "It wasn't 'nondescript'
to-day, though!"

"Some old maid telling you to bring your children up on the country,
and throw your husbands out of their jobs?"

"What, Joey?"  Nellie seemed to bring her thoughts back from a long
way off.  "Old maid?  I should say not!  We had a man.  We nearly
always do.  Then everybody comes, and there's more glow.  He was an
English socialist--I guess he was a socialist.  Burne-Jones hair,
and a homespun jacket,--loose, and all that,--and a heavy ribbon
on his glasses.  He talked about the new man."

"The--what?"

"The new man."  Nellie opened her eyes wide, as if her husband
puzzled her.

"Well--I'm damned!"

Nellie broke into sudden mirth.

"You were, Joey dear; that is just what you were.  You were damned
all the way there and back again."

Cameron strangled.

"Have I the honor to typify the--new creature?"

"You're the very image of him, Joey dear."  And she smiled upon
him as if he were some new moth, in at their window, to buzz round
their lamp.

"And--this person--?"

Nellie became eagerly communicative.

"I do wonder if I can make you see him?  Tall and dark, and with
good-looking, thinnish hands and almost amusing way of playing
with his eye-glasses.  You know, Joey:  the sort of distinguished
talk-it-all-out sort of man that just makes men rage.  Of course,"
she went on, largely wise, "he's the sort of socialist to make a
real socialist rage, but he's just the thing for clubs."

"You often have them?"

"Of course," she laughed.  "You see, we don't see much of men at
home any more.  It keeps us from forgetting how you look, and how
amusing you may be."

Cameron gazed before him into a chaos without words.

Nellie was oblivious.

"He finished off with a perfect bomb, Joey.  It was funny!  Of
course the new man's a city product, and he drew him to the life:
rushed and tortured by ambition, tired out at the end of the day,
too tired to be possibly amusing, his nerves excited till anything
quieter than lower Broadway hurts his ears, all passion and
brilliance spent on business, dinners here and there, with people
who all have their ax to grind, too, and are keyed up to it by
rows and rows of cocktails.  He drew him without mercy, and he had
every wife there either wincing or laughing, with the truth of what
he said.  He was quite eloquent."  She paused, she laughed softly,
she turned her eyes upon him.  "Then, Joey, guess--just guess!--what
he said!"

"Far be it from me!"

"He said that any intelligent modern woman would require at
least one husband and three lovers to arrive at the standards and
companionship of one wholesome old-fashioned man!"

Cameron got to his feet and held to the top shelf of the bookcase.

"Do you mean to tell me that respectable women sit and listen to
such talk?"

"But, Joey dear, you see so little of us respectable women now,
you don't really know us--"

"It's not decent--"

Nelly was all patience.

"But, you know, Joey dear, I think maybe it is true.  Don't you
think so?"

Cameron swallowed two or three retorts; then with a laugh that seemed
to break to pieces in the air, he went into he hall, got into his
hat and coat, and left the house.

Nellie listened gravely.

"Poor dear old land-lubber!" she sighed.  "But it had to come sooner
or later!"  Then she went to the telephone.

"57900 Bryant, please.  May I speak to Mr. Crane?"


II


When Cameron came in at midnight he found his wife and his old
friend Willoughby Crane playing chess in the dining room.

"Hello, Joe, old man," murmured Crane.  "That you?"

"Why, yes, I believe it is I," said Cameron.

"Almost forgot what you looked like," Crane rambled pleasantly.
"Dropped in for a reminder."

"I'm sorry to have missed you," muttered Cameron.

"Well, you haven't altogether missed me, you know:  so cheer up,
old man.  If Nell's good for a rubber, you may have the joy of my
presence for an hour or two longer.  You're lucky, having a wife
who can play chess!"

"Get yourself a drink, Joey," suggested Nellie.  "The whisky's in
the sideboard, down on he left."

"Don't you suppose I know where the whisky is?" demanded Cameron.

"Maybe there's not much left."  Nellie looked on, all solicitude.

Cameron, his thought babbling over the good old days of the
ducking-stool, poured himself carefully a highball that was brown.
Silence reigned.  The light fell upon the head and shoulders of
Crane and his long, quick-fingered hands.

"After a man has slaved his soul out," Cameron moaned, "these are
the things a woman cares about!"

Crane won the rubber, and spent considerable gallantry upon Nellie
in compensation.  Cameron had yawned all through, but no one had
noticed.  Crane lighted a cigarette and perched upon the corner of
the dining-table.

"I say, Joe, got anything on to-morrow night?"

"I have," said Cameron.

"Something you can't chuck?"

"Scarcely.  A director's dinner."

Crane grew thoughtful.

"You certainly are a victim of the power-passion," he sighed,
considering Cameron.  "I don't know how you stand it.  I'd have
more money, no doubt, if I weren't so apathetic, but, by Jinks, it
doesn't look worth it to me!"

"A question of taste," said Cameron briefly.

"Taste?  If that were all!"  He smoked, looking at Nellie through
the haze.  "I say, Nell, I've got tickets for Kreisler to-morrow
night.  Come with me, there's a good girl!  Lend me your wife, will
you, Joe?"

"Lend?" echoed Nellie.  "I like that!  Anybody'd take me for goods
and chattels.  Of course I'll come.  I'd love to."

"You know, Joey," Crane went on simply, "Nellie's the only woman I
know that it's real joy to hear music with.  She knows what she's
listening to.  A fellow can sort of forget that he's got her
along, an still be glad he has.  As for you, you old money-hunting
blunderbuss, the way you squirm in the presence of music ought to
be a penitentiary offense.  I'm almost glad you can't go."  He gave
a laugh that was dangerously genuine, and bolted for the hall to
get his coat and hat.

"Poor old Joe is almost asleep," said Nellie, sweetly.

Joe did not look it, but Willoughby got out solicitously, and he
sat upon a damp bench opposite Cameron's glowing windows, and he
laughed and laughed till a policeman sternly ordered him to move
on.

"Isn't Willoughby a dear!" Nellie commented as she moved about,
putting things in their places for the night.  Cameron yawned
obviously.  Nellie hummed a snatch of a tune.

All that long night Cameron lay stretched upon the edge of their
bed, staring into the lumpy darkness.  Nellie slept like a baby.
But once, soon after the lights were turned off, Cameron's blood
froze by inches from his head to his feet.  It seemed to him that
Nellie was laughing, was fairly biting her pillow to keep from
laughing aloud!  Gravely, of the darkness, he asked how all this had
come about.  He asked it of the familiar, shadowy heap of Nellie's
clothes upon the chair by the window, asked if he had deserved it.
Toward dawn he slept.


III


Cameron, after the way of the new man, kept some evening clothes
down town.  It saved traveling.  The next afternoon, about four
o'clock, there came, somewhere between the pit of his stomach and
his brain, an aching weight.  Conscience!  At six-thirty he hung
his dinner-jacket back in the closet and sent the directors word
that he had a headache.  Then, as blind as a moth, he started for
home, for that lamp about which Nellie "Loved to buzz."

He let himself into the apartment, chuckling to think of Nellie's
surprise, at just the hour at which they were used to dining.  The
place was shadowy, the table in its between-meals garb.  The aching
weight came back.  He tapped on the nursery door.

Miss Merritt, the nurse, was dining by the nursery window, Billy's
high chair drawn near by.  Billy, drowsy and rosy, was waving a
soup-spoon about his head, dabbing at the lights upon the silver
with fat fingers that were better at clinging than at letting go.

"Good evening, Miss Merritt," said Cameron.  "Hello, Bill!  Where's
your mother?"  His tone struck false, for through his mind was
booming the horrible question, "Can Nellie have gone out with that
ass Crane to dine?"

Miss Merritt's mousy face became all eyes.

"Why, sir, Mrs. Cameron has gone out to dinner, and after to a
concert.  I guess you forgot, sir."

"Oh, yes," said Cameron, easily.  "This is the night of the concert.
I had absolutely forgotten.  I'd have got a bite down town if I'd
thought.  Is the cook in?"

"Sure, sir.  I'll call her."

She left Cameron alone with Billy, who, cannibal-wise, was chewing
his father's hand and crowing over the appetizing bumps and veins.

"If you'd jest 'ave 'phoned, sir," panted the cook, who was a large,
purple-faced person.

Cameron sighed.

"Just anything, Katy.  I have a headache.  Some eggs and toast--poached
eggs, I think."

In another moment the maid passed the nursery door, with white
things over her arm, on her way to set the table.

Cameron, dazed as never in his life before, lifted Billy to his
shoulder and trotted up and down the room.  "Nice little boy!" he
laughed, Billy's damp fists hitting at him in ecstasy.  "I'll just
take him to the sitting-room while you finish your dinner."  He did
his best to pretend that the situation was not unusual, to act as
if, in his own home, a man could be nothing but at home.  All these
confounded hirelings, acting as if they owned the place, had the
cheek to be amazed over his dropping in!

Miss Merritt beamed.

"I always say, sir, that boys should know their fathers."

"Boys should know their fathers?"  This was almost the last straw.

"Here!" said Miss Merritt, holding out a pink-edged blanket.  "Jest
put in on your lap, sir."  There was about her that utter peculiar
lack of decorum that is common to nurses and mothers and Cameron,
blushing furiously, grabbed the blanket and fled.

"Boys should know their father, hey?"  Cameron was enraged.
"We'll see about that pretty quick!"  Billy crowed with joy as the
blanket flapped about them, and, above the chasm of his doubts and
his conscience Cameron heard himself laugh, too.  He got into his
arm-chair.  Billy, so warm and solid and gay, so evidently liking
him, gave him, parent that he was, the thrill of adventure as his
hands held him and knew him for his own.  The blanket spread upon
his knees, the door closed, Cameron expanded with the desire to
know his son, even as it was desirable that his son should know
him.  He turned him over and around, he studied the vagaries of
scallops and pearl buttons; profoundly he pitied his small image for
all of his discomforts, and advised him to grow out of safety-pins
as fast as possible.  He fell into a philosophical mood, spouting
away at Bill, and Bill responded with fists and delicious gurgles
and an imitative sense of investigation.  Cameron reflected, with
illumination, upon the amusing sounds a baby makes when the world
is well.  They were really having an awfully good time.

Billy was fuzzy and blond, one of those moist, very blue-eyed
babies that women appreciate.  Cameron all at once saw why.  Warmth
expanded his aching heart, and his arms circled his own mite of
boy.  Billy yawned, agreed instantly with Cameron that a yawn from
a baby was funny, and with a chuckle pitched against Cameron, bumped
his nose on a waistcoat button, considered the button solemnly,
with his small mouth stuck out ridiculously, and then snuggled into
the hollow of his father's arms, and, closing his big eyes with a
confidence that made thrills creep over him, the man, and brought
something stinging to his eyes, Bill went to sleep.

After an unmeasured lapse of time, Miss Merritt came for the baby.
"Oh, the lambkin!  Ain't he sweet, sir?"

Cameron ached in every joint, but he did not know it.

"Take care how you handle him!" he whispered.  "It's awful to be
awakened out of one's first sleep!"

"I know better than to wake a sleepin' baby, believe me," said Miss
Merritt with a touch of spice.

The door closed.  Cameron sat stretching his stiff arms and legs
and staring before him, and upon his usually tired and lined face
was the beam of full joy.

Then came dinner, a lonely, silent mockery of a meal.  And back the
question came, booming over the soft tinkling of glass and silver.
He realized, with his salad, that four nights out of seven, Nellie
dined like this, alone.  His lower lip protruded, and lines of
conscience fell in a curtain on his face.

"Mrs. Cameron hates eatin' 'lone, too," said the maid.  "She generally
eats early, so 's t' have Billy in his high chair 'longside.  If
he sleeps, she reads a book, sir."

He was alone in the sitting-room with his coffee, and the place had
sunk into fathomless silence.  It was only half after eight!  He
stuck his head out of the window.  Soft flakes touched and soothed
his feverish head.  "Damn money!" he whispered suddenly, then stood
back in the room, startled, staring his blasphemy in the face.
He'd go out in the snow, and get rid of himself.  This was awful!

Bundled in a greatcoat, collar high, trousers rolled up, he ducked
out of the great marble and iron vestibule into the night.  There
was no wind, and the snow was falling softly, steadily.  The drive
was deserted, and he made his way across to the walk along the wall.
By the light of the lamp, blurred by the flakes till it looked like
a tall-stemmed thistle-ball, he looked at his watch.  No matter
where Nellie had dined, she was a the concert by now, and a great
sigh of relief fluttered the flakes about his mouth.

He turned north, glad of the rise in the ground to walk against.
"By jinks!" he smiled grudgingly, "it's not so bad out here.  We
city idiots, we--NEW MEN, with all our motors and subways, we are
forgetting how to prowl."

The world fell of to shadow a little beyond the shore-line, a mere
space of air and flakes.  Ice swirled by its way to the sea, for
the tide was going out.  He peered; he began to hear all sorts
of fine snow-muffled sounds; and suddenly, away out on the river,
something was going on--boats whistling and signaling, chatting
in their scientific persiflage, out in the dark and cold of the
night.  "Lonesome, too!" Cameron laughed, and, boyishly, he tossed
a snow-ball into the space, as if he'd have something to say out
there, too!  "I'm soft!" he groaned, clutching his arm.  And suddenly
he smiled to think how one of these days he and Bill would come
out here and play together.  He looked about, and a sudden pride
filled him.  He was actually the only creature enjoying this splendid
snow!  He had passed one old gentleman in a fur-lined coat, with
a cap upon his white hair, walking slowly, a white bulldog playing
after him in the scarcely trodden snow.

Cameron turned home, a new and inexplicable glow upon him, cares
dropped away.  He marched; he laughed aloud once with a sudden
thought of Bill.  "Little corker!"  He let himself in, and went
straight to the bedroom to change his shoes.  "I must get some
water-tight things to prowl in," he thought, and he whistled a line
of "Tipperary."  Blurred in a pleasant fatigue he sat on the edge
of his bed, staring at his wet socks, when the telephone jingled,
and he hurried out to answer.

"Yep, this is Cameron.  Oh, hello, old girl!  Thought I'd just come
up for a quiet home dinner, you know."  A grin like the setting
sun for warmth spread over his face as he listened, as he felt the
tables turning under his wet feet.

"Nope.  Just bored down-town.  Felt like bein' cozy and--buzzin'
round the lamp in something comfy.  Fine!  Had a regular banquet!
Bill's all right, little devil!  I tucked him in so he shouldn't
be lonesome.

"Me?  I've been out walkin'.  Been throwin' snow-balls at the
street-lamps.  My feet are soakin', but I don't care, I don't care.
Heard a concert myself, thanks.  Whistles and things tootin' out
in the snow on the river to beat the band!  Don't think of it!  I'm
fine.  Enjoy yourself.  What's life for?  Good night, old girl.
Don't lose your key!"

Cameron got as far as the cedar chest in the hall, but there, in
his wet socks, he sat down and he laughed until he ached all over.
Suddenly he stiffened, and his heels banged against the chest.

Miss Merritt, mouth and eyes wide open, stood absorbing him, as
crimson as was Cameron himself.

"I heard the 'phone," she faltered.  "Miss. Cameron always calls
up to know if Billy's all right--"

"I know that she does," said Cameron, stiffly, and, rising, he
stocking-footed it past her and shut himself in his bedroom.

"yes, sir; good night, sir."  Miss Merritt stared at his door.  "Good
Lord!" she whispered in the nursery, "how awful for Billy and her
if he takes to drink!"

Nellie came out of the telephone booth, her face white with horror.
"Willoughby," she gasped, "get me a taxi quick!"

"Billy--"

"No, no, NO!  It's Joe!"

"What--"

"Oh," she wailed, "I've gone too far!  Joe is--drunk!"

Willoughby's face went to pieces.

"Don't look like that, Nell!  Don't!  What of it?  Just what we've
been up to, isn't it?"

"How can you say that?  Get my wraps.  I am going home."

"Your car isn't ordered till eleven--"

"What do I care what I go in?  Oh, I have been such a fool!"

"Don't mention it," grinned Crane as he wrapped her coat about her.

Gaily Crane waved his white-gloved hand to her, her face gleaming
back pearl-like for an instant in the shadowy taxi; then she was
whirled northward and lost in the snowy night.  Back in his place
next to Nellie's empty chair, he mused tenderly over the vagaries
of a mere bachelor till the incomparable Austrian carried his mind
off to where tone is reality, where there is neither marriage nor
giving in marriage.


Nellie fitted the key into the lock.  Her fingers shook.  The
apartment was dark except for a light in the hall, and as still
as if it were empty.  If only Joe would STAY asleep till he'd had
time to sleep this horrible state of affairs away!

She switched off the light and carefully let herself into their
room, and stood a moment, huddled, breathless, against the door.
The room was ghostly.  The vague, snow-veiled light filtered in
from the street-lamp below, making of Cameron an incoherent lump,
wrapped to his eyes in the covers of their chintz-hung bed.

Her hands clasped tight, she peered at him through the shadows.
He did not move.  He was sleeping heavily, curiously, irregularly,
his breath coming in jerky little snorts.  "Oh," she wailed in her
guilt heart, "he is, he is!  Poor dear old Joey, drunk!  And it's
all, all my fault!"  Swiftly she undressed in the dark.  If he were
to awaken, to begin saying awful maudlin things---

Her heart pounding, she lifted the covers and crept into martyrdom
on the hard edge of the bed.  Cameron slept on.  Once he seemed
to be strangling in a bad dream, and she fought with her sense of
duty to awaken him, then, miserably, let him strangle!

Gravely Nellie's tired eyes traveled from familiar shadow to shadow,
to rest at last upon the dangling heap of clothes upon a chair by
the window that symbolized Joe Cameron by the sane light of day.
Fatigue tossed her off to sleep now and then; terror snatched her
back and made her cry.  In the first faint dawn she awakened with
a start to find that in her sleep her tired body had slipped back
to its place, and her head was resting deliciously upon her pillow.
And, with the growing dawn, humor came creeping back, and try
as she would, her mouth twitched.  Of all people, dear old Joey!
Carefully she turned her head and peered at him.  His face was turned
toward her, what light there was fell full upon him.  Wonder took
away her smile.  His face was fresh, the lines of care and worry
softened away as if he were at the end of a two weeks' vacation.
She rested her chin on her arm, amazed, puzzled.  And suddenly
a grin like the sunrise spread over Joe's face, and he opened his
eyes.

[signed] Alice Woods

By courtesy of "The Century."





To Those Who Go




In a sense the hundreds of thousands of American soldiers who go
to France are modern crusaders.  Like the valiant men of the Middle
Ages who traveled far to fight in strange lands for the ideal that
possessed their souls, these twentieth-century knights-errant go
to defend the ideals of liberty and right and honor which are the
issues of this war and which our Allies have successfully upheld
for more than three years.

In that chivalric spirit General Pershing stood at the tomb
of LaFayette and said, "LaFayette, we are here."  As a young man
only twenty years old LaFayette went out to a new land to fight
for liberty, and now after nearly a century and a half the same
inspiration that sent him forth is taking our young men back to
fight in the land o his birth the old fight for right.  The great
romance of international history which the relations of France and
America have afforded from the birth of this republic has entered
a new chapter with the pilgrimage of our fighting men to Europe,
and the inestimable service of LaFayette and his comrades to our
infant republic is now to be in part repaid by the nation that
France helped to establish.

But though it is a chivalric mission on which our soldiers go,
they should not enter France in the attitude of saviors.  It must
be remembered that the United States came very late into this war,
and while our troops and even more our money and material resources
may have decisive weight toward victory, yet it is France, England,
Italy, Russia against whom the enemy has spent his strength.  Our
Allies have brought the war already to its turning point, and we can
at best only add completeness to their achievement.  Furthermore,
while we aid France and her Allies, we are defending ourselves
also.  We went to war because Germany was killing our citizens,
was plotting against the peace and security of our nation, because
her restless ambition and lust for power were choking not only
Europe but the world.

Our American soldiers will find in France a people who have endured
with wonderful courage and devotion through more than three years
of terrific strain against odds which must often have seemed
hopeless.  The French are the heroes of this war.  They have been
in the fight from the beginning and will be there until the end.
Their armies were fully engaged when England had not a hundred
thousand men under arms and Italy was a neutral; they fought on
when Russia lost her grip; and they will not quit until their land
is cleared of invaders and the Prussian shadow that has darkened
France for more than forty years is lifted.  More than any other
country except Belgium, France has felt the horror and hardships
of the war which we are spared because she has paid the price of
our protection.

American soldiers who go to France are to be envied because they
are getting what comes to few men,--opportunity to be of direct,
vital service to that country.  To be young, to be fit, to have a
part however small in the great events that are making the world
over into a safer and happier place for our children to live in,
is something for a man to be proud of now and to remember with
satisfaction to his last day.

The war may last much longer than we now anticipate, but there can
be no doubt of the ultimate victory of the cause to which we are
committed.  The world never turns back, it moves always forward,
always upward.  Our soldiers may go out, as the Crusaders went of
old, with absolute faith that their service will not be given in
vain, that their effort and daring will not be unavailing.

[signed] Myron Herrick





The Hero's Peace




There is a peace that springs where battles thunder,
  Unknown to those who walk the ways of peace
  Drowsy with safety, praising soft release
From pain and strife and the discomfortable wonder
Of life lived vehemently to its last, wild flame:
  This peace thinks not of safety, is not bound
To the wincing flesh, nor to the piteous round
Of human hopes and memories, nor to Fame.

Immutable and immortal it is born
  Within the spirit that has looked on fear
  Till fear has looked askance; on death has gazed
As on an equal, and with noble scorn,
Spurning the self that held the self too dear,
  To the height of being mounts calm and unamazed.

[signed] Amelie Rives (Princess Troubetzkoy)

Castle Hill, Virginia









This etext was produced by Jeroen Hellingman <jehe@kabelfoon.nl>





The South Pole

An Account of the Norwegian
Antarctic Expedition in the "Fram,"
1910 -- 1912



By Roald Amundsen

Translated from the Norwegian by
A. G. Chater


To

My Comrades,
The Brave Little Band That Promised
In Funchal Roads
To Stand by Me in the Struggle for the

South Pole,

I Dedicate this Book.

Roald Amundsen.

Uranienborg,

August 15, 1912.


Contents of Vol. I


Chapter                         Page

        The First Account               VII
        Introduction, by Fridtjof Nansen        XXVII
I.      The History of the South Pole   1
II.     Plan and Preparations   42
III.    On the Way to the South 90
IV.     From Madeira to the Barrier     126
V.      On the Barrier          169
VI.     Depot Journeys          206
VII.    Preparing for Winter    259
VIII.   A Day at Framheim       283
IX.     The End of the Winter   346




List of Illustrations to Vol. I




                                        To Face Page
Roald Amundsen  Frontispiece
Approximate Bird's-eye View, Drawn from the First Telegraphic
Account   1
Reproduced by permission of the Daily Chronicle
The Opening of Roald Amundsen's Manuscript      1
Helmer Hanssen, Ice Pilot, a Member of the Polar Party  50
The "Fram's" Pigsty     60
The Pig's Toilet        60
Hoisting the Flag       90
A Patient       90
Some Members of the Expedition  92
Sverre Hassel   101
Oscar Wisting   102
In the North-east Trades        130
In the Rigging  134
Taking an Observation   134
Ronne Felt Safer when the Dogs were Muzzled     136
Starboard Watch on the Bridge   136
Olav Bjaaland, a Member of the Polar Party      136
In the Absence of Lady Partners, Ronne Takes a Turn with the
Dogs       148
An Albatross    150
In Warmer Regions       150

A Fresh Breeze in the West Wind Belt    152
The Propeller Lifted in the Westerlies  154
The "Fram's" Saloon Decorated for Christmas Eve         158
Ronne at a Sailor's Job         162
The "Fram" In Drift-ice         162
Drift-ice in Ross Sea   168
A Clever Method of Landing      170
The "Fram" under Sail   170
Cape Man's Head on the Barrier  174
Seal-hunting    176
The "Fram"      176
The Crew of the "Fram" in the Bay of Whales     178
The "Fram" in the Bay of Whales         178
The First Dog-camp      180
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
Digging the Foundations of Framheim     184
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
Building the Hut        186
Unloading the Six Sledge-drivers        186
Polar Transport         192
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
Penguins        192
The Provision Store     192
Framheim, January, 1911         194
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
Suggen, Arne, and the Colonel   196
Mikkel, Ravn, and Mas-mas       196
Framheim, February, 1911        206
Prestrud in Winter Dress        208
Bjaaland in Winter Dress        208
The "Fram" Veteran, Lindstrom: the Only Man Who has Sailed round the
Continent of America       208

The Start of the First Depot Journey    208
A Page from the Sledge Diary, Giving Details of Depots I. and II.
230
Framheim, March, 1911   248
Killing Seals for the Depot     254
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
The Meat Tent   264
The Meteorological Screen       266
Inside a Dog-tent       266
A Winter Evening at Framheim    272
The Carpenters' Shop    272
Entrance to the Hut     272
Entrance to the Western Workshop        272
Prestrud in His Observatory     272
Wisting at the Sewing-machine   278
Packing Sledges in the "Crystal Palace"         278
Lindstrom with the Buckwheat Cakes      298
On His "Native Heath": A Dog on the Barrier Ice         304
Dogs Exercising         308
Helmer Hanssen on a Seal-hunt   308
Hanssen and Wisting Lashing the New Sledges     312
Passage in the Ice      312
Johansen Packing Provisions in the "Crystal Palace"     312
A Corner of the Kitchen         322
Stubberud Taking it Easy        322
Johansen Packing Biscuits in the "Crystal Palace"       322
Hassel and the Vapour-bath      330
Midwinter Day, June, 1911       362
Our Ski-binding in its Final Form       364
At Work on Personal Outfit      364
Trying on Patent Goggles        368

Hassel in the Oil-store         368
Deep in Thought         372
Funcho  372
The Loaded Sledges in the Clothing Store        374
Sledges Ready for Use Being Hauled Out of the Store-room        374
At the Depot in Lat. 80deg. S.     384
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News.
Some of the Land Party in Winter Costume        390
General Map of the South Polar Region   At end of Volume



The First Account

On February 10, 1911, we started for the South to establish depots,
and continued our journey until April 11. We formed three depots and
stored in them 3 tons of provisions, including 22 hundredweight of
seal meat. As there were no landmarks, we had to indicate the position
of our depots by flags, which were posted at a distance of about four
miles to the east and west. The first barrier afforded the best going,
and was specially adapted for dog-sledging. Thus, on February 15 we
did sixty-two miles with sledges. Each sledge weighed 660 pounds,
and we had six dogs for each. The upper barrier ("barrier surface")
was smooth and even. There were a few crevasses here and there, but
we only found them dangerous at one or two points. The barrier went
in long, regular undulations. The weather was very favourable, with
calms or light winds. The lowest temperature at this station was -49deg.
F., which was taken on March 4.

When we returned to winter quarters on February 5 from a first trip,
we found that the Fram had already left us. With joy and pride we heard
from those who had stayed behind that our gallant captain had succeeded
in sailing her farther south than any former ship. So the good old
Fram has shown the flag of Norway both farthest north and farthest
south. The most southerly latitude reached by the Fram was 78deg. 41'.

Before the winter set in we had 60 tons of seal meat in our winter
quarters; this was enough for ourselves and our 110 dogs. We had built
eight kennels and a number of connecting tents and snow huts. When we
had provided for the dogs, we thought of ourselves. Our little hut
was almost entirely covered with snow. Not till the middle of April
did we decide to adopt artificial light in the hut. This we did with
the help of a Lux lamp of 200 candle-power, which gave an excellent
light and kept the indoor temperature at about 68deg. F. throughout the
winter. The ventilation was very satisfactory, and we got sufficient
fresh air. The hut was directly connected with the house in which we
had our workshop, larder, storeroom, and cellar, besides a single
bathroom and observatory. Thus we had everything within doors and
easily got at, in case the weather should be so cold and stormy that
we could not venture out.

The sun left us on April 22, and we did not see it again for four
months. We spent the winter in altering our whole equipment, which our
depot journeys had shown to be too heavy and clumsy for the smooth
barrier surface. At the same time we carried out all the scientific
work for which there was opportunity. We made a number of surprising
meteorological observations. There was very little snow, in spite
of there being open water in the neighbourhood. We had expected to
observe higher temperatures in the course of the winter, but the
thermometer remained very low. During five months temperatures were
observed varying between -58deg. and -74deg. F. We had the lowest (-74deg.
F.) on August 13; the weather was calm. On August 1 we had -72deg.
F. with a wind of thirteen miles an hour. The mean temperature for
the year was -15deg. F. We expected blizzard after blizzard, but had
only two moderate storms. We made many excellent observations of the
aurora australis in all parts of the heavens. Our bill of health was
the best possible throughout the whole winter. When the sun returned
on August 24 it shone upon men who were healthy in mind and body,
and ready to begin the task that lay before them.

We had brought the sledges the day before to the starting-point of the
southern journey. At the beginning of September the temperature rose,
and it was decided to commence the journey. On September 8 a party of
eight men set out, with seven sledges and ninety dogs, provisioned for
ninety days. The surface was excellent, and the temperature not so bad
as it might have been. But on the following day we saw that we had
started too early. The temperature then fell, and remained for some
days between -58deg. and -75deg. F. Personally we did not suffer at all, as
we had good fur clothing, but with the dogs it was another matter. They
grew lanker and lanker every day, and we soon saw that they would not
be able to stand it in the long run. At our depot in lat. 80deg. we agreed
to turn back and await the arrival of spring. After having stored our
provisions, we returned to the hut. Excepting the loss of a few dogs
and one or two frostbitten heels, all was well. It was not till the
middle of October that the spring began in earnest. Seals and birds
were sighted. The temperature remained steady, between -5deg. and -22deg. F.

Meanwhile we had abandoned the original plan, by which all were to
go to the south. Five men were to do this, while three others made
a trip to the east, to visit King Edward VII. Land. This trip did
not form part of our programme, but as the English did not reach
this land last summer, as had been their intention, we agreed that
it would be best to undertake this journey in addition.

On October 20 the southern party left. It consisted of five men
with four sledges and fifty-two dogs, and had provisions for four
months. Everything was in excellent order, and we had made up our minds
to take it easy during the first part of the journey, so that we and
the dogs might not be too fatigued, and we therefore decided to make
a little halt on the 22nd at the depot that lay in lat. 80deg.. However,
we missed the mark owing to thick fog, but after two or three miles'
march we found the place again.

When we had rested here and given the dogs as much seal meat as
they were able to eat, we started again on the 26th. The temperature
remained steady, between -5deg. and -22deg. F.

At first we had made up our minds not to drive more than twelve to
eighteen miles a day; but this proved to be too little, thanks to
our strong and willing animals. At lat. 80deg. we began to erect snow
beacons, about the height of a man, to show us the way home.

On the 31st we reached the depot in lat. 81deg.. We halted for a day
and fed the dogs on pemmican. On November 5 we reached the depot
in 82deg., where for the last time the dogs got as much to eat as they
could manage.

On the 8th we started southward again, and now made a daily march of
about thirty miles. In order to relieve the heavily laden sledges, we
formed a depot at every parallel we reached. The journey from lat. 82deg.
to 83deg. was a pure pleasure trip, on account of the surface and the
temperature, which were as favourable as one could wish. Everything
went swimmingly until the 9th, when we sighted South Victoria Land
and the continuation of the mountain chain, which Shackleton gives
on his map, running southeast from Beardmore Glacier. On the same
day we reached lat. 83deg., and established here Depot No. 4.

On the 11th we made the interesting discovery that the Ross Barrier
ended in an elevation on the south-east, formed between a chain of
mountains running south-eastward from South Victoria Land and another
chain on the opposite side, which runs south-westward in continuation
of King Edward VII. Land.

On the 13th we reached lat. 84deg., where we established a depot. On the
16th we got to 85deg., where again we formed a depot. From our winter
quarters at Framheim we had marched due south the whole time.

On November 17, in lat. 85deg., we came to a spot where the land barrier
intersected our route, though for the time being this did not cause
us any difficulty. The barrier here rises in the form of a wave to
a height of about 300 feet, and its limit is shown by a few large
fissures. Here we established our main depot. We took supplies for
sixty days on the sledges and left behind enough provisions for
thirty days.

The land under which we now lay, and which we were to attack, looked
perfectly impossible, with peaks along the barrier which rose to
heights of from 2,000 to 10,000 feet. Farther south we saw more peaks,
of 15,000 feet or higher.

Next day we began to climb. The first part of the work was easy,
as the ground rose gradually with smooth snow-slopes below the
mountain-side. Our dogs working well, it did not take us long to get
over these slopes.

At the next point we met with some small, very steep glaciers,
and here we had to harness twenty dogs to each sledge and take the
four sledges in two journeys. Some places were so steep that it was
difficult to use our ski. Several times we were compelled by deep
crevasses to turn back.

On the first day we climbed 2,000 feet. The next day we crossed
small glaciers, and camped at a height of 4,635 feet. On the third
day we were obliged to descend the great Axel Heiberg Glacier, which
separates the mountains of the coast from those farther south.

On the following day the longest part of our climbing began. Many
detours had to be made to avoid broad fissures and open crevasses. Most
of them were filled up, as in all probability the glacier had long
ago ceased to move; but we had to be very careful, nevertheless,
as we could never know the depth of snow that covered them. Our camp
that night was in very picturesque surroundings, at a height of about
5,000 feet.

The glacier was here imprisoned between two mountains of 15,000 feet,
which we named after Fridtjof Nansen and Don Pedro Christophersen.

At the bottom of the glacier we saw Ole Engelstad's great snow-cone
rising in the air to 19,000 feet. The glacier was much broken up in
this narrow defile; enormous crevasses seemed as if they would stop
our going farther, but fortunately it was not so bad as it looked.

Our dogs, which during the last few days had covered a distance of
nearly 440 miles, put in a very good piece of work that day, as they
did twenty-two miles on ground rising to 5,770 feet. It was an almost
incredible record. It only took us four days from the barrier to reach
the immens