xhibition in the known world, an' all for the small sum of fifteen
cents."

Two gentlemen connected with the press here walked up and asked the
showman, in a still small voice, if he extended the usual courtesies
to editors.  He said he did, and requested them to go in.  While
they were in some sly dog told him their names.  When they came out
the showman pretended to talk with them, though he didn't say a
word.  They were evidently in a hurry.

"There, gentleMEN, what do you think them gentlemen say?  They air
editors--editors, gentleMEN--Mr. ---, of the Cleveland ---, and Mr.
---, of the Detroit ---, and they say it is the gerratist show they
ever seed in their born days!"

[Nothing but the tip ends of the editors' coat-tails could be seen
when the showman concluded this speech.]

A smart-looking chap was doing a brisk business with a gambling
contrivance.  Seeing two policemen approach, he rapidly and
ingeniously covered the dice up, mounted his table, and shouted:

"Ere's the only great show on the grounds!  The highly trained and
performing Mud Turtle with nine heads and seventeen tails, captured
in a well-fortified hencoop, after a desperate struggle, in the
lowlands of the Wabash!"

The facetious wretch escaped.

A grave, ministerial-looking and elderly man in a white choker had a
gift-enterprise concern.  "My friends," he solemnly said, "you will
observe that this jewellery is elegant indeed, but I can afford to
give it away, as I have a twin brother seven years older than I am,
in New York City, who steals it a great deal faster than I can give
it away.  No blanks, my friends--all prizes--and only fifty cents a
chance.  I don't make anything myself, my friends--all I get goes to
aid a sick woman--my aunt in the country, gentlemen--and besides I
like to see folks enjoy themselves!"

The old scamp said all this with a perfectly grave countenance.

The man with the "wonderful calf with five legs and a huming head,"
and "the philosophical lung-tester," were there.  Then there was the
Flying Circus and any number of other ingenious contrivances to
relieve young ladies and gentlemen from the rural districts of their
spare change.

A young man was bitterly bewailing the loss of his watch, which had
been cut from his pocket by some thief.

"You ain't smart," said a middle-aged individual in a dingy Kossuth
hat with a feather in it, and who had a very you-can't-fool-me look.
"I've been to the State Fair before, I want yer to understan, and
knows my bizniss aboard a propeller.  Here's MY money," he
exultingly cried, slapping his pantaloons' pocket.

About half an hour after this we saw this smart individual rushing
frantically around after a policeman.  Somebody had adroitly
relieved him of HIS money.  In his search for a policeman he
encountered the young man who wasn't smart.

"Haw, haw, haw," violently laughed the latter; "by G--, I thought
you was smart--I thought you'd been to the State Fair before."

The smart man looked sad for a moment, but a knowing smile soon
crossed his face, and drawing the young man who wasn't smart
confidentially toward him, said--

"There wasn't only fifteen cents in coppers in my pocket--my MONEY
is in my boot--they can't fool me--I'VE BEEN TO THE STATE FAIR
BEFORE!!"

7.8.  THE WIFE.

          "Home they brought her warrior dead:
            She nor swooned, nor uttered cry.
           All her maidens, watching, said,
            'She must weep, or she will die.'"

The propriety of introducing a sad story like the following, in a
book intended to be rather cheerful in its character, may be
questioned; but it so beautifully illustrates the firmness of woman
when grief and despair have taken possession of "the chambers of her
heart," that we cannot refrain from relating it.

Lucy M-- loved with all the ardor of a fond and faithful wife, and
when he upon whom she had so confidingly leaned was stolen from her
by death, her friends and companions said Lucy would go mad.  Ah,
how little they knew her!

Gazing for the last time upon the clay-cold features of her departed
husband, this young widow--beautiful even in her grief; so ethereal
to look upon, and yet so firm!--looking for the last time upon the
dear familiar face, now cold and still in death--oh, looking for the
last, last time--she rapidly put on her bonnet, and thus addressed
the sobbing gentlemen who were to act as pall-bearers:--"You
pall-bearers, just go into the buttery and get some rum, and we'll
start this man right along!"

7.9.  A JUVENILE COMPOSITION.

                    ON THE ELEPHANT.

The Elephant is the most largest Annymile in the whole world.  He
eats hay and kakes.  You must not giv the Elephant Tobacker, becoz
if you do he will stamp his grate big feet upon to you and kill you
fatally Ded.  Some folks thinks the Elephant is the most noblest
Annymile in the world; but as for Me, giv Me the American Egil and
the Stars & Stripes.  Alexander Pottles, his Peace.

7.10.  A POEM BY THE SAME.

         SOME VERSES SUGGESTID BY 2 OF MY UNCLES.

                 Uncle Simon he
                 Clum up a tree
                 To see what he could see
                 When presentlee
                 Uncle Jim
                 Clum beside of him
                 And squatted down by he.

7.11.  EAST SIDE THEATRICALS.

The Broadway houses have given the public immense quantities of
Central Park, Seven Sisters, Nancy Sykes, and J. Cade.  I suppose
the Broadway houses have done this chiefly because it has paid them,
and so I mean no disrespect when I state that to me the thing became
rather stale.  I sighed for novelty.  A man may stand stewed veal
for several years, but banquets consisting exclusively of stewed
veal would become uninteresting after a century or so.  A man would
want something else.  The least particular man, it seems to me,
would desire to have his veal "biled," by way of a change.  So I,
tired of the threadbare pieces at the Broadway houses, went to the
East Side for something fresh.  I wanted to see some libertines and
brigands.  I wanted to see some cheerful persons identified with the
blacksmith and sewing-machine interests triumph over those
libertines and brigands in the most signal manner.  I wanted, in
short, to see the Downfall of Vice and Triumph of Virtue.  That was
what ailed me.  And so I went to the East Side.

Poor Jack Scott is gone, and Jo. Kirby dies no more on the East
Side.  They've got the blood and things over there, but, alas!
they're deficient in lungs.  The tragedians in the Bowery and
Chatham Street of to-day don't start the shingles on the roof as
their predecessors, now cold and stiff in death, used to when they
threw themselves upon their knees at the footlights and roared a
red-hot curse after the lord who had carried Susan away, swearing to
never more eat nor drink until the lord's vile heart was torn from
his body and ther-rown to the dorgs--rattling their knives against
the tin lamps and glaring upon the third tier most fearfully the
while.

Glancing at the spot where it is said Senator Benjamin used to vend
second-hand clothes, and regretting that he had not continued in
that comparatively honorable vocation instead of sinking to his
present position--wondering if Jo. Kirby would ever consent, if he
were alive, to die wrapped up in a Secession flag!--gazing
admiringly upon the unostentatious signboard which is suspended in
front of the Hon. Izzy Lazarus's tavern--glancing, wondering, and
gazing thus, I enter the old Chatham theatre.  The pit is full, but
people fight shy of the boxes.

The play is about a servant girl, who comes to the metropolis from
the agricultural districts in short skirts, speckled hose, and a
dashing little white hat, gaily decked with pretty pink ribbons--
that being the style of dress invariably worn by servant girls
from the interior.  She is accompanied by a chaste young man in a
short-tailed red coat, who, being very desirous of protecting her
from the temptations of a large city, naturally leaves her in the
street and goes off somewhere.  Servant girl encounters an elderly
female, who seems to be a very nice sort of person indeed, but the
young man in a short-tailed coat comes in and thrusts the elderly
female aside, calling her "a vile hag."  This pleases the pit,
which is ever true to virtue, and it accordingly cries "Hi! hi! hi!"

A robber appears.  The idea of a robber in times like these is
rather absurd.  The most adroit robber would eke out a miserable
subsistence if he attempted to follow his profession now-a-days.  I
should prefer to publish a daily paper in Chelsea.  Nevertheless,
here is a robber.  He has been playing poker with his "dupe," but
singularly enough the dupe has won all the money.  This displeases
the robber, and it occurs to him that he will kill the dupe.  He
accordingly sticks him.  The dupe staggers, falls, says "Dearest
Eliza!" and dies.  Cries of "Hi! hi! hi!" in the pit, while a
gentleman with a weed on his hat, in the boxes, states that the
price of green smelts is five cents a quart.  This announcement is
not favorably received by the pit, several members of which come
back at the weeded individual with some advice in regard to
liquidating a long-standing account for beans and other refreshments
at an adjacent restaurant.

The robber is seized with remorse, and says the money which he has
taken from the dupe's pockets "scorches" him.  Robber seeks refuge
in a miser's drawing-room, where he stays for "seven days."  There
is a long chest full of money and diamonds in the room.  The chest
is unlocked, but misers very frequently go off and leave long chests
full of money unlocked in their drawing-rooms for seven days, and
this robber was too much of a gentleman to take advantage of this
particular miser's absence.  By and by the miser returns, when the
robber quietly kills him and chucks him in the chest.  "Sleep with
your gold, old man!" says the bold robber, as he melodramatically
retreats--retreats to a cellar, where the servant girl resides.
Finds that she was formerly his gal when he resided in the rural
districts, and regrets having killed so many persons, for if so be
he hadn't he might marry her and settle down, whereas now he can't
do it, as he says he is "unhappy."  But he gives her a ring--a ring
he has stolen from the dupe--and flies.  Presently the dupe, who has
come to life in a singular but eminently theatrical manner, is
brought into the cellar.  He discovers the ring upon the servant
girl's finger--servant girl states that she is innocent, and the
dupe, with the remark that he sees his mother, dies, this time
positively without reserve.  Servant girl is taken to Newgate,
whither goes the robber and gains admission by informing the turnkey
that he is her uncle.  Throws off his disguise, and, like a robber
bold and gay, says he is the guilty party and will save the servant
girl.  He drinks a vial of poison, says he sees HIS mother, and dies
to slow fiddling.  Servant girl throws herself upon him wildly, and
the virtuous young party in a short-tailed coat comes in and assists
in the tableau.  Robber tells the servant girl to take the party in
the short-tailed coat and be happy, repeats that he sees his mother
(they always do), and dies again.  Cries of "Hi! hi! hi!" and the
weeded gentleman reiterates the price of green smelts.

Not a remarkably heavy plot, but quite as bulky as the plots of the
Broadway sensation pieces.

7.12.  SOLILOQUY OF A LOW THIEF.

My name is Jim Griggins.  I'm a low thief.  My parients was ignorant
folks, and as poor as the shadder of a bean pole.  My advantages for
gettin' a eddycation was exceedin' limited.  I growed up in the
street, quite loose and permiskis, you see, and took to vice because
I had nothing else to take to, and because nobody had never given me
a sight at virtue.

I'm in the penitentiary.  I was sent here onct before for priggin' a
watch.  I served out my time, and now I'm here agin, this time for
stealin' a few insignificant clothes.

I shall always blame my parients for not eddycatin' me.  Had I been
liberally eddycated I could, with my brilliant native talents, have
bin a big thief--I b'leeve they call 'em defaulters.  Instead of
confinin' myself to priggin' clothes, watches, spoons, and sich
like, I could have plundered princely sums--thousands and hundreds
of thousands of dollars--and that old humbug, the Law, wouldn't have
harmed a hair of my head!  For, you see, I should be smart enough to
get elected State Treasurer, or have something to do with Banks or
Railroads, and perhaps a little of both.  Then, you see, I could
ride in my carriage, live in a big house with a free stun frunt,
drive a fast team, and drink as much gin and sugar as I wanted.  A
inwestigation might be made, and some of the noospapers might come
down on me heavy, but what the d----l would I care about that,
havin' previously taken precious good care of the stolen money?
Besides, my "party" would swear stout that I was as innersunt as the
new-born babe, and a great many people would wink very pleasant, and
say, "Well, Griggins understands what HE'S 'bout, HE does.!"

But havin' no eddycation, I'm only a low thief--a stealer of watches
and spoons and sich--a low wretch, anyhow--and the Law puts me
through without mercy.

It's all right, I spose, and yet I sometimes think it's wery hard to
be shut up here, a wearin' checkered clothes, a livin' on cold
vittles, a sleepin' on iron beds, a lookin' out upon the world
through iron muskeeter bars, and poundin' stun like a galley slave,
day after day, week after week, and year after year, while my
brother thieves (for to speak candid, there's no difference between
a thief and a defaulter, except that the latter is forty times
wuss), who have stolen thousands of dollars to my one cent, are
walkin' out there in the bright sunshine--dressed up to kill, new
clothes upon their backs and piles of gold in their pockets!  But
the Law don't tech 'em.  They are too big game for the Law to shoot
at.  It's as much as the Law can do to take care of us ignorant
thieves.

Who said there was no difference 'tween tweedledum and tweedledee?
He lied in his throat, like a villain as he was!  I tell ye there's
a tremendous difference.

Oh that I had been liberally eddycated!

                                              Jim Griggins.
Sing--Sing 1860.

7.13.  THE NEGRO QUESTION.

I was sitting in the bar, quietly smokin a frugal pipe, when two
middle-aged and stern-looking females and a young and pretty female
suddenly entered the room.  They were accompanied by two umberellers
and a negro gentleman.

"Do you feel for the down-trodden?" said one of the females, a
thin-faced and sharp-voiced person in green spectacles.

"Do I feel for it?" ansered the lan'lord, in a puzzled voice--" do
I feel for it?"

"Yes; for the oppressed, the benighted?"

"Inasmuch as to which?" said the lan'lord.

"You see this man?" said the female, pintin her umbreller at the
negro gentleman.

"Yes, marm, I see him."

"Yes!" said the female, raisin her voice to a exceedin high pitch,
"you see him, and he's your brother!"

"No, I'm darned if he is!" said the lan'lord, hastily retreating to
his beer-casks.

"And yours!" shouted the excited female, addressing me.  "He is also
your brother!"

"No, I think not, marm," I pleasantly replied.  "The nearest we come
to that color in our family was the case of my brother John.  He had
the janders for sev'ral years, but they finally left him.  I am
happy to state that, at the present time, he hasn't a solitary
jander."

"Look at this man!" screamed the female.

I looked at him.  He was an able-bodied, well-dressed,
comfortable-looking negro.  He looked as though he might heave three
or four good meals a day into him without a murmur.

"Look a that down-trodden man!" cried the female.

"Who trod on him?" I inquired.

"Villains! despots!"

"Well," said the lan'lord, "why don't you go to the willins about
it?  Why do you come here tellin us niggers is our brothers, and
brandishin your umbrellers round us like a lot of lunytics?  You're
wuss than the sperrit-rappers!"

"Have you," said middle-aged female No. 2, who was a quieter sort of
person, "have you no sentiment--no poetry in your soul--no love for
the beautiful?  Dost never go into the green fields to cull the
beautiful flowers?"

"I not only never dost," said the landlord, in an angry voice, "but
I'll bet you five pound you can't bring a man as dares say I durst."

"The little birds," continued the female, "dost not love to gaze
onto them?"

"I would I were a bird, that I might fly to thou!" I humorously
sung, casting a sweet glance at the pretty young woman.

"Don't you look in that way at my dawter!" said female No. 1., in a
violent voice; "you're old enough to be her father."

"'Twas an innocent look, dear madam," I softly said.  "You behold in
me an emblem of innocence and purity.  In fact, I start for Rome by
the first train to-morrow to sit as a model to a celebrated artist
who is about to sculp a statue to be called Sweet Innocence.  Do you
s'pose a sculper would send for me for that purpose onless he knowd
I was overflowing with innocency?  Don't make a error about me."

"It is my opinyn," said the leading female, "that you're a scoffer
and a wretch!  Your mind is in a wusser beclouded state than the
poor nergoes' we are seeking to aid.  You are a groper in the dark
cellar of sin.  O sinful man!

             'There is a sparkling fount
              Come, O come, and drink.'

No! you will not come and drink."

"Yes, he will," said the landlord, "if you'll treat.  Jest try him."

"As for you," said the enraged female to the landlord, "you're a
degraded bein, too low and wulgar to talk to."

"This is the sparklin fount for me, dear sister!" cried the
lan'lord, drawin and drinkin a mug of beer.  Having uttered which
goak, he gave a low rumblin larf, and relapsed into silence.

"My colored fren," I said to the negro, kindly, "what is it all
about?"

He said they was trying to raise money to send missionaries to the
Southern States in America to preach to the vast numbers of negroes
recently made free there.  He said they were without the gospel.
They were without tracts.

I said, "My fren," this is a seris matter.  I admire you for trying
to help the race to which you belong, and far be it from me to say
anything again carrying the gospel among the blacks of the South.
Let them go to them by all means.  But I happen to individually know
that there are some thousands of liberated blacks in the South who
are starvin.  I don't blame anybody for this, but it is a very sad
fact.  Some are really too ill to work, some can't get work to do,
and others are too foolish to see any necessity for workin.  I was
down there last winter and I observed that this class had plenty of
preachin for their souls, but skurce any vittles for their stummux.
Now, if it is proposed to send flour and bacon along with the
gospel, the idea is really an excellent one.  If, on t'other hand,
it is proposed to send preachin alone, all I can say is that it's a
hard case for the niggers.  If you expect a colored person to get
deeply interested in a tract when his stummuck is empty, you expect
too much."

I gave the negro as much as I could afford, and the kind-hearted
lan'lord did the same.  I said:

"Farewell, my colored fren, I wish you well, certainly.  You are now
as free as the eagle.  Be like him and soar.  But don't attempt to
convert a Ethiopian person while his stummuck yearns for vittles.
And you, ladies--I hope you are ready to help the poor and
unfortunate at home, as you seem to help the poor and unfortunate
abroad."

When they had gone, the lan'lord said, "Come into the garden, Ward."
And we went and culled some carrots for dinner.

7.14.  ARTEMUS WARD ON HEALTH.


[The following fragment from the pen of Artemus Ward was written in
the last days of his illness, and was found amongst the loose papers
on the table beside his bed.  It contains the last written jests of
the dying jester, and is illustrative of that strong spirit of humor
which even extreme exhaustion and the near approach of death itself
could not wholly destroy.

There is an anecdote related of Thomas Hood to the effect that when
he was just upon the point of dying, his friend, Mr. F.O. WARD,
visited him, and, to amuse him, related some of his adventures in
the low parts of the metropolis in his capacity as a sanitary
commissioner.  "Pray desist," said Hood; "your anecdote gives me the
back-slum-bago."  The proximity of death could no more deprive poor
Artemus of his power to jest than it could Thomas Hood.  When
nothing else was left him to joke upon, when he could no longer seek
fun in the city streets, or visit the Tower of London and call it "a
sweet boon," his own shattered self suggested a theme for jesting.
He commenced this paper "On Health."  The purport of it, I believe,
was to ridicule doctors generally; for Artemus was bitterly
sarcastic on his medical attendants, and he had some good reasons
for being so.  A few weeks before he died, a German physician
examined his throat with a laryngoscope, and told him that nothing
was the matter with him except a slight inflammation of the larynx.
Another physician told him that he had heart disease, and a third
assured him that he merely required his throat to be sponged two or
three times a day, and take a preparation of tortoise shell for
medicine, to perfectly recover!  Every doctor made a different
diagnosis, and each had a different specific.  One alone of the many
physicians to whom Artemus applied seemed to be fully aware that the
poor patient was dying of consumption in its most formidable form.
Not merely phthisis, but a cessation of functions and a wasting away
of the organs most concerned in the vital processes.  Artemus saw
how much the doctors were at fault, and used to smile at them with a
sadly scornful smile as they left the sick room.  "I must write a
paper," said he, "about health and doctors."  The few paragraphs
which follow are, I believe, all that he wrote on the subject.
Whether the matter became too serious to him for further jesting, or
whether his hand became too weak to hold the pen, I cannot say.  The
article terminates as abruptly as did the life of its gentle, kind,
ill-fated author.

E.P.H.]

Ontil quite recent, I've bin a helthy individooal.  I'm near 60, and
yit I've got a muskle into my arms which don't make my fists
resemble the tread of a canary bird when they fly out and hit a man.

Only a few weeks ago I was exhibitin in East Skowhegan, in a b'ildin
which had form'ly bin ockepyied by a pugylist--one of them fellers
which hits from the shoulder, and teaches the manly art of self
defens.  And he cum and said he was goin in free, in consekence of
previ'sly ockepyin sed b'ildin, with a large yeller dog.  I sed, "To
be sure, sir, but not with those yeller dogs."  He sed, "Oh, yes."
I sed, "Oh, no."  He sed, "Do you want to be ground to powder?"  I
sed, "Yes, I do, if there is a powder-grindist handy."  When he
struck me a disgustin blow in my left eye, which caused that concern
to at once close for repairs; but he didn't hurt me any more.  I
went for him.  I went for him energet'cally.  His parents live near
by, and I will simply state that 15 minits after I'd gone for him,
his mother, seein the prostrate form of her son approachin the house
on to a shutter carrid by four men, run out doors, keerfully looked
him over, and sed, "My son, you've been foolin round a thrashin
masheen.  You went in at the end where they put the grain in, come
out with the straw, and then got up in the thingumajig and let the
hosses tred on you, didn't you, my son?"

You can jedge by this what a disagreeable person I am when I'm
angry.

But to resoom about helth.  I cum of a helthy fam'ly.

The Wards has allus been noted for helthiness.

The fust of my ancestors that I know anything about was Abijah Ward
and his wife, Abygil Ward who came over with the Pilgrims in the
"Mayflower."  Most of the Pilgrims was sick on the passige, but my
ancestor wasn't.  Even when the tempist raged and the billers
howled, he sold another Pilgrim a kag of apple sass.  The Pilgrim
who bo't it was angry when he found that under a few layers of sass
the rest was sawdust, and my ancestor sed he wouldn't have b'leeved
such wickedness could exist, when he ascertained that the bill sed
Pilgrim gave him was onto a broken bank, and wasn't wuth the price
of a glass of new gin.  It will be thus seen that my fust ancestor
had a commercial mind.

My ancestors has all bin helthy people, tho' their pursoots in life
has been vari's.

         *     *     *     *     *

         *     *     *     *     *

7.15.  A FRAGMENT.

[Among the papers, letters and miscellanea left on the table of poor
Ward was found the fragment which follows.  Diligent search failed
to discover any beginning or end to it.  The probability is that it
consists of part of a paper intended to describe a comic trip round
England.  To write a comic itinerary of an English tour was one of
the author's favorite ideas; and another favorite one was to travel
on the Continent and compile a comic "Murray's Guide."  No interest
attaches to this mere scrap other than that it exemplifies what the
writer would have attempted had his life been longer.]

         *     *     *     *     *

At North Berwick there was a maniacal stampede toward the little
house by the railside, where they sell such immense quantities of
sponge-cake, which is very sweet and very yellow, but which lies
rather more heavily on the stomach than raw turnips, as I
ascertained one day from actual experience.  This is not stated
because I have any spite against this little house by the railside.
Their mince-pies are nobly made, and their apple-pies are
unsurpassed.  Some years ago there used to be a very pretty girl at
this house, and one day, while I was struggling rapidly with a piece
of mince-pie, I was so unfortunate as to wink slightly at her.  The
rash act was discovered by a yellow-haired party, who stated that
she was to be his wife ere long, and that he "expected" he could
lick any party who winked at her.  A cursory examination of his
frame convinced me that he could lick me with disgustin ease, so I
told him it was a complaint of the eyes.  "They are both so," I
added, "and they have been so from infancy's hour.  See here!"  And
I commenced winking in a frightful manner.  I escaped, but it was
inconvenient for me for some time afterwards, because whenever I
passed over the road I naturally visited the refreshment house, and
was compelled to wink in a manner which took away the appetites of
other travellers, and one day caused a very old lady to state, with
her mouth full of sponge-cake, that she had cripples and drunkards
in her family, but thanks to the heavens above, no idiots without
any control over their eyes, looking sternly at me as she spoke.

That was years ago.  Besides, the wink was a pure accident.  I trust
that my unblemished character--but I will not detain you further
with this sad affair.

         *     *     *     *     *


There have been several editions of the Works of Artemus Ward.
The Following appeared in THE COMPLETE WORKS OF ARTEMUS WARD, A New
Impression; Chatto & Windus, London 1922

Additional short pieces by A. Ward.

7.16.  BRIGHAM YOUNG'S WIVES.

7.17.  A. WARD'S FIRST UMBRELLA.

7.18.  AN AFFECTING POEM.

7.19.  MORMON BILL OF FARE.

A comtemporary review

7.20. "THE BABES IN THE WOOD."

Spurious pieces

7.21.  MR. WARD ATTENDS A GRAFFICK (SOIREE.)

7.22.  A. WARD AMONG THE MORMONS.--REPORTED BY HIMSELF
               --OR SOMEBODY ELSE.



7.16.  BRIGHAM YOUNG'S WIVES.

Frends and Feller Passingers.--I'm e'en a most tiard ov statin my
convicshuns regarden them Mormoness plooralyties, which sits
theirselves round Mister Yung's grate table when the dinner-bell
booms merryly thruout the long and short ov this ere land.

Heavy figgerin isn't my berthrite; it's the nobil contemplativ what's
the pecoolar offshute of these massiv brane.

"But how many wives has he?"

Wall, all A. W. nose abowt it is thet his luvly contemplativ wun day
used up the MulteplyKashun tabul in kountin the long Stockins on a
close line in Brigham's back yard--and he soddingly had to leave, fer
the site made him dizzy.  It was too mutch for him.
                     -- Yures abstractid,

                                                WARTEMUS DARD.

7.17.  A. WARD'S FIRST UMBRELLA.

[A friend of Artemus Ward's sends the following, with the request
that it may be included in the present edition.]

The solumncholies hev bin on-to A. W. now and agin, as it dus to most
ov the four-lorned human naturs in this Vayl of Tares.  She's tickled
me considerabull sumtims--only it was the wrong wa.  Most human
naturs git tickled the wrong wa sumtims.

She was heviest onter me the fust yeer I ever owned a Umbrellar.  I
was going on 18 yeer old then, and praid for rane as bad as any
dride-up farmer.  I wantid to show that umBrellar--I wantid to mak
sum persnul apeerents with that brellar--I desirud Jim parker and
Hiram Goss to witness the site--I felt my birthWrite was bowned up in
that brellar--I wantid to be a MAN!

I'd un-hook'd frum Betsy Jain fur a spell--(canfidenshal, leastways,
I hadn't commenced cortin up to her rite down in ernest then)--and
kum evenin I went over to the Widder Blakes.  I'd the umBrellar
along, and opun'd it outside the door--pretendin I couldn't klose it
like, so that the dawter could hev a good Luke at my property.  But
it wuz no use; the new Brellar didn't take, and Sally sed she thort I
"needn't cum agin !"

I hev bin many wheres, and seen sum few in this erthly Tavernknuckle,
but ov all the solum hours I ever speeriunsed the 1 ockepied in going
hum that partickler nite frum the Widders was the most solumm.

I'd a mind to throw awa that Brellar more'n onct as I went along.

7.18.            AN AFFECTING POEM.

              "POOR Jonathan Snow
               Away did go
               All on the ragen mane,
               With other males,
               All for to ketch wales,
               & nere come back agen.
               The wind bloo high,
               The billers tost,
               All hands were lost,
               And he was one,
               A spritely lad,
               Nigh 21."

7.19.  MORMON BILL OF FARE

                    BRIGHAM YOUNG'S HOUSES.

BRIGHAM'S Wives live in these houses.  They live well at Brigham's,
the following being the usual

                        BILL OF FARE.

                         SOUPS, ETC.
             Matrimonial Stews (with pretty Pickles).

                            FISH.
                   Salt Lake Gudgeon.

                            ROAST.
              Brigham's Lambs (Sauce piquante).
                Minced Heart (Mormon style).

                           BROILED.
               Domestic Broils (Family style)

                           ENTREES.
                        Little Deers.

                            COLD.
                     Raw Dog (a la Injun).
                      Tongue (lots of it).

                         VEGETABLES.
               Cabbage-head, Some Pumpkins, &c.

                           DESSERT.
             Apples of Discord, a great many Pairs;
             Mormon Sweet-Hearts, Jumbles, &c.

7.20.  "THE BABES IN THE WOOD."

[The following amusing critique or report of Artemus Ward's favourite
lecture entitled "The Babes in the wood" was written the day after
its first delivery in San Francisco, California, by one of the
contributors to the Golden Era.  As an imitation of A. Ward's
burlesque orthography it is somewhat overdone; but it has,
nevertheless, certain touches of humour which will amuse the English
reader.  Why the lecture is called "The Babes in the Wood" is not
known, unless it is because they are WARDS. -- ED.]

Nite befoar larst was an Erer in the annals of Sand Francisco; yis,
an Erer; I sa it, and I guess I know what a Erer is!  I gess I do!
It's something like this noosepaper, for instance; something that's
gut a big Injin onto it; though the Big Injin Fryday Nite had his
close on, which this moril Jernal's Injin hasn't, bein intended to
represent that nobil read man of the forrist, of hoom the poet
sweetly sings:

         "Low, the poor Injin! hoose untootered mind
          Clothes him in frunt--Butt leaves him bare behind!"

However, let that parse.

I hearn thare was to be a show up to Mr Platt's Haul on the occashun
allewded to; so I took Maria An an' the children--with the excepshun
of the smollest wun, which, under the inflewence of tired Nachure's
sweet restorer, Missis Winslow's Soothin Syrup, was rapped in barmy
slumbers--up to prayer meetin; and after havin excoosed myself to the
pardner of my boosom, on the plee of havin swallered a boks of
Bristol's Sugar-Coated Pills, I slipt out and went down to the Haul,
thinkin I would have a little relaxation.  Prubably Mariar An thought
so too.  (That are a double entender, but I didn't intend it.)
Although I arrove quite airly, I found a few Individools I mean to sa
I found but few who ware not--already in the Haul.  I would not on no
account whatsumdever, no how you can fix it, deceeve nobody nor
nothin', for I am a pieus man, and send my wife to church, and
addhere to the trooth; and yit, I ventoor to assurt, that I never in
all my born dase beheld so menny fokes befoar--stop, I er slitely-- I
had a seat in the rear.

It seemed as tho the hole populashun had turned out en massy to
welcum the gratist wit of his age.--He is older than me.

The curtin roze--no, I do not desire to misrepresent fax--there was
no curtin--I think thare should have bin!

The lectoor commenced at a few minutes past ate--precisely.  The gay
and gifted Artemus stepped to his place, and after acknowledging my
presence by a polite bow, prooeeded to define the platform on which
he stood--Oregon pine.  The papers, with thare usuil fidelity to fax,
had stated that the entertainment would consist only of a lectoor, &
that the kangaroo & wax-figgers would not be introdooced--"dooced
queer," thinks I, and I soon discovered the telegram; for Mr. Ward
used a number of figgers--of speech.

Thare ware also severeil animils thare, thare was, tho I don't know
whether they belonged to him, as they was scattered thro the
ordgunce, and was boysterous to a degre--yis, two degrese.

Some of the funniest of the fundymentall principles of the lectoor
escaped me--rather I escaped them--partly owin to the fokes squeeging
in at the dore, and partly owin to a pretty but frail gurl wayin all
the way from 200 up to 250 lbs. avoirdoopois, which sot herself rite
onto my lap.

Mr Ward statid that he would not give a fillosoffical lectoor--nor an
astronomical lectoor--nor--did he say what kind of lectoor he would
give.  The subjec was, however, the "Babes in the Wood."  He has had
the Babes in the Wood sum time.  Mr. Ward is not rich--but is doin--
as well as could be expected.

It is one of the lectoors you read about, you know--here.  Yis, I sa
it's a great moril lectoor; I sa it boldly, because I've heerd--of
it.

The structoor of the lectoor was as they sa in architectoor of the
compost like ordoor; first a stratter of this, then a stratter of
that; that is to sa--kinder mixed, you know.  It was on the
aneckdotale plan, and speakin of aneckdotes reminds me of a little
story--it is wun of Mr Ward's, by the way; it will bare repitition--
it lass, so far, stood it very well.  It is of a young made, hoose
name it was Mehitabull--some of it, at least--enuff--for the present
porpussus--and of a nobil and galyunt lovyier, which his naim it was
John Jones.  This young man was a patrut, tho oppoged to coershun.
The enrolin officer going his rounds was beheld by this young man
wile yit he was afar off, the site was not a welcum wun to John, and
it propelled him to seek proteekshun of his plited wun, in hoose hous
he was at that critical moment.  Time was preshus.  What was too be
dun?  The enemy was now neer at hand. "Git under my hoops," sez
Mehitabull.  The heroick youth obade.

After a pause the offisser hentered the manshun.

"Is thare any men in this 'ere hous?" sez he.

"Not as I nose--on," replied the damsell.

"Then," sez the offisser, "I gess I'll stop awhile myself."

He stopped a our.  After witch he stopped anuther our; after witch he
continuood to stop.

During this time John Jones was garspin for breath.  At last he felt
he cood endoor it no longer, without--ingoory to his helth.  He put
his hed out of his strong hold and sed to the amazed offisser, "I
think the draft will doo me good--I mean the draft of are."

"You air in favor of the Proclamashun!" red the offisser.

"Yis, and of ventilation."

The young man was not drafted, but he is still single--single-ar to
say.

The abov is a correct report of the story as I heern it--I only heern
the naims, fancy has supplide the rest.

P.S.--I larfed all the wa home; observin witch severil peple gave me
the hole walk, evidently taking me for a hilarious loonatic.

A. Ward will shortly lecshoor on Asstronmy, I heer, partickly upon
the Konstlashun ov the Suthern Cross, which he portends he found out
to be a MULATTO.

7.21.  MR. WARD ATTENDS A GRAFFICK (SOIREE.)

[Shortly after the publication in this country of "Artemus Ward His
Book," I received from a friend the following article, purporting to
have been written by Mr. W. during a stay in Bristol.  The sketch
appeared in the "Bristol Record,"* and upon writing to the editor for
further information concerning it, I received from that gentleman
such a cautious reply as confirmed a previous suspicion that "the
showman" had not visited the great western city, and that the article
was either a concoction in Mr. Ward's style, or one of the papers of
Josh Billings, an imitator of Mr. W., slightly altered to suit the
locality of its republication.  Whether these conjectures are correct
or not, the article is here given for the English reader's criticism,
and, although not equal in humour to A. Ward's more successful
pieces, certain pleasantries of expression and droll extravagances
observable in it will, at least, repay perusal.]

Prefixed to the article in the Record was the following:-" A letter
has just been shown to us, of which we subjoin a portion, from which
it will appear that Mr. -- (we suppress the name for obvious reasons)
is not the only illustrious American who is sojourning at present at
Clifton.  Artemus Ward has retired for the present from his
professional duties, in consequence of the rough treatment which he
lately received in the Southern States.  His admirers have sent him
to England to recruit, and he was last week at Clifton, and dined
with Mr. --.  We are violating no literary confidence in mentioning
the above, as Mr. Ward is combining business with pleasure, and his
letters will appear in the New York Tribune, to which journal he has
temporarily attached himself as special European correspondent.--Ed.
B. R.

WALL, we had a just sittled down to our wine, when sez the Squire
soddenlick, "Mr. W., would you like to go to a Graffick?"

"What's a Graffick?" sed I.

"A Pictur-shew," sed he, "with a swoiree between, and all the
fashionables of this interestin location there."

"Don't care if I duz," sed I, "perwided u go the Ticket."

"Sertingly," sed he.  "Mr. Ward, you are my guest for the evening."

So we put on our go-to-meetings, and yaller kid-skins, and sot off.
There was a purty tidy fixin of shrubs and statooary as we went in
(but nuthin ekal to the Bowery Saloon, New York!), and stairs up and
stairs down, and gals in opera clokes ascendin and D-scendin.

First we go up into a big room with a blaze o' lite and a crowd of
cumpany.  The Squire whispers to me, and sez he'll pint out the
lokial celebrities.  At the end of the room is a great pictur,
representin a stout femail on a tarnation dark back-ground.  The
critters scrowded up to it, and looked on in hor.  Presently I feels
the Squire nudging me.

"Do you see that individooal," sed he, "with Hyacinthian curls, and
his eye in a fine frenzy rollin!  That's the great art critic, who
lays down the lor for Bristol and ets vicinity."

So I pushed up cloas, and sed I to the creteck, "Wall, Mister, what
dew think of that air piece of canvas staining?"

At first he Ide me loftily, and made no reply.  At last he spoak
(with grate deliberashun).  "Not yet have I mastered the pictur.  I'm
a studyin of the onperfectly-seen vizionoimies behind.  Them guards
is a phernomenon.  The soul of the painter has projected itself
thrugh the august glooms."

"Don't see it," sez I.  "Them shadders want glazin--and the
middletints is no whur.  Guess if Hiram Applesquash (our 'domestic
decorator' to hum) had pertrayed them guards, he would hev slicked
off their Uniforms as bright as a New England tulip."

The creteck regarded me With Contemptoous indignashun.

"Hullo!" sed I next, "whose been and stolen a signboard, and stuck
it up in this refined society?"

"To what do you defer?" sez he, still very fridgid.

"To that corpulent figgur," sez I, "in military fixins."

"That, sair," sez he, with severity, "is a portrait of his Majusty
the King of Denmark, lately disEased."

"A portraickt of his cloze, you mean," sez I.  "Is that sprorling
pictur a work of art?  (N.B.--This I sed sarcasticul.)  Hiram A.
touched off a new Sign for the Tavern at Baldinsville jest before
I saled, and his 'President's Head' would bete this by a long chalk
any day."  With that I scowled at the Creteck, and left him looking
considerable smawl pertaters.

Arter this we went down into the Cole-hole, wich they had cleaned
out for the night and white-washed.  Here I own was buties of natur.
I always had a liken for water-colar paintin, and sometimes take a
sketcht in that way myself.  Me and Squire tried to get a good look,
but was engulphed in an oshun of hot galls, who kinder steamed again.
The gas, close over our heads, nigh made our brains bile over, so
sez I, "Let's make tracks out of this, Squire.  It ain't civet
(Schakspar) here.  This parfume of humanity is horrid unhandsome."

"Let's have a cup of corfy," says he, "to repare exhorsted natur."

"A sherry cobbler would be more to the purpose," says I, "but if they
hev none of them coolin drinks at art sworricks, here goes for the
Moky."  (N.B.--This I sed ironical.  Korfy at sworricks is usually
burnt beans.)

So we med our way into another room, with 2 bar-counters, and a crowd
of people pushin and drivin to get forrerd.  They knocked and elbered
me about till I felt my dander riz.  "Come on, Squire," sez I,
setting my arms a kimber; "take care, my old coons, of your tendur
Korns and Bunyans.  Look out for your ribs, for I've crooked my
elbers," and forrerd I goes with Squire follerin' in my wake.  Bimeby
a woman's long skirt gets between my legs, and I spins round and goes
kerslash into the stumuck of a fat old gentleman, who was just blowin
his third cup.  He med a spaired his breath though! kerslap I goes
into his wastecote, and kesouse goes his coffy over his shoulders
onto hed and neck of a bony old made with a bird of Pardice in her
artificial locks.

"Beg your pardon, marm," sez I, as soon as I could speak.

She looked imprekashuns, and turned away ortily, mopping herself down
with a laced nose-rag.

The Old gentleman was more cholerick.  "Cuss your clumsiness," says
he, "can't you come to a graffick without punching your ugly hed Into
other people's stumucks?"

"I didn't go for to do it," sez I, "and jest put the Sadll on the
right hoss, mister," I continerred.  "If this femail behind didn't
carry so much slack foresail, she wuddn't hev entangled my spars and
careened me over."

Arter this I would try no more of their all-fired corfy.  Squire--
had had enough of the Sworrick, so we made tracks for the Ho-tell.

"Bring-up a quart of brandy," sez the Squire, "and a bilin o' lemons
and sugar.  Mr. W.," sez he, "there's not much of me left.  Let's
liquor up!  Let's have a smoke and a cocktail."  So we mixes, and
had an entertaining discorse on polite literatoor.  "Dod-rabbit the
sworrick," says Squire.  "Say no more about it.  I was a fool, Mr
Ward, to prefare it to your amusin an inshstructive conversashun."

After a while we got cheerful and sung "ale Columby" (it's a fine
voice the Squire has for a doo-et).  Respect for the soshul Borde
makes me now cave in and klose my commoonication.  Squire -- is a
grate filantherpist, but he's not grate at stowing away his lick-er.
I tuk him to bed after the 3d tumbler, that the cuss of a british
Waiter might not see one of us free & enlightened citizens onable to
walk strate.  He said it was a wet night, and demanded his umburella.
Likewise he wouldn't hev his boots off, for fere of catchin cold.  I
put the candle in the wash-basan that the critter mightn't set
hisself on fire, and left him in bed with his umburella up, singing
"Ale columby."

Arter that I went down and finished the mahogany.  (Brandy and water,
the ruddy appearance of which indicates that very little of the
latter has been used in its composition.  Spanish is the stronger,
and Honduras the milder mixture.)

                                                   A. WARD.

7.22.  A. WARD AMONG THE MORMONS.--REPORTED BY HIMSELF--OR SOMEBODY
ELSE.

(The following rough report of Artemus Ward's Lecture in California
Appeared in the "San Francisco Era," during the lecturer's visit to
that city.  It has been thought worthy of preservation in the form
of a supplementary paper to the present little volume.

FELLER-CITIZENS AND FELLER-CITIZENESSES,--I feel truly glad to see
you here to-night, more especially those who have paid, although I am
too polite to say how many are here who have not paid, but who take a
base advantage of the good-nature of my friend and manager, Hingston,
bothering him to give them free tickets, gratis, and also for
nothing; and my former friend and manager, Rosenberg, assures me that
the best way to prevent a person from enjoying any entertainment is
to admit them without the equivalent spondulics.  What a man gets for
nothing he don't care for.

Talking of free tickets, my first lecture was a wonderful success--
house so full that everybody who could pay turned from the doors.  It
happened thus:

Walking about Salt Lake City on the morning before the lecture, I met
Elder Kimball.  Well, I most imprudently gave him a family ticket.
That ticket filled the house, and left about a dozen of the young
Kimballs howling in the cold.  After that I limited my family tickets
to "Admit Elder Jones, ten wives, and thirty children."

You may perhaps be astonished that I, a rather fascinating bachelor,
escaped from Salt Lake City without the loss of my innocence.  Well I
will confess, confidentially, that was only by the skin of my teeth,
and thanks to the virtuous lecturing of my friend Hingston, whose
British prejudices amainst Bigamy, Trigamy, and Brighamy, saying
nothing of Ninnygavigamy, could not be overcome.

My narrowest escape was this:

About six hours before I arrived an elder died.  I think his name
was Smith.  You may have heard that name before; but it isn't the
Smith you know--it is quite another Smith.  Well, this defunct elder
left a small assortment of wives behind him--I think there were
seventeen--of all ages, from seventeen to seventy.  This miscellaneous
gathering included three grandmothers, a fact which lent a venerable
sanctity to the affair.  I received an invitation--I went--and was
introduced to the whole seventeen widows at once.  Sam Weller or Dr.
Shelton Mackenzie--I forget which--says, "One widow is dangerous;"
but, perhaps, there is safety in a multitude of them.  All I know is,
that they made the tenderest appeals to me, as a man and a brother;
but I threw myself upon their mercy--I told them I was far away from
my parents and my Sainted Maria, and that I was a good young man;
and finally, I begged to know if their intentions were honourable?

One said:

"Young man, dash not the cup of happiness from your life!"

I said:

"I have no objection to a cup, but I cannot stand an entire
hogshead!"

They grew more and more tender--two put their arms around me and
pinioned me, while the other fifteen drew large shears from their
pockets, and, under pretence of getting a lock of hair for each,
they left me as bare as a goose-egg.  Indians couldn't have scalped
me closer.  I made Samson-like my escape from these Delilahs by
stratagem.  I assured them that I was sickening for the measles,
which, like love, is always the more fatal the later it comes in
life.  I also told them that my friend Hingston was a much better
looking man than I was; also that he was an Englishman, and that,
according to that nation's creed, every Englishman is equal to five
Americans and five hundred Frenchmen:  consequently there would be
some to spare of him.  This happy thought saved me.  I was let off
upon solemnly promising to deliver Hingston into their arms, bound,
Laocoon-like, by the serpent spells of their charms, or, like
Regulus, potted and preserved in a barrel of fingernails, for their
especial scratching.

Hingston, little dreaming of the sale I had made of him, went on the
pretended errand of conveying to these seventeen beauties a farewell
bouquet.  Poor fellow! that is the last I ever saw of him--he was
never heard of again.

The gentleman who acts as my manager is somebody else.  I must ask
the indulgence of the audience for twenty minutes, while I drop a few
tears to his memory.  (Here Artemus holds his head over a barrel, and
the distinct dripping of a copious shower is heard.)

As I feel a little better, I will recommence my lecture--I don't mean
to defend Mormonism--indeed, I have no hesitation in affirming, and I
affirm it boldly, and I would repeat the observation to my own wife's
face, if I had one, but as I haven't one, I'll say it boldly to every
other man's wife, that I don't think it wise to marry more than one
wife at a time, without it is done to oblige the ladies, and then it
should be done sparingly, and not oftener than three times a day, for
the marriage ceremony isn't lightly to be repeated.  But I want to
tell you what Brigham Young observed to me.

"Artemus, my boy," said he, "you don't know how often a man marries
against his will.  Let me recite one case out of a hundred that has
happened to myself.  About three months ago a family arrived here--
they were from Hoboken--everybody knows how beautiful the Jersey
girls are--with the exception of applejack, they are the nicest
things Jersey produces.  Well, this family consisted of four
daughters, a mother and two grandmothers, one with teeth, the other
without.  I took a fancy to the youngest of the girls, and proposed.
After considerable reflection she said: 'I can't think of marrying
you without you marry my three sisters as well.'

"After some considerable hesitation I agreed, and went to the girl's
mother for her consent: 'No objection to your marrying my four girls,
but you'll have to take me as well.'  After a little reflection, I
consented, and went to the two grandmothers for their consent:--'No
objection,' said the old dames in a breath, 'but you'll have to marry
us as well.  We cannot think of separating the family.'  After a
little cosy hesitation on my part, I finally agreed to swallow the
two old venerable antiquities as a sort of sauce to the other five."

Under these circumstances, who can wonder at Brigham Young being the
most highly married man in the Republic?  In a word, he is too much
married--indeed, if I were he, I should say two hundred and too much
married.

As I see my esteemed friend Joe Whitton, of Niblo's Garden, sitting
right before me, I will give him an anecdote which he will
appreciate.  There is considerable barter in Salt Lake City--horses
and cows are good for hundred-dollar greenbacks, while pigs, dogs,
cats, babies, and pickaxes are the fractional currency.  I dare say
my friend Joe Whitton would be as much astonished as I was after my
first lecture.  Seeing a splendid house I naturally began to reckon
my spondulics.  Full of this Pactolean vision, I went into my
treasurer's room.

"Now, Hingston, my boy, let us see what the proceeds are!  We s