 go in to her in her chamber and kiss her hands and
feet."[FN#71]  So he went in to her and did this and bussed her
between the eyes, saying, "O Princess of fair ones and life of
sprites and beholder's delight, be easy of heart, for I took thee
only that I might be thy bondsman till the Day of Doom, and this
my sister will be thy servant; for I, O my lady, desire naught
but to take thee to wife, after the law of Allah and the practice
of His Apostle, and whenas thou wilt, I will journey with thee to
my country and carry thee to Baghdad-city and abide with thee
there: moreover, I will buy thee handmaidens and negro chattels;
and I have a mother, of the best of women, who will do thee
service.  There is no goodlier land than our land; everything
therein is better than elsewhere and its folk are a pleasant
people and bright of face."  Now as he bespake her thus and
strave to comfort her, what while she answered him not a
syllable, lo! there came a knocking at the palace-gate.  So Hasan
went out to see who was at the door and found there the six
Princesses, who had returned from hunting and birding, whereat he
rejoiced and went to meet them and welcomed them.  They wished
him safety and health and he wished them the like; after which
they dismounted and going each to her chamber doffed their soiled
clothes and donned fine linen.  Then they came forth and demanded
the game, for they had taken a store of gazelles and wild cows,
hares and lions, hyaenas, and others; so their suite brought out
some thereof for butchering, keeping the rest by them in the
palace, and Hasan girt himself and fell to slaughtering for them
in due form,[FN#72] whilst they sported and made merry, joying
with great joy to see him standing amongst them hale and hearty
once more.  When they had made an end of slaughtering, they sat
down and addressed themselves to get ready somewhat for breaking
their fast, and Hasan, coming up to the eldest Princess, kissed
her head and on like wise did he with the rest, one after other. 
Whereupon said they to him, "Indeed, thou humblest thyself to us
passing measure, O our brother, and we marvel at the excess of
the affection thou showest us.  But Allah forfend that thou
shouldst do this thing, which it behoveth us rather to do with
thee, seeing thou art a man and therefor worthier than we, who
are of the Jinn."[FN#73] Thereupon his eyes brimmed with tears
and he wept sore; so they said to him, "What causeth thee to
weep?  Indeed, thou troublest our pleasant lives with thy weeping
this day.  'Twould seem thou longest after thy mother and native
land.  An things be so, we will equip thee and carry thee to thy
home and thy friends."  He replied, "By Allah, I desire not to
part from you!" Then they asked, "Which of us hath vexed thee,
that thou art thus troubled?"  But he was ashamed to say, "Naught
troubleth me save love of a damsel," lest they should deny and
disavow him: so he was silent and would tell them nothing of his
case. Then his sister came forward and said to them, "He hath
caught a bird from the air and would have you help him to tame
her." Whereupon they all turned to him and cried, "We are at thy
service every one of us and whatsoever thou seekest that will we
do: but tell us thy tale and conceal from us naught of thy case."
So he said to his sister, "Do thou tell them, for I am ashamed
before them nor can I face them with these words."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan said
to his sister, "Do thou tell them my tale, for before them I
stand abashed nor can I face them with these words."  So she said
to them, "O my sisters, when we went away and left alone this
unhappy one, the palace was straitened upon him and he feared
lest some one should come in to him, for ye know that the sons of
Adam are light of wits.  So, he opened the door of the staircase
leading to the roof, of his loneliness and trouble, and sat
there, looking upon the Wady and watching the gate, in his fear
lest any should come thither.  One day, as he sat thus, suddenly
he saw ten birds approach him, making for the palace, and they
lighted down on the brink of the basin which is in the
pavilion-terrace.  He watched these birds and saw, amongst them,
one goodlier than the rest, which pecked the others and flouted
them, whilst none of them dared put out a claw to it.  Presently,
they set their nails to their neck-collars and, rending their
feather-suits, came forth therefrom and became damsels, each and
every, like the moon on fullest night.  Then they doffed their
dress and plunging into the water, fell to playing with one
another, whilst the chief damsel ducked the others, who dared not
lay a finger on her and she was fairest of favour and most famous
of form and most feateous of finery.  They ceased not to be in
this case till near the hour of mid-afternoon prayer, when they
came forth of the basin and, donning their feather-shifts, flew
away home.  Thereupon he waxed distracted, with a heart afire for
love of the chief damsel and repenting him that he had not stolen
her plumery.  Wherefore he fell sick and abode on the palace-roof
expecting her return and abstaining from meat and drink and
sleep, and he ceased not to be so till the new moon showed, when
behold, they again made their appearance according to custom and
doffing their dresses went down into the basin.  So he stole the
chief damsel's feather-suit, knowing that she could not fly save
therewith, hiding himself carefully lest they sight him and slay
him.  Then he waited till the rest had flown away, when he arose
and seizing the damsel, carried her down from the terrace into
the castle." Her sisters asked, "Where is she?"; and she
answered, "She is with him in such a chamber." Quoth they,
"Describe her to us, O our sister:" so quoth she, "She is fairer
than the moon on the night of fullness and her face is sheenier
than the sun; the dew of her lips is sweeter than honey and her
shape is straighter and slenderer than the cane; one with eyes
black as night and brow flower-white; a bosom jewel-bright,
breasts like pomegranates twain and cheeks like apples twain, a
waist with dimples overlain, a navel like a casket of ivory full
of musk in grain, and legs like columns of alabastrine vein.  She
ravisheth all hearts with Nature-kohl'd eyne, and a waist
slender-fine and hips of heaviest design and speech that heals
all pain and pine: she is goodly of shape and sweet of smile, as
she were the moon in fullest sheen and shine."  When the
Princesses heard these praises, they turned to Hasan and said to
him, "Show her to us."  So he arose with them, all
love-distraught, and carrying them to the chamber wherein was the
captive damsel, opened the door and entered, preceding the seven
Princesses.  Now when they saw her and noted her loveliness, they
kissed the ground between her hands, marvelling at the fairness
of her favour and the significance which showed her inner gifts,
and said to her, "By Allah, O daughter of the Sovran Supreme,
this is indeed a mighty matter: and haddest thou heard tell of
this mortal among women thou haddest marvelled at him all thy
days.  Indeed, he loveth thee with passionate love; yet, O King's
daughter, he seeketh not lewdness, but desireth thee only in the
way of lawful wedlock.  Had we known that maids can do without
men, we had impeached him from his intent, albeit he sent thee no
messenger, but came to thee in person; and he telleth us he hath
burnt the feather dress; else had we taken it from him."  Then
one of them agreed with the Princess and becoming her deputy in
the matter of the wedding contract, performed the marriage
ceremony between them, whilst Hasan clapped palms with her,
laying his hand in hers, and she wedded him to the damsel by
consent; after which they celebrated her bridal feast, as
beseemeth Kings' daughters, and brought Hasan in to her.  So he
rose and rent the veil and oped the gate and pierced the
forge[FN#74] and brake the seal, whereupon affection for her
waxed in him and he redoubled in love and longing for her.  Then,
since he had gotten that which he sought, he gave himself joy and
improvised these couplets,

"Thy shape's temptation, eyes as Houri's fain * And sheddeth
     Beauty's sheen[FN#75] that radiance rare:
My glance portrayed thy glorious portraiture: * Rubies one-half
     and gems the third part were:
Musk made a fifth: a sixth was ambergris * The sixth a pearl but
     pearl without compare.
Eve never bare a daughter evening thee * Nor breathes thy like in
     Khuld's[FN#76] celestial air.
An thou would torture me 'tis wont of Love * And if thou pardon
     'tis thy choice I swear:
Then, O world bright'ner and O end of wish! * Loss of thy charms
     who could in patience bear?"

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Hasan went in unto the King's daughter and did away her
maidenhead, he enjoyed her with exceeding joy and affection for
her waxed in him and he redoubled in love-longing for her; so he
recited the lines aforesaid.  Now the Princesses were standing at
the door and when they heard his verses, they said to her, "O
King's daughter, hearest thou the words of this mortal?  How
canst thou blame us, seeing that he maketh poetry for love of
thee and indeed he hath so done a thousand times."[FN#77]  When
she heard this she rejoiced and was glad and felt happy and Hasan
abode with her forty[FN#78] days in all solace and delight,
joyance and happiest plight, whilst the damsels renewed
festivities for him every day and overwhelmed him with bounty and
presents and rarities; and the King's daughter became reconciled
to her sojourn amongst them and forgot her kith and kin.  At the
end of the forty days, Hasan saw in a dream, one night, his
mother mourning for him and indeed her bones were wasted and her
body had waxed shrunken and her complexion had yellowed and her
favour had changed the while he was in excellent case.  When she
saw him in this state, she said to him, "O my son, O Hasan, how
is it that thou livest thy worldly life at thine ease and
forgettest me?  Look at my plight since thy loss!  I do not
forget thee, nor will my tongue cease to name thy name till I
die; and I have made thee a tomb in my house, that I may never
forget thee.  Would Heaven I knew[FN#79] if I shall live, O my
son, to see thee by my side and if we shall ever again foregather
as we were."  Thereupon Hasan awoke from sleep, weeping and
wailing, the tears railed down his cheeks like rain and he became
mournful and melancholy; his tears dried not nor did sleep visit
him, but he had no rest, and no patience was left to him.  When
he arose, the Princesses came in to him and gave him good-morrow
and made merry with him as was their wont; but he paid no heed to
them; so they asked his wife concerning his case and she said, "I
ken not."  Quoth they, "Question him of his condition."  So she
went up to him and said, "What aileth thee, O my lord?" 
Whereupon he moaned and groaned and told her what he had seen in
his dream and repeated these two couplets,

"Indeed afflicted sore are we and all distraught, * Seeking for
     union; yet we find no way:
And Love's calamities upon us grow * And Love though light with
     heaviest weight doth weigh."

His wife repeated to the Princesses what he said and they,
hearing the verses, had pity on him and said to him, "In Allah's
name, do as thou wilt, for we may not hinder thee from visiting
thy mother; nay, we will help thee to thy wish by what means we
may.  But it behoveth that thou desert us not, but visit us,
though it be only once a year." And he answered, "To hear is to
obey: be your behest on my head and eyes!" Then they arose
forthright and making him ready victual for the voyage, equipped
the bride for him with raiment and ornaments and everything of
price, such as defy description, and they bestowed on him gifts
and presents which pens of ready writers lack power to set forth. 
Then they beat the magical kettle-drum and up came the
dromedaries from all sides.  They chose of them such as could
carry all the gear they had prepared; amongst the rest
five-and-twenty chests of gold and fifty of silver; and, mounting
Hasan and his bride on others, rode with them three days, wherein
they accomplished a march of three months.  Then they bade them
farewell and addressed themselves to return; whereupon his
sister, the youngest damsel, threw herself on Hasan's neck and
wept till she fainted. When she came to herself, she repeated
these two couplets,

"Ne'er dawn the severance-day on any wise * That robs of sleep
     these heavy-lidded eyes.
From us and thee it hath fair union torn * It wastes our force
     and makes our forms its prize."

Her verses finished she farewelled him, straitly charging him,
whenas he should have come to his native land and have
foregathered with his mother and set his heart at ease, to fail
not of visiting her once in every six months and saying, "If
aught grieve thee or thou fear aught of vexation, beat the
Magian's kettle-drum, whereupon the dromedaries shall come to
thee; and do thou mount and return to us and persist not in
staying away."  He swore thus to do and conjured them to go home. 
So they returned to the palace, mourning for their separation
from him, especially the youngest, with whom no rest would stay
nor would Patience her call obey, but she wept night and day. 
Thus it was with them; but as regards Hasan and his wife, they
fared on by day and night over plain and desert site and valley
and stony heights through noon-tide glare and dawn's soft light;
and Allah decreed them safety, so that they reached Bassorah-city
without hindrance and made their camels kneel at the door of his
house.  Hasan then dismissed the dromedaries and, going up to the
door to open it, heard his mother weeping and in a faint strain,
from a heart worn with parting-pain and on fire with consuming
bane, reciting these couplets,

"How shall he taste of sleep who lacks repose * Who wakes a-night
     when all in slumber wone?
He owned wealth and family and fame * Yet fared from house and
     home an exile lone:
Live coal beneath his[FN#80] ribs he bears for bane, * And mighty
     longing, mightier ne'er was known:
Passion hath seized him, Passion mastered him; * Yet is he
     constant while he maketh moan:
His case for Love proclaimeth aye that he, * (As prove his tears)
     is  wretched, woebegone."

When Hasan heard his mother weeping and wailing he wept also and
knocked at the door a loud knock.  Quoth she, "Who is at the
door?"; and quoth he, "Open!" Whereupon she opened the door and
knowing him at first sight fell down in a fainting fit; but he
ceased not to tend her till she came to herself, when he embraced
her and she embraced him and kissed him, whilst his wife looked
on mother and son.  Then he carried his goods and gear into the
house, whilst his mother, for that her heart was comforted and
Allah had reunited her with her son versified with these
couplets,

"Fortune had ruth upon my plight * Pitied my long long bane and
     blight;
Gave me what I would liefest sight; * And set me free from all
     afright.
So pardon I the sin that sin * näd she in days evanisht quite;
E'en to the sin she sinned when she * Bleached my hair-parting
     silvern white."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan
with his mother then sat talking and she asked him, "How faredst
thou, O my son, with the Persian?" whereto he answered, "O my
mother, he was no Persian, but a Magian, who worshipped the fire,
not the All-powerful Sire."  Then he told her how he dealt with
him, in that he had journeyed with him to the Mountain of Clouds
and sewed him up in the camel's skin, and how the vultures had
taken him up and set him down on the summit and what he had seen
there of dead folk, whom the Magian had deluded and left to die
on the crest after they had done his desire. And he told her how
he had cast himself from the mountain-top into the sea and Allah
the Most High had preserved him and brought him to the palace of
the seven Princesses and how the youngest of them had taken him
to brother and he had sojourned with them till the Almighty
brought the Magian to the place where he was and he slew him. 
Moreover, he told her of his passion for the King's daughter and
how he had made prize of her and of his seeing her[FN#81] in
sleep and all else that had befallen him up to the time when
Allah vouchsafed them reunion.  She wondered at his story and
praised the Lord who had restored him to her in health and
safety.  Then she arose and examined the baggage and loads and
questioned him of them.  So he told her what was in them, whereat
she joyed with exceeding joy. Then she went up to the King's
daughter, to talk with her and bear her company; but, when her
eyes fell on her, her wits were confounded at her brilliancy and
she rejoiced and marvelled at her beauty and loveliness and
symmetry and perfect grace: and she sat down beside her, cheering
her and comforting her heart while she never ceased to repeat
"Alhamdolillah, O my son, for thy return to me safe and sound!"
Next morning early she went down into the market and bought
mighty fine furniture and ten suits of the richest raiment in the
city, and clad the young wife and adorned her with everything
seemiy.  Then said she to Hasan, "O my son, we cannot tarry in
this town with all this wealth; for thou knowest that we are poor
folk and the people will suspect us of practising alchemy.  So
come, let us depart to Baghdad, the House[FN#82] of Peace, where
we may dwell in the Caliph's Sanctuary, and thou shalt sit in a
shop to buy and sell, in the fear of Allah (to whom belong Might
and Majesty!) and He shall open to thee the door of blessings
with this wealth." Hasan approved her counsel and going forth
straightway, sold the house and summoned the dromedaries, which
he loaded with all his goods and gear, together with his mother
and wife.  Then he went down to the Tigris, where he hired him a
craft to carry them to Baghdad and embarked therein all his
possessions and his mother and wife. They sailed up the river
with a fair wind for ten days till they drew in sight of Baghdad,
at which they all rejoiced, and the ship landed them in the city,
where without stay or delay Hasan hired a storehouse in one of
the caravanserais and transported his goods thither.  He lodged
that night in the Khan, and on the morrow he changed his clothes
and going down into the city, enquired for a broker.  The folk
directed him to one, and when the broker saw him, he asked him
what he lacked.  Quoth he, "I want a house, a handsome one and a
spacious." So the broker showed him the houses at his disposal
and he chose one that belonged to one of the Wazirs and buying it
of him for an hundred thousand golden dinars, gave him the price. 
Then he returned to his caravanserai and removed all his goods
and monies to the house; after which he went down to the market
and bought all the mansion needed of vessels and carpets and
other household stuff, besides servants and eunuchs, including a
little black boy for the house.  He abode with his wife in all
solace and delight of life three years, during which time he was
vouchsafed by her two sons, one of whom he named N†sir and the
other Mans£r: but, at the end of this time he bethought him of
his sisters, the Princesses, and called to mind all their
goodness to him and how they had helped him to his desire.  So he
longed after them and going out to the marketstreets of the city,
bought trinkets and costly stuffs and fruit-confections, such as
they had never seen or known. His mother asked him the reason of
his buying these rarities and he answered, "I purpose to visit my
sisters, who showed me every kind of kindness and all the wealth
that I at present enjoy is due to their goodness and munificence:
wherefore I will journey to them and return soon, Inshallah!"
Quoth she, "O my son, be not long absent from me;" and quoth he,
"Know, O my mother, how thou shalt do with my wife.  Here is her
feather-dress in a chest, buried under ground in such a place; do
thou watch over it, lest haply she hap on it and take it, for she
would fly away, she and her children, and I should never hear of
them again and should die of grieving for them; wherefore take
heed, O my mother, while I warn thee that thou name this not to
her.  Thou must know that she is the daughter of a King of the
Jinn, than whom there is not a greater among the Sovrans of the
Jann nor a richer in troops and treasure, and she is mistress of
her people and dearest to her father of all he hath. Moreover,
she is passing high-spirited, so do thou serve her thyself and
suffer her not to go forth the door neither look out of window
nor over the wall, for I fear the air for her when it
bloweth,[FN#83] and if aught befel her of the calamities of this
world, I should slay myself for her sake." She replied, "O my
son, I take refuge with Allah[FN#84] from gainsaying thee!  Am I
mad that thou shouldst lay this charge on me and I disobey thee
therein?  Depart, O my son, with heart at ease, and please Allah,
soon thou shalt return in safety and see her and she shall tell
thee how I have dealt with her: but tarry not, O my son, beyond
the time of travel."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Hasan had determined to visit the Princesses, he gave his mother
the orders we have mentioned.[FN#85]  Now, as Fate would have it,
his wife heard what he said to his mother and neither of them
knew it. Then Hasan went without the city and beat the
kettle-drum, whereupon up came the dromedaries and he loaded
twenty of them with rarities of Al-Irak; after which he returned
to his mother and repeated his charge to her and took leave of
her and his wife and children, one of whom was a yearling babe
and the other two years old.  Then he mounted and fared on,
without stopping night or day, over hills and valleys and plains
and wastes for a term of ten days till, on the eleventh, he
reached the palace and went in to his sisters, with the gifts he
had brought them. The Princesses rejoiced at his sight and gave
him joy of his safety, whilst his sister decorated the palace
within and without.  Then they took the presents and, lodging him
in a chamber as before, asked him of his mother and his wife, and
he told them that she had borne him two sons.  And the youngest
Princess, seeing him well and in good case, joyed with exceeding
joy and repeated this couplet,

"I ever ask for news of you from whatso breezes pass * And never
     any but yourselves can pass across my mind."

Then he abode with them in all honour and hospitality, for three
months, spending his time in feasting and merrymaking, joy and
delight, hunting and sporting.  So fared it with him; but as
regards his wife, she abode with his mother two days after her
husband's departure, and on the third day, she said to her,
"Glory be to God!  Have I lived with him three years and shall I
never go to the bath?" Then she wept and Hasan's mother had pity
on her condition and said to her, "O my daughter, here we are
strangers and thy husband is abroad.  Were he at home, he would
serve thee himself, but, as for me, I know no one.  However, O my
daughter, I will heat thee water and wash thy head in the
Hammam-bath which is in the house." Answered the King's daughter,
"O my lady, hadst thou spoken thus to one of the slave-girls, she
had demanded to be sold in the Sultan's open market and had not
abode with thee.[FN#86] Men are excusable, because they are
jealous and their reason telleth them that, if a woman go forth
the house, haply she will do frowardness.  But women, O my lady,
are not all equal and alike and thou knowest that, if woman have
a mind to aught, whether it be the Hammam or what not else, none
hath power over her to guard her or keep her chaste or debar her
from her desire; for she will do whatso she willeth and naught
restraineth her but her reason and her religion."[FN#87] Then she
wept and cursed fate and bemoaned herself and her strangerhood,
till Hasan's mother was moved to ruth for her case and knew that
all she said was but truth and that there was nothing for it but
to let her have her way.  So she committed the affair to Allah
(extolled and exalted be He!) and making ready all that they
needed for the bath, took her and went with her to the Hammam. 
She carried her two little sons with her, and when they entered,
they put off their clothes and all the women fell to gazing on
the Princess and glorifying God (to whom belong Might and
Majesty!) for that He had created so fair a form. The women of
the city, even those who were passing by, flocked to gaze upon
her, and the report of her was noised abroad in Baghdad till the
bath was crowded that there was no passing through it.  Now it
chanced there was present on that day and on that rare occasion
with the rest of the women in the Hammam, one of the slave-girls
of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, by name
Tohfah[FN#88] the Lutanist, and she, finding the Hammam over
crowded and no passing for the throng of women and girls, asked
what was to do; and they told her of the young lady.  So she
walked up to her and, considering her closely, was amazed at her
grace and loveliness and glorified God (magnified be His
majesty!) for the fair forms He hath created.  The sight hindered
her from her bath, so that she went not farther in nor washed,
but sat staring at the Princess, till she had made an end of
bathing and coming forth of the caldarium donned her raiment,
whereupon beauty was added to her beauty.  She sat down on the
divan,[FN#89] whilst the women gazed upon her; then she looked at
them and veiling herself, went out.  Tohfah went out with her and
followed her, till she saw where she dwelt, when she left her and
returned to the Caliph's palace; and ceased not wending till she
went in to the Lady Zubaydah and kissed ground between her hands;
whereupon quoth her mistress, "O Tohfah, why hast thou tarried in
the Hammam?"  She replied, "O my lady, I have seen a marvel,
never saw I its like amongst men or women, and this it was that
distracted me and dazed my wit and amazed me, so that I forgot
even to wash my head."  Asked Zubaydah, "And what was that?" ;
and Tohfah answered, "O my lady, I saw a damsel in the bath,
having with her two little boys like moons, eye never espied her
like, nor before her nor after her, neither is there the fellow
of her form in the whole world nor her peer amongst Ajams or
Turks or Arabs.  By the munificence, O my lady, an thou toldest
the Commander of the Faithful of her, he would slay her husband
and take her from him, for her like is not to be found among
women.  I asked of her mate and they told me that he is a
merchant Hasan of Bassorah hight.  Moreover, I followed her from
the bath to her own house and found it to be that of the Wazir,
with the two gates, one opening on the river and the other on the
land.[FN#90]  Indeed, O my lady, I fear lest the Prince of True
Believers hear of her and break the law and slay her husband and
take love-liesse with her."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Tohfah, after seeing the King's daughter, described her beauty to
the Lady Zubaydah ending with, "Indeed, O my mistress, I fear
lest the Prince of True Believers hear of her and break the law
and slay her mate and take her to wife," Zubaydah cried, "Woe to
thee, O Tohfah, say me, doth this damsel display such passing
beauty and loveliness that the Commander of the Faithful should,
on her account, barter his soul's good for his worldly lust and
break the Holy Law!  By Allah, needs must I look on her, and if
she be not as thou sayest, I will bid strike off thy head! O
strumpet, there are in the Caliph's Serraglio three hundred and
three score slave girls, after the number of the days of the
year, yet is there none amongst them so excellent as thou
describest!" Tohfah replied, "No, by Allah, O my lady!: nor is
there her like in all Baghdad; no, nor amongst the Arabs or the
Daylamites nor hath Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!)
created the like of her!" Thereupon Zuhaydah called for Masrur,
the eunuch, who came and kissed the ground before her, and she
said to him, "O Masrur, go to the Wazir's house, that with the
two gates, one giving on the water and the other on the land, and
bring me the damsel who dwelleth there, also her two children and
the old woman who is with her, and haste thou and tarry not." 
Said Masrur, "I hear and I obey," and repairing to Hasan's house,
knocked at the door.  Quoth the old woman, "Who is at the door?"
and quoth he, "Masrur, the eunuch of the Commander of the
Faithful."   So she opened the door and he entered and saluted
her with the salam; whereupon she returned his salute and asked
his need; and he replied, "The Lady Zubaydah, daughter of
Al-Kasim[FN#91] and queen-spouse of the Commander of the Faithful
Harun al-Rashid sixth[FN#92] of the sons of Al-Abbas, paternal
uncle of the Prophet (whom Allah bless and keep!) summoneth thee
to her, thee and thy son's wife and her children; for the women
have told her anent her and her beauty." Rejoined the old woman,
"O my lord Masrur, we are foreigner folk and the girl's husband
(my son) who is abroad and far from home hath strictly charged me
not to go forth nor let her go forth in his absence, neither show
her to any of the creatures of Allah Almighty; and I fear me, if
aught befal her and he come back, he will slay himself; wherefore
of thy favour I beseech thee, O Masrur, require us not of that
whereof we are unable." Masrur retorted, "O my lady, if I knew
aught to be feared for you in this, I would not require you to
go; the Lady Zubaydah desireth but to see her and then she may
return.  So disobey not or thou wilt repent; and like as I take
you, I will bring you both back in safety, Inshallah!" Hasan's
mother could not gainsay him; so she went in and making the
damsel ready, brought her and her children forth and they all
followed Masrur to the palace of the Caliphate where he carried
them in and seated them on the floor before the Lady Zubaydah.
They kissed ground before her and called down blessings upon her;
and Zubaydah said to the young lady (who was veiled), "Wilt thou
not uncover thy face, that I may look on it?" So she kissed the
ground between her hands and discovered a face which put to shame
the full moon in the height of heaven.  Zubaydah fixed her eyes
on her and let their glances wander over her, whilst the palace
was illumined by the light of her countenance; whereupon the
Queen and the whole company were amazed at her beauty and all who
looked on her became Jinn-mad and unable to bespeak one another. 
As for Zubaydah, she rose and making the damsel stand up,
strained her to her bosom and seated her by herself on the couch. 
Moreover, she bade decorate the palace in her honour and calling
for a suit of the richest raiment and a necklace of the rarest
ornaments put them upon her.  Then said she to her, "O liege lady
of fair ones, verily thou astoundest me and fillest mine
eyes.[FN#93] What arts knowest thou?" She replied, "O my lady, I
have a dress of feathers, and could I but put it on before thee,
thou wouldst see one of the fairest of fashions and marvel
thereat, and all who saw it would talk of its goodliness,
generation after generation."  Zubaydah asked, "And where is this
dress of thine?"; and the damsel answered, "'Tis with my
husband's mother.  Do thou seek it for me of her." So Zubaydah
said to the old woman, "O my lady the pilgrimess, O my mother, go
forth and fetch us her feather-dress, that we may solace
ourselves by looking on what she will do, and after take it back
again." Replied the old woman, "O my lady, this damsel is a liar. 
Hast thou ever seen any of womankind with a dress of feathers? 
Indeed, this belongeth only to birds." But the damsel said to the
Lady Zubaydah, "As thou livest, O my lady, she hath a
feather-dress of mine and it is in a chest, which is buried in
such a store-closet in the house." So Zubaydah took off her neck
a riviäre of jewels, worth all the treasures of Chosroe and
Cësar, and gave it to the old woman, saying, "O my mother, I
conjure thee by my life, take this necklace and go and fetch us
this dress, that we may divert ourselves with the sight thereof,
and after take it again!"  But she sware to her that she had
never seen any such dress and wist not what the damsel meant by
her speech.  Then the Lady Zubaydah cried out at her and taking
the key from her, called Masrur and said to him as soon as her
came, "Take this key and go to the house; then open it and enter
a store-closet there whose door is such and such and amiddlemost
of it thou wilt find a chest buried.  Take it out and break it
open and bring me the feather-dress which is therein and set it
before me."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Lady
Zubaydah, having taken the key from Hasan's mother, handed it to
Masrur, saying, "Take this key and open such a closet; then bring
forth of it the chest; break it open; bring me the feather-dress
which is therein and set it before me." "Hearkening and
obedience," replied he and taking the key went forth, whereupon
the old woman arose and followed him, weeping-eyed and repenting
her of having given ear to the damsel and gone with her to the
bath, for her desire to go thither was but a device.  So she went
with him to the house and opened the door of the closet, and he
entered and brought out the chest.  Then he took therefrom the
feather,dress and wrapping it in a napkin, carried it to the Lady
Zubaydah, who took it and turned it about, marvelling at the
beauty of its make; after which she gave it to the damsel,
saying, "Is this thy dress of feathers?"  She replied, "Yes, O my
lady," and at once putting forth her hand, took it joyfully. Then
she examined it and rejoiced to find it whole as it was, not a
feather gone.  So she rose and came down from beside the Lady
Zubaydah and taking her sons in her bosom, wrapped herself in the
feather-dress and became a bird, by the ordinance of Allah (to
whom belong Might and Majesty!), whereat Zubaydah marvelled as
did all who were present.  Then she walked with a swaying and
graceful gait and danced and sported and flapped her wings,
whilst all eyes were fixed on her and all marvelled at what she
did.  Then said she with fluent tongue, "Is this goodly, O my
ladies?"; and they replied, "Yes, O Princess of the fair! All
thou dost is goodly." Said she, "And this, O my mistresses, that
I am about to do is better yet." Then she spread her wings and
flying up with her children to the dome of the palace, perched on
the saloon-roof whilst they all looked at her, wide-eyed and
said, "By Allah, this is indeed a rare and peregrine fashion!
Never saw we its like." Then, as she was about to take flight for
her own land, she bethought her of Hasan and said, "Hark ye, my
mistresses!" and she improvised these couplets,[FN#94]

"O who bast quitted these abodes and faredst lief and light * To
     other objects of thy love with fain and fastest flight!
Deem'st thou that 'bided I with you in solace and in joy * Or
     that my days amid you all were clear of bane and blight?
When I was captive ta'en of Love and snaräd in his snare, * He
     made of Love my prison and he fared fro' me forthright:
So when my fear was hidden, he made sure that ne'er should I *
     Pray to the One, th' Omnipotent to render me my right:
He charged his mother keep the secret with all the care she
     could, * In closet shut and treated me with enemy's
     despight:
But I o'erheard their words and held them fast in memory * And
     hoped for fortune fair and weal and blessings infinite:
My faring to the Hammam-bath then proved to me the means * Of
     making minds of folk to be confounded at my sight:
Wondered the Bride of Al-Rashid to see my brilliancy * When she
     beheld me right and left with all of beauty dight:
Then quoth I, 'O our Caliph's wife, I once was wont to own * A
     dress of feathers rich and rare that did the eyes delight:
An it were now on me thou shouldst indeed see wondrous things *
     That would efface all sorrows and disperse all sores of
     sprite:'
Then deigned our Caliph's Bride to cry, 'Where is that dress of
     thine?' * And I replied, 'In house of him kept darkling as
     the night.'
So down upon it pounced Masr£r and brought it unto her, * And
     when 'twas there each feather cast a ray of beaming light:
Therewith I took it from his hand and opened it straightway * And
     saw its plumäd bosom and its buttons pleased my sight:
And so I clad myself therein and took with me my babes; * And
     spread my wings and flew away with all my main and might;
Saying, 'O husband's mother mine tell him when cometh he * An
     ever wouldest meet her thou from house and home must flee."'

When she had made an end of her verses, the Lady Zubaydah said to
her, "Wilt thou not come down to us, that we may take our fill of
thy beauty, O fairest of the fair?  Glory be to Him who hath
given thee eloquence and brilliance!" But she said, "Far be from
me that the Past return should see!" Then said she to the mother
of the hapless, wretched Hasan, "By Allah, O my lady, O mother of
my husband, it irketh me to part from thee; but, whenas thy son
cometh to thee and upon him the nights of severance longsome
shall be and he craveth reunion and meeting to see and whenas
breezes of love and longing shake him dolefully, let him come in
the islands of W†k[FN#95] to me." Then she took flight with her
children and sought her own country, whilst the old woman wept
and beat her face and moaned and groaned till she swooned away. 
When she came to herself, she said to the Lady Zubaydah,  "O my
lady, what is this thou hast done?"  And Zubaydah said to her, "O
my lady the pilgrimess, I knew not that this would happen and
hadst thou told me of the case and acquainted me with her
condition, I had not gainsaid thee.  Nor did I know until now
that she was of the Flying Jinn; else had I not suffered her to
don the dress nor permitted her to take her children: but now, O
my lady, words profit nothing; so do thou acquit me of offence
against thee."  And the old woman could do no otherwise than
shortly answer, "Thou art acquitted.!" Then she went forth the
palace of the Caliphate and returned to her own house, where she
buffeted her face till she swooned away, When she came to
herself, she pined for her daughter-in-law and her grandchildren
and for the sight of her son and versified with these couplets,

"Your faring on the parting-day drew many a tear fro' me, * Who
     must your flying from the home long mourn in misery:
And cried I for the parting pang in anguish likest fire * And
     tear-floods chafed mine eyelids sore that ne'er of tears
     were free;
'Yes, this is Severance, Ah, shall we e'er oy return of you? *
     For your departure hath deprived my power of privacy!'
Ah, would they had returned to me in covenant of faith * An they
     return perhaps restore of past these eyne may see."

Then arising she dug in the house three graves and betook herself
to them with weeping all whiles of the day and watches of the
night; and when her son's absence was longsome upon her and grief
and yearning and unquiet waxed upon her, she recited these
couplets,

"Deep in mine eye-balls ever dwells the phantom-form of thee * My
     heart when throbbing or at rest holds fast thy memory:
And love of thee doth never cease to course within my breast, *
     As course the juices in the fruits which deck the branchy
     tree:
And every day I see thee not my bosom straightened is * And even
     censurers excuse the woes in me they see:
O thou whose love hath gotten hold the foremost in the heart * Of
     me whose fondness is excelled by mine insanity:
Fear the Compassionate in my case and some compassion show! *
     Love of thee makes me taste of death in bitterest pungency."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Hasan's mother bewept through the watches of the night and the
whiles of the day her separation from her son and his wife and
children.  On this wise it fared with her; but as regards Hasan,
when he came to the Princesses, they conjured him to tarry with
them three months, after which long sojourn they gave him five
loads of gold and the like of silver and one load of victual and
accompanied him on his homeward way till he conjured them to
return, whereupon they farewelled him with an embrace; but the
youngest came up to him, to bid him adieu and clasping his neck
wept till she fainted. Then she recited these two  couplets,

"When shall the severance-fire be quenched by union, love, with
     you? * When shall I win my wish of you and days that were
     renew?
The parting-day affrighted me and wrought me dire dismay * And
     doubleth woe, O master mine, by the sad word 'Adieu.'"

Anon came forward the second Princess and embraced him and
recited these two couplets,

"Farewelling thee indeed is like to bidding life farewell * And
     like the loss of Zephyr[FN#96] 'tis to lose thee far our
     sight:
Thine absence is a flaming fire which burneth up my heart * And
     in thy presence I enjoy the Gardens of Delight."[FN#97]

Presently came forward the third and embraced him and recited
these two couplets,

"We left not taking leave of thee (when bound to other goal) *
     From aught of ill intention or from weariness and dole:
Thou art my soul, my very soul, the only soul of me: * And how
     shall I farewell myself and say, 'Adieu my Soul?'"[FN#98]

After her came forward the fourth and embraced him and recited
these two couplets,

"Nought garred me weep save where and when of severance spake he,
     * Persisting in his cruel will with sore persistency:
Look at this pearl-like ornament I've hung upon mine ear: * 'Tis
     of the tears of me compact, this choicest jewelry!"

In her turn came forward the fifth and embraced him and recited
these two couplets,

"Ah, fare thee not; for I've no force thy faring to endure, * Nor
     e'en to say the word farewell before my friend is sped:
Nor any patience to support the days of severance, * Nor any
     tears on ruined house and wasted home to shed."

Next came the sixth and embraced him and recited these two
couplets,

"I cried, as the camels went off with them, * And Love pained my
     vitals with sorest pain:
Had I a King who would lend me rule * I'd seize every ship that
     dares sail the Main."

Lastly came forward the seventh and embraced him and recited
these couplets,

"When thou seest parting, be patient still, * Nor let foreign
     parts deal thy soul affright:
But abide, expecting a swift return, * For all hearts hold
     parting in sore despight."

And eke these two couplets,

"Indeed I'm heartbroken to see thee start, * Nor can I farewell
     thee ere thou depart;
Allah wotteth I left not to say adieu * Save for fear that saying
     would melt your heart."

Hasan also wept for parting from them, till he swooned, and
repeated these couplets,

"Indeed, ran my tears on the severance-day * Like pearls I
     threaded in necklace-way
The cameleer drove his camels with song * But I lost heart,
     patience and strength and stay:
I bade them farewell and retired in grief * From tryst-place and
     camp where my dearlings lay:
I turned me unknowing the way nor joyed * My soul, but in hopes
     to return some day.
Oh listen, my friend, to the words of love * God forbid thy heart
     forget all I say!
O my soul when thou partest wi' them, part too * With all joys of
     life nor for living pray!"

Then he farewelled them and fared on diligently night and day,
till he came to Baghdad, the House of Peace and Sanctuary of the
Abbaside Caliphs, unknowing what had passed during his wayfare. 
At once entering his house he went in to his mother to salute
her, but found her worn of body and wasted of bones, for excess
of mourning and watching, weeping and wailing, till she was grown
thin as a toothpick and could not answer him a word.  So he
dismissed the dromedaries then asked her of his wife and children
and she wept till she fainted, and he seeing her in this state
searched the house for them, but found no trace of them.  Then he
went to the store-closet and finding it open and the chest broken
and the feather-dress missing, knew forthright that his wife had
possessed herself thereof and flown away with her children.  Then
he returned to his mother and, finding her recovered from her
fit, questioned her of his spouse and babes, whereupon she wept
and said, "O my son, may Allah amply requite thee their loss! 
These are their three tombs."[FN#99] When Hasan heard these words
of his mother, he shrieked a loud shriek and fell down in a
fainting-fit in which he lay from the first of the day till
noon-tide; whereupon anguish was added to his mother's anguish
and she despaired of his life.  However, after a-while, he came
to himself and wept and buffeted his face and rent his raiment
and went about the house clean distraught, reciting these two
couplets,[FN#100]

"Folk have made moan of passion before me, of past years, * And
     live and dead for absence have suffered pains and fears;
But that within my bosom I harbour, with mine eyes * I've never
     seen the like of nor heard with mine ears."

Then finishing his verses he bared his brand and coming up to his
mother, said  to her, "Except thou tell me the truth of the case,
I will strike off thy head and kill myself." She replied, "O my
son, do not such deed: put up thy sword and sit down, till I tell
thee what hath passed."  So he sheathed his scymitar and sat by
her side, whilst she recounted to him all that had happened in
his absence from first to last, adding, "O my son, but that I saw
her weep in her longing for the bath and feared that she would go
and complain to thee on thy return, and thou wouldst be wroth
with me.  I had never carried her thither; and were it not that
the Lady Zubaydah was wroth with me and took the key from me by
force, I had never brought out the feather-dress, though I died
for it. But thou knowest, O my son, that no hand may measure
length with that of the Caliphate.  When they brought her the
dress, she took it and turned it over, fancying that somewhat
might be lost thereof, but she found it uninjured; wherefore she
rejoiced and making her children fast to her waist, donned the
feather-vest, after the Lady Zubaydah had pulled off to her all
that was upon herself and clad her therein, in honour of her and
because of her beauty.  No sooner had she donned the dress than
she shook and becoming a bird, promenaded about the palace,
whilst all who were present gazed at her and marvelled at her
beauty and loveliness.  Then she flew up to the palace roof and
perching thereon, looked at me and said: 'Whenas thy son cometh
to thee and the nights of separation upon him longsome shall be
and he craveth reunion and meeting to see and whenas the breezes
of love and longing shake him dolefully let him leave his native
land and journey to the Islands of Wak and seek me.' This, then,
is her story and what befel in thine absence."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as soon
as Hasan's mother had made an end of her story, he gave a great
cry and fell down in a fainting fit which continued till the end
of day, when he revived and fell to buffeting his face and
writhing on the floor like a scotched snake.  His mother sat
weeping by his head until midnight, when he came to himself and
wept sore and recited these couplets',[FN#101]

"Pause ye and see his sorry state since when ye fain withdrew; *
     Haply, when wrought your cruelty, you'll have the grace to
     rue:
For an ye look on him, you'll doubt of him by sickness-stress *
     As though, by Allah, he were one before ye never knew.
He dies for nothing save for love of you, and he would be *
     Numbered amid the dead did not he moan and groan for you.
And deem not pangs of severance sit all lightly on his soul; *
     'Tis heavy load on lover-wight; 'twere lighter an ye slew."

Then having ended his verse he rose and went round about the
house, weeping and wailing, groaning and bemoaning himself, five
days, during which he tasted nor meat nor drink.  His mother came
to him and conjured him, till he broke his fast, and besought him
to leave weeping; but he hearkened not to her and continued to
shed tears and lament, whilst she strove to comfort him and he
heeded her not.  Then he recited these couplets,[FN#102]

"Beareth for love a burden sore this soul of me, * Could break a
     mortal's back however strong that be;
I am distraught to see my case and languor grows * Making my day
     and night indifferent in degree:
I own to having dreaded Death before this day: * This day I hold
     my death mine only remedy."

And Hasan ceased not to do thus till daybreak, when his eyes
closed and he saw in a dream his wife grief-full and repentant
for that which she had done.  So he started up from sleep crying
out and reciting these two couplets,

"Their image bides with me, ne'er quits me, ne'er shall fly; *
     But holds within my heart most honourable stead;
But for reunion-hope, I'd see me die forthright, * And but for
     phantom-form of thee my sleep had fled."

And as morning morrowed he redoubled his lamentations.  He abode
weeping-eyed and heavy-hearted, wakeful by night and eating
little, for a whole month, at the end of which he bethought him
to repair to his sisters and take counsel with them in the matter
of his wife, so haply they might help him to regain her.
Accordingly he summoned the dromedaries and loading fifty of them
with rarities of Al-Irak, committed the house to his mother's
care and deposited all his goods in safe keeping, except some few
he left at home.  Then he mounted one of the beasts and set out
on his journey single handed, intent upon obtaining aidance from
the Princesses, and he stayed not till he reached the Palace of
the Mountain of Clouds, when he went in to the damsels and gave
them the presents in which they rejoiced. Then they wished him
joy of his safety and said to him, "O our brother, what can ail
thee to come again so soon, seeing thou wast with us but two
months since?"  Whereupon he wept and improvised these couplets,

"My soul for loss of lover sped I sight; * Nor life enjoying
     neither  life's delight:
My case is one whose cure is all unknown; * Can any cure the sick
     but doctor wight?
O who hast reft my sleep-joys, leaving me * To ask the breeze
     that blew from that fair site,--
Blew from my lover's land (the land that owns * Those charms so
     sore a grief in soul excite),
'O breeze, that visitest her land, perhaps * Breathing her scent,
     thou mayst revive my sprite!'"

And when he ended his verse he gave a great cry and fell down in
a fainting-fit.  The Princesses sat round him, weeping over him,
till he recovered and repeated these two couplets,

"Haply and happily may Fortune bend her rein * Bringing my love,
     for