 Time's a freke of jealous strain;[FN#103]
Fortune may prosper me, supply mine every want, * And bring a
     blessing where before were ban and bane."

Then he wept till he fainted again, and presently coming to
himself recited the two following couplets,

"My wish, mine illness, mine unease! by Allah, own * Art thou
     content? then I in love contented wone!
Dost thou forsake me thus sans crime or sin * Meet me in ruth, I
     pray, and be our parting gone."

Then he wept till he swooned away once more and when he revived
he repeated these couplets,

"Sleep fled me, by my side wake ever shows * And hoard of
     tear-drops from these eyne aye flows;
For love they weep with beads cornelian-like * And growth of
     distance greater dolence grows:
Lit up my longing, O my love, in me * Flames burning 'neath my
     ribs with fiery throes!
Remembering thee a tear I never shed * But in it thunder roars
     and leven glows."

Then he wept till he fainted away a fourth time, and presently
recovering, recited these couplets,

"Ah! for lowe of love and longing suffer ye as suffer we? * Say,
     as pine we and as yearn we for you are pining ye?
Allah do the death of Love, what a bitter draught is his! * Would
     I  wot of Love what plans and what projects nurseth he!
Your faces radiant-fair though afar from me they shine, * Are
     mirrored in our eyes whatsoever the distance be;
My heart must ever dwell on the memories of your tribe; * And the
     turtle-dove reneweth all as oft as moaneth she:
Ho thou dove, who passest night-tide in calling on thy fere, *
     Thou doublest my repine, bringing grief for company;
And leavest thou mine eyelids with weeping unfulfilled * For the
     dearlings who departed, whom we never more may see:
I melt for the thought of you at every time and hour, * And I
     long for you when Night showeth cheek of blackest blee."

Now when his sister heard these words and saw his condition and
how he lay fainting on the floor, she screamed and beat her face
and the other Princesses hearing her scream came out and learning
his misfortune and the transport of love and longing and the
passion and distraction that possessed him they questioned him of
his case.  He wept and told them what had befallen in his absence
and how his wife had taken flight with her children, wherefore
they grieved for him and asked him what she said at leave-taking. 
Answered he, "O my sisters, she said to my mother, 'Tell thy son,
whenas he cometh to thee and the nights of sever- ance upon him
longsome shall be and he craveth reunion and meeting to see, and
whenas the winds of love and longing shake him dolefully, let him
fare in the Islands of Wak to me." When they heard his words they
signed one to other with their eyes and shook their heads, and
each looked at her sister, whilst Hasan looked at them all.  Then
they bowed their heads groundwards and bethought themselves
awhile; after which they raised their heads and said, "There is
no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great!"; presently adding, "Put forth thy hand to heaven and when
thou reach thither, then shalt thou win to thy wife.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Princesses said to Hasan, "Put forth thy hand to Heaven and when
thou reach thither, then shalt thou win to wife and children,"
thereat the tears ran down his cheeks like rain and wet his
clothes, and he recited these couplets,

"Pink cheeks and eyes enpupil'd black have dealt me sore
     despight; * And whenas wake overpowered sleep my patience
     fled in fright:
The fair and sleek-limbed maidens hard of heart withal laid waste
     * My very bones till not a breath is left for man to sight:
Houris, who fare with gait of grace as roes o'er sandy-mound: *
     Did Allah's saints behold their charms they'd doat thereon
     forthright;
Faring as fares the garden breeze that bloweth in the dawn. * For
     love of them a sore unrest and troubles rack my sprite:
I hung my hopes upon a maid, a loveling fair of them, * For whom
     my heart still burns with lowe in Laz -hell they light;--
A dearling soft of sides and haught and graceful in her gait, *
     Her grace is white as morning, but her hair is black as
     night:
She stirreth me!  But ah, how many heroes have her cheeks *
     Upstirred for love, and eke her eyes that mingle black and
     white."

Then he wept, whilst the Princesses wept for his weeping, and
they were moved to compassion and jealousy for him.  So they fell
to comforting him and exhorting him to patience and offering up
prayers for his reunion with his wife; whilst his sister said to
him, "O my brother, be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear and be patient; so shalt thou win thy will; for whoso hath
patience and waiteth, that he seeketh attaineth.  Patience
holdeth the keys of relief and indeed the poet saith,

'Let destiny with slackened rein its course appointed fare!  And
     lie thou down to sleep by night, with heart devoid of care;
For 'twixt the closing of an eye and th' opening thereof, God
     hath it in His power to change a case from foul to
     fair."[FN#104]

So hearten thy heart and brace up thy resolve, for the son of ten
years dieth not in the ninth.[FN#105]  Weeping and grief and
mourning gender sickness and disease; wherefore do thou abide
with us till thou be rested, and I will devise some device for
thy winning to thy wife and children, Inshallah--so it please
Allah the Most High!"  And he wept sore and recited these verses,

"An I be healed of disease in frame, * I'm unhealed of illness in
     heart and sprite:
There is no healing disease of love, * Save lover and loved one
     to re-unite."

Then he sat down beside her and she proceeded to talk with him
and comfort him and question him of the cause and the manner of
his wife's departure. So he told her and she said, "By Allah, O
my brother, I was minded to bid thee burn the feather-dress, but
Satan made me forget it."  She ceased not to converse with him
and caress him and company with him other ten days, whilst sleep
visited him not and he delighted not in food; and when the case
was longsome upon him and unrest waxed in him, he versified with
these couplets,

"A beloved familiar o'erreigns my heart * And Allah's ruling
     reigns evermore:
She hath all the Arab's united charms * This gazelle who feeds on
     my bosom's core.
Though my skill and patience for love of her fail, * I weep
     whilst I wot that 'tis vain to deplore.
The dearling hath twice seven years, as though * She were moon of
     five nights and of five plus four."[FN#106]

When the youngest Princess saw him thus distracted for love and
longing for passion and the fever-heat of desire, she went in to
her sisterhood weeping-eyed and woeful-hearted, and shedding
copious tears threw herself upon them, kissed their feet and
besought them to devise some device for bringing Hasan to the
Islands of Wak and effecting his reunion with his wife and wees.
She ceased not to conjure them to further her brother in the
accomplishment of his  desire and to weep before them, till she
made them weep and they said to her, "Hearten thy heart:  we will
do our best endeavour to bring about his reunion with his family,
Inshallah!" And he abode with them a whole year, during which his
eyes never could retain their tears.  Now the sisterhood had an
uncle, brother-german to their sire and his name was Abd
al-Kadd£s, or Slave of the Most Holy; and he loved the eldest
with exceeding love and was wont to visit her once a year and do
all she desired. They had told him of Hasan's adventure with the
Magian and how he had been able to slay him; whereat he rejoiced
and gave the eldest Princess a pouch[FN#107] which contained
certain perfumes, saying, "O daughter of my brother, an thou be
in concern for aught, or if aught irk thee, or thou stand in any
need, cast of these perfumes upon fire naming my name and I will
be with thee forthright and will do thy desire." This speech was
spoken on the first of Moharram[FN#108]; and the eldest Princess
said to one of the sisterhood, "Lo, the year is wholly past and
my uncle is not come.  Rise, bring me the fire-sticks and the box
of perfumes." So the damsel arose rejoicing and, fetching what
she sought, laid it before her sister, who opened the box and
taking thence a little of the perfume, cast it into the fire
naming her unde's name; nor was it burnt out ere appeared a
dust-cloud at the farther end of the Wady; and presently lifting,
it discovered a Shaykh riding on an elephant, which moved at a
swift and easy pace, and trumpeted under the rider.  As soon as
he came within sight of the Princesses, he began making signs to
them with his hands and feet; nor was it long ere he reached the
castle and, alighting from the elephant, came in to them,
whereupon they embraced him and kissed his hands and saluted him
with the salam.  Then he sat down, whilst the girls talked with
him and questioned him of his absence. Quoth he, "I was sitting
but now with my wife, your aunt, when I smelt the perfumes and
hastened to you on this elephant.  What wouldst thou, O daughter
of my brother?"  Quoth she, "O uncle, indeed we longed for thee,
as the year is past and 'tis not thy wont to be absent from us
more than a twelvemonth." Answered he, "I was busy, but I
purposed to come to you to-morrow." Wherefore they thanked him
and blessed him and sat talking with him.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

             When it was the Eight Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
girls sat down to chat with their uncle the eldest said to him "O
my uncle, we told thee the tale of Hasan of Bassorah, whom Bahram
the Magian brought and how he slew the wizard and how, after
enduring all manner of hardships and horrors, he made prize of
the Supreme King's daughter and took her to wife and journeyed
with her to his native land?" Replied he, "Yes, and what befel
him after that?" Quoth the Princess, "She played him false after
he was blest with two sons by her; for she took them in his
absence and fled with them to her own country, saying to his
mother: 'Whenas thy son returneth to thee and asketh for me and
upon him the nights of severance longsome shall be and he craveth
reunion and meeting to see and whenas the breezes of love and
longing shake him dolefully, let him come in the Islands of Wak
to me.'" When Abd al-Kaddus heard this, he shook his head and bit
his forefinger; then, bowing his brow groundwards he began to
make marks on the earth with his finger-tips;[FN#109] after which
he again shook his head and looked right and left and shook his
head a third time, whilst Hasan watched him from a place where he
was hidden from him.  Then said the Princesses to their uncle,
"Return us some answer, for our hearts are rent in sunder." But
he shook his head at them, saying, "O my daughters, verily hath
this man wearied himself in vain and cast himself into grievous
predicament and sore peril; for he may not gain access to the
Islands of Wak." With this the Princesses called Hasan, who came
forth and, advancing to Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus, kissed his hand and
saluted him.  The old man rejoiced in him and seated him by his
side; whereupon quoth the damsels, "O uncle, acquaint our brother
Hasan with that thou hast told us."  So he said to Hasan, "O my
son, put away from thee this peine forte et dure; for thou canst
never gain access to the Islands of Wak, though the Flying Jinn
and the Wandering Stars were with thee; for that betwixt thee and
these islands are seven Wadys and seven seas and seven mighty
mountains.  How then canst thou come at this stead and who shall
bring thee thither?  Wherefore, Allah upon thee, O my son, do
thou reckon thy spouse and sons as dead and turn back forthright
and weary not thy sprite!  Indeed, I give thee good counsel, an
thou wilt but accept it."  Hearing these words from the Shaykh,
Hasan wept till he fainted, and the Princesses sat round him,
weeping for his weeping, whilst the youngest sister rent her
raiment and buffeted her face, till she swooned away.  When
Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus saw them in this transport of grief and
trouble and mourning, he was moved to ruth for them and cried,
"Be ye silent!"  Then said he to Hasan, "O my son, hearten thy
heart and rejoice in the winning of thy wish, an it be the will
of Allah the Most High;" presently adding, "Rise, O my son, take
courage and follow me."  So Hasan arose forthright and after he
had taken leave of the Princesses followed him, rejoicing in the
fulfilment of his wish. Then the Shaykh called the elephant and
mounting, took Hasan up behind him and fared on three days with
their nights, like the blinding leven, till he came to a vast
blue mountain, whose stones were all of azure hue and amiddlemost
of which was a cavern, with a door of Chinese iron.  Here he took
Hasan's hand and let him down and alighting dismissed the
elephant.  Then he went up to the door and knocked, whereupon it
opened and there came out to him a black slave, hairless, as he
were an Ifrit, with brand in right hand and targe of steel in
left.  When he saw Abd al-Kaddus, he threw sword and buckler from
his grip and coming up to the Shaykh kissed his hand.  Thereupon
the old man took Hasan by the hand and entered with him, whilst
the slave shut the door behind them; when Hasan found himself in
a vast cavern and a spacious, through which ran an arched
corridor and they ceased not faring on therein a mile or so, till
it abutted upon a great open space and thence they made for an
angle of the mountain wherein were two huge doors cast of solid
brass.  The old man opened one of them and said to Hasan, "Sit at
the door, whilst I go within and come back to thee in haste, and
beware lest thou open it and enter." Then he fared inside and,
shutting the door after him, was absent during a full sidereal
hour, after which he returned, leading a black stallion, thin of
flank and short of nose, which was ready bridled and saddled,
with velvet housings; and when it ran it flew, and when it flew,
the very dust in vain would pursue; and brought it to Hasan,
saying, "Mount!" So he mounted and Abd al-Kaddus opened the
second door, beyond which appeared a vast desert.  Then the twain
passed through the door into that desert and the old man said to
him, "O my son, take this scroll and wend thou whither this steed
will carry thee.  When thou seest him stop at the door of a
cavern like this, alight and throw the reins over the saddle-bow
and let him go.  He will enter the cavern, which do thou not
enter with him, but tarry at the door five days, without being
weary of waiting.  On the sixth day there will come forth to thee
a black Shaykh, clad all in sable, with a long white beard,
flowing down to his navel. As soon as thou seest him, kiss his
hands and seize his skirt and lay it on thy head and weep before
him, till he take pity on thee and he will ask thee what thou
wouldst have.  When he saith to thee, 'What is thy want?' give
him this scroll which he will take without speaking and go in and
leave thee.  Wait at the door other five days, without wearying,
and on the sixth day expect him; and if he come out to thee
himself, know that thy wish will be won, but, if one of his pages
come forth to thee, know that he who cometh forth to thee,
purposeth to kill thee; and--the Peace![FN#110]  For know, O my
son, that whoso self imperilleth doeth himself to death;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the Eight Hundred and First Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after
handing the scroll to Hasan, Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus told him what
would befal him and said, "Whoso self imperilleth doeth himself
to death; but also who ventureth naught advantageth naught. 
However an thou fear for thy life, cast it not into danger of
destruction; but, an thou fear not, up and do thy will, for I
have expounded to thee the whole case.  Yet shouldest thou be
minded to return to thy friends, the elephant is still here and
he will carry thee to my nieces, who will restore thee to thy
country and return thee to thy home, and Allah will vouchsafe
thee a better than this girl, of whom thou art enamoured." Hasan
answered the Shaykh, saying, "And how shall life be sweet to me,
except I win my wish?  By Allah, I will never turn back, till I
regain my beloved or my death overtake me!" And he wept and
recited these couplets,

"For loss of lover mine and stress of love I dree, * I stood
     bewailing self in deep despondency.
Longing for him, the Spring-camp's dust I kissed and kissed, *
     But this bred more of grief and galling reverie.
God guard the gone, who in our hearts must e'er abide * With
     nearing woes and joys which still the farther flee.
They say me, 'Patience!' But they bore it all away: * On
     parting-day, and left me naught save tormentry.
And naught affrighted me except the word he said, * 'Forget me
     not when gone nor drive from memory.'
To whom shall turn I? hope in whom when you are lost? * Who were
     my only hopes and joys and woes of me?
But ah, the pang of home-return when parting thus! * How joyed at
     seeing me return mine enemy.
Then well-away! this 'twas I guarded me against! * And ah, thou
     lowe of Love double thine ardency![FN#111]
An fled for aye my friends I'll not survive the flight; * Yet an
     they deign return, Oh joy!  Oh ecstacy!
Never, by Allah tears and weeping I'll contain * For loss of you,
     but tears on tears and tears will rain."

When Abd al-Kaddus heard his verse he knew that he would not turn
back from his desire nor would words have effect on him, and was
certified that naught would serve him but he must imperil
himself, though it lose him his life.  So he said to him, "Know,
O my son, that the Islands of Wak are seven islands, wherein is a
mighty host, all virgin girls, and the Inner Isles are peopled by
Satans and Marids and warlocks and various tribesmen of the Jinn;
and whoso entereth their land never returneth thence; at least
none hath done so to this day.  So, Allah upon thee, return
presently to thy people, for know that she whom thou seekest is
the King's daughter of all these islands: and how canst thou
attain to her?  Hearken to me, O my son, and haply Allah will
vouchsafe thee in her stead a better than she."  "O my lord,"
answered Hasan, though for the love of her I were cut in pieces
yet should I but redouble in love and transport!  There is no
help but that I enter the Wak Islands and come to the sight of my
wife and children; and Inshallah, I will not return save with her
and with them." Said the Shaykh, "Then nothing will serve thee
but thou must make the journey?" Hasan replied "Nothing! and I
only ask of thee thy prayers for help and aidance; so haply Allah
will reunite me with my wife and children right soon." Then he
wept for stress of longing and recited these couplets,

"You are my wish, of creatures brightest-light * I deem you lief
     as hearing, fain as sight:
You hold my heart which hath become your home * And since you
     left me, lords, right sore's my plight:
Then think not I have yielded up your love, * Your love which set
     this wretch in fierce affright:
You went and went my joy whenas you went; * And waned and wax'ed
     wan the brightest light:
You left me lone to watch the stars in woe: * Railing tears
     likest rain-drops infinite.
Thou'rt longsome to the wight, who pining lies * On wake,
     moon-gazing through the night,
O Night! Wind! an thou pass the tribe where they abide * Give
     them my greeting, life is fain of flight.
And tell them somewhat of the pangs I bear: * The loved one
     kenneth not my case aright."

Then he wept with sore weeping till he fainted away; and when he
came to himself, Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus said to him, "O my son,
thou hast a mother; make her not taste the torment of thy loss." 
Hasan replied, "By Allah, O my lord, I will never return except
with my wife, or my death shall overtake me." And he wept and
wailed and recited these couplets,

"By Love's right! naught of farness thy slave can estrange * Nor
     am I one to fail in my fealty:
I suffer such pains did I tell my case * To folk, they'd cry,
     'Madness! clean witless is he!'
Then ecstasy, love-longing, transport and lowe! * Whose case is
     such case how shall ever he be?"

With this the old man knew that he would not turn from his
purpose, though it cost him his life; so he handed him the scroll
and prayed for him and charged him how he should do, saying "I
have in this letter given a strict charge concerning thee to Ab£
al-Ruwaysh,[FN#112] son of Bilkis, daughter of Mu'in, for he is
my Shaykh and my teacher, and all, men and Jinn, humble
themselves to him and stand in awe of him.  And now go with the
blessing of God." Hasan forthright set out giving the horse the
rein, and it flew off with him swiftlier than lightning, and
stayed not in its course ten days, when he saw before him a vast
loom black as night, walling the world from East to West.  As he
neared it, the stallion neighed under him, whereupon there
flocked to it horses in number as the drops of rain, none could
tell their tale or against them prevail, and fell to rubbing
themselves against it.  Hasan was affrighted at them and fared
forwards surrounded by the horses, without drawing rein till he
came to the cavern which Shaykh Abd al-Kaddus had described to
him.  The steed stood still at the door and Hasan alighted and
bridged the bridle over the saddle-bow[FN#113]; whereupon the
steed entered the cavern, whilst the rider abode without, as the
old man had charged him, pondering the issue of his case in
perplexity and distraction and unknowing what would befal
him.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

        When it was the Eight Hundred and Second Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Hasan,
dismounting from the steed, stood at the cavern-mouth pondering
the issue of his case and unknowing what might befal him.  He
abode standing on the same spot five days with their nights,
sleepless, mournful, tearful-eyed; distracted, perplexed,
pondering his severance from home and family, comrades and
friends, with weeping eye-lids and heavy heart. Then he bethought
him of his mother and of what might yet happen to him and of his
separation from his wife and children and of all that he had
suffered, and he recited these couplets,

"With you is my heart-cure a heart that goes; * And from
     hill-foot of eyelids the tear-rill flows:
And parting and sorrow and exile and dole * And farness from
     country and throe that o'erthrows:
Naught am I save a lover distracted by love, * Far parted from
     loved one and wilted by woes.
And 'tis Love that hath brought me such sorrow, say where * Is
     the noble of soul who such sorrow unknows?"

Hardly had Hasan made an end of his verses, when out came the
Shaykh Abu al-Ruwaysh, a blackamoor and clad in black raiment,
and at first sight he knew him by the description that Abd
al-Kaddus had given him.  He threw himself at his feet and rubbed
his cheeks on them and seizing his skirt, laid it on his head and
wept before him.  Quoth the old man, "What wantest thou, O my
son?" Whereupon he put out his hand to him with the letter, and
Abu al-Ruwaysh took it and reentered the cavern, without making
him any answer.  So Hasan sat down at the cave-mouth in his place
other five days as he had been bidden, whilst concern grew upon
him and terror redoubled on him and restlessness gat hold of him,
and he fell to weeping and bemoaning himself for the anguish of
estrangement and much watching. And he recited these couplets,

"Glory to Him who guides the skies! * The lover sore in sorrow
     lies.
Who hath not tasted of Love's food * Knows not what mean its
     miseries.
Did I attempt to stem my tears * Rivers of blood would fount and
     rise.
How many an intimate is hard * Of heart, and pains in sorest
     wise!
An she with me her word would keep, * Of tears and sighs I'd fain
     devise,
But I'm forgone, rejected quite * Ruin on me hath cast her eyes.
At my fell pangs fell wildlings weep * And not a bird for me but
     cries."

Hasan ceased not to weep till dawn of the sixth day, when Shaykh
Abu al-Ruwaysh came forth to him, clad in white raiment, and with
his hand signed[FN#114] to him to enter.  So he went in,
rejoicing and assured of the winning of his wish, and the old man
took him by the hand and leading him into the cavern, fared on
with him half a day's journey, till they reached an arched
doorway with a door of steel.  The Shaykh opened the door and
they two entered a vestibule vaulted with onyx stones and
arabesqued with gold, and they stayed not walking till they came
to a great hall and a wide, paved and walled with marble.  In its
midst was a flower-garden containing all manner trees and flowers
and fruits, with birds warbling on the boughs and singing the
praises of Allah the Almighty Sovran; and there were four daises,
each facing other, and in each dais a jetting fountain, at whose
corners stood lions of red gold, spouting gerbes from their
mouths into the basin.  On each dais stood a chair, whereon sat
an elder, with exceeding store of books before him[FN#115] and
censers of gold, containing fire and perfumes, and before each
elder were students, who read the books to him.  Now when the
twain entered, the elders rose to them and did them honour;
whereupon Abu al-Ruwaysh signed to them to dismiss their scholars
and they did so.  Then the four arose and seating themselves
before that Shaykh, asked him of the case of Hasan to whom he
said, "Tell the company thy tale and all that hath betided thee
from the beginning of thine adventure to the end." So Hasan wept
with sore weeping and related to them his story with Bahram;
whereupon all the Shaykhs cried out and said, "Is this indeed he
whom the Magian caused to climb the Mountain of Clouds by means
of the vultures, sewn up in the camel-hide?" And Hasan said,
"Yes."  So they turned to the Shaykh, Abu al-Ruwaysh and said to
him, "O our Shaykh, of a truth Bahram contrived his mounting to
the mountaintop; but how came he down and what marvels saw he
there?" And Abu al-Ruwaysh said, "O Hasan, tell them how thou
camest down and acquaint them with what thou sawest of marvels."
So he told them all that had befallen him, first and last; how he
had gotten the Magian into his power and slain him, how he had
delivered the youth from him and sent him back to his own
country, and how he had captured the King's daughter of the Jinn
and married her; yet had she played him false and taken the two
boys she had borne him and flown away; brief, he related to them
all the hardships and horrors he had undergone; whereat they
marvelled, each and every, and said to Abu al-Ruwaysh, "O elder
of elders, verily by Allah, this youth is to be pitied!  But
belike thou wilt aid him to recover his wife and wees."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the Eight Hundred and Third Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Hasan told his tale to the elders, they said to Shaykh Abu
al-Ruwaysh, "This youth is to be pitied and haply thou wilt aid
him to recover his wife and wees." He replied, "O my brothers, in
very sooth this is a grave matter and a perilous; and never saw I
any loathe his life save this youth.  You know that the Islands
of Wak are hard of access and that none may come to them but at
risk of life; and ye know also the strength of their people and
their guards.  Moreover I have sworn an oath not to tread their
soil nor transgress against them in aught; so how shall this man
come at the daughter of the Great King, and who hath power to
bring him to her or help him in this matter?" Replied the other,
"O Shaykh of Shaykhs, verily this man is consumed with desire and
he hath endangered himself to bring thee a scroll from thy
brother Abd al-Kaddus; wherefore it behoveth thee to help him."
And Hasan arose and kissed Abu al-Ruwaysh's feet and raising the
hem of his garment laid it on his head, weeping and crying. "I
beseech thee, by Allah, to reunite me with my wife and children,
though it cost me my life and my soul!"  The four elders all wept
for his weeping and said to Abu al-Ruwaysh, "Deal generously with
this unhappy and show him kindness for the sake of thy brother
Abd al-Kaddus and profit by this occasion to earn reward from
Allah for helping him." Quoth he, "This wilful youth weeteth not
what he undertaketh; but Inshallah! we will help him after the
measure of our means, nor leave aught feasible undone." When
Hasan heard the Shaykh's word he rejoiced and kissed the hands of
the five elders, one after other, imploring their aidance.
Thereupon Abd al-Ruwaysh took inkcase and a sheet of paper and
wrote a letter, which he sealed and gave to Hasan, together with
a pouch of perfumed leather,[FN#116] containing incense and
fire-sticks[FN#117] and other needs, and said to him, "Take
strictest care of this pouch, and whenas thou fallest into any
strait, burn a little of the incense therein and name my name,
whereupon I will be with thee forthright and save thee from thy
stress." Moreover, he bade one of those present fetch him an
Ifrit of the Flying Jinn; and he did so incontinently; whereupon
quoth Abu al-Ruwaysh to the fire-drake, "What is thy name!"
Replied the Ifrit, "Thy thrall is hight Dahnash bin Faktash." And
the Shaykh said "Draw near to me!" So Dahnash drew near to him
and he put his mouth to his ear and said somewhat to him, whereat
the Ifrit shook his head and answered, "I accept, O elder of
elders!" Then said Abu al-Ruwaysh to Hasan, "Arise, O my son,
mount the shoulders of this Ifrit, Dahnash the Flyer; but, when
he heaveth thee heavenwards and thou hearest the angels
glorifying God a-welkin with 'Subh na Il h,' have a care lest
thou do the like; else wilt thou perish and he too." Hasan
replied, "I will not say a word; no, never;" and the old man
continued, "O Hasan, after faring with thee all this day,
to-morrow at peep of dawn he will set thee down in a land cleanly
white, like unto camphor, whereupon do thou walk on ten days by
thyself, till thou come to the gate of a city.  Then enter and
enquire for the King of the city; and when thou comest to his
presence, salute him with the salam and kiss his hand: then give
him this scroll and consider well whatso he shall counsel thee,"
Hasan replied, "Hearing and obeying," and rose up and mounted the
Ifrit's shoulders, whilst the elders rose and offered up prayers
for him and commended him to the care of Dahnash the Firedrake.
And when he had perched on the Flyer's back the Ifrit soared with
him to the very confines of the sky, till he heard the angels
glorifying God in Heaven, and flew on with him a day and a night
till at dawn of the next day he set him down in a land white as
camphor, and went his way, leaving him there.  When Hasan found
himself in the land aforesaid with none by his side he fared on
night and day for ten days, till he came to the gate of the city
in question and entering, enquired for the King.  They directed
him to him and told him that his name was King Hass£n,[FN#118]
Lord of the Land of Camphor, and that he had troops and soldiers
enough to fill the earth in its length and breadth.  So he sought
audience of him and, being admitted to his presence, found him a
mighty King and kissed ground between his hands. Quoth the King,
"What is thy want?" Whereupon Hasan kissed the letter and gave it
to him.  The King read it and shook his head awhile, then said to
one of his officers, "Take this youth and lodge him in the house
of hospitality."  So he took him and stablished him in the
guest-house, where he tarried three days, eating and drinking and
seeing none but the eunuch who waited on him and who entertained
him with discourse and cheered him with his company, questioning
him of his case and how he came to that city; whereupon he told
him his whole story, and the perilous condition wherein he was. 
On the fourth day, that eunuch carried him before the King, who
said to him, "O Hasan, thou comest to me, seeking to enter the
Islands of Wak, as the Shaykh of Shaykhs adviseth me. O my son, I
would send thee thither this very day, but that by the way are
many perils and thirsty wolds full of terrors; yet do thou have
patience and naught save fair shall befal thee, for needs must I
devise to bring thee to thy desire, Inshallah!  Know, O my son,
that here is a mighty host,[FN#119] equipped with arms and steeds
and warlike gear, who long to enter the Wak Islands and lack
power thereto.  But, O my son, for the sake of the Shaykh Abu
al-Ruwaysh, son of Bilkis,[FN#120] the daughter of Mu'in, I may
not send thee back to him unfulfilled of thine affair.  Presently
there will come to us ships from the Islands of Wak and the first
that shall arrive I will send thee on board of her and give thee
in charge to the sailors, so they may take care of thee and carry
thee to the Islands.  If any question thee of thy case and
condition, answer him saying, 'I am kinsman to King Hassun, Lord
of the Land of Camphor;' and when the ship shall make fast to the
shore of the Islands of Wak and the master shall bid thee land,
do thou land.  Now as soon as thou comest ashore, thou wilt see a
multitude of wooden settles all about the beach, of which do thou
choose thee one and crouch under it and stir not.  And when dark
night sets in, thou wilt see an army of women appear and flock
about the goods landed from the ship, and one of them will sit
down on the settle, under which thou hast hidden thyself,
whereupon do thou put forth thy hand to her and take hold of her
and implore her protection. And know thou, O my son, that an she
accord thee protection, thou wilt win thy wish and regain thy
wife and children; but, if she refuse to protect thee, make thy
mourning for thyself and give up all hope of life, and make sure
of death for indeed thou art a dead man.  Understand, O my son,
that thou adventurest thy life and this is all I can do for thee,
and--the peace!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Eight Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said,  It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Hassun spake these words to Hasan and charged him as we have
related, ending with, "This is all I can do for thee and know
that except the Lord of Heaven had aided thee, thou hadst not
come hither!" The youth wept till he swooned away, and when he
recovered, he recited these two couplets,


"A term decreed my lot I 'spy; * And, when its days shall end, I
     die.
Though lions fought with me in lair * If Time be mine I'd beat
     them, I!"

Then having ended his verse he kissed the ground before the
Sovran and said to him, "O mighty King, how many days remain till
the coming of the ships?" Replied the other, "In a month's time
they will come and will tarry here, selling their cargueson,
other two months, after which they will return to their own
country; so hope not to set out save after three whole months."
Then the King bade him return to the house of hospitality and
bade supply him with all that he needed of meat and drink and
raiment fit for Kings.  Hasan abode in the guest-house a month,
at the end of which the vessels arrived and the King and the
merchants went forth to them, taking Hasan with them. Amongst
them he saw a ship with much people therein, like the shingles
for number; none knew their tale save He who created them.  She
was anchored in mid-harbour and had cocks which transported her
lading to the shore.  So Hasan abode till the crew had landed all
the goods and sold and bought and to the time of departure there
wanted but three days; whereupon the King sent for him and
equipped him with all he required and gave him  great gifts:
after which he summoned the captain of the great ship and said to
him, "Take this youth with thee in the vessel, so none may know
of him save thou, and carry him to the Islands of Wak and leave
him there; and bring him not back."  And the Rais said, "To hear
is to obey: with love and gladness!" Then quoth the King to
Hasan, "Look thou tell none of those who are with thee in the
ship thine errand nor discover to them aught of thy case; else
thou art a lost man;" and quoth he, "Hearing and obedience!" With
this he farewelled the King, after he had wished him long life
and victory over his enviers and his enemies; wherefore the King
thanked him and wished him safety and the winning of his wish. 
Then he committed him to the captain, who laid him in a chest
which he embarked in a dinghy, and bore him aboard, whilst the
folk were busy in breaking bulk and no man doubted but the chest
contained somewhat of merchandise.  After this, the vessels set
sail and fared on without ceasing ten days, and on the eleventh
day they made the land.  So the Rais set Hasan ashore and, as he
walked up the beach, he saw wooden settles[FN#121] without
number, none knew their count save Allah, even as the King had
told him. He went on, till he came to one that had no fellow and
hid under it till nightfall, when there came up a mighty many of
women, as they were locusts over-swarming the land and they
marched afoot and armed cap-…-pie in hauberks and strait-knit
coats of mail hending drawn swords in their hands, who, seeing
the merchandise landed from the ships, busied themselves
therewith. Presently they sat down to rest themselves, and one of
them seated herself on the settle under which Hasan had crouched:
whereupon he took hold of the hem of her garment and laid it on
his head and throwing himself before her, fell to kissing her
hands and feet and weeping and crying, "Thy protection! thy
good-will!" Quoth she, "Ho, thou!  Arise and stand up, ere any
see thee and slay thee." So he came forth and springing up kissed
her hands and wept and said to her, "O my mistress, I am under
thy protection!"; adding, "Have ruth on one who is parted from
his people and wife and children, one who hath haste to rejoin
them and one who adventureth life and soul for their sake! Take
pity on me and be assured that therefor Paradise will be thy
reward; or, an thou wilt not receive me, I beseech thee, by Allah
the Great, the Concealer, to conceal my case!" The merchants
stared to see him talking with her; and she, hearing his words
and beholding his humility, was moved to ruth for him; her heart
inclined to him and she knew that he had not ventured himself and
come to that place, save for a grave matter.  So she said to him,
"O my son, be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear,
hearten thy heart and take courage and return to thy hiding-place
till the coming night, and Allah shall do as He will." Then she
took leave of him and Hasan crept under the wooden settle as
before, whilst the troops lighted flambeaux of wax mixed with
aloes-wood and Nadd-perfume and crude ambergris[FN#122] and
passed the night in sport and delight till the morning.  At
daybreak, the boats returned to the shore and the merchants
busied themselves with buying and selling and the transport of
the goods and gear till nightfall, whilst Hasan lay hidden
beneath the settle, weeping-eyed and woeful-hearted, knowing not
what was decreed to him in the secret preordainment of Allah.  As
he was thus, behold, the merchant-woman with whom he had taken
refuge came up to him and giving him a habergeon and a helmet, a
spear, a sword and a gilded girdle, bade him don them and seat
himself on the settle after which she left him, for fear of the
troops. So he arose and donned the mail-coat and helmet and
clasped the girdle about his middle; then he slung the sword over
his shoulder till it hung under his armpit, and taking the spear
in his hand, sat down on that settle, whilst his tongue neglected
not to name Allah Almighty and call on Him for protection.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Eight Hundred and Fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Hasan received the weapons which the merchant-woman had given to
him, saying, "Sit thee upon the settle and let none wot thy
case," he armed himself and took his seat, whilst his tongue
neglected not to name Allah Almighty and to call upon Him for
protection.  And behold, there appeared cressets and lanthorns
and flambeaux and up came the army of women.  So he arose and
mingling with them, became as one of them.  A little before
daybreak, they set out, and Hasan with them, and fared on till
they came to their camp, where they dispersed each to her tent,
and Hasan followed one of them and lo! it was hers for whose
protection he had prayed.  When she entered, she threw down her
arms and doffed her hauberk and veil.  So Hasan did the like and
looking at his companion, saw her to be a grizzled old woman
blue-eyed and big-nosed, a calamity of calamities, the foulest of
all created things, with face pock-marked and eyebrows bald,
gap-toothed and chap-fallen, with hair hoary, nose running and
mouth slavering;[FN#123] even as saith the like of her the poet,

"In her cheek-corners nine calamities * Wone, and when shown,
     each one Jehannam is:
Hideous the face and favour foulest foul * As cheek of hog; yea,
     'tis a cesspool phiz."

And indeed she was like a pied snake or a scald she-wolf.  Now
when the old woman looked at Hasan, she marvelled and said, "How
came this one to these lands and in which of the ships was he and
how arrived he hither in safety?"  And she fell to questioning
him of his case and admiring at his arrival, whereupon he fell at
her feet and rubbed his face on them and wept till he fainted;
and, when he recovered himself, he recited these couplets,

"When will Time grant we meet, when shall we be * Again united
     after severance stark?
And I shall win my choicest wish and view? * Blame end and Love
     abide without remark?
Were Nile to flow as freely as my tears, * 'Twould leave no
     region but with water-mark:
'Twould overthrow Hijaz and Egypt-land * 'Twould deluge Syria and
     'twould drown Ir k.
This, O my love, is caused by thy disdain, * Be kind and promise
     meeting fair and fain!"

Then he took the crone's skirt and laid it on his head and fell
to weeping and craving her protection.  When she saw his ardency
and transport and anguish and distress, her heart softened to him
and she promised him her safeguard, saying, "Have no fear
whatsoever." Then she questioned him of his case and he told her
the manner of his coming thither and all that had befallen him
from beginning to end, whereat she marvelled and said, "This that
hath betide thee, methinks, never betided any save thyself and
except thou hadst been vouchsafed the especial protection of
Allah, thou hadst not been saved: but now, O my son, take comfort
and be of good courage; thou hast nothing more to fear, for
indeed thou hast won thy wish and attained thy desire, if it
please the Most High!"  Thereat Hasan rejoiced with joy exceeding
and she sent to summon the captains of the army to her presence,
and it was the last day of the month.  So they presented
themselves and the old woman said to them, "Go out and proclaim
to all the troops that they come forth to-morrow at daybreak and
let none tarry behind, for whoso tarryeth shall be slain." They
replied, "We hear and we obey," and going forth, made
proclamation to all the host anent a review next morning, even as
she bade them, after which they returned and told her of this;
whereby Hasan knew that she was the Commander-in-chief of the
army and the Viceregent in authority over them; and her name was
Shawahi the Fascinator, entituled Umm al-Daw hi, or Mother of
Calamities.[FN#124] She ceased not to bid and forbid and Hasan
doffed not off his arms from his body that day.  Now when the
morning broke, all the troops fared forth from their places, but
the old woman came not out with them, and as soon as they were
sped and the stead was clear of them, she said to Hasan, "Draw
near unto me, O my son[FN#125]." So he drew near unto her and
stood between her hands.  Quoth she, "Why and wherefore hast thou
adventured thyself so boldly as to enter this land, and how came
thy soul to consent to its own undoing?  Tell me the truth and
the whole truth and fear aught of ill come of it, for thou hast
my plighted word and I am moved to compassion for thy case and
pity thee and have taken thee under my protection.  So, if thou
tell me the truth, I will help thee to win thy wish, though it
involve the undoing of souls and the destruction of bodies; and
since thou hast come to seek me, no hurt shall betide thee from
me, nor will I suffer any to have at thee with harm of all who be
in the Islands of Wak." So he told her his tale from first to
last, acquainting her with the matter of his wife and of the
birds; how he had captured her as his prize from amongst the ten
and married her and abode with her, till she had borne him two
sons, and how she had taken her children and flown away with
them, whenas she knew the way to the feather-dress.  Brief, he
concealed from her no whit of his case, from the beginning to
that day.  But when Shawahi heard his relation, she shook her
head and said to him, "Glory be to God who hath brought thee
hither in safety and made thee hap upon me!  For, hadst thou
happened on any but myself, thou hadst lost thy life without
winning thy wish; but the truth of thine intent and thy fond
affection and the excess of thy love-longing for thy wife and
yearning for thy children, these it was that have brought thee to
the attainment of thine aim.  Didst thou not love her and love
her to distraction, thou hadst not thus imperilled thyself, and
Alhamdolillah--Praised be Allah--for thy safety!  Wherefore it
behoveth us to do thy desire and conduce to thy quest, so thou
mayst presently attain that thou seekest, if it be the will of
Almighty Allah.  But know, O my son, that thy wife is not here,
but in the seventh of the Islands of Wak and between us and it is
seven months' journey, night and day. From here we go to an
island called the Land of Birds, wherein, for the loud crying of
the birds and the flapping of their wings, one cannot hear other
speak."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

         When it was the Eight Hundred and Sixth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old
woman said to Hasan, "Indeed thy wife is in the Seventh
Island,[FN#126] the greatest amongst the Islands of Wak and
betwixt us and it is a seven-months' journey.  From here we fare
for the Land of Birds, whereon for the force of their flying and
the flapping of their wings, we cannot hear one other speak. 
Over that country we journey night and day, eleven days, after
which we come forth of it to another called the Land of Ferals
where, for stress of roaring of lions and howling of wolves and
laughing of hyaenas and the crying of other beasts of prey we
shall hear naught, and therein we travel twenty days' journey. 
Then we issue therefrom and come to a third country, called the
Land of the J nn, where, for stress of the crying of the Jinn and
the flaming of fires and the flight of sparks and smoke from
their mouths and the noise of their groaning and their arrogance
in blocking up the road before us, our ears will be deafened and
our eyes blinded, so that we shall neither hear nor see, nor dare
any look behind him, or he perisheth: but there horseman boweth
head on saddle-bow and raiseth it not for three days.  After
this, we abut upon a mighty mountain and a running river
contiguous with the Isles of Wak, which are seven in number and
the extent whereof is a whole year's journey for a well-girt
horseman.  And thou must know, O my son, that these troops are
all virgin girls, and that the ruler over us is a woman of the
Archipelago of Wak. On the bank of the river aforesaid is another
mountain, called Mount Wak, and it is thus named by reason of a
tree which beareth fruits like heads of the Sons of Adam.[FN#127] 
When the sun riseth on them, the heads cry out all, saying in
their cries:-- 'Wak!  Wak!  Glory be to the Creating King,
Al-Khall k!' And when we hear their crying, we know that the sun
is risen.  In like manner, at sundown, the heads set up the same
cry, 'Wak! Wak!  Glory to Al-Khallak!' and so we know that the
sun hath set.  No man may abide with us or reach to us or tread
our earth: and betwixt us and the abiding-place of the Queen who
ruleth over us is a month's journey from this shore, all the
lieges whereof are under her hand, as are also the tribes of the
Jinn, Marids and Satans, while of the warlocks none kenneth the
number save He who created them.  Wherefore, an thou be afraid, I
will send with thee one who will convey thee to the coast and
there bring one who will embark thee on board a ship that bear
thee to thine own land.  But an thou be content to tarry with us,
I will not forbid thee and thou shalt be with me in mine
eye,[FN#128] till thou win thy wish, Inshallah!" Quoth he, "O my
lady, I will never quit thee till I foregather with my wife or
lose my life!"; and quoth she, "This is a light matter; be of
good heart, for soon shalt thou come to thy desire, Allah
willing; and there is no help but that I let the Queen know of
thee, that she may help thee to attain thine aim." Hasan blessed
her and kissed her head and hands, thanking her for her good deed
and exceeding kindness and firm will.  Then he set out with her,
pondering the issue of his case and the horrors of his
strangerhood; wherefore he fell a-weeping and a-wailing and
recited these couplets,

"A Zephyr bloweth from the lover's site; * And thou canst view me
     in the saddest plight:
The Night of Union is as brilliant morn; * And black the
     Severance-day as blackest night:
Farewelling friend is sorrow sorest sore * Parting from lover's
     merest undelight.
I will not blame her harshness save to her, * And 'mid mankind
     nor friend nor fere I sight:
How can I be consoled for loss of you? * Base censor's blame
     shall not console my sprite!
O thou in charms unique, unique's my love; * O peerless thou, my
     heart hath peerless might!
Who maketh semblance that be loveth you * And dreadeth blame is
     most blame-worthy wight."

Then the old woman bade beat the kettle-drums for departure and
the army set out.  Hasan fared with her, drowned in the sea of
solicitude and reciting verses like those above, whilst she
strave to comfort him and exhorted him to patience; but he awoke
not from his tristesse and heeded not her exhortations.  They
journeyed thus till they came to the boundaries of the Land of
Birds[FN#129] and when they entered it, it seemed to Hasan as if
the world were turned topsy-turvy for the exceeding clamour.  His
head ached and his mind was dazed, his eyes were blinded and his
ears deafened, and he feared with exceeding fear and made certain
of deaths saying to himself, "If this be the Land of Birds, how
will be the Land of Beasts?" But, when the crone hight Shawahi
saw him in this plight, she laughed at him, saying, "O my son, if
this be thy case in the first island, how will it fare with thee,
when thou comest to the others?"  So he prayed to Allah and
humbled himself before the Lord, beseeching Him to assist him
against that wherewith He had afflicted him and bring him to his
wishes; and they ceased not going till they passed out of the
Land of Birds and, traversing the Land of Beasts, came to the
Land of the Jann which when Hasan saw, he was sore affrighted and
repented him of having entered it with them.  But he sought aid
of Allah the Most High and fared on with them, till they were
quit of the Land of the Jann and came to the river and set down
their loads at the foot of a vast mountain and a