set
sail!" And the ship put out to sea with a fair wind.  So far
concerning the Persian; but as regards Hasan's mother, she
awaited him till supper-time but heard neither sound nor news of
him; so she went to the house and finding it thrown open, entered
and saw none therein and missed the two chests and their
valuables; wherefore she knew that her son was lost and that doom
had overtaken him; and she buffeted her face and rent her raiment
crying out and wailing and saying, "Alas, my son, ah!  Alas, the
fruit of my vitals, ah!"  And she recited these couplets,

"My patience fails me and grows anxiety; * And with your absence
     growth of grief I see.
By Allah, Patience went what time ye went! * Loss of all Hope how
     suffer patiently?
When lost my loved one how can' joy I sleep? * Who shall enjoy
     such life of low degree?
Thou 'rt gone and, desolating house and home, * Hast fouled the
     fount erst flowed from foulness free:
Thou wast my fame, my grace 'mid folk, my stay; * Mine aid wast
     thou in all adversity!
Perish the day, when from mine eyes they bore * My friend, till
     sight I thy return to me!"

And she ceased not to weep and wail till the dawn, when the
neighbours came in to her and asked her of her son, and she told
them what had befallen him with the Persian, assured that she
should never, never see him again.  Then she went round about the
house, weeping, and wending she espied two lines written upon the
wall; so she sent for a scholar, who read them to her; and they
were these,

"Leyla's phantom came by night, when drowsiness had overcome me,
     towards morning while my companions were sleeping in the
     desert,
But when we awoke to behold the nightly phantom, I saw the air
     vacant and the place of visitation was distant."[FN#23]

When Hasan's mother heard these lines, she shrieked and said,
"Yes, O my son!  Indeed, the house is desolate and the
visitation-place is distant!"  Then the neighbours took leave of
her and after they had prayed that she might be vouchsafed
patience and speedy reunion with her son, went away; but she
ceased not to weep all watches of the night and tides of the day
and she built amiddlemost the house a tomb whereon she let write
Hasan's name and the date of his loss, and thenceforward she
quitted it not, but made a habit of incessantly biding thereby
night and day. Such was her case; but touching her son Hasan and
the Ajami, this Persian was a Magian, who hated Moslems with
exceeding hatred and destroyed all who fell into his power.  He
was a lewd and filthy villain, a hankerer after alchemy, an
astrologer and a hunter of hidden hoards, such an one as he of
whom quoth the poet,

"A dog, dog-fathered, by dog-grandsire bred; * No good in dog
     from dog race issued:
E'en for a gnat no resting-place gives he * Who is composed of
     seed by all men shed."[FN#24]

The name of this accursed was Bahrám the Guebre, and he was wont,
every year, to take a Moslem and cut his throat for his own
purposes.  So, when he had carried out his plot against Hasan the
goldsmith, they sailed on from dawn till dark, when the ship made
fast to the shore for the night, and at sunrise, when they set
sail again, Bahram bade his black slaves and white servants bring
him the chest wherein were Hasan.  They did so, and he opened it
and taking out the young man, made him sniff up vinegar and blew
a powder into his nostrils.  Hasan sneezed and vomited the Bhang;
then, opening his eyes, he looked about him right and left and
found himself amiddleward the sea on aboard a ship in full sail,
and saw the Persian sitting by him; wherefore he knew that the
accursed Magian had put a cheat on him and that he had fallen
into the very peril against which his mother had warned him.  So
he spake the saying which shall never shame the sayer, to wit,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!  Verity, we are Allah's and unto Him we are
returning! O my God, be Thou gracious to me in Thine appointment
and give me patience to endure this Thine affliction, O Lord of
the three Worlds!"  Then he turned to the Persian and bespoke him
softly, saying, "O my father, what fashion is this and where is
the covenant of bread and salt and the oath thou swarest to
me?"[FN#25]  But Bahram stared at him and replied, "O dog,
knoweth the like of me bond of bread and salt? I have slain of
youths like thee a thousand, save one, and thou shalt make up the
thousand."  And he cried out at him and Hasan was silent, knowing
that the Fate-shaft had shot him.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Hasan beheld himself fallen into the hands of the damned Persian
he bespoke him softly but gained naught thereby for the Ajami
cried out at him in wrath, so he was silent, knowing that the
Fate-shaft had shot him.  Then the accursed bade loose his
pinion-bonds and they gave him a little water to drink, whilst
the Magian laughed and said, "By the virtue of the Fire and the
Light and the Shade and the Heat, methought not thou wouldst fall
into my nets!  But the Fire empowered me over thee and helped me
to lay hold upon thee, that I might win my wish and return and
make thee a sacrifice, to her[FN#26] so she may accept of me."
Quoth Hasan, "Thou hast foully betrayed bread and salt";
whereupon the Magus raised his hand and dealt him such a buffet
that he fell and, biting the deck with his fore-teeth, swooned
away, whilst the tears trickled down his cheeks.  Then the Guebre
bade his servants light him a fire and Hasan said, "What wilt
thou do with it?" Replied the Magian, "This is the Fire, lady of
light and sparkles bright!  This it is I worship, and if thou
wilt worship her even as I, verily I will give thee half my
monies and marry thee to my maiden daughter."  Thereupon Hasan
cried angrily at him, "Woe to thee!  Thou art a miscreant Magian
who to Fire dost pray in lieu of the King of Omnipotent sway,
Creator of Night and Day; and this is naught but a calamity among
creeds!" At this the Magian was wroth and said to him, "Wilt thou
not then conform with me, O dog of the Arabs, and enter my
faith?"  But Hasan consented not to this: so the accursed Guebre
arose and prostrating himself to the fire, bade his pages throw
him flat on his face. They did so, and he beat him with a hide
whip of plaited thongs[FN#27] till his flanks were laid open,
whilst he cried aloud for aid but none aided him, and besought
protection, but none protected him. Then he raised his eyes to
the All-powerful King and sought of Him succour in the name of
the Chosen Prophet.  And indeed patience failed him; his tears
ran down his cheeks, like rain, and he repeated these couplets
twain,

"In patience, O my God, Thy doom forecast * I'll bear, an thereby
     come Thy grace at last:
They've dealt us wrong, transgressed and ordered ill; * Haply Thy
     Grace  shall pardon what is past."

Then the Magian bade his negro-slaves raise him to a sitting
posture and bring him somewhat of meat and drink.  So they sat
food before him; but he consented not to eat or drink; and Bahram
ceased not to torment him day and night during the whole voyage,
whilst Hasan took patience and humbled himself in supplication
before Almighty Allah to whom belong Honour and Glory; whereby
the Guebre's heart was hardened against him. They ceased not to
sail the sea three months, during which time Hasan was
continually tortured till Allah Almighty sent forth upon them a
foul wind and the sea grew black and rose against the ship, by
reason of the fierce gale; whereupon quoth the captain and
crew,[FN#28] "By Allah, this is all on account of yonder youth,
who hath been these three months in torture with this Magian.
Indeed, this is not allowed of God the Most High."  Then they
rose against the Magian and slew his servants and all who were
with him; which when he saw, he made sure of death and feared for
himself.  So he loosed Hasan from his bonds and pulling off the
ragged clothes the youth had on, clad him in others; and made
excuses to him and promised to teach him the craft and restore
him to his native land, saying, "O my son, return me not evil for
that I have done with thee."  Quoth Hasan, "How can I ever rely
upon thee again?"; and quoth Bahram, "O my son, but for sin,
there were no pardon.  Indeed, I did all these doings with thee,
but to try thy patience, and thou knowest that the case is
altogether in the hands of Allah."  So the crew and captain
rejoiced in Hasan's release, and he called down blessings on them
and praised the Almighty and thanked Him.  With this the wind was
stilled and the sky cleared and with a fair breeze they continued
their voyage. Then said Hasan to Bahram, "O Master,[FN#29]
whither wendest thou?"  Replied the Magian, "O, my son, I am
bound for the Mountain of Clouds, where is the Elixir which we
use in alchemy."  And the Guebre swore to him by the Fire and the
Light that he had no longer any cause to fear him.  So Hasan's
heart was set at ease and rejoicing at the Persian's words, he
continued to eat and drink and sleep with the Magian, who clad
him in his own raiment.  They ceased not sailing on other three
months, when the ship came to anchor off a long shoreline of many
coloured pebbles, white and yellow and sky-blue and black and
every other hue, and the Magian sprang up and said, "O Hasan,
come, let us go ashore for we have reached the place of our wish
and will."  So Hasan rose and landed with Bahram, after the
Persian had commended his goods to the captain's care. They
walked on inland, till they were far enough from the ship to be
out of sight, when Bahram sat down and taking from his pocket a
kettle-drum[FN#30] of copper and a silken strap, worked in gold
with characts, beat the drum with the strap, until there arose a
cloud of dust from the further side of the waste.  Hasan
marvelled at the Magian's doings and was afraid of him: he
repented of having come ashore with him and his colour changed.
But Bahram looked at him and said, "What aileth thee, O my son? 
By the truth of the Fire and the Light, thou hast naught to fear
from me; and, were it not that my wish may never be won save by
thy means, I had not brought thee ashore.  So rejoice in all
good; for yonder cloud of dust is the dust of somewhat we will
mount and which will aid us to cut across this wold and make easy
to us the hardships thereof."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Persian said to Hasan, "In very sooth yonder dust-cloud is the
cloud of something we will mount and which will aid us to cut
across this wold and will make easy to us the hardships thereof."
Presently the dust lifted off three she-dromedaries, one of which
Bahram mounted and Hasan another.  Then they loaded their victual
on the third and fared on seven days, till they came to a wide
champaign and, descending into its midst, they saw a dome vaulted
upon four pilasters of red gold; so they alighted and entering
thereunder, ate and drank and took their rest.  Anon Hasan
chanced to glance aside and seeing from afar a something lofty
said to the Magian, "What is that, O nuncle?"  Bahram replied,
"'Tis a palace," and quoth Hasan, "Wilt thou not go thither, that
we may enter and there repose ourselves and solace ourselves with
inspecting it?"  But the Persian was wroth and said, "Name not to
me yonder palace; for therein dwelleth a foe, with whom there
befel me somewhat whereof this is no time to tell thee."  Then he
beat the kettle-drum and up came the dromedaries, and they
mounted and fared on other seven days.  On the eighth day, the
Magian said, "O Hasan, what seest thou?"  Hasan replied, "I see
clouds and mists twixt east and west."  Quoth Bahram, "That is
neither clouds nor mists, but a vast mountain and a lofty whereon
the clouds split,[FN#31] and there are no clouds above it, for
its exceeding height and surpassing elevation.  Yon mount is my
goal and thereon is the need we seek. 'Tis for that I brought
thee hither, for my wish may not be won save at thy hands.  Hasan
hearing this gave his life up for lost and said to the Magian,
"By the right of that thou worshippest and by the faith wherein
thou believest, I conjure thee to tell me what is the object
wherefor thou hast brought me!"  Bahram replied, "The art of
alchemy may not be accomplished save by means of a herb which
groweth in the place where the clouds pass and whereon they
split. Such a site is yonder mountain upon whose head the herb
groweth and I purpose to send thee up thither to fetch it; and
when we have it, I will show thee the secret of this craft which
thou desirest to learn."  Hasan answered, in his fear, "'Tis
well, O my master;" and indeed he despaired of life and wept for
his parting from his parent and people and patrial stead,
repenting him of having gainsaid his mother and reciting these
two couplets,

"Consider but thy Lord, His work shall bring * Comfort to thee,
     with quick  relief and near:
Despair not when thou sufferest sorest bane: * In bane how many
     blessed  boons appear!"

They ceased not faring on till they came to the foothills of that
mountain where they halted; and Hasan saw thereon a palace and
asked Bahram, "What be yonder palace?"; whereto he answered,
"'Tis the abode of the Jann and Ghuls and Satans."  Then the
Magian alighted and making Hasan also dismount from his dromedary
kissed his head and said to him, "Bear me no ill will anent that
I did with thee, for I will keep guard over thee in thine ascent
to the palace; and I conjure thee not to trick and cheat me of
aught thou shalt bring therefrom; and I and thou will share
equally therein."  And Hasan replied, "To hear is to obey." Then
Bahram opened a bag and taking out a handmill and a sufficiency
of wheat, ground the grain and kneaded three round cakes of the
flour; after which he lighted a fire and baked the bannocks. 
Then he took out the copper kettledrum and beat it with the
broidered strap, whereupon up came the dromedaries. He chose out
one and said, "Hearken, O my son, O Hasan, to what I am about to
enjoin on thee;" and Hasan replied, "'Tis well."  Bahram
continued, "Lie down on this skin and I will sew thee up therein
and lay thee on the ground; whereupon the Rakham birds[FN#32]
will come to thee and carry thee up to the mountain-top.  Take
this knife with thee; and, when thou feelest that the birds have
done flying and have set thee down, slit open therewith the skin
and come forth.  The vultures will then take fright at thee and
fly away; whereupon do thou look down from the mountain head and
speak to me, and I will tell thee what to do."  So he sewed him
up in the skin, placing therein three cakes and a leathern bottle
full of water, and withdrew to a distance. Presently a vulture
pounced upon him and taking him up, flew away with him to the
mountain-top and there set him down.  As soon as Hasan felt
himself on the ground, he slit the skin and coming forth, called
out to the Magian, who hearing his speech rejoiced and danced for
excess of joy, saying to him, "Look behind thee and tell me what
thou seest."  Hasan looked and seeing many rotten bones and much
wood, told Bahram, who said to him, "This be what we need and
seek. Make six bundles of the wood and throw them down to me, for
this is wherewithal we do alchemy."  So he threw him the six
bundles and when he had gotten them into his power he said to
Hasan, "O gallows bird, I have won my wish of thee; and now, if
thou wilt, thou mayst abide on this mountain, or cast thyself
down to the earth and perish.  So saying, he left him[FN#33] and
went away, and Hasan exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is
no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!  This hound hath
played the traitor with me."  And he sat bemoaning himself and
reciting these couplets,

"When God upon a man possessed of reasoning, Hearing and sight
     His will in aught to pass would bring,
He stops his ears and blinds his eyes and draws his wit, From
     him, as one  draws out the hairs to paste that cling;
Till, His decrees fulfilled, He gives him back His wit, That
     therewithal he  may receive admonishing.
So say thou not of aught that haps, 'How happened it?' For Fate
     and  fortune fixed do order everything.[FN#34]"

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Magian sent Hasan to the mountain-top and made him throw down all
he required he presently reviled him and left him and wended his
ways and the youth exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is
no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! This damned
hound hath played the traitor."  Then he rose to his feet and
looked right and left, after which he walked on along the
mountain top, in mind making certain of death.  He fared on thus
till he came to the counterslope of the mountain, along which he
saw a dark-blue sea, dashing with billows clashing and yeasting
waves each as it were a lofty mount.  So he sat down and repeated
what he might of the Koran and besought Allah the Most High to
ease him of his troubles, or by death or by deliverance from such
strait.  Then he recited for himself the funeral-prayer[FN#35]
and cast himself down into the main; but, the waves bore him up
by Allah's grace, so that he reached the water unhurt, and the
angel in whose charge is the sea watched over him, so that the
billows bore him safe to land, by the decree of the Most High. 
Thereupon he rejoiced and praised Almighty Allah and thanked Him;
after which he walked on in quest of something to eat, for stress
of hunger, and came presently to the place where he had halted
with the Magian, Bahram.  Then he fared on awhile, till behold,
he caught sight of a great palace, rising high in air, and knew
it for that of which he had questioned the Persian and he had
replied, "Therein dwelleth a foe, of mine."  Hasan said to
himself, "By Allah, needs must I enter yonder palace; perchance
relief awaiteth me there."  So coming to it and finding the gate
open, he entered the vestibule, where he saw seated on a bench
two girls like twin moons with a chess-cloth before them and they
were at play.  One of them raised her head to him and cried out
for joy saying, "By Allah, here is a son of Adam, and methinks
'tis he whom Bahram the Magian brought hither this year!" So
Hasan hearing her words cast himself at their feet and wept with
sore weeping and said, "Yes, O my ladies, by Allah, I am indeed
that unhappy." Then said the younger damsel to her elder sister,
"Bear witness against me,[FN#36] O my sister, that this is my
brother by covenant of Allah and that I will die for his death
and live for his life and joy for his joy and mourn for his
mourning." So saying, she rose and embraced him and kissed him
and presently taking him by the hand and her sister with her, led
him into the palace, where she did off his ragged clothes and
brought him a suit of King's raiment wherewith she arrayed him. 
Moreover, she made ready all manner viands[FN#37] and set them
before him, and sat and ate with him, she and her sister. Then
said they to him, "Tell us thy tale with yonder dog, the wicked,
the wizard, from the time of thy falling into his hands to that
of thy freeing thee from him; and after we will tell thee all
that hath passed between us and him, so thou mayst be on thy
guard against him an thou see him again." Hearing these words and
finding himself thus kindly received, Hasan took heart of grace
and reason returned to him and he related to them all that had
befallen him with the Magian from first to last.  Then they
asked, "Didst thou ask him of this palace?"; and he answered,
"Yes, but he said, 'Name it not to me; for it belongeth to Ghuls
and Satans.'" At this, the two damsels waxed wroth with exceeding
wrath and said, "Did that miscreant style us Ghuls and Satans?"
And Hasan answered, "Yes." Cried the younger sister, "By Allah, I
will assuredly do him die with the foulest death and make him to
lack the wind of the world!"  Quoth Hasan, "And how wilt thou get
at him, to kill him, for he is a crafty magician?"; and quoth
she, "He is in a garden by name Al-Mushayyad,[FN#38] and there is
no help but that I slay him before long."  Then said her sister,
"Sooth spake Hasan in everything he hath recounted to us of this
cur; but now tell him our tale, that all of it may abide in his
memory."  So the younger said to him, "Know, O my brother, that
we are the daughters of a King of the mightiest Kings of the
Jann, having Marids for troops and guards and servants, and
Almighty Allah blessed him with seven daughters by one wife; but
of his folly such jealousy and stiff-neckedness and pride beyond
compare gat hold upon him that he would not give us in marriage
to any one and, summoning his Wazirs and Emirs, he said to them,
'Can ye tell me of any place untrodden by the tread of men and
Jinn and abounding in trees and fruits and rills?' And quoth
they, 'What wilt thou therewith, O King of the Age?' And quoth
he, 'I desire there to lodge my seven daughters.' Answered they,
'O King, the place for them is the Castle of the Mountain of
Clouds, built by an Ifrit of the rebellious Jinn, who revolted
from the covenant of our lord Solomon, on whom be the peace! 
Since his destruction, none hath dwelt there, nor man nor Jinni,
for 'tis cut off[FN#39] and none may win to it.  And the Castle
is girt about with trees and fruits and rills, and the water
running around it is sweeter than honey and colder than snow:
none who is afflicted with leprosy or elephantiasis[FN#40] or
what not else drinketh thereof but he is healed forthright. 
Hearing this our father sent us hither, with an escort of his
troops and guards and provided us with all that we need here. 
When he is minded to ride to us he beateth a kettle-drum,
whereupon all his hosts present themselves before him and he
chooseth whom he shall ride and dismisseth the rest; but, when he
desireth that we shall visit him, he commandeth his followers,
the enchanters, to fetch us and carry us to the presence; so he
may solace himself with our society and we accomplish our desire
of him; after which they again carry us back hither.  Our five
other sisters are gone a-hunting in our desert, wherein are wild
beasts past compt or calculation and, it being our turn to do
this we two abode at home, to make ready for them food.  Indeed,
we had besought Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) to vouchsafe
us a son of Adam to cheer us with his company and praised be He
who hath brought thee to us!  So be of good cheer and keep thine
eyes cool and clear, for no harm shall befal thee."  Hasan
rejoiced and said, "Alhamdolillah, laud to the Lord who guideth
us into the path of deliverance and inclineth hearts to us!" Then
his sister[FN#41] rose and taking him by the hand, led him into a
private chamber, where she brought out to him linen and furniture
that no mortal can avail unto.  Presently, the other damsels
returned from hunting and birding and their sisters acquainted
them with Hasan's case; whereupon they rejoiced in him and going
into him in his chamber, saluted him with the salam and gave him
joy of his safety.  Then he abode with them in all the solace of
life and its joyance, riding out with them to the chase and
taking his pleasure with them whilst they entreated him
courteously and cheered him with converse, till his sadness
ceased from him and he recovered health and strength and his body
waxed stout and fat, by dint of fair treatment and pleasant time
among the seven moons in that fair palace with its gardens and
flowers; for indeed he led the delightsomest of lives with the
damsels who delighted in him and he yet more in them.  And they
used to give him drink of the honey-dew of their lips[FN#42]
these beauties with the high bosoms, adorned with grace and
loveliness, the perfection of brilliancy and in shape very
symmetry.  Moreover the youngest Princess told her sisters how
Bahram the Magian had made them of the Ghuls and Demons and
Satans,[FN#43] and they sware that they would surely slay him. 
Next year the accursed Guebre again made his appearance, having
with him a handsome young Moslem, as he were the moon, bound hand
and foot and tormented with grievous tortures, and alighted with
him below the palace-walls. Now Hasan was sitting under the trees
by the side of the stream; and when he espied Bahram, his heart
fluttered,[FN#44] his hue changed and he smote hand upon
hand.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Hasan the goldsmith saw the Magian, his heart fluttered, his hue
changed and he smote hand upon hand.  Then he said to the
Princesses, "O my sisters, help me to the slaughter of this
accursed, for here he is come back and in your grasp, and he
leadeth with him captive a young Moslem of the sons of the
notables, whom he is torturing with all manner grievous torments. 
Lief would I kill him and console my heart of him; and, by
delivering the young Moslem from his mischief and restoring him
to his country and kith and kin and friends, fain would I lay up
merit for the world to come, by taking my wreak of him.[FN#45] 
This will be an almsdeed from you and ye will reap the reward
thereof from Almighty Allah."  "We hear and we obey Allah and
thee, O our brother, O Hasan," replied they and binding
chin-veils, armed themselves and slung on their swords: after
which they brought Hasan a steed of the best and equipped him in
panoply and weaponed him with goodly weapons.  Then they all
sallied out and found the Magian who had slaughtered and skinned
a camel, ill-using the young Moslem, and saying to him, "Sit thee
in this hide."  So Hasan came behind him, without his knowledge,
and cried out at him till he was dazed and amazed.  Then he came
up to him, saying, "Hold thy hand, O accursed! O enemy of Allah
and foe of the Moslems! O dog! O traitor! O thou that flame dost
obey! O thou that walkest in the wicked ones' ways, worshipping
the fire and the light and swearing by the shade and the heat!"
Herewith the Magian turned and seeing Hasan, thought to wheedle
him and said to him, "O my son, how diddest thou escape and who
brought thee down to earth?" Hasan replied, "He delivered me, who
hath appointed the taking of thy life to be at my hand, and I
will torture thee even as thou torturedst me the whole way long.
O miscreant, O atheist,[FN#46] thou hast fallen into the twist
and the way thou hast missed; and neither mother shall avail thee
nor brother, nor friend nor solemn covenant shall assist thee;
for thou saidst, O accursed, Whoso betrayeth bread and salt, may
Allah do vengeance upon him! And thou hast broken the bond of
bread and salt; wherefore the Almighty hath thrown thee into my
grasp, and far is thy chance of escape from me."  Rejoined
Bahram, "By Allah, O my son, O Hasan, thou art dearer to me than
my sprite and the light of mine eyes!" But Hasan stepped up to
him and hastily smote him between the shoulders, that the sword
issued gleaming from his throat-tendons and Allah hurried his
soul to the fire, and abiding-place dire.  Then Hasan took the
Magian's bag and opened it, then having taken out the kettle-drum
he struck it with the strap, whereupon up came the dromedaries
like lightning.  So he unbound the youth from his bonds and
setting him on one of the camels, loaded him another with victual
and water,[FN#47] saying, "Wend whither thou wilt."  So he
departed, after Almighty Allah had thus delivered him from his
strait at the hands of Hasan.  When the damsels saw their brother
slay the Magian they joyed in him with exceeding joy and gat
round him, marvelling at his valour and prowess,[FN#48] and
thanked him for his deed and gave him joy of his safety, saying,
"O Hasan thou hast done a deed, whereby thou hast healed the
burning of him that thirsteth for vengeance and pleased the King
of Omnipotence!"  Then they returned to the palace, and he abode
with them, eating and drinking and laughing and making merry; and
indeed his sojourn with them was joyous to him and he forgot his
mother;[FN#49] but while he led with them this goodly life one
day, behold, there arose from the further side of the desert a
great cloud of dust that darkened the welkin and made towards
them.  When the Princess saw this, they said to him, "Rise, O
Hasan, run to thy chamber and conceal thyself; or an thou wilt,
go down into the garden and hide thyself among the trees and
vines; but fear not, for no harm shall befal thee." So he arose
and entering his chamber, locked the door upon himself, and lay
lurking in the palace.  Presently the dust opened out and showed
beneath it a great conquering host, as it were a surging sea,
coming from the King, the father of the damsels. Now when the
troops reached the castle, the Princesses received them with all
honour and hospitably entertained them three days; after which
they questioned them of their case and tidings and they replied
saying, "We come from the King in quest of you."  They asked,
"And what would the King with us?"; and the officers answered,
"One of the Kings maketh a marriage festival, and your father
would have you be present thereat and take your pleasure
therewith." The damsels enquired, "And how long shall we be
absent from our place?"; and they rejoined, "The time to come and
go, and to sojourn may be two months." So the Princesses arose
and going in to the palace sought Hasan, acquainted him with the
case and said to him, "Verily this place is thy place and our
house is thy house; so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool
and clear and feel nor grief nor fear, for none can come at thee
here; but keep a good heart and a glad mind, till we return to
thee.  The keys of our chambers we leave with thee; but, O our
brother, we beseech thee, by the bond of brotherhood, in very
deed not to open such a door, for thou hast no need thereto."
Then they farewelled him and fared forth with the troops, leaving
Hasan alone in the palace.  It was not long before his breast
grew straitened and his patience shortened: solitude and sadness
were heavy on him and he sorrowed for his severance from them
with passing chagrin.  The palace for all its vastness, waxed
small to him and finding himself sad and solitary, he bethought
him of the damsels and their pleasant converse and recited these
couplets,

"The wide plain is narrowed before these eyes * And the landscape
     troubles  this heart of mine.
Since my friends went forth, by the loss of them * Joy fled and
     these  eyelids rail floods of brine:
Sleep shunned these eyeballs for parting woe * And my mind is
     worn with  sore pain and pine:
Would I wot an Time shall rejoin our lots * And the joys of love
     with night-talk combine."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
departure of the damsels, Hasan sat in the palace sad and
solitary and his breast was straitened by severance.  He used to
ride forth a-hunting by himself in the wold and bring back the
game and slaughter it and eat thereof alone: but melancholy and
disquiet redoubled on him, by reason of his loneliness.  So he
arose and went round about the palace and explored its every
part; he opened the Princesses' apartments and found therein
riches and treasures fit to ravish the beholder's reason; but he
delighted not in aught thereof, by reason of their absence.  His
heart was fired by thinking of the door they had charged him not
to approach or open on any account and he said in himself, "My
sister had never enjoined me not to open this door, except there
were behind it somewhat whereof she would have none to know; but,
by Allah, I will arise and open it and see what is within, though
within it were sudden death!" Then he took the key and, opening
the door,[FN#50] saw therein no treasure but he espied a vaulted
and winding staircase of Yamani onyx at the upper end of the
chamber.  So he mounted the stair, which brought him out upon the
terrace- roof of the palace, whence he looked down upon the
gardens and vergiers, full of trees and fruits and beasts and
birds warbling praises of Allah, the One, the All-powerful; and
said in himself "This is that they forbade to me."   He gazed
upon these pleasaunces and saw beyond a surging sea, dashing with
clashing billows, and he ceased not to explore the palace right
and left, till he ended at a pavilion builded with alternate
courses, two bricks of gold and one of silver and jacinth and
emerald and supported by four columns.  And in the centre he saw
a sitting- room paved and lined with a mosaic of all manner
precious stones such as rubies and emeralds and balasses and
other jewels of sorts; and in its midst stood a basin[FN#51]
brimful of water, over which was a trellis-work of sandalwood and
aloes-wood reticulated with rods of red gold and wands of emerald
and set with various kinds of jewels and fine pearls, each sized
as a pigeon's egg.  The trellis was covered with a climbing vine,
bearing grapes like rubies, and beside the basin stood a throne
of lign-aloes latticed with red gold, inlaid with great pearls
and comprising vari-coloured gems of every sort and precious
minerals  each kind fronting each and symmetrically disposed. 
About it the birds warbled with sweet tongues and various voices
celebrating the praises of Allah the Most High: brief, it was a
palace such as nor Cæsar nor Chosroës ever owned; but Hasan saw
therein none of the creatures of Allah, whereat he marvelled and
said in himself, "I wonder to which of the Kings this place
pertaineth, or is it Many-Columned Iram whereof they tell, for
who among mortals can avail to the like of this?"   And indeed he
was amazed at the spectacle and sat down in the pavilion and cast
glances around him marvelling at the beauty of its ordinance and
at the lustre of the pearls and jewels and the curious works
which therein were, no less than at the gardens and orchards
aforesaid and at the birds that hymned the praises of Allah, the
One, the Almighty; and he abode pondering the traces of him whom
the Most High had enabled to rear that structure, for indeed He
is muchel of might.[FN#52] And presently, behold, he espied ten
birds[FN#53] flying towards the pavilion from the heart of the
desert and knew that they were making the palace and bound for
the basin, to drink of its waters: so he hid himself, for fear
they should see him and take flight.  They lighted on a great
tree and a goodly and circled round about it; and he saw amongst
them a bird of marvel-beauty, the goodliest of them all, and the
nine stood around it and did it service; and Hasan marvelled to
see it peck them with its bill and lord it over them while they
fled from it.  He stood gazing at them from afar as they entered
the pavilion and perched on the couch; after which each bird rent
open its neck-skin with its claws and issued out of it; and lo!
it was but a garment of feathers, and there came forth therefrom
ten virgins, maids whose beauty shamed the brilliancy of the
moon.  They all doffed their clothes and plunging into the basin,
washed and fell to playing and sporting one with other; whilst
the chief bird of them lifted up the rest and ducked them down
and they fled from her and dared not put forth their hands to
her.  When Hasan beheld her thus he took leave of his right
reason and his sense was enslaved, so he knew that the Princesses
had not forbidden him to open the door save because of this; for
he fell passionately in love with her, for what he saw of her
beauty and loveliness, symmetry and perfect grace, as she played
and sported and splashed the others with the water.  He stood
looking upon them whilst they saw him not, with eye gazing and
heart burning and soul[FN#54] to evil prompting; and he sighed to
be with them and wept for longing, because of the beauty and
loveliness of the chief damsel.  His mind was amazed at her
charms and his heart taken in the net of her love; lowe was
loosed in his heart for her sake and there waxed on him a flame,
whose sparks might not be quenched, and desire, whose signs might
not be hidden.  Presently, they came up out of that basin, whilst
Hasan marvelled at their beauty and loveliness and the tokens of
inner gifts in the elegance of their movements. Then he cast a
glance at the chief damsel who stood mother- naked and there was
manifest to him what was between her thighs a goodly rounded dome
on pillars borne, like a bowl of silver or crystal, which
recalled to him the saying of the poet,[FN#55]

"When I took up her shift and discovered the terrace-roof of her
     kaze, I found it as strait as my humour or eke my worldly
     ways:
So I thrust it, incontinent, in, halfway, and she heaved a sigh.
     'For what dost thou sigh?' quoth I. 'For the rest of it
     sure,' she says."

Then coming out of the water they all put on their dresses and
ornaments, and the chief maiden donned a green dress,[FN#56]
wherein she surpassed for loveliness all the fair ones of the
world and the lustre of her face outshone the resplendent full
moons: she excelled the branches with the grace of her bending
gait and confounded the wit with apprehension of disdain; and
indeed she was as saith the poet,[FN#57]

"A maiden 'twas, the dresser's art had decked with cunning
     sleight;
The sun thou 'd'st say had robbed her cheek and shone with
     borrowed light.
She came to us apparelled fair in under vest of green,
Like as the ripe pomegranate hides beneath its leafy screen;
And when we asked her what might be the name of what she wore,
She answered in a quaint reply that double meaning bore:
The desert's heart we penetrate in such apparel dressed,
And Pierce-heart therefore is the name by which we call the
     vest."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Hasan saw the damsels issue forth the basin, the chief maiden
robbed his reason with her beauty and loveliness compelling him
to recite the couplets forequoted.  And after dressing they sat
talking and laughing, whilst he stood gazing on them, drowned in
the sea of his love, burning in the flames of passion and
wandering in the Wady of his melancholy thought.  And he said to
himself, "By Allah, my sister forbade me not to open the door,
but for cause of these maidens and for fear lest I should fall in
love with one of them!  How, O Hasan shalt thou woo and win them?
How bring down a bird flying in the vasty firmament?  By Allah
thou hast cast thyself into a bottomless sea and snared thyself
in a net whence there is no escape!  I shall die desolate and
none shall wot of my death."  And he continued to gaze on the
charms of the chief damsel, who was the loveliest creature Allah
had made in her day, and indeed she outdid in beauty all human
beings. She had a mouth magical as Solomon's seal and hair
blacker than the night of estrangement to the love-despairing
man; her brow was bright as the crescent moon of the Feast of
Ramazán[FN#58] and her eyes were like eyes wherewith gazelles
scan; she had a polished nose straight as a cane and cheeks like
blood-red anemones of Nu'uman, lips like coralline and teeth like
strung pearls in carcanets of gold virgin to man, and a neck like
an ingot of silver, above a shape like a wand of Bán: her middle
was full of folds, a dimpled plain such as enforceth the
distracted lover to magnify Allah and extol His might and main,
and her navel[FN#59] an ounce of musk, sweetest of savour could
contain: she had thighs great and plump, like marble columns
twain or bolsters stuffed with down from ostrich ta'en, and
between them a somewhat, as it were a hummock great of span or a
hare with ears back lain while terrace-roof and pilasters
completed the plan; and indeed she surpassed the bough of the
myrobalan with her beauty and symmetry, and the Indian rattan,
for she was even as saith of them the poet whom love did
unman,[FN#60]

"Her lip-dews rival honey-sweets, that sweet virginity; *
     Keener than Hindi scymitar the glance she casts at thee:
She shames the bending bough of Bán with graceful movement slow *
     And as she smiles her teeth appear with leven's brilliancy:
When I compared with rose a-bloom the tintage of her cheeks, *
     She laughed in scorn and cried, 'Whoso compares with rosery
My hue and breasts, granados terms, is there no shame in him? *
     How should pomegranates bear on bough such fruit in form or
     blee?
Now by my beauty and mine eyes and heart and eke by Heaven *
     Of favours mine and by the Hell of my unclemency,
They say 'She is a garden-rose in very pride of bloom'; *
     And yet no rose can ape my cheek nor branch my symmetry!
If any garden own a thing which unto me is like, *
     What then is that he comes to crave of me and only me?"'

They ceased not to laugh and play, whilst Hasan stood still
a-watching them, forgetting meat and drink, till near the hour of
mid-afternoon prayer, when the beauty, the chief damsel, said to
her mates, "O Kings' daughters, it waxeth late and our land is
afar and we are weary of this stead.  Come, therefore, let us
depart to our own place." So they all arose and donned their
feather vests, and becoming birds as they were before, flew away
all together, with the chief lady in their midst.  Then, Hasan,
despairing of their return, would have arisen and gone down into
the palace  but could not move or even stand; wherefore the tears
ran down his cheeks and passion was sore on him and he recited
these couplets,

"May God deny me boon of troth if I * After your absence sweets
     of slumber know:
Yea; since that sev'rance never close mine eyes, * Nor rest
     repose me since departed you!
'Twould seem as though you saw me in your sleep; * Would Heaven
     the dreams of sleep were real-true!
Indeed I dote on sleep though needed not, * For sleep may bring
     me that dear form to view."

Then Hasan walked on, little by little, heeding not the way he
went, till he reached the foot of the stairs, whence he dragged
himself to his own chamber; then he entered and shutting the
door, lay sick eating not nor drinking and drowned in the sea of
his solitude.  He spent the night thus, weeping and bemoaning
himself, till the morning, and when it morrowed he repeated these
couplets,

"The birds took flight at eve and winged their way; * And sinless
     he who died of Love's death-blow.
I'll keep my love-tale secret while I can * But, an desire
     prevail, its needs must show:
Night brought me nightly vision, bright as dawn; * While nights
     of my desire lack morning-glow.
I mourn for them[FN#61] while they heart-freest sleep * And winds
     of love on me their plaything blow:
Free I bestow my tears, my wealth, my heart * My wit, my sprite:–
     most gain who most bestow!
The worst of woes and banes is enmity * Beautiful maidens deal us
     to our woe.
Favour they say's forbidden to the fair * And shedding lovers'
     blood their laws allow;
That naught can love-sicks do but lavish soul, * And stake in
     love-play life on single throw:[FN#62]
I cry in longing ardour for my love: * Lover can only weep and
     wail Love-lowe."

When the sun rose he opened the door, went forth of the chamber
and mounted to the stead where he was before: then he sat down
facing the pavilion and awaited the return of the birds till
nightfall; but they returned not; wherefore he wept till he fell
to the ground in a fainting-fit. When he came to after his swoon,
he dragged himself down the stairs to his chamber; and indeed,
the darkness was come and straitened upon him was the whole world
and he ceased not to weep and wail himself through the livelong
night, till the day broke and the sun rained over hill and dale
its rays serene.  He ate not nor drank nor slept, nor was there
any rest for him; but by day he was distracted and by night
distressed, with sleeplessness delirious and drunken with
melancholy thought and excess of love-longing.  And he repeated
the verses of the love-distraught poet,

"O thou who shamest sun in morning sheen * The branch
     confounding, yet with nescience blest;
Would Heaven I wot an Time shall bring return * And quench the
     fires which flame unmanifest,--
Bring us together in a close embrace, * Thy cheek upon my cheek,
     thy breast abreast!
Who saith, In Love dwells sweetness? when in Love * Are bitterer
     days than Aloës[FN#63] bitterest."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-eighty Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Hasan the goldsmith felt love redouble upon him, he recited those
lines; and, as he abode thus in the stress of his
love-distraction, alone and finding none to cheer him with
company, behold, there arose a dust-cloud from the desert,
wherefore he ran down and hid himself knowing that the Princesses
who owned the castle had returned.  Before long, the troops
halted and dismounted round the palace and the seven damsels
alighted and entering, put off their arms and armour of war.  As
for the youngest, she stayed not to doff her weapons and gear,
but went straight to Hasan's chamber, where finding him not, she
sought for him, till she lighted on him in one of the sleeping
closets hidden, feeble and thin, with shrunken body and wasted
bones and indeed his colour was changed and his eyes sunken in
his face for lack of food and drink and for much weeping, by
reason of his love and longing for the young lady.  When she saw
him in this plight, she was confounded and lost her wits; but
presently she questioned him of his case and what had befallen
him, saying, "Tell me what aileth thee, O my brother, that I may
contrive to do away thine affliction, and I will be thy
ransom!"[FN#64] Whereupon he wept with sore weeping and by way of
reply he began reciting,

"Lover, when parted from the thing he loves, * Has naught save
     weary woe and bane to bear.
Inside is sickness, outside living lowe, * His first is fancy and
     his last despair."

When his sister heard this, she marvelled at his eloquence and
loquent speech and his readiness at answering her in verse and
said to him, "O my brother, when didst thou fall into this thy
case and what hath betided thee, that I find thee speaking in
song and shedding tears that throng?  Allah upon thee, O my
brother, and by the honest love which is between us, tell me what
aileth thee and discover to me thy secret, nor conceal from me
aught of that which hath befallen thee in our absence; for my
breast is straitened and my life is troubled because of thee." 
He sighed and railed tears like rain, after which he said, "I
fear, O my sister, if I tell thee, that thou wilt not aid me to
win my wish but wilt leave me to die wretchedly in mine anguish."
She replied, "No, by Allah, O my brother, I will not abandon
thee, though it cost me my life!"  So he told her all that had
befallen him, and that the cause of his distress and affliction
was the passion he had conceived for the young lady whom he had
seen when he opened the forbidden door; and how he had not tasted
meat nor drink for ten days past.  Then he wept with sore weeping
and recited these couplets,

"Restore my heart as 'twas within my breast, * Let mine eyes
     sleep again, then fly fro' me.
Deem ye the nights have had the might to change * Love's vow? 
     Who changeth may he never be!"

His sister wept for his weeping and was moved to ruth for his
case and pitied his strangerhood; so she said to him, "O my
brother, be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for
I will venture being and risk existence to content thee and
devise thee a device wherewith, though it cost me my dear life
and all I hold dear, thou mayst get possession of her and
accomplish thy desire, if such be the will of Allah Almighty. 
But I charge thee, O my brother, keep the matter secret from my
sisterhood and discover not thy case to any one of them, lest my
life be lost with thy life.  An they question thee of opening the
forbidden door, reply to them, 'I opened it not; no, never; but I
was troubled at heart for your absence and by my loneliness here
and yearning for you.'"[FN#65] And he answered, "Yes: this is the
right rede."  So he kissed her head and his heart was comforted
and his bosom broadened.  He had been nigh upon death for excess
of affright, for he had gone in fear of her by reason of his
having opened the door; but now his life and soul returned to
him. Then he sought of her somewhat of food and after serving it
she left him, and went in to her sisters, weeping and mourning
for him.  They questioned her of her case and she told them how
she was heavy at heart for her brother, because he was sick and
for ten days no food had found way into his stomach.  So they
asked the cause of his sickness and she answered, "The reason was
our severance from him and our leaving him desolate; for these
days we have been absent from him were longer to him than a
thousand years and scant blame to him, seeing he is a stranger,
and solitary and we left him alone, with none to company with him
or hearten his heart; more by token that he is but a youth and
may be he called to mind his family and his mother, who is a
woman in years, and bethought him that she weepeth for him all
whiles of the day and watches of the night, ever mourning his
loss; and we used to solace him with our society and divert him
from thinking of her." When her sisters heard these words they
wept in the stress of their distress for him and said,
"Wa'lláhi--'fore Allah, he is not to blame!" Then they went out
to the army and dismissed it, after which they went into Hasan
and saluted him with the salam.  When they saw his charms changed
with yellow colour and shrunken body, they wept for very pity and
sat by his side and comforted him and cheered him with converse,
relating to him all they had seen by the way of wonders and
rarities and what had befallen the bridegroom with the bride. 
They abode with him thus a whole month, tendering him and
caressing him with words sweeter than syrup; but every day
sickness was added to his sickness, which when they saw, they
bewept him with sore weeping, and the youngest wept even more
than the rest.  At the end of this time, the Princesses having
made up their minds to ride forth a-hunting and a-birding invited
their sister to accompany them, but she said, "By Allah, O my
sisters, I cannot go forth with you whilst my brother is in this
plight, nor indeed till he be restored to health and there cease
from him that which is with him of affliction.  Rather will I sit
with him and comfort him." They thanked her for her kindness and
said to her, "Allah will requite thee all thou dost with this
stranger." Then they left her with him in the palace and rode
forth taking with them twenty days' victual;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Seven Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Princesses mounted and rode forth a-hunting and a-birding, after
leaving in the palace their youngest sister sitting by Hasan's
side; and as soon as the damsel knew that they had covered a long
distance from home, she went in to him and said, "O my brother,
come, show me the place where thou sawest the maidens." He
rejoiced in her words, making sure of winning his wish, and
replied, "Bismillah! On my head!" Then he essayed to rise and
show her the place, but could not walk; so she took him up in her
