men and children
done to death.  Is that war?  Or is it murder?  Already men are
reading in New York and Washington of the sinking of that ship and
the murder of their people.  What are they going to do?  What are
YOU going to do?

GILRUTH

(Creeps unsteadily to the door; standing himself with a hand on the
lock; his back is to the room.  He speaks in a strange, far-off,
quavering voice)

She was on the LUSITANIA!  Mona.  She was on it.  Mona was on it.

(Creeps out through the street door and disappears)

(Dartrey looks after him)

(The curtain falls and rises again in a few moments.  Several days
have elapsed.  Dartrey, in full uniform, is busily packing his
regimental kit.  The bandage has been removed from his head.  The
telephone bell rings.  Dartrey answers it)

DARTREY

Yes.  Yes.  Who is it?  Oh!  Do.  Yes.  No.  Not at all.  Come up.
All right.

(Replaces the receiver and continues packing)

(In a few moments the door-bell rings.  Dartrey opens the outer
door and brings Gilruth into the room.  He is in deep mourning; is
very white and broken.  He seems grievously ill.  Dartrey looks at
him commiseratingly.  He is sensitive about speaking)

GILRUTH

(Faintly)  Put up with me for a bit?  Will you?

(Dartrey just puts his hand on the man's shoulder)

(Gilruth sinks wearily and lifelessly into a chair)

She is buried.

DARTREY

What?

GILRUTH

(Nods)  She is buried.  In Kensal Green.  Half an hour ago.

DARTREY

(In a whisper)  They found her?

GILRUTH

(Nods again)  Picked up by some fishermen.

DARTREY

Queenstown?

GILRUTH

A few miles outside.  I went there that night and stayed there
until--until she--they found her.

(Covers his face.  Dartrey puts his arm around him and presses his
shoulder)

I wandered round there for days.  Wasn't so bad while it was light.
People to talk to.  All of us on the same errand.  Searching.
Searching.  Hoping--some of them.  I didn't.  I knew from the first.
I KNEW.  It was horrible at night alone.  I had to try and sleep
sometimes.  They'd wake me when the bodies were brought in.  Hers
came toward dawn one morning.  Three little babies, all twined in
each others arms, lying next to her.  Three little babies.  Cruel
that.  Wasn't it?

(Waits as he thinks; then he goes on dully; evenly, with no emotion)

Fancy!  She'd been out in the water for days and nights.  All alone.
Tossed about.  Days and nights.  She! who'd never hurt a soul.
Couldn't.  She was always laughing and happy.  Drifting about.  All
alone.  Quite peaceful she looked.  Except--except--

(Covers his eyes and groans.  In a little while he looks up at
Dartrey and touches his left eye)

This.  Gone.  Gulls.

(Dartrey draws his breath in sharply and turns a little away)

In a few hours the cuts opened.  The salt-water had kept them
closed.

DARTREY

Cuts?

GILRUTH

(Nods)  Her head.  And her face.  Cuts.  Blood after all that time.

(He clenches and unclenches his hands nervously and furiously.  He
gets up slowly, walks over to the fireplace, shivers, then braces
himself trying to shake off the horror of his thoughts.  Then he
begins to speak brokenly and tremblingly endeavoring to moisten
his lips with a dry tongue)

Never saw anything to equal the kindness of those poor peasants.
They gave the clothes from their bodies; the blankets from their
beds.  And took nothing.  Not a thing.  "We're all in this," they
said.  "We're doing our best.  It's little enough."  That's what
they sayd.  Pretty find the Irish of Queenstown.  Eh?

(Dartrey nods.  He does not trust himself to speak)

A monument.  That's what the Irish peasants of Queenstown should
have.  A monument.  Never slept, some of them.  Wrapped the soaking
woman in their shawls--and the little children.  Took off their
wet things and gave them dry, warm ones.  Fed them with broths they
cooked themselves.  Spent their poor savings on brandy for them.
Stripped the clothes off their own backs for them to travel in when
they were well enough to go.  And wouldn't take a thing.  Great
people the Irish of Queenstown.  Nothing much the matter with them.
A monument.  That's what they should have.  And poetry.

(Thinks for a while, then goes on)

Laid out the bodies too; just as reverently as if they were their
own people.  They laid her out.  And prayed over her.  And watched
with me over her until she was put into the--.  Such a tiny shell
it was, too.  She had no father or mother or brother or sisters.
I was all she had.  That's why I buried her here.  Kensal Green.
She'll rest easy there.

(He walks about distractedly.  Suddenly he stops and with his hands
extended upwards as if in prayer, he cries)

Out of my depths I cry to Thee.  I call on you to curse them.
Curse the Prussian brutes made in Your likeness, but with hearts
as the lowest of beasts.  Curse them.  May their hopes wither.  May
everything they set their hearts on rot.  Send them pestilence,
disease and every foul torture they have visited on Your people.
Send the Angel of Death to rid the earth of them.  May their souls
burn in hell for all eternity.

(Quickly to Dartrey)

and if there is a god they will.  But is there a good God that such
things can be and yet no sign from Him?  Listen.  I didn't believe
in war.  I reasoned against it.  I shouted for Peace.  And thousands of
cravens like me.  I thought God was using this universal slaughter
for a purpose.  When His end was accomplished He would cry to
the warring peoples "Stop!"  It was His will, I thought, that out
of much evil might come permanent good.  That was my faith.  It
has gone.  How can there be a good God to look down on His people
tortured and maimed and butchered?  The women whose lives were devoted
to Him, defiled.  His temples looted, filled with the filth of the
soldiery, and then destroyed.  And yet no sign.  Oh, no.  My faith
is gone.  Now I want to murder and torture and massacre the foul
brutes....  I'm going out, Dartrey.  In any way.  Just a private.
I'll dig, carry my load, eat their rations.  Vermin:  mud:  ache
in the cold and scorch in the heat.  I will welcome it.  Anything
to stop the gnawing here, and the throbbing here.

(Beating at his head and heart)

Anything to find vent for my hatred.

(Moving restlessly about)

I'm going through Ireland first.  Every town and village.  It's
our work now.  It's Irishmen's work.  All the Catholics will be in
now.  No more "conscientious-objecting."  They can't.  It's a war
on women and little children.  All right.  No Irish-Catholic will
rest easy; eat, sleep and go his days round after this.  The call
has gone out.  America too.  She'll come in.  You watch.  She can't
stay out.  She's founded on Liberty.  She'll fight for it.  You
see.  It's clean against unclean.  Red blood against black filth.
Carrion.  Beasts.  Swine.

(Drops into a chair mumbling incoherently.  Takes a long breath;
looks at Dartrey)

I'm selling out everything back home.

DARTREY

Why?

GILRUTH

I'm not going back.  I'm bringing everything over here.  England,
France, Russia, Belgium, Serbia--they can have it.  All of it.
They've suffered.  Only now do I know how much.  Only now.

(Fiercely)  I want to tear them--tear them as they've torn me.  As
they mangled her.

(Grits his teeth and claws with his fingers)  Tear them--that's
what I want to do.  May I live to do it.  May the war never end
until every dirty Prussian is rotting in his grave.  Then a quick
end for me, too.  I've nothing now.  Nothing.

(Gets up again wearily and dejectedly; all the blazing passion
burnt out momentarily)

This was to have been my wedding-day; our wedding-day.  Now she's
lying there, done to death by Huns.  A few days ago all youth and
freshness and courage and love.  Lying disfigured in her little coffin.
I know what you meant now by wanting to go back for a third time.
I couldn't understand it the other day.  It seemed that every one
should hate war.  But you've seen them.  You know them.  And you
want to destroy them.  That's it.  Destroy....  The call is all
over the world by now.  Civilization will be in arms....  To hell
with your Pacifists.  It's another name for cowards.  They'd lose
those nearest them:  the honor of their women; the liberty of their
people--and never strike a blow.  To hell with them.  It's where
they should be.  I was one of them.  No more.  Wherever I meet them
I'll spit in their faces.  They disgrace the women they were born
of; the country they claim....  To hell with them.

DARTREY

(Tries to soothe him)  You must try and get some grip on yourself.

GILRUTH

(His fingers ceaselessly locking and unlocking)  I'll be all right.
It's a relief to talk to you.  (Sees the preparations for Dartrey's
departure)  Are you off?

DARTREY

Yes.  To-night.

GILRUTH

I envy you now.  I wish I were going.  But I will soon.  Ireland
first.  I must have my say there.  What will the "Sinn Feiners"
say to the LUSITANIA murder?  I want to meet some of them.  What
are our wrongs of generations to this horror?  All humanity is at
stake here.  I'll talk to them.  I must.  They'll have to do something
now or go down branded through the generations as Pro-German.  Can
a man have a worse epitaph?  No decent Irishman will bear that;
every loyal Irishman must loathe them....  I'll talk to them--soul
to soul....  Sorry, Dartrey.  You have your own sorrow....  Good
of you to put up with me.  Now I'll go....

(Goes to the door, stops, takes out wallet)

Just one thing.  If it won't bother you.

(Tapping some papers)

I've mentioned you here....  If I don't come through--see to a few
things for me.  Will you?  They're not much.  Will you?

DARTREY

Of course I will.

GILRUTH

(Simply)  Thank you.  You've always been decent to me....  Dartrey.
To-day!  You would have been my best man--and she's--

DARTREY

(Shaking him by the shoulders)  Come, my man.  Pull up.

GILRUTH

I will.  I'll be all right.  In a little while I'll be along out
there.  I hope I server under you.  (Grips his hand)  Good-by.

DARTREY

Keep in touch with me.

GILRUTH

All right.

(Passes out, opens and closes the outer door behind him and disappears
in the street.  Dartrey resumes his preparations)


The End of the Play

[signed]J. Hartley Manners





To France




For the third time in history it has fallen to the lot of France to
stem the Barbarian tide.  Once before upon the Marne, Aetius with
a Gallic Army stopped the Hun under Attila.  Three hundred years
later Charles Martel at Tours saved Europe from becoming Saracen,
just as in September, 1914, more than eleven centuries later,
General Joffre with the citizen soldiery of France upon that same
Marne saved Europe from the heel of the Prussianized Teuton, the
reign of brute force and the religion of the Moloch State.  These
were among the world's "check battles."  Yet the flood of barbarism
was only checked at the Marne, not broken; again the flood arose
and pressed on to be stopped once more at Verdun--the Gateway of
France--in the greatest of human conflicts yet seen.

America was a spectator, but not an indifferent one.  Once again
mere momentary material interest counseled abstention; precedent
was invoked to justify isolation and indifference.  The timid,
the ignorant, the disloyal, those to whom physical life was more
precious than the dictates of conscience, counseled "peace and
prosperity."  Many began to wonder if America had a soul and was
indeed worth saving as the policy of "Terrorism" on land followed
that of "Terrorism" on the high seas seemed to leave us indifferent.
Yet the same spirit, as of yore, dominated the nation.  The people
of America at last understood that it was not any particular rule
of law, but the existence of law itself, divine and human, that
was involved in the Fate of France.

The task confronting this nation is a stupendous one.  Let there
be no illusion.  The war may well be long and painful, beyond
expression, but the past few weeks have taught us that the nation
will bear the strain with that same courage and enduring perseverance
as in the past, following the example of the Fathers and inspired by
the traditions of the American Revolution, this people will stand
like a stone wall with our splendid Ally of old and of to-day--France--and
from Great Britain from whence came our institutions, to end forever
the Hohenzollern system of blood and iron so that a better future
may come to Europe and America, one in which peace may be builded upon
a guaranty of justice and law--a world order in which fundamental
moral postulates and human rights may never again be set at defiance at
the behest of mere material force, however scientifically organized.

To France has fallen the honor of checking, to Britain the burden
of containing by sea and land, to America now comes the duty of
finally overthrowing that common enemy of democratic institutions
and ordered liberty, the foe whose morality knows no truth, whose
philosophy admits no check upon the "will to power."

In France the traveler passing along the roads to the northeast
leading to Lorraine may see at every cross-road a great index
finger pointing to the single word VERDUN.  To many thousands,
nay, hundreds of thousands of men passing over these roads in the
five fateful months of critical battle, these six letters spelled
mutilation and death, yet the word was an inspiration to heroism
in every home of France, and from every corner of the land men
followed that great index finger pointing, as it did indeed, to
the modern Calvary.

To-day at every cross-road must we here in America set up a great
index hand with the words "TO FRANCE."  To France, land of suffering
humanity, in whose devastated fields again must be saved the same
principles for which Americans fought at Bunker Hill, at Saratoga,
at Yorktown, at Gettysburg and in the Wilderness; to France, where
the fate of the world is still pending; to France, which has again
checked the Huns of the modern world as it did those of the ancient;
to France, the manhood of this nation must now be directed, to
save the heritage of the American Revolution and the Civil War, to
preserve the dearest conquests of the Christian civilization; to
France will our men go by the thousands, hundreds of thousands, if
need be by the million, to prove that the soul of America is more
completely intent upon battling for the right than ever before,
intent that slavery in another but far subtler and more dangerous
form may not prevail upon the earth.

It was Washington who gave as the watchword of the day in those
soul-trying hours that preceded the birth of our nation the immortal
and prophetic phrase, "America and France--United Forever."

[signed]Frederick Coudert THE END.





Ce Que Disent Nos Morts




Il n'est pas besoin de rappeler le souvenir de ceux qui nous furent
chers et ne sont plus, à notre peuple qui passe, non sans raison,
pour célébrer avec ferveur le culte des morts.  N'est-ce pas
en France, au dix-neuvième siècle, qu'est née cette philosophie
qui met au rang des premiers devoirs de l'homme la reconnaissance
envers les générations qui nous ont précédés dans la tombe, en nous
laissant le fruit de leurs pensées et de leurs travaux?  Certes la
religion des ancêtres est de tous les temps et de tous les climats;
elle est même chez certains peuples orientaux la religion unique;
mais en quel pas les liens entre les morts et les vivants sont-ils
plus forts qu'en France, les deuils plus solennels à la fois et plus
intimes?  Chez nous, d'ordinaire, les defunts aimés et vénérés ne
quittent pas tout entiers le foyer où ils vécu; ils y respirent
dans le coeur de ceux qui demeurent; ils y sont imités, consultés,
écoutés.

Je me rappelle trop confusément pour en faire usage ici une scène
très belle d'une vieille chanson de geste, GIRART DE ROUSILLON,
je crois, où l'on voit une fille de roi contempler, la nuit, après
une bataille, la plaine où gisent les guerriers innombrables tomber
pour sa querelle.  "Elle eut voulu, dit le poète, les embrasser
tous."  Et, du fond de mes très lointains souvenirs, cette royale
fille m'apparait comme une image de notre France pleurant aujourd'hui
la fleur de sa race abondamment moissonnée.

Aussi n'est-ce pas pour exhorter mes concitoyens à commemorer en ce
jour nos morts selon un usage immémorial, que j'écris ces lignes,
mais pour honorer avec notre peuple tout entier ceux qui lui ont
sacrifié leur vie at pour mediter la leçon qu'ils nous donnent du
fond de leur demeures profondes.

Et tout d'abord, à la mémoire des notres, associons pieusement la
mémoire des braves qui ont versé leur sang sous tous les étendards
de l'Alliance, depuis les canaux de l'Yser jusqu'aux rives de la
Vistule, depuis les montagnes du Frioul jusqu'aux défiles de la
Morava, et sur les vastes mers.

Puis, offrons les fleurs les plus nobles palmes aux innocentes
victimes d'une atroce cruauté, aux femmes, aux enfants martyrs, à
cette jeune infirmière anglaise, coupable seulement de générosité
et dont l'assassinat a soulevé d'indignation tout l'univers.

Et nos morts, nos morts bien aimés!  Que la patrie reconnaissante
ouvre assez grand son coeur pour les contenir tous, les plus humbles
comme les plus illustrés, les héros tombés avec gloire à qui l'on
prepare des monuments de marbre et de bronze et qui vivront dans
l'histoire, et les simples qui rendirent leur dernier souffle en
pensant au champ paternel.

Que tous ceux dont le sang coula pour la patrie soient bénis!
Ils n'ont pas fait en vain le sacrifice de leur vie.  Glorieusement
frappés en Artois, en Champagne, en Argonne, ils ont arrêté l'envahisseur
qui n'a pu faire un pas de plus en avant sur la terre sacrée qui
les recouvre.  Quelques-uns les pleurent, tous les admirent, plus
d'un les envie.  Ecoutons les.  Tendons l'oreille:  ils parlent.
Penchons-nous sur cette terre bouleversée par la mitraille où
beaucoup d'entre eux dorment dans leurs vêtements ensanglantés.
Agenouillons-nous dans le cimetière, au bords des tombes fleuries
de ceux qui sont revenus dans le doux pays, et là, entendons le
souffle imperceptible et puissant qu'ils mêlent, la nuit, au murmure
du vent et au bruissement des feuilles qui tombent.  Efforçons-nous
de comprendre leur parole sainte.  Ils disent:

FRERES, vivez, combattez, achevez notre ouvrage.  Apportez la victoire
et la paix à nos ombres consolées.  Chassez l'étranger qui a deja
reculé devant nous, et ramenez vos charrues dans les champs qui
nous avons imbibés de notre sang.

Ainsi parlent nos morts.  Et ils disent encore:

FRANÇAIS, aimez-vous les uns les autres d'un amour fraternal et,
pour prevaloir contre l'ennemi, mettez en commun vos biens et vos
pensées.  Que parmi vous les plus grands et les plus forts soient
les serviteurs des faibles.  Ne marchandez pas plus vos richesses
que votre sang à la patrie.  Soyez tous égaux par la bonne volonté.
Vous le devez à vos morts.

VOUS nous devez d'assurer, à notre exemple, par le sacrifice de
vous-mêmes, le triomphe de la plus sainte des causes.  Frères, pour
payer votre dette envers nous, il vous faut vaincre, et il vous
faut faire plus encore:  il vois faut mériter de vaincre.

Nos morts nous ordonnent de vivre et de combattre en citoyens d'un
peuple libre, de marcher résolument dans l'ouragan de fer vers la
paix qui se levera comme une belle aurore sur l'Europe affranchie
des menaces de ses tyrans, et verra renaître, faibles et timides
encore, la JUSTICE et L'HUMANITE étouffées par le crime de l'Allemagne.

Voila ce qu'inspirent nos morts à un Français que le détachement
des vanités et le progrès de l'age rapprochent d'eux.

[signed]Anatole France





What our Dead Say to Us




There is no need to recall to the minds of our people those who
were dear to us and have passed hence, for they are celebrating--and
with good cause--the anniversaries of their deaths.  Was it not in
France, in the 19th century, that there was born that philosophy
which placed in the rank of the foremost duties of mankind gratitude
towards those generations who have preceded us to the grave, and
have left us the fruits of their thoughts and of their labors?
Indeed, ancestral worship prevails in all climes and at all periods;
in fact, with certain Oriental nations it is the only religion.
But in what country is the link between the dead and the living
so strong as it is in France--the rites at the same time so solemn
and so intimate?  With us, as a rule, our dead, beloved and venerated,
never entirely depart from the homes in which they have dwelt, but
take up their abode in the hearts of the living who imitate them,
consult them, pay heed to them.

I recollect, too vaguely to make full use of it here, a beautiful
scene from the heroic song, "Girart de Roussillon," I think it
is, where one is shown a king's daughter, one night after a battle
gazing across the battlefield where lay the innumerable warriors
who had fallen in the fight.  "She felt a desire," said the poet,
"to embrace them all."  And from the depths of my far-away memories
this apparition of the daughter of a royal house arises before me
as an image of our France to-day, weeping for the flower of our
race so abundantly cut down.

My object in writing these lines is not to exhort my fellow-citizens
to commemorate to-day our noble dead, according to immemorial
custom, but to honor as a united people those who have sacrificed
their lives for their country and to meditate upon the lesson that
comes to us from their scattered burial places.

First, with the memory of our own, let us with all piety associate
the memory of those brave ones who have shed their blood under all
the Allies' standards, from the streams of the Yser to the banks
of the Vistule; from the mountains of Frioul to the defiles of
Morava, and on the vast seas.

Then, let us offer our choicest flowers of memory to the innocent
victims of an atrocious cruelty, to the women, the child martyrs,
to that young English nurse, guilty only of generosity, whose
assassination aroused the indignation of the entire universe.

And our dead, our beloved dead!  May a grateful country open wide
enough its great heart to contain them all, the humblest as well
as the most illustrious, the heroes fallen with glory to whom
have been erected monuments of bronze and marble, who will live in
history, and those simple ones who drew their last breath thinking
of the green fields of home.

Blessed be all those whose blood has been shed for their country!
Not in vain have they sacrificed their lives.  At the glorious
encounter at Artois, Champagne, and Argonne they repulsed the
invader who could not advance one step farther on the ground made
sacred by their fallen bodies.  Some weep for them, all admire them,
more than one envies them.  Let us listen to them.  They speak.
Let us make every effort to hear them.  Let us prostrate ourselves
on this ground, torn up by shot and shell, where many of them sleep
in their blood-dyed garments.  Let us kneel in the cemetery at the
foot of the flower-strewn graves of those who were brought back to
their country, and there listen to the whispers, scarcely audible
but powerful, which mingle through the night with the murmur of
the breeze and the rustle of the falling leaves.  Let us make every
effort to understand their inspired words.  They say:

BROTHERS, live, fight, accomplish our work.  Win victory and peace
for the sake of your dead.  Drive out the intruder who has already
retreated before us, and bring back your plows into the fields now
saturated with our blood.

Thus speak our dead.  And they say, further:

FRENCHMEN, love one another with brotherly love, and, in order
that you may prevail against the enemy, put into common use your
possessions and your ideas.  Let the greatest and strongest among
you serve the weak.  Be as willing to give your money as your blood
for your country.  Be willing that perfect equality shall exist
amongst you.  You owe this to your dead.  Because of our example,
you owe us the assurance that by your self-sacrifice ours will be
the triumph in this holiest of all causes.  Brothers, in order to
pay your debt to us you must conquer, and you must do still more:
you must deserve to conquer.

Our dead demand that we shall live and fight as citizens of a free
country; that we shall march resolutely through the hurricane of
steel toward Peace, which shall arise like a beautiful aurora over
Europe freed from the menace of her tyrants, and shall see reborn,
though weak and timid, Justice and Humanity, for the time being
crushed through the crime of Germany.

Thus are the French, detached from the vanities and progress of
the age, drawn nearer to our dead and inspired by them.

Anatole France Translation by E. M. Pope.





The Transports




Poetical version of Sully Prud'homme's "Les Berceaux"


The long tide lifts each might boat   Asleep and nodding on the dock,
Of the little cradles they take no note   Which the tender-hearted
mothers rock.

But time brings round the Day of Good-Byes   For it's women's fate
to weep and endure, While curious men attempt the skies   And follow
wherever horizons lure.

Yet the mighty boats on that morning tide   When they flee away
from the dwindling lands Will feel the clutch of mother hands   And
the soul of the far-off cradleside.

[signed]Robert Hughes





La Prière Du Poilu




(Written in the Trenches, before Verdun, December, 1915)


Et alors, le poilu, levant la tête derrière son parapet, se mit,
dans la nuit froide de décembre, à fixer une étoile qui brillait au
ciel d'un feu étrange.  Son cerveau commença à remeur de lointaines
pensées; son coeur se fit plus léger, comme s'il voulait monter
vers l'astre; ses lèvres frémirent doucement pour laisser passer
une prière:

"O Etoile, murmura-t-il, je n'ai pas besoin de ta lueur, car je
connais ma route!  Elle a pu me paraitre sombre au début, quand mes
yeux n'étaient point accoutumés à ses rudes contours; mais, depuis
un an, elle est pour moi éblouissante de clarté.  On a beau me
l'allonger chaque jour, on n'arrivera pas à me l'obscurcir.  On a
beau y multiplier les ronces et les pierres, après lesquelles je
laisse de ma chair et de mon sang, on n'arrivera pas à m'y arrêter.
Je sais que j'irai jusqu'au bout.  Je vois devant moi la victoire....
Mais, là-bas, derrière moi, il y a une foule qui parfois s'inquiète
dans les ténèbres.  Au moment où la vieille anné va tourner sur ses
gonds vermoulus, elle repasse en son esprit agité les évènements
qui la marquèrent.  Elle songe aux peuplades barbares d'Orient que
le Germain a entraînées derrière son char:  Turcs et Bulgares, Kurdes
et Malissores, et elle oublie les grandes nations qui s'enrôlèrent
sous la bannière de la civilisation.  Elle songe aux territoires
que foule la lorde botte tudesque, et elle oublie les empires que
nous détenons en gages:  ici, l'ouest et l'est Africains, grands
comme quatre fois toute l'Allemagne, avec leurs 5000 kilomètres de
voies ferrées et leurs mines de diamants; là, ces îles d'Océanie et
cette forteresse d'Asie:  Kiao-Tchéou, que le kaiser avait proclamé
la perle de ses colonies.  Elle s'alarme de toutes les pailles que,
dans sa course désordonnée, ramasse l'Allemagne et ne voit pas les
poutres énormes qui soutiennent la France....  Nous autres, qui
sommes la poutre, nous savons mieux, nous voyons mieux.

"O Etoile, apprends à ceux qui ne sont pas dans la tranchée la
confiance!...

"Le passé est là qui enseigne l'avenir.  Chaque fois qu'une armée
quelconque, prise de la folie de l'espace, a voulu s'enfoncer dans
les terres lointaines et abandonner le berceau où elle puisait sa
force et ses vivres, elle est morte de langueur et d'épuisement,
elle s'est éffritée comme la pierre qu'on arrache de l'assemblage
solide des maisons, elle n'est pas plus revenue que ne reviennent
les grains de poussière qu'emporte le vent....  Voici plus d'un
siècle que des légions ont tenté la conquète de l'Egypte et ces
légions étaient les plus magnifiques du monde.  Elles avaient des
chefs qui s'appelaient Desaix, Kléber et Bonaparte; mais elles
n'avaient pas la maitrise de la mer et rien ne revint des sables
brulants du désert.  Voici un siècle aussi qu'une armée la plus
formidable d'Europe, conduite par le plus fameux conquérant qu'ait
connu l'univers, tenta de submerger l'immense empire russe; mais
l'empire était trop grand pour la grande armée et rien ne revint
des solitudes glacées de la steppe....  Puisse, de même, aller
loin, toujours plus loin, l'armée allemande déjà décimée, haletante,
épuisée!  Puisse-t-elle pousser jusqu'au Tigre, jusqu'à l'Euphrate,
jusqu'à l'Inde!...

"O Etoile, apprends à ceux qui ne sont pas dans la tranchée,
l'Histoire!...

"Certes ces nuits d'hiver sont longues.  Et tous tes scintillements,
Etoile, ne valent pas le sourire de la femme aimée au logis.
Cependant, tu as quelque chose de la femme, puisque tant d'hommes
te suivent aveuglément:  tu en as la grâce et l'éclat; et toi, au
moins, nul couturier boche ne t'habilla jamais!...  Tu possèdes
même des vertus que ne possède pas toujours la femme:  tu as la
patience et le calme.  Les nuages ont beau s'interposer entre tes
adorateurs et toi, l'aurore a beau chaque matin éteindre tes feux,
tu t'inclines devant la loi suprême de la nature et nulle révolte
ne vint jamais de toi....  Tâche d'inspirer ta soumission à tes
soeurs terrestres qui, dans les villes, attendent le retour des
guerriers.

"O Etoile, apprends à celles qui ne sont pas dans les tranchées,
la Discipline!...

"Que tous, que toutes sachent qu'il y a quelque chose au-dessus
du Nombre, au-dessus de la Force, au-dessus même du Courage:  et
c'est la Persévérance....  Il y eut, une fois, un match de lutte
qui restera à jamais célèbre dans l'histoire du sport:  celui de
Sam Mac Vea contre Joe Jeannette.  Le premier, trapu, massif, tout
en muscles:  un colosse noir du plus beau noir.  Le second, plus
léger, plus harmonieux, tout en nerfs:  un métis jaune du plus beau
cuivre.  Le combat fut épique:  il se poursuivit pendant quarantedeux
rounds et dura trois heures.  Au troisième round, puis au septième,
Sam Mac Vea jetait Joe Jeannette à terre et sa victoire ne paraissait
plus faire de doute.  Cependant, Joe Jeannette peu à peu revint à
la vie, se cramponna, se défendit, vécut sur ses nerfs, puis attaqua
à son tour.  Au quarante-deuxième round, épaule contre épaule,
haletants, ruisselants de sang, ils se portaient les derniers coups;
mais le ressort de Sam Mac Vea était cassé et, devant l'assurance
de son adversaire, il se sentit vaincu...  Alors on vit le grand
géant noir lever les bras et s'écrouler en disant:  I GUESS I CAN
NOT....  (Je crois que je ne peux pas...)  Ainsi, bientôt peut-être,
verrons-nous s'écrouler l'Allemagne, en avouant:  "Je ne peux
pas...."

"O Etoile, apprends à ceux qui ne sont pas dans la tranchée, la
Boxe!..."

[signed]Stéphane Lauzanne





The Prayer of "Le Poilu"




Then "Le Poilu" standing, in the cold December night, behind
the breastworks, fixed his gaze upon a star that was shining with
a strange brilliance in the sky above.  His mind was stirred with
thoughts of far away things.  His heart grew lighter, as though it
yearned to reach the star; his lips trembled, and softly he breathed
a prayer.

"O Star," he murmured, "I need not thy glimmering light, for I
know my way.  The road may have appeared dark at first when my eyes
were unaccustomed to its sharp turns, but for a year it has been
divinely illumined for me.  Even if it grew longer each day, it will
never seem dark again.  Although torn by thorns and cut by stones,
nothing can make me turn back.  I know that I shall go on, steadfast
to the end.  I behold before me Victory....  But there,--behind
me, is a multitude sorely troubled in the darkness.

"Now, as the old year revolves on its rusty hinges, those who wait
at home live over in their troubled hearts the events which marked
its passing.  They think of the barbarous hordes of the Orient
which the German has caught in his train; Turks and Bulgarians,
Kurds and Malissores, and they overlook the great nations enrolled
under the banner of civilization.  They brood over lands ground
under the iron heel of the Teuton and overlook the Empires that we
hold; here, West and East Africa, four times as large as all Germany,
with their thousands of miles of railroads and their diamond mines;
there, the Islands of Oceania and the fortress of Asia:  Kiao-Tcheou,
which the Kaiser has proclaimed the pearl of his colonies.  They
are alarmed at the chaff that Germany gathers in her lawless course
and they do not see the mighty girders that stay France.  But we
who are the girders, we know better, we see farther.

"O Star, teach those who are not in the trenches....  Confidence!

"By the light of the past we behold the future.  Whenever an army,
seized with the frenzy of conquest, has forced its way into a far
land, abandoning the cradle whence it drew its life and strength,
it has wasted away, it has perished from utter exhaustion.  Like
stones loosened from a solid wall, it has disintegrated.  Like the
grain of dust which the wind has blow away, it has vanished never
to return.

"More than a century ago legions attempted the conquest of Egypt.
They were the most magnificent in the world.  Their chiefs bore
the names of Desaix, Kleber and Bonaparte.  But they had not the
mastery of the seas, and returned not from the burning sands of the
desert....  Think also of the time when the most formidable army
of Europe, led by the greatest conqueror the world has ever known,
tried to overwhelm the vast Russian Empire.  But the empire was
mightier than the Great Army, and it returned not from the glacial
solitude of the steppes....  So let it go far, ever farther on,
that German army already decimated, panting, exhausted; let it
reach the Tigris, the Euphrates, even far off India!  It will not
return.

"O Star, teach those who are not in the trenches....  History!

"Truly the winter nights are long, and all the rays, O Star, are
not worth the smile of the loved woman at the hearth.  And yet,
thou hast something of woman, since so many men follow thee blindly:
thou hast her grace and splendor.  [No German couturier will ever
clothe you!]  Thou hast even virtues that women do not possess,
for thou art patient and calm.  Clouds come between thy worshipers
and thee, dawn each morning extinguishes thy light, yet dost thou
bow before the supreme law of nature without a murmur.  I pray
thee inspire with submission thy sisters of the earth; teach them
calmly and patiently to await the return of their warriors.

"O Star, teach those who are not in the trenches....  Discipline!

"Would that all men, that all women might know that there is
something above Numbers, above Force, above even Courage, and that
is PERSEVERANCE!  A few years ago there was a boxing match between
Sam Mac Vea and Joe Jeannette that will remain famous in the history
of the sport.  Mac Vea was a heavy weight, strong, all muscle:  a
veritable black giant.  Joe Jeannette, light, well proportioned,
all nerve:  a mongrel of the best sort.  The match was epic.  It
went on for forty-two rounds and lasted three hours.  At the third
round, and again in the seventh, Sam Mac Vea threw Joe Jeannette,
and his victory seemed assured.  But little by little Joe Jeannette
revived, pulled himself together, defended himself, and through
sheer nerve, began to attack.  At the forty-second round, shoulder
to shoulder, panting, dripping wet and covered with blood they
struck the last blow.  The resources of Sam Mac Vea were exhausted,
and through the very assurance of his adversary he felt himself
beaten....  Suddenly the great giant lifted his arms and gave way,
saying:  'I guess I cannot.'...

"Thus shall we soon see Germany fall to the earth, saying brokenly,
'I cannot.'...

"O Star, teach those who are not in the trenches...to be game!"

Stéphane Lauzanne

Translation by Madame Carlo Polifème.




A Tribute to England




It may be said of this war, as the master mind of all the ages said
of adversity, that "its uses are sweet," even though they be as a
precious jewel shining in the head of an ugly and venomous toad.
While the world-war has brutalized men, it has as a moral paradox
added immeasurably to the sum of human nobility.  Its epic grandeur
is only beginning to reveal itself, and in it the human soul has
reached the high water marker of courage and honor.

The war has enriched our language with many new expressions, but
none more beautiful than that of "Somewhere in France."  To all noble
minds, while it sounds the abysmal depths of tragic suffering, it
rises to the sublimest heights of heroic self-sacrifice.

The world has paid its tribute to the immortal valor of France,
and no words could pay the debt of appreciation which civilization
owes to this heroic nation; but has there been due recognition of
the equal valor and the like spirit of self-sacrifice which has
characterized Great Britain in this titanic struggle?

When the frontier of Belgium was crossed, England staked the existence
of its great empire upon the issue of the uncertain struggle.  It
had, as figures go in this war, only a small army.  If it had been
niggardly in its effort to defend Belgium, and save France in her
hour of supreme peril, England might have said, without violating
any express obligation arising under the ENTENTE CORDIALE, that
in giving its incomparable fleet it had rendered all the service
that its political interests, according to former standards of
expediency, justified; and it could have been plausibly suggested
that the ordinary considerations of prudence and the instinct of
self-preservation required it, in the face of the deadly assault
by the greatest military power in the world, to reserve its little
army for the defense of its own soil.  England never hesitated, when
the Belgian frontier was crossed, but moved with such extraordinary
speed that within four days after its declaration of war its
standing army was crossing the channel, and within a fortnight it
had landed upon French soil the two army corps which constituted
the backbone of her military power.

What follows will be remembered with admiration and gratitude
by the English speaking races as long as they endure, for nothing
in the history of that race is finer than the way in which the so
called "contemptible little British Army," as the Kaiser somewhat
prematurely called it--outnumbered four to one, and with an even
greater disproportion in artillery--withstood the powerful legions
of Von Kluck at Mons.  Enveloped on both flanks they stood as a
stone wall for three days against an assault of one of the mightiest
armies in recorded history, and only retreated when ordered to do
so by the high command of the Allied forces in order to conform to
its strategic plans.  The English were not defeated at Mons.  It
was a victory, both in a technical and moral sense.

The retreat from Mons to the Marne was one of terrible hardship
and imminent danger.  For nearly fourteen days, in obedience to
orders, the British soldiers,--fighting terrific rear guard actions,
which, in retarding the invaders, made possible the ultimate
victory,--slowly retreated, never losing their morale, although
suffering untold physical hardships and the greater agony of temporary
defeats, which they could not at that time understand, and yet it
is to their undying credit, in common with their brave comrades
of the French Army, that when the moment came to cease the retreat
and to turn upon a foe, which flushed with unprecedented victory
still greatly outnumbered the retreating armies, the British soldier
struck back with almost undiminished power.  The "miracle of the
Marne" is due to Tommy Atkins as well as to the French Poilu.

Even more wonderful was the defense of Ypres.  There was a time in
the first battle of Ypres when the British high command, denuded
of shells, were allotting among their commands, then engaged in a
life-and-death struggle, ammunition which had not yet left England.
So terribly was the "first seven divisions" of glorious memory
decimated in this first battle of Ypres, that at a critical time,
the bakers, cobblers and grooms were put into the trenches to fill
the gaps made by the slain soldiers in that great charnel house.
The "thin red line" held back--not for days, but for weeks,--an
immensely superior force, and the soldiers of England unflinchingly
bared their breasts to the most destructive artillery-fire that
the world at that time had ever known.  They held their ground and
saved the day, and the glory of the first and second battles of
Ypres, which saved Calais, and possibly the war itself, will ever
be that of the British Army.

Over four million Britons have volunteered in the war, and although
very few of them had ever had an previous military experience, yet
their stamina and unconquerable courage were such that the youth
of the great Empire, on more than one occasion, when called upon,
as on the Somme, to attack as well as defend, swept the famed Prussian
guard out of seemingly impregnable positions, as for example at
Contalmaison.

Will the world ever forget the children of the Mother Empire who
came so freely and nobly from far distant Canada, who wrenched Vimy
and Messines ridges from a powerful foe?

I hear still the tramp of marching thousands in the first days of
the war, as they passed through the streets of Winchester en route
to France via Southampton, singing with cheer and joy, "It is a
long way to Tipperary."  Alas!  It is indeed a "long, long way,"
and many a gallant English boy has fallen in that way of glory.

To-day, from the Channel to the Vosges, there are hundreds of
thousands of graves where British soldiers keep the ghostly bivouac
of the dead.  They gave their young lives on the soil of France to
save France, and when the great result is finally accomplished, a
grateful world will never forget that "fidelity even unto death" of
the British soldier.  Their place on Fame's eternal camping ground
is sure.

What just man can fail to appreciate the work of the English
sailor?  It has been said by Lord Curzon, that never has an English
mariner in this war refused to accept the arduous and most dangerous
service of patrolling the great highways of the deep.  No soldier
can surpass in courage or fortitude the mine sweepers, who have
braved the elemental forces of nature, and the most cruel forces
of the Terror, which lurks under the seas.

The spirit of Nelson still inspires them, for every mariner of
England has done his duty in this greatest crisis of the modern
world.

And how can words pay due tribute to the work and sacrifices of the
women and children of England?  They have endured hardships with
masculine strength, and have accepted irreparable sacrifices with
infinite self-sacrifice.

When the three British cruisers were sunk early in the war by a
single submarine, and many thousand British sailors perished, the
news was conveyed to a seaport town in England, from which many of
them had been recruited, by posting upon a screen the names of the
pitifully few men who had survived that terrible disaster.  Thousands
of women, the wives and daughters of those who had perished, waited
in the open square in the hope, in most cases in vain, to see the
name of some one who was dear to them posted among the survivors;
and yet when the last names of the rescued were finally posted, and
thousands of English women, there assembled, realized that those
who were nearest and dearest to them had perished beneath the waves,
these women of England, instead of lamentations or tears, in the
spirit of loftiest and most sacred patriotism united their voices
and sang "Britannia Rules the Waves," and re-affirmed their belief
that, notwithstanding all the powers of Hell, that "Britons never
would be slaves."

Who shall then question England's right to a conspicuous place in
this worldwide tournament of Fame?  In all her past history, there
has never been any page more glorious.  Without her, as without
France, civilization would have perished.  To each nation be lasting
honor!

The spirit of Shakespeare has animated his people, and that mighty
spirit still says to them in his own flaming words---

"In God's name, cheerily on, courageous friends,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
By this one bloody trial of sharp war."

[signed]James M. Beck





Unity and Peace




Great Britain and the United States were politically separated
nearly a century and a half ago, because Britain was not in those
days governed by the will of the people as she has been for the
last eighty years and more.  But the ideals of the two nations
have been for many generations substantially the same.  Both have
loved Liberty ever since the time when their common ancestors
wrested it from feudal monarchs.  A time has now come when both
nations are called to defend, and to extend in the world at large,
the freedom they won within their own countries.  America has
harkened to the call.  Renouncing her former isolation, she has
felt that duty to mankind requires her to contend in arms for the
freedom she has illustrated by her example.  The soldiers of Britain
and France welcome the stalwart sons of America as their comrades
in this great struggle for Democracy and Humanity.  With their help,
they look forward confidently to a decisive victory, a victory to
be followed by a lasting peace.

[signed] Bryce.





[caption under a picture] The Right Honourable Arthur James Balfour

"Here was a great British statesman equal to his place and fame.
He will long be remembered in America.  He has done a high service
to Great Britain and all democracies." -- New York Times (Editorial)





Our Common Heritage




Not very long ago I happened to be dining in The Savoy Restaurant
in London one evening at a table close to the screen, when suddenly
there was a stir.  People looked away from their dinners.  The band
abruptly stopped the air it was playing, and after an instant's
pause struck up another.  Every one in the crowded restaurant stood
up.  And then there came in slowly from the outer hall a procession
of serious looking men in uniform, who, walking in couples, made
their way to a large table almost in the middle of the room.  They
gained their places.  The air ceased.  The new comers sat down.
And we all went on with our dinners and our interrupted conversations.

What did we talk about?  Well, I will dare forswear that at
all the tables the same subject was discussed.  And that subject
was--America.  For the air we had heard was "The Star Spangled
Banner," and the men we had seen were General Pershing, commanding
the first American contingent to France, and his Staff, who had
landed that day in England.  It was a great moment for Britishers,
and those of us who were there will probably never forget it.  For
it meant the beginning of a New Era, and, let us hope, of a new
sympathy and a new understanding.

Since then we have learnt something of what America is doing.  We
know that ten millions of men have registered as material
for the American army, that a gigantic aircraft scheme and a huge
shipbuilding program are in process of realization; that enormous
camps and cantonments have been established for the training of
officers and men, that American women have crossed the Atlantic,
in spite of the great danger from submarines, to act as nurses at
the front, that the regular army has been increased to thrice its
former size, that the volunteer militia has been doubled through
voluntary enlistment, and that an immense expenditure has been voted
for war purposes.  We know all this and we are glad, and thankful
that hands have been held out to us across the sea.

True sympathy and true understanding are very rare in this world.
Even between individuals they are not easy to bring about, and
between nations they are practically unknown.  Diversity of tongues
builds up walls between the peoples.  But the Americans and the
British ought to learn to draw near to each other, and surely the
end of this war, whenever it comes, will find them more inclined
for true friendship, for frank understanding, than they have ever
been yet, less critical of national failings, less clearsighted
for national faults.  The brotherhood of man, which the idealistic
Russian sighs for, may only be a far away dream, but the brotherhood
of those who speak one language, have one great aim, and fight
side by side for freedom against force, law against lawlessness,
justice against persecution, right against evil, is a reality, and
must surely endure long after the smoke of the world war has faded
into the blue sky of peace, and the roar of the guns has died away
into the silence of the dawn for which humanity is longing.

The happy warriors lead us.  Let us follow them and we shall attain
a goodly heritage.

[signed] Robert Hichens.





Poetic Justice




I


The blow fell without warning, and a typewritten notice informed
the Poet that the Cabinet Committee on Accommodation required the
tiny, thread-bare chambers in Stafford's Inn, where he had lived
unobtrusively for seven happy, insolvent years.

"'There was no worth in the fashion; there was no wit in the
plan,'" murmured the Poet.  The rooms were too small even for a
Deputy-Director-General, and he knew that not one of the
silk-stockinged, short-skirted, starling-voiced young women
with bare arms and regimental badges, who acted as secretaries to
Deputy-Director-Generals, would consent to walk up four flights
of creaking, uncarpeted stairs to the dusty sparrows' nest on the
housetop that was his home.

For a while he scented a vendetta, but--deleterious poetry apart--he
had injured no man, and the personnel of the Cabinet Committee was
as little known to him as his poetry to the Cabinet Committee.  In
general, too, he was the object of a certain popularity and pitying
regard; the Millionaire sent him presents of superfluous game each
year, the Iron King invited him at short notice to make a fourteenth
at dinner and the Official Receiver unloaded six bottles of sample
port wine when the Poet succumbed to his annual bronchitis.  Even
the notice of eviction was politely worded and regretful; it was
also uncompromising in spirit, and the Poet made his hurried way
to four house-agents.  No sooner had he started his requirements
to be a bed-sitting-room (with use of bath) within the four-mile
radius than all four agents offered him a Tudor manor house in
Westmoreland; further, they refused to offer him anything else, but
on his own initiative he discovered a studio in Glebe Place and a
service-flat in Victoria Street.

"I saw in the paper that you'd been turned out," said the Millionaire
that night, when the Poet trudged home, footsore and fretful, to
find his chambers occupied by the Iron King, the Private Secretary,
the Lexicographer, the Military Attaché and their friends.  "What
are you going to do about it?" he continued with the relentlessness
of a man who likes a prompt decision, even if it be a wrong one.
"You know nothing about business, I'm sure; leases, premiums,
insurance, all that sort of thing.  You're in a hole; I don't see
what more there is to be said."

So far the Poet, his mind wavering wearily between Glebe Place and
Victoria Street, had said nothing; he turned silently to the Iron
King, wondering how, without being rude, to indicate his desire
for bed.

"I saw rather a decent place that might suit you," drawled the
Private Secretary, smoothing a wrinkle out of his shapely silk
socks.  "It's next to my Chief's in Belgrave Square.  Of course,
I don't know what rent they want for it..."

The Iron King shook his head.

"He couldn't afford it," he said, speaking through and around and
over the Poet.  "Now I'm told that there are some very comfortable
and cheap boarding-houses near Kensington Palace Gardens...."

The Poet drew the cork of a fresh bottle of whisky and collected
four unbroken tumblers, a pewter mug and two breakfast cups without
handles.  As so often before, his destiny seemed to be slipping
out of his control into the hands of the practical, strong-voiced
men who filled his sitting-room to overflowing and would not
let him go to bed.  The Military Attaché knew of a maisonnette in
Albemarle Street; the Official Receiver had been recently brought
into professional contact with a fine Georgian pro