 all the world will
listen to the majestic masterpieces of the Russian composers, see
the infinite beauty of the Russian life and feel the greatness
of the Russian soul.  Not only has Russia her peculiar racial
civilization, her unique art and literature, and national traditions,
but she has riches of which the outside world knows little, riches
that are still buried.  The Russian stage, art galleries, archives,
monastery treasuries and romantic traits of life remain still a
sealed book to the outsiders.  Take for instance, Russian music, the
operas of Rimsky-Korsakoff, the plays of Ostrowsky and the symphonies
of Reinhold Gliere or Spendiarov and you will have eloquent chapters
of a modern living Bible.  No music of another country is such a
true mirror of a nation's racial character, life, passion, blood,
struggle, despair and agony, as the Russian.  One can almost see
in its turbulent-lugubrious or buoyant-hilarious chords the rich
colors of the Byzantine style, the half Oriental atmosphere that
surrounds everything with a romantic halo.

The fundamental purpose of the pathfinders of Russian art, music,
literature and poetry was to create beauties that emanated, not
from a certain class or school, but directly from the souls of the
people.  Their ideal was to create life from life.  Though profound
melancholy seems to be the dominant note in Russian music and art,
yet along with the dramatic gloom go also reckless hilarity and
boisterous humor, which often whirl one off one's feet.  This is
explained by the fact that the average Russian is extremely emotional
and consequently dramatic in his artistic expressions.  Late Leo
Tolstoy said to me on one occasion:  "In our folksong and folk
art is evidently yearning without end, without hope, also power
invisible, the fateful stamp of destiny, and the fate in preordination,
one of the fundamental principles of our race, which explains much
that in Russian life seems incomprehensible for the foreigners."

Thus the Russian art and soul in their very foundations are already
democratic, simple, direct and true to the ethnographic traits of
the race.  In the same way you will find the Russian home life,
the peasant communities, the zemstvoe institutions, offsprings of
an extremely democratic tendency, perhaps far more than any such
institution of the West.  Instead of the rich or noblemen absorbing
the land of the peasants, we find in Russia the peasant commune
succeeding tot he property of the baron.  An average Russian
peasant is by far more democratic and educated, irrespective of
his illiteracy than an average farmer of the New World.  He has
the culture of the ages in his traditions, religion and national
folk-arts.  Russia has more than a thousand municipal theaters,
more than a hundred grand operas, more than a hundred colleges and
universities or musical conservatories.  Russia has a well-organized
system of cooperative banks and stores and a marvelous artelsystem of
the working professional classes which in its democratic principles
surpasses by far the labor union systems of the West.  Herr von
Bruggen, the eminent German historian writes of the Russian tendency
as follows:  "Wherever the Russian finds a native population in
a low state of civilization, he knows how to settle down with it
without driving it out or crushing it; he is hailed by the natives
as the bringer of order, as a civilizing power."

I have always preached and continue to do so in the future, that
Russia and the United States should join hands, know and love each
other, the sooner the better.  Russia needs the active spirit,
the practical grasp of the things, which the people of the United
States possess.  Nothing will help and inspire an average Russian
more than the sincere democratic hand of an American.  A dose
of American optimism and active spirit is the best toxin for free
Russia.  On the other hand, the American needs just as much Russian
emotionalism, aesthetic culture and mystic romanticism, as he can
give of his racial qualities.

The old system having gone, Russia is free to open her national,
spiritual and physical treasures.  For some time to come neither
Germany nor other European countries, will be able to go to Russia,
for even if the war does not last long, its havoc will take years
to repair.  Endless readjustments will have to take place in each
country affected by the war.  Russia, being more an agricultural,
intellectual-aristocratical country, will fell least of all
the after effects of the past horrors, therefore has the greatest
potentialities.  There is not only a great work, adventure
and romance that waits an American pioneer in Russia, but a great
mission which will ultimately benefit both nations.  It should be
understood that the Russian democracy will not be based upon the
economic-industrial, but aesthetic-intellectual principles of life.
It is not the money, the financial power that will play the dominant
role in free Russia, but the ideal, the dramatic, the romantic
or mystic tendency.  Money will never have that meaning in Russia
which it has in the West.  It will be the individual, the emotional,
the great symbol of the mystic beyond, that will speak from future
democratic Russia only in a different and more dynamic form, as it
has been speaking in the past.

As Lincoln is the living voice of the American people, thus Tolstoy
is and remains the glorified Russian peasant uttering his heart to
the world.  The voice of this man alone is sufficient to tell the
outside world that the Russian democracy is a creation not of form
and economics but of spirit and aesthetics.

[signed]Ivan Narodny

Author of "Echoes of Myself," "The Dance," "The Art of Music," X
Volume, etc.





The American Bride




Petka had been for years a village tailor but he had never been
able to save enough money to open a grocery-store.  He hated his
profession and hated to think that he could never get anything higher
in the social rank of the place than what he was.  While the name
of a tailor sounded to him so cheap, that of a merchant flattered
his ambition immensely.  But there was no chance to earn the five
hundred rubles, which, he thought, was necessary to change the
profession.

"If I marry a poor peasant girl like Tina or Vera, I'll never get
anywhere," soliloquized Petka and made plans for his future.

Petka knew a girl with two hundred ruble-dowry, but she was awfully
homely and deaf; and he knew a widow with three hundred rubles, but
she was twenty years older than himself.  It was a critical situation.

One day Petka heard that the daughter of an old peddler had a
dowry of five hundred rubles, exactly the amount he needed.  After
careful planning of the undertaking he hired a horse and drove
to the lonely cottage of the rag peddler to whom he explained as
clearly as he could, the purpose of his visit.

"My Liz ain't at home," the old man replied.  "She is in that
distant country called America.  Good Lord, Liza is a lady of some
distinction.  If you should see her on the street you would never
take her for my daughter.  She wears patent-leather shoes, kid-gloves,
corsets and such finery.  Why, I suppose she has a proposal for
every finger, if not more.  She is some girl, I tell you."

Petka listened with throbbing heart to the thrilling story of the
old man, scratched his head and said:

"I suppose that she is employed in some high class establishment
or something like that?"

"Of course, she is," grunted the peddler proudly.  "She might be
employed or she might not.  She has written to me that she is a
lady all right."

"What is her special occupation?"

"She is employed as the waitress in a lunch-room on the so called
Second Avenue corner at New York.  And her salary reaches often
thirty dollars a month, which represents a value in our money of
something over sixty rubles.  Now that is not a joke.  She has all
the food and lodging free.  Why, it's a real gold-mine."

"Has she saved already much?"

"She has five hundred dollars in the savings bank, and she has all
the hats and shoes, and gloves and such stuff that would make our
women faint.  So you see she is the real thing."

The happy father pulled the daughter's letter from the bottom of
his bed and reached it over to the visitor.  Petka read and reread
the letter with breathless curiosity.  In the letter which was
also a small snap-shot picture of the girl.  Petka looked at the
picture and did not know what to say.  To judge from her photograph,
she was a frail spinster, with high cheekbones, a long neck and a
nose like a frozen potato.  But the trimming of her hair, her city
hat with flowers, and her whole American bearing made her interesting
enough to the ambitious tailor.  For a long time he was gazing at
the picture and thinking.

"Do you think that Liza would marry a man like me?  I am a well
known tailor.  But I have now a chance to become a merchant in our
village.  I need some money to make up the difference, and why not
try the luck?  Liza might be a well known waitress in New York,
but to be a merchant's wife is a different thing.  Don't you think
she might consider my proposal seriously?"

The old peddler puffed at his pipe, walked to the window and back
as if measuring the matter most seriously.

"It all depends--you know Liza is a queer girl--it all depends on
how you strike her with a strong letter.  You could not go to New
York and make the proposal personally.  It has to be done by mail.
It all depends how well the letter is written, how everything is
explained and how the idea of being a merchant's wife strikes her.
She is a queer girl, like all the American women are."

"Can your Liza read and write letters?"

"Of course, she can.  Liza is a lady of some standing.  She can
write and read like our priest.  She is a highly educated girl."

"So you think a strong letter will fix her up?"

"Exactly.  And tell her everything you plan to do."

Petka took Liza's address, drank a glass of vodka to the success
of the plan and left the old peddler still harping on his daughter.
All the way home and many days afterwards Petka could think of nothing
else.  It seemed to him the greatest opportunity in the world to
marry a girl from America.  But now and then he got skeptical of
his ability to get such a prize.  However, he decided to try.  He
admitted that the whole success lay in the shaping of a strong and
convincing letter and sending it to her properly.  Petka knew how
to write letters, but the question was would his style be impressive
enough to influence a girl in America to come to Russia and marry
a man whom she had never seen?  However, Petka knew Platon, the
village saloon-keeper, as the most gifted man for that purpose.
But in a case like this he hated to take anybody into his confidence.

After arriving home Petka began to practice, writing a love letter
every day.  But nothing came of it.  One letter was too mild, the
other too extravagant.  Finally he gave it up, and whispered his
secret to the inn-keeper, saying:

"Now, old man, do me the great favor and I'll fix you up when I get
her dowry.  I want the letter to be strong and tender at the same
time."

The inn-keeper consented.  But Petka had to tell all the details
and the specifications.  Evan Platon admitted that it required some
skill to write the letter.  When he had thought the matter over
carefully, made some notes and discussed the subject with Petka
from every angle, he took a long sheet of paper, glued a rose in
the corner and wrote as follows:

"Highly respected Mademoiselle Liza:--You have never been in our
village, but it is a peach.  I am the cream of the place.  I have
here all the girls I need.  I have a house and my business.  But
the point is I want to open a store and need a wife with experience.
We have all the money.  But I need some capital to begin.  As you
have all that and besides, I have fallen in love with you, I lay
the offer before your tender feet.  Your beautiful image has haunted
me day and night, and your wonderful eyes follow me in my dreams,
oh, you lovely rose!  If you are ready to marry a merchant like
myself, do not waste any time, but come over and let's have a marriage
ceremony as the world has never seen here.  However, before you do
come, send me an early reply with a rosy yes.  Most affectionately
and respectfully, Petka Petroff."

"It's bully, it's superb," praised the tailor.  "But it lacks the
tender touch.  It lacks that style which the city women like."

"I put in the punch, but you can add a love poem from some school-book
if you like," protested the inn-keeper.  "The city girls are funny
creatures.  Sometimes they like the finger, other times the fist.
Who knows the taste of your Liza!  The waitresses of big cities
are usually broad-minded and highly educated."

After the poem was added and another rose glued on the corner of
the letter, it was mailed, registered, with a note "highly urgent,"
and Petka breathed freely, like one who had survived a great ordeal.

Two months of heavy waiting passed and still no reply from Liza.
Petka was like one on thorns.  His strange romance was already
known to his neighbors and now everybody was expecting the letter
from America to furnish the most sensational news in all the world.

One afternoon as the tailor was sewing a pair of trousers the
alderman of the village brought him a registered letter from America.
Nearly half the village population had gathered outside, curious
to hear the content of the letter.  Petka took tremblingly and
greatly excited the letter and rushed to Platon, the inn-keeper,
all the time followed by the crowd.  All the audience gathered in
the inn and Platon was instructed to read it aloud to the gathering.
As it was a ceremonial event of rare occasion, the inn-keeper stood
up, and began in a solemn voice:

"My dear Petka:  I am most happy to reply to your valued letter
of the fifteenth of July, that I am glad to accept your proposal.
But everything must be all right.  I can marry only a man of the
merchant class.  I know the business and I can supply you with the
capital you need.  But you must remember that I do not like to be
fooled and marry a man beneath me.  No peasant or tailor for me.
I stand here very high and cannot ruin my name.  You have not told
me your age, but I suppose you are not an old fogey.  I will follow
this letter next month, so you fix the wedding ceremony, secure all
the musicians and manage the meals, drinks and such necessities.
If this is not agreeable cable me.  Your Liza."

While Platon was reading the letter Petka gazed dreamily out of
the window and built, not an air castle, but a large grocery store,
with showy windows.  It seemed as if he saw his store already
opened, the people going and coming, the shelves filled with cans
and packages.  The sign "Merchant Petka" hung in his eyes.

The letter was like a bomb in the idyllic village.  Plans were made
of the wedding date and elaborate ceremony.  The village Luga had
never witnessed yet a marriage ceremony of this magnitude.  The
American bride was like a fairy princess of some ancient times.
Petka was like one in a trance.  But Vasska, the blacksmith, opposed
to the idea of such a strange marriage, pounded his hand against
the bar, exclaiming:

"Liza may be all right, but Petka should not marry her.  What do
we know about an American woman?  What do we know about her habits?
I've been told funny stories about such strange women.  I've heard
that nearly every American woman paints her cheeks, dyes her hair,
wears false teeth, puts up bluffs and does everything to deceive a
man.  Spit at her capital.  Besides, this American Liza is a woman
whom nobody here knows."

The blacksmith's arguments were taken seriously by the others and
a gloom came over the gathered gossips.  But the inn-keeper, who
was always optimistic, replied:

"American Liza must be a refined girl, and she has the money.  That's
what Petka wants, and that's what he will get.  So we better let
the wedding take place and see what will happen.  I've heard that
an American woman looks at the marriage as a business proposition,
so we let her do what she pleases."

"Business or no business, but we take the marriage seriously.  If
a man makes up his mind that he likes a woman, he must marry her,
and once he has married her, no ax or pike shall separate them.  No
monkeying with married men or women thereafter," argued the serious
blacksmith.

Petka turned the conversation to the subject of the wedding meals
and music.  The whole program of the ceremony was analyzed and
discussed in detail, some maintaining that the American custom
was to eat with forks and knives from the plates, others that only
uncooked meat was eaten and frogs served as delicacies.  Finally
the entertainment was arranged and the blacksmith remarked:

"All city women like fun and don't care about serious affairs.
They have the theaters and operas for amusements, so we better get
a real amusement for American Liza.  The best fun would be a huge
hurdy-gurdy or something of that kind, an instrument with sensation.
Our village violins and harps are too mild for women like that
Liza."

After discussing the matter at length, the inn-keeper agreed to take
care of the entertainment.  A short cable was composed and sent to
Liza and the wedding date clearly explained.  All the village got
alive with the news that Petka was to marry an American girl by
mail.

The three weeks of preparation for the wedding festival passed like
a dream.  The Sunday, that was to be the final date, began bright
and cheerful.  Petka was hustling to and fro in his newly rented
house, the front of which was to be arranged for the grocery store,
strutted like a big rooster preparing the affairs of his flock.  At
the entrance of the house was hung a big flag.  Long tables were
arranged in all the rooms, covered with meats, drinks and delicacies,
all prepared in the village.  Women were still busy baking other
foods, frying meats and boiling water for tea or drinks.  Everybody
was busy and everything looked most solemn and impressive.  The
host was dressed in a picturesque new suit of clothes with a silk
scarf around his neck.

While the groom was busy with preparing his heart for joy, the
inn-keeper was solving the problem of the entertainment.  He had
constructed, what he thought to be distinctly American, a huge
music-box, which was to produce the most wonderful tones ever
heard.  This instrument had the appearance of a big wine-cask and
yet a street-organ at the same time, and was an invention of the
ingenious inn-keeper.  It was practically a barrel, covered with
illustrations of old Sunday newspapers and county-fair posters.
To its side was fastened an improvised lever, made from a broken
cart-wheel.  Under this barrel, concealed so that no one could see
within, were placed three most prominent musicians of the village,
Ivan with his violin, Semen with his concertina and Nicholas with
his drum.  As soon as the conductor outside pulled a string, the
lever began to turn around and the musicians in the barrel had to
start to play.  In the corner of the house this strange instrument
looked like a mysterious engine, one knew not whether to expect it
to develop into a flying or moving picture machine.

At last everything was ready.  The guests began to arrive and the
carriage was sent to the town to bring the bride.  Everybody was
in festival attire and all tuned to expect the utmost excitements
the village had ever had.  One could see the people in groups of
three or four, discussing in a high pitch of voice the wonders of
the wedding festival or venturing various guesses about the American
bride.  The village girls, who were not a little jealous, nudged
each other and exchanged meaning glances, that Petka was to get
in a fix he had never been before.  All were anxious to see the
arrival of the two thousand-ruble bride.  The blacksmith and the
inn-keeper were discussing something excitedly.

"Say what you want, but this kind of matrimonial affair is the
limit," argued the blacksmith, pushing back his hat.  "I can't see
how a woman comes such a distance and so many weeks to marry Petka,
whom she has never seen, and how Petka gets the crazy thought
to marry a city woman whom he does not know.  Something is wrong
somewhere.  This is going to bust sooner or later."

"My dear Vasska, it's the education, the refinement and all that
which I and you can do without," grunted the inn-keeper.

Vasska rubbed his fists and spat vigorously.  The inn-keeper tried
to mollify him by saying that he should not take the matter so
seriously.

Suddenly the dogs began to bark and the boys shouted:

"The American bride!  Here comes the lady from abroad!"

All the guests rushed out to see her.  And there she was, in a
big flower-trimmed hat, with a silk parasol, and all the wonderful
fineries.  She looked so elegant, so superior that the village women,
accustomed to their rural simplicity, felt overawed.  The groom
hurrying with throbbing heart to open the gates of the front-yard
bowed almost to the ground to the dazzling reality of his romantic
dreams.  He was so confused by this apparition that he did not know
whether to shout or cry.

"My gracious, how she is made up!" whispered the women.

"What a wonderful dress!" whispered the girls.

"Ain't you Petka?  You deary!" exclaimed the bride, affecting a
foreign accent.

"Yes, mademoiselle, gracious yes," stammered the groom nervously,
wiping the tears of joy from his eyes.

"Gee, Petka, you are a nice boy!" gushed the bride, trying to show
the quality of her refinement.

She took his both hands and whispered that he should kiss them
gracefully in the American manner.  Then she leaned her head on
his shoulder and sighed.  These American manners so embarrassed
the groom that he blushed and dropped his eyes.  But after all, was
she not a highly educated American lady?  And of course, she knew
what was proper.

Though Liza looked ten years older than Petka, yet she had all the
city air, the American manners and style, and most important of
all, she had the capital.  The first question Liza asked was whether
they had a manicure, hair-dresser and boot-black in the village.
No one had ever heard that such functionaries existed, so the groom
explained excitedly that he would take her after the wedding to
the town where she could get what she wanted.  Petka carried the
trunk and the five suit-cases into he house, implements which on
one had ever seen.  All the novelties and sensations were so great
that the guests and the groom felt dazed for a moment.

"Have you got here champagne?" asked the bride, entering the house.

"We do not have such American drinks.  We have kvas, beer, vodka
and all the home-made cordials," stammered the groom.

"But you must have some high-balls or cocktails at least," went on
the bride with an affected gesture.

"My gracious, there we are!" groaned the groom, and shrugged
denyingly his shoulders.  "We've never handled those things here,
so you must forgive us."

"Mademoiselle Liza, I beg your pardon," interrupted the inn-keeper
seriously.  "We can arrange the balls and the tails, but you see
we are simply country people and keep our bowels in order.  City
amusements put our stomachs in a bad fix and don't agree with us."

The groom felt embarrassed and did not know what to do.  He bowed
apologetically before his bride and tried to please her in every
possible way.  He imitated her gestures and manners, her shrugs
and voice.  He even kept his hands on his breast, as was Liza's
manner.  Finally the bride asked whether there was any entertainment
prepared as she had asked.  The groom gave the inn-keeper a hint
and the latter said that he would do his best.  The three musicians
were already concealed with their instruments in a big barrel and
the imposing organist began his function.  Strains of an unique
music issued from the decorated music-box.  Everybody at once rushed
into the room.  All stared amazed at the strange contrivance which
played at one and the same time concertina, violin and drum.  It
was like a miracle, gripping and inspiring.

"I bet you this would interest your American audiences," remarked
the inn-keeper to the bride.

"It beats the Coney Island noise," stammered Liza, and took up the
conversation with a village woman.

All the house now was jollity.  The room was bursting of the powerful
music, the laughter and the loud conversation of the guests.  How
it happened no one knows, but one of the women had placed a bowl
with hot punch on the music box.  Whether through an accident, or
the excitement of the organist, the vessel broke, and the punch
leaked through the cracks and holes into the instrument.  Suddenly
the music stopped, although the conductor was still industriously
turning the lever.  Then were heard mysterious voices and sounds
as if of muffled exclamations.  Everybody looked at the music-box,
which began to quake and tremble as if a ghost were within.  Then
arose fierce yells and agonizing cries, mixed with loud curses.
Before anybody could realize what had happened, three angry musicians
leaped from the music instrument, the steaming punch dropping from
their heads.

"Good Lord, what's this?" gasped the men while the women shrieked
and fled.  One of the musicians put his fist under the frightened
organist and shouted:

"I'll pay for this joke, you scoundrel!"

"Semen, don't be a fool.  I didn't do it.  By Jove, I didn't do
it," exclaimed apologetically the organist, trembling.

"Damn, who did it?" asked the groom excited.

No one replied.  And when the people realized what had happened,
everybody roared.  No one who glanced at the overturned music
instrument and at the musicians, with their punch-dropping heads
could restrain their laughter.  Even the pompous bride found it so
funny that she laughed with the rest.

When the excitement was over and the dessert was ready the wedding
guests once more took their seats at the table.  The inn-keeper,
thinking that this was the moment to settle the matter of dowry,
before the actual marriage act could be performed by the priest,
knocked on the table for quiet.   Then he arose, wiped his beard
and began:

"Friends, this is a very unusual ceremony, our best known citizen
and friend Petka, marrying a girl from America.  Petka loves Liza,
it is all right.  But I know and so all our guests know, that Petka
expected the bride to bring a fat dowry.  Now we all would like to
see the bride place her dowry upon the table before she is declared
the wife of our friend, Petka.  We think that in justice to the
guests she ought to do that, because it was understood that she
bring the money and we give her the husband.  Don't you think,
friends and guests, that I am right?"

Everybody shouted "Bravo, inn-keeper," only the groom and the bride
sat silent with downcast eyes.  Finally the bride glanced at Petka,
pulled a bag from her dress, opened it and laid a bunch of green
bills on the table.  All eyes stared in awe at the money, and the
guests were so silent that one could hear the beating of their
hearts.  Only the purring of the cats, looking curiously down from
the big stove, was to be heard.

"Here is the dowry, right here.  It is in American money, one
thousand dollars, which is equal to two thousand rubles in your
money.  It's all in cash," exclaimed the bride proudly.

The inn-keeper took the bills, looked at them curiously, turned
them over and over and shook his head.  The blacksmith took one bill
after the other, and did the same.  For several minutes everybody
was quiet.  The "organist" who sat next to the inn-keeper, took
the money, looked at it still more closely and then smelled it.
Taking one of the bills in his hand, he rose and showed it to all
the guests and asked:

"Friends, have you ever seen this kind of money?"

"No," was the unanimous reply of the guests.

"Can any one here read American?" asked the blacksmith.

No one replied.

"The money is all right.  I rushed to reach the train so I had no
time to exchange it into your rubles," replied the bride.

"It might be all right," replied the inn-keeper, "but what do we
know about the American money and its value?  I've been told many
stories of American girls boasting they have money enough to buy
their husband, but heaven knows.  It's a country too far away and
a language too complicated for us to understand.  We like to have
our stuff on the table before everything is all right."

The bride glanced at the groom. The groom took silently her hand,
assuring her that he cared nothing for what her dowry was worth,
if he had only her as his wife.

"What nonsense!  I came on Petka's invitation, and I'll stay with him,
do you let the priest marry us or not.  We can go both to America
and marry there, but never here," exclaimed the bride, tossing her
head and snorting her indignation.  As she rose, she took Petka by
his hand and gave this parting thrust:

"Do you want or not, but I'll stay with Petka here.  We don't care
for your priest.  I keep the American law and know what's what."

"Liza, Liza, listen.  Don't make a scandal like that here.  Let's
better harness our horses and get to the priest as fast as we can,"
shouted the excited guests, all following the couple.

[signed]Ivan Narodny





The Insane Priest




A priest insane went many days without repose or sleep,
"My visions are a shadow world but love is real and deep."
He, like a prophet, staff in hand, sought out a distant shrine.
"As sacred ash are all my dreams, and fateful love is mine."
Long, long he knelt and prayed alone, his tears fell unrestrained.
"My visions are the snow-crowned heights, my love the flood unchained."
A sacrifice he laid upon that altar far away.
"My visions are a dream of dawn, my love the radiant day."
A knife he thrust into his heart, to seal the holy rite.
"My visions all resplendent glow, my love is like the night."
And on the altar falling prone, he then gave up his soul.
"My visions are the lightning's flash, my love the thunder's roll."
Upon the altar poured his blood, it formed a crimson pall.
"As his deliriums are my dreams, as death my love my all."

Sergey Makowsky
Translation by Constance Purdy

Note: To this poem Mr. Reinhold Gliere has composed a magnificent
musical setting with piano and orchestra accompaniment and dedicated
it to a prominent Russian revolutionist.





Without a Country




One thought awakes us early in the morning,
One thought follows us the whole day long,
One thought stabs at night our breast:
Is my father suffering?

One sorrow awakes us at dawn like an executioner,
One sorrow is persecuting us ceaselessly,
One sorrow is swelling our breast the whole night long:
Is my mother alive?

A longing awakes us at daybreak,
A longing is continually hidden in our heart,
A longing is burning at night in our breast;
What of my wife?

A fear awakes us early like a funeral mass,
A fear persecutes us and darkens our eyes,
A fear fills at night our breast with hatred:
Our sisters are threatened with shame.

A pain awakens us in the morning like a trumpet,
With pain is filled every glass we drink
With pain is secretly weeping our breast:
Where are our children?

...Only one way will give an answer:
Through a river of blood and over a bridge of dead!
Woe! you will reach your home where the mother, who died of sorrow,
Does not wait for her son any more.

M. Boich

Note:  M. Boich is a young Serbian poet, now about twenty-six
years old, who already has a recognized place in modern Serbian
Literature.  The poem "Without a Country" was written after the
well-known Serbian tragedy of 1915, and was published last year
(March 28) in the official Serbian journal "Srpske Novine," which
now appears at Corfu.





Indian Prayer to the Mountain Spirit




Lord of the Mountain,
Reared within the Mountain
Young Man, Chieftain,
Hear a young man's prayer!

Hear a prayer for cleanness.
Keeper of the strong rain,
Drumming on the mountain;
Lord of the small rain
That restores the earth in newness;
Keeper of the clean rain,
Hear a prayer for wholeness.

Young Man, Chieftain.
Hear a prayer for fleetness.
Keeper of the deer's way,
Reared among the eagles,
Clear my feet of slothness.
Keeper of the paths of men,
Hear a prayer for straightness.

Hear a prayer for braveness.
Lord of the thin peaks,
Reared amid the thunders;
Keeper of the headlands
Holding up the harvest,
Keeper of the strong rocks
Hear a prayer for staunchness.

Young Man, Chieftain,
Spirit of the Mountain!

Interpreted by [signed] Mary Austin





To America--4 July, 1776




When England's king put English to the horn[1],
To England thus spake England over sea,
"In peace be friend, in war my enemy";
Then countering pride with pride, and lies with scorn,
Broke with the man[2] whose ancestor had borne
A sharper pain for no more injury.
How otherwise should free men deal and be,
With patience frayed and loyalty outworn?
  No act of England's shone more generous gules
Than that which sever'd once for all the strands
Which bound you English.  You may search the lands
In vain, and vainly rummage in the schools,
To find a deed more English, or a shame
On England with more honor to her name. 

[written] Respectfully submitted to the Defenders of Democracy

[signed] M. Hewlett

(Westluilaruig[illegible, this is a guess], Chichester, England)

[1] To "put to the horn" was to declare an outlawry.
[2] The "man" is George III, his "ancestor," Charles I.





The Need of Force to Win and Maintain Peace




Must, then, gentle and reasonable men and women give over their sons
to the National Government to be trained for the devilish work of
war?  Must civilized society continue to fight war with war?  Is
not the process a complete failure?  Shall we not henceforth contend
against evil-doing by good-doing, against brutality by gentleness,
against vice in others solely by virtue in ourselves?

There are many sound answers to these insistent queries.  One is
the policeman, usually a protective and adjusting force, but armed
and trained to hurt and kill in defense of society against criminals
and lunatics.  Another is the mother who blazes into violence, with
all her might, in defense of her child.  Even the little birds do
that.  Another is the instinctive forcible resistance of any natural
man to insult or injury committed or threatened against his mother,
wife, or daughter.  The lions and tigers do as much.  A moving
answer of a different sort is found in words written by Mme. le
Verrier to the parents of Victor Chapman on her return from his
funeral in the American Church in Paris--"It...has brought home to
me the beauty of heroic death and the meaning of life."

The answer from history is that primitive Governments were despotic,
and in barbarous societies might makes right; but that liberty
under law has been wrung from authority and might by strenuous
resistance, physical as well as moral, and not by yielding
to injustice and practising non-resistance.  The Dutch Republic,
the British Commonwealth, the French Republic, the Italian and
Scandinavian constitutional monarchies, and the American republics
have all been developed by generations of men ready to fight and
fighting.

So long as there are wolves, sheep cannot form a safe community.
The precious liberties which a few more fortunate or more vigorous
nations have won by fighting for them generation after generation,
those nations will have to preserve by keeping ready to fight in
their defense.

The only complete answer to these arguments in favor of using force
in defense of liberty is that liberty is not worth the cost.  In
free countries to-day very few persons hold that opinion.

[signed] Charles W. Eliot





Woman and Mercy




Woman and Mercy--to think of one is to think of the other, and yet
the suggestion of ideas is purely Christian.  The ancient world knew
of a few great women who transcended the conditions of society in
those days and helped, each one her country, in some extraordinary
way.  Thus Deborah helped the people of God in a time of terrible
difficulty.  And even the Pagan world was not without its Semiramis
and its Portia.  When mercy came into the world with Christianity
the dispensation of it was largely committed to the gentle hands
of women, for since men have believed that God has taken a woman
to be His human mother, the position of every woman has been that
of a mother and of a queen.  The wife has become the guardian of
the internal affairs of the home as the husband is of its external
affairs.

Whenever women have acted up to the noble ideals of womanhood
preached by the Christian religion, they have received honor,
respect, deference and almost worship from the ruder sex.

It gives me great pleasure to think that in our own country so
many women have banded themselves together for such a noble ideal
as that embodied in the very name of "The Militia of Mercy."  Here
in her true sphere, as nurse, woman will shed the gentle light
of mercy over the gory battle field and amid the pain and wounds
of the hospital wards; or, if she is not called to such active
participation she will find means to hold up the hands of those
more actively engaged, and in countless ways will she be able to
mitigate the evils of this most terrible of all wars, and not least
of all because of the gift of piety with which Almighty God has so
generously endowed her.  Her unceasing prayers will ascend to the
throne of God for those engaged in this terrible struggle, and
mercies and blessings will be drawn down upon multitudes of people
whom she has never seen.

I bid Godspeed to The Militia of Mercy, and I hope that every
American woman who can will take part in this most womanly and most
patriotic work.

[signed] J. Cardinal Gibbons





Joan of Arc--Her Heritage




I saw in Orleans three years ago the celebration of the 487th
Anniversary of the deliverance of the ancient city by Joan of Arc.

The flower of the French army passed before me, the glorious
sunlight touching sword and lance and bayonet tip until they formed
a shimmering fretwork of steel.  Then came the City Fathers in
democratic dress--and following them, the dignitaries of the Church,
in purple and crimson and old lace, and a host of choir boys singing
Glory to God in the Highest, and finally in his splendid scarlet
robe, a cardinal symbolical of power and majesty and dominion.

In whose honor was all this gorgeous pageantry?  In honor of a simple
peasant girl, who saw or thought she saw visions--it is perfectly
immaterial whether she did or not--and who heard or fancied she
heard--it matters not--voices calling to her out of the silences
of the night to go forth and save France.  Soldiers and clergy and
populace, Catholics and Protestants and pagans united in paying
homage to the courage of a woman.  And I thought as I watched
the brilliant spectacle in the shadow of the old cathedral, that
thousands of women in the twentieth century in England and America,
and France and Germany and all the Nations are serving in a different
way, it is true, from the way in which Joan of Arc served France,
but none the less effectively.  Aye, even more so, as they go forth
clad not in mail, but in Christian love to help mankind.  In the
very forefront of this shining host are the trained nurses, following
the standard uplifted by Florence Nightingale.

When I see a trained nurse in her attractive cap and gown I always
feel that a richer memory, a finer intention has been read into
life.  Wherever they go they carry healing with them.

To maintain this army of militant good will and helpfulness, and
to increase it as occasion requires is an obligation so imperative
that it cannot be evaded.

Never was it as urgent as it is to-day, that there should be generous
response to the appeal for nurses.

If we are often discouraged in our philanthropic work, it is not
because we consider what we are doing in a detached way, independent
of its world relationships.  If we could only realize that we are
part of the mighty army composed of all nationalities and races
and creeds, an army of life, not of death, marching past disease
and suffering and misery and sin, we would be inspired to wage the
conflict with greater vigor, until our vision of the world freed
from suffering, was realized.

When the realization comes, it will not come with shouting and
tumult, but will come quietly and beautifully as the sun makes its
triumphant progress through the heavens, gradually conquering the
night until at last the earth is flooded with glorious warmth and
light and all the formless shapes that loved darkness rather than
light silently steal away and are forgotten.

John Lewis Griffiths

Note:  Although the above selection was part of an address delivered in
London in 1911, its truth is more apparent today than ever before.





Things Which Cannot Be Shaken




There are season in life when everything seems to be shaking.  Old
landmarks are crumbling.  Venerable foundations are upheaved in a
night, and are scattered abroad as dust.  Guiding buoys snap their
moorings, and go drifting down the channel.  Institutions which
promised to outlast the hills collapse like a stricken tent.
Assumptions in which everybody trusted burst like air-balloons.
Everything seems to lose its base, and trembles in uncertainty and
confusion.

Such seasons are known in our personal life.  One day our
circumstances appear to share the unshaken solidity of the planet,
and our security is complete.  And then some undreamed-of antagonism
assaults our life.  We speak of it as a bolt from the blue!
Perhaps it is some stunning disaster in business.  Or perhaps death
has leaped into our quiet meadows.  Or perhaps some presumptuous
sin has suddenly revealed its foul face in the life of one of our
children.  And we are "all at sea!"  Our little, neat hypotheses
crumple like withered leaves.  Our accustomed roads are all broken
up, our conventional ways of thinking and feeling, and the sure
sequences on which we have depended vanish in a night.  It is
experiences like these which make the soul cry out with the psalmist,
in bewilderment and fear,--"My foot slippeth!"  His customary
foothold had given way.  The ground was shaking beneath him.  The
foundations trembled.

And such seasons are known in the life of nations.  An easy-going
traditionalism can be overturned in a single blast.  Conventional
standards, which seemed to have the fixedness of the stars are
blown to the winds.  Political and economic safeguards go down like
wooden fences before an angry sea.  The customary foundations of
society are shaken.  We must surely have had such experiences as
these during the past weeks and months.  What was unthinkable has
become a commonplace.  The impossible has happened.  Our working
assumptions are in ruins.  Common securities have vanished.  And
on every side men and women are whispering the question,--Where
are we?  We are all staggered!  And everywhere men and women, in
their own way, are whispering the confession of the psalmist,--"My
foot slippeth!"

Well, where are we?  Amid all these violations of our ideals, and
the quenching of our hopes, in this riot of barbarism and unutterable
sorrow, where are we?  Where can we find a footing?  Where can
we stay our souls?  Where can we set our feet as upon solid rock?
Amid the many things which are shaking what things are there which
cannot be shaken?

"Things which cannot be shaken."  Let us begin here:  THE SUPREMACY
OF SPIRITUAL FORCES CANNOT BE SHAKEN.  The obtrusive circumstances
of the hour shriek against that creed.  Spiritual forces seem to
be overwhelmed.  We are witnessing a perfect carnival of insensate
materialism.  The narratives which fill the columns of the daily
press reek with the fierce spectacle of labor and achievement.
And yet, in spite of all this appalling outrage upon the sense, we
must steadily beware of becoming the victims of the apparent and
the transient.  Behind the uncharted riot there hides a power whose
invisible energy is the real master of the field.  The ocean can
be lashed by the winds into indescribable fury, and the breakers
may rise and fall in crushing weight and disaster; and yet behind
and beneath all the wild phenomena there is a subtle, mystical
force which is exerting its silent mastery even at the very height
of the storm.  We must discriminate between the phenomenal and
the spiritual, between the event of the hour and the drift of the
year, between the issue of a battle and the tendency of a campaign.
All of which means that "While we look at the things which are seen,
we are also to look at the things which are not seen."  Well, look
at them.

THE POWER OF TRUTH can never be shaken.  The force of disloyalty
may have its hour of triumph, and treachery may march for a season
to victory after victory; but all the while truth is secretly
exercising her mastery, and in the long run the labor of falsehood
will crumble into ruin.  There is no permanent conquest for a lie.
You can no more keep the truth interred than you could keep the
Lord interred in Joseph's tomb.  You cannot bury the truth, you
cannot strangle her, you cannot even shake her!  You may burn up
the records of the truth, but you cannot impair the truth itself!
When the records are reduced to ashes truth shall walk abroad as
an indestructible angel and minister of the Lord!  "He shall give
His angels charge over thee," and truth is one of His angels, and
she cannot be destroyed.

There was a people in the olden days who sought to find security
in falsehood, and to construct a sovereignty by the aid of broken
covenants.  Let me read to you their boasts as it is recorded
by the prophet Isaiah:  "We have made a covenant with death, and
with hell are we at agreement:  when the overflowing scourge shall
pass through, it shall not come unto us, for we have made lies our
refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves."  And so they
banished truth.  But banished truth is not vanquished truth.  Truth
is never idle; she is ever active and ubiquitous, she is forever
and forever our antagonist or our friend.  "Therefore thus saith the
Lord God...your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand...and the hail shall sweep away
the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding-places."
Thus said the Lord!  We may silence a fort, but we cannot paralyze
the truth.  Amid all the material convulsions of the day the
supremacy of truth remains unshaken.  "The mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it."

"Things which cannot be shaken!"  What is there which cannot be
shaken?  THE PASSION OF FREEDOM is one of the rarest of spiritual
flames, and it can not be quenched.  Make your appeal to history.
Again and again militarism has sought to crush it, but it has
seemed to share the very life of God.  Brutal inspirations have
tried to smother it, but it has breathed an indestructible life.
Study its energy in the historical records of the Book or in annals
of a wider field.  Study the passion of freedom amid the oppressions
of Egypt, or in the captivity of Babylon, or in the servitude of
Rome.  How does the passion express itself?  "If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, may my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, and may
my right hand forget her cunning!"  Study it in the glowing pages
of the history of this country, that breath of free aspiration which
no power of armament, and no menace of material strength was ever
able to destroy.  The mightiest force in all those days was not
the power of threat, and powder, and sword, but that breath of
invincible aspiration which was the very breath of God.  And when
we gaze upon stricken Belgium to-day, and look upon her sorrows,
and her smitten fields, and her ruined cities, and her desolate
homes, we can firmly and confidently proclaim that the breath
of that divinely planted aspiration, her passion of freedom, will
prove to be mightier than all the materialistic strength and all
the prodigious armaments which seem to have laid her low.  It is
a reality which cannot be shaken.

There are other spiritual forces which we might have named, and which
would have manifested the same incontestable supremacy:  there is
the energy of meekness, that spirit of docility which communes with
the Almighty in hallowed and receptive awe:  there is the boundless
vitality of love which lives on through midnight after midnight,
unfainting and unspent:  there is the inexhaustible energy of faith
which hold on and out amid the massed hostilities of all its foes.
You cannot defeat spirits like these, you cannot crush and destroy
them.  You cannot hold them under, for their supremacy shares the
holy sovereignty of the eternal God.  "Not by might, nor by power,
but by my Spirit, saith the Lord;" and these spirits, the spirit
of truth, the spirit of freedom, the spirit of meekness and love,
are in fellowship with the divine Spirit, and therefore shall they
remain unshaken.

[signed]J.H. Jowett





Somewhere in France




"Somewhere in France"--the day is tranquil, the sky unvexed, the
green earth without a wound as I write; yet "somewhere in France"
the day is torn with clamors, the sky is soiled with man's mounting
hatred of man, and long, open wounds lie cruelly across the disputed
earth.  "Somewhere in France"--my mind goes back to remembered
scenes:  the crowd blocking the approach to a depot; white faces
and staring eyes, eyes that alternately fear and hope, and in the
crush a tickling gray line of returning PERMISSIONAIRES.  "Somewhere
in France"--on such a perfect day as this I see a little village
street nestled among the trees, and hear the sound of the postman's
reluctant feet tapping over the cobblestones--the postman that comes
with the relentlessness of Fate--and at every house the horror of
the black envelope.  "Somewhere in France" the great immemorial
cathedrals and the dotted, cool, moss-covered churches are filled
with supplicating women and the black-framed, golden locks of
children lifting their eyes before the Great Consoler as the sun
breaks through the paling candle-flames.  "Somewhere in France"--in
its crowded stations I remember a proud womanhood, gray in
the knowledge of sorrow, speeding its young sons and speaking the
Spartan words.  "Somewhere in France," in its thousand hospitals,
the ministering white-clad angels are moving in their long vigils,
calm, smiling, inspired.  "Somewhere in France"--I see again
imperishable fragments of remembered emotions; the women working
in the vineyards of Champagne, careless of fate or the passing
shells; the orphan children playing in the ruins of Rheims; a laughing
child in bombarded Arras running out to pick up an exploded shell,
a child in whom daily habits has brought fear into contempt; a
skeleton of a church in far-flung Bethany, that still lives in a
sea of fire, where a black-coated priest of the unflinching faith
was holding his mass among kneeling men before an altar hidden in
the last standing corner from which the shredded ruins had been
swept.

"Somewhere in France"--I remember the volcanic earth, the strewn
ruin of all things, the prostrate handiwork of man mingled with
the indignant bowels of the earth, and from a burrowed hole a POILU
laughing out at us in impertinent greeting, with a gaiety which is
more difficult than courage.

"Somewhere in France"--in bombarded Arras, was it not?--I remember
an old woman, a very old woman, leaning on her cane as she peered
from her cellar door within a hundred yards of the smoldering cathedral.
I wonder if she still lives, for Arras will be struggling back to
life now.

"Somewhere in France"--what thronged memories troop at these liberating
words!  And yet, through all the passing drama of remembered little
things, what I see always before my eyes is the spiritual rise of
Verdun.  Verdun, heroic sister of the Marne; Verdun, the battling
heart of France--whose stained slopes are anointed by the blood
of a million men.  Verdun!  The very name has the upward fury and
descending shock of an attacking wave dying against an immemorial
shore.  To have seen it as I was privileged to see it in that
historic first week of August, 1915, at the turning of the tide,
at the moment of the retaking of Fleury and Thi