aumont, was to have
stood between two great spectacles:  the written page of a defense
such as history has never seen, and the future, glowing with the
unquenchable fire of undying France.  When I think of the flaming
courage of that heroic race, my imagination returns always to the
vision of that defense--not the patient fortitude before famine of
Paris, Sebastopol or Mafeking, but that miracle of patience and
calm in the face of torrential rains of steel which for months
swept the human earth in such a deluge as never before had been
sent in punishment upon the world.  This was no adventure such as
that gambling with fate which in all times and in all forms has
stirred the spirit of man.  Regiment after regiment marched down into
the maw of hell, into the certainty of death.  They went forward,
not to dare, but to die, in that sublimest spirit of exultation
and sacrifice of which humanity is capable, that the children of
France might live free and unafraid, Frenchmen in a French land.
They went in regiment after regiment, division after division--living
armies to replace the ghostly armies that had held until they died.
Days without nights, weeks without a breathing spell--five months
and more.  They lie there now, the human wall of France, that no
artillery has ever mastered or ever will, to prove that greater
than all the imagined horror of man's instinct of destruction,
undaunted before the new death that rocks the earth beneath him
and pollutes the fair vision of the sky above, the spirit of man
abides superior.  Death is but a material horror; the will to live
free is the immortal thing.

[signed] Owen Johnson





The Associated Press




It is worth while to explain how the world's news is gathered and
furnished in a newspaper issued at one cent a copy.  First, as
to the foreign news, which is, of course, the most difficult to
obtain and the most expensive.  In normal times there are the four
great agencies which, with many smaller and tributary agencies,
are covering the whole world.  These four agencies are, as above
noted, the Reuter Telegram Company, Ltd., of London, which assumes
responsibility for the news of the great British Empire, including
the home land, every colony except Canada, and the Suzerain,
or allied countries, as Egypt, Turkey, and even China and Japan;
and the Agency Havas of Paris, taking care of the Latin countries,
France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, Switzerland and South
America as well as Northern Africa; and the Wolff Agency of Berlin,
reporting the happening in the Teutonic, Scandinavian, and Slav
nations.  These three organizations are allied with The Associated
Press in an exclusive exchange arrangement.  Subordinate to these
agencies is a smaller one in almost every nation, having like
exchange agreements with the larger companies.

Thus it happens that there is not a place of moment in the habitable
globe that is not provided for.  Moreover, there is scarcely a
reporter on any paper in the world who does not, in a sense, become
a representative of all these four agencies.  Not only are there
these alliances, but in every important capital of every country, and
in a great many of the other larger cities abroad there are "A.P."
men, trained by long experience in its offices in this country.
This is done because, first, the organization is naturally anxious
to view every country with American eyes; and, second, because a
number of the agencies spoken of are under the influence of their
Governments and, therefore, not always trustworthy.  They are relied
upon for a certain class of news, as for instance, accidents by
flood and field, where there is no reason for any misrepresentation
on their part.  But where it is a question which may involve national
pride or interest, or where there is a possibility of partisanship
or untruthfulness, the "A.P." men are trusted.

Now, assume that a fire has broken out in Benares, the sacred
city of the Hindus, on the banks of the Ganges, and a hundred or a
thousand people have lost their lives.  Not far away, at Allahabad
or at Calcutta, is a daily paper, having a correspondent at Benares,
who reports the disaster fully.  Some one on this paper sends the
story, or as much of it as is of general rather than local interest,
to the agent of the Reuter Company at Calcutta, Bombay, or Madras;
and thence it is cabled to London and Hongkong, and Sydney and
Tokio.  At each of these places there are Associated Press men,
one of whom picks it up and forwards it to New York.

The wide world is combed for news, and an incredibly short time
is delivered and printed everywhere.  When Pope [Leo] XIII died in
Rome the fact was announced by an Associated Press dispatch in the
columns of a San Francisco paper in nine minutes from the instant
when he breathed his last.  And this message was repeated back to
London, Paris, and Rome, and gave those cities the first information
of the event.  When Port Arthur was taken by the Japanese in the
war of 1896 it came to us in New York in fifty minutes, although
it passed through twenty-seven relay offices.  Few of the operators
transmitting it knew what the dispatch meant.  But they understood
the Latin letters, and sent it on from station to station, letter
by letter.

When Peary came back from his great discovery in the Arctic Sea
he reached Winter Harbor, on the coast of Labrador, and from there
sent me a wireless message that he had nailed the Stars and Stripes
to the North Pole.  This went to Sydney, on Cape Breton Island,
and was forwarded thence by cable and telegraph to New York.

The organization is cooperative in its character.  As a condition
of membership, each one belonging agrees to furnish to his
fellow-members, either directly or through the Association, and
to them exclusively, the news of his vicinage, as gathered by him
for his own paper.  This constitutes the large fountain from which
our American news supply is drawn.  But, as in the case of the
foreign official agencies, if there be danger that an individual
member is biased, or if the matter be one of high importance, our
own trained and salaried staff men do the reporting.  For this
purpose, as well as for administrative work, there is a bureau in
every leading city.

For the collection and interchange of this information we lease
from the various telephone and telegraph companies, and operate with
our own employees, something like fifty thousand miles of wires,
stretching out in every direction through the country and touching
every important center.  To reach smaller cities, the telephone
is employed.  Everywhere in every land, and every moment of every
day, there is ceaseless vigil for news.

People frequently ask what it costs thus to collect the news of the
world.  And we cannot answer.  Our annual budget is between three
and four million dollars.  But this makes no account of the work
done by the individual papers all over the world in reporting the
matters and handling the news over to the agencies.  Neither can
we estimate the number of men and women engaged in this fashion.
It is easy to measure the cost of certain specific events; as, for
instance, we expended twenty-eight thousand dollars to report the
Martinique disaster.  And the Russo-Japanese war cost us over three
hundred thousand dollars.

Such is an outline of our activities in what we call normal times.
But these are not normal times.  When the great European war broke
on us, eighteen months ago, all of the processes of civilization
seemed to go down in an hour.  And we suffered in common with
others.  Our international relations for the exchange of news were
instantly dislocated.  We had been able to impress the governments
abroad with the value of an impartial and unpurchasable news service,
as opposed to the venal type of journalism, which was too common
on the European continent. And in our behalf they had abolished
their censorships.  They had accorded us rules assuring us great
rapidity in the transmission of our messages over their government
telegraph lines.  They had opened the doors of their chancelleries
to our correspondents, and told them freely the news as it developed.

All the advantages ceased.  The German news agency was prohibited
from holding any intercourse with the English, French, or Russian
organizations.  Simultaneously, like commerce was interdicted in
the other countries.  The virtue of impartial news-gathering at
once ceased to be quoted at par.  Everywhere, in all of the warring
lands the Biblical rule that "he that is not with me is against me,"
became the controlling view.  Government telegrams were obviously
very important and there was no time to consider anywhere any of
the promised speed in sending our dispatches.  Finally, censorships
were imposed.  This was quite proper in principle.  Censorships are
always necessary in time of war.  But it is desirable, from every
point of view, that they be intelligent, and that is not always
the case.

Nevertheless, we have fared pretty well in the business of reporting
this war.  We have made distinct progress in teaching the belligerents
that we hold no brief for any one of them, and, while each would
much rather have us plead his cause, they are coming to see why we
cannot and ought not do so.  And our men are everywhere respected
and accorded as large privileges as, perhaps, in the light of the
tension of the hour, could be reasonably asked.

[signed] Melville E. Stone





Pan and the Pot-Hunter




They are not many who are privileged to learn that the forces of the
Wilderness are as gods, distributing benefits, and, from such as
have earned them, taking even handed reprisals.  Only the Greeks of
all peoples realized this in its entirety, and them the gods repaid
with the pure joy of creation which is the special prerogative of
gods.

But Greenhow had heard nothing of the Greeks save as a symbol of
all unintelligibility, and of the gods not at all.  His stock was
out of England by way of the Tennessee mountains, drifting Pacific
coastward after the war of the Rebellion, and he was a Pot Hunter
by occasion and inclination.  The occasion he owned to being born
in one of the bays of the southerly Sierras where the plentitude
of wild life reduced pot hunting to the degree of easy murder.

A Pot Hunter, you understand, is a business man.  He is out for
what he can get, and regards game laws as an interference with the
healthful interactions of competition.  Greenhow potted quail in
the Temblors where by simply rolling out of his blanket he could
bag two score at a shot as they flocked, sleek and stately blue,
down the runways to the drinking places.  He took pronghorn at
Castac with a repeating rifle and a lure of his red necktie held
aloft on a cleaning rod, and packed them four to a mule-back down
the Tejon to Summerfield.  He shot farrow does and fished out of
season, and had never heard of the sportsmanly obligation to throw
back the fingerlings.  Anything that made gunning worth while to
the man who came after you was, by Greenhow's reckoning, a menace
to pot hunting.

There were Indians in those parts who could have told him
better--notable hunters who never shot swimming deer nor does with
fawn nor any game unaware; who prayed permission of the Wuld before
they went to hunt, and left offal for their little brothers of the
Wilderness.  Indians know.  But Greenhow, being a business man,
opined that Indians were improvident, and not being even good at
his business, fouled the waters where he camped, left man traces
in his trails and neglected to put out his fires properly.

Whole hillsides where the deer had browsed were burnt off bare as
your hand in the wake of the pot hunter.  Thus in due course, though
Greenhow laid it to the increasing severity of game laws framed in
the interests of city sportsmen, who preferred working hard for
their venison to buying it comfortably in the open market, pot
hunting grew so little profitable that he determined to leave it
off altogether an become a Settler.  Not however until he had earned
the reprisal of the gods, of whom in a dozen years he had not even
become aware.

In the Spring of the year the Tonkawanda irrigation district was
opened, he settled himself on a spur of San Jacinto where it plunges
like a great dolphin in the green swell of the camissal, and throws
up a lacy foam of chaparral along its sides.  Below him, dotted
over the flat reach of the mesa, the four square clearings of the
Homesteaders showed along the line of the great canal, keen and
blue as the cutting edge of civilization.  There was a deep-soil
level under the nose of San Jacinto--rabbits used to play there
until Greenhow took to potting them for his breakfast--and a stream
bubbled from under the hill to waste in the meadow.

Greenhow built a shack under a live oak there and fancied himself
in the character of a proprietor.  He reckoned that in the three
years before his vineyard came into bearing, he could pot-hunt in
the hills behind his clearing for the benefit of the Homesteaders.

It was altogether a lovely habitation.  Camise grew flush with the
meadow and the flanks of San Jacinto shivered and sparkled with
the wind that turned the thousand leaves of the chaparral.  Under
the wind one caught at times the slow deep chuckle of the water.
Greenhow should have been warned by that.  In just such tones the
ancient Greeks had heard the great god Pan laughing in the woods
under Parnassus,--which was Greek indeed to the Pot Hunter.

Greenhow was thirty-four when he took out his preemption papers
and planted his first acre of vines.  For reasons best known to
the gods, the deer kept well away from that side of the San Jacinto
that year.  Greenhow enlarged the meadow and turned up ground for
a garden; he became acquainted with his neighbors and learned that
they had prejudices in favor of game regulations, also that one of
them had a daughter.  She had white, even teeth that flashed when
she laughed; the whole effect of her was as sound and as appetizing
as a piece of ripe fruit.  Greenhow told her that the prospect of
having a home of his own was an incentive such as pot-hunting held
out to no man.  He looked as he said it, a very brother to Nimrod,
for as yet the Pot had not marked him.

He stood straight; his eyes had the deep, varying blueness of lake
water.  Little wisps and burrs, odors of the forest clung about
his clothing; a beard covered his slack, formless mouth.  When he
told the Homesteader's daughter how the stars went by on heather
planted headlands and how the bucks belled the does at the bottom
of deep canons in October, she heard in it the call of the trail
and young Adventure.  Times when she would see from the level of
her father's quarter section the smoke of the Pot Hunter's cabin
rising blue against the glistening green of the live oak, she thought
that life might have a wilder, sweeter tang there about the roots
of the mountain.

In his second Spring when the camissal foamed all white with bloom
and the welter of yellow violets ran in the grass under it like
fire, Greenhow built a lean-to to his house and made the discovery
that the oak which jutted out from the barranca behind it was of
just the right height from the ground to make a swing for a child,
which caused him a strange pleasant embarrassment.

"Look kind o' nice to see a little feller playin' round," he
admitted to himself, and the same evening went down to call on the
Homesteader's daughter.

That night the watchful guardians of the Wild sent the mule-deer
to Harry the man who had been a pot-hunter.  A buck of three years
came down the draw by the watercourse and nibbled the young shoots
of the vines where he could reach them across the rabbit proof
fencing that the settler had drawn about his planted acres.  Not
that the wire netting would have stopped him; this was merely the
opening of the game.  Three days later he spent the night in the
kitchen garden and cropped the tips of the newly planted orchard.
After that the two of them put in nearly the whole of the growing
season dodging one another through the close twigged manzanita,
lilac, laurel and mahogany that broke upward along the shining
bouldered coasts of San Jacinto.  the chaparral at this season took
all the changes of the incoming surf, blue in the shadows, darkling
green about the heads of the gulches, or riffling with the white
under side of wind-lifted leaves.  Once its murmurous swell had
closed over them, the mule-deer would have his own way with the
Pot Hunter.  Often after laborious hours spent in repairing the
garden, the man would hear his enemy coughing in the gully behind
the house, and take up his rifle to put in the rest of the day
snaking through the breathless fifteen foot cover, only to have
a glimpse of the buck at last dashing back the late light from
glittering antlers as he bounded up inaccessible rocky stairs.  This
was the more exasperating since Greenhow had promised the antlers
to the Homesteader's daughter.

When the surface of the camissal had taken on the brown tones
of weed under sea water and the young clusters of the grapes were
set--for this was the year the vineyard was expected to come into
bearing--the mule-deer disappeared altogether from that district,
and Greenhow went back hopefully to rooting the joint grass out
of the garden.  But about the time he should have been rubbing the
velvet off his horns among the junipers of the high ridges, the
mule-deer came back with two of his companions and fattened on
the fruit of the vineyard.  They went up and down the rows ruining
with selective bites the finest clusters.  During the day they
lay up like cattle under the quaking aspens beyond the highest,
wind-whitened spay of the chaparral, and came down to feast day by
day as the sun ripened the swelling amber globules.  They slipped
between the barbs of the fine wired fence without so much as changing
a leg or altering their long, loping stride; and what they left
the quail took.

In pattering droves of hundreds they trekked in from the camise
before there was light enough to shoot by, and nipped once and
with precision at the ripest in every bunch.  Afterward they dusted
themselves in the chaparral and twitted the proprietor with soft
contented noises.  At the end of the October rut the deer came
back plentifully to the Tonkawanda District, and Greenhow gave up
the greater part of the rainy season to auditing his account with
them.  He spent whole days scanning the winter colored slope for
the flicker and slide of light on a hairy flank that betrayed his
enemy, or, rifle in hand, stalking a patch of choke cherry and
manzanita within which the mule-deer could snake and crawl for
hours by intricacies of doubling and back tracking that yielded
not a square inch of target and no more than the dust of his final
disappearance.  Wood gatherers heard at times above their heads
the discontented whine of deflected bullets.  Windy mornings the
quarry would signal from the high barrens by slow stiff legged
bounds that seemed to invite the Pot Hunter's fire, and at the end
of a day's tracking among the punishing stubs of the burnt district,
Greenhow returning would hear the whistling cough of the mule-deer
in the ravine not a rifle shot from the house.

In the meantime rabbits burrowed under the wire netting to bark
his young trees, and an orchardist who held the job of ditch tender
along the Tonkawanda, began to take an interest in the Homesteader's
daughter.  Seldom any smoke went up now from the cabin under the
Dolphin's nose.  Occasionally there rose a blue thread of it far up
on the thinly forested crest of San Jacinto where the buck, bedded
in the low brush between the bosses of the hills, kept a look out
across the gullies from which Greenhow attempted to ambuscade him.
Day by day the man would vary the method of approach until almost
within rifle range, and then the wind would change or there would
be the click of gravel underfoot, or the scrape of a twig on stiff
overalls, and suddenly the long oval ears would slope forward, the
angular lines flow into grace and motion and the game would begin
again.

Greenhow killed many deer that season and got himself under suspicion
of the game warden, but never THE deer; and a very subtle change
came over him, such a change as marks the point at which a man
leaves off being hunter to become the hunted.  He began to sense,
with vague reactions of resentment, the personality of Power.

It was about the end of the rains that the DITCH TENDER who was
also an orchardist, took the Homesteader's daughter to ride on his
unoccupied Sunday afternoon.  He had something to say to her which
demanded the wide, uninterrupted space of day.  They went up toward
the roots of the mountain between the green dikes of the chaparral,
and he was so occupied with watching the pomegranate color of her
cheeks and the nape of her neck where the sun touched it, that
he failed to observe that it was she who turned the horses into
the trail that led off the main road toward the shack of the Pot
Hunter.  The same change that had come over the man had fallen on
his habitation.  through the uncurtained window they saw heaps of
unwashed dishes and the rusty stove, and along the eaves of the
lean-to, a row of antlers bleaching.

"There's really no hope for a man," said the ditch tender, "once
he gets THAT habit.  It's worse than drink."

"Perhaps," said the Homesteader's daughter, "if he had any one at
home who cared..."  She was looking down at the bindweed that had
crept about the roots of a banksia rose she had once given the Pot
Hunter out of her own garden, and she sighed, but the ditch tender
did not notice that either.  He was thinking this was so good an
opportunity for what he had to say that he drew the horses toward
the end of the meadow where the stream came in, and explained to
her particularly just what it meant to a man to have somebody at
home who cared.

The Homesteader's daughter leaned against the oak as she listened,
and lifted up her clear eyes with a light in them that was like a
flash out of the deep, luminous eye of day, which caused the ditch
tender the greatest possible satisfaction.  He did not think it
strange, immediately he had her answer, to hear the titter of the
leaves of the lilac and the sudden throaty chuckle of the water.

"I am so happy," laughed the ditch tender, "that I fancy the whole
world is laughing with me."


All this was not so long as you would imagine to look at the Pot
Hunter.  As time went on the marking of the pot came out on him
very plainly.  He acquired the shifty, sidelong gait of the meaner
sort of predatory creatures.  His clothes, his beard, his very
features have much the appearance that his house has, as if the
owner of it were distant on another occupation, and the camise has
regained a considerable portion of his clearing.  Owing to the
vigilance of the game warden his is not a profitable business;
also he is in disfavor with the homesteaders along the Tonkawanda
who credit him with the disappearance of the mule-deer, once
plentiful in that district.  A solitary specimen is occasionally
met by sportsmen along the back of San Jacinto, exceedingly gun
wary.  But if Greenhow had known a little more about the Greeks it
might all have turned out quite differently.

[signed] Mary Austin





Men of the Sea




The afternoon sun etched our shadows on the whitewashed wall behind
us.  Acres of grain and gorse turned the moorland golden under a
windy blue sky.  In front of us the Bay of Biscay burned sapphire
to the horizon.

"You men of the sea," I said, "attain a greater growth of soul than
do we whose roots are in the land.  You are men of wider spiritual
vision, of deeper capacity than are we."

The coastguard's weather-beaten visage altered subtly.

"How can that be, Monsieur?  Our sins stalk us like vast red shadows.
We live violently, we men of the sea."

"But you really LIVE--spiritually and physically.  You attain a
spiritual growth, a vision, an understanding, a depth seldom reached
by us:--a wide kindness, a charity, a noble humanity outside the
circumference of our experience."

He said, looking seaward out of vague, sea-gray eyes:  "We drink
too deeply.  We love too often.  We men of the sea have great need
of intercession and of prayer."

"Not YOU."

"There was a girl at Rosporden....  And one at Bannalec....  And
others...from the ends of the earth to the ends of it...We Icelanders
drank deep.  And afterwards...in the China seas...."

His gray Breton eyes brooded on the flowing sapphire of the sea;
the low sun painted his furrowed face red.

"Not one among you but lays down his life for others as quietly
and simply as he fills his pipe.  From the rocking mizzen you look
down calmly upon the world of men tossing with petty and complex
passions--look down with the calm, kindly comprehension of a mature
soul which has learned something of Immortal toleration.  The
scheme of things is clearer to you than to us; your pity, wiser;
our faith more logical."

"We are children," he muttered, "we men of the sea."

I have tried to say so--in too many words," said I.

My dog looked up at me, then with a slight sigh settled himself
again beside the game bag and tucked his nose under his flank.  On
the whitewashed walls of the ancient, ruined fort behind us our
shadows towered in the red sunset.

I turned and looked at the roofless, crumbling walls, then at the
coast where jeweled surf tumbled, stained with crimson.

These shores had been washed with a redder stain in years gone
by:  these people were forever stamped with the eradicable scar
of suffering borne by generations dead.  The centuries had never
spared them.

And, as I brooded there, watching two peasants, father and son,
grubbing out the gorse below us to make a place for future wheat,
the rose surf beyond seemed full of little rosy children and showy
women, species of the endless massacres that this sad land had
endlessly endured.

"They struck you hard and deep," I said, thinking of the past.

"Deep, Monsieur," he replied, understanding me.  "Deep as your
people's hatred."

"Oh, poor ça"--he made a vague gesture.  "The dead are dead," he
said, leaning over and opening my game bag to look into it and sort
and count the few braces of partridge, snipe and widgeon.

Presently, from below, the peasants at work in the gorse, shouted
up to us something that I did not understand.

They were standing close together, leaning on mattock and spade,
grouped around something in the gorse.

"What do they say?" I asked.

"They have found a soldier's body."

"A body?"

"Long dead, Monsieur.  The skeleton of one of these who scourged
this coast in the old days."

He rose and started leisurely down through the flowering gorse.  I
followed, and my dog followed me.

In the shallow excavation there lay a few bones and shreds and bits
of tarnished metal.

I stooped and picked up a button and a belt buckle.  The royal arms
and the Regimental number were decipherable on the brasses.  One
of the peasants said:

"In Quimper lives a rich man who pays for relics.  God, in his
compassion, sends us poor men these bones."

The coastguard said:  "God sends them to you for decent internment.
Not to sell."

"But," retorted the peasant, "these bones and bits of brass belonged
to one of those who came here with fire and sword.  Need we respect
our enemies who slew without pity young and old?  And these bones
are very ancient."

"The living must respect the dead, Jean Le Locard."

"I am poor," muttered Le Locard.  "We Bretons are born to misery
and sorrow.  Life is very hard.  Is it any harm if I sell these
bones and brasses to a rich man, and buy a little bread for my wife
and little ones?"

The coastguard shook his head gravely:  "We Bretons may go hungry
and naked, but we cannot traffic in death.  Here lies a soldier,
a hundred years hidden under the gorse.  Nevertheless--"

He touched his cap in salute.  Slowly the peasants lifted their
caps and stood staring down at the bones, uncovered.

"Make a grave," said the coastguard simply.  He pointed up at the
old graveyard on the cliff above us.  Then, touching my elbow, he
turned away with me toward the little hamlet across the moors.

"Let us find the Curé," he murmured.  "We men of the sea should
salute the death God sends with the respect we owe to all His gifts
to man."

Our three gigantic shadows led us back across the moor,--my dog,
myself, and the gray-eyed silent man who knew the sea,--and something
perhaps, of the sea's Creator:--and much of his fellow men.

[signed] Robert W. Chambers





Jim--A Soldier of the King




We were machine gunners of the British Army stationed "Somewhere
in France" and had just arrived at our rest billets, after a weary
march from the front line sector.

The stable we had to sleep in was an old, ramshackle affair,
absolutely over-run with rats.  Great, big, black fellows, who used
to chew up our leather equipment, eat our rations, and run over
out bodies at night.  German gas had no effect on these rodents;
in fact, they seemed to thrive on it.

The floor space would comfortably accommodate about twenty men lying
down, but when thirty-three, including equipment, were crowded into
it, it was nearly unbearable.

The roof and walls were full of shell holes.  When it rained, a
constant drip, drip, drip was in order.  We were so crowded that if
a fellow was unlucky enough (and nearly all of us in this instance
were unlucky) to sleep under a hole, he had to grin and bear it.
It was like sleeping beneath a shower bath.

At one end of the billet, with a ladder leading up to it, was a sort
of grain bin, with a door in it.  This place was the headquarters
of our guests, the rats.  Many a stormy cabinet meeting was held
there by them.  Many a boot was thrown at it during the night
to let them know that Tommy Atkins objected to the matter under
discussion.  Sometimes one of these missiles would ricochet, and
land on the upturned countenance of a snoring Tommy, and for about
half an hour even the rats would pause in admiration of his flow
of language.

On the night in question we flopped down in our wet clothes, and
were soon asleep.  As was usual, No. 2 gun's crew were together.

The last time we had rested in this particular village, it was
inhabited by civilians, but now it was deserted.  An order had
been issued, two days previous to our arrival, that all civilians
should move farther back of the line.

I had been asleep about two hours when I was awakened by Sailor
Bill shaking me by the shoulder.  He was trembling like a leaf,
and whispered to me:

"Wake up, Yank, this ship's haunted.  There's some one aloft who's
been moaning for the last hour.  Sounds like the wind in the rigging.
I ain't scared of humans or Germans, but when it comes to messin'
in with spirits it's time for me to go below.  Lend your ear and
cast your deadlights on that grain locker, and listen."

I listened sleepily for a minute or so, but could hear nothing.
Coming to the conclusion that Sailor Bill was dreaming things, I
was again soon asleep.

Perhaps fifteen minutes had elapsed when I was rudely awakened.

"Yank, for God's sake, come aboard and listen!"  I listened and
sure enough, right out of that grain bin overhead came a moaning
and whimpering, and then a scratching against the door.  My hair
stood on end.  Blended with the drip, drip of the rain, and the
occasional scurrying of a rat overhead, that noise had a super-natural
sound.  I was really frightened; perhaps my nerves were a trifle
unstrung from our recent tour in the trenches.

I awakened "Ikey" Honney, while Sailor Bill roused "Happy" Houghton
and "Hungry" Foxcroft.

Hungry's first words were, "What's the matter, breakfast ready?"

In as few words as possible, we told them what had happened.  By
the light of the candle I had lighted, their faces appeared as
white as chalk.  Just then the whimpering started again, and we
were frozen with terror.  The tension was relieved by Ikey's voice:

"I admint I'm afraid of ghosts, but that sounds like a dog to me.
Who's going up the ladder to investigate?"

No one volunteered.

I had an old deck of cards in my pocket.  Taking them out, I
suggested cutting, the low man to go up the ladder.  They agreed.
I was the last to cut.  I got the ace of clubs.  Sailor Bill was
stuck with the five of diamonds.  Upon this, he insisted that it
should be the best two out of three cuts, but we overruled him,
and he was unanimously elected for the job.

With a "So long, mates, I'm going aloft," he started toward the
ladder, with the candle in his hand, stumbling over the sleeping
forms of many.  Sundry grunts, moans, and curses followed in his
wake.

As soon as he started to ascend the ladder, a "tap-tap-tap" could
be heard from the grain bin.  We waited in fear and trembling the
result of his mission.  Hungry was encouraging him with "Cheero,
mate, the worst is yet to come."

After many pauses, Bill reached the top of the ladder and opened
the door.  We listened with bated breath.  Then he shouted:

"Blast my deadlights, if it ain't a poor dog!  Come alongside mate,
you're on a lee shore, and in a sorry plight."

Oh, what a relief those words were to us.

With the candle in one hand and a dark object under his arm, Bill
returned and deposited in our midst the sorriest-looking specimen
of a cur dog you ever set eyes on.  It was so weak it couldn't
stand.  But that look in its eyes--just gratitude, plain gratitude.
Its stump of a tail was pounding against my mess tin and sounded
just like a message in the Morse code.  Happy swore that it was
sending S O S.

We were a lot of school children, every one wanting to help and
making suggestions at the same time.  Hungry suggested giving it
something to eat, while Ikey wanted to play on his infernal jew's
harp, claiming it was a musical dog.  Hungry's suggestion met our
approval, and there was a general scramble for haversacks.  All we
could muster was some hard bread and a big piece of cheese.

His nibs wouldn't eat bread, and also refused the cheese, but not
before sniffling it for a couple of minutes.  I was going to throw
the cheese away, but Hungry said he would take it.  I gave it to
him.

We were in a quandary.  It was evident that the dog was starving
and in a very weak condition.  Its coat was lacerated all over,
probably from the bites of rats.  That stump of a tail kept sending
S O S against my mess tin.  Every tap went straight to our hearts.
We would get something to eat for that mutt if we were shot for
it.

Sailor Bill volunteered to burglarize the quartermaster's stores
for a can of unsweetened condensed milk, and left on his perilous
venture.  He was gone about twenty minutes.  During his absence,
with the help of a bandage and a capsule of iodine, we cleaned the
wounds made by the rats.  I have bandaged many a wounded Tommy,
but never received the amount of thanks that that dog gave with
its eyes.

Then the billet door opened and Sailor Bill appeared.  He looked
like the wreck of the HESPERUS, uniform torn, covered with dirt
and flour, and a beautiful black eye, but he was smiling, and in
his hand he carried the precious can of milk.

We asked no questions, but opened the can.  Just as we were going
to pour it out, Happy butted in and said it should be mixed with
water; he ought to know, because his sister back in Blighty had
a baby, and she always mixed water with its milk.  We could not
dispute this evidence, so water was demanded.  We could not use
the water in our water bottles, as it was not fresh enough for our
new mate.  Happy volunteered to get some from the well--that is, if
we would promise not to feed his royal highness until he returned.
We promised, because Happy had proved that he was an authority on
the feeding of babies.  By this time the rest of the section were
awake and were crowding around us, asking numerous questions, and
admiring our newly found friend.  Sailor Bill took this opportunity
to tell of his adventures while in quest of the milk.

"I had a fair wind, and the passage was good until I came alongside
the quartermaster's shack, then the sea got rough.  The porthole
was battened down, and I had to cast it loose.  When I got aboard,
I could hear the wind blowing through the rigging of the supercargo
(quartermaster sergeant snoring), so I was safe.  I set my course
due north to the ration hold, and got my grappling irons on a cask
of milk, and came about on my homeward-bound passage, but something
was amiss with my wheel, because I ran nose on into him, caught him
on the rail, amidships.  Then it was repel boarders, and it started
to blow big guns.  His first shot put out my starboard light, and
I keeled over.  I was in the trough of the sea, but soon righted,
and then it was a stern chase, with me in the lead.  Getting into
the open sea, I made a port tack and have to in this cove with the
milk safely in tow."

Most of us didn't know what he was talking about, but surmised
that he had gotten into a mix-up with the quartermaster sergeant.
This surmise proved correct.

Just as Bill finished his narration, a loud splash was heard, and
Happy's voice came to us.  It sounded very far off:

"Help, I'm in the well!  Hurry up, I can't swim!"  Then a few
unintelligible words intermixed with blub! blub! and no more.

We ran to the well, and way down we could hear an awful splashing.
Sailor Bill yelled down, "Look out below; stand from under; bucket
coming!"  With that he loosed the windlass.  In a few seconds a
spluttering voice from the depths yelled up to us, "Haul away!"

It was hard work, hauling him up.  We had raised him about ten
feet from the water, when the handle of the windlass got loose from
our grip, and down went the bucket and Happy.  A loud splash came
to us, and grabbing the handle again, we worked like Trojans.  A
volley of curses came from that well which would have shocked Old
Nick himself.

When we got Happy safely out, he was a sight worth seeing.  He
did not even notice us.  Never said a word, just filled his water
bottle from the water in the bucket, and went back to the billet.  We
followed.  My mess tin was still sending S O S.

Happy, though dripping wet, silently fixed up the milk for the
dog.  In appetite, the canine was close second to Hungry Foxcroft.
After lapping up all he could hold, our mascot closed his eyes and
his tail ceased wagging.  Sailor Bill took a dry flannel shirt from
his pack, wrapped the dog in it, and informed us:

"Me and my mate are going below, so the rest of you lubbers batten
down and turn in."

We all wanted the honor of sleeping with the dog, but did not dispute
Sailor Bill's right to the privilege.  By this time the bunch were
pretty sleepy and tired, and turned in without much coaxing, as it
was pretty near daybreak.

Next day we figured out that perhaps one of the French kiddies had
put the dog in the grain bin, and, in the excitement of packing up
and leaving, had forgotten he was there.

Sailor Bill was given the right to christen our new mate.  He
called him "Jim."  In a couple of days Jim came around all right,
and got very frisky.  Every man in the section loved that dog.

Sailor Bill was court-martialed for his mix-up with the quartermaster
sergeant, and got seven days field punishment No. 1.  This meant
that two hours each day for a week he would be tied to the wheel
of a limber.  During those two-hour periods Jim would be at Bill's
feet, and no matter how much we coaxed him with choice morsels
of food, he would not leave until Bill was untied.  When Bill was
loosed, Jim would have nothing to do with him--just walked away
in contempt.  Jim respected the king's regulations, and had no use
for defaulters.

At a special meeting held by the section, Jim had the oath
of allegiance read to him.  He barked his consent, so we solemnly
swore him in as a soldier of the Imperial British Army, fighting
for king and country.  Jim made a better soldier than any one of
us, and died for his king and country.  Died without a whimper of
complaint.

From the village we made several trips to the trenches; each time
Jim accompanied us.  The first time under fire he put the stump of
his tail between his legs, but stuck to his post.  When "carrying
in" if we neglected to give Jim something to carry, he would make
such a noise barking that we soon fixed him up.

Each day Jim would pick out a different man of the section to follow.
He would stick to the man, eating and sleeping with him until the
next day, and then it would be some one's else turn.  When a man
had Jim with him, it seemed as if his life were charmed.  No matter
what he went through, he would come out safely.  We looked upon
Jim as a good-luck sign, and believe me, he was.

Whenever it came Ikey Honney's turn for Jim's company, he was
over-joyed, because Jim would sit in dignified silence, listening
to the jew's-harp.  Honney claimed that Jim had a soul for music,
which was more than he would say about the rest of us.

Once, at daybreak, we had to go over the top in an attack.  A man
in the section named Dalton was selected by Jim as his mate in this
affair.

The crew of gun No. 2 were to stay in the trench for over-head fire
purposes, and, if necessary, to help repel a probably counter-attack
by the enemy.  Dalton was very merry, and hadn't the least fear or
misgiving as to his safety, because Jim would be with him through
it all.

In the attack, Dalton, closely followed by Jim, had gotten about
sixty yards into No Man's Land, when Jim was hit in the stomach by
a bullet.  Poor old Jim toppled over, and lay still.  Dalton turned
around, and, just as he did so, we saw him throw up his hands and
fall face forward.

Ikey Honney, who was No. 3 on our gun, seeing Jim fall, scrambled
over the parapet, and through that rain of shells and bullets,
raced to where Jim was, picked him up, and, tucking him under his
arm, returned to our trench in safety.  If he had gone to rescue
a wounded man in this way he would have no doubt been awarded the
Victoria Cross.  but he only brought in poor bleeding, dying Jim.

Ikey laid him on the fire step alongside of our gun, but we could
not attend to him, because we had important work to do.  So he
died like a soldier, without a look of reproach for our heartless
treatment.  Just watched our every movement until his lights burned
out.  After the attack, what was left of our section gathered around
Jim's bloodstained body.  There wasn't a dry eye in the crowd.

Next day, we wrapped him in a small Union Jack belonging to Happy,
and laid him to rest, a soldier of the king.

We put a little wooden cross over his grave which read:

PRIVATE JIM
MACHINE-GUN COMPANY
KILLED IN ACTION
APRIL 10, 1916
A DOG WITH A MAN'S HEART

Although the section has lost lots of men, Jim is never forgotten.

[signed] Arthur Guy Empey





Heel and Toe




That man--it could only have been a man--who invented the Klinger
darning and mending machine struck a blow at marriage.  Martha
Eggers, bending over her work in the window of the Elite Hand
Laundry (washing delivered same day if left before 8 A.M.) never
quite evolved this thought in her mind.  When one's job is that
of darning six bushels of socks a day, not to speak of drifts of
pajamas and shirts, there remains very little time for philosophizing.

The window of the Elite Hand Laundry was a boast.  On a line strung
from side to side hung snowy, creaseless examples of the ironer's
art.  Pale blue tissue paper, stuffed into the sleeves and front
of lace and embroidery blouses cunningly enhanced their immaculate
virginity.  White piqué skirts, destined to be grimed by the sands
of beach and tee, dangled like innocent lambs before the slaughter.
Just behind this starched and glistening ambush one glimpsed the
bent head and the nimble fingers of Martha Eggers, first aid to
the unwed.

As she sat weaving, in and out, in and out, she was a twentieth
century version of any one of the Fates, with the Klinger darner
and mender substituted for distaff and spindle.  There was something
almost humanly intelligent in the workings of Martha's machine.
Under its glittering needle she would shove a sock whose heel bore
a great, jagged, gaping wound.  Your home darner, equipped only with
mending egg, needle, and cotton, would have pronounced it fatal.
But Martha's modern methods of sock surgery always saved its life.
In and out, back and forth, moved the fabric under the needle.
And slowly, the wound began to heal.  Tack, tack, back and forth.
The operation was completed.

"If I see you many more Mondays," Martha would say, grimly, tossing
it into the heap at her side, "there won't be anything left of
the original cloth.  I should think people would realize that this
laundry darns socks, but it doesn't manufacture 'em."

Before the advent of the ingenious mending machine I suppose more
men than would care to admit it married largely because they grew
so tired of seeing those eternal holes grinning back at them from
heel and toe, and of feeling for absent buttons in a hastily donned
shirt.  The Elite laundry owed much of its success to the fact that
it advertised alleviation for these discomforts.

If you had known Martha as I know her you would have found a certain
pathos in the thought of this spare spinster performing for legions
of unknown unseen men those homely, intimate tasks that have long
been the duty of wife or mother.  For Martha had no men-folks.
Martha was one of those fatherless, brotherless, husbandless women
who, because of their state, can retain their illusions about men.
She had never known the tragedy of setting forth a dinner only to
have hurled at her that hateful speech beginning with, "I had that
for lunch."  She had never seen a male, collarless, bellowing about
the house for his laundry.  She had never beheld that soul-searing
sight--a man in his trousers and shirt, his suspenders dangling,
his face lathered, engaged in the unbecoming rite of shaving.

Her knowledge of the home habits of the male biped she gleaned from
the telltale hints of the inanimate garments that passed through
her nimble hands.  She could even tell character and personality
from deductions gathered at heel and toe.  She knew, for example,
that F.C. (in black ink) was an indefatigable fox trotter and she
dubbed him Ferdy Cahn, though his name, for all she knew, might
have been Frank Callahan.  The dancing craze, incidentally, had
added mountainous stacks to Martha's already heaped up bins.

The Elite Laundry served every age and sex.  But Martha's department
was, perforce, the unwed male section.  No self-respecting wife
or mother would allow laundry-darned hose or shirts to reflect on
her housekeeping habits.  And what woman, ultra-modern though she
be, would permit machine-mended stockings to desecrate her bureau
drawers?  So it was that Martha ministered, for the most part, to
those boarding house bachelors living within delivery-wagon proximity
to the Elite Laundry.

It was early in May that Martha first began to notice the white
lisle socks marked E.G.  She picked them from among the great heap
at her work table because of the exquisite fineness of the darning
that adorned them.  It wasn't merely darning.  It was embroidery.
It was weaving.  It was cobweb tapestry.  It blended in with the
original fabric so intimately that it required an expert eye to
mark where darning finished and cloth began.  Martha regarded it
with appreciation unmarred by envy, as the artisan eye regards the
work of the artist.

"That's his mother's darning," she thought, as she smoothed it with
one work-scarred finger.  "And she doesn't live here in Chicago.  No,
sir!  It takes a small town mother to have the time and patience for
that kind of work.  She's the kind whose kitchen smells of ginger
cookies on Saturday mornings.  And I'll bet if she ever found a
moth in the attic she'd call the fire department.  He's her only
son.  And he's come to the city to work.  And his name--his name
is Eddie."

And Eddie he remained for the months that followed.

Now, there was nothing uncanny in Martha Eggers' deduction
that a young man who wears white hose, miraculously darned, is a
self-respecting young man, brought up by a worshiping mother who
knows about ginger cookies and winter underwear, and whose Monday
washing is fragrant with the clean-smelling scent of green grass
and sunshine.  But it was remarkable that she could pick this one
needle from the haystack of socks and shirts that towered above
her.  She ran her hand through hundreds of garments in the day's
work.  Some required her attention.  Some were guiltless of rent
or hole.  She never thought of mating them.  That was the sorter's
work.  But with Eddie's socks it was different.  They had not, as
yet, required the work of her machine needle.  She told her self,
whimsically, that when the time came to set her crude work next
to the masterly effects produced by the needle of Eddie's ma every
fiber in her would shrink from the task.  Of course Martha did not
put it in just that way.  But the thought was there.  And bit by
bit, week by week, month by month, the life, and aims, and ambitions,
and good luck and misfortunes of this country boy who had come
to the call of the city, were unfolded before the keen eye of the
sparse spinster who sat stitching away in the window of the Elite
Laundry.

For a long, long time the white hose lacked reinforcements, so
that they began to grow thin from top to toe.  Martha feared that
they would go to pieces in one irremediable catastrophe, like the
one-hoss shay.  Evidently Eddie's job did not warrant unnecessary
expenditures.  Then the holes began to appear.  Martha tucked
them grimly under the glittering needle of the Klinger darner and
mender but at the first incision she snapped the thread, drew out
the sock, and snipped the stitches.

"His ma'd have a fit.  I'll just roll 'em up, and take 'em home
with me to-night and darn 'em by hand."  She laughed at herself,
a little shame-faced laugh, but tender, too.

She did darn them that night, in the twilight, and in the face
of the wondering contempt of Myrt.  Myrt dwelt across the hall in
five-roomed affluence with her father and mother.  She was one of
the ten stenographers employed by the Slezak Film Company.  There
existed between the two women an attraction due to the law of
opposites.  Myrt was nineteen.  She earned twelve dollars a week.
She knew all the secrets of the moving picture business, but even
that hideous knowledge had left her face unscarred.  Myrt's twelve
was expended wholly upon the embellishment of Myrt.  Myrt was one
of those asbestos young women upon whom the fires of life leave no
mark.  She regarded Martha Eggers, who dwelt in one room, in the
rear, across the hall, with that friendly contempt which nineteen,
cruelly conscious of its charms, bestows upon plain forty.

She strolled into Martha Eggers' room now to find that lady
intent upon a white sock, darning needle in hand.  She was working
in the fast-fading light that came through her one window.  Myrt,
kimono-clad, stared at her in unbelief.

"Well, I've heard that when actors get a day off they go to the
theater.  I suppose it's the same idea.  I should think you'd get
enough darning and mending from eight A. M. to six P. M. without
dragging it home with you."

"I'm doing it for a friend," said Martha, her head bent over her
work.

"What's his name?"

"Eddie."

"Eddie what?"

Martha blushed, pricked her finger, bent lower.  "Eddie--Eddie
Grant."

At the end of the next six weeks every pair of Eddie Grant's hose,
heel and toe, bore the marks of Martha's workmanship.  Then, quite
suddenly, they ceased to appear.  Had he gone back home, defeated?
Had he moved to another neighborhood?  Had he invested in a fresh
supply of haberdashery?  On Tuesday of the seventh week E. G.'s
white hose appeared once more.  Martha picked them from among the
heap.  Instantly she knew.  Clumsily, painstakingly, they had been
darned by a hand all unaccustomed to such work.  A masculine hand,
as plucky as it was awkward.

"Why, the poor kid!  The poor little kid!  Lost his job for six
weeks, and did his own washing and mending."

That night she picked out the painfully woven stitches and replaced