ow of them,
And khaki-clad soldiers
Lift their eyes to the garish red and blue
And turn back to their khaki tasks
Refreshed.

America,
The clock strikes.
The spring is upon us,
The seed of our forefathers
Quickens again in the soil,
And these flags are the small, early flowers
Of the solstice of our Hope!

Thru suffering to Peace!
Thru sacrifice to Security!
Red stripes,
Turn us not from our purpose,
Lead us up as by a ladder
To the deep blue quiet
Wherein are shining
The silver stars.

Soldiers, sailors, clerks, and office boys,
Men, and Women--but not children,
No!  Not children!
Let these march
With their paper caps and toy rifles
And feel only the panoply of War--
But the others,
Welded and forged,
Seared, melted, broken,
Molded without flaw,
Slowly, faithfully pursuing a Purpose,
A Purpose of Peace,

Even into the very flame of Death.
Over the city,
Over all the cities,
Flutter flags.
Flags of spring,
Flags of burgeoning,
Flags of fulfillment.

[signed] Amy Lowell





Our Day




London, April 20, 1917


It was the evening of our Day; that young April day when in
the solemn vastness of St. Paul's were held the services to mark
America's historic entrance into the Great World War.  Across the
mighty arch of the Chancel on either side hung the Stars and Stripes
and the Union Jack.

From the organ pealed those American songs to which half a century
ago, in another war for Freedom, men marched to battle, and, even
if by ways of defeat and death, to ultimate Victory.  How many there
were that April day for whom the sight of the Stars and Stripes was
blurred with tears.  How the familiar airs and simple words pained
us with the memory of our distant homes.  Perhaps for the first
time we understood the solemn significance of this dedication to
war of what we hardly knew was so unspeakably dear.

In the Crypt of St. Paul's, Mausoleum of England's greatest soldier
and sailor heroes, their ashes rest who once fought and conquered.
If it is given to those who have gone before to hear our human
appeal, perhaps the immortal spirits of Nelson, of Wellington, of
Kitchener, whose tragic fate is its unfulfilled destiny, may have
rested like an inspiration on that kindred nation offering the
sacrifice of all it holds most sacred to the cause of Divine Justice.

After the solemn benediction thousands streamed slowly out to mingle
with the multitudes gathered before the great Entrance where Queen
Anne in crown and scepter keeps majestic guard, and where in peaceful
days doves flit and flutter down to peck at the grain strewn about
her royal feet.

Stern and momentous times have passed over that old, gray Cathedral;
times of a Nation's grief and a Nation's rejoicing.  But of all such
days, in its centuries of existence, none has been so momentous for
the destiny of the Empire as that sunny April day.  And yet--and
yet--perhaps more touching, more solemn, even than the High
Service at St. Paul's, that which stirred Americans even more who
love England with only a lesser love, and made us realize as never
before what America stands for, joint defender now of the new
Civilization, was the silent symbol of her dedication to the Cause
of Human Freedom, for all London to see and on which, seeing, to
reflect.  It was the symbol of that for which Statesmen who were
also prophets, have lived and toiled.

It rose against the glowing West, never to be forgotten by those
who saw it at the close of Our Day, for it marked the new Epoch.

Now at last "Let the dead Past bury its Dead."

Along Whitehall, down Parliament Street, and where towards the left
Westminster Bridge spans its immortal river, stand the Houses of
Parliament, their delicate tracery of stonework etched against the
sunset sky.

Hurrying crowds, released from the day's toil, stopped here, as if
by a common impulse, to gaze upwards, and, gazing in silent wonder,
they saw such a sight as London has never seen before.  On the
highest pinnacle of the Victoria tower where the flag of another
nation has never before shared its proud eminence there floated
together from one flagstaff Old Glory and the Union Jack.

That was America's supreme consecration.

[signed] Annie E. Lane (Mrs. John Lane)





Pour La Patrie




They were brothers, Louis and François, standing in the presence of
the Prussian commander, looking hopelessly into his cold, unsmiling
eyes.  For the third time in as many days he was bargaining with
them for that which God had given them and they in turn had promised
to France:  their lives.

"Do not make the mistake of thinking that we exalt you for what
you may call courage, or that your country will sing your praises,"
said the general harshly.  "Your country will never know how or when
you die.  You have nothing to gain by dying, not even the credit
of dying."

François allowed his hot, dry eyes to sweep slowly around the group.
He was pale, his forehead wet.

"You are soldiers," said he, his voice low and steady.  "Is there
one among you who would do the thing we are asked to do?  If there is
one man here who will stand forth in the presence of his comrades
and say that he would betray Germany as you are asking us to
betray France,--if there is such a man among you, let him speak,
and the,--then I will do what you ask of me."

A dozen pairs of hard implacable eyes returned his challenge.  No
man spoke.  No man smiled.

"You do not even pretend," cried the little poilu.  "well, I too
am a soldier.  I am a soldier of France.  It is nothing to me that
I day to-day or to-morrow, or that my country knows when or how.
Take me out and shoot me," he shouted, facing the commander.  "I
am but one poor soldier.  I am one of millions.  What is my little
life worth to you?"

"Nothing," said the commander.  "Ten such as you would not represent
the worth of one German soldier."

"We say not so over there," said François boldly, jerking his thumb
in the direction of Pont-a-mousson.

And now for the first time the Prussians about him smiled.

"What is it, pray, that you do say over there?" inquired the general
mockingly.

"That the worst of the Frenchmen is worth five of your best," said
François, unafraid.  Why should he be afraid to speak the truth?
He was going to die.

"And one of your frog-eating generals is the equal of five of me,
I suppose?"  The commander's grim face relaxed into a smile.  "That
is good!  Ha-ha!  That is good!"

"So we say, excellency," said François simply.  "Our Papa Joffre--ah,
he is greater than all of you put in one."

The Prussian flushed.  His piggish eyes glittered.

"Your Papa Joffre!" he scoffed.

"He is greater than the Kaiser,--though I die for saying it," cried
the little poilu recklessly.

The commander turned his eyes from the white, impassioned face
of François and looked upon the quivering, ghastly visage of the
brother who stood beside him.  The fire that glowed in the eyes of
François was missing in those of Louis.

The grizzled Prussian smiled, but imperceptibly.  What he saw
pleased him.  Louis, the big one, the older of the two, trembled.
It was only by the supremest effort that he maintained a pitiable
show of defiance.  His face was haggard and blanched with fear;
there was a hunted, shifty look in his narrowed eyes.  The general's
smile developed.  It proffered comfort, consolation, encouragement.

"And you," he said, almost gently, "have not you profited by the
reflections of your three days of grace?  Are you as stubborn as
this mule of a brother, this foolish lad who spouts even poorer
French than I address to you?"

François shot a quick, appealing glance at his big brother's face.
There were tiny rivulets of slaver at the corners of Louis's mouth.

"Louis!" he cried out sharply.

Louis lifted his sagging shoulders.  "I have nothing to say," he
said thickly, and with the set of his jaws François breathed deeply
of relief.

"So!" said the general, shrugging his shoulders.  "I am sorry.  You
are young to die, you two.  To die on the field of battle,--ah,
that is noble!  To die with one's back to a wall, blindfolded, and
to be covered with earth so loosely that starving dogs may scratch
away to feast--But, no more.  You have decided.  You have had many
hours in which to consider the alternative.  You will be shot at
daybreak."

The slight figure of François straightened, his chin went up.  His
thin, dirt-covered hands were tightly clenched.

"For France!" he murmured, lifting his eyes above the head of the
Prussian.

A vast shudder swept over the figure of Louis, a hoarse gasp broke
through his lips.  The commander leaned forward, fixing him with
compelling eyes.

"For France!" cried François again, and once more Louis lifted his
head to quaver:

"For France!"

"Take them away," said the commander.  "But stay!  How old are
you?"  He addressed François.

"I am nineteen."

"And you?"

Louis's lips moved but no sound issued.

"My brother is twenty-one," said François, staring hard at Louis.

"He has a sweetheart who will grieve bitterly if he does not
return for her caresses, eh?  I thought so.  Oh, you French!  But
she will soon recover.  She will find another,--like that!  So!"
He snapped his fingers.  "She will not wait long, my good Louis.
Take them away!"

Louis's face was livid.  His chin trembled, his lips fell apart
slackly; he lowered his eyes after an instant's contact with the
staunch gaze of his brother.

"You have until sunrise to change your minds," said the Prussian,
turning on his heel.

"Sunrise," muttered Louis, his head twitching.

They were led from the walled-in garden and across the cobblestones
of the little street that terminated in a cul de sac just above.
Over the way stood the shattered remnants of a building that once
had been pointed to with pride by the simple villagers as the finest
shop in town.  The day was hot.  Worn-out German troopers sprawled
in the shade of the walls, sound asleep, their mouths ajar,--beardless
boys, most of them.

"Poor devils," said François, as he passed among them.  He too was
very young.

They were shoved through the wrecked doorway into the mortar-strewn
ruin, and, stumbling over masses of débris, came to the stone steps
that led to the cellar below.  Louis drew back with a groan.  He
had spent centuries in that foul pit.

"Not there--again!" he moaned.  He was whimpering feebly as he
picked himself up at the bottom of the steps a moment later.

"Dogs!" cried François, glaring upward and shaking his fist at the
heads projecting into the turquoise aperture above.  Far on high,
where the roof had been, gleamed the brilliant sky.  "Our general
will make you pay one of these days,--our GREAT general!"

Then he threw his arms about his brother's shoulders and--cried a
little too,--no in fear but in sympathy.

The trap door dropped into place, a heavy object fell upon it with
a thud, and they were in inky darkness.  There was no sound save
the sobs of the two boys, and later the steady tread of a man who
paced the floor overhead,--a man who carried a gun.

They had not seen, but they knew that a dead man lay over in the
corner near a window chocked by a hundred tons of brick and mortar.
He had died some time during the second century of their joint
occupance of the black and must hole.  On the 28th he had come in
with them, wounded.  It was now the 31st, and he was dead, having
lived to the age of nine score years and ten!  When they spoke to
their guards at the beginning of the third century, saying that
their companion was dead and should be carried away, the Germans
replied:

"There is time enough for that," and laughed,--for the Germans
could count the time by hours out there in the sunshine.  But that
is not why they laughed.

A hidden French battery in the wooded, rocky hills off to the
west had for days kept up a deadly, unerring fire upon the German
positions.  Shift as he would, the commander could not escape the
shells from those unseen, undiscovered guns.  They followed him
with uncanny precision.  His own batteries had searched in vain,
with thousands of shrieking shells, for the gadfly gunners.  They
could find him, but he could not find them.  For every shell he
wasted, they returned one that counted.

Three French scouts fell into his hands on the night of the 28th.
Two of them were still alive.  He had them up before him at once.

"On one condition will I spare your lives," said he.  And that
condition had been pounded into their ears with unceasing violence,
day and night, by officers high and low, since the hour of their
capture.  It was a very simple condition, declared the Germans.
Only a stubborn fool would fail to take advantage of the opportunity
offered.  The exact position of that mysterious battery,--that
was all the general demanded in return for his goodness in sparing
their lives.  He asked no more of them than a few, truthful words.

They had steadfastly refused to betray their countrymen.

François could not see his brother, but now and then he put out a
timid hand to touch the shaking figure.  He could not understand.
Why was it not the other way about?  Who was he to offer consolation
to the big and strong?

"Courage," he would say, and then stare hard ahead into the blackness.
"You are great and strong," he would add.  "It is I who am weak
and little, Louis.  I am the little brother."

"You have not so much to live for as I," Louis would mutter, over
and over again.

Their hour drew near.  "Eat this," persuaded François, pressing
upon Louis the hunk of bread their captors had tossed down to them.

"Eat?  God!  How can I eat?"

"Then drink.  It is not cold, but--"

"Let me alone!  Keep away from me!  God in heaven, why do they
leave that Jean Picard down here with us--"

"You have seen hundreds of dead men, Louis.  All of them were
heroes.  All of them were brave.  It was glorious to die as they
died.  Why should we be afraid of death?"

"But they died like men, not like rats.  They died smiling.  They
had no time to think."

And then he fell to moaning.  His teeth rattled.  He turned upon
his face and for many minutes beat upon the stone steps with his
clenched hands, choking out appeals to his Maker.

François stood.  His hot, unblinking eyes tried to pierce the darkness.
Tears of shame and pity for this big brother burnt their way out
and ran down his cheeks.  He was wondering.  He was striving to
put away the horrid doubt that was searing his soul:  the doubt of
Louis!

The dreary age wore on.  Louis slept!  The little brother sat with
his chin in his hands, his heart cold, his eyes closed.  He prayed.

Then came the sound of the heavy object being dragged away from
the door at the top of the steps.  They both sprang to their feet.
An oblong patch of drab, gray light appeared overhead.  Sunrise!

"Come!  It is time," called down a hoarse voice.  Three guns hung
over the edge of the opening.  They were taking no chances.

"Louis!" cried François sharply.

Louis straightened his gaunt figure.  The light from above fell
upon his face.  It was white,--deathly white,--but transfigured.
A great light flamed in his eyes.

"Have no fear, little brother," he said gently, caressingly.  He
clasped his brother's hand.  "We die together.  I have dreamed.
A vision came to me,--came down from heaven.  My dream was of our
mother.  She came to me and spoke.  So!  I shall die without fear.
Come!  Courage, little François.  We are her soldier boys.  She
gave us to France.  She spoke to me.  I am not afraid."

Glorified, rejoicing, almost unbelieving, François followed his
brother up the steps, there was comfort in the grip of Louis's
hand.

"This general of yours," began Louis, facing the guard, a sneer on
his colorless lips, his teeth showing, "he is a dog!  I shall say
as much to him when the guns are pointed at my breast."

The Germans stared.

"What has come over this one?" growled one of them.  "Last night
he was breaking."

"There is still a way to break him," said another, grinning.  "Hell
will be a relief to him after this hour."

"Canailès!" snarled Louis, and François laughed aloud in sheer joy!

"My good,--my strong brother!" he cried out.

"This Papa Joffre of yours," said the burliest German,--"he is
worse than a dog.  He is a toad."  He shoved the captives through
the opening in the wall.  "Get on!"

"The smallest sergeant in Germany is greater than your Papa Joffre,"
said another.  "What is it you have said, baby Frenchman?  One
frog-eater is worth five Germans?  Ho-ho!  You shall see."

"I--I myself," cried François hotly,--"I am nobler, braver, greater
than this beast you call master."

"Hold your tongue," said a third German, in a kindlier tone than
the others had employed.  "It can do you no good to talk like this.
Give in, my brave lads.  Tell everything.  I know what is before
you if you refuse to-day,--and I tremble.  He will surely break
you to-day."

They were crossing the narrow road.

"He is your master,--not ours," said François calmly.

Louis walked ahead, erect, his jaw set.  The blood leaped in
François' veins.  Ah, what a brave, strong fellow his brother was!

"He is the greatest commander in all the German armies," boasted
the burly sergeant.  "And, young frog-eater, he commands the finest
troops in the world.  Do you know that there are ten thousand iron
crosses in this God-appointed corps!  Have a care how you speak
of our general.  He is the Emperor's right hand.  He is the chosen
man of the Emperor."

"And of God," added another.

"Bah!" cried François, snapping his fingers scornfully.  "His is
worth no more than that to me!"

François was going to his death.  His chest swelled.

"You fool.  He is to the Emperor worth more than an entire army
corps,--yes, two of them.  The Emperor would sooner lose a hundred
thousand men than this single general."

"A hundred thousand men?" cried François, incredulously.  "That is
a great many men,--even Germans."

"Pigs," said Louis, between his teeth.

They now entered the little garden.  The Prussian commander was
eating his breakfast in the shelter of a tent.  The day was young,
yet the sun was hot.  Papers and maps were strewn over the top of
the long table at which he sat, gorging himself.  The guard and
the two prisoners halted a few paces away.  The general's breakfast
was not to be interrupted by anything so trivial as the affairs of
Louis and François.

"And that ugly glutton is worth more than a hundred thousand men,"
mused François, eyeing him in wonder.  "God, how cheap these boches
must be."

Staff officers stood outside the tent, awaiting and receiving
gruff orders from their superior.  Between gulps he gave out almost
unintelligible sounds, and one by one these officers, interpreting
them as commands, saluted and withdrew.

François gazed as one fascinated.  He WAS a great general, after
all.  Only a very great and powerful general could enjoy such
respect, such servile obedience as he was receiving from these
hulking brutes of men.

Directions were punctuated,--or rather indicated,--by the huge
carving-knife with which the general slashed his meat.  He pointed
suddenly with the knife, and, as he did so, the officer at whom
it was leveled, sprang into action, to do as he was bidden, as if
the shining blade had touched his quivering flesh.

Suddenly the great general pushed his bench back from the table,
slammed the knife and fork down among the platters, and barked:

"Well!"

His eyes were fastened upon the prisoners.  The guards shoved them
forward.

"Have you decided?  What is it to be,--life or death?"

He was in an evil humor.  That battery in the hills had found its
mark again when the sun was on the rise.

"Vive la France!" shouted Louis, raising his eye to heaven.

"vive la France!" almost screamed François.

"So be it!" roared the commander.  His gaze was fixed on Louis.
There was the one who would weaken.  Not that little devil of a
boy beside him.  He uttered a short, sharp command to an aide.

The torturing of Louis began....

"End it!" commanded the Prussian general after a while.  "The fool
will not speak!"

And the little of life that was left to the shuddering, sightless
Louis went out with a sigh--slipped out with the bayonet as it was
withdrawn from his loyal breast.

Turning to François, who had been forced to witness the mutilation
of his brother,--whose arms had been held and whose eyelids were
drawn up by the cruel fingers of a soldier who stood behind him,--he
said:

"Now YOU!  You have seen what happened to him!  It is your turn
now.  I was mistaken.  I thought that he was the coward.  Are you
prepared to go through even more than--Ah!  Good!  I thought so!
The little fire-eater weakens!"

François, shaken and near to dying of the horror he had witnessed,
sagged to his knees.  They dragged him forward,--and one of them
kicked him.

"I will tell!  I will tell!" he screamed.  "Let me alone!  Keep
your hands off of me!  I will tell, God help me, general!"

He staggered, white-faced and pitiful, to the edge of the table,
which he grasped with trembling, straining hands.

"Be quick about it," snarled the general, leaning forward eagerly.

Like a cat, François sprang.  He had gauged the distance well.  He
had figured it all out as he stood by and watched his brother die.

His fingers clutched the knife.

"I will!" he cried out in an ecstasy of joy.

To the hasp sank the long blade into the heart of the Prussian
commander.

Whirling, the French boy threw his arms on high and screamed into
the faces of the stupefied soldiers:

"Vive la France!  One hundred thousand men!  There they lie!  Ha-ha!
I--I, François Dupré,--I have sent them all to hell!  Wait for me,
Louis!  I am coming!"

The first words of the "Marseillaise" were bursting from his lips
when his uplifted face was blasted--

He crumpled up and fell.

[signed] George Barr McCutcheon





Sonnet




Thou art not lovelier than lilacs,--no,
Nor honeysuckle,--thou art not more fair
Than small white single poppies,--I can bear
Thy beauty; though I bend before thee, though
From left to right, not knowing where to go,
I turn my troubled eyes, nor here nor there
Find any refuge from thee, yet I swear
So has it been with mist,--with moonlight so.

Like him who day by day unto his draught
Of delicate poison adds him one drop more
Till he may drink unharmed the death of ten,
Even so, inured to beauty, who have quaffed
Each hour more deeply than the hour before,
I drink,--and live--what has destroyed some men.

[signed] Edna St. Vincent Millay





The Idiot




I


The change was not affected without whispering.  The spirit both
of the troops who were going back of the lines to rest and of those
who had zigzagged up through two miles of communication trenches
to take their places was excellent.

"What is the name of this country?" asked one of the new comers.

"If it had a name, that is all that remains.  We are somewhere in
Picardy.  The English are off there not very far.  Their cannon
have different voices from ours.  Good Luck!"

His gray, faded uniform seemed to melt into the night.  The New
Comer stepped on to the firing platform and poked his head over
the parapet.  A comrade pulled at his trousers leg.

"Come down, Idiot," he said, "Fritz is only twelve yards away."

The Idiot came down, sniffing the night air luxuriously.

"We are somewhere in Picardy," he said.  "I know without being
told.  It is like going home."

A sergeant approached, his body twisted sideways because the trench
was too narrow for his shoulders.

"Have you a watch?"

The Idiot had.

Under his coat, so that the enemy should not perceive the glow,
the sergeant flashed his electric torch and compared the watches.

"Yours leads by a minute," he said.  "The advance will be at four
o'clock.  there will be hot coffee at three.  Good luck."

He passed on, and the comrades drew a little closer together.  The
sergeant's words had made the Idiot very happy.

"In less than two hours!" he said.

"I thought there was something in the wind," said Paul Guitry.

"If we advanced only three kilometers," said the Idiot, "the village
in which I was born would be French again.  But there will be great
changes."

"You were born at Champ-de-Fer?"

"It is directly opposite us."

"You cannot know that."

"I feel it," said the Idiot.  "Wherever I have been stationed I have
felt it.  Sometimes I have asked an officer to look for Champ-de-Fer
on his field map, and when he has done so, I have pointed, and said
'Is it in that direction?' and always I have been right."

"Did your family remain in the village?"

"I don't know.  But I think so, for from the hour of the mobilization
until now, I have not heard from them."

"Since the hour of the mobilization," said Paul Guitry, "much water
has flowed under the bridges.  I had just been married.  My wife
is in Paris.  I have a little son now.  I saw them when I had my
eight days' leave.  And it seems that again I am to be a father.
It is very wonderful."

"I was going to be married," said the Idiot simply.

There was a short silence.

"If I had known," said Paul Guitry, "I would not have boasted of
my own happiness."

"I am not the only French soldier who has not heard from his
sweetheart since the mobilization," said the Idiot.  "It has been
hard," he said, "but by thinking of all the others, I have been
able to endure."

"She remained there at Champ-de-Fer?"

"She must have, or else she would have written to me."

Paul Guitry could not find anything to say.

"Soon," said the Idiot, "we shall be in Champ-de-Fer, and they will
tell me what has become of her."

"She will tell you herself," said Paul Guitry with a heartiness
which he did not feel.  The Idiot shrugged his shoulders.

"We have loved each other," he said, "even since we were little
children.  Do you know why I am called the Idiot?  It is because
I do not go with women, when I have the chance.  But I don't mind.
They cannot say that I am not a real man, for I have the military
medal and I have been mentioned twice in the orders of the day."

To Paul Guitry, a confirmed sinner as opportunity offered, the
Idiot's statement contained much psychic meat.

"It must be," he said, "that purity tempts some men, just as impurity
tempts others."

"It is even simpler," said the Idiot; but he did not explain.  And
there was a long silence.

Now and then Paul Guitry glanced at his companion's profile, for
the night was no longer inky black.  It was a simple direct young
face, not handsome, but full of dignity and kindness; the line of
the jaw had a certain sternness, and the wide and delicately molded
nostril indicated courage and daring.

Paul Guitry thought of his wife and of his little son, of his eight
days' leave, and of its consequences.  He tried to imagine how he
would feel, if for two years his wife had been in the hands of the
Germans.  Without meaning to, he spoke his thought aloud:

"Long since," he said, "I should have gone mad."

The Idiot nodded.

"They say," he said, "that in fifty years all this will be forgotten;
and that we French will feel friendly toward the Germans."

He laughed softly, a laugh so cold, that Paul Guitry felt as if
ice water had suddenly been spilled on his spine.

"Hell," he went on, "has no tortures which French men, and women,
and little children have not suffered.  You say that if you had
been in my boots you must long since have gone mad?  well, it is
because I have been able to think of all the others who are in my
boots that I have kept my sanity.  It has not been easy.  It is
not as if my imagination alone had been tortured.  Just as I have
the sense that my village is there--" he pointed with his sensitive
hand, "so I have the sense of what has happened there.  I KNOW that
she is alive," he concluded, "and that she would rather be dead."

There was another silence.  The Idiot's nostrils dilated and he
sniffed once or twice.

"The coffee is coming," he said.  "Listen.  If I am killed in the
advance, find her, will you--Jeanne Bergère?  And say what you can
to comfort her.  It doesn't matter what has happened, her love for
me is like the North Star--fixed.  When she knows that I am dead
she will wish to kill herself.  You must prevent that.  You must
show her how she can help France.  Aha!--The cannon!"

From several miles in the rear there rose suddenly a thudding percussive
cataract of sound.  The earth trembled like some frightened animal
that has been driven into a corner.

The Idiot leaped to his feet, his eyes joyously alight.

"It is the voice of God," he cried.

If indeed it was the voice of God, that other great voice which is
of Hell, made no answer.  The German guns were unaccountably silent.

On the stroke of four, the earth still trembling with the incessant
concussions of the guns, the French scrambled out of their trenches
and went forward.  But no sudden blast of lead and iron challenged
their temerity.  A few shells, but all from field pieces, fired
perfunctorily as it were, fell near them and occasionally among
them.  It looked as if Fritz wasn't going to fight.

The wire guarding the first line of German trenches had been so
torn and disrupted by the French cannon, that only here and there
an ugly strand remained to be cut.  The trench was empty.

"The Boche," said Paul Guitry, "has left nothing but his smell."

Rumor spread swiftly through the lines.  "We are not to be opposed.
Fritz has been withdrawn in the night.  His lines are too long.
He is straightening out his salients.  It is the beginning of the
end."

There was good humor and elation.  There was also a feeling of
admiration for the way in which Fritz had managed to retreat without
being detected.

The country over which the troops advanced was a rolling desert,
blasted, twisted, swept clear of all vegetation.  What the Germans
could not destroy they had carried away with them.  There remained
only frazzled stumps of trees, dead bodies and ruined engines of
war.

Paul Guitry and the Idiot came at last to the summit of a little
hill.  Beyond and below at the end of a long sweep of tortured and
ruined fields could be seen picturesquely grouped a few walls of
houses and one bold arch of an ancient bridge.

The Idiot blinked stupidly.  Then he laughed a short, ugly laugh.

"I had counted on seeing the church steeple.  But of course they
would have destroyed that."

"Is it Champ-de-Fer?" asked Guitry.

At that moment a dark and sudden smoke, as from ignited chemicals
began to pour upward from the ruined village.

"It was," said the Idiot, and once more the word was passed to go
forward.


II


They did not know what was going on in the world.  They had been
ordered into the cellars of the village, and told to remain there
for twenty-four hours.  They had no thought but to obey.

Into the same cellar with Jeanne Bergère had been herded four old
women, two old men, and a little boy whom a German surgeon (the day
the champagne had been discovered buried in the Notary's garden)
had strapped to a board and--vivisected.

Twenty-three of the twenty-four hours had passed (one of the old
men had a Waterbury watch) but only the little boy complained of
hunger and thirst.  He wanted to drink from the well in the corner
of the cellar; but they would not let him.  The well had supplied
good drinking water since the days of Julius Caesar, but shortly
after entering the cellar one of the old women had drunk from it,
and shortly afterward had died in great torment.  The little boy
kept saying:

"But maybe it wasn't the water which killed Madame Pigeon.  Only
let me try it and then we shall know for sure."

But they would not let him drink.

"It is not agreeable to live," said one of the old men, "but it
is necessary.  We are of those who will be called upon to testify.
The terms of peace will be written by soft-hearted statesmen; we
who have suffered must be on hand.  We must be on hand to see that
the Boche gets his deserts."

Jeanne Bergère spoke in a low unimpassioned voice:

"What would you do to them, father," she asked, "if you were God?"

"I do not know," said the old man.  "For I have experience only
of those things which give them pleasure.  Those who delight in
peculiar pleasures are perhaps immune to ordinary pains...."

"Surely," interrupted the little boy, "it was not the water that
killed Madame Pigeon."

"How peaceful she looks," said the old man.  "You would say the
stone face of a saint from the façade of a cathedral."

"It may be," said Jeanne Bergère, "that already God has opened His
mind to her, and that she knows of that vengeance, which we with
our small minds are not able to invent."

"I can only think of what they have done to us," said the old man.
"It does not seem as if there was anything left for us to do to
them.  Vengeance which does not give the Avenger pleasure is a poor
sort of vengeance.  Madame Simon..."

The old woman in question turned a pair of sheeny eyes towards the
speaker.

"Would it give you any particular pleasure to cut the breasts off
an old German woman?"

With a trembling hand Madame Simon flattened the bosom of her dress
to show that there was nothing beneath.

"It would give me no pleasure," she said, "but I shall show my
scars to the President."

"An eye for an eye--a tooth for a tooth," said the old man.  "That
is the ancient law.  But it does not work.  There is no justice in
exchanging a German eye and a French.  French eyes see beauty in
everything.  To the German eye the sense of beauty has been denied.
You cannot compare a beast and a man.  In the old days, when there
were wolves, it was the custom of the naive people of those days
to torture a wolf if they caught one.  They put him to death with
the same refinements which were requisitioned for human criminals.
This meant nothing to the wolf.  The mere fact that he had been
caught was what tortured him.  And so I think it will be with the
Germans when they find that they have failed.  They have built
up their power on the absurd hypothesis that they are men.  Their
punishment will be in discovering that they never were anything
but low animals and never could be."

"That is too deep for me," said the other man.  "They tied my
daughter to her bed, and afterward they set fire to her mattress."

"I wish," said Jeanne Bergère, "that they had set fire to my
mattress."

A violent concussion shook the cellar to its foundations.  Even
the face of the thirsty little boy brightened.

"It is one of ours," he said.

"To eradicate the lice which feed upon the Germans and the foul
smells which emanate from their bodies there is nothing so effective
as high explosives," said the old man.  He looked at his watch and
said:

"We have half an hour more."

At the end of that time, he climbed the cellar stair, pushed open
the door, and looked out.  Partly in the bright sunlight and partly
in the deep shadows, he resembled a painting by Rembrandt.

"I see no one," he said.  "There is a lot of smoke."

His eyes became suddenly wide open, fixed, round with a kind of
celestial astonishment.  This his old French heart stopped beating,
and he fell to the foot of the stair.  His companions thought that
he must have been shot.  They dared not move.

But it was no bullet or fragment of far-blown shell that had laid
the old man low.  He had seen in the smoke that whirled down the
village street, a little soldier in the uniform of France.  Pure
unadulterated joy had struck him dead.

Five minutes passed, and no one had moved except the little boy.
With furtive glances and trembling hands he had crept to the old
well in the corner and drunk a cup of the poisoned water.  Then he
crept back to his place.

The second old man now rose, drew a deep breath and climbed
the cellar stair.  For a time he stood blinking, and mouthing his
scattered teeth.  He was trying to speak and could not.

"What is it?" they called up to him.  "What has happened?"

He did not answer.  He made inarticulate sounds, and suddenly with
incredible speed, darted forward into the smoke and the sunlight.

A little hand cold and wet crept into Jeanne Bergère's.  She was
vexed.  She wished to go out of the cellar with the others; but the
little hand clung to her so tightly that she could not free herself.

Except for the old woman who had drunk from the well, and the old
man, all in a heap at the foot of the cellar stair, they were alone.
She and the little boy.

"It is true," said the little boy, "at least I think it is true
about the water...when...nobody was looking....  Please, please
stay with me, Jeanne Bergère."

"You drank when it was forbidden?  That was very naughty, Charlie....
Good God, what am I saying--you poor baby--you poor baby."  She
snatched him into her arms, and held him with a kind of tigerish
ferocity.

"It hurts," said Charlie.  "It hurts.  It hurts me all over.  It
hurts worse all the time."

"I will go for help," she said.  "Wait."

"Please do not go away."

"You want to die?"

The child nodded.

"If I grow up, I should not be a man," he said.  "You know what
the doctor did to me?"

"I know," she said briefly, "but you shan't die if I can help it."

She could not help it.  A few minutes after she had gone, his back
strongly arched became rigid.  His jaws locked and he died in the
attitude of a wrestler making a bridge.

The village street was full of smoke and Frenchmen.  These were
methodically fighting the fires and hunting the ruins for Germans.
Jeanne Bergère seized one of the little soldiers by the elbow.

"Come quickly," she said, "there is a child poisoned!"

The Idiot turned, and she would have fallen if he had not caught
her.  She tore herself loose from his arms with a kind of ferocity.

"Come!  Come!" she cried, and she ran like a frightened animal back
to the cellar door, the Idiot close behind her.

The Idiot knelt by the dead child, and after feeling in vain for
any pulsation, straightened up and said:

"He is dead."

"He drank from the well," said Jeanne.  "We told him that it was
poisoned.  But he was so thirsty."

They tried to straighten the little boy, but could not.  The Idiot
rose to his feet, and looked at her for the first time.  He must
have made some motion with his hands, for she cried suddenly:

"Don't!  You mustn't touch me!"

"We have always loved each other," he said simply.

"You don't understand."

"What have you been through?  I understand.  Kiss me."

She held him at arm's length.

"Listen," she said.  "The old people would not leave the village,--your
father and mother...so I stayed.  At that time it was still supposed
that the Germans were human beings..."

"And my father and mother?" asked the Idiot.

"Some of the people went into the street to see the Germans enter
the village.  But we watched from a window in your father's house....
They were Uhlans, who came first.  They were so drunk that they
could hardly sit on their horses.  Their lieutenant took a sudden
fancy to Marie Lebrun, but when he tried to kiss her, she slapped
his face....  That seemed to sober him....  Old man Lebrun had
leapt forward to protect his daughter.

"'Are you her father?'" asked the Lieutenant.

"'Yes,'" said the old man.

"'Bind him,'" said the lieutenant, and then he gave an order and
some men went into the house and came out dragging a mattress....
They dragged it into the middle of the street....  They held old
man Lebrun so that he had to see everything...for some hours, as
many as wanted to....  Then the lieutenant stepped forward and shot
her through the head, and then he shot her father....  Your father
and mother hid me in the cellar of their house, as well as they
could....  But from the Germans nothing remains long hidden....
Your father and mother tried to defend me...tied them to their
bed...and...set fire to the house."

The Idiot's granite-gray face showed no new emotion.

"And you?"

She shook her head violently.

"What you cannot imagine," she said.  "I have forgotten....  There
have been so many....  No street-walker has ever been through what
I have been through....  There's nothing more to say...I wanted to
live...to bear witness against them....  For you and me everything
is finished..."

"Almost," said the Idiot.  "You talk as if you no longer loved me."

The granite-gray of his face had softened into the ruddy, sun-burned
coloring of a healthy young soldier, long in the field, and she
could not resist the strong arms that he opened to her.

"They have not touched your soul," said the Idiot.

[signed] Gouverneur Morris





Memories of Whitman and Lincoln




"When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd" --W. W.


Lilacs shall bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.
Spring hangs in the dew of the dooryards
These memories--these memories--
They hang in the dew for the bard who fetched
A sprig of them once for his brother
When he lay cold and dead....
And forever now when America leans in the dooryard
And over the hills Spring dances,
Smell of lilacs and sight of lilacs shall bring to her heart these brothers....
Lilacs shall bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Who are the shadow-forms crowding the night?
What shadows of men?
The stilled star-night is high with these brooding spirits--
Their shoulders rise on the Earth-rim, and they are great presences in heaven--
They move through the stars like outlined winds in young-leaved maples.
Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Deeply the nation throbs with a world's anguish--
But it sleeps, and I on the housetops
Commune with souls long dead who guard our land at midnight,
A strength in each hushed heart--
I seem to hear the Atlantic moaning on our shores with the plaint of the dying
And rolling on our shores with the rumble of battle....
I seem to see my country growing golden toward California,
And, as fields of daisies, a people, with slumbering up-turned faces
Leaned over by Two Brothers,
And the greatness that is gone.

Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Spring runs over the land,
A young girl, light-footed, eager...
For I hear a song that is faint and sweet with first love,
Out of the West, fresh with the grass and the timber,
But dreamily soothing the sleepers...
I listen:  I drink it deep.

Softly the Spring sings,
Softly and clearly:
"I open lilacs for the beloved,
Lilacs for the lost, the dead.
And, see, for the living, I bring sweet strawberry blossoms,
And I bring buttercups, and I bring to the woods anemones and blue bells...
I open lilacs for the beloved,
And when my fluttering garment drifts through dusty cities,
And blows on hills, and brushes the inland sea,
Over you, sleepers, over you, tired sleepers,
A fragrant memory falls...
I open love in the shut heart,
I open lilacs for the beloved."

Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Was that the Spring that sang, opening locked hearts,
And is remembrance mine?
For I know these two great shadows in the spacious night,
Shadows folding America close between them,
Close to the heart...
And I know how my own lost youth grew up blessedly in their spirit,
And how the morning song of the might bard
Sent me out from my dreams to the living America,
To the chanting seas, to the piney hills, down the railroad vistas,
Out into the streets of Manhattan when the whistles blew at seven,
Down to the mills of Pittsburgh and the rude faces of labor...
And I know how the grave great music of that other,
Music in which lost armies sang requiems,
And the vision of that gaunt, that great and solemn figure,
And the graven face, the deep eyes, the mouth,
O human-hearted brother,
Dedicated anew my undevoted heart
to America, my land.

Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Now in this hour I was suppliant for these two brothers,
And I said:  Your land has need:
Half-awakened and blindly we grope in the great world....
What strength may we take from our Past, What promise hold for our future?

And the one brother leaned and whispered:
"I put my strength in a book,
And in that book my love...
This, with my love, I give to America..."
And the other brother leaned and murmured:
  "I put my strength in a life,
  And in that life my love,
  This, with my love, I give to America."

Lilacs bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

Then my heart sang out:  This strength shall be our strength:
Yea, when the great hour comes, and the sleepers wake and are hurled back,
And creep down into themselves
There shall they find Walt Whitman
And there, Abraham Lincoln.

O Spring, go over this land with much singing
And open the lilacs everywhere,
Open them out with the old-time fragrance
Making a people remember that something has been forgotten, 
Something is hidden deep--strange memories--strange memories--
Of him that brought a sprig of the purple cluster
To him that was mourned of all...
And so they are linked together
While yet America lives...
While yet America lives, my heart,
Lilacs shall bloom for Walt Whitman
And lilacs for Abraham Lincoln.

[signed] James Oppenheim





Bred to the Sea




Ye who are bred to the sea, sons of the sons of seamen,
  In what faith do ye sail?  By what creed do ye hold?
Little we know of faiths, and we leave the creeds to the parsons.
  But we 'bide by the law of the sea which our father made of old.

Where is that sea law writ for mariners and for captains,
  That they may know the law by which they sail the sea?
We never saw it writ for sailormen or for masters;
  But 'tis laid with the keel of the ship.  What would you have?
      Let be.

Ye who went down tot he sea in ships and perished aforetime,
  In what faith did ye sail?  In what creed did ye die?
What is that law to which your lives were forfeit?
  What do ye teach your sons that they may not deny?

We kept the faith of our breed.  We died in the creed of seamen,
  As our sons, too, shall die:  the sea will have its way.
The law which bade us sail with death in smack and whaler,
  In tall ship and in open boat, is the seaman's law to-day.

The master shall rule his crew.  The crew shall obey the master.
  Ye shall work your ship while she fleets and ye can stand.
Though ye starve, and freeze, and drown, shipmate shall stand
      by shipmate.
  Ye shall 'bide by this law of seafaring folk, though ye never
      come to land.

Ye shall hold your lives in trust for those who need your succor:
  A flash of fire by night, a loom of smoke by day,
A rag to an oar shall be to you the symbol
  Of your faith, of your creed, of the law which sailormen obey.

Ye shall not count the odds, ye shall not weigh the danger,
  When life is to be saved from storm, from fire, from thirst.
Ye shall not leave your foe adrift and helpless;
  And when the boats go overside, 't is, "Women and children 
      first."

We kept this faith of our breed.  We died in this creed of seamen.
  We sealed our creed with our lives.  It shall endure alway.
The law which bade us sail with death in smack and whaler,
  In tall ship and in open boat, is the seaman's law to-day.

[signed] James W. Pryor.





Our Defenders

Across the fields of waving wheat
  And leagues of golden corn
The fragrance of the wild-rose bloom
  And elder-flower is borne;
But earth's appealing loveliness
  We do but half surmise,
For oh, the blur of battle-fields
  Is ever in our eyes.

The robin-red-breast and the wren,
  We cannot harken these
For dreadful thunder of the guns
  That echoes overseas;
And evermore our vision turns
  To those who follow far
The bright white light of Liberty
  Through the red fires of war.

Our thoughts are with the hero souls
  And hero hearts of gold
Who keep Old Glory's hallowed stars
  Untarnished as of old;
Who join their hands with hero hands
  In hero lands to save
The fearless forehead of the free
  The shameful brand of slave.

And through these days of strife and death,
  We know they shall not fail,
That Freedom shall not pass from earth
  Nor tyranny prevail;
Yea, those that now in anguish bow,
  We know that soon or late
They shall be lifted from beneath
  The iron heel of hate.

O brave defenders of the free,
  For you our tears of pride!
Lo, every drop of blood you shed
  Our hearts have sanctified!
And through these days of strife and death,
  These weary night-times through,
Our spirits watch with yours, our love
  It hovers over you.

[signed] Evaleen Stein





The Bomb




I


"You are late.  Billy's been howling the house down."

"All babies cry, big or little, now and then.  The nurse is with
Billy.  I--" Nellie Cameron paused to smooth a quiver out of her
voice--"I am not late."

"You are not?" Joseph Cameron, bewildered, laid his paper upon his
knees and squinted up at his wife.

"No, Joe, I am not."  As if it absorbed her, and no one could
have said that it did not, for she kept house beautifully, Nellie
straightened an etching; the quietly she walked out of the room.

She went into their bedroom and closed the door.  After a while
Cameron, watching warily, saw her come into the hall again in a
peach-colored dress that he particularly liked her in; saw her go
down the hall, away from him--and she had a very good back--to the
nursery door, the warm, cheerful firelight falling full upon her
face, her hands, her softly glowing dress.  Billy, their only son,
just learning to walk, toddled to meet her.  Cameron saw the chubby
hands rumple her skirts, saw Nellie stoop and swing him high with
her firm arms, the drop him to his place upon her breast.  The
door close, the hall was shadowy again, the apartment as still as
a place marked "To Let."

The dinner was on time and excellent; Nellie, decorative and
chatty, was promptly in her place.  Dinner over, they went to the
sitting-room for their coffee.  The apartment was very high up, the
windows looking over the tree-tops of the Drive, across the Hudson
tot he Jersey shore.  It was March, and the shore lights wavered
in gusts of rain that threatened to turn to snow.  The room was
warm; Cameron was suffocating; Nellie was serenely unaware.  She
had eaten well, from her soup through her cheese.  There are times
when, to a man, a woman's appetite is the last straw.  She was
tired, she said, but at her ease, and never prettier.

"Going out to-night, Joey?"

"Yes.  Bridge hand around at Gordon's.  Want a talk with Gordon
about a matter of business."

"I like to have things to do in the afternoon, but when night
comes"--Nellie smothered a contented yawn--"I love getting into
something comfy, and just buzzing round our own lamp."

"I must own that I have never found afternoon diversions to be
diverting."  To save him he could not keep his voice good-natured.
He had had a grind of a day, and was dog-tired; it seemed to him
she ought to know it and talk about it.

"Yes?" Nellie mused.  "It was amusing at the club to-day--the
Non-descripts."  She laughed softly.  "It wasn't 'nondescript'
to-day, though!"

"Some old maid telling you to bring your children up on the country,
and throw your husbands out of their jobs?"

"What, Joey?"  Nellie seemed to bring her thoughts back from a long
way off.  "Old maid?  I should say not!  We had a man.  We nearly
always do.  Then everybody comes, and there's more glow.  He was an
English socialist--I guess he was a socialist.  Burne-Jones hair,
and a homespun jacket,--loose, and all that,--and a heavy ribbon
on his glasses.  He talked about the new man."

"The--what?"

"The new man."  Nellie opened her eyes wide, as if her husband
puzzled her.

"Well--I'm damned!"

Nellie broke into sudden mirth.

"You were, Joey dear; that is just what you were.  You were damned
all the way there and back again."

Cameron strangled.

"Have I the honor to typify the--new creature?"

"You're the very image of him, Joey dear."  And she smiled upon
him as if he were some new moth, in at their window, to buzz round
their lamp.

"And--this person--?"

Nellie became eagerly communicative.

"I do wonder if I can make you see him?  Tall and dark, and with
good-looking, thinnish hands and almost amusing way of playing
with his eye-glasses.  You know, Joey:  the sort of distinguished
talk-it-all-out sort of man that just makes men rage.  Of course,"
she went on, largely wise, "he's the sort of socialist to make a
real socialist rage, but he's just the thing for clubs."

"You often have them?"

"Of course," she laughed.  "You see, we don't see much of men at
home any more.  It keeps us from forgetting how you look, and 