how
amusing you may be."

Cameron gazed before him into a chaos without words.

Nellie was oblivious.

"He finished off with a perfect bomb, Joey.  It was funny!  Of
course the new man's a city product, and he drew him to the life:
rushed and tortured by ambition, tired out at the end of the day,
too tired to be possibly amusing, his nerves excited till anything
quieter than lower Broadway hurts his ears, all passion and
brilliance spent on business, dinners here and there, with people
who all have their ax to grind, too, and are keyed up to it by
rows and rows of cocktails.  He drew him without mercy, and he had
every wife there either wincing or laughing, with the truth of what
he said.  He was quite eloquent."  She paused, she laughed softly,
she turned her eyes upon him.  "Then, Joey, guess--just guess!--what
he said!"

"Far be it from me!"

"He said that any intelligent modern woman would require at
least one husband and three lovers to arrive at the standards and
companionship of one wholesome old-fashioned man!"

Cameron got to his feet and held to the top shelf of the bookcase.

"Do you mean to tell me that respectable women sit and listen to
such talk?"

"But, Joey dear, you see so little of us respectable women now,
you don't really know us--"

"It's not decent--"

Nelly was all patience.

"But, you know, Joey dear, I think maybe it is true.  Don't you
think so?"

Cameron swallowed two or three retorts; then with a laugh that seemed
to break to pieces in the air, he went into he hall, got into his
hat and coat, and left the house.

Nellie listened gravely.

"Poor dear old land-lubber!" she sighed.  "But it had to come sooner
or later!"  Then she went to the telephone.

"57900 Bryant, please.  May I speak to Mr. Crane?"


II


When Cameron came in at midnight he found his wife and his old
friend Willoughby Crane playing chess in the dining room.

"Hello, Joe, old man," murmured Crane.  "That you?"

"Why, yes, I believe it is I," said Cameron.

"Almost forgot what you looked like," Crane rambled pleasantly.
"Dropped in for a reminder."

"I'm sorry to have missed you," muttered Cameron.

"Well, you haven't altogether missed me, you know:  so cheer up,
old man.  If Nell's good for a rubber, you may have the joy of my
presence for an hour or two longer.  You're lucky, having a wife
who can play chess!"

"Get yourself a drink, Joey," suggested Nellie.  "The whisky's in
the sideboard, down on he left."

"Don't you suppose I know where the whisky is?" demanded Cameron.

"Maybe there's not much left."  Nellie looked on, all solicitude.

Cameron, his thought babbling over the good old days of the
ducking-stool, poured himself carefully a highball that was brown.
Silence reigned.  The light fell upon the head and shoulders of
Crane and his long, quick-fingered hands.

"After a man has slaved his soul out," Cameron moaned, "these are
the things a woman cares about!"

Crane won the rubber, and spent considerable gallantry upon Nellie
in compensation.  Cameron had yawned all through, but no one had
noticed.  Crane lighted a cigarette and perched upon the corner of
the dining-table.

"I say, Joe, got anything on to-morrow night?"

"I have," said Cameron.

"Something you can't chuck?"

"Scarcely.  A director's dinner."

Crane grew thoughtful.

"You certainly are a victim of the power-passion," he sighed,
considering Cameron.  "I don't know how you stand it.  I'd have
more money, no doubt, if I weren't so apathetic, but, by Jinks, it
doesn't look worth it to me!"

"A question of taste," said Cameron briefly.

"Taste?  If that were all!"  He smoked, looking at Nellie through
the haze.  "I say, Nell, I've got tickets for Kreisler to-morrow
night.  Come with me, there's a good girl!  Lend me your wife, will
you, Joe?"

"Lend?" echoed Nellie.  "I like that!  Anybody'd take me for goods
and chattels.  Of course I'll come.  I'd love to."

"You know, Joey," Crane went on simply, "Nellie's the only woman I
know that it's real joy to hear music with.  She knows what she's
listening to.  A fellow can sort of forget that he's got her
along, an still be glad he has.  As for you, you old money-hunting
blunderbuss, the way you squirm in the presence of music ought to
be a penitentiary offense.  I'm almost glad you can't go."  He gave
a laugh that was dangerously genuine, and bolted for the hall to
get his coat and hat.

"Poor old Joe is almost asleep," said Nellie, sweetly.

Joe did not look it, but Willoughby got out solicitously, and he
sat upon a damp bench opposite Cameron's glowing windows, and he
laughed and laughed till a policeman sternly ordered him to move
on.

"Isn't Willoughby a dear!" Nellie commented as she moved about,
putting things in their places for the night.  Cameron yawned
obviously.  Nellie hummed a snatch of a tune.

All that long night Cameron lay stretched upon the edge of their
bed, staring into the lumpy darkness.  Nellie slept like a baby.
But once, soon after the lights were turned off, Cameron's blood
froze by inches from his head to his feet.  It seemed to him that
Nellie was laughing, was fairly biting her pillow to keep from
laughing aloud!  Gravely, of the darkness, he asked how all this had
come about.  He asked it of the familiar, shadowy heap of Nellie's
clothes upon the chair by the window, asked if he had deserved it.
Toward dawn he slept.


III


Cameron, after the way of the new man, kept some evening clothes
down town.  It saved traveling.  The next afternoon, about four
o'clock, there came, somewhere between the pit of his stomach and
his brain, an aching weight.  Conscience!  At six-thirty he hung
his dinner-jacket back in the closet and sent the directors word
that he had a headache.  Then, as blind as a moth, he started for
home, for that lamp about which Nellie "Loved to buzz."

He let himself into the apartment, chuckling to think of Nellie's
surprise, at just the hour at which they were used to dining.  The
place was shadowy, the table in its between-meals garb.  The aching
weight came back.  He tapped on the nursery door.

Miss Merritt, the nurse, was dining by the nursery window, Billy's
high chair drawn near by.  Billy, drowsy and rosy, was waving a
soup-spoon about his head, dabbing at the lights upon the silver
with fat fingers that were better at clinging than at letting go.

"Good evening, Miss Merritt," said Cameron.  "Hello, Bill!  Where's
your mother?"  His tone struck false, for through his mind was
booming the horrible question, "Can Nellie have gone out with that
ass Crane to dine?"

Miss Merritt's mousy face became all eyes.

"Why, sir, Mrs. Cameron has gone out to dinner, and after to a
concert.  I guess you forgot, sir."

"Oh, yes," said Cameron, easily.  "This is the night of the concert.
I had absolutely forgotten.  I'd have got a bite down town if I'd
thought.  Is the cook in?"

"Sure, sir.  I'll call her."

She left Cameron alone with Billy, who, cannibal-wise, was chewing
his father's hand and crowing over the appetizing bumps and veins.

"If you'd jest 'ave 'phoned, sir," panted the cook, who was a large,
purple-faced person.

Cameron sighed.

"Just anything, Katy.  I have a headache.  Some eggs and toast--poached
eggs, I think."

In another moment the maid passed the nursery door, with white
things over her arm, on her way to set the table.

Cameron, dazed as never in his life before, lifted Billy to his
shoulder and trotted up and down the room.  "Nice little boy!" he
laughed, Billy's damp fists hitting at him in ecstasy.  "I'll just
take him to the sitting-room while you finish your dinner."  He did
his best to pretend that the situation was not unusual, to act as
if, in his own home, a man could be nothing but at home.  All these
confounded hirelings, acting as if they owned the place, had the
cheek to be amazed over his dropping in!

Miss Merritt beamed.

"I always say, sir, that boys should know their fathers."

"Boys should know their fathers?"  This was almost the last straw.

"Here!" said Miss Merritt, holding out a pink-edged blanket.  "Jest
put in on your lap, sir."  There was about her that utter peculiar
lack of decorum that is common to nurses and mothers and Cameron,
blushing furiously, grabbed the blanket and fled.

"Boys should know their father, hey?"  Cameron was enraged.
"We'll see about that pretty quick!"  Billy crowed with joy as the
blanket flapped about them, and, above the chasm of his doubts and
his conscience Cameron heard himself laugh, too.  He got into his
arm-chair.  Billy, so warm and solid and gay, so evidently liking
him, gave him, parent that he was, the thrill of adventure as his
hands held him and knew him for his own.  The blanket spread upon
his knees, the door closed, Cameron expanded with the desire to
know his son, even as it was desirable that his son should know
him.  He turned him over and around, he studied the vagaries of
scallops and pearl buttons; profoundly he pitied his small image for
all of his discomforts, and advised him to grow out of safety-pins
as fast as possible.  He fell into a philosophical mood, spouting
away at Bill, and Bill responded with fists and delicious gurgles
and an imitative sense of investigation.  Cameron reflected, with
illumination, upon the amusing sounds a baby makes when the world
is well.  They were really having an awfully good time.

Billy was fuzzy and blond, one of those moist, very blue-eyed
babies that women appreciate.  Cameron all at once saw why.  Warmth
expanded his aching heart, and his arms circled his own mite of
boy.  Billy yawned, agreed instantly with Cameron that a yawn from
a baby was funny, and with a chuckle pitched against Cameron, bumped
his nose on a waistcoat button, considered the button solemnly,
with his small mouth stuck out ridiculously, and then snuggled into
the hollow of his father's arms, and, closing his big eyes with a
confidence that made thrills creep over him, the man, and brought
something stinging to his eyes, Bill went to sleep.

After an unmeasured lapse of time, Miss Merritt came for the baby.
"Oh, the lambkin!  Ain't he sweet, sir?"

Cameron ached in every joint, but he did not know it.

"Take care how you handle him!" he whispered.  "It's awful to be
awakened out of one's first sleep!"

"I know better than to wake a sleepin' baby, believe me," said Miss
Merritt with a touch of spice.

The door closed.  Cameron sat stretching his stiff arms and legs
and staring before him, and upon his usually tired and lined face
was the beam of full joy.

Then came dinner, a lonely, silent mockery of a meal.  And back the
question came, booming over the soft tinkling of glass and silver.
He realized, with his salad, that four nights out of seven, Nellie
dined like this, alone.  His lower lip protruded, and lines of
conscience fell in a curtain on his face.

"Mrs. Cameron hates eatin' 'lone, too," said the maid.  "She generally
eats early, so 's t' have Billy in his high chair 'longside.  If
he sleeps, she reads a book, sir."

He was alone in the sitting-room with his coffee, and the place had
sunk into fathomless silence.  It was only half after eight!  He
stuck his head out of the window.  Soft flakes touched and soothed
his feverish head.  "Damn money!" he whispered suddenly, then stood
back in the room, startled, staring his blasphemy in the face.
He'd go out in the snow, and get rid of himself.  This was awful!

Bundled in a greatcoat, collar high, trousers rolled up, he ducked
out of the great marble and iron vestibule into the night.  There
was no wind, and the snow was falling softly, steadily.  The drive
was deserted, and he made his way across to the walk along the wall.
By the light of the lamp, blurred by the flakes till it looked like
a tall-stemmed thistle-ball, he looked at his watch.  No matter
where Nellie had dined, she was a the concert by now, and a great
sigh of relief fluttered the flakes about his mouth.

He turned north, glad of the rise in the ground to walk against.
"By jinks!" he smiled grudgingly, "it's not so bad out here.  We
city idiots, we--NEW MEN, with all our motors and subways, we are
forgetting how to prowl."

The world fell of to shadow a little beyond the shore-line, a mere
space of air and flakes.  Ice swirled by its way to the sea, for
the tide was going out.  He peered; he began to hear all sorts
of fine snow-muffled sounds; and suddenly, away out on the river,
something was going on--boats whistling and signaling, chatting
in their scientific persiflage, out in the dark and cold of the
night.  "Lonesome, too!" Cameron laughed, and, boyishly, he tossed
a snow-ball into the space, as if he'd have something to say out
there, too!  "I'm soft!" he groaned, clutching his arm.  And suddenly
he smiled to think how one of these days he and Bill would come
out here and play together.  He looked about, and a sudden pride
filled him.  He was actually the only creature enjoying this splendid
snow!  He had passed one old gentleman in a fur-lined coat, with
a cap upon his white hair, walking slowly, a white bulldog playing
after him in the scarcely trodden snow.

Cameron turned home, a new and inexplicable glow upon him, cares
dropped away.  He marched; he laughed aloud once with a sudden
thought of Bill.  "Little corker!"  He let himself in, and went
straight to the bedroom to change his shoes.  "I must get some
water-tight things to prowl in," he thought, and he whistled a line
of "Tipperary."  Blurred in a pleasant fatigue he sat on the edge
of his bed, staring at his wet socks, when the telephone jingled,
and he hurried out to answer.

"Yep, this is Cameron.  Oh, hello, old girl!  Thought I'd just come
up for a quiet home dinner, you know."  A grin like the setting
sun for warmth spread over his face as he listened, as he felt the
tables turning under his wet feet.

"Nope.  Just bored down-town.  Felt like bein' cozy and--buzzin'
round the lamp in something comfy.  Fine!  Had a regular banquet!
Bill's all right, little devil!  I tucked him in so he shouldn't
be lonesome.

"Me?  I've been out walkin'.  Been throwin' snow-balls at the
street-lamps.  My feet are soakin', but I don't care, I don't care.
Heard a concert myself, thanks.  Whistles and things tootin' out
in the snow on the river to beat the band!  Don't think of it!  I'm
fine.  Enjoy yourself.  What's life for?  Good night, old girl.
Don't lose your key!"

Cameron got as far as the cedar chest in the hall, but there, in
his wet socks, he sat down and he laughed until he ached all over.
Suddenly he stiffened, and his heels banged against the chest.

Miss Merritt, mouth and eyes wide open, stood absorbing him, as
crimson as was Cameron himself.

"I heard the 'phone," she faltered.  "Miss. Cameron always calls
up to know if Billy's all right--"

"I know that she does," said Cameron, stiffly, and, rising, he
stocking-footed it past her and shut himself in his bedroom.

"yes, sir; good night, sir."  Miss Merritt stared at his door.  "Good
Lord!" she whispered in the nursery, "how awful for Billy and her
if he takes to drink!"

Nellie came out of the telephone booth, her face white with horror.
"Willoughby," she gasped, "get me a taxi quick!"

"Billy--"

"No, no, NO!  It's Joe!"

"What--"

"Oh," she wailed, "I've gone too far!  Joe is--drunk!"

Willoughby's face went to pieces.

"Don't look like that, Nell!  Don't!  What of it?  Just what we've
been up to, isn't it?"

"How can you say that?  Get my wraps.  I am going home."

"Your car isn't ordered till eleven--"

"What do I care what I go in?  Oh, I have been such a fool!"

"Don't mention it," grinned Crane as he wrapped her coat about her.

Gaily Crane waved his white-gloved hand to her, her face gleaming
back pearl-like for an instant in the shadowy taxi; then she was
whirled northward and lost in the snowy night.  Back in his place
next to Nellie's empty chair, he mused tenderly over the vagaries
of a mere bachelor till the incomparable Austrian carried his mind
off to where tone is reality, where there is neither marriage nor
giving in marriage.


Nellie fitted the key into the lock.  Her fingers shook.  The
apartment was dark except for a light in the hall, and as still
as if it were empty.  If only Joe would STAY asleep till he'd had
time to sleep this horrible state of affairs away!

She switched off the light and carefully let herself into their
room, and stood a moment, huddled, breathless, against the door.
The room was ghostly.  The vague, snow-veiled light filtered in
from the street-lamp below, making of Cameron an incoherent lump,
wrapped to his eyes in the covers of their chintz-hung bed.

Her hands clasped tight, she peered at him through the shadows.
He did not move.  He was sleeping heavily, curiously, irregularly,
his breath coming in jerky little snorts.  "Oh," she wailed in her
guilt heart, "he is, he is!  Poor dear old Joey, drunk!  And it's
all, all my fault!"  Swiftly she undressed in the dark.  If he were
to awaken, to begin saying awful maudlin things---

Her heart pounding, she lifted the covers and crept into martyrdom
on the hard edge of the bed.  Cameron slept on.  Once he seemed
to be strangling in a bad dream, and she fought with her sense of
duty to awaken him, then, miserably, let him strangle!

Gravely Nellie's tired eyes traveled from familiar shadow to shadow,
to rest at last upon the dangling heap of clothes upon a chair by
the window that symbolized Joe Cameron by the sane light of day.
Fatigue tossed her off to sleep now and then; terror snatched her
back and made her cry.  In the first faint dawn she awakened with
a start to find that in her sleep her tired body had slipped back
to its place, and her head was resting deliciously upon her pillow.
And, with the growing dawn, humor came creeping back, and try
as she would, her mouth twitched.  Of all people, dear old Joey!
Carefully she turned her head and peered at him.  His face was turned
toward her, what light there was fell full upon him.  Wonder took
away her smile.  His face was fresh, the lines of care and worry
softened away as if he were at the end of a two weeks' vacation.
She rested her chin on her arm, amazed, puzzled.  And suddenly
a grin like the sunrise spread over Joe's face, and he opened his
eyes.

[signed] Alice Woods

By courtesy of "The Century."





To Those Who Go




In a sense the hundreds of thousands of American soldiers who go
to France are modern crusaders.  Like the valiant men of the Middle
Ages who traveled far to fight in strange lands for the ideal that
possessed their souls, these twentieth-century knights-errant go
to defend the ideals of liberty and right and honor which are the
issues of this war and which our Allies have successfully upheld
for more than three years.

In that chivalric spirit General Pershing stood at the tomb
of LaFayette and said, "LaFayette, we are here."  As a young man
only twenty years old LaFayette went out to a new land to fight
for liberty, and now after nearly a century and a half the same
inspiration that sent him forth is taking our young men back to
fight in the land o his birth the old fight for right.  The great
romance of international history which the relations of France and
America have afforded from the birth of this republic has entered
a new chapter with the pilgrimage of our fighting men to Europe,
and the inestimable service of LaFayette and his comrades to our
infant republic is now to be in part repaid by the nation that
France helped to establish.

But though it is a chivalric mission on which our soldiers go,
they should not enter France in the attitude of saviors.  It must
be remembered that the United States came very late into this war,
and while our troops and even more our money and material resources
may have decisive weight toward victory, yet it is France, England,
Italy, Russia against whom the enemy has spent his strength.  Our
Allies have brought the war already to its turning point, and we can
at best only add completeness to their achievement.  Furthermore,
while we aid France and her Allies, we are defending ourselves
also.  We went to war because Germany was killing our citizens,
was plotting against the peace and security of our nation, because
her restless ambition and lust for power were choking not only
Europe but the world.

Our American soldiers will find in France a people who have endured
with wonderful courage and devotion through more than three years
of terrific strain against odds which must often have seemed
hopeless.  The French are the heroes of this war.  They have been
in the fight from the beginning and will be there until the end.
Their armies were fully engaged when England had not a hundred
thousand men under arms and Italy was a neutral; they fought on
when Russia lost her grip; and they will not quit until their land
is cleared of invaders and the Prussian shadow that has darkened
France for more than forty years is lifted.  More than any other
country except Belgium, France has felt the horror and hardships
of the war which we are spared because she has paid the price of
our protection.

American soldiers who go to France are to be envied because they
are getting what comes to few men,--opportunity to be of direct,
vital service to that country.  To be young, to be fit, to have a
part however small in the great events that are making the world
over into a safer and happier place for our children to live in,
is something for a man to be proud of now and to remember with
satisfaction to his last day.

The war may last much longer than we now anticipate, but there can
be no doubt of the ultimate victory of the cause to which we are
committed.  The world never turns back, it moves always forward,
always upward.  Our soldiers may go out, as the Crusaders went of
old, with absolute faith that their service will not be given in
vain, that their effort and daring will not be unavailing.

[signed] Myron Herrick





The Hero's Peace




There is a peace that springs where battles thunder,
  Unknown to those who walk the ways of peace
  Drowsy with safety, praising soft release
From pain and strife and the discomfortable wonder
Of life lived vehemently to its last, wild flame:
  This peace thinks not of safety, is not bound
To the wincing flesh, nor to the piteous round
Of human hopes and memories, nor to Fame.

Immutable and immortal it is born
  Within the spirit that has looked on fear
  Till fear has looked askance; on death has gazed
As on an equal, and with noble scorn,
Spurning the self that held the self too dear,
  To the height of being mounts calm and unamazed.

[signed] Amelie Rives (Princess Troubetzkoy)

Castle Hill, Virginia










This etext was produced by Jeroen Hellingman <jehe@kabelfoon.nl>





The South Pole

An Account of the Norwegian
Antarctic Expedition in the "Fram,"
1910 -- 1912



By Roald Amundsen

Translated from the Norwegian by
A. G. Chater


To

My Comrades,
The Brave Little Band That Promised
In Funchal Roads
To Stand by Me in the Struggle for the

South Pole,

I Dedicate this Book.

Roald Amundsen.

Uranienborg,

August 15, 1912.


Contents of Vol. I


Chapter                         Page

        The First Account               VII
        Introduction, by Fridtjof Nansen        XXVII
I.      The History of the South Pole   1
II.     Plan and Preparations   42
III.    On the Way to the South 90
IV.     From Madeira to the Barrier     126
V.      On the Barrier          169
VI.     Depot Journeys          206
VII.    Preparing for Winter    259
VIII.   A Day at Framheim       283
IX.     The End of the Winter   346




List of Illustrations to Vol. I




                                        To Face Page
Roald Amundsen  Frontispiece
Approximate Bird's-eye View, Drawn from the First Telegraphic
Account   1
Reproduced by permission of the Daily Chronicle
The Opening of Roald Amundsen's Manuscript      1
Helmer Hanssen, Ice Pilot, a Member of the Polar Party  50
The "Fram's" Pigsty     60
The Pig's Toilet        60
Hoisting the Flag       90
A Patient       90
Some Members of the Expedition  92
Sverre Hassel   101
Oscar Wisting   102
In the North-east Trades        130
In the Rigging  134
Taking an Observation   134
Rönne Felt Safer when the Dogs were Muzzled     136
Starboard Watch on the Bridge   136
Olav Bjaaland, a Member of the Polar Party      136
In the Absence of Lady Partners, Rönne Takes a Turn with the
Dogs       148
An Albatross    150
In Warmer Regions       150

A Fresh Breeze in the West Wind Belt    152
The Propeller Lifted in the Westerlies  154
The "Fram's" Saloon Decorated for Christmas Eve         158
Rönne at a Sailor's Job         162
The "Fram" In Drift-ice         162
Drift-ice in Ross Sea   168
A Clever Method of Landing      170
The "Fram" under Sail   170
Cape Man's Head on the Barrier  174
Seal-hunting    176
The "Fram"      176
The Crew of the "Fram" in the Bay of Whales     178
The "Fram" in the Bay of Whales         178
The First Dog-camp      180
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
Digging the Foundations of Framheim     184
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
Building the Hut        186
Unloading the Six Sledge-drivers        186
Polar Transport         192
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
Penguins        192
The Provision Store     192
Framheim, January, 1911         194
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
Suggen, Arne, and the Colonel   196
Mikkel, Ravn, and Mas-mas       196
Framheim, February, 1911        206
Prestrud in Winter Dress        208
Bjaaland in Winter Dress        208
The "Fram" Veteran, Lindström: the Only Man Who has Sailed round the
Continent of America       208

The Start of the First Depot Journey    208
A Page from the Sledge Diary, Giving Details of Depots I. and II.
230
Framheim, March, 1911   248
Killing Seals for the Depot     254
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News
The Meat Tent   264
The Meteorological Screen       266
Inside a Dog-tent       266
A Winter Evening at Framheim    272
The Carpenters' Shop    272
Entrance to the Hut     272
Entrance to the Western Workshop        272
Prestrud in His Observatory     272
Wisting at the Sewing-machine   278
Packing Sledges in the "Crystal Palace"         278
Lindström with the Buckwheat Cakes      298
On His "Native Heath": A Dog on the Barrier Ice         304
Dogs Exercising         308
Helmer Hanssen on a Seal-hunt   308
Hanssen and Wisting Lashing the New Sledges     312
Passage in the Ice      312
Johansen Packing Provisions in the "Crystal Palace"     312
A Corner of the Kitchen         322
Stubberud Taking it Easy        322
Johansen Packing Biscuits in the "Crystal Palace"       322
Hassel and the Vapour-bath      330
Midwinter Day, June, 1911       362
Our Ski-binding in its Final Form       364
At Work on Personal Outfit      364
Trying on Patent Goggles        368

Hassel in the Oil-store         368
Deep in Thought         372
Funcho  372
The Loaded Sledges in the Clothing Store        374
Sledges Ready for Use Being Hauled Out of the Store-room        374
At the Depot in Lat. 80° S.     384
Reproduced by permission of the Illustrated London News.
Some of the Land Party in Winter Costume        390
General Map of the South Polar Region   At end of Volume



The First Account

On February 10, 1911, we started for the South to establish depots,
and continued our journey until April 11. We formed three depots and
stored in them 3 tons of provisions, including 22 hundredweight of
seal meat. As there were no landmarks, we had to indicate the position
of our depots by flags, which were posted at a distance of about four
miles to the east and west. The first barrier afforded the best going,
and was specially adapted for dog-sledging. Thus, on February 15 we
did sixty-two miles with sledges. Each sledge weighed 660 pounds,
and we had six dogs for each. The upper barrier ("barrier surface")
was smooth and even. There were a few crevasses here and there, but
we only found them dangerous at one or two points. The barrier went
in long, regular undulations. The weather was very favourable, with
calms or light winds. The lowest temperature at this station was -49°
F., which was taken on March 4.

When we returned to winter quarters on February 5 from a first trip,
we found that the Fram had already left us. With joy and pride we heard
from those who had stayed behind that our gallant captain had succeeded
in sailing her farther south than any former ship. So the good old
Fram has shown the flag of Norway both farthest north and farthest
south. The most southerly latitude reached by the Fram was 78° 41'.

Before the winter set in we had 60 tons of seal meat in our winter
quarters; this was enough for ourselves and our 110 dogs. We had built
eight kennels and a number of connecting tents and snow huts. When we
had provided for the dogs, we thought of ourselves. Our little hut
was almost entirely covered with snow. Not till the middle of April
did we decide to adopt artificial light in the hut. This we did with
the help of a Lux lamp of 200 candle-power, which gave an excellent
light and kept the indoor temperature at about 68° F. throughout the
winter. The ventilation was very satisfactory, and we got sufficient
fresh air. The hut was directly connected with the house in which we
had our workshop, larder, storeroom, and cellar, besides a single
bathroom and observatory. Thus we had everything within doors and
easily got at, in case the weather should be so cold and stormy that
we could not venture out.

The sun left us on April 22, and we did not see it again for four
months. We spent the winter in altering our whole equipment, which our
depot journeys had shown to be too heavy and clumsy for the smooth
barrier surface. At the same time we carried out all the scientific
work for which there was opportunity. We made a number of surprising
meteorological observations. There was very little snow, in spite
of there being open water in the neighbourhood. We had expected to
observe higher temperatures in the course of the winter, but the
thermometer remained very low. During five months temperatures were
observed varying between -58° and -74° F. We had the lowest (-74°
F.) on August 13; the weather was calm. On August 1 we had -72°
F. with a wind of thirteen miles an hour. The mean temperature for
the year was -15° F. We expected blizzard after blizzard, but had
only two moderate storms. We made many excellent observations of the
aurora australis in all parts of the heavens. Our bill of health was
the best possible throughout the whole winter. When the sun returned
on August 24 it shone upon men who were healthy in mind and body,
and ready to begin the task that lay before them.

We had brought the sledges the day before to the starting-point of the
southern journey. At the beginning of September the temperature rose,
and it was decided to commence the journey. On September 8 a party of
eight men set out, with seven sledges and ninety dogs, provisioned for
ninety days. The surface was excellent, and the temperature not so bad
as it might have been. But on the following day we saw that we had
started too early. The temperature then fell, and remained for some
days between -58° and -75° F. Personally we did not suffer at all, as
we had good fur clothing, but with the dogs it was another matter. They
grew lanker and lanker every day, and we soon saw that they would not
be able to stand it in the long run. At our depot in lat. 80° we agreed
to turn back and await the arrival of spring. After having stored our
provisions, we returned to the hut. Excepting the loss of a few dogs
and one or two frostbitten heels, all was well. It was not till the
middle of October that the spring began in earnest. Seals and birds
were sighted. The temperature remained steady, between -5° and -22° F.

Meanwhile we had abandoned the original plan, by which all were to
go to the south. Five men were to do this, while three others made
a trip to the east, to visit King Edward VII. Land. This trip did
not form part of our programme, but as the English did not reach
this land last summer, as had been their intention, we agreed that
it would be best to undertake this journey in addition.

On October 20 the southern party left. It consisted of five men
with four sledges and fifty-two dogs, and had provisions for four
months. Everything was in excellent order, and we had made up our minds
to take it easy during the first part of the journey, so that we and
the dogs might not be too fatigued, and we therefore decided to make
a little halt on the 22nd at the depot that lay in lat. 80°. However,
we missed the mark owing to thick fog, but after two or three miles'
march we found the place again.

When we had rested here and given the dogs as much seal meat as
they were able to eat, we started again on the 26th. The temperature
remained steady, between -5° and -22° F.

At first we had made up our minds not to drive more than twelve to
eighteen miles a day; but this proved to be too little, thanks to
our strong and willing animals. At lat. 80° we began to erect snow
beacons, about the height of a man, to show us the way home.

On the 31st we reached the depot in lat. 81°. We halted for a day
and fed the dogs on pemmican. On November 5 we reached the depot
in 82°, where for the last time the dogs got as much to eat as they
could manage.

On the 8th we started southward again, and now made a daily march of
about thirty miles. In order to relieve the heavily laden sledges, we
formed a depot at every parallel we reached. The journey from lat. 82°
to 83° was a pure pleasure trip, on account of the surface and the
temperature, which were as favourable as one could wish. Everything
went swimmingly until the 9th, when we sighted South Victoria Land
and the continuation of the mountain chain, which Shackleton gives
on his map, running southeast from Beardmore Glacier. On the same
day we reached lat. 83°, and established here Depot No. 4.

On the 11th we made the interesting discovery that the Ross Barrier
ended in an elevation on the south-east, formed between a chain of
mountains running south-eastward from South Victoria Land and another
chain on the opposite side, which runs south-westward in continuation
of King Edward VII. Land.

On the 13th we reached lat. 84°, where we established a depot. On the
16th we got to 85°, where again we formed a depot. From our winter
quarters at Framheim we had marched due south the whole time.

On November 17, in lat. 85°, we came to a spot where the land barrier
intersected our route, though for the time being this did not cause
us any difficulty. The barrier here rises in the form of a wave to
a height of about 300 feet, and its limit is shown by a few large
fissures. Here we established our main depot. We took supplies for
sixty days on the sledges and left behind enough provisions for
thirty days.

The land under which we now lay, and which we were to attack, looked
perfectly impossible, with peaks along the barrier which rose to
heights of from 2,000 to 10,000 feet. Farther south we saw more peaks,
of 15,000 feet or higher.

Next day we began to climb. The first part of the work was easy,
as the ground rose gradually with smooth snow-slopes below the
mountain-side. Our dogs working well, it did not take us long to get
over these slopes.

At the next point we met with some small, very steep glaciers,
and here we had to harness twenty dogs to each sledge and take the
four sledges in two journeys. Some places were so steep that it was
difficult to use our ski. Several times we were compelled by deep
crevasses to turn back.

On the first day we climbed 2,000 feet. The next day we crossed
small glaciers, and camped at a height of 4,635 feet. On the third
day we were obliged to descend the great Axel Heiberg Glacier, which
separates the mountains of the coast from those farther south.

On the following day the longest part of our climbing began. Many
detours had to be made to avoid broad fissures and open crevasses. Most
of them were filled up, as in all probability the glacier had long
ago ceased to move; but we had to be very careful, nevertheless,
as we could never know the depth of snow that covered them. Our camp
that night was in very picturesque surroundings, at a height of about
5,000 feet.

The glacier was here imprisoned between two mountains of 15,000 feet,
which we named after Fridtjof Nansen and Don Pedro Christophersen.

At the bottom of the glacier we saw Ole Engelstad's great snow-cone
rising in the air to 19,000 feet. The glacier was much broken up in
this narrow defile; enormous crevasses seemed as if they would stop
our going farther, but fortunately it was not so bad as it looked.

Our dogs, which during the last few days had covered a distance of
nearly 440 miles, put in a very good piece of work that day, as they
did twenty-two miles on ground rising to 5,770 feet. It was an almost
incredible record. It only took us four days from the barrier to reach
the immense inland plateau. We camped at a height of 7,600 feet. Here
we had to kill twenty-four of our brave dogs, keeping eighteen --
six for each of our three sledges. We halted here for four days on
account of bad weather. On November 25 we were tired of waiting, and
started again. On the 26th we were overtaken by a raging blizzard. In
the thick, driving snow we could see absolutely nothing; but we felt
that, contrary to what we had expected -- namely, a further ascent
-- we were going rapidly downhill. The hypsometer that day showed a
descent of 600 feet. We continued our march next day in a strong wind
and thick, driving snow. Our faces were badly frozen. There was no
danger, but we simply could see nothing. Next day, according to our
reckoning, we reached lat. 86°. The hypsometer showed a fall of 800
feet. The following day passed in the same way. The weather cleared up
about noon, and there appeared to our astonished eyes a mighty mountain
range to the east of us, and not far away. But the vision only lasted
a moment, and then disappeared again in the driving snow. On the 29th
the weather became calmer and the sun shone -- a pleasant surprise. Our
course lay over a great glacier, which ran in a southerly direction. On
its eastern side was a chain of mountains running to the southeast. We
had no view of its western part, as this was lost in a thick fog. At
the foot of the Devil's Glacier we established a depot in lat. 86°
21', calculated for six days. The hypsometer showed 8,000 feet above
sea level. On November 30 we began to ascend the glacier. The lower
part was much broken up and dangerous, and the thin bridges of snow
over the crevasses often broke under us. From our camp that evening
we had a splendid view of the mountains to the east. Mount Helmer
Hansen was the most remarkable of them all; it was 12,000 feet high,
and covered by a glacier so rugged that in all probability it would
have been impossible to find foothold on it. Here were also Mounts
Oskar Wisting, Sverre Hassel, and Olav Bjaaland, grandly lighted up
by the rays of the sun. In the distance, and only visible from time
to time through the driving mists, we saw Mount Thorvald Nilsen,
with peaks rising to 15,000 feet. We could only see those parts of
them that lay nearest to us. It took us three days to get over the
Devil's Glacier, as the weather was unusually misty.

On December 1 we left the glacier in high spirits. It was cut up by
innumerable crevasses and holes. We were now at a height of 9,370
feet. In the mist and driving snow it looked as if we had a frozen
lake before us; but it proved to be a sloping plateau of ice, full
of small blocks of ice. Our walk across this frozen lake was not
pleasant. The ground under our feet was evidently hollow, and it
sounded as if we were walking on empty barrels. First a man fell
through, then a couple of dogs; but they got up again all right. We
could not, of course, use our ski on this smooth-polished ice, but we
got on fairly well with the sledges. We called this place the Devil's
Ballroom. This part of our march was the most unpleasant of the whole
trip. On December 2 we reached our greatest elevation. According to
the hypsometer and our aneroid barometer we were at a height of 11,075
feet -- this was in lat. 87° 51'. On December 8 the bad weather came
to an end, the sun shone on us once more, and we were able to take our
observations again. It proved that the observations and our reckoning
of the distance covered gave exactly the same result -- namely, 88°
16' S. lat. Before us lay an absolutely flat plateau, only broken
by small crevices. In the afternoon we passed 88° 23', Shackleton's
farthest south. We pitched our camp in 88° 25', and established our
last depot -- No. 10. From 88° 25' the plateau began to descend evenly
and very slowly. We reached 88° 29' on December 9. On December 10, 88°
56'; December 11, 89° 15'; December 12, 89° 30'; December 13, 89° 45'.

Up to this moment the observations and our reckoning had shown a
surprising agreement. We reckoned that we should be at the Pole on
December 14. On the afternoon of that day we had brilliant weather --
a light wind from the south-east with a temperature of -10° F. The
sledges were going very well. The day passed without any occurrence
worth mentioning, and at three o'clock in the afternoon we halted,
as according to our reckoning we had reached our goal.

We all assembled about the Norwegian flag -- a handsome silken flag --
which we took and planted all together, and gave the immense plateau
on which the Pole is situated the name of "King Haakon VII.'s Plateau."

It was a vast plain of the same character in every direction, mile
after mile. During the afternoon we traversed the neighbourhood of
the camp, and on the following day, as the weather was fine, we were
occupied from six in the morning till seven in the evening in taking
observations, which gave us 89° 55' as the result. In order to take
observations as near the Pole as possible, we went on, as near true
south as we could, for the remaining 9 kilometres. On December 16 we
pitched our camp in brilliant sunshine, with the best conditions for
taking observations. Four of us took observations every hour of the
day -- twenty-four in all. The results of these will be submitted to
the examination of experts.

We have thus taken observations as near to the Pole as was humanly
possible with the instruments at our disposal. We had a sextant and
artificial horizon calculated for a radius of 8 kilometres.

On December 17 we were ready to go. We raised on the spot a little
circular tent, and planted above it the Norwegian flag and the Fram's
pennant. The Norwegian camp at the South Pole was given the name of
"Polheim." The distance from our winter quarters to the Pole was about
870 English miles, so that we had covered on an average 15 1/2 miles
a day.

We began the return journey on December 17. The weather was unusually
favourable, and this made our return considerably easier than the
march to the Pole. We arrived at "Framheim," our winter quarters,
in January, 1912, with two sledges and eleven dogs, all well. On the
homeward journey we covered an average of 22 1/2 miles a day. The
lowest temperature we observed on this trip was -24° F., and the
highest +23° F.

The principal result  --  besides the attainment of the Pole  --  is
the determination of the extent and character of the Ross Barrier. Next
to this, the discovery of a connection between South Victoria Land
and, probably, King Edward VII. Land through their continuation in
huge mountain-ranges, which run to the south-east and were seen as far
south as lat. 88° 8', but which in all probability are continued right
across the Antarctic Continent. We gave the name of "Queen Maud's
Mountains" to the whole range of these newly discovered mountains,
about 530 miles in length.

The expedition to King Edward VII. Land, under Lieutenant Prestrud,
has achieved excellent results. Scott's discovery was confirmed, and
the examination of the Bay of Whales and the Ice Barrier, which the
party carried out, is of great interest. Good geological collections
have been obtained from King Edward VII. Land and South Victoria Land.

The Fram arrived at the Bay of Whales on January 9, having been
delayed in the "Roaring Forties " by easterly winds.

On January 16 the Japanese expedition arrived at the Bay of Whales,
and landed on the Barrier near our winter quarters.

We left the Bay of Whales on January 30. We had a long voyage on
account of contrary wind.

We are all in the best of health.

Roald Amundsen.

Hobart,

March 8, 1912.







Introduction

When the explorer comes home victorious, everyone goes out to cheer
him. We are all proud of his achievement -- proud on behalf of the
nation and of humanity. We think it is a new feather in our cap,
and one we have come by cheaply.

How many of those who join in the cheering were there when the
expedition was fitting out, when it was short of bare necessities,
when support and assistance were most urgently wanted? Was there
then any race to be first? At such a time the leader has usually
found himself almost alone; too often he has had to confess that his
greatest difficulties were those he had to overcome at home before
he could set sail. So it was with Columbus, and so it has been with
many since his time.

So it was, too, with Roald Amundsen -- not only the first time, when he
sailed in the Gjöa with the double object of discovering the Magnetic
North Pole and of making the North-West Passage, but this time again,
when in 1910 he left the fjord on his great expedition in the Fram,
to drift right across the North Polar Sea. What anxieties that man has
gone through, which might have been spared him if there had been more
appreciation on the part of those who had it in their power to make
things easier! And Amundsen had then shown what stuff he was made of:
both the great objects of the Gjöa's expedition were achieved. He
has always reached the goal he has aimed at, this man who sailed his
little yacht over the whole Arctic Ocean, round the north of America,
on the course that had been sought in vain for four hundred years. If
he staked his life and abilities, would it not have been natural if
we had been proud of having such a man to support?

But was it so?

For a long time he struggled to complete his equipment. Money was still
lacking, and little interest was shown in him and his work, outside the
few who have always helped so far as was in their power. He himself
gave everything he possessed in the world. But this time, as last,
he nevertheless had to put to sea loaded with anxieties and debts,
and, as before, he sailed out quietly on a summer night.

Autumn was drawing on. One day there came a letter from him. In
order to raise the money he could not get at home for his North Polar
expedition he was going to the South Pole first. People stood still
-- did not know what to say. This was an unheard-of thing, to make
for the North Pole by way of the South Pole! To make such an immense
and entirely new addition to his plans without asking leave! Some
thought it grand; more thought it doubtful; but there were many who
cried out that it was inadmissible, disloyal -- nay, there were some
who wanted to have him stopped. But nothing of this reached him. He
had steered his course as he himself had set it, without looking back.

Then by degrees it was forgotten, and everyone went on with his own
affairs. The mists were upon us day after day, week after week --
the mists that are kind to little men and swallow up all that is
great and towers above them.

Suddenly a bright spring day cuts through the bank of fog. There
is a new message. People stop again and look up. High above them
shines a deed, a man. A wave of joy runs through the souls of men;
their eyes are bright as the flags that wave about them.

Why? On account of the great geographical discoveries, the
important scientific results? Oh no; that will come later, for the
few specialists. This is something all can understand. A victory of
human mind and human strength over the dominion and powers of Nature;
a deed that lifts us above the grey monotony of daily life; a view
over shining plains, with lofty mountains against the cold blue sky,
and lands covered by ice-sheets of inconceivable extent; a vision
of long-vanished glacial times; the triumph of the living over the
stiffened realm of death. There is a ring of steeled, purposeful
human will -- through icy frosts, snowstorms, and death.

For the victory is not due to the great inventions of the present
day and the many new appliances of every kind. The means used are
of immense antiquity, the same as were known to the nomad thousands
of years ago, when he pushed forward across the snow-covered plains
of Siberia and Northern Europe. But everything, great and small, was
thoroughly thought out, and the plan was splendidly executed. It is
the man that matters, here as everywhere.

Like everything great, it all looks so plain and simple. Of course,
that is just as it had to be, we think.

Apart from the discoveries and experiences of earlier explorers --
which, of course, were a necessary condition of success -- both
the plan and its execution are the ripe fruit of Norwegian life
and experience in ancient and modern times. The Norwegians' daily
winter life in snow and frost, our peasants' constant use of ski and
ski-sledge in forest and mountain, our sailors' yearly whaling and
sealing life in the Polar Sea, our explorers' journeys in the Arctic
regions -- it was all this, with the dog as a draught animal borrowed
from the primitive races, that formed the foundation of the plan and
rendered its execution possible -- when the man appeared.

Therefore, when the man is there, it carries him through all
difficulties as if they did not exist; every one of them has been
foreseen and encountered in advance. Let no one come and prate
about luck and chance. Amundsen's luck is that of the strong man who
looks ahead.

How like him and the whole expedition is his telegram home -- as
simple and straightforward as if it concerned a holiday tour in the
mountains. It speaks of what is achieved, not of their hardships. Every
word a manly one. That is the mark of the right man, quiet and strong.


It is still too early to measure the extent of the new discoveries,
but the cablegram has already dispersed the mists so far that the
outlines are beginning to shape themselves. That fairyland of ice, so
different from all other lands, is gradually rising out of the clouds.

In this wonderful world of ice Amundsen has found his own way. From
first to last he and his companions have traversed entirely unknown
regions on their ski, and there are not many expeditions in history
that have brought under the foot of man so long a range of country
hitherto unseen by human eye. People thought it a matter of course that
he would make for Beardmore Glacier, which Shackleton had discovered,
and by that route come out on to the high snow plateau near the Pole,
since there he would be sure of getting forward. We who knew Amundsen
thought it would be more like him to avoid a place for the very reason
that it had been trodden by others. Happily we were right. Not at
any point does his route touch that of the Englishmen -- except by
the Pole itself.

This is a great gain to research. When in a year's time we have Captain
Scott back safe and sound with all his discoveries and observations on
the other route, Amundsen's results will greatly increase in value,
since the conditions will then be illuminated from two sides. The
simultaneous advance towards the Pole from two separate points was
precisely the most fortunate thing that could happen for science. The
region investigated becomes so much greater, the discoveries so many
more, and the importance of the observations is more than doubled,
often multiplied many times. Take, for instance, the meteorological
conditions: a single series of observations from one spot no doubt has
its value, but if we get a simultaneous series from another spot in
the same region, the value of both becomes very much greater, because
we then have an opportunity of understanding the movements of the
atmosphere. And so with