ith shade and fruitage
     and fount that flows."

Presently Princess Miriam and Nur al-Din alighted to rest in this
Wady,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say. 

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hat reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Princess Miriam and Nur al-Din alighted in that valley, they ate
of its fruits and frank of its streams, after turning the
stallions loose to pasture: then they sat talking and recalling
their past and all that had befallen them and complaining one to
other of the pangs of parting and of the hardships suffered for
estrangement and love-longing. As they were thus engaged, behold,
there arose in the distance a dust-cloud which spread till it
walled the world, and they heard the neighing of horses and clank
of arms and armour. Now the reason of this was, that after the
Princess had been bestowed in wedlock upon the Wazir who had gone
in to her that night, the King went forth at daybreak, to give
the couple good morrow, taking with him, after the custom of
Kings with their daughters, a gift of silken stuffs and
scattering gold and silver among the eunuchs and tire-women, that
they might snatch at and scramble for it. And he fared on
escorted by one of his pages; but when he came to the new palace,
he found the Wazir prostrate on the carpet, knowing not his head
from his heels; so he searched the place right and left for his
daughter, but found her not; whereat he was troubled sore with
concern galore and his wits forlore. Then he bade bring hot water
and virgin vinegar and frankincense[FN#8] and mingling them
together, blew the mixture into the Wazir's nostrils and shook
him, whereupon he cast the Bhang forth of his stomach, as it were
a bit of cheese. He repeated the process, whereupon the Minister
came to himself and the King questioned him of his case and that
of his daughter. He replied, "O mighty King, I have no knowledge
of her save that she poured me out a cup of wine with her own
hand; and from that tide to this I have no recollection of aught
nor know I what is come of her." When the King heard this, the
light in his eyes became night, and he drew his scymitar and
smote the Wazir on the head, then the steel came out gleaming
from between his grinder teeth. Then, without an instant delay,
he called the groom sand syces and demanded of them the two
stallions: but they said, "O King, the two steeds were lost in
the night and together with them our chief, the Master of Horse;
for, when we awoke in the morning, we found all the doors wide
open." Cried the King, "By the faith of me and by all wherein my
belief is stablished on certainty, none but my daughter hath
taken the steeds, she and the Moslem captive which used to tend
the Church and which took her aforetime! Indeed I knew him right
well and none delivered him from my hand save this one-eyed
Wazir; but now he is requited his deed." Then the King called his
three sons, who were three doughty champions, each of whom could
withstand a thousand horse in the field of strife and the stead
where cut and thrust are rife; and bade them mount. So they took
horse forthwith and the King and the flower of his knights and
nobles and officers mounted with them and followed on the trail
of the fugitives till Miriam saw them, when she mounted her
charger and baldrick'd her blade and took her arms. Then she said
to Nur al-Din, "How is it with thee and how is thy heart for
fight and strife and fray?" Said he, "Verily, my steadfastness in
battle-van is as the steadfastness of the stake in bran."[FN#9]
And he improvised and said,

"O Miriam thy chiding I pray, forego; * Nor drive me to death or
     injurious blow: 
How e'er can I hope to bear fray and fight * Who quake at the
     croak of the corby-crow?
I who shiver for fear when I see the mouse * And for very funk I
     bepiss my clo'!
I loveno foin but the poke in bed, * When coynte well knoweth my
     prickle's prow;
This is rightful rede, and none other shows * Righteous as this
     in my sight, I trow."

Now when Miriam heard his speech and the verse he made, she
laughed and smilingly said, "O my lord Nur al-Din, abide in thy
place and I will keep thee from their ill grace, though they be
as the sea-sands in number. But mount and ride in rear of me, and
if we be defeated and put to flight, beware of falling, for none
can overtake thy steed." So saying, she turned her lance-head
towards foe in plain and gave her horse the rein, whereupon he
darted off under her, like the stormy gale or like waters that
from straitness of pipes outrail. Now Miriam was the doughtiest
of the folk of her time and the unique pearl of her age and tide;
for her father had taught her, whilst she was yet little, on
steeds to ride and dive deep during the darkness of the night in
the battle tide. When the King saw her charging down upon them,
he knew her but too well and turning to his eldest son, said, "O
Bartaut,[FN#10] thou who art surnamed Ras al-Killaut[FN#11] this
is assuredly thy sister Miriam who chargeth upon us, and she
seeketh to wage war and fight fray with us. So go thou out to
give her battle: and I enjoin thee by the Messiah and the Faith
which is no liar, an thou get the better of her, kill her not
till thou have propounded to her the Nazarene faith. An she
return to her old creed, bring her to me prisoner; but an she
refuse, do her die by the foulest death and make of her the
vilest of examples, as well as the accursed which is with her."
Quoth Bartaut, "Hearkening obedience"; and, rushing out
forthright to meet his sister, said to her, "O Miriam, doth not
what hath already befallen us on thine account suffice thee, but
thou must leave the faith of thy fathers and forefathers and
follow after the faith of the Vagrants in the lands, that is to
say, the faith of Al-Islam?  By the virtue of the Messiah and the
Faith which is no liar, except thou return to the creed of the
Kings thy Forebears and walk therein after the goodliest fashion,
I will put thee to an ill death and make of thee the most
shameful of ensamples!" But Miriam laughed at his speech and
replied, "Well-away! Far be it that the past should present stay
or that he who is dead should again see day! I will make thee
drink the sourest of regrets! By Allah, I will not turn back upon
the faith of Mohammed son of Abdullah, who made salvation
general; for his is the True Faith; nor will I leave the right
road though I drain the cup of ruin!"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Miriam
exclaimed to her brother, "Well-away! Heaven forfend that I turn
back from the faith of Mohammed Abdullah-son who made salvation
general; for his is the Right Road nor will I leave it although I
drain the cup of ruin." When the accursed Bartaut heard this, the
light in his eyes became night, the matter was great and grievous
to him and between them there befel a sore fight. The twain
swayed to and fro battling throughout the length and breadth of
the valley and manfully enduring the stress of combat singular,
whilst all eyes upon them were fixed in admiring surprise:  after
which they wheeled about and foined and feinted for a long bout
and as often as Bartaut opened on his sister Miriam a gate of
war,[FN#12] she closed it to and put it to naught, of the
goodliness of her skill and her art in the use of arms and her
cunning of cavalarice. Nor ceased they so doing till the dust
overhung their heads vault-wise and they were hidden from men's
eyes; and she ceased not to baffle Bartaut and stop the way upon
him, till he was weary and his courage wavered and his resolution
was worsted and his strength weakened; whereupon she smote him on
the nape, that the sword came out gleaming from his throat
tendons and Allah hurried his soul to the Fire and the
abiding-place which is dire. Then Miriam wheeled about in the
battleplain and the stead where cut and thrust are fain; and
championed it and offered battle, crying out and saying, "Who is
for fighting? Who is for jousting? Let come forth to me to-day no
weakling or niderling; ay, let none come forth to me but the
champions who the enemies of The Faith represent, that I may give
them to drink the cup of ignominious punishment. O worshippers of
idols, O miscreants, O rebellious folk, this day verily shall the
faces of the people of the True Faith be whitened and theirs who
deny the Compassionate be blackened!" Now when the King saw his
eldest son slain, he smote his face and rent his dress and cried
out to his second son, saying, "O Batrus, thou who art surnamed
Khara al-Sus,[FN#13] go forth, O my son, in haste and do battle
with thy sister Miriam; avenge me the death of thy brother
Bartaut and bring her to me a prisoner, abject and humiliated!"
He answered, "Hearkening and obedience, O my sire, and charging
down drave at his sister, who met him in mid-career, and they
fought, he and she, a sore fight, yet sorer than the first.
Bartus right soon found himself unable to cope with her might and
would have sought safety in flight, but of the greatness of her
prowess could not avail unto this sleight; for, as often as he
turned to flee, she drave after him and still clave to him and
pressed him hard, till presently she smote him with the sword in
his throat, that it issued gleaming from his nape, and sent him
after his brother. Then she wheeled about in the mid-field and
plain where cut and thrust are dealed, crying out and saying,
"Where be the Knights? Where be the Braves? Where is the one-eyed
Wazir, the lameter, of the crooked faith[FN#14] the worthy
believer?" Thereupon the King her father cried out with heart in
bleeding guise and tear-ulcerated eyes, saying, "She hath slain
my second son, by the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith which
is no liar!" And he called aloud to his youngest son, saying, "O
Fasyan, surnamed Salh al-Subyan,[FN#15] go forth, O my son, to do
battle with thy sister and take of her the blood-wreak for thy
brothers and fall on her, come what may; and whether thou gain or
thou lose the day;[FN#16] and if thou conquer her, slay her with
foulest slaughter!" So he drave out to Miriam, who ran at him
with the best of her skill and charged him with the goodliness of
her cleverness and her courage and her cunning in fence and
cavalarice, crying to him, "O accursed, O enemy of Allah and the
Moslems, I will assuredly send thee after thy brothers and woeful
is the abiding-place of the Miscreants!" So saying, she
unsheathed her sword and smote him and cut off his head and arms
and sent him after his brothers and Allah hurried his soul to the
Fire and the abiding-place dire. Now when the Knights and riders
who rode with her sire saw his three sons slain, who were the
doughtiest of the folk of their day, there fell on their hearts
terror of the Princess Miriam, awe of her overpowered them; they
bowed their heads earthwards and they made sure of ruin and
confusion, disgrace and destruction. So with the flames of hate
blazing in heart they turned their backs forthright and addressed
themselves to flight. When the King saw his sons slain and on his
flying troops cast sight, there fell on him bewilderment and
affright, whilst his heart also was a-fire for despight. Then
quoth he to himself, "In very sooth Princess Miriam hath
belittled us; and if I venture myself and go out against her
alone, haply she will gar me succumb and slay me without ruth,
even as she slew her brothers and make of me the foulest of
examples, for she hath no longer any desire for us nor have we of
her return any hope. Wherefore it were the better rede that I
guard mine honour and return to my capital." So he gave reins to
his charger and rode back to his city. But when he found himself
in his palace, fire was loosed in his heart for rage and chagrin
at the death of his three gallant sons and the defeat of his
troops and the disgrace to his honour; nor did he abide half an
hour ere he summoned his Grandees and Officers of state and
complained to them of that his daughter Miriam had done with him
of the slaughter of her brothers and all he suffered therefrom of
passion and chagrin, and sought advice of them. They all
counselled him to write to the Vicar of Allah in His earth, the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, and acquaint him with
his circumstance. So he wrote a letter to the Caliph, containing,
after the usual salutations, the following words. "We have a
daughter, Miriam the Girdle-girl hight, who hath been seduced and
debauched from us by a Moslem captive, named Nur al-Din Ali, son
of the merchant Taj al-Din of Cairo, and he hath taken her by
night and went forth with her to his own country; wherefore I beg
of the favour of our lord the Commander of the Faithful that he
write to all the lands of the Moslems to seize her and send her
back to us by a trusty messenger."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
of France wrote to the Caliph and Prince of True Believers, Harun
al-Rashid, a writ humbling himself by asking for his daughter
Miriam and begging of his favour that he write to all the
Moslems, enjoining her seizure and sending back to him by a
trusty messenger of the servants of his Highness the Commander of
the Faithful; adding, "And in requital of your help and aidance
in this matter, we will appoint to you half of the city of Rome
the Great, that thou mayst build therein mosques for the Moslems,
and the tribute thereof shall be forwarded to you." And after
writing this writ, by rede of his Grandees and Lords of the land,
he folded the scroll and calling his Wazir, whom he had appointed
in the stead of the monocular Minister, bade him seal it with the
seal of the kingdom, and the Officers of state also set hands and
seals thereto; after which the King bade the Wazir bear the
letter to Baghdad,[FN#17] the Palace of Peace, and hand it into
the Caliph's own hand, saying, "An thou bring her back, thou
shalt have of me the fiefs of two Emirs and I will bestow on thee
a robe of honour with two-fold fringes of gold." The Wazir set
out with the letter and fared on over hill and dale, till he came
to the city of Baghdad, where he abode three days, till he was
rested from the way, when he sought the Palace of the Commander
of the Faithful and when guided thereto he entered it and craved
audience. The Caliph bade admit him; so he went in and kissing
ground before him, handed to him the letter of the King of
France, together with rich gifts and rare presents beseeming the
Commander of the Faithful. When the Caliph read the writ and
apprehended its significance, he commanded his Wazir to write,
without stay or delay, despatches to all the lands of the
Moslems, setting out the name and favour of Princess Miriam and
of Nur al-Din, stating how they had eloped and bidding all who
found them lay hands on them and send them to the Commander of
the Faithful, and warning them on no wise in that matter to use
delay or indifference. So the Wazir wrote the letters and sealing
them, despatched them by couriers to the different Governors, who
hastened to obey the Caliph's commandment and addressed
themselves to make search in all the lands for persons of such
name and favour. On this wise it fared with the Governors and
their subjects; but as regards Nur al-Din and Miriam the
Girdle-girl, they fared on without delay after defeating the King
of France and his force and the Protector protected them, till
they came to the land of Syria and entered Damascus-city. Now the
couriers of the Caliph had foregone them thither by a day and the
Emir of Damascus knew that he was commanded to arrest the twain
as soon as found, that he might send them to the Caliph.
Accordingly, when they entered the city, the secret police[FN#18]
accosted them and asked them their names. They told them the
truth and acquainted them with their adventure and all that had
betided them; whereupon they knew them for those of whom they
were in search and seizing them, carried them before the Governor
of the city. He despatched them to the city of Baghdad under
escort of his officers who, when they came thither, craved
audience of the Caliph which he graciously granted; so they came
into the presence; and, kissing ground before him, said, "O
Commander of the Faithful, this is Miriam the Girdle-girl,
daughter of the King of France, and this is the captive Nur
al-Din, son of the merchant Taj al-Din of Cairo, who debauched
her from her sire and stealing her from his kingdom and country
fled with her to Damascus, where we found the twain as they
entered the city, and questioned them. They told us the truth of
their case: so we laid hands on them and brought them before
thee." The Caliph looked at Miriam and saw that she was slender
and shapely of form and stature, the handsomest of the folk of
her tide and the unique pearl of her age and her time; sweet of
speech[FN#19] and fluent of tongue, stable of soul and hearty of
heart. Thereupon she kissed the ground between his hands and
wished him permanence of glory and prosperity and surcease of
evil and enmity. He admired the beauty of her figure and the
sweetness of her voice and the readiness of her replies and said
to her, "Art thou Miriam the Girdle-girl, daughter of the King of
France?" Answered she, "Yes, O Prince of True Believers and
Priest of those who the Unity of Allah receive and Defender of
the Faith and cousin of the Primate of the Apostles!" Then the
Caliph turned to Nur al-Din Ali and seeing him to be a shapely
youth, as he were the shining full moon on fourteenth night, said
to him, "And thou, art thou Ali Nur al-Din, son of the merchant
Taj al-Din of Cairo?" Said he, "Yes, O Commander of the Faithful
and stay of those who for righteousness are care-full!" The
Caliph asked, "How cometh it that thou hast taken this damsel and
fled forth with her of her father's kingdom?" So Nur al-Din
proceeded to relate to the Commander of the Faithful all his
past, first and last; whereat the Caliph was astonied with
extreme astonishment and diverted and exclaimed, "How manifold
are the sufferings that men suffer!"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid asked Nur al-Din of his adventure and was
told of all that had passed, first and last, he was astonied with
extreme astonishment and exclaimed, "How manifold are the
sufferings that men suffer!" Then he turned to the Princess and
said to her, "Know, O Miriam, that thy father, the King of
France, hath written to me anent thee. What sayst thou?" She
replied, "O Vicar of Allah on His earth and Executor of the
precepts of His prophet and commands to man's unworth,[FN#20] may
He vouchsafe thee eternal prosperity and ward thee from evil and
enmity! Thou art Viceregent of Allah in His earth and I have
entered thy Faith, for that it is the creed which Truth and
Righteousness inspire; and I have left the religion of the
Miscreants who make the Messiah a liar,[FN#21] and I am become a
True Believer in Allah the Bountiful and in the revelation of His
compassionate Apostle. I worship Allah (extolled and exalted be
He!) and acknowledge Him to be the One God and prostrate myself
humbly before Him and glorify Him; and I say before the Caliph,
'Verily , I testify that there is no god but the God and I
testify that Mohammed is the Messenger of God, whom He sent with
the Guidance and the True Faith, that He might make it victorious
over every other religion, albeit they who assign partners to God
be averse from it.'[FN#22] Is it therefore in thy competence, O
Commander of the Faithful, to comply with the letter of the King
of the heretics and send me back to the land of the schismatics
who deny The Faith and give partners to the All-wise King, who
magnify the Cross and bow down before idols and believe in the
divinity of Jesus, for all he was only a creature? An thou deal
with me thus, O Viceregent of Allah, I will lay hold upon thy
skirts on the Day of Muster before the Lord and make my complaint
of thee to thy cousin the Apostle of Allah (whom God assain and
preserve!) on the Day when wealth availeth not neither children
save one come unto Allah wholehearted!"[FN#23] Answered the
Caliph, "O Miriam, Allah forfend that I should do this ever! How
can I send back a Moslemah believer in the one God and in His
Apostle to that which Allah hath forbidden and eke His Messenger
hath forbidden?" Quoth she, "I testify that there is no god but
the God and that Mohammed is the Apostle of God!" Rejoined the
Caliph, "O Miriam, Allah bless and direct thee in the way of
righteousness! Since thou art a Moslemah and a believer in Allah
the One, I owe thee a duty of obligation and it is that I should
never transgress against thee nor forsake thee, though be
lavished unto me on thine account the world full of gold and
gems. So be of good cheer and eyes clear of tear; and be thy
breast broadened and thy case naught save easy. Art thou willing
that this youth Ali of Cairo be to thee man and thou to him
wife?" Replied Miriam, "O Prince of True Believers, how should I
be other than willing to take him to husband, seeing that he
bought me with his money and hath entreated me with the utmost
kindness and, for crown of his good offices, he hath ventured his
life for my sake many times?" So the Caliph summoned the Kazi and
the witneses and married her to him assigning her a dowry and
causing the Grandees of his realm be present and the marriage day
was a notable. Then he turned to the Wazir of the French King,
who was present, and said to him, "Hast thou heard her words? How
can I her send back to her father the Infidel, seeing that she is
a Moslemah and a believer in the Unity? Belike he will evil
entreat her and deal harshly with her, more by token that she
hath slain his sons, and I shall bear blame for her on
Resurrection-day. And indeed quoth the Almighty 'Allah will by no
means make a way for the Infidels over the True
Believers.'[FN#24] So return to thy King and say to him, 'Turn
from this thing and hope not to come at thy desire thereof.'" Now
this Wazir was a Zany: so he said to the Caliph, "O Commander of
the Faithful, by the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith which is
no liar, were Miriam forty times a Moslemah and forty times
thereto, I may not depart from thee without that same Miriam! And
if thou send her not back with me of free will, I will hie me to
her sire and cause him despatch thee an host, wherewith I will
come upon you from the landward and the seaward; and the van
whereof shall be at your capital city whilst the rear is yet on
the Euphrates[FN#25] and they shall lay waste thy realms." When
the Caliph heard these words from the accursed Wazir of the King
of France, the light in his face became night and he was wroth at
his speech with exceeding wrath and said to him, "O damned one, O
dog of the Nazarenes, art thou come to such power that thou durst
assail me with the King of the Franks?" Then quoth he to his
guards, "Take this accursed and do him die"; and he repeated this
couplet,[FN#26] 

"This be his recompense who will * Oppose and thwart his betters'
will."

Then he commanded to cut off the Wazir's head and burn his body;
but Princess Miriam cried, "O Commander of the Faithful, soil not
thy sword with the blood of this accursed." So saying, she barred
her brand and smote him and made his head fly from his corpse,
and he went to the house of ungrace; his abode was Gehenna, and
evil is the abiding-place. The Caliph marvelled at the force of
her fore-arm and the strength of her mind, and they carried the
dead Wazir forth of the pavilion and burnt him. Then the
Commander of the Faithful bestowed upon Nur al-Din a splendid
robe of honour and assigned to him and her a lodging in his
palace. Moreover, he appointed them solde and rations, and
commanded to transport to their quarters all they needed of
raiment and furniture and vessels of price. They sojourned awhile
in Baghdad in all delight of life and solace thereof till Nur
al-Din longed for his mother and father. So he submitted the
matter to the Caliph and sought his leave to revisit his native
land and visit his kinsfolk, and he granted him the permission he
sought and calling Miriam, commended them each to other. He also
loaded them with costly presents and rarities and bade write
letters to the Emirs and Olema and notables of Cairo the
God-guarded, commending Nur al-Din and his wife and parents to
their care and charging them honour them with the highmost
honour. When the news reached Cairo, the merchant Taj al-Din
joyed at the return of his son and Nur al-Din's mother likewise
rejoiced therein with passing joy. The Emirs and the notables of
the city went forth to meet him, in obedience to the Caliph's
injunctions, and indeed it was for them a right note-worthy day,
wherein foregathered the lover and the beloved and the seeker
attained the sought. Moreover, alit he Emirs made them
bride-feasts, each on his own day, and joyed in them with joy
exceeding and vied in doing them honour, one the other
succeeding. When Nur al-Din foregathered with his mother and
father, they were gladdened in each other with the utmost
gladness and care and affliction ceased from them, whilst his
parents joyed no less in the Princess Miriam and honoured her
with the highmost honour. Every day, there came to them presents
from all the Emirs and great merchants, and they were in new
delight and gladness exceeding the gladness of festival. Then
they ceased not abiding in solace and pleasance and good cheer
and abounding prosperity, eating and drinking with mirth and
merriment, till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and
Sunderer of societies, Waster of houses and palace-domes and
Peopler of the bellies of the tombs. So they were removed from
worldly stead and became of the number of the dead; and glory be
to the Living One, who dieth not and in whose hand are the keys
of the Seen and the Unseen! And a tale was also told by the Emir
Shuja al-Din,[FN#27] Prefect of Cairo anent




            THE MAN OF UPPER EGYPT AND HIS FRANKISH
                             WIFE.


We lay one night in the house of a man of the Sa'id or Upper
Egypt, and he entertained us and entreated us hospitably. Now he
was a very old man with exceeding swarthiness, and he had little
children, who were white, of a white dashed with red. So we said
to him, "Harkye, such an one, how cometh it that these thy
children are white, whilst thou thyself art passing swart?" and
he said, "Their mother was a Frankish woman, whom I took prisoner
in the days of Al-Malik al-Nasir Salah al-Din,[FN#28] after the
battle of Hattin,[FN#29] when I was a young man." We asked, "And
how gottest thou her?" and he answered, "I had a rare adventure
with her." Quoth we, "Favour us with it;" and quoth he, "With all
my heart! You must know that I once sowed a crop of flax in these
parts and pulled it and scutched it and spent on it five hundred
gold pieces; after which I would have sold it, but could get no
more than this therefor, and the folk said to me, 'Carry it to
Acre: for there thou wilt haply make good gain by it.' Now Acre
was then in the hands of the Franks; [FN#30] so I carried my flax
thither and sold part of it at six months' credit. One day, as I
was selling, behold, there came up a Frankish woman (now 'tis the
custom of the women of the Franks to go about with market streets
with unveiled faces), to buy flax of me, and I saw of her beauty
what dazed my wits. So I sold her somewhat of flax and was easy
with her concerning the price; and she took it and went away.
Some days after, she returned and bought somewhat more flax of me
and I was yet easier with her about the price; and she repeated
her visits to me, seeing that I was in love with her. Now she was
used to walk in company of an old woman to whom I said, "I am
sore enamoured of thy mistress. Canst thou contrive for me to
enjoy her?" Quoth she, 'I will contrive this for thee; but the
secret must not go beyond us three, me, thee and her; and there
is no help but that thou be lavish with money, to boot.' And I
answered, saying, 'Though my life were the price of her favours
'twere no great matter.'" -- And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the old
woman said to the man, "However the secret must not go beyond us
three, to wit me, thee and her; and there is no help but thou be
lavish of thy money to boot." He replied, "Though my life were
the price of her favours 'twere no great matter." "So it was
agreed" (continued the man of Upper Egypt), "that I should pay
her fifty dinars and that she should come to me; whereupon I
procured the money and gave it to the old woman. She took it and
said, 'Make ready a place for her in thy house, and she will come
to thee this night.' Accordingly I went home and made ready what
I could of meat and drink and wax candles and sweetmeats. Now my
house overlooked the sea and 'twas the season of summer; so I
spread the bed on the terrace roof. Presently, the Frank woman
came and we ate and drank, and the night fell dark. We lay down
under the sky, with the moon shining on us, and fell to watching
the shimmering of the stars in the sea: and I said to myself,
'Art not ashamed before Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!)
and thou a stranger, under the heavens and in presence of the
deep waters, to disobey Him with a Nazarene woman and merit the
torment of Fire?' Then said I, 'O my God, I call Thee to witness
that I abstain from this Christian woman this night, of
shamefastness before Thee and fear of Thy vengeance!' So I slept
till the morning, and she arose at peep of day full of anger and
went away. I walked to my shop and sat there; and behold,
presently she passed, as she were the moon, accompanied by the
old woman who was also angry; whereat my heart sank within me and
I said to myself, 'Who art thou that thou shouldst refrain from
yonder damsel? Art thou Sari al-Sakati or Bishr Barefoot or
Junayd of Baghdad or Fuzayl bin 'Iyaz?'[FN#31] then I ran after
the old woman and coming up with her said to her, 'Bring her to
me again;' and said she, 'By the virtue of the Messiah, she will
not return to thee but for an hundred ducats!' Quoth I, 'I will
give thee a hundred gold pieces.' So I paid her the money and the
damsel came to me a second time; but no sooner was she with me
than I returned to my whilome way of thinking and abstained from
her and forbore her for the sake of Allah Almighty. Presently she
went away and I walked to my shop, and shortly after the old
woman came up, in a rage. Quoth I to her, 'Bring her to me
again;' and quoth she, 'By the virtue of the Messiah, thou shalt
never again enjoy her presence with thee, except for five hundred
ducats, and thou shalt perish in thy pain!' At this I trembled
and resolved to spend the whole price of my flax and therewith
ransom my life. But, before I could think I heard the crier
proclaiming and saying, 'Ho, all ye Moslems, the truce which was
between us and you is expired, and we give all of you Mahometans
who are here a week from this time to have done with your
business and depart to your own country.' Thus her visits were
cut off from me and I betook myself to getting in the price of
the flax which men had bought upon credit, and to bartering what
remained in my hands for other goods. Then I took with me fair
merchandise and departed Acre with a soul full of affection and
love-longing for the Frankish woman, who had taken my heart and
my coin. So I journeyed until I made Damascus, where I sold the
stock in trade I had brought from Acre, at the highest price,
because of the cutting off of communication by reason of the term
of truce having expired; and Allah (extolled and exalted be He!)
vouchsafed me good gain. Then I fell to trading in captive slave-
girls, thinking thus to ease my heart of its pining for the
Frankish woman, and in this traffic engaged I abode three years,
till there befel between Al-Malik al-Nasir and the Franks what
befel of the action of Hattin and other encounters and Allah gave
him the victory over them, so that he took all their Kings
prisoners and he opened [FN#32] the coast [FN#33] cities by His
leave. Now it fortuned one day after this, that a man came to me
and sought of me a slave-girl for Al-Malik al-Nasir. Having a
handsome handmaid I showed her to him and he bought her of me for
an hundred dinars and gave me ninety thereof, leaving ten still
due me, for that there was no more found in the royal treasury
that day, because he had expended all his monies in waging war
against the Franks. Accordingly they took counsel with him and he
said, 'Carry him to the treasury[FN#34] where are the captives'
lodging and give him his choice among the damsels of the Franks,
so he may take one of them for the ten dinars,'" -- And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that whenas
Al-Malik al-Nasir said, " 'Give him his choice to take one of the
girls for the ten dinars that are due to him;' they brought me to
the captives' lodging and showed me all who were therein, and I
saw amongst them the Frankish damsel with whom I had fallen in
love at Acre and knew her right well. Now she was the wife of one
of the cavaliers of the Franks. So I said, 'Give me this one,'
and carrying her to my tent, asked her, 'Dost thou know me?' She
answered, 'No;' and I rejoined, 'I am thy friend, the sometime
flax-merchant with whom thou hadst to do at Acre and there befel
between us what befel. Thou tookest money of me and saidest,
'Thou shalt never again see me but for five hundred dinars.' And
now thou art become my property for ten ducats.' Quoth she, 'This
is a mystery. Thy faith is the True Faith and I testify that
there is no god but the God and that Mohammed is the Messenger of
God!' And she made perfect profession of Al-Islam. Then said I to
myself, 'By Allah, I will not go in unto her till I have set her
free and acquainted the Kazi.' So I betook myself to Ibn
Shaddad[FN#35] and told him what had passed and he married me to
her. Then I lay with her that night and she conceived; after
which the troops departed and we returned to Damascus. But within
a few days there came an envoy from the King of the Franks, to
seek the captives and the prisoners, according to the treaty
between the Kings. So Al-Malik al-Nasir restored all the men and
women captive, till there remained but the woman who was with me
and the Franks said, 'The wife of such an one the Knight is not
here.' Then they asked after her and making strict search for
her, found that she was with me; whereupon they demanded her of
me and I went in to her sore concerned and with colour changed;
and she said to me, 'What aileth thee and what evil assaileth
thee?' Quoth I, 'A messenger is come from the King to take all
the captives, and they demand thee of me.' Quoth she, 'Have no
fear, bring me to the King and I know what to say before and to
him.' I carried her into the presence of the Sultan Al-Malik al-
Nasir, who was seated, with the envoy of the King of the Franks
on his right hand, and I said to him, 'This is the woman that is
with me.' Then quoth the King and the envoy to her, 'Wilt thou go
to thy country or to[FN#36] thy husband? For Allah hath loosed
thy bonds and those of thy fellow captives.' Quoth she to the
Sultan, 'I am become a Moslemah and am great with child, as by my
middle ye may see, and the Franks shall have no more profit of
me.' The envoy asked, 'Whether is dearer to thee, this Moslem or
thy first husband and knight such an one?;' and she answered him
even as she had answered the Sultan. Then said the envoy to the
Franks with him, 'Heard ye her words?' They replied, 'Yes.' And
he said to me, 'Take thy wife and depart with her.' So I took her
and went away; but the envoy sent after me in haste and cried,
'Her mother gave me a charge for her, saying, 'My daughter is a
captive and naked; and I would have thee carry her this chest.'
Take it thou and deliver it to her.' Accordingly I carried the
chest home and gave it to her. She opened it and found in it all
her raiment as she had left it and therein I saw the two purses
of fifty and an hundred dinars which I had given her, untouched
and tied up with my own tying, wherefore I praised Almighty
Allah. There are my children by her and she is alive to this day
and 'twas she dressed you this food." We marvelled at his story
and at that which had befallen him of good fortune, and Allah is
All-knowing. But men also tell a tale anent the






            RUINED MAN OF BAGHDAD AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL


There was of old time in Baghdad a man of condition, who had
inherited from his father abounding affluence. He fell in love
with a slave-girl; so he bought her and she loved him as he loved
her; and he ceased not to spend upon her, till all his money was
gone and naught remained thereof; whereupon he sought a means of
getting his livelihood, but availed not to find any. Now this
young man had been used, in the days of his affluence, to
frequent the assemblies of those who were versed in the art of
singing and had thus attained to the utmost excellence therein.
Presently he took counsel with one of his intimates, who said to
him, "Meseems thou canst find no better profession than to sing,
thou and thy slave-girl; for on this wise thou wilt get money in
plenty and wilt eat and drink." But he misliked this, he and the
damsel, and she said to him, "I have bethought me of a means of
relief for thee." He asked, "What is it?;" and she answered, "Do
thou sell me; thus shall we be delivered of this strait, thou and
I, and I shall be in affluence; for none will buy the like of me
save a man of fortune, and with this I will contrive for my
return to thee." He carried her to the market and the first who
saw her was a Hashimi[FN#37] of Bassorah, a man of good breeding,
fine taste and generosity, who bought her for fifteen hundred
dinars. (Quoth the young man, the damsel's owner), "When I had
received the price, I repented me and wept, I and the damsel; and
I sought to cancel the sale; but the purchaser would not consent.
So I took the gold in a bag, knowing not whither I should wend,
now my house was desolate of her and buffeted my face and wept
and wailed as I had never done before. Then I entered a mosque
and sat shedding tears, till I was stupefied and losing my senses
fell asleep, with the bag of money under my head by way of
pillow. Presently, ere I could be ware, a man plucked the bag
from under my head and ran off with it at speed: whereupon I
started up in alarm and affright and would have arisen to run
after him; but lo! my feet were found with a rope and I fell on
my face. Then I took to weeping and buffeting myself, saying,
'Thou hast parted with thy soul[FN#38] and thy wealth is lost!'"-
- And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
young man continued, "So I said to myself, 'Thou hast parted with
thy soul and thy wealth is lost.' Then, of the excess of my
chagrin, I betook myself to the Tigris and wrapping my face in my
gown, cast myself into the stream. The bystanders saw me and
cried, 'For sure, this is because of some great trouble that hath
betided him.' They cast themselves in after me and bringing me
ashore, questioned me of my case. I told them what misadventure
had befallen me and they condoled with me. Then an old man of
them came to me and said, 'Thou hast lost thy money, but why
goest thou about to lose thy life and become of the people of The
Fire?[FN#39] Arise, come with me, that I may see thy lodging.' I
went with him to my house and he sat with me awhile, till I waxed
calmer, and becoming tranquil I thanked him and he went away.
When he was gone I was like to kill myself, but bethought me of
the Future and the Fire; so I fared forth my house and fled to
one of my friends and told him what had befallen me. He wept for
pity of me and gave me fifty dinars, saying, 'Take my advice and
hie thee from Baghdad forthright and let this provide thee till
thy heart be diverted from the love of her and thou forget her.
Thy forbears were Secretaries and Scribes and thy handwriting is
fine and thy breeding right good: seek out, then, whom thou wilt
of the Intendants[FN#40] and throw thyself on his bounty; thus
haply Allah shall reunite thee with thy slave-girl.' I hearkened
to his words (and indeed my mind was strengthened and I was
somewhat comforted) and resolved to betake myself to
Wasit,[FN#41] where I had kinfolk. So I went down to the river-
side, where I saw a ship moored and the sailors embarking goods
and goodly stuffs. I asked them to take me with them and carry me
to Wasit; but they replied, 'We cannot take thee on such wise,
for the ship belongeth to a Hashimi.' However, I tempted them
with promise of passage-money and they said, 'We cannot embark
thee on this fashion;[FN#42] but, if it must be, doff those fine
clothes of thine and don sailor's gear and sit with us as thou
wert one of us.' I went away and buying somewhat of sailors'
clothes, put them on; after which I bought me also somewhat of
provisions for the voyage; and, returning to the vessel, which
was bound for Bassorah, embarked with the crew. But ere long I
saw my slave-girl herself come on board, attended by two waiting-
women; whereupon what was on me of chagrin subsided and I said in
myself, 'Now shall I see her and hear her singing, till we come
to Bassorah.' Soon after, up rode the Hashimi, with a party of
people, and they embarked aboard the ship, which dropped down the
river with them. Presently the Hashimi brought out food and ate
with the damsel, whilst the rest ate amidships. Then said he to
her, 'How long this abstinence from singing and permanence in
this wailing and weeping? Thou art not the first that hath been
parted from a beloved!' Wherefore I knew what she suffered for
love of me. Then he hung a curtain before her along the gunwale
and calling those who ate apart, sat down with them without the
curtain; and I enquired concerning them and behold they were his
brethren.[FN#43] he set before them what they needed of wine and
dessert, and they ceased not to press the damsel to sing, till
she called for the lute and tuning it, intoned these two
couplets,

'The company left with my love by night, * Nor forbore to fare
     with heart's delight:
And raged, since their camels off paced, a fire * As of
     Ghaza[FN#44]-wood in the lover's sprite.'

Then weeping overpowered her and she threw down the elute and
ceased singing; whereat the folks were troubled and I slipped
down a-swoon. They thought I was possessed[FN#45] and one of them
began reciting exorcisms in my ear; nor did they cease to comfort
her and beseech her to sing, till she tuned the lute again and
chaunted these couplets twain,

'I stood and bewailed who their loads had bound * And far yode
     but still in my heart are found;
I drew near the ruins and asked of them * And the camp was void
     and lay waste the ground.'

Then she fell down in a fainting-fit and weeping arose amongst
the folk; and I also cried out and fainted away. The sailors were
startled by me and one of the Hashimi's pages said to them, 'How
came ye to take this madman on board?' So they said one to other,
'As soon as we come to the next village, we will set him ashore
and rid us of him.' When I heard this, I was sore troubled but I
heartened and hardened myself, saying in thought, 'Nothing will
serve me to deliver myself from their hands, except I make shift
to acquaint her with my presence in the ship, so she may prevent
my being set ashore.' Then we sailed when we came hard by a
hamlet[FN#46] and the skipper said, 'Come, let us go ashore.'
Therewith they all landed, save myself; and as evening fell I
rose and going behind the curtain took the lute and changed its
accord, mode[FN#47] by mode, and tuning it after a fashion of my
own,[FN#48] that she had learnt of me, returned to my place in
the ship;" --And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
young man continued, "I returned to my place in the ship; and
presently the whole party came on board again and the moon shone
bright upon river and height. Then said the Hashimi to the
damsel, 'Allah upon thee, trouble not our joyous lives!' So she
took the lute, and touching it with her hand, gave a sob, that
they thought her soul had fled her frame, and said, 'By Allah, my
master and teacher is with us in this ship!' Answered the
Hashimi, 'By Allah, were this so, I would not forbid him our
conversation! Haply he would lighten thy burthen, so we might
enjoy thy singing: but his being on board is far from possible.'
However she said, 'I cannot smite lute-string or sing sundry airs
I was wont to sing whilst my lord is with us.' Quoth the Hashimi,
'Let us ask the sailors;' and quoth she, 'Do so.' He questioned
them, saying, 'Have ye carried anyone with you!'; and they
answered, 'No.' then I feared lest the enquiry should end there;
so I laughed and said, 'Yes; I am her master and taught her
whenas I was her lord.' Cried she, 'By Allah, that is my lord's
voice!' Thereupon the pages carried me to the Hashimi, who knew
me at first sight and said to me, 'Out on thee! What plight is
this in which I see thee and what hath brought thee to such
condition?' I related to him all that had befallen me of my
affair, weeping the while, and the damsel made loud wail from
behind the curtain. The Hashimi wept with sore weeping, he and
his brethren, for pity of me, and he said, 'By Allah, I have not
drawn near this damsel nor enjoyed her, nor have I even heard her
sing till this day! I am a man to whom Allah hath been ample and
I came to Baghdad but to hear singing and seek my allowances of
the Commander of the Faithful. I accomplished both my needments
and being about to return home, said to myself, 'Let us hear some
what of the singing of Baghdad.' Wherefore I bought this damsel,
knowing not that such was the case with you twain; and I take
Allah to witness that, when I reach Bassorah I will free her and
marry her to thee and assign you what shall suffice you, and
more; but on condition that, whenever I have a mind to hear
music, a curtain shall be hung for her and she shall sing to me
from behind it, and thou shalt be of the number of my brethren
and boon-companions.' Hereat I rejoiced and the Hashimi put his
head within the curtain and said to her, 'Will that content
thee?'; whereupon she fell to blessing and thanking him. Then he
called a servant and said to him, 'Take this young man and do off
his clothes and robe him in costly raiment and incense[FN#49] him
and bring him back to us.' So the servant did with me as his
master bade him and brought me back to him, and served me with
wine, even as the rest of the company. Then the damsel began
singing after the goodliest fashion and chanted these couplets,

'They blamed me for causing my tears to well * When came my
     beloved to bid farewell:
They ne'er tasted the bitters of parting nor felt * Fire beneath
     my ribs that flames fierce and fell!
None but baffled lover knows aught of Love, * Whose heart is lost
     where he wont to dwell.'

The folk rejoiced in her song with exceeding joy and my gladness
redoubled, so that I took the lute from the damsel and preluding
after the most melodious fashion, sang these couplets,

'Ask (if needs thou ask) the Compassionate, * And the generous
     donor of high estate.
For asking the noble honours man * And asking the churl entails
     bane and bate:
When abasement is not to be 'scaped by wight * Meet it asking
     boons of the good and great.
Of Grandee to sue ne'er shall vilify man, * But 'tis vile on the
     vile of mankind to 'wait.'

The company rejoiced in me with joy exceeding and the ceased not
from pleasure and delight, whilst anon I sang and anon the
damsel, till we came to one of the landing-places, where the
vessel moored and all on board disembarked and I with them. Now I
was drunken with wine and squatted on my hams to make water; but
drowsiness overcame me and I slept, and the passengers returned
to the ship which ran down stream without any missing me, for
that they also were drunken, and continued their voyage until
they reached Bassorah. As for me I awoke not till the heat of the
sun aroused me, when I rose and looked about me, but saw no one.
Now I had given my spending money to the damsel and had naught
left: I had also forgotten to ask the Hashimi his name and where
his house was at Bassorah and his titles; thus I was confounded
and my joy at meeting the damsel had been but a dream; and I
abode in perplexity till there came up a great vessel wherein I
embarked and she carried me to Bassorah. Now I knew none there,
much less the Hashimi's house, so I accosted a grocer and taking
of him inkcase and paper, -- And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Baghdad man who owned the maid entered Bassorah, he was perplexed
for not knowing the Hashimi's house. "So I accosted" (said he) "a
grocer and, taking of him inkcase and paper, sat down to write.
He admired my handwriting and seeing my dress stained and soiled,
questioned me of my case, to which I replied that I was a
stranger and poor. Quoth he, 'Wilt thou abide with me and order
the accounts of my shop and I will give thee thy food and
clothing and half a dirham a day for ordering the accompts of my
shop?'; and quoth I, ''Tis well,' and abode with him and kept his
accounts and ordered his income and expenditure for a month, at
the end of which he found his income increased and his
disbursements diminished; wherefore he thanked me and made my
wage a dirham a day. When the year was out, he proposed to me to
marry his daughter and become his partner in the shop. I agreed
to this and went in to my wife and applied me to the shop. But I
was broken in heart and spirit, and grief was manifest upon me;
and the grocer used to drink and invite me thereto, but I
refrained for melancholy. I abode on this wise two years till,
one day, as I sat in the shop, behold, there passed by a parcel
of people with meat and drink, and I asked the grocer what was
the matter. Quoth he, 'This is the day of the pleasure-makers,
when all the musicians and dancers of the town go forth with the
young men of fortune to the banks of the Ubullah river[FN#50] and
eat and drink among the trees there.' The spirit prompted me to
solace myself with the sight of this thing and I said in my mind,
'Haply among these people I may foregather with her I love.' So I
told the grocer that I had a mind to this and he said, 'Up and go
with them an thou please.' He made me ready meat and drink and I
went till I came to the River of Ubullah, when, behold, the folk
were going away: I also was about to follow, when I espied the
Rais of the bark wherein the Hashimi had been with the damsel and
he was going along the river. I cried out to him and his company
who knew me and took me onboard with them and said to me, 'Art
thou yet alive?'; and they embraced me and questioned me of my
case. I told them my tale and they said, 'Indeed, we thought that
drunkenness had gotten the better of thee and that thou hadst
fallen into the water and wast drowned.' Then I asked them of the
d