n pieces and restored their prey to the Jackals. "This
showeth," added Shimas, "that it fitteth no King to neglect the
affairs of his subjects; wherefore do thou hearken to my rede and
give credit to the words which I say to thee." Quoth the King, "I
will hearken to thee and to-morrow, Inshallah, I will go forth to
them." Accordingly Shimas went from him and returning to the
folk, told them that the King had accepted his advice and
promised to come out unto them on the morrow. But, when the
favourite heard this saying reported of Shimas and was certified
that needs must the King go forth to his subjects, she betook
herself to him in haste and said to him, "How great is my wonder
at thy submissiveness and thine obedience to thy slaves! Knowest
thou not that these Wazirs are thy thralls? Why then dost thou
exalt them to this highmost pitch of importance that they imagine
them it was they gave thee this kingship and advanced thee to
this rank and that it is they who confer favours on thee, albeit
they have no power to do thee the least damage? Indeed, 'tis not
thou who owest submission to them; but on the contrary they owe
it to thee, and it is their duty to carry out thine orders. How
cometh it then, that thou art so mightily Frighted at them? It is
said, 'Unless thy heart be like iron, thou art not fit to be a
Sovran.' But thy mildness hath deluded these men, so that they
presume upon thee and cast off their allegiance, although it
behoveth that they be constrained unto thy obedience and enforced
to thy submission. therefore an thou hasten to accept their words
and leave them as they now are and vouchsafe to them the least
thing against thy will, they will weigh heavily upon thee and
require other concessions of thee, and this will become their
habit. But, an thou hearken to me, thou wilt not advance any one
of them to power neither wilt thou accept his word nor encourage
him to presume upon thee, else wilt thou fare with them as did
the Shepherd with the Rogue." Asked the King, "How was that?" and
she answered, "They relate this adventure of




The Shepherd and the Rogue.[FN#159]



There was once a Shepherd, who fed a flock of sheep in the wold
and kept over them strait watch. One night, there came to him a
Rogue thinking to steal some of his charges and, finding him
assiduous in guarding them, sleeping not by night nor neglecting
them by day, prowled about him all the livelong night, but could
plunder nothing from him. So, when he was weary of striving, he
betook himself to another part of the waste and trapping a lion,
skinned him and stuffed his hide with bruised straw[FN#160],
after which he set it up on a high place in the desert, where the
Shepherd might see it and be assured thereof. Then he accosted
the Shepherd and said to him, "Yonder lion hath sent me to demand
his supper of these sheep." The Shepherd asked, "Where is the
lion?" and the Rogue answered, "Lift thine eyes; there he
standeth." So the Shepherd raised his eyes and, seeing the
semblance, deemed it a very lion and was much Frighted;--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-second Night, 

She resumed: It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Shepherd saw the semblance of the lion, he deemed it a very lion
and was Frighted with the sorest fright, trembling for dread so
he said to the thief, "O my brother take what thou wilt, I will
not gainsay thee." Accordingly the Rogue took what he would of
the sheep and redoubled in greed by reason of the excess of the
Shepherd's fear. Accordingly, every little while, he would hie to
him and terrify him, saying, "The lion hath need of this and
requireth that, and his intent is to do thus and thus," and take
his sufficiency of the sheep; and he stinted not to do thus with
him, till he had wasted the most part of his flock. "This, O
King," added the favourite, "I tell thee only that thou suffer
not the Grandees of thy realm to be deluded by thy mildness and
easiness of temper and presume on thee; and, in right rede, their
death were better than that they deal thus with thee." Quoth the
King, "I accept this thy counsel and will not hearken to their
admonition neither will I go out unto them." On the morrow the
Wazirs and Officers of State and heads of the people assembled;
and, taking each with him his weapon, repaired to the palace of
the King, so they might break in upon him and slay him and seat
another in his stead. When they came to the door, they required
the doorkeeper to open to them; but he refused, whereupon they
sent to fetch fire, wherewith to burn down the doors and enter.
The doorkeeper, hearing what they said went in to the King in
haste and told him that the folk were gathered together at the
gate, adding, "They required me to open to them, but I refused;
and they have sent to fetch fire to burn down the doors withal,
so they may come into thee and slay thee. What dost thou bid me
do?" Quoth the King in himself, "Verily, I am fallen into
uttermost perdition." Then he sent for the favourite; and, as
soon as she came, said to her, "Indeed, Shimas never told me
aught but I found it true, and now great and small are coming
purposing to slay me and thee; and because the doorkeeper would
not open to them, they have sent to fetch fire, to burn the doors
withal; so will the house be burnt and we therein. What dost thou
counsel me to do?" She replied, "No harm shall betide thee, nor
let thine affair affright thee. This is a time when the simple
rise against their Kings." Quoth he, "What dost thou counsel me
to do and how shall I act in this affair?" Quoth she, "My rede is
that thou fillet thy head and feign thyself sick; then send for
the Wazir Shimas, who will come and see the plight wherein thou
art; and do thou say to him, 'Verily I purposed to go forth to
the folk this day; but this malady hindered me. So go thou out to
them and acquaint them with my condition and tell them that to-
morrow I will fare forth without fail to them and do their need
and look into their affairs, so they may be reassured and their
rage may subside.' Then do thou summon ten of thy father's
slaves, stalwart men of strength and prowess, to whom thou canst
entrust thyself, hearing to thy hest and complying with thy
commandment, surely keeping thy secret and fief to thy love; and
charge them on the morrow to stand at thy head and bid them
suffer none of the folk to enter, save one by one; and all who
enter do thou say, 'Seize them and do them die.' An they agree
with thee upon this, to-morrow set up thy throne in the
Divan[FN#161] and open thy doors. When the folk see that thou
hast opened to them, their minds will be set at ease and they
will come to thee with a whole heart and seek admission to thee.
Then do thou admit them, one after one, even as I said to thee
and work with them thy will, but it behoveth thee begin by
slaying Shimas, their chief and leader, for he is the Grand Wazir
and head of the matter. Therefore do him die first and after put
all the rest to death, one after other, and spare none whom thou
knowest to have broken with thee his covenant; and in like way
slaughter all whose violence thou fearest. An thou deal thus with
them, there will be left them no power to make head against thee;
so shalt thou be at rest from them with full repose, and shalt
enjoy thy kingship in peace and do whatso thou wilt, and know
that there is no device that will profit thee more than this."
Quoth the King, "Verily, this thy counsel is just and that which
thou biddest me is to the point and I will assuredly do as thou
directest." So he called for a fillet and bound his head
therewith and shammed sickness. Then he sent for the Grand Wazir
and said to him, "O Shimas, thou knowest that I love thee and
hearken to the counsel of thee and thou art to me as brother and
father both in one; also thou knowest that I do all thou biddest
me and indeed thou badest me go forth to the lieges and sit to
judge between them. Now I was assured that this was right rede on
thy part, and purposed to go forth to them yesterday; but this
sickness assailed me and I cannot sit up. It hath reached me that
the folk are incensed at my failure to come forth to them and are
minded of their mischief to do with me that which is unmeet for
that they know not what ailment aileth me. So go thou forth to
them and acquaint them with my case and the condition I am in,
and excuse me to them, for I am obedient to their bidding and
will do as they desire; wherefore order this affair and engage
thyself for me herefor, even as thou hast been a loyal counsellor
to me and to my sire before me, and it is of thy wont to make
peace between the people. To-morrow, Inshallah, I will without
fail come forth to them, and peradventure my sickness will cease
from me this night, by the blessing of the purest intent and the
good I purpose them in my heart." So Shimas prostrated himself to
Allah and called down blessings on the King and kissed his hand,
rejoicing at this. Then he went forth to the folk and told them
what he had heard from the King and forbade them from that which
they had a mind to do, acquainting them with what excused the
King for his absence and informing them that he had promised to
come forth to them on the morrow and deal with them according to
their desires; whereupon they dispersed and tried them to their
houses.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said: It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shimas went
from the presence to the ringleaders of the commons and said to
them, "To-morrow the Sovran will come forth to you and will deal
with you as ye desire." So they tried them to their homes. On
such wise fared it with them; but as regards the Monarch, he
summoned ten slaves of gigantic stature,[FN#162] men of hard
heart and prow of prowess, whom he had chosen from amongst his
father's body guard, and said to them, "Ye know the favour,
esteem and high rank ye held with my sire and all the bounties,
benefits and honours he bestowed on you, and I will advance you
to yet higher dignity with me than this. Now I will tell you the
reason thereof and ye are under safeguard of Allah from me. But
first I will ask you somewhat, wherein if ye do my desire,
obeying me in that which I shall bid you and conceal my secret
from all men, ye shall have of me largesse and favour surpassing
expectation. But above all things obedience!" The ten thralls
answered him with one mouth and in sequent words, saying, "Whatso
thou biddest us, O our liege, that we will do, nor will we depart
in aught from thy commandment, for thou art our lord and master."
Quoth the King, "Allah allot you weal! Now will I tell you the
reason why I have chosen you out for increase of honour with me.
Ye know how liberally my father dealt with the folk of his realm
and the oath he took from them on behalf of me and how they
promised him that they would break faith with me nor gainsay the
bidding of me; and ye saw how they did yesterday, whenas they
gathered all together about me and would have slain me. Now I am
minded to do with them somewhat; and 'tis this, for that I have
considered their action of yesterday and see that naught will
restrain them from its like save exemplary chastisement;
wherefore I perforce charge you privily to do to death whom I
shall point out to you, to the intent that I may ward off
mischief and calamity from my realm by slaying their leaders and
Chiefs; and the manner thereof shall be on this wise. To-morrow I
will sit on this seat in this chamber and give them admission to
me one by one, coming in at one door and going out at another;
and do ye, all ten, stand before me and be attentive to my signs;
and whoso entereth singly, take him and drag him into yonder
chamber and kill him and hide his corpse." The slaves answered,
"We hearken to thy hest and obey thy order." Whereupon he gave
them gifts and dismissed them for the night. On the morrow he
summoned the thralls and bade set up the royal seat; then he
donned his kingly robes and taking the Book of law-cases[FN#163]
in his hands, posted the ten slaves before him and commanded to
open the doors. So they opened the doors and the herald
proclaimed aloud, saying, "Whoso hath authority, let him come to
the King's carpet[FN#164]!" Whereupon up came the Wazirs and
Prefects and Chamberlains and stood, each in his rank. Then the
King bade admit them, one after one, and the first to enter was
Shimas, according to the custom of the Grand Wazir; but no sooner
had he presented himself before the King, and ere he could
beware, the ten slaves get about him, and dragging him into the
adjoining chamber, despatched him. On likewise did they with the
rest of the Wazirs and Olema and Notables, slaying them, one
after other, till they made a clean finish.[FN#165] Then the King
called the headsmen and bade them ply sword upon all who remained
of the folk of velour and stowre; so they fell on them and left
none whom they knew for a man of mettle but they slew him,
sparing only the proletaires and the refuse of the people. These
they drove away and they returned each to his folk, whilst the
King secluded himself with his pleasures and surrendered his soul
to its lusts, working tyranny, oppression and violence, till he
outraced all the men of evil who had forerun him.[FN#166] Now
this King's dominion was a mine of gold and silver and jacinths
and jewels and the neighbouring rulers, one and all, envied him
this empire and looked for calamity to betide him. Moreover, one
of them, the King of Outer Hind, said in himself, "I have gotten
my desire of wresting the realm from the hand of yonder silly
lad, by reason of that which hath betided of his slaughter of the
Chiefs of his State and of all men of velour and mettle that were
in his country. This is my occasion to snatch away that which is
in his hand, seeing he is young in years and hath no knowledge of
war nor judgment thereto, nor is there any left to counsel him
aright or succour him. Wherefore this very day will I open on him
the door of mischief by writing him a writ wherein I will flyte
him and reproach him with that which he hath done and see what he
will reply." So he indited him a letter to the following effect,
"In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the Compassionate! *
And after * I have heard tell of that which thou hast done with
thy Wazirs and Olema and men of valiancy * and that whereinto
thou hast cast thyself of calamity * so that there is neither
power nor strength left in thee to repel whoso shall assail thee,
more by token that thou transgressest and orderest thyself
tyrannously and profligately * Now Allah hath assuredly given me
the conquering of thee and the mastery over thee and into my hand
hath delivered thee; wherefore do thou give ear to my word and
obey the commandment of me and build me an impregnable castle
amiddlemost the sea * An thou cannot do this, depart thy realm
and with thy life go flee * for I will send unto thee, from the
farthest ends of Hind, twelve hordes[FN#167] of horse, each
twelve thousand fighting men strong, who shall enter thy land and
spoil thy goods and slay thy men and carry thy women into
captivity * Moreover, I will make my Wazir, Badi'a captain over
them and bid him lay strait siege to thy capital till the master
he be; * and I have bidden the bearer of this letter that he
tarry with thee but days three * So, an thou do my demand, thou
shalt be saved; else will I send that which I have said unto
thee." Then he sealed the scroll and gave it to a messenger, who
journeyed with it till he came to the capital of Wird Khan and
delivered it to him. When the King read it, his strength failed
him, his breast waxed strait and he made sure of destruction,
having none to whom he might resort for aid or advice. Presently
he rose and went in to his favourite wife who, seeing him changed
of colour, said to him, "What mattereth thee, O King?" Quoth he,
"This day I am no King but slave to the King." And he opened the
letter and read it to her, whereupon she fell to weeping and
wailing and rending her raiment. Then he asked her, "Hast thou
aught of rede or resource in this grievous strait?"; but she
answered, "Women have no resource in time of war, nor have women
any strength or aught of counsel. 'Tis men alone who in like of
this affair have force and discourse and resource." When the King
heard her words, there befel him the utmost regret and repentance
and remorse for that he had transgressed against his Wazirs and
Officers and Lords of his land,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She continued: It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
King Wird Khan heard the words of his favourite wife there befel
him the utmost regret and repentance for having transgressed
against and slain his Wazirs and the chiefs of his state, and he
would that he had died ere there came to him the like of these
shameful tidings. Then he said to his women, "Verily, there hath
betided me from you that which befel the Francolin and the
Tortoises." Asked they, "What was that?"; and he answered, Men
tell this tale of




The Francolin and the Tortoises.



It is said that sundry Tortoises dwelt once in a certain island
abounding in trees and fruiterers and rills, and it fortuned, one
day, that a Francolin, passing over the island, was overcome with
the fiery heat and fatigue and being in grievous suffering stayed
his flight therein. Presently, looking about for a cool place, he
espied the resort of the Tortoises and alighted down near their
home. Now they were then abroad foraging for food, and when they
returned from their feeding places to their dwelling, they found
the Francolin there. His beauty pleased them and Allah made him
lovely in their eyes, so that they exclaimed "Subhana 'llah,"
extolling their Creator and loved the Francolin with exceeding
love and rejoiced in him, saying one to other, "Forsure this is
of the goodliest of the birds;" and all began to caress him and
entreat him with kindness. When he saw that they looked on him
with eyes of affection, he inclined to them and companioned with
them and took up his abode with them, flying away in the morning
whither he would and returning at eventide to pass the night by
side of them. On this wise he continued a long while until the
Tortoises, seeing that his daily absence from them desolated them
and finding that they never saw him save by night (for at dawn he
still took flight in haste and they knew not what came of him,
for all that their love grew to him), said each to other,
"Indeed, we love this Francolin and he is become our true friend
and we cannot bear parting from him, so how shall we devise some
device tending to make him abide with us always? For he flieth
away at dawn and is absent from us all day and we see him not
save by night." Quoth one of them, "Be easy, O my sisters; I will
bring him not to leave us for the turn of an eye?" and quoth the
rest, saying, "An thou do this, we will all be thy thralls." So,
when the Francolin came back from his feeding place and sat down
amongst them, that wily Tortoise drew near unto him and called
down blessings on him, giving him joy of his safe return and
saying, "O my lord, know that Allah hath vouch-safed thee our
love and hath in like manner set in thy heart the love of us,
whereby thou art become to us a familiar friend and a comrade in
this desert. Now the goodliest of times for those who love one
another is when they are united and the sorest of calamities for
them are absence and severance. But thou departest from us at
peep of day and returnest not to us till sundown, wherefore there
betideth us extreme desolation. Indeed this is exceeding grievous
to us and we abide in sore longing for such reason." The
Francolin replied, "Indeed, I love you also and yearn for you yet
more than you can yearn for me, nor is it easy for me to leave
you; but my hand hath no help for this, seeing that I am a fowl
with wings and may not wone with you always, because that is not
of my nature. For a bird, being a winged creature, may not remain
still, save it be for the sake of sleep o' nights; but, as soon
as it is day, he flieth away and seeketh his morning-meal in what
place soever pleaseth him." Answered the Tortoise, "Sooth thou
speakest! Nevertheless he who hath wings hath no repose at most
seasons, for that the good he getteth is not a fourth part of
what ill betideth him, and the highmost aims of the creature are
repose and ease of life. Now Allah hath bred between us and thee
love and fellowship and we fear for thee, lest some of thine
enemies catch thee and thou perish and we be denied the sight of
thy countenance." Rejoined the Francolin, "True! But what rede
hast thou or resource for my case?" Quoth the Tortoise, "My
advice is that thou pluck out thy wing-feathers, wherewith thou
speedest thy flight, and tarry with us in tranquillity, eating of
our meat and drinking of our drink in this pasturage, that
aboundeth in trees rife with fruits yellow-ripe and we will
sojourn, we and thou, in this fruitful stead and enjoy the
company of one another." The Francolin inclined to her speech,
seeking ease for himself, and plucked out his wing-feathers, one
by one, in accordance with the rede approved of by the Tortoise;
then he took up his abode with them and contented himself with
the little ease and transient pleasure he enjoyed. Presently up
came a Weasel[FN#168] and glancing at the Francolin, saw that his
wings were plucked, so that he could not fly, whereat he rejoiced
with joy exceeding and said to himself, "Verily yonder Francolin
is fat of flesh and scant of feather." So he went up to him and
seized him, whereupon the Francolin called out to the Tortoises
for help; but when they saw the Weasel rend him, they drew apart
from him and huddled together, choked with weeping for him, for
they witnessed how the beast tortured him. Quoth the Francolin,
"Is there aught with you but weeping?"; and quoth they, "O our
brother, we have neither force nor resource nor any course
against a Weasel." At this the Francolin was grieved and cutting
off all his hopes of life said to them, "The fault is not yours,
but mine own fault, in that I hearkened to you and plucked out my
wing-feathers wherewith I used to fly. Indeed I deserve
destruction for having obeyed you, and I blame you not in aught."
"On like wise," continued the King, "I do not blame you, O women;
but I blame and reproach myself for that I remembered not that ye
were the cause of the transgression of our father Adam, by reason
whereof he was cast out from the Garden of Eden, and for that I
forgot ye are the root of all evil and hearkened to you, in mine
ignorance, lack of sense and weakness of judgment, and slew my
Wazirs and the Governors of my State, who were my loyal advisers
in all mine actions and my glory and my strength against
whatsoever troubled me. But at this time find I not one to
replace them nor see I any who shall stand me in their stead, and
I fall into utter perdition."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She pursued: It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
blamed himself saying, "'Twas I that hearkened to you in mine
ignorance and slew my Wazirs so that now I find none to stand in
their stead, and unless Allah succour me with one of sound
judgment, who shall guide me to that wherein is my deliverance, I
am fallen into utter perdition." Then he arose and withdrew into
his bedchamber, bemoaning his Wazirs and wise men and saying,
"Would Heaven those lions were with me at this time, though but
for an hour; so I might excuse myself unto them and look on them
and bemoan to them my case and the travail that hath betided me
after them!" And he abode all his day sunken in the sea of cark
and care neither eating nor drinking. But as soon as the night
fell dark, he arose and changing his raiment, donned old clothes
and disguised himself and went forth at a venture to walk about
the city, so haply he might hear from any some word of comfort.
As he wandered about the main streets, behold, he chanced upon
two boys who had sought a retired seat by a wall and he observed
that they were equal in age, or about twelve years old. As they
talked together he drew near them whereas he might hear and
apprehend what they said, unseen of them, and heard one say to
the other, "Listen, O my brother, to what my sire told me
yesternight of the calamity which hath betided him in the
withering of his crops before their time, by reason of the rarity
of rain and the sore sorrow that is fallen on this city." Quoth
the other, "Wottest thou not the cause of this affliction?"; and
quoth the first, "No! and, if thou ken it pray tell it me."
Rejoined the other, "Yes, I wot it and will tell it thee. Know
that I have heard from one of my father's friends that our King
slew his Wazirs and Grandees, not for aught of offence done of
them, but only by reason of his love for women and inclination to
them; for that his Ministers forbade him from this, but he would
not be forbidden and commanded to do them die in obedience to his
wives. Thus he slew Shimas my sire, who was his Wazir and the
Wazir of his father before him and the chief of his council; but
right soon thou shalt see how Allah will do with him by reason of
his sins against them and how He shall avenge them of him." The
other boy asked, "What can Allah do now that they are dead?"; and
his fellow answered, "Know that the King of Outer Hind[FN#169]
maketh light of our monarch, and hath sent him a letter berating
him and saying to him, 'Build me a castle amiddlemost the sea, or
I will send unto thee Badi'a my Wazir, with twelve hordes of
horse, each twelve thousand strong, to seize upon thy kingdom and
slay thy men and carry thee and thy women into captivity.' And he
hath given him three days' time to answer after the receipt of
that missive. Now thou must know, O my brother, that this King of
Outer Hind is a masterful tyrant, a man of might and prowess in
fight, and in his realm are much people; so unless our King made
shift to fend him off from himself, he will fall into perdition,
whilst the King of Hind, after slaying our Sovran, will seize on
our possessions and massacre our men and make prize of our
women." When the King heard this their talk, his agitation
increased and he inclined to the boys, saying, "Surely, this boy
is a wizard, in that he is acquainted with this thing without
learning it from me; for the letter is in my keeping and the
secret also and none hath knowledge of such matter but myself.
How then knoweth this boy of it? I will resort to him and talk
with him and I pray Allah that our deliverance may be at his
hand." Hereupon the King approached the boy softly and said to
him, "O thou dear boy, what is this thou sayest of our King, that
he did ill of the evilest in slaying his Wazirs and the Chiefs of
his State? Indeed he sinned against himself and his subjects and
thou art right in that which thou sayest. But tell me, O my son,
whence knowest thou that the King of Outer Hind hath written him
a letter, berating him and bespeaking him with the grievous
speech whereof thou tellest?" The boy replied, "O brother, I know
this from the sand[FN#170] wherewith I take compt of night and
day and from the saying of the ancients, 'No mystery from Allah
is hidden; for the sons of Adam have in them a spiritual virtue
which discovereth to them the darkest secrets.'" Answered Wird
Khan, "True, O my son, but whence learnedest thou geomancy and
thou young of years?" Quoth the boy, "My father taught it me;"
and quoth the King, "Is thy father alive or dead?" "He is dead,"
replied the boy. Then Wird Khan asked, "Is there any resource or
device for our King, whereby to ward off from himself and his
kingdom this sore calamity?" And the boy answered, saying, "It
befitteth not that I speak with thee of this; but, an the King
send for me and ask me how he shall do to baffle his foe and get
free of his snares, I will acquaint him with that wherein, by the
power of Allah Almighty, shall be his salvation." Rejoined Wird
Khan, "But who shall tell the King of this that he may send for
thee and invite thee to him?" The boy retorted, "I hear that he
seeketh men of experience and good counsel, so I will go up with
them to him and tell him that wherein shall be his welfare and
the warding off of this affliction from him; but, an he neglect
the pressing matter and busy himself with his love-liesse among
his women and I go to him of my own accord designing to acquaint
him with the means of deliverance, he will assuredly give orders
to slay me, even as he slew those his Wazirs, and my courtesy to
him will be the cause of my destruction. Wherefore the folk will
think slightly of me and belittle my wit and I shall be of those
of whom it is said, 'He whose science excelleth his sense
perisheth by his ignorance.'" When the King heard the boy's
words, he was assured of his sagacity, and the excellence of his
merit was manifest and he was certified that deliverance would
betide him and his subjects at the boy's hands. So presently he
resumed the colloquy and asked him, "Whence art thou and where is
thy home?"; and the boy answered, "This is the wall of our
house." The King took note of the place and farewelling the boy,
returned to his palace in high spirits. there he changed his
clothes and called for meat and wine, forbidding his women from
him; and he ate and drank and returned thanks to Allah the Most
High and besought Him of succour and deliverance, and he craved
His pardon and forgiveness for that which he had done with his
Wazirs and Olema and turned to Him with sincere repentance,
imposing on himself many a prayer and long fasting, by way of
discipline-vow. On the morrow, he called one of his confidential
eunuchs and, describing to him the boy's home, bade him repair
thither and bring him to his presence with all gentleness.
Accordingly the slave sought out the boy and said to him, "The
King summoneth thee, that good may betide thee from him and that
he may ask thee a question; then shalt thou return safe and sound
to thy dwelling." Asked the boy, "What is the King's need of me
that he biddeth me to him on this wise?", and the eunuch
answered, "My lord's occasion with thee is question and answer."
"A thousand times hearkening and a thousand times obeying the
commandment of the King!" replied the boy and accompanied the
slave to the palace. When he came into the presence, he
prostrated himself before Allah and after salaming, called down
blessings on the King who returned his salutation and bade him be
seated.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She resumed: It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
boy appeared before the King and saluted him with the salam, Wird
Khan returned his salutation and bade him be seated. So he sat
down and the King asked him, "Knowest thou who talked with thee
yesternight?" Answered the boy, "Yes," and the King said, "And
where is he?" "'Tis he who speaketh with me at this present,"
said the boy. Rejoined the King, "Thou sayst sooth, O friend,"
and bade set him a chair beside his own, whereon he made him sit
and called for meat and drink. Then they talked awhile and the
King said, "Ho, thou the Wazir,[FN#171] in our talk yesternight
thou toldest me that thou hadst a device whereby thou couldst
defend us from the malice of the King of Hind. What is this
contrivance and how shall we manoeuvre to ward off his mischief
from us? Tell me, that I may make thee chief of those who speak
with me in the realm and choose thee to be my Grand Wazir and do
according to thy judgment in all thou counsellest me and assign
thee a splendid honorarium." Answered the boy, "O King, keep thy
honorarium to thyself and seek counsel and policy of thy women,
who directed thee to slay my father Shimas and the rest of the
Wazirs." When the King heard this, he was ashamed and sighed and
said, "O thou dear boy, was Shimas indeed thy sire?" The boy
replied, "Shimas was indeed my sire, and I am in truth his son."
Whereupon the King bowed his head, whilst the tears ran from his
eyes, and he craved pardon of Allah. Then said he, "O boy, indeed
I did this of my ignorance and by the evil counsel of the women,
for 'Great indeed is their malice'[FN#172]; but I beseech thee to
forgive me and I will set thee in thy father's stead and make thy
rank higher than his rank. Moreover, an thou do away from us this
retribution sent down from Heaven, I will deck thy neck with a
collar of gold and mount thee on the goodliest of steeds and bid
the crier make proclamation before thee, saying, 'This is the
lief[FN#173] boy, the Wazir who sitteth in the second seat after
the King!' And touching what thou sayest of the women, I have it
in mind to do vengeance on them at such time as Almighty Allah
shall will it. But tell me now what thou hast with thee of
counsel and contrivance, that my heart may be content." Quoth the
boy, "Swear to me an oath that thou wilt not gainsay me in whatso
I shall say to thee and that I from that which I fear shall be
safe," and quoth the King, "This is the covenant of Allah between
me and thee, that I will not go from thy word and that thou shalt
be my chief counsellor and whatsoever thou biddest me, that will
I do; and the Almighty Lord is witness betwixt us twain whatso I
say." therewith the boy's breast waxed broad and the field of
speech was opened to him wide and he said, "O King, my rede to
thee is that thou await the expiration of the delay appointed to
thee for answering the courier of the King of Hind, and when he
cometh before thee seeking the reply, do thou put him off to
another day. With this he will excuse himself to thee, on the
ground of his master having appointed him certain fixed days, and
importune for an answer; but do thou rebut him and defer him to
another day, without specifying what day it be. Then will he go
forth from thee an angered and betake himself into the midst of
the city and speak openly among the folk, saying, 'O people of
the city, I am a courier of the King of Outer Hind, who is a
monarch of great puissance and of determination such as softeneth
iron. He sent me with a letter to the King of this city
appointing to me certain days, saying, 'An thou be not with me by
the time appointed, my vengeance shall fall on thee.' Now,
behold, I went in to the King of this city and gave him the
missive, which when he had read, he sought of me a delay of three
days, after which he would return me an answer to the letter, and
I agreed to this of courtesy and consideration for him. When the
three days were past, I went to seek the reply of him, but he
delayed me to another day; and now I have no patience to wait
longer; so I am about to return to my lord, the King of Outer
Hind, and acquaint him with that which hath befallen me; and ye,
O folk, are witnesses between me and him.' All this will be
reported to thee and do thou send for him and speak him gently
and say to him, 'O thou who seekest thine own ruin, what hath
moved thee to blame us among our subjects? Verily, thou deservest
present death at our hands; but the ancients say, 'Clemency is of
the attributes of nobility.' Know that our delay in answering
arose not from helplessness on our part, but from our much
business and lack of leisure to look into thine affair and write
a reply to thy King.' Then call for the scroll and read it again
and laugh loud and long and say to the courier, 'Hast thou a
letter other than this? If so, we will write thee an answer to
that also.' He will say, 'I have none other than this letter';
but do thou repeat thy question to him a second time and a third
time, and he will reply, 'I have none other at all.' Then say to
him, 'Verily, this thy King is utterly witless in that he writeth
us the like of this writ seeking to arouse our wrath against him,
so that we shall go forth to him with our forces and domineer
over his dominions and capture his kingdom. But we will not
punish him this time for his unmannerly manners as shown in this
letter, because he is wanting in wit and feeble of foresight, and
it beseemeth our dignity that we first warn him not to repeat the
like of these childish extravagances, and if he risk his life by
returning to the like of this, he will deserve speedy
destruction. Indeed, methinks this King of thine who sent thee on
such errand must be an ignorant fool, taking no thought to the
issue of things and having no Wazir of sense and good counsel,
with whom he may advise. Were he a man of mind, he had taken
counsel with a Wazir, ere sending us the like of this laughable
letter. But he shall have a reply similar to his script and
surpassing it, for I will give it to one of the boys of the
school to answer.' Then send for me and, when I come to the
presence, bid me read the letter and reply thereto." When the
King heard the boy's speech, his breast broadened and he approved
his proposal and his device delighted him. So he conferred gifts
upon him and installing him in his father's office, sent him away
rejoicing. And as soon as expired the three days of delay which
he had appointed, the courier presented himself and going in to
the King, demanded the answer, but he put him off to another day;
whereupon he went to the end of the carpet-room[FN#174] and spake
with unseemly speech, even as the boy had fore said. Then he
betook himself to the bazar and cried, "Ho, people of this city,
I am a courier of the King of Outer Hind and came with a message
to your monarch who still putteth me off from a reply. Now the
term is past which my master limited to me and your King hath no
excuse, and ye are witnesses unto this." When these words reached
the King, he sent for that courier and said to him, "O thou that
seeketh thine own ruin, art thou not the bearer of a letter from
King to King, between whom are secrets, and how cometh it that
thou goest forth among the folk and publishest Kings' secrets to
the vulgar? Verily, thou meritest retribution from us, but this
we will forbare, for the sake of returning an answer by thee to
this fool of a King of thine; and it befitteth not that any
return to him reply but the least of the boys of the school."
Then he sent for the Wazir's son, who came and prostrating
himself before Allah, offered up prayers for the King's lasting
glory and long life; whereupon Wird Khan threw him the letter,
saying, "Read that letter and write me an acknowledgment thereof
in haste." The boy took the letter and read it, smiled; then he
laughed; then he laughed aloud and asked the King, "Didst thou
send for me to answer this letter?" "Yes," answered Wird Khan,
and the boy said, "O King, me thought thou hadst sent for me on
some grave occasion; indeed, a lesser than I had answered this
letter but 'tis thine to command, O puissant potentate." Quoth
the King, "Write the reply forthright, on account of the courier,
for that he is appointed a term and we have delayed him another
day." Quoth the boy, "With the readiest hearkening and
obedience," and pulling out paper and inkcase[FN#175] wrote as
follows:--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said: It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
boy took the letter and read it, he forthright pulled out inkcase
and paper and wrote as follows:--"In the name of Allah the
Compassionating, the Compassionate! Peace be upon him who hath
gotten pardon and deliverance and the mercy of the Merciful! But
after, O thou who pretendest thyself a mighty King and art but a
King in word and not in deed, we give thee to know that thy
letter hath reached us and we have read it and have taken note of
that which is therein of absurdities and peregrine extravagances,
whereby we are certified of thine ignorance and ill-will to us.
Verily, thou hast put out thy hand to that whereunto thou canst
never reach and, but that we have compassion on Allah's creatures
and the lieges, we had not held back from thee. As for thy
messenger, he went forth to the market streets and published the
news of thy letter to great and small, whereby he merited
retaliation from us, but we spared him and remitted his offence,
of pity for him, seeing that he is excusable with thee and not
for aught of respect to thyself. As for that whereof thou makest
mention in thy letter of the slaying of my Wazirs and Olema and
Grandees, this is the truth and this I did for a reason that
arose with me, and I slew not one man of learning but there are
with me a thousand of his kind, wiser than he and cleverer and
wittier; nor is there with me a child but is filled with
knowledge, and I have, in the stead of each of the slain, of
those who surpass in his kind, what is beyond count. Each man of
my troops also can cope with an horde of thine, whilst, as for
monies I have a manufactory that maketh every day a thousand
pounds of silver, besides gold, and precious stones are with me
as pebbles; and as for the people of my possessions I cannot set
forth to thee their goodliness and abundance of means. How darest
thou, therefore, presume upon us and say to us, 'Build me a
castle amiddlemost the main'? Verily, this is a marvellous thing,
and doubtless it ariseth from the slightness of thy wit, for
hadst thou aught of sense, thou hadst enquired of the beatings of
the billows and the waftings of the winds. But wall it off from
the waves and the surges of the sea and still the winds, and we
will build thee the castle. Now as for thy pretension that thou
wilt vanquish me, Allah forfend that such thing should befal, and
the like of thee should lord it over us and conquer our realm!
Nay, the Almighty hath given me the victory over thee, for that
thou hast transgressed against me and rebelled without due cause.
Know, therefore, that thou hast merited retribution from the Lord
and from me; but I fear Allah in respect of thee and thy
subjects[FN#176] and will not take horse against thee except
after warning. Wherefore, an thou also fear Allah, hasten to send
me this year's tribute, else will I not turn from my design to
ride forth against thee with a thousand thousand[FN#177] and an
hundred thousand fighting men, all furious giants on elephants,
and I will range them round about my Wazir and bid him besiege
thee three years, in lieu of the three days' delay thou
appointedst to thy messenger, and I will make myself master of
thy dominion, except that I will slay none save thyself alone and
take captive therefrom none but thy Harim." Then the boy drew his
own portrait in the margin of the letter and wrote thereunder the
words: "This answer was written by the least of the boys of the
school." After this he sealed it and handed it to the King, who
gave it to the courier, and the man, after taking it and kissing
the King's hands went forth from him thanking Allah and the
Sovran for his royal clemency to him and marvelling at the boy's
intelligence. He arrived at the court of the King, his master, on
the third day after the expiration of the term appointed to him,
and found that he had called a meeting of his council, by reason
of the failure of the courier to return at the time appointed. So
he went in to the King and prostrating himself before him, gave
him the letter. The King took it and questioned him of the cause
of his tarrying and how it was with King Wird Khan. So he told
him all he had seen with his own eyes and heard with his own
ears; whereat the King's wit was confounded and he said, "Out on
thee! What tale is this thou tellest me of the like of this
King?" Answered the courier, "O mighty monarch, here am I in thy
presence,[FN#178] but open the letter and read it, and the truth
of my speech will be manifest to thee." So the King opened the
letter and read it and seeing the semblance of the boy who had
written it, made sure of the loss of his kingdom and was
perplexed anent the end of his affair. Then, turning to his
Wazirs and Grandees, he acquainted them with what had occurred
and read to them the letter, whereat they were affrighted with
the sorest affright and sought to soothe the King's terror with
words that were only from the tongue, whilst their hearts were
torn piecemeal with palpitations of alarm. But Badi'a (the Chief
Wazir) presently said, "Know, O King, that there is no profit in
that which my brother Wazirs have proffered, and it is my rede
that thou write this King a writ and excuse thyself to him
therein, saying, 'I love thee and loved thy father before thee
and sent thee not this letter by the courier except only to prove
thee and try thy constancy and see what was in thee of valiancy
and thy proficiency in matters of practick and theorick and skill
in enigmas and that wherewith thou art endowed of all
perfections, So we pray Almighty Allah to bless thee in thy
kingdom and strengthen the defences of thy capital and add to thy
dominion, since thou art mindful of thyself and managest to
accomplish every need of thy subjects'. And send it to him by
another courier." Exclaimed the King, "By Allah of All-might!
'tis a marvel of marvels that this man should be a mighty King
and ready for war, after his slaughter of all the wise men of his
kingdom and his counsellors and the captains of his host and that
his realm should be populous and prosper after this and there
should issue therefrom this prodigious power! But the
marvelousest of all is that the little ones of its schools should
return the like of this answer for its King. Verily, of the
vileness of my greed I have kindled this fire upon myself and
lieges, and I know not how I shall quench it, save by taking the
advice of this my Wazir." Accordingly he get ready a costly
present, with eunuchs and slaves manifold, and wrote the
following reply, "In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the
Compassionate! To proceed: O Glorious King Wird Khan, son of my
dear brother, Jali'ad, may the Lord have mercy on thee and
continue thee! Thine answer to our letter hath reached us and we
have read it and apprehended its contents and see therein that
which gladdeneth us and this is the utmost of that which we
sought of Allah for thee; so we beseech Him to exalt thy dignity
and stablish the pillars of thy state and give thee the victory
over thy foes and those who purpose thee frowardness. Know, O
King, that thy father was my brother and that there were between
us in his lifetime pacts and covenants, and never saw he from me
aught save weal, nor ever saw I from him other than good; and
when he deceased and thou tookest seat upon the throne of his
kingship, there betided us the utmost joy and gladness; but, when
the news reached us of that which thou didst with thy Wazirs and
the Notables of thy State, we feared lest the report of thee
should come to the ears of some King other than ourselves and he
should presume against thee, for that we deemed thee negligent of
thine affairs and of the maintenance of thy defences and
neglectful of the interests of thy kingdom; so we let write unto
thee what should arouse thy spirit. But, when we saw that thou
returnedest us the like of this reply, our heart was set at ease
for thee, may Allah give thee enjoyment[FN#179] of thy kingdom
and stablish thee in thy dignity! And so peace be with thee."
Then he despatched the letter and the presents to Wird Khan with
an escort of an hundred horse,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She continued: It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
monarch of Outer Hind, after making ready his presents,
despatched them to King Wird Khan with an escort of an hundred
horse, who fared on till they came to his court and saluting him,
presented letter and gifts. The King read the writ and lodged the
leader of the escort in a befitting place, entreating him with
honour and accepting the presents he presented. So the news of
this was bruited abroad among the folk and the King rejoiced
therein with joy exceeding. Then he sent for the boy, the son of
Shimas, and the Captain of the hundred horse and, entreating the
young Wazir with honour, gave him the letter to read, whilst he
himself blamed the King's conduct to the Captain who kissed his
hands and made his excuses to him, offering up prayers for the
continuance of his life and the permanence of his prosperity. The
King thanked him for this and bestowed upon him honours and
largesse and gave to all his men what befitted them and made
ready presents to send by them and bade the boy Wazir indite an
answer to their King's letter. So the boy wrote a reply, wherein,
after an address[FN#180] beautiful exceedingly, he touched
briefly on the question of reconciliation and praised the good
breeding of the envoy and of his mounted men, and showed it when
duly finished, to the King who said to him, "Read it, O thou dear
boy, that we may know what is written[FN#181] therein." So the
boy read the letter in the presence of the hundred horse, and the
King and all present marvelled at its ordinance of style and
sense. Then the King sealed the letter and delivering it to the
Captain of the hundred horse, dismissed him with some of his own
troops, to escort him as far as the frontier of his country. The
Captain returned, confounded in mind at that which he had seen of
the boy's knowledge and thanking Allah for the speedy
accomplishment of his errand and the acceptance of peace, to the
King of Outer Hind. Then going in to the presence, he delivered
the presents and handed to him the letter, telling him what he
had seen and heard, whereat the King rejoiced with joy exceeding
and rendered lauds to his Lord the Most High and honoured the
Captain commending his care and zeal and advancing him in rank.
And from that hour he woned in peace and tranquillity and all
happiness. As for King Wird Khan, he returned to the paths of
righteousness, abandoning his evil ways and repenting to Allah
with sincere penitence; and he gave up womanising altogether and
applied himself wholly to the ordering of the affairs of his
realm and the governance of his people in the fear of Allah.
Furthermore, he made the son of Shimas, Wazir in his father's
stead, and the chief after himself in his realm and keeper of his
secrets and bade decorate his capital for seven days and likewise
the other cities of his kingdom. At this the subjects rejoiced
and fear and alarm ceased from them and they were glad in the
prospect of justice and equity and instant in prayer for the King
and for the Minister who from him and them had done away this
trouble. Then said the King to the Wazir, "What is thy rede for
the assuring of the state and the prospering of the people and
the return of the realm to its aforetime state as regards
Captains and Councillors?" Answered the boy, "O King of high
estate, in my judgment it behoveth before all, that thou begin by
rending out from thy heart the root of wickedness and leave thy
debauchery and tyranny and addiction to women; for, an thou
return to the root of transgression, the second backsliding will
be worse than the first." The King asked, "And what is the root
of sinfulness that it behoveth me to root out from my heart?";
and was answered by the Wazir, little of years but great of wit,
"O King the root of wickedness is subjection to the desire of
women and inclining to them and following their counsel and
contrivance, for the love of them changeth the soundest wit and
corrupteth the most upright nature, and manifest proofs bear
witness to my saying, wherein an thou meditate them and follow 
their actions and consequences with eyes intent, thou wilt find a
loyal counsellor against thy own soul and wilt stand in no need
whatever of my rede. Look, then, thou occupy not thy heart with
the thought of womankind and do away the trace of them fr