 chattels.  Now the number of the Nobles who were washed
with the King that day was four hundred souls;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
number of the Nobles who were washed with the King that day were
four hundred souls; so that the total of that which they gave him
was forty thousand dinars, besides four hundred Mamelukes and a
like number of negroes and slave-girls.[FN#213]  Moreover the
King gave him ten thousand dinars, besides ten white slaves and
ten hand-maidens and a like number of blackamoors; whereupon
coming forward Abu Sir kissed the ground before him and said, "O
auspicious Sovereign, lord of justice, what place will contain me
all these women and slaves?"  Quoth the King, "O weak o wit, I
bade not my nobles deal thus with thee but that we might gather
together unto thee wealth galore; for may be thou wilt bethink
thee of thy country and family and repine for them and be minded
to return to thy mother-land; so shalt thou take from our country
muchel of money to maintain thyself withal, what while thou
livest in thine own country."  And quoth Abu Sir, "O King of the
age, (Allah advance thee!) these white slaves and women and
negroes befit only Kings and hadst thou ordered me ready money,
it were more profitable to me than this army; for they must eat
and drink and dress, and whatever betideth me of wealth, it will
not suffice for their support."  The King laughed and said, "By
Allah thou speakest sooth!  They are indeed a mighty host, and
thou hast not the wherewithal to maintain them; but wilt thou
sell them to me for an hundred dinars a head?"  Said Abu Sir, "I
sell them to thee at that price."  So the King sent to his
treasurer for the coin and he brought it and gave Abu Sir the
whole of the price without abatement[FN#214] and in full tale;
after which the King restored the slaves take them; for they are
a gift from me to you."  So they obeyed his bidding and took each
what belonged to him; whilst Abu Sir said to the King, "Allah
ease thee, O King of the age, even as thou hast eased me of these
Ghuls, whose bellies none may fill save Allah[FN#215]!"  The King
laughed, and said he spake sooth; then, taking the Grandees of
his Realm from the Hammam returned to his palace; but the barber
passed the night in counting out his gold and laying it up in
bags and sealing them; and he had with him twenty black slaves
and a like number of Mamelukes and four slave girls to serve him. 
Now when morning morrowed, he opened the Hammam and sent out a
crier to cry, saying, "Whoso entereth the Baths and washeth shall
give that which he can afford and which his generosity requireth
him to give."  Then he seated himself by the pay-chest[FN#216]
and customers flocked in upon him, each putting down that which
was easy to him, nor had eventide evened ere the chest was full
of the good gifts of Allah the Most High.  Presently the Queen
desired to go to the Hammam, and when this came to Abu Sir's
knowledge, he divided the day on her account into two parts,
appointing that between dawn and noon to men and that between
midday and sundown to women.[FN#217]  As soon as the Queen came,
he stationed a handmaid behind the pay-chest; for he had taught
four slave-girls the service of the Hammam, so that they were
become expert bathwomen and tire-women.  When the Queen entered,
this pleased her and her breast waxed broad and she laid down a
thousand dinars.  Thus his report was noised abroad in the city,
and all who entered the bath he entreated with honour, were they
rich or poor; good came in upon him at every door and he made
acquaintance with the royal guards and got him friends and
intimates.  The King himself used to come to him one day in every
week, leaving with him a thousand dinars and the other days were
for rich and poor alike; and he was wont to deal courteously with
the folk and use them with the utmost respect.  It chanced that
the King's sea-captain came in to him one day in the bath; so Abu
Sir did off his dress and going in with him, proceeded to shampoo
him and entreated him with exceeding courtesy.  When he came
forth, he made him sherbet and coffee; and when he would have
given him somewhat, he swore that he would not accept him from
aught.  So the captain was under obligation to him, by reason of
his exceeding kindness and courtesy and was perplexed how to
requite the bath-man his generous dealing.  Thus fared it with
Abu Sir: but as regards Abu Kir, hearing all the people
recounting wonders of the Baths and saying, "Verily, this Hammam
is the Paradise of this world!  Inshallah, O such an one, thou
shalt go with us to-morrow to this delightful bath," he said to
himself, "Needs must I fare like the rest of the world, and see
this bath that hath taken folk's wits."  So he donned his richest
dress and mounting a she-mule and bidding the attendance of four
white slaves and four blacks, walking before and behind him, he
rode to the Hammam.  When he alighted at the door, he smelt the
scent of burning aloes-wood and found people going in and out and
the benches full of great and small.  So he entered the vestibule
and saw Abu Sir, who rose to him and rejoiced in him: but the
dyer said to him, "Is this the way of well-born men?  I have
opened me a dyery and am become master-dyer of the city and
acquainted with the King and have risen to prosperity and
authority: yet camest thou not to me nor askest of me nor saidst,
Where's my comrade?  For my part I sought thee in vain and sent
my slaves and servants to make search for thee in all the Khans
and other places; but they knew not whither thou hadst gone, nor
could any one give me tidings of thee."  Said Abu Sir, "Did I not
come to thee and didst thou not make me out a thief and bastinado
me and dishonour me before the world?"  At this Abu Kir made a
show of concern and asked, "What manner of talk is this?  Was it
thou whom I beat?"; and Abu Sir answered, "Yes, 'twas I." 
Whereupon Abu Kir swore to him a thousand oaths that he knew him
not and said, "There was a fellow like thee, who used to come
every day and steal the people's stuff, and I took thee for him." 
And he went on to pretend penitence, beating hand upon hand and
saying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah,
the Glorious, the Great?  Indeed we have sinned against thee; but
would that thou hadst discovered thyself to me and said, I am
such an one!  Indeed the fault is with thee, for that thou madest
not thyself known unto me, more especially seeing that I was
distracted for much business."  Replied Abu Sir, "Allah pardon
thee,[FN#218] O my comrade!  This was foreordained in the Secret
Purpose, and reparation is with Allah.  Enter and put off thy
clothes and bathe at thine ease."  Said the dyer, "I conjure
thee, by Allah, O my brother, forgive me!"; and said Abu Sir,
"Allah acquit thee of blame and forgive thee!  Indeed this thing
was decreed to me from all eternity."  Then asked Abu Kir,
"Whence gottest thou this high degree?"; and answered Abu Sir,
"He who prospered thee prospered me; for I went up to the King
and described to him the fashion of the Hammam and he bade me
build one."  And the dyer said, "Even as thou art beknown of the
King, so also am I;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
Kir and Abu Sir were exchanging reproof and excuse, the dyer said
to him, "Even as thou art beknown of the King, so also am I; and,
Inshallah,-God willing-I will make him love and favour thee more
than ever, for my sake, he knoweth not that thou art my comrade,
but I will acquaint him of this and commend thee to him."  But
Abu Sir said, "There needeth no commendation; for He who moveth
man's heart to love still liveth; and indeed the King and all his
court affect me and have given me this and that."  And he told
him the whole tale and said to him, "Put off thy clothes behind
the chest and enter the Hammam, and I will go in with thee and
rub thee down with the glove."  So he doffed his dress and Abu
Sir, entering the bath with him, soaped him and gloved him and
then dressed him and busied himself with his service till he came
forth, when he brought him dinner and sherbets, whilst all the
folk marvelled at the honour he did him.  Then Abu Kir would have
given him somewhat; but he swore that he would not accept aught
from him and said to him, "Shame upon such doings!  Thou art my
comrade, and there is no difference between us."  Then Abu Kir
observed, "By Allah, O my comrade, this is a mighty fine Hammam
of thine, but there lacketh somewhat in its ordinance."  Asked
Abu Sir, "And what is that?" and Abu Kir answered, "It is the
depilatory,[FN#219] to wit, the paste compounded of yellow
arsenic and quicklime which removeth the hair with comfort.  Do
thou prepare it and next time the King cometh, present it to him,
teaching him how he shall cause the hair to fall off by such
means, and he will love thee with exceeding love and honour
thee."  Quoth Abu Sir, "Thou speakest sooth, and Inshallah, I
will at once make it."  Then Abu Kir left him and mounted his
mule and going to the King said to him, "I have a warning to give
thee, O King of the age!"  "And what is thy warning?" asked the
King; and Abu Kir answered, "I hear that thou hast built a
Hammam."  Quoth the King, "Yes: there came to me a stranger and I
builded the Baths for him, even as I builded the dyery for thee;
and indeed 'tis a mighty fine Hammam and an ornament to my city;"
and he went on to describe to him the virtues of the bath.  Quoth
the dyer, "Hast thou entered therein?"; and quoth the King,
"Yes."  Thereupon cried Abu Kir, "Alhamdolillah-praised be
God,-who save thee from the mischief of yonder villain and foe of
the Faith, I mean the bathkeeper!"  The King enquired, "And what
of him?"; and Abu Kir replied, "Know, O King of the age that, an
thou enter the Hammam again, after this day, thou wilt surely
perish."  "How so?" said the King; and the dyer said, "This
bath-keeper is thy foe and the foe of the Faith, and he induced
thee not to stablish this Bath but because he designed therein to
poison thee.  He hath made for thee somewhat and he will present
it to thee when thou enterest the Hammam, saying, 'This is a drug
which, if one apply to his parts below the waist, will remove the
hair with comfort.'  Now it is no drug, but a drastic dreg and a
deadly poison; for the Sultan of the Christians hath promised
this obscene fellow to release to him his wife and children, an
he will kill thee; for they are prisoners in the hands of that
Sultan.  I myself was captive with him in their land, but I
opened a dyery and dyed for them various colours, so that they
conciliated the King's heart to me and he bade me ask a boon of
him.  I sought of him freedom and he set me at liberty, whereupon
I made my way to this city and seeing yonder man in the Hammam,
said to him, 'How didst thou effect thine escape and win free
with thy wife and children?'  Quoth he, 'We ceased not to be in
captivity, I and my wife and children, till one day the King of
the Nazarenes held a court whereat I was present, amongst a
number of others; and as I stood amongst the folk, I heard them
open out on the Kings and name them, one after other, till they
came to the name of the King of this city, whereupon the King of
the Christians cried out 'Alas!' and said, 'None vexeth
me[FN#220] in the world, but the King of such a city![FN#221]
Whosoever will contrive me his slaughter I will give him all he
shall ask.'  So I went up to him and said, 'An I compass for thee
his slaughter, wilt thou set me free, me and my wife and my
children?'  The King replied 'Yes; and I will give thee to boot
whatso thou shalt desire.'  So we agreed upon this and he sent me
in a galleon to this city, where I presented myself to the King
and he built me this Hammam.  Now, therefore, I have nought to do
but to slay him and return to the King of the Nazarenes, that I
may redeem my children and my wife and ask a boon of him.'  Quoth
I, "And how wilt thou go about to kill him?'; and quoth he, 'By
the simplest of all devices; for I have compounded him somewhat
wherein is poison; so, when he cometh to the bath, I shall say to
him, 'Take this paste and anoint therewith thy parts below the
waist for it will cause the hair[FN#222] to drop off.'  So he
will take it and apply it to himself and the poison will work in
him a day and a night, till it reacheth his heart and destroyeth
him; and meanwhile I shall have made off and none will know that
it was I slew him.'"  "When I heard this," added Abu Kir, "I
feared for thee, my benefactor, wherefore I have told thee of
what is doing."  As soon as the King heard the dyer's story, he
was wroth with exceeding wrath and said to him, "Keep this
secret."  Then he resolved to visit the Hammam, that he might
dispel doubt by supplying certainty; and when he entered, Abu Sir
doffed his dress and betaking himself as of wont to the service
of the King, proceeded to glove him; after which he said to him,
"O King of the age, I have made a drug which assisteth in
plucking out the lower hair."  Cried the King, "Bring it to me":
so the barber brought it to him and the King, finding it nauseous
of smell, was assured that it was poison; wherefore he was
incensed and called out to his guards, saying, "Seize him!" 
Accordingly they seized him and the King donned his dress and
returned to his palace, boiling with fury, whilst none knew the
cause of his indignation; for, of the excess of his wrath he had
acquainted no one therewith and none dared ask him.  Then he
repaired to the audience-chamber and causing Abu Sir to be
brought before him, with his elbows pinioned, sent for his
Sea-captain and said to him, "Take this villain and set him in a
sack with two quintals of lime unslacked and tie its mouth over
his head.  Then lay him in a cock-boat and row out with him in
front of my palace, where thou wilt see me sitting at the
lattice.  Do thou say to me, 'Shall I cast him in?' and if I
answer, 'Cast him!' throw the sack into the sea, so the
quick-lime may be slaked on him to the intent that he shall die
drowned and burnt."[FN#223] "Hearkening and obeying;" quoth the
Captain and taking Abu Sir from the presence carried him to an
island facing the King's palace, where he said to him, "Ho thou,
I once visited thy Hammam and thou entreatedst me with honour and
accomplishedst all my needs and I had great pleasure of thee:
moreover, thou swarest that thou wouldst take no pay of me, and I
love thee with a great love.  So tell me how the case standeth
between thee and the King and what abominable deed thou hast done
with him that he is wroth with thee and hath commanded me that
thou shouldst die this foul death."  Answered Abu Sir, "I have
done nothing, nor weet I of any crime I have committed against
him which meriteth this!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Sea-captain asked Abu Sir the cause of the King's wrath with him,
he replied, "By Allah, O my brother I have committed no crime
against him which meriteth this!"  Rejoined the Captain, "Verily,
thou wast high in rank with the King, such as none ever won
before thee, and all who are prosperous are envied.  Haply some
one was jealous of thy good fortune and threw out certain hints
concerning thee to the King, by reason whereof he is become
enraged against thee with rage so violent: but be of good cheer;
no harm shall befal thee; for, even as thou entreatedst me
generously, without acquaintanceship between me and thee, so now
I will deliver thee.  But, an if I release thee, thou must abide
with me on this island till some galleon sail from our city to
thy native land, when I will send thee thither therein."  Abu Sir
kissed his hand and thanked him for that; after which the Captain
fetched the quicklime and set it in a sack, together with a great
stone, the size of a man, saying, "I put my trust in
Allah!"[FN#224] Then he gave the barber a net, saying, "Cast this
net into the sea, so haply thou mayst take somewhat of fish.  For
I am bound to supply the King's kitchen with fish every day; but
to-day I have been distracted from fishing by this calamity which
hath befallen thee, and I fear lest the cook's boys come to me in
quest of fish and find none.  So, an thou take aught, they will
find it and thou wilt veil my face,[FN#225] whilst I go and play
off my practice in front of the palace and feign to cast thee
into the sea."  Answered Abu Sir, "I will fish the while; go thou
and God help thee!"  So the Captain set the sack in the boat and
paddled till he came under the palace, where he saw the King
seated at the lattice and said to him, "O King of the age, shall
I cast him in?"  "Cast him!" cried the King, and signed to him
with his hand, when lo and behold!; something flashed like leven
and fell into the sea.  Now that which had fallen into the water
was the King's seal-ring; and the same was enchanted in such way
that, when the King was wroth with any one and was minded to slay
him, he had but to sign to him with his right hand, whereon was
the signet-ring, and therefrom issued a flash of lightning, which
smote the object, and thereupon his head fell from between his
shoulders; and the troops obeyed him not, nor did he overcome the
men of might save by means of the ring.  So, when it dropped from
his finger, he concealed the matter and kept silence, for that
dared not say, "My ring is fallen into the sea," for fear of the
troops, lest they rise against him and slay him.  On this wise it
befel the King; but as regards Abu Sir, after the Captain had
left him on the island he took the net and casting it into the
sea presently drew it up full of fish; nor did he cease to throw
it and pull it up full, till there was a great mound of fish
before him.  So he said in himself, "By Allah, his long while I
have not eaten fish!"; and chose himself a large fat fish,
saying, "When the Captain cometh back, I will bid him fry it for
me, so I may dine on it."  Then he cut its throat with a knife he
had with him; but the knife stuck in its gills and there he saw
the King's signet-ring; for the fish had swallowed it and Destiny
had driven it to that island, where it had fallen into the net. 
He took the ring and drew it on his little finger,[FN#226] not
knowing its peculiar properties.  Presently, up came two of the
cook's boys in quest of fish and seeing Abu Sir, said to him, "O
man, whither is the Captain gone?"  "I know not," said he and
signed to them with his right hand; when, behold, the heads of
both underlings dropped off from between their shoulders.  At
this Abu Sir was amazed and said, "Would I wot who slew them!" 
And their case was grievous to him and he was still pondering it,
when the Captain suddenly returned and seeing the mound of fishes
and two men lying dead and the seal-ring on Abu Sir's finger,
said to him, "O my brother, move not thy hand whereon is the
signet-ring; else thou wilt kill me."  Abu Sir wondered at this
speech and kept his hand motionless; whereupon the Captain came
up to him and said, "Who slew these two men?"  "By Allah, O my
brother I wot not!"  "Thou sayst sooth; but tell me whence hadst
thou that ring?"  "I found it in this fish's gills."  "True,"
said the Captain, "for I saw it fall flashing from the King's
palace and disappear in the sea, what time he signed towards
thee,[FN#227] saying, Cast him in.  So I cast the sack into the
water, and it was then that the ring slipped from his finger and
fell into the sea, where this fish swallowed it, and Allah drave
it to thee, so that thou madest it thy prey, for this ring was
thy lot; but kennest thou its property?"  Said Abu Sir, "I knew
not that it had any properties peculiar to it;" and the Captain
said, "Learn, then, that the King's troops obey him not save for
fear of this signet-ring, because it is spelled, and when he was
wroth with any one and had a mind to kill him, he would sign at
him therewith and his head would drop from between his shoulders;
for there issued a flash of lightning from the ring and its ray
smote the object of his wrath, who died forthright."  At this,
Abu Sir rejoiced with exceeding joy and said to the Captain,
"Carry me back to the city;" and he said, "That will I, now that
I no longer fear for thee from the King; for, wert thou to sign
at him with thy hand, purposing to kill him, his head would fall
down between thy hands; and if thou be minded to slay him and all
his host, thou mayst slaughter them without let or hindrance." 
So saying, he embarked him in the boat and bore him back to the
city;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Captain embarked with Abu Sir he bore him back to the city, so
Abu Sir landed and going up to the palace, entered the
council-chamber, where he found the King seated facing his
officers, in sore cark and care by reason of the seal-ring and
daring not tell any of his folk anent its loss.  When he saw Abu
Sir, he said to him, "Did we not cast thee into the sea?  How
hast thou contrived to come forth of it?"  Abu Sir replied, "O
King of the age, whenas thou badest throw me into the sea, thy
Captain carried me to an island and asked me of the cause of thy
wrath against me, saying, 'What hast thou done with the King,
that he should decree thy death?' I answered, 'By Allah, I know
not that I have wrought him any wrong!' Quoth he, 'Thou wast high
in rank with the King, and haply some one envied thee and threw
out certain hints concerning htee to him, so that he is become
incensed against thee.  But when I visited thee in thy Hammam,
thou entreatedst me honourably, and I will requite thee thy
hospitality to me by setting thee free and sending thee back to
thine own land.'  Then he set a great stone in the sack in my
stead and cast it into the sea; but, when thou signedst to him to
throw me in, thy seal-ring dropped from thy finger into the main,
and a fish swallowed it.  Now I was on the island a-fishing, and
this fish came up in the net with the others; whereupon I took
it, intending to broil it; but, when I opened its belly, I found
the signet-ring therein; so I took it and put it on my finger. 
Presently, up came two of the servants of the kitchen, questing
fish, and I signed to them with my hand, knowing not the property
of the seal-ring, and their heads fell off.  Then the Captain
came back, and seeing the ring on my finger, acquainted me with
its spell; and behold, I have brought it back to thee, for that
thou dealtest kindly by me and entreatedst me with the utmost
honour, nor is that which thou hast done me of kindness lost upon
me.  Here is thy ring; take it!  But an I have done with thee
aught deserving of death, tell me my crime and slay me and thou
shalt be absolved of sin in shedding my blood."  So saying, he
pulled the ring from his finger and gave it to the King who,
seeing Abu Sir's noble conduct, took the ring and put it on and
felt life return to him afresh.  Then he rose to his feet and
embracing the barber, said to him, "O man, thou art indeed of the
flower of the well-born!  Blame me not, but forgive me the wrong
I have done thee.  Had any but thou gotten hold of this ring, he
had never restored it to me."  Answered Abu Sir, "O King of the
age, an thou wouldst have me forgive thee, tell me what was my
fault which drew down thine anger upon me, so that thou
commandedst to do me die."  Rejoined the King, "By Allah, 'tis
clear to me that thou art free and guiltless in all things of
offence since thou hast done this good deed; only the dyer
denounced thee to me in such and such words;" and he told him all
that Abu Kir had said.  Abu Sir replied, "By Allah, O King of the
age, I know no King of the Nazarenes nor during my days have ever
journeyed to a Christian country, nor did it ever come into my
mind to kill thee.  But this dyer was my comrade and neighbour in
the city of Alexandria where life was straitened upon us;
therefore we departed thence, to seek our fortunes, by reason of
the narrowness of our means at home, after we had recited the
Opening Chapter of the Koran together, pledging ourselves that he
who got work should feed him who lacked work; and there befel me
with him such and such things."  Then he went on to relate to the
King all that had betided him with Abu Kir the dyer; how he had
robbed him of his dirhams  and had left him alone and sick in the
Khan-closet and how the door-keeper had fed him of his own monies
till Allah recovered him of his sickness, when he went forth and
walked about the city with his budget, as was his wont, till he
espied a dyery, about which the folk were crowding; so he looked
at the door and seeing Abu Kir seated on a bench there, went in
to salute him, whereupon he accused him of being a thief and beat
him a grievous beating; brief, he told him his whole tale, from
first to last, and added, "O King of the age, 'twas he who
counselled me to make the depilatory and present it to thee,
saying, 'The Hammam is perfect in all things but that it lacketh
this'; and know, O King of the age, that this drug is harmless
and we use it in our land where 'tis one of the requisites of the
bath; but I had forgotten it: so, when the dyer visited the
Hammam I entreated him with honour and he reminded me of it, and
enjoined me to make it forthwith.  But do thou send after the
porter of such a Khan and the workmen of the dyery and question
them all of that which I have told thee."  Accordingly the King
sent for them and questioned them one and all and they acquainted
him with the truth of the matter.  Then he summoned the dyer,
saying, "Bring him barefooted, bareheaded and with elbows
pinioned!"  Now he was sitting in his house, rejoicing in Abu
Sir's death; but ere he could be ware, the King's guards rushed
in upon him and cuffed him on the nape, after which they bound
him and bore him into the presence, where he saw Abu Sir seated
by the King's side and the door-keeper of the Khan and workmen of
the dyery standing before him.  Quoth the door-keeper to him, "Is
no this thy comrade whom thou robbedst of his silvers and leftest
with me sick in the closet doing such and such by him?"  And the
workmen said to him, "Is not this he whom thou badest us seize
and beat?"  Therewith Abu Kir's baseness was made manifest to the
King and he was certified that he merited torture yet sorer than
the torments of Munkar and Nakir.[FN#228]  So he said to his
guards, "Take him and parade him about the city and the
markets;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

        When it was the Nine Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicous King, that when
the King heard the words spoken by the door-keeper of the
Caravanserai and the workmen of the dyery, he was certified of
the vileness of Abu Kir; so he upbraided him with flout and fleer
and said to his guards, "Take him and parade him about the city
and the market-streets; then set him in a sack and cast him into
the sea."  Whereupon quoth Abu Sir, "O King of the age, accept my
intercession for him, for I pardon him all he hath done with me." 
But quoth the King, "An thou pardon him all his offences against
thee, I cannot pardon him his offences against me."  And he cried
out, saying, "Take him."  So they took him and paraded him about
the city, after which they set him in a sack with quicklime and
cast him into the sea, and he died, drowned and burnt.  Then said
the King to the barber, "O Abu Sir, ask of me what thou wilt and
it shall be given thee."  And he answered, saying, "I ask of thee
to send me back to my own country, for I care no longer to tarry
here."  Then the King gifted him great store of gifts, over and
above that which he had whilome bestowed on the crew of this
galleon were Mamelukes; so he gave him these also, after offering
to make him his Wazir whereto the barber consented not. 
Presently he farewelled the King and set sail in his own ship
manned by his own crew; nor did he cast anchor till he reached
Alexandria and made fast to the shore there.  Then he landed and
one of his Mamelukes, seeing a sack on the beach, said to Abu
Sir, "O my lord, there is a great heavy sack on the sea-shore,
with the mouth tied up and I know not what therein."  So Abu Sir
came up and opening the sack, found therein the remains of Abu
Kir, which the sea had borne thither.  He took it forth and
burying it near Alexandria, built over the grave a place of
visitation and endowed it with mortmain writing over the door
these couplets,


"Man is known among me as his deeds attest; * Which make noble
     origin manifest: 
Backbite not, lest other men bit thy back; * Who saith aught, the
     same shall to him be addrest:
Shun immodest words and indecent speech * When thou speakest in
     earnest or e'en in jest.[FN#229]
We bear with the dog which behaves itself * But the lion is
     chained lest he prove a pest:
And the desert carcases swim the main * While union-pearls on the
     sandbank rest[FN#230]:
No sparrow would hustle the sparrow-hawk, * Were it not by folly
     and weakness prest:
A-sky is written on page of air * 'Who doth kindly of kindness
     shall have the best!'
'Ware of gathering sugar from bitter gourd:[FN#231] * 'Twill
     prove to its origin like in taste."

After this Abu Sir abode awhile, till Allah took him to Himself,
and they buried him hard by the tomb of his comrade Abu Kir;
wherefore that place was called Abu Kir and Abu Sir; but it is
now known as Abu Kir only.  This, then, is that which hath
reached us of their history, and glory be to Him who endureth for
ever and aye and by whose will interchange the night and the day. 
And of the stories they tell is one anent 




               ABDULLAH[FN#232] THE FISHERMAN AND
                      ABDULLAH THE MERMAN.



There was once a Fisherman named Abdullah, who had a large
family, to wit, nine children and their mother, so was he poor,
very poor, owning naught save his net.  Every day he used to go
to the sea a-fishing, and if he caught little, he sold it and
spent the price on his children, after the measure of that which
Allah vouchsafed him of provision; but if he caught much, he
would cook a good mess of meat and buy fruit and spend without
stint till nothing was left him, saying to himself, "The daily
bread of to-morrow will come to-morrow."  Presently, his wife
gave birth to another child, making a total of ten, and it
chanced that day that he had nothing at all; so she said to him,
"O my master, see and get me somewhat wherewithal I may sustain
myself."  Quoth he, "I am going (under favour of Almighty Allah)
this day seawards to fish on the luck of this new-born child,
that we may see its fair fortune;" and quoth she, "Put thy trust
in Allah!"  So he took his net and went down to the sea-shore,
where he cast it on the luck of the little one, saying, "O my
God, make his living of ease not of unease, and abundant, not
scant!"  Then he waited awhile and drew in the net, which came up
full of rubbish and sand and pebbles and weeds, and he saw
therein no sign of fish neither muchel nor little.  He cast it
again and waited, then drew it in, but found no catch in it, and
threw it a third and a fourth and a fifth time still not a single
fish came up.  So he removed to another place beseeching his
daily bread of Allah Almighty and thus he kept working till the
end of the day, but caught not so much as a minnow;[FN#233]
whereat he fell a-marvelling in himself and said self-communing,
"Hath Allah then created this new-born child without lot of
provision?  This may never, never be.  He who slitteth the
corners of the lips hath pledged Himself for its provision,
because Almighty Allah is the Bountiful, the Provider!"[FN#234] 
So saying, he shouldered his net and turned him homewards,
broken-spirited and heavy at heart about his family, for that he
had left them without food, more by token that his wife was in
the straw.  And as he continued trudging along and saying in
himself, "How shall I do and what shall I say to the children to-
night?" he came to a baker's oven and saw a crowd about it; for
the season was one of dearth and in those days food was scant
with the folk; so people were proffering the baker money, but he
paid no heed to any of them, by reason of the dense crowd. The
fisherman stood looking and snuffing he smell of the hot bread
(and indeed his soul longed for it, by reason of his hunger),
till the baker caught sight of him and cried out to him, "Come
hither, O fisherman!"  So he went up to him, and the baker said,
"Dost thou want bread?" But he was silent.  Quoth the baker,
"Speak out and be not ashamed, for Allah is bountiful.  An thou
have no silver, I will give thee bread and have patience with
thee till weal betide thee." And quoth the fisherman, "By Allah,
O master, I have indeed no money!  But give me bread enough for
my family, and I will leave thee this net in pawn till the
morrow."  Rejoined the baker, "Nay, my poor fellow, this net is
thy shop and the door of thy daily subsistence; so an thou pawn
it, wherewithal wilt thou fish? Tell me how much will suffice
thee?"; and replied the fisherman, "Ten half-dirhams'
worth."[FN#235]  So he gave him ten Nusfs worth of bread and ten
in silver saying, "Take these ten Nusfs and cook thyself a mess
of meat therewith; so wilt thou owe me twenty, for which bring me
fish to-morrow; but, an thou catch nothing again, come and take
thy bread and thy ten Nusfs, and I will have patience with thee
till better luck betide thee,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say. 

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
baker said to the fisherman, "Take whatso thou needest and I will
have patience with thee till better luck betide thee, after the
which thou shalt bring me fish for all thou owest me."  Said the
fisherman, Almighty Allah reward thee, and requite thee for me
with all good!"  Then he took the bread and the coins and went
away, glad at heart, and buying what he could returned to his
wife whom he found sitting up, soothing the children, who were
weeping for hunger, and saying to them, "At once your father will
be here with what ye may eat."  So he set the bread before them
and they ate, whilst he told his wife what had befallen him, and
she said, "Allah is bountiful."[FN#236]  On the morrow, he
shouldered his net and went forth of his house, saying, "I
beseech thee, O Lord, to vouchsafe me this day that which shall
whiten my face with the baker!"[FN#237]  When he came to the sea-
shore, he proceeded to cast his net and pull it in; but there
came up no fish therein; and he ceased not to toil thus till
ended day but he caught nothing.  Then he set out homewards, in
great concern, and the way to his house lay past the baker's
oven; so he said to himself, "How shall I go home?  But I will
hasten my pace that the baker may not see me."  When he reached
the shop, he saw a crowd about it and walked the faster, being
ashamed to face his creditor; but the baker raised his eyes to
him and cried out to him, saying, "Ho, fisherman!  Come and take
thy bread and spending-money.  Meseems thou forgettest."  Quoth
Abdullah, "By Allah, I had not forgotten; but I was ashamed to
face thee, because I have caught no fish this day;" and quoth the
baker, "Be not ashamed.  Said I not to thee, At thy
leisure,[FN#238] till better luck betide thee?" Then he gave him
the bread and the ten Nusfs and he returned and told his wife,
who said, "Allah is bountiful.  Better luck shall yet betide thee
and thou shalt give the baker his due, Inshallah."  He ceased not
doing on this wise forty days, betaking himself daily to the sea,
from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, and
returning home without fish; and still he took bread and
spending-money of the baker, who never once named the fish to him
nor neglected him nor kept him waiting like the folk,[FN#239] but
gave him the bread and the ten half-dirhams without delay. 
Whenever the fisherman said to him, "O my brother, reckon with
me," he would say, "Be off:[FN#240] this is no time for
reckoning.  Wait till better luck betide thee, and then I will
reckon with thee."  And the fisherman would bless him and go away
thanking him.  On the one-and-fortieth day, he said to his wife,
"I have a mind to tear up the net and be quit of this life." She
asked, "Why wilt thou do this?"; and he answered, "Meseems there
is an end of my getting my daily bread from the waters.  How long
shall this last?  By Allah, I burn with shame before the baker
and I will go no more to the sea, so I may not pass by his oven,
for I have none other way home; and every time I pass he calleth
me and giveth me the bread and the ten silvers.  How much longer
shall I run in debt to him?"  The wife replied, "Alhamdolillah--
lauded be the Lord, the Most High, who hath inclined his heart to
thee, so that he giveth thee our daily bread!  What dislikest
thou in this?"; and the husband rejoined, "I owe him now a mighty
great sum of dirhams, and there is no doubt but that he will
demand his due."  "Hath he vexed thee with words?" "No, on the
contrary, he still refuseth to reckon with me, saying, 'Wait till
better luck betide thee.'"  "If he press thee, say to him, 'Wait
till there come the good luck for which we hope, thou and I.'"
"And when will the good luck come that we hope for?"  "Allah is
bountiful."  "Sooth thou speakest!" So saying he shouldered his
net and went down to the sea-side, praying, "O Lord provide thou
me, though but with one fish, that I may give it to the baker!" 
And he cast his net into the sea and pulling it in, found it
heavy; so he tugged at it till he was tired with sore travail. 
But when he got it ashore, he found in it a dead donkey swollen
and stinking; whereat his senses sickened and he freed it from
the net, saying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save
in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!  Indeed, I can no more! I say
to that wife of mine, 'There is no more provision for me in the
waters; let me leave this craft.'  And she still answereth me,
'Allah is bountiful: good will presently betide thee.'  Is this
dead ass the good whereof she speaketh?"  And he grieved with the
sorest grief. Then he turned to another place, so he might remove
from the stench of the dead donkey, and cast his net there and
waited a full hour: then he drew it in and found it heavy. 
Thereupon quoth he, "Good; we are hauling up all the dead donkeys
in the sea and ridding it of its rubbish.[FN#241]"  However he
gave not over tugging at the net, till blood came from the palms
of his hands, and when he got it ashore, he saw a man[FN#242] in
it and took him for one of the Ifrits of the lord Solomon, whom
he was wont to imprison in cucurbits of brass and cast him into
the main, believing that the vessel had burst for length of years
and that the Ifrit had come forth and fallen into the net;
wherefore he fled from him, crying out and saying, "Mercy, mercy,
O Ifrit of Solomon!"  But the Adamite called out to him from
within the net and said, "Come hither, O fisherman, and flee not
from me; for I am human like thyself.  Release me, so thou mayst
get a recompense for me of Allah."  Whenas he heard these words,
the fisherman took heart and coming up to him, said to him, "Art
thou not an Ifrit of the Jinn?"; and replied the other, "No: I am
a mortal and a believer in Allah and His Apostle."  Asked the
fisherman, "Who threw thee into the sea?"; and the other
answered, "I am of the children of the sea, and was going about
therein, when thou castest the net over me.  We are people who
obey Allah's commandments and show loving-kindness unto the
creatures of the Almighty, and but that I fear and dread to be of
the disobedient, I had torn thy net; but I accept that which the
Lord hath decreed unto me; wherefore by setting me free thou
becomest my owner and I thy captive.  Wilt thou then set me free
for the love[FN#243] of Almighty Allah and make a covenant with
me and become my comrade? I will come to thee every day in this
place, and do thou come to me and bring me a gift of the fruits
of the land.  For with you are grapes and figs and water-melons
and peaches and pomegranates and so forth, and all thou bringest
me will be acceptable unto me.  Moreover, with us are coral and
pearls and chrysolites and emeralds and rubies and other gems,
and I will fill thee the basket, wherein thou bringest me the
fruit, with precious stones of the jewels of the sea.[FN#244]
What sayest thou to this, O my brother?"  Quoth the fisherman,
"Be the Opening Chapter of the Koran between thee and me upon
this!"  So they recited together the Fatihah, and the fisherman
loosed the Merman from the net and asked him, "What is thy name?" 
He replied, "My name is Abdullah of the sea; and if thou come
hither and see me not, call out and say, 'Where are thou, O
Abdullah, O Merman?' and I will be with thee."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah
of the sea thus enjoined the other, "An thou come hither and see
me not, call out and say, 'Where art thou, O Abdullah, O Merman?'
and I will be with thee forthwith.  But thou, what is thy name?" 
Quoth the fisherman, "My name also is Abdullah;" and quoth the
other, "Thou art Abdullah of the land and I am Abdullah of the
Sea; but tarry here till I go and fetch thee a present."  And the
fisherman repented him of having released him and said to
himself, "How know I that he will come back to me?  Indeed, he
beguiled me, so that I loosed him, and now he will laugh at
me.[FN#245]  Had I kept him, I might have made a show of him for
the diversion of the city-folk and taken silver from all men and
gone with him to the houses of the great."  And he repented him
of having set him free and said, "Thou hast let thy prey from thy
hand away."  But, as he was thus bemoaning his folly in releasing
the prisoner, behold, Abdullah the merman returned to him, with
both hands full of pearls and coral and smaragds and rubies and
other gems, and said to him, "Take these, O my brother, and
excuse me; had I a fish-basket[FN#246] I would have filled it for
thee."  Abdullah the fisherman rejoiced and took the jewels from
the Merman who said to him, "Every day come hither, before
sunrise," and farewelling him, went down into the sea; whilst the
other returned to the city, rejoicing, and stayed not walking
till he came to the baker's oven and said to him, "O my brother,
good luck is come to us at last; so do thou reckon with me." 
Answered the baker, "There needeth no reckoning.  An thou have
aught, give it me: and if thou have naught, take thy bread and
spending-money and begone, against weal betide thee."  Rejoined
the fisherman, "O my friend, indeed weal hath betided me of
Allah's bounty, and I owe thee much money; but take this."  So
saying, he took for him a handful of the pearls and coral and
rubies and other jewels he had with him (the handful being about
half of the whole), and gave them to the baker, saying, "Give me
some ready money to spend this day, till I sell these jewels." 
So the baker gave him all the money he had in hand and all the
bread in his basket and rejoiced in the jewels, saying, "I am thy
slave and thy servant."  Then he set all the bread on his head
and following the fisherman home, gave it to his wife and
children, after which he repaired to the market and brought meat
and greens and all manner fruit.  Moreover, he left his oven and
abode with Abdullah all that day, busying himself in his service
and fulfilling all his affairs.  Said the fisherman, "O my
brother, thou weariest thyself;" and the baker replied, "This is
my duty, for I am become thy servant and thou hast overwhelmed me
with thy boons."  Rejoined the fisherman, "'Tis thou who wast my
benefactor in the days of dearth and distress."  And the baker
passed that night with him enjoying good cheer and became a
faithful friend to him.  Then the fisherman told his wife what
had befallen him with the Merman, whereat she rejoiced and said,
"Keep thy secret, lest the government come down upon thee;" but
he said, "Though I keep my secret from all men, yet will I not
hide it from the baker."  On the morrow, he rose betimes and,
shouldering a basket which he had filled in the evening with all
manner fruits, repaired before sunrise to the sea-shore, and
setting down the crate on the water-edge called out, "Where art
thou, O Abdullah, O Merman?" He answered, "Here am I, at thy
service;" and came forth to him. The fisherman gave him the fruit
and he took it and plunging into the sea with it, was absent a
full hour, after which time he came up, with the fish-basket full
of all kinds of gems and jewels.  The fisherman set it on his
head and went away; and, when he came to the oven, the baker said
to him, "O my lord, I have baked thee forty buns[FN#247] and have
sent them to thy house; and now I will bake some firsts and as
soon as all is done, I will bring it to thy house and go and
fetch thee greens and meat."  Abdullah handed to him three
handfuls of jewels out of the fish-basket and going home, set it
down there.  Then he took a gem of price of each sort and going
to the jewel-bazar, stopped at the Syndic's shop and said to him,
"Buy these precious stones of me." "Show them to me," said the
Shaykh.  So he showed them to him and the jeweller said, "Hast
thou aught beside these?"; and Abdullah replied, "I have a
basket-full at home."  The Syndic asked, "And where is thine
house?" and the fisherman answered, "In such a quarter";
whereupon the Shaykh took the jewels from him and said to his
followers, "Lay hold of him, for he is the thief who stole the
jewellery of the Queen, the wife of our Sultan."  And he bade
beat him.  So they bastinadoed him and pinioned him; after which
the Syndic and all the people of the jewel-market arose and set
out for the palace, saying, "We have caught the thief."  Quoth
one, "None robbed such an one but this villain," and quoth
another, "'Twas none but he stole all that was in such an one's
house;" and some said this and others said that.  All this while
he was silent and spake not a word nor returned a reply, till
they brought him before the King, to whom said the Syndic, "O
King of the age, when the Queen's necklace was stolen, thou
sentest to acquaint us of the theft, requiring of us the
discovery of the culprit; wherefore I strove beyond the rest of
the folk and have taken the thief for thee. Here he standeth
before thee, and these be the jewels we have recovered from him." 
Thereupon the King said to the chief eunuch, "Carry these jewels
for the Queen to see, and say to her, 'Are these thy property
thou hast lost?'"  So the eunuch took the jewels and went in with
them to the Queen, who seeing their lustre marvelled at them and
sent to the King to say, "I have found my necklace in my own
place and these jewels are not my property; nay, they are finer
than those of my necklace. So oppress not the man;"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
King's wife sent to the King to say, "These are not my property;
nay, these gems are finer than those of my necklace.  So oppress
not this man; but, if he will sell them, buy them for thy
daughter Umm al-Su'ud,[FN#248] that we may set them in a necklace
for her."  When the eunuch returned and told the King what the
Queen said, he damned the Syndic of the jewellers, him and his
company, with the damnation of Ad and Thamud,[FN#249] and they
said to him, "O King of the age, we knew this man for a poor
fisherman and deemed such things too much for him,[FN#250] so we
supposed that he had stolen them."  Cried the King, "O ye filthy
villains, begrudge ye a True Believer good fortune? Why did ye
not make due enquiry of him?  Haply Allah Almighty hath
vouchsafed him these things from a source whereupon he reckoned
not. Why did ye make him out a thief and disgrace him amongst the
folk? Begone, and may Allah never bless you!"  So they went out
affrighted and the King said to Abdullah, "O man (Allah bless
thee in all He hath bestowed on thee!), no harm shall befal thee;
but tell me truly, whence gottest thou these jewels; for I am a
King yet have I not the like of them."  The fisherman replied, "O
King of the age, I have a fish-basket full of them at home and
the case is thus and thus."  Then he told him of his friendship
with the Merman, adding, "We have made a covenant together that I
shall bring him every day a basket full of fruit and that he
shall fill me the basket with these jewels."  Quoth the King, O
man this is thy lucky lot; but wealth needeth rank,[FN#251] I
will defend thee for the present against men's domineering; but
haply I shall be deposed or die and another rule in my stead, and
he shall slay thee because of his love of the goods of this world
and his covetousness.  So I am minded to marry thee to my
daughter and make thee my Wazir and bequeath thee the kingdom
after me, so none may hanker for thy riches when I am gone.  Then
said he, "Hie with this man to the Hammam."  So they bore him to
the Baths and bathed his body and robed him in royal raiment,
after which they brought him back to the King, and he made him
his Wazir and sent to his house couriers and the soldiers of his
guard and all the wives of the notables, who clad his wife and
children in Kingly costume and mounting the woman in a horse-
litter, with the little child in her lap, walked before her to
the palace, escorted by the troops and couriers and officers. 
They also brought her elder children in to the King who made much
of them, taking them in his lap and seating them by his side; for
they were nine children male and the King had no son and heir nor
had he been blessed with any child save this one daughter, Umm
al-Su'ud hight.  Meanwhile the Queen entreated Abdullah's wife
with honour and bestowed favours on her and made her Waziress to
her.  Then the King bade draw up the marriage contract between
his daughter and Abdullah of the Land[FN#252] who assigned to
her, as her dower, all the gems and precious stones in his
possession, and they opened the gates of festival.  The King
commanded by proclamation to decorate the city, in honour of his
daughter's wedding.  Then Abdullah went in unto the Princess and
abated her maidenhead.  Next morning the King looked out of the
lattice and saw Abdullah carrying on his head a fish-crate full
of fruit.  So he called to him, "What hast thou there, O my son-
in-law, and whither wendest thou?"  The fisherman replied, "To my
friend, Abdullah the Merman;" and the King said, "O my son-in-
law, this is no time to go to thy comrade."  Quoth Abdullah,
"Indeed, I fear to break tryst with him, lest he reckon me a liar
and say, 'The things of the world have diverted thee from me,'"
and quoth the King, "Thou speakest sooth: go to thy friend and
God help thee!"  So he walked through the city on his way to his
companion; and, as he went, he heard the folk who knew him say,
"There goeth the King's son-in-law to exchange fruit for gems;"
whilst those who knew him not said, "Ho, fellow, how much a
pound?  Come, sell to me."  And he answered, saying, "Wait till I
come back to thee," for that he would not hurt the feelings of
any man. Then he fared on till he came to the sea-shore and
foregathered with his friend Abdullah the Merman, to whom he
delivered the fruit, receiving gems