ays in Baghdad,  without tasting meat or
drink, and on the fourth day seeing a ship  bound for Bassorah, I
took passage in her of the owner, and when  we reached our port,
I landed and went into the bazar, being sore  anhungered.
Presently, a man saw me, a grocer, whom I had  known aforetime,
and coming up to me, embraced me, for he had  been my friend and
my father's friend before me. Then he  questioned me of my case,
seeing me clad in those tattered clothes;  so I told him all that
had befallen me, and he said, 'By Allah,  this is not the act of
a sensible man! But after this that hath  befallen thee what dost
thou purpose to do?' Quoth I, 'I know  not what I shall do,' and
quoth he, 'Wilt thou abide with me  and write my outgo and income
and thou shalt have two dirhams  a day, over and above thy food
and drink?' I agreed to this and  abode with him, O Prince of
True Believers, selling and buying,  till I had gotten an hundred
dinars; when I hired me an upper  chamber by the river-side, so
haply a ship should come up with  merchandise, that I might buy
goods with the dinars and go back  with them to Baghdad. Now it
fortuned that one day, there came  ships with merchandise, and
all the merchants resorted to them to  buy, and I went with them
on board, when behold, there came  two men out of the hold and
setting themselves chairs on the  deck, sat down thereon. The
merchants addressed themselves to  the twain with intent to buy,
and the man said to one of the crew,  'Bring the carpet.'
Accordingly he brought the carpet and  spread it, and another
came with a pair of saddle-bags, whence  he took a budget and
emptied it on the carpet; and our sights  were dazzled with that
which issued therefrom of pearls and corals  and jacinths and
carnelians and other jewels of all sorts and  colours."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and  ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young 
merchant, after recounting to the Caliph the matter of the bag
and  its containing jewels of all sorts, continued, "Presently, O 
Commander of the Faithful, said one of the men on the chairs, 'O 
company of merchants, we will sell but this to-day, by way of 
spending-money, for that we are weary.' So the merchants fell to
bidding  one against other for the jewels and bid till the price
reached four  hundred dinars. Then said to me the owner of the
bag (for he  was an old acquaintance of mine, and when he saw me,
he came  down to me and saluted me), 'Why dost thou not speak and
bid  like the rest of the merchants?' I said, 'O my lord, by
Allah,  the shifts of fortune have run against me and I have lost
my  wealth and have only an hundred dinars left in the world.' 
Quoth he, 'O Omani, after this vast wealth, can only an  hundred
dinars remain to thee?' And I was abashed before  him and my eyes
filled with tears; whereupon he looked  at me and indeed my case
was grievous to him. So he said  to the merchants, 'Bear witness
against me that I have sold  all that is in this bag of various
gems and precious stones to  this man for an hundred gold pieces,
albeit I know them to be  worth so many thousand dinars, and this
is a present from  me to him.' Then he gave me the saddle-bag and
the carpet,  with all the jewels that were thereon, for which I
thanked him, and  each and every of the merchants present praised
him. Presently  I carried all this to the jewel-market and sat
there to sell and buy.  Now among the precious stones was a round
amulet of the handi-work  of the masters,[FN#290] weighing half a
pound: it was red of the  brightest, a carnelian on both whose
sides were graven characts  and characters, like the tracks of
ants; but I knew not its worth.  I sold and bought a whole year,
at the end of which I took the  amulet[FN#291] and said, 'This
hath been with me some while, and I  know not what it is nor what
may be its value.' So I gave it to  the broker who took it and
went round with it and returned, saying,  'None of the merchants
will give me more than ten dirhams for  it.' Quoth I, 'I will not
sell it at that price;' and he threw it in  my face and went
away. Another day I again offered it for sale  and its price
reached fifteen dirhams; whereupon I took it from  the broker in
anger and threw it back into the tray. But a few  days after, as
I sat in my shop, there came up to me a man, who  bore the traces
of travel, and saluting me, said, 'By thy leave, I  will turn
over what thou hast of wares.' Said I, ''Tis well,' and  indeed,
O Commander of the Faithful, I was still wroth by reason  of the
lack of demand for the talisman. So the man fell to turning  over
my wares, but took nought thereof save the amulet, which  when he
saw, he kissed his hand and cried, 'Praised be Allah!'  Then said
he to me, 'O my lord, wilt thou sell this?'; and I  replied,
'Yes,' being still angry. Quoth he, 'What is its price?'  And I
asked, 'How much wilt thou give?' He answered  'Twenty dinars':
so I thought he was making mock of me and  exclaimed, 'Wend thy
ways.' But he resumed, 'I will give thee  fifty dinars for it.' I
made him no answer, and he continued, 'A  thousand dinars.' But I
was silent, declining to reply, whilst he  laughed at my silence
and said, 'Why dost thou not return me an  answer?' 'Hie thee
home,' repeated I and was like to quarrel  with him. But he bid
thousand after thousand, and I still made  him no reply, till he
said, 'Wilt thou sell it for twenty thousand  dinars?' I still
thought he was mocking me; but the people  gathered about me and
all of them said, 'Sell to him, and if he  buy not, we will all
up and at him and drub him and thrust him  forth the city.' So
quoth I to him, 'Wilt thou buy or dost thou  jest?'; and quoth
he, 'Wilt thou sell or dost thou joke?' I said,  'I will sell if
thou wilt buy;' then he said, 'I will buy it for  thirty thousand
dinars; take them and make the bargain;' so I  cried to the
bystanders, 'Bear witness against him,' adding to  him, 'But on
condition that thou acquaint me with the virtues and  profit of
this amulet for which thou payest all this money.' He  answered,
'Close the bargain, and I will tell thee this;' I rejoined,  'I
sell it to thee;' and he retorted, 'Allah be witness of that 
which thou sayst and testimony!' Then he brought out the  gold
and giving it to me took the amulet, and set it in his bosom; 
after which he turned to me and asked, 'Art thou content?' 
Answered I, 'Yes,' and he said to the people, 'Bear witness 
against him that he hath closed the bargain and touched the
price,  thirty thousand dinars.' Then he turned to me and said,
'Harkye,  my poor fellow, hadst thou held back from selling, by
Allah I  would have bidden thee up to an hundred thousand dinars,
nay,  even to a thousand thousand!' When I heard these words, O 
Commander of the Faithful, the blood fled my face, and from that 
day there overcame it this pallor thou seest. Then said I to him, 
'Tell me the reason of this and what is the use of this amulet.' 
And he answered, saying, 'Know that the King of Hind hath  a
daughter, never was seen a thing fairer than she, and she is 
possessed with a falling sickness.[FN#292] So the King summoned
the  Scribes and men of science and Divines, but none of them
could  relieve her of this. Now I was present in the assembly; so
I said  to him, 'O King, I know a man called Sa'adu'llah the
Babylonian,  than whom there is not on the face of the earth one
more masterly  in these matters, and if thou see fit to send me
to him, do so.'  Said he, 'Go to him;' and quoth I, 'Bring me a
piece of  carnelian.' Accordingly he gave me a great piece of
carnelian  and an hundred thousand dinars and a present, which I
took, and  with which I betook myself to the land of Babel. Then
I sought  out the Shaykh and when he was shown to me I delivered
to him  the money and the present, which he accepted and sending
for a  lapidary, bade him fashion the carnelian into this amulet.
Then  he abode seven months in observation of the stars, till he
chose  out an auspicious time for engraving it, when he graved
upon it  these talismanic characters which thou seest, and I took
it and  returned with it to the King.'"--And Shahrazad perceived
the  dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the 
young man said to the Commander of the Faithful, "'So after the 
Shaykh had spoken, I took this talisman and returned with it to 
the King. Now the Princess was bound with four chains, and  every
night a slave-girl lay with her and was found in the morning 
with her throat cut. The King took the amulet and laid it upon 
his daughter who was straightway made whole. At this he  rejoiced
with exceeding joy and invested me with a vest of honour  and
gave alms of much money; and he caused set the amulet in  the
Princess's necklace. It chanced, one day, that she embarked  with
her women in a ship and went for a sail on the sea. Presently, 
one of her maids put out her hand to her, to sport with her, and 
the necklace brake asunder and fell into the waves. From that 
hour the possessor[FN#293] of the Princess returned to her,
wherefore  great grief betided the King and he gave me much
money, saying,  'Go thou to Shaykh Sa'adu'llah and let him make
her another  amulet, in lieu of that which is lost.' I journeyed
to Babel,  but found the old man dead; whereupon I returned and
told the  King, who sent me and ten others to go round about in
all  countries, so haply we might find a remedy for her: and now
Allah  hath caused me happen on it with thee.' Saying these
words, he  took from me the amulet, O Commander of the Faithful,
and went  his ways. Such, then, is the cause of the wanness of my 
complexion. As for me, I repaired to Baghdad, carrying all my
wealth  with me, and took up my abode in the lodgings where I
lived  whilome. On the morrow, as soon as it was light, I donned
my  dress and betook myself to the house of Tahir ibn al-Alaa,
that  haply I might see her whom I loved, for the love of her had
never  ceased to increase upon my heart. But when I came to his
home,  I saw the balcony broken down and the lattice builded up;
so I  stood awhile, pondering my case and the shifts of Time,
till there  came up a serving-man, and I questioned him, saying,
'What hath  God done with Tahir ibn al-Alaa?' He answered, 'O my
brother,  he hath repented to Almighty Allah.[FN#294]' Quoth I,
'What was the  cause of his repentance?'; and quoth he, 'O my
brother, in such  a year there came to him a merchant, by name
Abu al-Hasan the  Omani, who abode with his daughter awhile, till
his wealth was all  spent, when the old man turned him out,
broken-hearted. Now  the girl loved him with exceeding love, and
when she was parted  from him, she sickened of a sore sickness
and came nigh upon  death. As soon as her father knew how it was
with her, he sent  after and sought for Abu al-Hasan through the
lands, pledging  himself to bestow upon whoso should produce him
an hundred  thousand dinars; but none could find him nor come on
any trace  of him; and she is now hard upon death.' Quoth I, 'And
how  is it with her sire?' and quoth the servant, 'He hath sold
all his  girls, for grief of that which hath befallen him, and
hath repented  to Almighty Allah.' Then asked I, 'What wouldst
thou say to  him who should direct thee to Abu al-Hasan the
Omani?'; and  he answered, 'Allah upon thee, O my brother, that
thou do this  and quicken my poverty and the poverty of my
parents![FN#295]' I  rejoined, 'Go to her father and say to him,
Thou owest me the  reward for good news, for that Abu al-Hasan
the Omani standeth  at the door.' With this he set off trotting,
as he were a mule  loosed from the mill, and presently came back,
accompanied by  Shaykh Tahir himself, who no sooner saw me than
he returned to  his house and gave the man an hundred thousand
dinars which he  took and went away blessing me. Then the old man
came up and  embraced me and wept, saying, 'O my lord, where hast
thou been  absent all this while? Indeed, my daughter hath been
killed by  reason of her separation from thee; but come with me
into the  house.' So we entered and he prostrated himself in
gratitude to  the Almighty, saying, 'Praised be Allah who hath
reunited us  with thee!' Then he went in to his daughter and said
to her,  'The Lord hath healed thee of this sickness;' and said
she, 'O  my papa, I shall never be whole of my sickness, save I
look upon  the face of Abu al-Hasan.' Quoth he, 'An thou wilt eat
a morsel  and go to the Hammam, I will bring thee in company with
him.'  Asked she, 'Is it true that thou sayst?'; and he answered,
'By  the Great God, 'tis true!' She rejoined, 'By Allah, if I
look  upon his face, I shall have no need of eating!' Then said
he to  his page, 'Bring in thy lord.' Thereupon I entered, and
when  she saw me, O Prince of True Believers, she fell down in a
swoon,  and presently coming to herself, recited this couplet,

'Yea, Allah hath joined the parted twain, * When no thought they
thought e'er to meet again.'

Then she sat upright and said, 'By Allah, O my lord, I had not 
deemed to see thy face ever more, save it were in a dream!' So 
she embraced me and wept, and said, 'O Abu al-Hasan, now will  I
eat and drink.' The old man her sire rejoiced to hear these 
words and they brought her meat and drink and we ate and drank, 
O Commander of the Faithful. After this, I abode with them 
awhile, till she was restored to her former beauty, when her
father  sent for the Kazi and the witnesses and bade write out
the  marriage-contract between her and me and made a mighty great 
bride-feast; and she is my wife to this day and this is my son by 
her." So saying he went away and returned with a boy of rare 
beauty and symmetry of form and favour to whom said he, "Kiss 
the ground before the Commander of the Faithful." He kissed 
ground before the Caliph, who marvelled at his beauty and
glorified  his Creator; after which Al-Rashid departed, he and
his company,  saying, "O Ja'afar, verily, this is none other than
a marvellous thing,  never saw I nor heard I aught more
wondrous." When he was  seated in the palace of the Caliphate, he
cried, "O Masrur!" who  replied, "Here am I, O my lord!" Then
said he, "Bring the  year's tribute of Bassorah and Baghdad and
Khorasan, and set it  in this recess.[FN#296]" Accordingly he
laid the three tributes together  and they were a vast sum of
money, whose tale none might tell  save Allah. Then the Caliph
bade draw a curtain before the  recess and said to Ja'afar,
"Fetch me Abu al-Hasan." Replied  Ja'afar, "I hear and obey," and
going forth, returned presently  with the Omani, who kissed
ground before the Caliph, fearing lest  he had sent for him
because of some fault that he had committed  when he was with him
in his house. Then said Al-Rashid,  "Harkye, O Omani!" and he
replied, "Adsum, O Prince of True  Believers! May Allah ever
bestow his favours upon thee!"  Quoth the Caliph, "Draw back
yonder curtain." Thereupon  Abu al-Hasan drew back the curtain
from the recess and  was confounded and perplexed at the mass of
money he saw  there. Said Al-Rashid, "O Abu al-Hasan, whether is
the more,  this money or that thou didst lose by the
amulet?[FN#297]"; and he  answered, "This is many times the
greater, O Commander of the  Faithful!" Quoth the Caliph, "Bear
witness, all ye who are  present, that I give this money to this
young man." So Abu  al-Hasan kissed ground and was abashed and
wept before the  Caliph for excess of joy. Now when he wept, the
tears ran down  from his eyelids upon his cheeks and the blood
returned to its  place and his face became like the moon on the
night of its  fulness. Whereupon quoth the Caliph, "There is no
god but the  God! Glory be to Him who decreeth change upon change
and  is Himself the Everlasting who changeth not!" Saying these 
words, he bade fetch a mirror and showed Abu al-Hasan his face 
therein, which when he saw, he prostrated himself, in gratitude
to  the Most High Lord. Then the Caliph bade transport the money 
to Abu al-Hasan's house and charged the young man not to absent 
himself from him, so he might enjoy his company as a
cup-companion.  Accordingly he paid him frequent visits, till
Al-Rashid  departed to the mercy of Almighty Allah; and glory be
to Him  who dieth not the Lord of the Seen and the Unseen! And
among  tales they tell is one touching




                  IBRAHIM AND JAMILAH.[FN#298]



Al-Khasib,[FN#299] Wazir of Egypt, had a son named Ibrahim, than
whom there was none goodlier, and of his fear for him, he
suffered him not to go forth, save to the Friday prayers. One
day, as the youth was returning from the mosque, he came upon an
old man, with whom were many books; so he lighted down from his
horse and seating himself beside him, began to turn over the
tomes and examine them. In one of them he espied the semblance of
a woman which all but spoke, never was seen on the earth's face
one more beautiful; and as this captivated his reason and
confounded his wit, he said to the old man, "O Shaykh, sell me
this picture." The bookseller kissed ground between his hands and
said, "O my lord, 'tis thine without price.[FN#300]" Ibrahim gave
him an hundred dinars and taking the book in which was the
picture, fell to gazing upon it and weeping night and day,
abstaining from meat and drink and sleep. Then said he in his
mind, "An I ask the book seller of the painter of this picture,
haply he will tell me; and if the original be living, I will seek
access to her; but, if it be only a picture, I will leave doting
upon it and plague myself no more for a thing which hath no real
existence."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
youth Ibrahim said in his mind, "An I ask the bookseller of the
painter of this picture, haply he will tell me; and, if it be
only a picture, I will leave doting upon it and plague myself no
more for a thing which hath no real existence." So on the next
Friday he betook himself to the bookseller, who sprang up to
receive him, and said to him, "Oh uncle, tell me who painted this
picture." He replied, "O my lord, a man of the people of Baghdad
painted it, by name Abu al-Kasim al-Sandalani who dwelleth in a
quarter called Al-Karkh; but I know not of whom it is the
portraiture." So Ibrahim left him without acquainting any of his
household with his case, and returned to the palace, after
praying the Friday prayers. Then he took a bag and filling it
with gold and gems to the value of thirty thousand dinars, waited
till the morning, when he went out, without telling any, and
presently overtook a caravan. Here he saw a Badawi and asked him,
"O uncle, what distance is between me and Baghdad?"; and the
other answered,  O my son, where art thou, and where is
Baghdad?[FN#301] Verily, between thee and it is two months'
journey." Quoth Ibrahim, O nuncle, an thou wilt guide me to
Baghdad, I will give thee an hundred dinars and this mare under
me that is worth other thousand gold pieces;" and quoth the
Badawi, "Allah be witness of what we say! Thou shalt not lodge
this night but with me." So Ibrahim agreed to this and passed the
night with him. At break of dawn, the Badawi took him and fared
on with him in haste by a near road, in his greed for the mare
and the promised good; nor did they leave wayfaring till they
came to the walls of Baghdad, when said the wildling, "Praised be
Allah for Safety! O my lord, this is Baghdad." Whereat Ibrahim
rejoiced with exceeding joy and alighting from the mare, gave her
to the Desert man, together with the hundred dinars. Then he took
the bag and entering the city walked on, enquiring for the
quarter al-Karkh and the station of the merchants, till Destiny
drave him to a by-way, wherein were ten houses, five fronting
five, and at the farther end was a two-leaved door with a silver
ring. By the gate stood two benches of marble, spread with the
finest carpets, and on one of them sat a man of handsome aspect
and reverend, clad in sumptuous clothing and attended by five
Mamelukes like moons. When the youth Ibrahim saw the street, he
knew it by the description the bookseller had given him; so he
salaamed to the man, who returned his salutation and bidding him
welcome, made him sit down and asked him of his case. Quoth
Ibrahim, "I am a stranger man and desire of thy favour that thou
look me out a house in this street where I may take up my abode."
With this the other cried out, saying, "Ho, Ghazalah![FN#302]";
and there came forth to him a slave-girl, who said, "At thy
service, O my lord!" Said her master, "Take some servants and
fare ye all and every to such a house and clean it and furnish it
with whatso is needful for this handsome youth." So she went
forth and did his bidding; whilst the old man took the youth and
showed him the house; and he said, "O my lord, how much may be
the rent of this house?" The other answered, "O bright of face, I
will take no rent of thee whilst thou abidest therein." Ibrahim
thanked him for this and the old man called another slave-girl,
whereupon there came forth to him a damsel like the sun, to whom
said he, "Bring chess." So she brought it and one of the servants
set the cloth;[FN#303] where upon said the Shaykh to Ibrahim,
"Wilt thou play with me?"; and he answered, "Yes." So they played
several games and Ibrahim beat him, when his adversary exclaimed,
"Well done, O youth! Thou art indeed perfect in qualities. By
Allah, there is not one in Baghdad can beat me, and yet thou hast
beaten me!" Now when they had made ready the house and furnished
it with all that was needful, the old man delivered the keys to
Ibrahim and said to him, "O my lord, wilt thou not enter my place
and eat of my bread?" He assented and walking in with him, found
it a handsome house and a goodly, decorated with gold and full of
all manner pictures and furniture galore and other things, such
as tongue faileth to set out. The old man welcomed him and called
for food, whereupon they brought a table of the make of Sana'a of
al-Yaman and spread it with all manner rare viands, than which
there was naught costlier nor more delicious. So Ibrahim ate his
sufficiency, after which he washed his hands and proceeded to
inspect the house and furniture. Presently, he turned to look for
the leather bag, but found it not and said in himself, "There is
no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great! I have eaten a morsel worth a dirham or two and have lost
a bag wherein is thirty thousand dinars' worth: but I seek aid of
Allah!" And he was silent and could not speak,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
youth Ibrahim saw that his bag was lost, he was silent and could
not speak for the greatness of his trouble. Presently his host
brought the chess and said to him, "Wilt thou play with me?"; and
he said, "Yes." So they played and the old man beat him. Ibrahim
cried, "Well done!" and left playing and rose: upon which his
host asked him, "What aileth thee, O youth?" whereto he answered,
"I want the bag." Thereupon the Shaykh rose and brought it out to
him, saying, "Here it is, O my lord. Wilt thou now return to
playing with me?" "Yes," replied Ibrahim. Accordingly they played
and the young man beat him. Quoth the Shaykh, "When thy thought
was occupied with the bag, I beat thee: but, now I have brought
it back to thee, thou beatest me. But, tell me, O my son, what
countryman art thou." Quoth Ibrahim, "I am from Egypt," and quoth
the oldster, "And what is the cause of thy coming to Baghdad?";
whereupon Ibrahim brought out the portrait and said to him,
"Know, O uncle, that I am the son of Al-Kasib, Wazir of Egypt,
and I saw with a bookseller this picture, which bewildered my
wit. I asked him who painted it and he said, 'He who wrought it
is a man, Abu al-Kasim al-Sandalani hight, who dwelleth in a
street called the Street of Saffron in the Karkh quarter of
Baghdad.' So I took with me somewhat of money and came hither
alone, none knowing of my case; and I desire of the fullness of
thy favour that thou direct me to Abu al-Kasim, so I may ask him
of the cause of his painting this picture and whose portrait it
is. And whatso ever he desireth of me, I will give him that
same." Said his host, "By Allah, O my son, I am Abu al-Kasim al
Sandalani, and this is a prodigious thing how Fate hath thus
driven thee to me!" Now when Ibrahim heard these words, he rose
to him and embraced him and kissed his head and hands, saying,
"Allah upon thee, tell me whose portrait it is!" The other
replied, "I hear and I obey," and rising, opened a closet and
brought out a number of books, wherein he had painted the same
picture. Then said he, "Know, O my son, that the original of this
portrait is my cousin, the daughter of my father's brother, whose
name is Abu al-Lays.[FN#304] She dwelleth in Bassorah of which
city her father is governor, and her name is Jamilah--the
beautiful. There is not on the face of the earth a fairer than
she; but she is averse from men and cannot hear the word 'man'
pronounced in her presence. Now I once repaired to my uncle, to
the intent that he should marry me to her, and was lavish of
wealth to him; but he would not consent thereto: and when his
daughter knew of this she was indignant and sent to me to say,
amongst other things, 'An thou have wit, tarry not in this town;
else wilt thou perish and thy sin shall be on shine own
neck.[FN#305]' For she is a virago of viragoes. Accordingly I
left Bassorah, brokenhearted, and limned this likeness of her in
books and scattered them abroad in various lands, so haply they
might fall into the hands of a comely youth like thyself and he
contrive access to her and peradventure she might fall in love
with him, purposing to take a promise of him that, when he should
have possession of her, he would show her to me, though I look
but for a moment from afar off." When Ibrahim son of al-Kasib
heard these words, he bowed his head awhile in thought and
al-Sandalani said to him, "O my son, I have notseen in Baghdad a
fairer than thou, and meseems that, when she seeth thee, she will
love thee. Art thou willing, therefore, in case thou be united
with her and get possession of her, to show her to me, if I look
but for a moment from afar?" Ibrahim replied, Yes; and the
painter rejoined, "This being so, tarry with me till thou set
out." But the youth  retorted, "I cannot tarry longer; for my
heart with love of her is all afire." "Have patience three days,"
said the Shaykh, "till I fit thee out a ship, wherein thou mayst
fare to Bassorah." Accordingly he waited whilst the old man
equipped him a craft and stored therein all that he needed of
meat and drink and so forth. When the three days were past, he
said to Ibrahim, "Make thee ready for the voyage; for I have
prepared thee a packet-boat furnished with all thou requirest.
The craft is my property and the seamen are of my servants. In
the vessel is what will suffice thee till thy return, and I have
charged the crew to serve thee till thou come back in safety."
Thereupon Ibrahim farewelled his host and embarking sailed down
the river till he came to Bassorah, where he pulled out an
hundred dinars for the sailors, but they said, "We have gotten
our hire of our lord." However he replied, "Take this by way of
largesse; and I will not acquaint him therewith." So they took it
and blessed him. Then the youth landed and entering the town
asked, "Where do the merchants lodge?" and was answered, "In a
Khan called the Khan of Hamadan."[FN#306] So he walked to the
market wherein stood the Khan, and all eyes were fixed upon him
and men's sight was attracted to him by reason of his exceeding
beauty and loveliness. He entered the caravanserai, with one of
the sailors in his company; and, asking for the porter, was
directed to an aged man of reverend aspect. He saluted him and
the doorkeeper returned his greeting; after which Ibrahim said to
him, ' O uncle, hast thou a nice chamber?" He replied, 'Yes," and
taking him and the sailor, opened to them a handsome room
decorated with gold, and said, "O youth, this chamber befitteth
thee." Ibrahim pulled out two dinars and gave them to him,
saying, "Take these to key-money."[FN#307] And the porter took
them and blessed him. Then the youth Ibrahim sent the sailor back
to the ship and entered the room, where the doorkeeper abode with
him and served him, saying, "O my lord, thy coming hath brought
us joy!" Ibrahim gave him a dinar, and said, "Buy us herewith
bread and meat and sweetmeats and wine." Accordingly the
doorkeeper went to the market; and, buying ten dirhams' worth of
victual, brought it back to Ibrahim and gave him the other ten
dirhams. But he cried to him, "Spend them on thyself;" whereat
the porter rejoiced with passing joy. Then he ate a scone with a
little kitchen[FN#308] and gave the rest to the concierge,
adding, "Carry this to the people of thy household." The porter
carried it to his family and said to them, "Methinketh there is
not on the face of the earth a more generous than the young man
who has come to lodge with us this day, nor yet a pleasanter than
he. An he abide with us, we shall grow rich." Then he returned to
Ibrahim and found him weeping; so he sat down and began to
rub[FN#309] his feet and kiss them, saying, "O my lord, wherefore
weepest thou? May Allah not make thee weep!" Said Ibrahim, "O
uncle, I have a mind to drink with thee this night;" and the
porter replied, "Hearing and obeying!" So he gave him five dinars
and said, "Buy us fresh fruit and wine;" and presently added
other five, saying, "With these buy also for us dessert[FN#310]
and flowers and five fat fowls and bring me a lute." The
doorkeeper went out and, buying what he had ordered, said to his
wife, "Strain this wine and cook us this food and look thou dress
it daintily, for this young man overwhelmeth us with his
bounties." She did as he bade her, to the utmost of desire; and
he took the victuals and carried them to Ibrahim son of the
Sultan.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that then they
ate and drank and made merry, and Ibrahim wept and repeated the
following verses,

"O my friend! an I rendered my life, my sprite, * My wealth and
     whatever the world can unite;
Nay, th' Eternal Garden and Paradise[FN#311] * For an hour of
     Union my heart would buy't!"

Then he sobbed a great sob and fell down a-swoon. The porter
sighed, and when he came to himself, he said to him, "O my lord,
what is it gars thee weep and who is she to whom thou alludest in
these verses? Indeed, she cannot be but as dust to thy feet." But
Ibrahim arose and for all reply brought out a parcel of the
richest raiment that women wear and said to him, "Take this to
thy Harim." So he carried it to his wife and she returned with
him to the young man's lodging and behold, she found him weeping,
quoth the doorkeeper to him, "Verily, thou breakest our hearts!
Tell us what fair one thou desirest, and she shall be naught save
thy handmaid." Quoth he, "O uncle, know that I am the son of
al-Kasib, Wazir of Egypt, and I am enamoured of Jamilah, daughter
of Abu al-Lays the Governor." Exclaimed the porter's wife,
"Allah! Allah! O my brother, leave this talk, lest any hear of us
and we perish. Verily there is not on earth's face a more
masterful than she, nor may any name to her the word man, for she
is averse from men. Wherefore, O my son, turn from her to other
than her." Now when Ibrahim heard this, he wept with sore weeping
and the doorkeeper said to him, "I have nothing save my life; but
that I will risk for thy love and find thee a means of winning
thy will." Then the twain went out from him, and on the morrow he
betook himself to the Hammam and donned a suit of royal raiment,
after which he returned to his lodging, when behold, the porter
and his wife came in to him and said, "Know, O my lord, that
there is a humpbacked tailor here who seweth for the lady
Jamilah. Go thou to him and acquaint him with thy case; haply he
will show thee the way of attaining shine aim." So the youth
Ibrahim arose and betaking himself to the shop of the humpbacked
tailor, went in to him and found with him ten Mamelukes as they
were moons. He saluted them with the Salam, and they returned his
greeting and bade him welcome and made him sit down; and indeed
they rejoiced in him and were amazed at his charms and
loveliness, especially the hunchback who was confounded at his
beauty of form and favour. Presently he said to the Gobbo, "I
desire that thou sew me up my pocket;" and the tailor took a
needleful of silk and sewed up his pocket which he. had torn
purposely; whereupon Ibrahim gave him five dinars and returned to
his lodging. Quoth the tailor, "What thing have I done for this
youth, that he should give me five gold pieces?" And he passed
the night, pondering his beauty and generosity. And when morning
morrowed Ibrahim repaired to the shop and saluted the tailor, who
returned his Salam and welcomed him and made much of him. Then he
sat down and said to the hunchback, "O uncle, sew up my pocket,
for I have rent it again." Replied the tailor, "On my head and
eyes, O my son," and sewed it up; whereupon Ibrahim gave him ten
ducats and he took them, amazed at his beauty and generosity.
Then said he, "By Allah, O youth, for this conduct of thine needs
must be a cause, this is no matter of sewing up a pocket. But
tell me the truth of thy case. An thou be in love with one of
these boys,[FN#312] by Allah, there is not among them a comelier
than thou, for they are each and every as the dust at thy feet;
and behold, they are all thy slaves and at thy command. Or if it
be other than this, tell me." Replied Ibrahim, "O uncle, this is
no place for talk, for my case is wondrous and my affair
marvellous." Rejoined the tailor, "An it be so, come with me to a
place apart." So saying, he rose up in haste and took the youth
by the hand and carrying him into a chamber behind the shop,
said, "Now tell me thy tale, O youth!" Accordingly Ibrahim
related his story first and last to the tailor, who was amazed at
his speech and cried, "O youth, fear Allah for thyself :[FN#313]
indeed she of whom thou speakest is a virago and averse from men.
Wherefore, O my brother, do thou guard thy tongue, else thou wilt
destroy thyself." When Ibrahim heard the hunchback's words, he
wept with sore weeping and clinging to the tailor's skirts said,
"Help me, O my uncle, or I am a dead man; for I have left my
kingdom and the kingdom of my father and grandfather and am
become a stranger in the lands and lonely; nor can I endure
without her." When the tailor saw how it was with him, he pitied
him and said, "O my son, I have but my life and that I will
venture for thy love, for thou makest my heart ache. But by to-
morrow I will contrive thee somewhat whereby thy heart shall be
solaced. Ibrahim blessed him and returning to the khan, told the
doorkeeper what  The hunchback had said, and he answered,
"Indeed, he hath dealt kindly with thee." Next morning, the youth
donned his richest dress and taking a purse of gold, repaired to
the Gobbo and saluted him. Then he sat down and said, "O uncle,
keep thy word with me." Quoth the hunchback, "Arise forthright
and take thee three fat fowls and three ounces[FN#314] of sugar-
candy and two small jugs which do thou fill with wine; also a
cup. Lay all these in a budget[FN#315] and to-morrow, after the
morning-prayers, take boat with them, saying to the boatman, 'I
would have thee row me down the river below Bassorah.' An he say
to thee, 'I cannot go farther than a parasang' do thou answer,
'As thou wilt;' but, when he shall have come so far, lure him on
with money to carry thee farther; and the first flower-garden
thou wilt descry after this will be that of the lady Jamilah. Go
up to the gate as soon as thou espiest it and there thou wilt see
two high steps, carpeted with brocade, and seated thereon a
Quasimodo like me. Do thou complain to him of thy case and crave
his favour: belike he will have compassion on thy condition and
bring thee to the sight of her, though but for a moment from
afar. This is all I can do for thee; and unless he be moved to
pity for thee, we be dead men, I and thou. This then is my rede
and the matter rests with the Almighty." Quoth Ibrahim, "I seek
aid of Allah; whatso He willeth becometh; and there is no Majesty
and there is no Might save in Allah!" Then he left the hunchback
tailor and returned to his lodging where, taking the things his
adviser had named, he laid them in a bag. On the morrow, as soon
as it was day, he went down to Tigris bank, where he found a
boatman asleep; so he awoke him and giving him ten sequins, bade
him row him down the river below Bassorah. Quoth the man, "O my
lord, it must be on condition that I go no farther than a
parasang; for if I pass that distance by a span, I am a lost man,
and thou too." And quoth Ibrahim, "Be it as thou wilt." Thereupon
he took him and dropped down the river with him till he drew near
the flower garden, when he said to him, "O my son, I can go no
farther; for, if I pass this limit, we are both dead men." Hereat
Ibrahim pulled out other ten dinars and gave them to him, saying,
"Take this spending-money and better thy case therewithal." The
boatman was ashamed to refuse him and fared on with him crying "I
commit the affair to Allah the Almighty!"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the youth Ibrahim gave the boatman other ten dinars, the man took
them, saying, "I commit the affair to Allah the Almighty!" and
fared on with him down stream. When they came to the flower
garden, the youth sprang out of the boat, in his joy, a spring of
a spear's cast from the land, and cast himself down, whilst the
boatman turned and fled. Then Ibrahim fared forward and found all
as it had been described by the Gobbo: he also saw the garden-
gate open, and in the porch a couch of ivory, whereon sat a hump
backed man of pleasant presence, clad in gold-laced clothes and
hending in hand a silvern mace plated with gold. So he hastened
up to him and seizing his hand kissed it; whereupon asked the
hunchback, "Who art thou and whence comest thou and who brought
thee hither, O my son?" And indeed, when the man saw Ibrahim
Khasib-son, he was amazed at his beauty. He answered, "O uncle, I
am an ignorant lad and a stranger," and he wept. The hunchback
had pity on him and taking him up on the couch, wiped away his
tears and said to him, "No harm shall come to thee. An thou be in
debt, may Allah settle thy debt: and if thou be in fear, may
Allah appease thy fear!" Replied Ibrahim, "O uncle, I am neither
in fear nor am I in debt, but have money in plenty, thanks to
Allah." Rejoined the other, "Then, O my son, what is thy need
that thou venturest thyself and thy loveliness to a place wherein
is destruction?" So he told him his story and disclosed to him
his case, whereupon the man bowed his head earthwards awhile,
then said to him, "Was he who directed thee to me the humpbacked
tailor?" "Yes," answered Ibrahim, and the keeper said, "This is
my brother, and he is a blessed man!" presently adding, "But, O
my son, had not affection for thee sunkinto my heart, and had I
not taken compassion on thee, verily thou wert lost, thou and my
brother and the doorkeeper of the Khan and his wife. For know
that this flower-garden hath not its like on the face of the
earth and that it is called the Garden of the Wild
Heifer,[FN#316] nor hath any entered it in all my life long, save
the Sultan and myself and its mistress Jamilah; and I have dwelt
here twenty years and never yet saw any else attain to this
stead. Every forty days the Lady Jamilah cometh hither in a bark
and landeth in the midst of her women, under a canopy of satin,
whose skirts ten damsels hold up with hooks of gold, whilst she
entereth, and I see nothing of her. Natheless, I have but my life
and I will risk it for the sake of thee." Herewith Ibrahim kissed
his hand and the keeper said to him, "Sit by me, till I devise
somewhat for thee." Then he took him by the hand and carried him
into the flower-garden which, when he saw, he deemed it Eden, for
therein were trees intertwining and palms high towering and
waters welling and birds with various voices carolling.
Presently, the keeper brought him to a domed pavilion and said to
him, "This is where the Lady Jamilah sitteth." So he examined it
and found it of the rarest of pleasances, full of all manner
paintings in gold and lapis lazuli. It had four doors, whereto
man mounted by five steps, and in its centre was a cistern of
water, to which led down steps of gold all set with precious
stones. Amiddlewards the basin was a fountain of gold, with
figures, large and small, and water jetting in gerbes from their
mouths; and when, by reason of the issuing forth of the water,
they attuned themselves to various tones, it seemed to the hearer
as though he were in Eden. Round the pavilion ran a channel of
water, turning a Persian wheel[FN#317] whose buckets[FN#318] were
silvern covered with brocade. To the left of the pavilion[FN#319]
was a lattice of silver, giving upon a green park, wherein were
all manner wild cattle and gazelles and hares, and on the right
hand was another lattice, overlooking a meadow full of birds of 
all sorts, warbling in various voices and bewildering the
hearers' wits. Seeing all this the youth was delighted and sat
down in the doorway by the gardener, who said to him, "How
seemeth to thee my garden?" Quoth Ibrahim "'Tis the Paradise of
the world!" Whereat the gardener laughed. Then he rose and was
absent awhile and presently returned with a tray, full of fowls
and quails and other dainties including sweet-meats of sugar,
which he set before Ibrahim, saying, "Eat thy sufficiency" So he
ate his fill, whereat the keeper rejoiced and cried, "By Allah,
this is the fashion of Kings and sons of Kings!"[FN#320] Then
said he, "O Ibrahim, what hast thou in yonder bag?" Accordingly
he opened it before him and the keeper said, "Carry it with thee;
'twill serve thee when the Lady Jamilah cometh; for when once she
is come, I shall not be able to bring thee food." Then he rose
and taking the youth by the hand, brought him to a place fronting
the pavilion, where he made him an arbour[FN#321] among the trees
and said to him, "Get thee up here, and when she cometh thou wilt
see her and she will not see thee. This is the best I can do for
thee and on Allah be our dependence! Whenas she singeth, drink
thou to her singing, and whenas she departeth thou shalt return
in safety whence thou camest, Inshallah!" Ibrahim thanked him and
would have kissed his hand, but he forbade him. Then the youth
laid the bag in the arbour and the keeper said to him, "O
Ibrahim, walk about and take thy pleasure in the garth and eat of
its fruits, for thy mistress's coming is appointed to be to-
morrow." So he solaced himself in the garden and ate of its
fruits; after which he righted with the keeper. And when morning
morrowed and showed its sheen and shone, he prayed the dawn-
prayer and presently the keeper came to him with a pale face, and
said to him, "Rise, O my son, and go up into the arbour: for the
slave-girls are come to order the place, and she cometh after
them;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
keeper came to Ibrahim Khasib-son in the Garden he said to him,
"Rise, O my son, and go up into the arbour; for the slave-girls
are come to order the place and she cometh after them. So beware
lest thou spit or sneeze or blow thy nose[FN#322]; else we are
dead men, I and thou." Hereupon Ibrahim rose and went up into his
nest, whilst the keeper fared forth, saying, "Allah grant thee
safety, O my son!" Presently behold, up came four slave-girls,
whose like none ever saw, and entering the pavilion, doffed their
outer dresses and washed it. Then they sprinkled it with rose-
water and incensed it with ambergris and aloes-wood and spread it
with brocade. After these came fifty other damsels, with
instruments of music, and amongst them Jamilah, within a canopy
of red brocade, whose skirts the handmaidens bore up with hooks
of gold, till she had entered the pavilion, so that Ibrahim saw
naught of her nor of her raiment. So he said to himself, "By
Allah, all my travail is lost! But needs must I wait to see how
the case will be." Then the damsels brought meat and drink and
they ate and drank and washed their hands, after which they set
her a royal chair and she sat down; and all played on instruments
of music and with ravishing voices incomparably sang. Presently,
out ran an old woman, a duenna, and clapped hands and danced,
whilst the girls pulled her about, till the curtain was lifted
and forth came Jamilah laughing. Ibrahim gazed at her and saw
that she was clad in costly robes and ornaments, and on her head
was a crown set with pearls and gems. About her long fair neck
she wore a necklace of unions and her waist was clasped with a
girdle of chrysolite bugles, with tassels of rubies and pearls.
The damsels kissed ground before her, and, 'When I considered
her" (quoth Ibrahim), "I took leave of my senses and wit and I
was dazed and my thought was confounded for amazement at the
sight of loveliness whose like is not on the face of the earth.
So I fell into a swoon and coming to myself, weeping eyed,
recited these two couplets,

'I see thee and close not mine eyes for fear * Lest their lids
     prevent me beholding thee:
An I gazed with mine every glance these eyne * Ne'er could sight
     all the loveliness moulding thee.'"

Then said the old Kahramanah[FN#323] to the girls, "Let ten of
you arise and dance and sing." And Ibrahim when looking at them
said in himself, "I wish the lady Jamilah would dance." When the
handmaidens had made an end of their pavane, they gathered round
the Princess and said to her, "O my lady, we long for thee to
dance amongst us, so the measure of our joy may be fulfilled, for
never saw we a more delicious day than this." Quoth Ibrahim to
himself, "Doubtless the gates of Heaven are open[FN#324] and
Allah hath granted my prayer."  Then the damsels bussed her feet
and said to her, "By Allah, we never saw thee broadened of breast
as to day!" Nor did they cease exciting her, till she doffed her
outer dress and stood in a shift of cloth of gold,[FN#325]
broidered with various jewels, showing breasts which stood out
like pomegranates and unveiling a face as it were the moon on the
night of fullness. Then she began to dance, and Ibrahim beheld
motions he had never in his life seen their like, for she showed
such wondrous skill and marvellous invention, that she made men
forget the dancing of bubbles in wine-cups and called to mind the
inclining of the turbands from head[FN#326]-tops: even as saith
of her the poet[FN#327],

"A dancer whose form is like branch of Ban! * Flies my soul well
     nigh as his steps I greet:
While he dances no foot stands still and meseems * That the fire
     of my heart is beneath his feet."

And as quoth another,[FN#328]

"A dancer whose figure is like a willow-branch: my soul almost
     quitteth me at the sight of her movements.
No foot can remain stationary at her dancing, she is as though
     the fire of my heart were beneath her feet."

Quoth Ibrahim, "As I gazed upon her, she chanced to look up and
caught sight of me whereupon her face changed and she said to her
women, 'Sing ye till I come back to you.' Then, taking up a knife
half a cubit long, she made towards me, crying, 'There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious the
Great!' Now when I saw this, I well-nigh lost my wits but, whenas
she drew near me and face met face, the knife dropped from her
hand, and she exclaimed, 'Glory to Him who changeth men's
hearts!' Then said she to me, 'O youth, be of good cheer, for
thou art safe from what thou dost fear!' Whereupon I fell to
weeping, and she to wiping away my tears with her hand and
saying, 'O youth, tell me who thou art, and what brought thee
hither' I kissed the ground before her and seized her skirt; and
she said, No harm shall come to thee; for, by Allah, no male hath
ever filled mine eyes[FN#329] but thyself! Tell me, then, who
thou art.' So I recited to her my story from first to last,
whereat she marvelled and said to me, 'O my lord, I conjure thee
by Allah, tell me if thou be Ibrahim bin al-Khasib?' I replied,
'Yes!' and she threw herself upon me, saying, 'O my lord, 'twas
thou madest me averse from men; for, when I heard that there was
in the land of Egypt a youth than whom there was none more
beautiful on earth's face, I fell in love with thee by report,
and my heart became enamoured of thee, for that which reached me
of thy passing comeliness, so that I was, in respect of thee,
even as saith the poet,

'Mine ear forewent mine eye in loving him; * For ear shall love
before the eye at times.'

'So praised be Allah who hath shown thy face! But, by the
almighty, had it been other than thou, I had crucified the keeper
of the garden and the porter of the Khan and the tailor and him
who had recourse to them!' And presently she added, 'But how
shall I contrive for somewhat thou mayst eat, without the
knowledge of my women?' Quoth I, 'With me is somewhat we may eat
and drink;' and I opened the bag before her. She took a fowl and
began to morsel me and I to morsel her; which when I saw, it
seemed to me that this was a dream. Then I brought out wine and
we drank, what while the damsels sang on; nor did they leave to
do thus from morn to noon, when she rose and said, 'Go now and
get thee a boat and await me in such a place, till I come to
thee: for I have no patience left to brook severance.' I replied,
'O my lady, I have with me a ship of my own, whose crew are in my
hire, and they await me.' Rejoined she, 'This is as we would have
it,' and returning to her women,"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Lady Jamilah returned to her women, she said to them, "Come, let
us go back to our palace." They replied, "Why should we return
now, seeing that we use to abide here three days?" Quoth she, "I
feel an exceeding oppression in myself, as though I were sick,
and I fear lest this increase upon me."[FN#330] So they answered,
"We hear and obey," and donning their walking dresses went down
to the river-bank and embarked in a boat; whereupon behold, the
keeper of the garden came up to Ibrahim and said to him, knowing
not what had happened, "O Ibrahim, thou hast not had the luck to
enjoy the sight of her, and I fear lest she have seen thee, for
'tis her wont to tarry here three days." Replied Ibrahim, "She
saw me not nor I her; for she came not forth of the
pavilion."[FN#331] Rejoined the keeper, "True, O my son, for, had
she seen thee, we were both dead men: but abide with me till she
come again next week, and thou shalt see her and take thy fill of
looking at her." Replied the Prince, "O my lord, I have with me
money and fear for it: I also left men behind me and I dread lest
they take advantage of my absence."[FN#332] He retorted, "O my
son 'tis grievous to me to part with thee;" and he embraced and
farewelled him. Then Ibrahim returned to the Khan where he
lodged, and foregathering with the doorkeeper, took of him all
his