my contrivance, and now I am at the term of my
devices." Upon this he left her and returned to the Khan where,
as eventide evened, the jeweller came to him and invited him. He
said, "I cannot go with thee." Asked the merchant, "Why so? I
love thee and cannot brook separation from thee. Allah upon thee
come with me!" The other replied, "An it be thy wish to continue
our comradeship and keep up the friendship betwixt thee and me,
take me a house by the side of thine own and when thou wilt, thou
shalt pass the evening with me and I with thee; but, as soon as
the time of sleep cometh, each of us shall hie him to his own
home and lie there." Quoth Obayd, "I have a house adjoining mine,
which is my own property: so go thou with me to night and to-
morrow I will have the house untenanted for thee." Accordingly he
went with him and they supped and prayed the night prayer, after
which the jeweller drank the cup of drugged[FN#422] liquor and
fell asleep: but in Kamar al-Zaman's cup there was no trick; so
he drank it and slept not. Then came the jeweller's wife and sat
chatting with him through the dark hours, whilst her husband lay
like a corpse. When he awoke in the morning as of wont, he sent
for his tenant and said to him, "O man, quit me the house, for I
have need of it." "On my head and eyes," answered the other and
voided the house to him, whereupon Kamar al-Zaman took up his
abode therein and transported thither all his baggage. The
jeweller passed that evening with him, then went to his own
house. On the next day, his wife sent for a cunning builder and
bribed him with money to make her an underground-way[FN#423] from
her chamber to Kamar al-Zaman's house, with a trap-door under the
earth. So, before the youth was ware, she came in to him with two
bags of money and he said to her, "Whence comest thou?" She
showed him the tunnel and said to him, "Take these two bags of
his money." Then she sat with him, the twain toying and tumbling
together till the morning, when she said, "Wait for me, till I go
to him and wake him, so he may go to his shop, and I return to
thee." He sat expecting her, whilst she went away and awoke her
husband, who made the Wuzu ablution and prayed and went to his
shop. As soon as he was gone, she took four bags and, carrying
them through the Souterrain to Kamar al-Zaman, said to him,
"Store these up;" then she sat with him awhile, after which she
retired to her home and he betook himself to the bazar. When he
returned at sundown, he found in his house ten purses and jewels
and much besides. Presently the jeweller came to him and carried
him to his own house, where they passed the evening in the
saloon, till the handmaid came in according to custom, and
brought them the drink. Her master drank and fell asleep, whilst
naught betided Kamar al-Zaman for that his cup was wholesome and
there was no trick therein. Then came Halimah who sat down
atoying with him, whilst the slave-girl transported the
jeweller's goods to Kamar al-Zaman's house by the secret passage.
Thus they did till morning, when the handmaid awoke her lord and
gave them to drink coffee, after which they went each his own
way. On the third day the wife brought out to him a knife of her
husband's, which he had chased and wrought with his own hand, and
which he priced at five hundred diners. But there was no knife
like it and because of the eagerness with which folk sought it of
him, he had laid it up in a chest and could not bring himself to
sell it to any one in creation. Quoth she, "Take this knife and
set it in thy waist shawl and go to my husband and sit with him.
Then pull out the knife and say to him, 'O master, look at this
knife I bought to day and tell me if I have the worst or the best
of the bargain.' He will know it, but will be ashamed to say to
thee, 'This is my knife;' so he will ask thee, 'Whence didst thou
buy it and for how much?'; and do thou make answer, 'I saw two
Levantines[FN#424] disputing and one said to the other, 'Where
hast thou been?' Quoth his companion, 'I have been with my
mistress, and whenever I foregather with her, she giveth me ten
dirhams; but this day she said to me, 'My hand is empty of silver
for thee to day, but take this knife of my husband's.' So I took
it and intend to sell it.' The knife pleased me and hearing his
tale I said to him, 'Wilt thou sell it to me?' when he replied,
'Buy.' So I got it of him for three hundred gold pieces and I
wonder whether it was cheap or dear.' And note what he will say
to thee. Then talk with him awhile and rise and come back to me
in haste. Thou wilt find me awaiting thee at the tunnel mouth,
and do thou give me the knife." Replied Kamar al-Zaman, "I hear
and I obey," and taking the knife set it in his waist-shawl. Then
he went to the shop of the jeweller, who saluted him with the
salam and welcomed him and made him sit down. He spied the knife
in his waist shawl, at which he wondered and said to himself,
"That is my knife: who can have conveyed it to this merchant?"
And he fell a musing and saying in his mind, "I wonder an it be
my knife or a knife like it!" Presently Kamar al-Zaman pulled it
out and said to him, "Harkye, master; take this knife and look at
it." Obayd took it and knew it right well, but was ashamed to
say, "This is my knife;" And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
jeweller took the knife from Kamar al-Zaman, he knew it, but was
ashamed to say, "This is my knife." So he asked, "Where didst
thou buy it?" Kamar al-Zaman answered as Halimah had charged him,
and the jeweller said, "The knife was cheap at that price, for it
is worth five hundred diners." But fire flamed in his heart and
his hands were tied from working at his craft. Kamar al-Zaman
continued to talk with him, whilst he was drowned in the sea of
solicitudes, and for fifty words wherewith the youth bespoke him,
he answered him but one; for his heart ached and his frame was
racked and his thoughts were troubled and he was even as saith
the poet,

"I have no words though folk would have me talk * And who bespeak
     me find me thought waylaid:
Plunged in the Care-sea's undiscovered depths, * Nor aught of
     difference see 'twixt man and maid!"


When Kamar al-Zaman saw his case thus changed, he said to him
"Belike thou art busy at this present," and leaving him, returned
in hottest haste to his own house, where he found Halimah
standing at the passage door awaiting him. Quoth she "Hast thou
done as I bade thee?"; and quoth he, "Yes." She asked, "What said
he to thee?"; and he answered, "He told me that the knife was
cheap at that price, for that it was worth five hundred diners:
but I could see that he was troubled; so I left him and know not
what befel him after that." Cried she, "Give me the knife and
reck thou not of him." Then she took the knife and restoring it
to its place, sat down. Now after Kamar al-Zaman's departure fire
flamed in the jeweller's heart and suspicion was sore upon him
and he said to himself, "Needs must I get up and go look for the
knife and cut down doubt with certainty." So he rose and repaired
to his house and went in to his wife, snorting like a
dragon;[FN#425] and she said to him, "What mattereth thee, O my
lord?" He asked, "Where is my knife?" and she answered, "In the
chest," and smote hand upon breast, saying, "O my grief! Belike
thou hast fallen out with some one and art come to fetch the
knife to smite him withal." Said he, "Give me the knife. Let me
see it." But said she, "Not till thou swear to me that thou wilt
not smite any one therewith." So he swore this to her and she
opened the chest and brought out to him the knife and he fell to
turning it over, saying, "Verily, this is a wondrous thing!" Then
quoth he to her, "Take it and lay it back in its place;" and she,
"Tell me the meaning of all this." He answered, "I saw with our
friend a knife like this," and told her all that had passed
between himself and the youth, adding, "But, when I saw it in the
chest, my suspicion ended in certainty." Said she, "Haply thou
misdoubtedest of me and deemedst that I was the Levantine's
mistress and had given him the knife." He replied, "Yes, I had my
doubts of this; but, when I saw the knife, suspicion was lifted
from my heart." Rejoined she, "O man, there is now no good in
thee!" And he fell to excusing himself to her, till he appeased
her; after which he fared forth and returned to his shop. Next
day, she gave Kamar al-Zaman her husband's watch, which he had
made with his own hand and whereof none had the like, saying, "Go
to his shop and sit by his side and say to him, 'I saw again to-
day him whom I saw yesterday. He had a watch in his hand and said
to me, 'Wilt thou buy this watch?' Quoth I, 'Whence hadst thou
it?'; and quoth he, 'I was with my mistress and she gave me this
watch.' So I bought it of him for eight-and-fifty gold pieces.
Look at it: is it cheap at that price or dear?' Note what he
shall say to thee; then return to me in haste and give me the
watch." So Kamar al-Zaman repaired to the jeweller and did with
him as she had charged him. When Obayd saw the watch, he said,
"This is worth seven hundred ducats;" and suspicion entered into
him. Then the youth left him and returning to the wife, gave her
back the watch. Presently, her husband suddenly came in snorting,
and said to her, "Where is my watch?" Said she, "Here it is;" and
he cried, "Give it to me." So she brought it to him and he
exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!"; and she too exclaimed, "O man,
there is something the matter with thee. Tell me what it is." He
replied, "What shall I say? Verily, I am bewildered by these
chances!" And he recited these couplets,[FN#426]

"Although the Merciful be doubtless with me,
Yet am I sore bewildered, for new griefs
Have compassed me about, or ere I knew it
I have endured till Patience self became
Impatient of my patience.--I have endured
Waiting till Heaven fulfil my destiny.--
I have endured till e'en endurance owned
How I bore up with her; (a thing more bitter
Than bitter aloes) yet though a bitterer thing
Is not, than is that drug it were more bitter
To me should Patience leave me unsustained."

Then said he to his wife, "O woman, I saw with the merchant our
friend, first my knife, which I knew, for that its fashion was a
device of my own wit, nor cloth its like exist; and he told me of
it a story that troubled the heart: so I came back and found it
at home. Again to day I see him with the watch, whose fashion
also is of my own device, nor is there the fellow of it in
Bassorah, and of this also he told me a story that saddened my
heart. Wherefore I am bewildered in my wit and know not what is
to come to me." Quoth she, "The purport of thy speech is that
thou suspectedst me of being the friend of that merchant and his
leman, and eke of giving him thy good; so thou camest to question
me and make proof of my perfidy; and, had I not shown thee the
knife and the watch, thou hadst been certified of my treason. But
since, O man, thou deemest me this ill deme, henceforth I will
never again break with thee bread nor drain with thee drink, for
I loathe thee with the loathing of prohibition.[FN#427]" So he
gentled her and excused himself till he had appeased her and
returned, repenting him of having bespoken her thus, to his shop,
where he sat, And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
jeweller quitted his wife, he repented having bespoken her thus
and, returning to his shop, he sat there in disquiet sore and
anxiety galore, between belief and unbelief. About eventide he
went home alone, not bringing Kamar al-Zaman with him: whereupon
quoth his wife, "Where is the merchant?"; and quoth he, "In his
lodgings." She asked, "Is the friendship between thee and him
grown cold?" and he answered, "By Allah, I have taken a dislike
to him, because of that which hath betided me from him."[FN#428]
Quoth she, "Go fetch him, to please me." So he arose and went in
to Kamar al-Zaman in his house; where he saw his own goods strewn
about and knew them. At this sight, fire was kindled in his heart
and he fell asighing. Quoth the youth, "How is it that I see thee
melancholy?" Obayd was ashamed to say, "Here are my goods in thy
house: who brought them hither?"; so he replied only, "A vexation
hath betided me; but come thou with me to my house, that we may
solace ourselves there." The other rejoined, "Let me be in my
place: I will not go with thee." But the jeweller conjured him to
come and took him to his house, where they supped and passed the
evening together, Kamar al-Zaman talking with the jeweller, who
was drowned in the sea of solicitude and for a hundred words,
wherewith the guest bespoke him, answered him only one word.
Presently, the handmaid brought them two cups of drink, as usual,
and they drank; whereupon the jeweller fell asleep, but the youth
abode on wake, because his cup was not drugged. Then came Halimah
and said to her lover, "How deemest thou of yonder cornuted, who
is drunken in his heedlessness and weeteth not the wiles of
women? There is no help for it but that I cozen him into
divorcing me. To-morrow, I will disguise myself as a slave-girl
and walk after thee to his shop, where do thou say to him, 'O
master, I went to-day into the Khan of Al-Yasirjiyah, where I saw
this damsel and bought her for a thousand diners. Look at her for
me and tell me whether she was cheap at that price or dear.' Then
uncover to him my face and breasts and show all of me to him;
after which do thou carry me back to thy house, whence I will go
to my chamber by the secret passage, so I may see the issue of
our affair with him." Then the twain passed the night in mirth
and merriment, converse and good cheer, dalliance and delight
till dawn, when she returned to her own place and sent the
handmaid to arouse her lawful lord and her lover. Accordingly
they arose and prayed the dawn-prayer and brake their fast and
drank coffee, after which Obayd repaired to his shop and Kamar
al-Zaman betook himself to his own house. Presently, in came
Halimah to him by the tunnel, in the guise of a slave-girl, and
indeed she was by birth a slave-girl.[FN#429] Then he went out
and she walked behind him, till he came to the jeweller's shop
and saluting him, sat down and said, "O master, I went into the
Khan of Al-Yasirjiyah to-day, to look about me, and saw this
damsel in the broker's hands. She pleased me; so I bought her for
a thousand diners and I would have thee look upon her and see if
she be cheap at that price or no." So saying, he uncovered her
face and the jeweller saw her to be his own wife. clad in her
costliest clothes, tricked out in her finest trinkets and kohl'd
and henna'd, even as she was wont to adorn herself before him in
the house. He knew with full knowledge her face and dress and
trinkets, for those he had wrought with his own hand, and he saw
on her fingers the seal rings he had newly made for Kamar al-
Zaman, whereby he was certified with entire assurance that she
was indeed his very wife. So he asked her, "What is thy name, O
slave-girl?"; and she answered, "Halimah," naming to him her own
name; whereat he was amazed and said to the youth, "For how much
didst thou buy her?" He replied, "For a thousand diners"; and the
jeweller rejoined, "Thou hast gotten her gratis; for her rings
and clothes and trinkets are worth more than that." Said Kamar
al-Zaman, "May Allah rejoice thee with good news! Since she
pleaseth thee, I will carry her to my house;" and Obayd said, "Do
thy will." So he took her off to his house, whence she passed
through the secret passage to her own apartment and sat there.
Meanwhile, fire flamed in the jeweller's heart and he said to
himself, "I will go see my wife. If she be at home, this slave-
girl must be her counterpart, and glory be to Him who alone hath
no counterpart! But, if she be not at home, 'tis she herself
without a doubt." Then he set off running, and coming to his
house, found his wife sitting in the same clothes and ornaments
he had seen upon her in the shop; whereupon he beat hand upon
hand, saying, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" "O man," asked she, "art thou
mad or what aileth thee? 'Tis not thy wont to do thus, and needs
must it be that something hath befallen thee." Answered he, "If
thou wilt have me tell thee be not vexed." Quoth she, "Say on";
so he said, "Our friend the merchant hath bought a slave-girl,
whose shape is as thy shape and her height as thy height; more-
over, her name is even as thy name and her apparel is the like of
thine apparel. Brief, she resembleth thee in all her attributes,
and on her fingers are seal rings like thy seal rings and her
trinkets are as thy trinkets. So, when he displayed her to me,
methought it was thyself and I was perplexed concerning my case.
Would we had never seen this merchant nor companied with him; and
would he had never left his own country and we had not known him,
for he hath troubled my life which before was serene, causing ill
feeling to succeed good faith and making doubt to enter into my
heart." Said she, "Look in my face, belike I am she who was with
him and he is my lover and I disguised myself as a slave-girl and
agreed with him that he should display me to thee, so he might
lay a snare for thee." He replied, "What words are these? Indeed,
I never suspected that thou wouldst do the like of this deed."
Now this jeweller was unversed in the wiles of women and knew not
how they deal with men, nor had he heard the saying of him who
said,

"A heart bore thee off in chase of the fair, * As fled Youth and
     came Age wi' his hoary hair:
Layla troubles me and love joys are far; * And rival and risks
     brings us cark and care.
An would'st ask me of woman, behold I am * In physic of womankind
     wise and ware:
When grizzleth man's head and his monies fail, * His lot in their
     love is a poor affair."

Nor that of another,[FN#430]

"Gainsay women; he obeyeth Allah best, who saith them nay And he
     prospers not who giveth them his bridle rein to sway
For they'll hinder him from winning to perfection in his gifts,
     Though a thousand years he study, seeking after wisdom's 
     way."

And a third,

"Women Satans are, made for woe of man: * To Allah I fly from
     such Satanesses!
Whom they lure by their love he to grief shall come * And lose
     bliss of world and the Faith that blesses."

Said she, "Here am I sitting in my chamber; so go thou to him
forthright and knock at the door and contrive to go in to him
quickly. An thou see the damsel with him 'tis a slave-girl of his
who resembleth me (and Glory be to Him who hath no
resemblance[FN#431]) But, an thou see no slave-girl with him,
then am I myself she whom thou sawest with him in the shop, and
thine ill thought of me will be stablished." "True," answered
Obayd, and went out leaving her, whereupon she passed through the
hidden passage and seating herself by Kamar al-Zaman, told him
what had passed, saying, "Open the door quickly and show me to
him." Now, as they were talking, behold, there came a knocking at
the door. Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "Who is at the door?"; and quoth
the jeweller, "I, thy friend; thou displayedst to me thy slave-
girl in the bazar, and I rejoiced for thee in her, but my joy in
her was not completed; so open the door and let me look at her
again." Rejoined he, "So be it," and opened the door to him,
whereupon he saw his wife sitting by him. She rose and kissed
their hands; and he looked at her; then she talked with him
awhile and he saw her not to be distinguished from his wife in
aught and said, "Allah createth whatso He will." Then he went
away more disheartened than before and returned to his own house
where he saw his wife sitting, for she had foregone him thither
by the souterrain. And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
lady forewent her spouse by the souterrain as he fared through
the door and sat down in her upper chamber;[FN#432] so as soon as
he entered she asked him, "What hast thou seen?" and he answered,
"I found her with her master; and she resembleth thee." Then said
she, "Off to thy shop and let this suffice thee of ignoble
suspicion and never again deem ill of me." Said he, "So be it:
accord me pardon for what is past." And she, "Allah grant thee
grace!"[FN#433] whereupon he kissed her right and left and went
back to his shop. Then she again betook herself to Kamar al-Zaman
through the underground passage, with four bags of money, and
said to him, "Equip thyself at once for the road and be ready to
carry off the money without delay, against I devise for thee the
device I have in mind." So he went out and purchased mules and
loaded them and made ready a travelling litter, he also bought
Mamelukes and eunuchs and sending, without let or hindrance, the
whole without the city, returned to Halimah and said to her, "I
have made an end of my affairs." Quoth she, "And I on my side am
ready; for I have transported to thy house all the rest of his
monies and treasures and have left him nor little nor much,
whereof he may avail himself. All this is of my love for thee, O
dearling of my heart, for I would sacrifice my husband to thee a
thousand times. But now it behoveth, thou go to him and farewell
him, saying, 'I purpose to depart after three days and am come to
bid thee adieu; so do thou reckon what I owe thee for the hire of
the house that I may send it to thee and acquit my conscience.'
Note his reply and return to me and tell me; for I can no more; I
have done my best, by cozening him, to anger him with me and
cause him to put me away, but I find him none the less infatuated
with me. So nothing will serve us but to depart to thine own
country." And quoth he, "O rare! an but swevens prove
true!"[FN#434] Then he went to the jeweller's shop and sitting
down by him, said to him, "O master, I set out for home in three
days' time, and am come to farewell thee. So I would have thee
reckon what I owe thee for the hire of the house, that I may pay
it to thee and acquit my conscience." Answered Obayd, "What talk
is this? Verily, 'tis I who am indebted to thee. By Allah, I will
take nothing from thee for the rent of the house, for thou hast
brought down blessings upon us! However, thou desolatest me by
thy departure, and but that it is forbidden to me, I would
certainly oppose thee and hinder thee from returning to thy
country and kinsfolk." Then he took leave of him, whilst they
both wept with sore weeping and the jeweller went with him, and
when they entered Kamar al-Zaman's house, there they found
Halimah who stood before them and served them; but when Obayd
returned home, he found her sitting there; nor did he cease to
see her thus in each house in turn, for the space of three days,
when she said to Kamar al-Zaman, "Now have I transported to thee
all that he hath of monies and hoards and carpets and things of
price, and there remaineth with him naught save the slave-girl,
who used to come in to you with the night drink: but I cannot
part with her, for that she is my kinswoman and she is dear to me
as a confidante. So I will beat her and be wroth with her and
when my spouse cometh home, I will say to him, 'I can no longer
put up with this slave-girl nor stay in the house with her; so
take her and sell her.' Accordingly he will sell her and do thou
buy her, that we may carry her with us." Answered he, "No harm in
that." So she beat the girl and when the jeweller came in, he
found her weeping and asked her why she wept. Quoth she, "My
mistress hath beaten me." He then went in to his wife and said to
her, "What hath that accursed girl done, that thou hast beaten
her?" She replied, "O man, I have but one word to say to thee,
and 'tis that I can no longer bear the sight of this girl; so
take her and sell her, or else divorce me." Quoth he, "I will
sell her that I may not cross thee in aught;" and when he went
out to go to the shop he took her and passed with her by Kamar
al-Zaman. No sooner had he gone out than his wife slipped through
the under ground passage to Kamar al-Zaman, who placed her in the
litter, before the Shaykh her husband reached him. When the
jeweller came up and the lover saw the slave-girl with him, he
asked him, "What girl is this?"; and the other answered, "'Tis my
slave-girl who used to serve us with the night drink; she hath
disobeyed her mistress who is wroth with her and hath bidden me
sell her." Quoth the youth, "An her mistress have taken an
aversion to her, there is for her no abiding with her; but sell
her to me, that I may smell your scent in her, and I will make
her handmaid to my slave Halimah." "Good," answered Obayd: "take
her." Asked Kamar al-Zaman, "What is her price?"; but the
jeweller said, "I will take nothing from thee, for thou hast been
bountiful to us." So he accepted her from him and said to
Halimah, "Kiss thy lord's hand." Accordingly, she came out from
the litter and kissing Obayd's hand, remounted, whilst he looked
hard at her. Then said Kamar al-Zaman, "I commend thee to Allah,
O Master Obayd! Acquit my conscience of responsibility.[FN#435]"
Answered the jeweller, "Allah acquit thee! and carry thee safe to
thy family!" Then he bade him farewell and went to his shop
weeping, and indeed it was grievous to him to part from Kamar al-
Zaman, for that he had been friend and friendship hath its
debtorship; yet he rejoiced in the dispelling of the doubts which
had befallen him anent his wife, since the young man was now gone
and his suspicions had not been stablished. Such was his case;
but as regards Kamar al-Zaman, the young lady said to him, "An
thou wish for safety, travel with me by other than the wonted
way." And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Halimah said to Kamar al-Zaman, "An thou wish for safety travel
with me by other than the wonted way," he replied, "Hearing and
obeying;" and, taking a road other than that used by folk, fared
on without ceasing from region to region till he reached the
confines of Egypt-land[FN#436] and sent his sire a letter by a
runner. Now his father the merchant Abd al-Rahman was sitting in
the market among the merchants, with a heart on fire for
separation from his son, because no news of the youth had reached
him since the day of his departure; and while he was in such case
the runner came up and cried, "O my lords, which of you is called
the merchant Abd al-Rahman?" They said, "What wouldst thou of
him?"; and he said, "I have a letter for him from his son Kamar
al-Zaman, whom I left at Al-Arish."[FN#437] At this Abd al-Rahman
rejoiced and his breast was broadened and the merchants rejoiced
for him and gave him joy of his son's safety. Then he opened the
letter and read as follows, "From Kamar al-Zaman to the merchant
Abd al-Rahman. And after Peace be upon thee and upon all the
merchants! An ye ask concerning us, to Allah be the praise and
the thanks. Indeed we have sold and bought and gained and are
come back in health, wealth and weal." Whereupon Abd al-Rahman
opened the door[FN#438] of rejoicing and made banquets and gave
feasts and entertainments galore, sending for instruments of
music and addressing himself to festivities after rarest fashion.
When Kamar al-Zaman came to Al-Salihiyah,[FN#439] his father and
all the merchants went forth to meet him, and Abd al-Rahman
embraced him and strained him to his bosom and sobbed till he
swooned away. When he came to himself he said, "Oh, 'tis a boon
day O my son, whereon the Omnipotent Protector hath reunited us
with thee!" And he repeated the words of the bard,

"The return of the friend is the best of all boons, * And the joy
     cup circles o' morns and noons:
So well come, welcome, fair welcome to thee, * The light of the
     time and the moon o' full moons."

Then, for excess of joy, he poured forth a flood of tears from
his eyes and he recited also these two couplets,

"The Moon o' the Time,[FN#440] shows unveiled light; * And, his
     journey done, at our door cloth alight:
His locks as the nights of his absence are black * And the sun
     upstands from his collar's[FN#441] white."

Then the merchants came up to him and saluting him, saw with him
many loads and servants and a travelling litter enclosed in a
spacious circle.[FN#442] So they took him and carried him home;
and when Halimah came forth from the litter, his father held her
a seduction to all who beheld her. So they opened her an upper
chamber, as it were a treasure from which the talismans had been
loosed;[FN#443] and when his mother saw her, she was ravished
with her and deemed her a Queen of the wives of the Kings. So she
rejoiced in her and questioned her; and she answered, "I am wife
to thy son;" and the mother rejoined, "Since he is wedded to thee
we must make thee a splendid marriage feast, that we may rejoice
in thee and in my son." On this wise it befel her; but as regards
the merchant Abd al-Rahman, when the folk had dispersed and each
had wended his way, he foregathered with his son and said to him,
"O my son, what is this slave-girl thou hast brought with thee
and for how much didst thou buy her?"[FN#444] Kamar al-Zaman
said, "O my father, she is no slave-girl; but 'tis she who was
the cause of my going abroad." Asked his sire, "How so?"; and he
answered, "'Tis she whom the Dervish described to us the night he
lay with us; for indeed my hopes crave to her from that moment
and I sought not to travel save on account of her. The Arabs came
out upon me by the way and stripped me and took my money and
goods, so that I entered Bassorah alone and there befel me there
such and such things;" and he went on to relate to his parent all
that had befallen him from commencement to conclusion. Now when
he had made an end of his story, his father said to him, "O my
son, and after all this didst thou marry her?" "No; but I have
promised her marriage." "Is it thine intent to marry her?" "An
thou bid me marry her, I will do so; otherwise I will not marry
her." Thereupon quoth his father, "An thou marry her, I am quit
of thee in this world and in the next, and I shall be incensed
against thee with sore indignation. How canst thou wed her,
seeing that she hath dealt thus with her husband? For, even as
she did with her spouse for thy sake, so will she do the like
with thee for another's sake, because she is a traitress and in a
traitor there is no trusting. Wherefore an thou disobey me, I
shall be wroth with thee; but, an thou give ear to my word, I
will seek thee out a girl handsomer than she, who shall be pure
and pious, and marry thee to her, though I spend all my substance
upon her; and I will make thee a wedding without equal and will
glory in thee and in her; for 'tis better that folk should say,
Such an one hath married such an one's daughter, than that they
say, He hath wedded a slave-girl sans birth or worth." And he
went on to persuade his son to give up marrying her, by citing in
support of his say, proofs, stories, examples, verses and moral
instances, till Kamar al-Zaman exclaimed, "O my father, since the
case is thus, 'tis not right and proper that I marry her." And
when his father heard him speak on such wise, he kissed him
between the eyes, saying, "Thou art my very son, and as I live, O
my son, I will assuredly marry thee to a girl who hath not her
equal!" Then the merchant set Obayd's wife and her handmaid in a
chamber high up in the house and, before locking the door upon
the twain, he appointed a black slave-girl to carry them their
meat and drink and he said to Halimah, "Ye shall abide imprisoned
in this chamber, thou and thy maid, till I find one who will buy
you, when I will sell you to him. An ye resist, I will slay ye
both, for thou art a traitress, and there is no good in thee."
Answered she, "Do thy will: I deserve all thou canst do with me."
Then he locked the door upon them and gave his Harim a charge
respecting them, saying, "Let none go up to them nor speak with
them, save the black slave-girl who shall give them their meat
and drink through the casement of the upper chamber." So she
abode with her maid, weeping and repenting her of that which she
had done with her spouse. Meanwhile Abd al-Rahman sent out the
marriage brokers to look out a maid of birth and worth for his
son, and the women ceased not to make search, and as often as
they saw one girl, they heard of a fairer than she, till they
came to the house of the Shaykh al-Islam[FN#445] and saw his
daughter. In her they found a virgin whose equal was not in Cairo
for beauty and loveliness, symmetry and perfect grace, and she
was a thousand fold handsomer than the wife of Obayd. So they
told Abd al-Rahman of her and he and the notables repaired to her
father and sought her in wedlock of him. Then they wrote out the
marriage contract and made her a splendid wedding; after which
Abd al-Rahman gave bride feasts and held open house forty days.
On the first day, he invited the doctors of the law and they held
a splendid nativity[FN#446]: and on the morrow, he invited all
the merchants, and so on during the rest of the forty days,
making a banquet every day to one or other class of folk, till he
had bidden all the Olema and Emirs and Antients[FN#447] and
Magistrates, whilst the kettle drums were drummed and the pipes
were piped and the merchant sat to greet the guests, with his son
by his side, that he might solace himself by gazing on the folk,
as they ate from the trays. Each night Abd al-Rahman illuminated
the street and the quarter with lamps and there came every one of
the mimes and jugglers and mountebanks and played all manner
play; and indeed it was a peerless wedding. On the last day he
invited the Fakirs, the poor and the needy, far and near, and
they flocked in troops and ate, whilst the merchant sat, with his
son by his side.[FN#448] And among the paupers, behold, entered
Shaykh Obayd the jeweller and he was naked and weary and bare on
his face the marks of wayfare. When Kamar al-Zaman saw him, he
knew him and said to his sire, "Look, O my father, at yonder poor
man who is but now come in by the door." So he looked and saw him
clad in worn clothes and on him a patched gown[FN#449] worth two
dirhams: his face was yellow and he was covered with dust and was
as he were an offcast of the pilgrims.[FN#450] He was groaning as
groaneth a sick man in need, walking with a tottering gait and
swaying now to the right and then to the left, and in him was
realized his saying who said,[FN#451]

"Lack-gold abaseth man and cloth his worth away, Even as the
     setting sun that pales with ended day.
He passeth 'mongst the folk and fain would hide his head; And
     when alone, he weeps with tears that never stay.
Absent, none taketh heed to him or his concerns; Present, he hath
     no part in life or pleasance aye.
By Allah, whenas men with poverty are cursed, But strangers midst
     their kin and countrymen are they!"

And the saying of another,

"The poor man fares by everything opposed: * On him to shut the
     door Earth ne'er shall fail:
Thou seest men abhor him sans a sin, * And foes he finds tho none
     the cause can tell:
The very dogs, when sighting wealthy man, * Fawn at his feet and
     wag the flattering tail;
Yet, an some day a pauper loon they sight, * All at him bark and,
     gnashing fangs, assail."

And how well quoth a third,

"If generous youth be blessed with luck and wealth, *
     Displeasures fly his path and perils fleet:
His enviers pimp for him and par'site-wise * E'en without tryst
     his mistress hastes to meet.
When loud he farts they say 'How well he sings!' * And when he
     fizzles[FN#452] cry they, 'Oh, how sweet!'"

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    When it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when his
son said to Abd al-Rahman, "Look at yonder pauper!" he asked, "O
my son, who is this?" And Kamar al-Zaman answered, "This is
Master Obayd the jeweller, husband of the woman who is imprisoned
with us." Quoth Abd al-Rahman, "Is this he of whom thou toldest
me?"; and quoth his son, "Yes; and indeed I wot him right well."
Now the manner of Obayd's coming thither was on this wise. When
he had farewelled Kamar al-Zaman, he went to his shop and thence
going home, laid his hand on the door whereupon it opened and he
entered and found neither his wife nor the slave-girl, but saw
the house in sorriest plight, quoting in mute speech his saying
who said,[FN#453]

"The chambers were like a bee hive well stocked: * When their
bees quitted it, they became empty."

When he saw the house void, he turned right and left and
presently went round about the place, like a madman, but came
upon no one. Then he opened the door of his treasure closet, but
found therein naught of his money nor his hoards; whereupon he
recovered from the intoxication of fancy and shook off his
infatuation and knew that it was his wife herself who had turned
the tables upon him and outwitted him with her wiles. He wept for
that which had befallen him, but kept his affair secret, so none
of his foes might exult over him nor any of his friends be
troubled, knowing that, if he disclosed his secret, it would
bring him naught but dishonour and contumely from the folk;
wherefore he said in him self, "O Obayd, hide that which hath
betided thee of affliction and ruination; it behoveth thee to do
in accordance with his saying who said,

'If a man's breast with bane he hides be straitened, * The breast
that tells its hidden bale is straiter still.' "

Then he locked up his house and, making for his shop, gave it in
charge of one of his apprentices to whom said he, "My friend the
young merchant hath invited me to accompany him to Cairo, for
solacing ourselves with the sight of the city, and sweareth that
he will not march except he carry us with him, me and my wife.
So, O my son, I make thee my steward in the shop, and if the King
ask for me, say thou to him, 'He is gone with his Harim to the
Holy House of Allah.'"[FN#454] Then he sold some of his effects
and bought camels and mules and Mamelukes, together with a slave-
girl,[FN#455] and placing her in a litter, set out from Bassorah
after ten days. His friends farewelled him and none doubted but
that he had taken his wife and gone on the Pilgrimage, and the
folk rejoiced in this, for that Allah had delivered them from
being shut up in the mosques and houses every Friday. Quoth some
of them, "Allah grant he may never return to Bassorah, so we may
no more be boxed up in the mosques and houses every Friday!"; for
that this usage had caused the people of Bassorah exceeding
vexation. Quoth another, "Methinks he will not return from this
journey, by reason of the much praying of the people of Bassorah
against him."[FN#456] And yet another, "An he return, 'twill not
be but in reversed case."[FN#457] So the folk rejoiced with
exceeding joy in the jeweller's departure, after they had been in
mighty great chagrin, and even their cats and dogs were
comforted. When Friday came round, however, the crier proclaimed
as usual that the people should repair to the mosques two hours
before prayer time or else hide themselves in their houses,
together with their cats and dogs; whereat their breasts were
straitened and they assembled in general assembly and betaking
themselves to the King's divan, stood between his hands and said,
"O King of the age, the jeweller hath taken his Harim and
departed on the pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah: so the
cause of our restrains hath ceased to be, and why therefore are
we now shut up?" Quoth the King, "How came this traitor to depart
without telling me? But, when he cometh back from his journey,
all will not be save well[FN#458]: so go ye to your shops and
sell and buy, for this vexation is removed from you." Thus far
concerning the King and the Bassorites; but as for the jeweller,
he fared on ten days' journey, and as he drew near Baghdad, there
befel him that which had befallen Kamar al-Zaman, before his
entering Bassorah; for the Arabs[FN#459] came out upon him and
stripped him and took all he had and he escaped only by feigning
himself dead. As soon as they were gone, he rose and fared on,
naked as he was, till he came to a village, where Allah inclined
to him the hearts of certain kindly folk, who covered his shame
with some old clothes; and he asked his way, begging from town to
town, till he reached the city of Cairo the God guarded. There,
burning with hunger, he went about alms seeking in the market
streets, till one of the townsfolk said to him, "O poor man, off
with thee to the house of the wedding festival and eat and drink;
for to day there is open table for paupers and strangers." Quoth
he, "I know not the way thither": and quoth the other, "Follow me
and I will show it to thee." He followed him, till he brought him
to the house of Abd al-Rahman and said to him, "This is the house
of the wedding; enter and fear not, for there is no doorkeeper at
the door of the festival." Accordingly he entered and Kamar al-
Zaman knew him and told his sire who said, "O my son, leave him
at this present: belike he is anhungered: so let him eat his
sufficiency and recover himself and after we will send for him."
So they waited till Obayd had eaten his fill and washed his hands
and drunk coffee and sherbets of sugar flavoured with musk and
ambergris and was about to go out, when Abd al-Rahman sent after
him a page who said to him, "Come, O stranger, and speak with the
merchant Abd al-Rahman." "Who is he?" asked Obayd; and the man
answered, "He is the master of the feast." Thereupon the jeweller
turned back, thinking that he meant to give him a gift, and
coming up to Abd al-Rahman, saw his friend Kamar al-Zaman and
went nigh to lose his senses for shame before him. But Kamar al-
Zaman rose to him and embracing him, saluted him with the salam,
and they both wept with sore weeping. Then he seated him by his
side and Abd al-Rahman said to his son, "O destitute of good
taste, this is no way to receive friends! Send him first to the
Hammam and despatch after him a suit of clothes of the choicest,
worth a thousand dinars."[FN#460] Accordingly they carried him to
the bath, where they washed his body and clad him in a costly
suit, and he became as he were Consul of the Merchants. Meanwhile
the bystanders questioned Kamar al-Zaman of him, saying, "Who is
this and whence knowest thou him?" Quoth he, "This is my friend,
who lodged me in his house and to whom I am indebted for favours
without number, for that he entreated me with exceeding kindness.
He is a man of competence and condition and by trade a jeweller,
in which craft he hath no equal. The King of Bassorah loveth him
dearly and holdeth him in high honour and his word is law with
him." And he went on to enlarge before them on his praises,
saying, "Verily, he did with me thus and thus and I have shame of
him and know not how to requite him his generous dealing with
me." Nor did he leave to extol him, till his worth was magnified
to the bystanders and he became venerable in their eyes; so they
said, "We will all do him his due and honour him for thy sake.
But we would fain know the reason why he hath departed his native
land and the cause of his coming hither and what Allah hath done
with him, that he is reduced to this plight?" Replied Kamar al-
Zaman, "O folk, marvel not, for a son of Adam is still subject to
Fate and Fortune, and what while he abideth in this world, he is
not safe from calamities. Indeed he spake truly who said these
couplets,

The world tears man to shreds, so be thou not * Of those whom
     lure of rank and title draws:
Nay; 'ware of slips and turn from sin aside * And ken that bane
     and bale are worldly laws:
How oft high Fortune falls by least mishap * And all things bear
     inbred of change a cause!'

Know that I entered Bassorah in yet iller case and worse distress
than this man, for that he entered Cairo with his shame hidden by
rags; but I indeed came into his town with my nakedness
uncovered, one hand behind and another before; and none availed
me but Allah and this dear man. Now the reason of this was that
the Arabs stripped me and took my camels and mules and loads and
slaughtered my pages and serving men; but I lay down among the
slain and they thought that I was dead, so they went away and
left me. Then I arose and walked on, mother naked, till I came to
Bassorah where this man met me and clothed me and lodged me in
his house, he also furnished me with money, and all I have
brought back with me I owe to none save to Allah's goodness and
his goodness. When I departed, he gave me great store of wealth
and I returned to the city of my birth with a heart at ease. I
left him in competence and condition, and haply there hath
befallen him some bale of the banes of Time, that hath forced him
to quit his kinsfolk and country, and there happened to him by
the way the like of what happened to me. There is nothing strange
in this; but now it behoveth me to requite him his noble dealing
with me and do according to the saying of him who saith,

'O who praises" Time with the fairest appraise, * Knowest thou
     what Time hath made and unmade?
What thou dost at least be it kindly done,[FN#461] * For with pay
     he pays shall man be repaid.'"

As they were talking and telling the tale, behold, up came Obayd
as he were Consul[FN#462] of the Merchants; whereupon they all
rose to salute him and seated him in the place of honour. Then
said Kamar al-Zaman to him, "O my friend, verily, thy day[FN#463]
is blessed and fortunate! There is no need to relate to me a
thing that befel me before thee. If the Arabs have stripped thee
and robbed thee of thy wealth, verily our money is the ransom of
our bodies, so let not thy soul be troubled; for I entered thy
city naked and thou clothedst me and entreatedst me generously,
and I owe thee many a kindness. But I will requite thee."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say,

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar
al-Zaman said to Master Obayd the jeweller, "Verily I entered thy
city naked and thou clothedst me and I owe thee many a kindness.
But I will requite thee and do with thee even as thou didst with
me; nay, more: so be of good cheer and eyes clear of tear." And
he went on to soothe him and hinder him from speech, lest he
should name his wife and what she had done with him nor did he
cease to ply him with saws and moral instances and verses and
conceits and stories and legends and console him, till the
jeweller saw his drift and took the hint and kept silence
concerning the past, diverting himself with the tales and rare
anecdotes he heard and repeating in himself these lines,

"On the brow of the World is a writ; an thereon thou look, * Its
     contents will compel thine eyes tears of blood to rain:
For the World never handed to humans a cup with its right, * But
     with left it compelled them a beaker of ruin to drain."

Then Kamar al-Zaman and his father took Obayd and carrying him
into the saloon of the Harim, shut themselves up with him; and
Abd al-Rahman said to him, "We did not hinder thee from speaking
before the folk, but for fear of dishonour to thee and to us: but
now we are private; so tell me all that hath passed between thee
and thy wife and my son." So he told him all, from beginning to
end, and when he had made an end of his story, Abd al-Rahman
asked him, "Was the fault with my son or with thy wife?" He
answered, "By Allah, thy son was not to blame, for men must needs
lust after women, and 'tis the bounder duty of women to defend
themselves from men. So the sin lieth with my wife, who played me
false and did with me these deeds."[FN#464] Then Abd al-Rahman
arose and taking his son aside, said to him, "O my son, we have
proved his wife and know her to be a traitress; and now I mean to
prove him and see if he be a man of honour and manliness, or a
wittol."[FN#465] "How so?" asked Kamar al-Zaman; and Abd al-
Rahman answered, "I mean to urge him to make peace with his wife,
and if he consent thereto and forgive her, I will smite him with
a sword and slay him and kill her after, her and her maid, for
there is no good in the life of a cuckold and a queen;[FN#466]
but, if he turn from her with aversion I will marry him to thy
sister and give him more of wealth than that thou tookest from
him." Then he went back to Obayd and said to him, "O master,
verily, the commerce of women requireth patience and magnanimity
and whoso loveth them hath need of fortitude, for that they order
themselves viper wise towards men and evilly entreat them, by
reason of their superiority over them in beauty and loveliness:
wherefore they magnify themselves and belittle men. This is
notably the case when their husbands show them affection; for
then they requite them with hauteur and coquetry and harsh
dealing of all kinds. But, if a man be wroth whenever he seeth in
his wife aught that offendeth him, there can be no fellowship
between them; nor can any hit it off with them who is not
magnanimous and long suffering; and unless a man bear with his
wife and requite her foul doing with forgiveness, he shall get no
good of her conversation. Indeed, it hath been said of them,
'Were they in the sky, the necks of men would incline themwards';
and he who hath the power and pardoneth, his reward is with
Allah. Now this woman is thy wife and thy companion and she hath
long consorted with thee; wherefore it behoveth that thou entreat
her with indulgence which in fellowship is of the essentials of
success. Furthermore, women fail in wit and Faith,[FN#467] and if
she have sinned, she repenteth and Inshallah she will not again
return to that which she whilome did. So 'tis my rede that thou
make peace with her and I will restore thee more than the good
she took; and if it please thee to abide with me, thou art
welcome, thou and she, and ye shall see naught but what shall joy
you both; but, an thou seek to, return to thine own land. For
that which falleth out between a man and his wife is manifold,
and it behoveth thee to be indulgent and not take the way of the
violent." Said the jeweller, "O my lord, and where is my wife?"
and said Abd al-Rahman, "She is in that upper chamber, go up to
her and be easy with her, for my sake, and trouble her not; for,
when my son brought her hither, he would have married her, but I
forbade him from her and shut her up in yonder room, and locked
the door upon her saying in myself, 'Haply her husband will come
and I will hand her over to him safe; for she is fair of favour,
and when a woman is like unto this one, it may not be that her
husband will let her go.' What I counted on is come about and
praised be Allah Almighty for thy reunion with thy wife! As for
my son, I have sought him another woman in marriage and have
married him to her: these banquets and rejoicings are for his
wedding, and to-night I bring him to his bride. So here is the
key of the chamber where thy wife is: take it and open the door
and go in to her and her handmaid and be buxom with her. There
shall be brought you meat and drink and thou shalt not come down
from her till thou have had thy fill of her." Cried Obayd, "May
Allah requite thee for me with all good, O my lord!" and taking
the key, went up, rejoicing. The other thought his words had
pleased him and that he consented thereto; so he took the sword
and following him unseen, stood to espy what should happen
between him and his wife. This is how it fared with the merc