hant
Abd al-Rahman; but as for the jeweller, when he came to the
chamber door, he heard his wife weeping with sore weeping for
that Kamar al-Zaman had married another than her, and the
handmaid saying to her, "O my lady, how often have I warned thee
and said, 'Thou wilt get no good of this youth: so do thou leave
his company.' But thou heededst not my words and spoiledst thy
husband of all his goods and gayest them to him. After the which
thou forsookest thy place, of thine fondness and infatuation for
him, and camest with him to this country. And now he hath cast
thee out from his thought and married another and hath made the
issue of thy foolish fancy for him to be durance vile." Cried
Halimah, "Be silent, O accursed! Though he be married to another,
yet some day needs must I occur to his thought. I cannot forget
the nights I have spent in his company and in any case I console
myself with his saying who said,

'O my lords, shall he to your mind occur * Who recurs to you only
     sans other mate?
Grant Heaven you ne'er shall forget his state * Who for state of
     you forgot own estate!'

It cannot be but he will bethink him of my affect and converse
and ask for me, wherefore I will not turn from loving him nor
change from passion for him, though I perish in prison; for he is
my love and my leach[FN#468] and my reliance is on him that he
will yet return to me and deal fondly with me." When the jeweller
heard his wife's words, he went in to her and said to her, "O
traitress, thy hope in him is as the hope of Iblis[FN#469] in
Heaven. All these vices were in thee and I knew not thereof; for,
had I been ware of one single vice, I had not kept thee with me
an hour. But now I am certified of this in thee, it behoveth me
to do thee die although they put me to death for thee, O
traitress!" and he clutched her with both hands and repeated
these two couplets,

"O fair ones forth ye cast my faithful love * With sin, nor had
     ye aught regard for right:
How long I fondly clung to you, but now * My love is loathing and
     I hate your sight."

Then he pressed hardly upon her windpipe and brake her neck,
whereupon her handmaid cried out "Alas, my mistress!" Said he, "O
harlot, 'tis thou who art to blame for all this, for that thou
knewest this evil inclination to be in her and toldest me
not."[FN#470] Then he seized upon her and strangled her. All this
happened while Abd al-Rahman stood, brand in hand, behind the
door espying with his eyes and hearing with his ears. Now when
Obayd the ]eweller had done this, apprehension came upon him and
he feared the issue of his affair and said to himself, "As soon
as the merchant learneth that I have killed them in his house, he
will surely slay me; yet I beseech Allah that He appoint the
taking of my life to be while I am in the True Belief!" And he
abode bewildered about his case and knew not what to do, but, as
he was thus behold, in came Abd al-Rahman from his lurking place
without the door and said to him, "No harm shall befal thee, for
indeed thou deserves" safety. See this sword in my hand. 'Twas in
my mind to slay thee, hadst thou made peace with her and restored
her to favour, and I would also have slain her and the maid. But
since thou hast done this deed, welcome to thee and again
welcome! And I will reward thee by marrying thee to my daughter,
Kamar al-Zaman's sister." Then he carried him down and sent for
the woman who washed the dead: whereupon it was bruited abroad
that Kamar al-Zaman had brought with him two slave-girls from
Bassorah and that both had deceased. So the people began to
condole with him saying, "May thy head live!" and "May Allah
compensate thee!" And they washed and shrouded them and buried
them, and none knew the truth of the matter. Then Abd al-Rahman
sent for the Shaykh al-Islam and all the notables and said, "O
Shaykh, draw up the contract of marriage between my daughter
Kaukab al-Salah[FN#471] and Master Obayd the jeweller and set
down that her dowry hath been paid to me in full." So he wrote
out the contract and Abd al-Rahman gave the company to drink of
sherbets, and they made one wedding festival for the two brides
the daughter of the Shaykh al-Islam and Kamar al-Zaman's sister;
and paraded them in one litter on one and the same night; after
which they carried Kamar al-Zaman and Obayd in procession
together and brought them in to their brides.[FN#472] When the
jeweller went in to Abd al-Rahman's daughter, he found her
handsomer than Halimah and a thousand fold lovelier. So he took
her maidenhead and on the morrow, he went to the Hammam with
Kamar al-Zaman. Then he abode with them awhile in pleasance and
joyance, after which he began to yearn for his native land; so he
went in to Abd al-Rahman and said to him, "O uncle, I long for my
own country, for I have there estates and effects, which I left
in charge of one of my prentices; and I am minded to journey
thither that I may sell my properties and return to thee. So wilt
thou give me leave to go to my country for that purpose?"
Answered the merchant, "O my son, I give thee leave to do this
and there be no fault in thee or blame to thee for these words,
for 'Love of mother land is a part of Religion'; and he who hath
not good in his own country hath none in other folks' country.
But, haply, an thou depart without thy wife, when thou art once
come to thy native place, it may seem good to thee to settle
there, and thou wilt be perplexed between returning to thy wife
and sojourning in thine own home; so it were the righter rede
that thou carry thy wife with thee; and after, an thou desire to
return to us, return and welcome to you both; for we are folk who
know not divorce and no woman of us marrieth twice, nor do we
lightly discard a man."[FN#473] Quoth Obayd, "Uncle, I fear me
thy daughter will not consent to journey with me to my own
country." Replied Abd al-Rahman, "O my son, we have no women
amongst us who gainsay their spouses, nor know we a wife who is
wroth with her man." The jeweller cried, "Allah bless you and
your women!" and going in to his wife, said to her, "I am minded
to go to my country: what sayst thou?" Quoth she, "Indeed, my
sire had the ordering of me, whilst I was a maid, and when I
married, the ordering all passed into the hands of my lord and
master, nor will I gainsay him." Quoth Obayd, "Allah bless thee
and thy father, and have mercy on the womb that bare thee and the
loins that begat thee!" Then he cut his thongs[FN#474] and
applied himself to making ready for his journey. His father-in-
law gave him much good and they took leave each of other, after
which tile jeweller and his wife journeyed on without ceasing,
till they reached Bassorah where his kinsmen and comrades came
out to meet him, doubting not but that he had been in Al-Hijaz.
Some rejoiced at his return, whilst others were vexed, and the
folk said one to another, "Now will he straiten us again every
Friday, as before, and we shall be shut up in the mosques and
houses, even to our cats and our dogs." On such wise it fared
with him; but as regards the King of Bassorah, when he heard of
his return, he was wroth with him; and sending for him, upbraided
him and said to him, "Why didst thou depart, without letting me
know of thy departure? Was I unable to give thee somewhat
wherewith thou mightest have succoured thyself in thy pilgrimage
to the Holy House of Allah?" Replied the jeweller, "Pardon, O my
lord! By Allah, I went not on the pilgrimage! but there have
befallen me such and such things." Then he told him all that had
befallen him with his wife and with Abd al-Rahman of Cairo and
how the merchant had given him his daughter to wife, ending with
these words, "And I have brought her to Bassorah." Said the King,
"By the Lord, did I not fear Allah the Most High, I would slay
thee and marry this noble lady after thy death, though I spent on
her mints of money, because she befitteth none but Kings. But
Allah hath appointed her of thy portion and may He bless thee in
her! So look thou use her well." Then he bestowed largesse on the
jeweller, who went out from before him and abode with his wife
five years, after which he was admitted to the mercy of the
Almighty. Presently the King sought his widow in wedlock; but she
refused, saying, "O King, never among my kindred was a woman who
married again after her husband's death; wherefore I will never
take another husband, nor will I marry thee, no, though thou kill
me." Then he sent to her one who said, "Dost thou seek to go to
thy native land?" And she answered, "An thou do good, thou shalt
be requited therewith." So he collected for her all the
jeweller's wealth and added unto her of his own, after the
measure of his degree. Lastly he sent with her one of his Wazirs,
a man famous for goodness and piety, and an escort of five
hundred horse, who journeyed with her, till they brought her to
her father; and in his home she abode, without marrying again,
till she died and they died all. So, if this woman would not
consent to replace her dead husband with a Sultan, how shall she
be compared with one who replaced her husband, whilst he was yet
alive, with a youth of unknown extraction and condition, and
especially when this was in lewd carriage and not by way of
lawful marriage? So he who deemeth all women alike,[FN#475] there
is no remedy for the disease of his insanity. And glory be to Him
to whom belongeth the empire of the Seen and the Unseen and He is
the Living, who dieth not! And among the tales they tell, O
auspicious King, is one of





          ABDULLAH BIN FAZIL AND HIS BROTHERS.[FN#476]



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid was one day examining the tributes of
his various provinces and viceroyalties, when he observed that
the contributions of all the countries and regions had come into
the treasury, except that of Bassorah which had not arrived that
year. So he held a Divan because of this and said, "Hither to me
with the Wazir Ja'afar;" and when they brought him into the
presence he thus bespoke him, "The tributes of all the provinces
have come into the treasury, save that of Bassorah, no part
whereof hath arrived." Ja'afar replied, "O Commander of the
Faithful, belike there hath befallen the governor of Bassorah
something that hath diverted him from sending the tribute." Quoth
the Caliph, "The time of the coming of the tribute was twenty
days ago; what then, can be his excuse for that, in this time, he
hath neither sent it nor sent to show cause for not doing so?"
And quoth the Minister, "O Commander of the Faithful, if it
please thee, we will send him a messenger. Rejoined the Caliph,
"Send him Abu Ishak al-Mausili,[FN#477] the boon companion," and
Ja'afar, "Hearkening and obedience to Allah and to thee, O Prince
of True Believers!" Then he returned to his house and summoning
Abu Ishak, wrote him a royal writ and said to him, Go to Abdullah
bin Fazil, Viceroy of Bassorah, and see what hath diverted him
from sending the tribute. If it be ready, do thou receive it from
him in full and bring it to me in haste, for the Caliph hath
examined the tributes of the provinces and findeth that they are
all come in, except that of Bassorah: but an thou see that it is
not ready and he make an excuse to thee, bring him back with
thee, that he may report his excuse to the Caliph with his own
tongue." Answered Abu Ishak, "I hear and I obey;" and taking with
him five thousand horse of Ja'afar's host set out for Bassorah.
Now when Abdullah bin Fazil heard of his approach, he went out to
meet him with his troops, and led him into the city and carried
him to his palace, whilst the escort encamped without the city
walls, where he appointed to them all whereof they stood in need.
So Abu Ishak entered the audience-chamber and sitting down on the
throne, seated the governor beside himself, whilst the notables
sat round him, according to their several degrees. After
salutation with the salam Abdullah bin Fazil said to him "O my
lord, is there for thy coming to us any cause?;" and said Abu
Ishak, "Yes, I come to seek the tribute; for the Caliph enquireth
of it and the time of its coming is gone by." Rejoined Abdullah
bin Fazil, "O my lord, would Heaven thou hadst not wearied
thyself nor taken upon thyself the hardships of the journey! For
the tribute is ready in full tale and complete, and I purpose to
despatch it to-morrow. But, since thou art come, I will entrust
it to thee, after I have entertained thee three days; and on the
fourth day I will set the tribute between thine hands. But it
behoveth us now to offer thee a present in part requital of thy
kindness and the goodness of the Commander of the Faithful."
"There is no harm in that," said Abu Ishak. So Abdullah bin Fazil
dismissed the Divan and carrying him into a saloon that had not
its match, bade set a tray of food before him and his companions.
They ate and drank and made merry and enjoyed themselves; after
which the tray was removed and there came coffee and sherbets.
They sat conversing till a third part of the night was past, when
they spread for Abu Ishak bedding on an ivory couch inlaid with
gold glittering sheeny. So he lay down and the viceroy lay down
beside him on another couch; but wakefulness possessed Abu Ishak
and he fell to meditating on the metres of prosody and poetical
composition, for that he was one of the primest of the Caliph's
boon-companions and he had a mighty fine fore-arm[FN#478] in
producing verses and pleasant stories; nor did he leave to lie
awake improvising poetry till half the night was past. Presently,
behold, Abdullah bin Fazil arose, and girding his middle, opened
a locker,[FN#479] whence he brought out a whip; then, taking a
lighted waxen taper, he went forth by the door of the saloon.--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Abdullah bin Fazil went forth by the door of the saloon deeming
Abu Ishak asleep, the Caliph's cup-companion, seeing this,
marvelled and said in himself, "Whither wendeth Abdullah bin
Fazil with that whip? Perhaps he is minded to punish some body.
But needs must I follow him and see what he will do this night."
So he arose and went out after him softly, very softly, that he
might not be seen and presently saw him open a closet and take
thence a tray containing four dishes of meat and bread and a
gugglet of water. Then he went on, carrying the tray and secretly
followed by Abu Ishak, till he came to another saloon and
entered, whilst the cup-companion stood behind the door and,
looking through the chink, saw a spacious saloon, furnished with
the richest furniture and having in its midst a couch of ivory
plated with gold glittering sheeny, to which two dogs were made
fast with chains of gold. Then Abdullah set down the tray in a
comer and tucking up his sleeves, loosed the first dog, which
began to struggle in his hands and put its muzzle to the floor,
as it would kiss the ground before him, whining the while in a
weak voice. Abdullah tied its paws behind its back and throwing
it on the ground, drew forth the whip and beat it with a painful
beating and a pitiless. The dog struggled, but could not get
free, and Abdullah ceased not to beat it with the same whip till
it left groaning and lay without consciousness. Then he took it
and tied it up in its place, and unbinding the second dog, did
with him as he had done with the first; after which he pulled out
a kerchief and fell to wiping away their tears and comforting
them, saying, "Bear me not malice; for by Allah, this is not of
my will, nor is it easy to me! But it may be Allah will grant you
relief from this strait and issue from your affliction." And he
prayed for the twain what while Abu Ishak the cup-companion stood
hearkening with his ears and espying with his eyes, and indeed he
marvelled at his case. Then Abdullah brought the dogs the tray of
food and fell to morselling them with his own hand, till they had
enough, when he wiped their muzzles and lifting up the gugglet,
gave them to drink; after which he took up the tray, gugglet and
candle and made for the door. But Abu Ishak forewent him and
making his way back to his couch, lay down; so that he saw him
not; neither knew that he had walked behind him and watched him.
Then the governor replaced the tray and the gugglet in the closet
and returning to the saloon, opened the locker and laid the whip
in its place; after which he doffed his clothes and lay down. But
Abu Ishak passed the rest of that night pondering this affair
neither did sleep visit him for excess of wonderment, and he
ceased not to say in himself, "I wonder what can be the meaning
of this!" Nor did he leave wondering till day break, when they
arose and prayed the dawn-prayer. Then they set the
breakfast[FN#480] before them and they ate and drank coffee,
after which they went out to the divan. Now Abu Ishak's thought
was occupied with this mystery all day long but he concealed the
matter and questioned not Abdullah thereof. Next night, he again
followed the governor and saw him do with the two dogs as on the
previous night, first beating them and then making his peace with
them and giving them to eat and to drink; and so also he did the
third night. On the fourth day he brought the tribute to Abu
Ishak who took it and departed, without opening the matter to
him. He fared on, without ceasing, till he came to Baghdad, where
he delivered the tribute to the Caliph, who questioned him of the
cause of its delay. Replied he, "O Commander of the Faithful, I
found that the governor of Bassorah had made ready the tribute
and was about to despatch it; and I delayed a day, it would have
met me on the road. But, O Prince of True Believers, I had a
wondrous adventure with Abdullah bin Fazil; never in my life saw
I its like." "And what was it, O Abu Ishak?" asked the Caliph. So
he replied, "I saw such and such;" and, brief, acquainted him
with that which the governor had done with the two dogs, adding,
"After such fashion, I saw him do three successive nights, first
beating the dogs, then making his peace with them and comforting
them and giving them to eat and drink, I watching him, and he
seeing me not." Asked the Caliph, "Didst thou question him of the
cause of this?"; and the other answered, "No, as thy head liveth,
O Commander of the Faithful." Then said Al-Rashid, "O Abu Ishak,
I command thee to return to Bassorah and bring me Abdullah bin
Fazil and the two dogs." Quoth he, "O Commander of the Faithful,
excuse me from this; for indeed Abdullah entertained me with
exceedingly hospitable entertainment and I became ware of this
case with chance undesigned and acquainted thee therewith. So how
can I go back to him and bring him to thee? Verily, if I return
to him, I shall find me no face for shame of him; wherefore
'twere meet that thou send him another than myself, with a letter
under thine own hand, and he shall bring him to thee, him and the
two dogs." But quoth the Caliph, "If I send him other than
thyself, peradventure he will deny the whole affair and say,
'I've no dogs.' But if I send thee and thou say to him, 'I saw
them with mine own eyes,' he will not be able to deny that.
Wherefore nothing will serve but that thou go and fetch him and
the two dogs; otherwise I will surely slay thee."[FN#481]--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Nine Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid said to Abu Ishak, "Nothing will serve but
that thou go and fetch him and the two dogs; otherwise I will
surely slay thee." Abu Ishak replied, "Hearing and obeying, O
Commander of the Faithful: Allah is our aidance and good is the
Agent. He spake sooth who said, 'Man's wrong is from the
tongue;'[FN#482] and 'tis I who sinned against myself in telling
thee. But write me a royal rescript[FN#483] and I will go to him
and bring him back to thee." So the Caliph gave him an autograph
and he took it and repaired to Bassorah. Seeing him come in the
governor said, "Allah forfend us from the mischief of thy return,
O Abu Ishak! How cometh it I see thee return in haste?
Peradventure the tribute is deficient and the Caliph will not
accept it?" Answered Abu Ishak, "O Emir Abdullah, my return is
not on account of the deficiency of the tribute, for 'tis full
measure and the Caliph accepteth it; but I hope that thou wilt
excuse me, for that I have failed in my duty as thy guest and
indeed this lapse of mine was decreed of Allah Almighty."
Abdullah enquired, "And what may be the lapse?" and he replied,
"Know that when I was with thee, I followed thee three following
nights and saw thee rise at midnight and beat the dogs and
return; whereat I marvelled, but was ashamed to question thee
thereof. When I came back to Baghdad, I told the Caliph of thine
affair, casually and without design, whereupon he charged me to
return to thee, and here is a letter under his hand. Had I known
that the affair would lead to this, I had not told him, but
Destiny foreordained thus." And he went on to excuse himself to
him; whereupon said Abdullah, "Since thou hast told him this, I
will bear out thy report with him, lest he deem thee a liar, for
thou art my friend. Were it other than thou, I had denied the
affair and given him the lie. But now I will go with thee and
carry the two dogs with me, though this be to me ruin-rife and
the ending of my term of life." Rejoined the other, "Allah will
veil[FN#484] thee, even as thou hast veiled my face with the
Caliph!" Then Abdullah took a present beseeming the Commander of
the Faithful and mounting the dogs with him, each on a camel,
bound with chains[FN#485] of gold, journeyed with Abu Ishak to
Baghdad, where he went in to the Caliph and kissed ground before
him. He deigned bid him sit; so he sat down and brought the two
dogs before Al-Rashid, who said to him "What be these dogs, O
Emir Abdullah?" Whereupon they fell to kissing the floor between
his hands and wagging their tails and weeping, as if complaining
to him. The Caliph marvelled at this and said to the governor,
"Tell me the history of these two dogs and the reason of thy
beating them and after entreating them with honour." He replied,
"O Vicar of Allah, these be no dogs, but two young men, endowed
with beauty and seemliness, symmetry and shapeliness, and they
are my brothers and the sons of my father and mother." Asked the
Caliph "How is it that they were men and are become dogs?"; and
he answered, "An thou give me leave, O Prince of True Believers,
I will acquaint thee with the truth of the circumstance." Said
Al-Rashid, "Tell me and 'ware of leasing, for 'tis of the fashion
of the hypocrites, and look thou tell truth, for that is the
Ark[FN#486] of safety and the mark of virtuous men." Rejoined
Abdullah, "Know then, O vice-regent of Allah, when I tell thee
the story of these dogs, they will both bear witness against me:
an I speak sooth they will certify it and if I lie they will give
me the lie." Cried the Caliph, "These are of the dogs; they
cannot speak nor answer; so how can they testify for thee or
against thee?" But Abdullah said to them, "O my brothers, if I
speak a lying word, do ye lift your heads and stare with your
eyes; but, if I say sooth hang down your heads and lower your
eyes." Then said he to the Caliph, "Know, O Commander of the
Faithful, that we are three brothers by one mother and the same
father. Our sire's name was Fazil and he was so named because his
mother bare two sons at one birth, one of whom died forthright
and the other twin remained alive, wherefore his sire named him
Fazil--the Remainder. His father brought him up and reared him
well, till he grew to manhood when he married him to our mother
and died. Our mother conceived a first time and bare this my
first brother, whom our sire named Mansur; then she conceived
again and bare this my second brother, whom he named
Nasir[FN#487]; after which she conceived a third time and bare
me, whom he named Abdullah. My father reared us all three till we
came to man's estate, when he died, leaving us a house and a shop
full of coloured stuffs of all kinds, Indian and Greek and
Khorasani and what not, besides sixty thousand dinars. We washed
him and buried him to the ruth of his Lord, after which we built
him a splendid monument and let pray for him prayers for the
deliverance of his soul from the fire and held perlections of the
Koran and gave alms on his behalf, till the forty days[FN#488]
were past; when I called together the merchants and nobles of the
folk and made them a sumptuous entertainment. As soon as they had
eaten, I said to them, 'O merchants, verily this world is
ephemeral, but the next world is eternal, and extolled be the
perfection of Him who endureth always after His creatures have
passed away! Know ye why I have called you together this blessed
day?' And they answered, 'Extolled be Allah sole Scient of the
hidden things.[FN#489]' Quoth I, 'My father died, leaving much of
money, and I fear lest any have a claim against him for a debt or
a pledge[FN#490] or what not else, and I desire to discharge my
father's obligations towards the folk. So whoso hath any demand
on him, let him say, 'He oweth me so and so,' and I will satisfy
it to him, that I may acquit the responsibility of my
sire.[FN#491]' The merchants replied, 'O Abdullah, verily the
goods of this world stand not in stead of those of the world to
come, and we are no fraudful folk, but all of us know the lawful
from the unlawful and fear Almighty Allah and abstain from
devouring the substance of the orphan. We know that thy father
(Allah have mercy on him!) still let his money lie with the
folk,[FN#492] nor did he suffer any man's claim on him to go
unquitted, and we have ever heard him declare, 'I am fearful of
the people's substance.' He used always to say in his prayers, 'O
my God, Thou art my stay and my hope! Let me not die while in
debt.' And it was of his wont that, if he owed any one aught, he
would pay it to him, without being pressed, and if any owed him
aught he would not dun him, but would say to him, 'At thy
leisure.' If his debtor were poor, he would release him from his
liability and acquit him of responsibility; and if he were not
poor and died in his debt, he would say, 'Allah forgive him what
he owed me!' And we all testify that he owed no man aught.' Quoth
I, 'May Allah bless you!' Then I turned to these my brothers and
said, 'Our father owed no man aught and hath left us much money
and stuffs, besides the house and the shop. Now we are three and
each of us is entitled to one third part. So shall we agree to
waive division and wone copartners in our wealth and eat together
and drink together, or shall we apportion the stuffs and the
money and take each his part?' Said they, 'We will divide them
and take each his share.'" (Then Abdullah turned to the two dogs
and said to them, "Did it happen thus, O my brothers?". and they
bowed their heads and lowered their eyes, as to say, "Yes.")
Abdullah continued "I called in a departitor from the Kazi's
court, O Prince of True Believers, and he distributed amongst us
the money and the stuffs and all our father had left, allotting
the house and shop to me in exchange for a part of the coin and
clothes to which I was entitled. We were content with this; so
the house and shop fell to my share, whilst my brothers took
their portion in money and stuffs. I opened the shop and stocking
it with my stuffs bought others with the money apportioned to me,
over and above the house and shop, till the place was full, and I
sat selling and buying. As for my brothers, they purchased stuffs
and hiring a ship, set out on a voyage to the far abodes of folk.
Quoth I, 'Allah aid them both! As for me, my livelihood is ready
to my hand and peace is priceless.' I abode thus a whole year,
during which time Allah opened the door of fortune to me and I
gained great gains, till I became possessed of the like of that
which our father had left us. One day, as I sat in my shop, with
two fur pelisses on me, one of sable and the other of
meniver,[FN#493] for it was the season of winter and the time of
the excessive cold, behold, there came up to me my two brothers,
each clad in a ragged shirt and nothing more, and their lips were
white with cold, and they were shivering. When I saw them in this
plight, it was grievous to me and I mourned for them,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah
bin Fazil continued to the Caliph, "When I saw them in this
plight, it was grievous to me and I mourned for them and my
reason fled my head. So I rose and embraced them and wept over
their condition: then I put on one of them the pelisse of sable
and on the other the fur coat of meniver and, carrying them to
the Hammam, sent thither for each of them a suit of apparel such
as befitted a merchant worth a thousand.[FN#494] When they had
washed and donned each his suit, I carried them to my house
where, seeing them well nigh famished, I set a tray of food
before them and ate with them, caressing them and comforting
them." (Then he again turned to the two dogs and said to them
"Was this so, O my brothers?"; and they bent their heads and
lowered their eyes.) So Abdullah continued "When they had eaten,
O Vicar of Allah, quoth I to them, 'What hath befallen you and
where are your goods?'; and quoth they, 'We fared up the
river,[FN#495] till we came to a city called Cufa, where we sold
for ten dinars the piece of stuff that had cost half a ducat and
that which cost us a ducat for twenty. So we profited greatly and
bought Persian stuffs at the rate of ten sequins per piece of
silk worth forty in Bassorah. Thence we removed to a city called
Al-Karkh[FN#496] where we sold and bought and made gain galore
and amassed of wealth great store.' And they went on to set forth
to me the places and the profits. So I said to them, 'Since ye
had such good luck and lot, how cometh it that I see you return
naked?' They sighed and answered, 'O our brother, some one must
have evileyed us, and in travel there is no trusting. When we had
gotten together these monies and goods, we freighted a ship
therewith and set sail, intending for Bassorah. We fared on three
days and on the fourth day we saw the sea rise and fall and roar
and foam and swell and dash, whilst the waves clashed together
with a crash, striking out sparks like fire[FN#497] in the darks.
The winds blew contrary for us and our craft struck upon the
point of a bill-projected rock, where it brake up and plunged us
into the river, and all we had with us was lost in the waters. We
abode struggling on the surface a day and a night, till Allah
sent us another ship, whose crew picked us up and we begged our
way from town to town, suffering mighty sore hardships and
selling our body-clothes piecemeal, to buy us food, till we drew
near Bassorah; nor did we make the city till we had drained the
draught of a thousand miseries. But, had we come safely off with
that which was by us, we had brought back riches that might be
even with those of the King: but this was fore ordained to us of
Allah.' I said, 'O my brothers, let not your hearts be grieved,
for wealth is the ransom of bodies and safety is property. Since
Allah hath written you of the saved, this is the end of desire,
for want and wealth are but as it were illusions of dreams and
God-gifted is he who said,

'If a man from destruction can save his head * Let him hold his
wealth as a slice of nail.'

I continued, 'O my brothers we will suppose that our sire died
to-day and left us all this wealth that is with me, for I am
right willing to share it with you equally.' So I fetched a
departitor from the Kazi's court and brought out to him all my
money, which he distributed into three equal parts, and we each
took one. Then said I to them, 'O my brothers, Allah blesseth a
man in his daily bread, if he be in his own country: so let each
of you open him a shop and sit therein to get his living; and he
to whom aught is ordained in the Secret Purpose,[FN#498] needs
must he get it.' Accordingly, I helped each of them to open a
shop and filled it for him with goods, saying to them, 'Sell and
buy and keep your monies and spend naught thereof; for all ye
need of meat and drink and so forth I will furnish to you.' I
continued to entreat them generously, and they fell to selling
and buying by day and returning at even-tide to my house where
they lay the night; nor would I suffer them to expend aught of
their own substance. But, whenever I sat talking with them, they
would praise travel and proclaim its pleasures and vaunt the
gains they had made therein; and they ceased not to urge me to
accompany them in travelling over foreign parts." (Then he said
to the dogs, "Was this so, O my brothers?" and they again bowed
their heads and lowered their eyes in confirmation of his words.)
He continued, "On such wise, O Vicar of Allah, they continued to
urge me and tempt me to travel by vaunting the great gains and
profit to be obtained thereby till I said to them, 'Needs must I
fare with you for your sake!' Then I entered into a contract of
partnership with them and we chartered a ship and packing up all
manner of precious stuffs and merchandise of every kind,
freighted it therewith; after which we embarked in it all we
needed and, setting sail from Bassorah, launched out into the
dashing sea, swollen with clashing surge whereinto whoso entereth
is lone and lorn and whence whoso cometh forth is as a babe new-
born. We ceased not sailing on till we came to a city of the
cities, where we sold and bought and made great cheape. Thence we
went on to another place, and we ceased not to pass from land to
land and port to port, selling and buying and profiting, till we
had gotten us great wealth and much advantage. Presently, we came
to a mountain,[FN#499] where the captain cast anchor and said to
us, 'O passengers; go ye ashore; ye shall be saved from this
day,[FN#500] and make search; it may be ye shall find water.' So
all landed I amongst the crowd, and dispersed about the island in
search of water. As for me, I climbed to the top of the mountain,
and whilst I went along, lo and behold! I saw a white snake
fleeing and followed by a black dragon, foul of favour and
frightful of form, hotly pursuing her. Presently he overtook her
and clipping her, seized her by the head and wound his tail about
her tail, whereupon she cried out and I knew that he purposed to
rape her. So I was moved to ruth for her and taking up a lump of
granite,[FN#501] five pounds or more in weight, hurled it at the
dragon. It smote him on the head and crushed it, and ere I knew,
the white snake changed and became a young girl bright with
beauty and loveliness and brilliancy and perfect grace, as she
were the shining full moon, who came up to me and kissing my
hands, said to me, 'Allah veil thee with two-fold veils, one from
shame in this world and the other from the flame in the world to
come on the day of the Great Upstanding, the day when neither
wealth nor children shall avail save to him who shall come to
Allah with a sound heart!'[FN#502] And presently she continued,
'O mortal, thou hast saved my honour and I am indebted to thee
for kindness, wherefore it behoveth me to requite thee.' So
saying, she signed with her hand to the earth, which opened and
she descended thereinto: then it closed up again over her and by
this I knew that she was of the Jinn. As for the dragon, fire was
kindled in him and consumed him and he became ashes. I marvelled
at this and returned to my comrades, whom I acquainted with
whatso I had seen, and we passed the night in the island. On the
morrow the Captain weighed anchor and spread the sails and coiled
the ropes and we sailed till the shore faded from our gaze. We
fared on twenty days, without seeing or land or bird, till our
water came to an end and quoth the Rais to us, 'O folk, our fresh
water is spent.' Quoth we, 'Let us make for land; haply we shall
find water.' But he exclaimed, 'By Allah, I have lost my way and
I know not what course will bring me to the seaboard.' Thereupon
betided us sore chagrin and we wept and besought Almighty Allah
to guide us into the right course. We passed that night in the
sorriest case: but God-gifted is He who said,

'How many a night have I spent in woes * That would grizzle the
     suckling-babe with fear:
But morrowed not morn ere to me there came * 'Aidance from Allah
     and victory near.'[FN#503]

But when the day arose in its sheen and shone, we caught sight of
a high mountain and rejoiced therein. When we came to its skirts,
the Captain said to us, 'O folk, go ashore and seek for water.'
So we all landed and sought water but found none, whereat we were
sore afflicted because we were suffering for want of it. As for
me, I climbed up to the mountain-top and on the other side
thereof I saw a spacious circle[FN#504] distant from us an hour's
journey or more. Presently I called my companions and as soon as
they all rejoined me, said to them 'Look at yonder basin behind
this mountain; for I see therein a city high of base and a
strong-cornered place girt with sconce and rampartry, pasturage
and lea and doubtless it wanteth not water and good things. So
hie we thither and fetch drink therefrom and buy what we need of
provisions, meat and fruit, and return.' But they said, 'We fear
lest the city-folk be Kafirs ascribing to Allah partners and
enemies of The Faith and lay hand on us and take us captive or
else slay us; so should we cause the loss of our own lives,
having cast ourselves into destruction and evil emprise. Indeed,
the proud and presumptuous are never praiseworthy, for that they
ever fare in danger of calamities, even as saith of such an one a
certain poet,

'Long as earth is earth, long as sky is sky, * The o'erproud is
blamed tho' from risk he fly!'

So we will not expose ourselves to peril.' I replied, 'O folk, I
have no authority over you; so I will take my brothers and go to
yonder city.' But my brothers said to me, 'We also fear this
thing and will not go with thee.' Quoth I, 'As for me, I am
resolved to go thither, and I put my trust in Allah and accept
whatsoever He shall decree to me. Do ye therefore await me,
whilst I wend thither and return to you twain.'"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah
said, "'Do ye twain await me whilst I wend thither and return to
you.'"--"So I left them and walked on till I came to the gate of
the place and saw it a city of building wondrous and projection
marvellous, with boulevards high-towering and towers strong-
builded and palaces high-soaring. Its portals were of Chinese
iron, rarely gilded and graven on such wise as confounded the
wit. I entered the gateway and saw there a stone bench, whereon
sat a man bearing on his forearm a chain of brass, whereto hung
fourteen keys; so I knew him to be the porter of the city and
that it had fourteen gates. I drew near him and said to him
'Peace be with thee!'; but he returned not my salam and I saluted
him a second and a third time; but he made me no reply. Then I
laid my hand on his shoulder and said to him, 'Ho thou, why dost
thou not return my salam? Art thou asleep or deaf or other than a
Moslem, that thou refrainest from exchanging the salutation?' But
he answered me not neither stirred; so I considered him and saw
that he was stone. Quoth I, 'Verily an admirable matter! This is
a stone wroughten in the semblance of a son of Adam and wanting
in naught save speech!' Then I left him and entering the city,
beheld a man standing in the road; so I went up to him and
scrutinised him and found him stone. Presently, as I walked adown
the broad-ways, and saw that this was every where the case, I met
an old woman bearing on her head a bundle of clothes ready for
washing; so I went up to her and examining her, saw that she was
stone, and the bundle of clothes on her head was stone
also.[FN#505] Then I fared for the market, where I saw an oilman
with his scales set up and fronted by various kinds of wares such
as cheese and so forth, all of stone. Moreover, I saw all manner
of tradesmen seated in their shops and men and women and
children, some standing and some sitting; but they were all
stone; and the stuffs were like spiders' webs. I amused myself
with looking upon them, and as often as I laid hold upon a piece
of stuff, it powdered in my hands like dust dispread. Presently I
saw some chests and opening one of them, found it full of gold in
bags; so I laid hold upon the bags, but they crumbled away in my
grasp, whilst the gold abode unchanged. I carried off of it what
I could carry and said to myself, 'Were my brothers with me, they
might take of this gold their fill and possess themselves of
these hoards which have no owner.' Then I entered another shop
and found therein more than this, but could bear away no more
than I had borne. I left this market and went on to another and
thence to another and another, much enjoying the sight of all
manner of creatures of various kinds, all several stones, even to
the dogs and the cats, till I came to the goldsmiths' bazar,
where I saw men sitting in their shops, with their stock-in-trade
about them, some in their hands and others in crates of wicker-
work. When I saw this, O Commander of the Faithful, I threw down
the gold and loaded myself with goldsmiths' ware, as much as I
could carry. Then I went on to the jewel-market and saw there the
jewellers seated in their shops, each with a tray before him,
full of all sorts of precious stones, jacinths and diamonds and
emeralds and balass rubies and so forth: but all the shop-keepers
were stones; whereupon I threw away the goldsmiths' ware and
carried off as many jewels as I could carry, regretting that my
brothers were not with me, so they might take what they would of
those costly gems. Then I left the jewel-market and went on till
I came to a great door, quaintly gilded and decorated after the
fairest fashion, within which were wooden benches and in the
porch sat eunuchs, and body-guards; horsemen, and footmen and
officers of police each and every robed in the richest of
raiment; but they were all stones. I touched one of them and his
clothes crumbled away from his body like cobwebs. Then I passed
through the door and saw a palace without equal for its building
and the goodliness of the works that were therein. Here I found
an audience-chamber, full of Grandees and Wazirs and Officers and
Emirs, seated upon chairs and every one of them stone. Moreover,
I saw a throne of red gold, crusted with pearls and gems, and
seated thereon a son of Adam arrayed in the most sumptuous
raiment and bearing on his head a Chosroan[FN#506] crown,
diademed with the finest stones that shed a light like the light
of day; but, when I came up to him, I found him stone. Then I
went on to the gate of the Harim and entering, found myself in
the Queen's presence-chamber, wherein I saw a throne of red gold,
inlaid with pearls and gems, and the Queen seated thereon. On her
head she wore a crown diademed with finest jewels, and round
about her were women like moons, seated upon chairs and clad in
the most sumptuous clothing of all colours. There also the
eunuchry, with their hands upon their breasts,[FN#507] were
standing in the attitude of service, and indeed this hall
confounded the beholder's wits with what was therein of quaint
gilding and rare painting and curious carving and fine furniture.
There hung the most brilliant lustres[FN#508] of limpid crystal,
and in every globe[FN#509] of the crystal was an unique jewel,
whose price money might not fulfil. So I threw down that which
was with me, O Prince of True Believers, and fell to taking of
these jewels what I could carry, bewildered as to what I should
bear away and what I should leave; for indeed I saw the place as
it were a treasure of the treasures of the cities. Presently I
espied a wicket[FN#510] standing open and within it a staircase:
so I entered and mounting forty steps, heard a human voice
reciting the Koran in a low tone. I walked towards that sound
till I came to the main door hung with a silken curtain, laced
with wires of gold whereon were strung pearls and coral and
rubies and cut emeralds which gave forth a light like the light
of stars. The voice came from behind the curtain: so I raised it
and discovered a gilded door, whose beauty amazed the mind. I
passed through the door and found myself in a saloon as it were a
hoard upon earth's surface[FN#511] and therein a girl as she were
the sun shining fullest sheen in the zenith of a sky serene. She
was robed in the costliest of raiment and decked with ornaments
the most precious that could be and withal she was of passing
beauty and loveliness, a model of symmetry and seemliness, of
elegance and perfect grace, with waist slender and hips heavy and
dewy lips such as heal the sick and eyelids lovely in their
languor, as it were she of whom the sayer spake when he said,

'My best salam to what that robe enrobes of symmetry, * And what
     that blooming garth of cheek enguards of rosy blee:
It seems as though the Pleiades depend upon her brow; * And other
     lights of Night in knots upon her breast we see:
Did she but don a garment weft of Rose's softest leaf, * The leaf
     of Rose would draw her blood[FN#512] when pluckt that fruit
     from tree:
And did she crache in Ocean's face, next Morn would see a change
     * To sweeter than the honeycomb of what was briny sea:
And did she deign her favours grant to grey-beard staff-enpropped
     * He'd wake and rend the lion's limbs for might and
     valiancy.'"

Then Abdullah continued, "O Prince of True Believers, as soon as
I saw that girl I fell passionately in love with her and going
straight up to her, found her seated on a high couch, reciting by
heart and in grateful memory the Book of Allah, to whom belong
honour and glory! Her voice was like the harmony of the gates of
Heaven, when Rizwan openeth them, and the words came from her
lips like a shower of gems; whilst her face was with beauty
dight, bright and blossom-white, even as saith the poet of a
similar sight,

'O thou who gladdenest man by speech and rarest quality; * Grow
     longing and repine for thee and grow beyond degree!
In thee two things consume and melt the votaries of Love; * The
     dulcet song of David joined with Joseph's brilliancy.'

When I heard her voice of melody reciting the sublime Koran, my
heart quoted from her killing glances, 'Peace, a word from a
compassionating Lord;'[FN#513] but I stammered[FN#514] in my
speech and could not say the salam-salutation aright, for my mind
and sight were confounded and I was become as saith the bard,

'Love-longing urged me not except to trip in speech o'er free; *
     Nor, save to shed my blood I passed the campment's boundary:
I ne'er will hear a word from those who love to rail, but I *
     Will testify to love of him with every word of me.'

Then I hardened myself against the horrors of repine and said to
her, 'Peace be with thee, O noble Lady, and treasured jewel!
Allah grant endurance to the foundation of thy fortune fair and
upraise the pillars of thy glory rare!' Said she, 'And on thee
from me be peace and salutation and high honour, O Abdullah, O
son of Fazil! Well come and welcome and fair welcome to thee, O
dearling mine and coolth of mine eyne!' Rejoined I, 'O my lady,
whence wottest thou my name and who art thou and what case befel
the people of this city, that they are become stones? I would
have thee tell me the truth of the matter, for indeed I am
admiring at this city and its citizens and that I have found none
alive therein save thyself. So, Allah upon thee, tell me the
cause of all this, according to the truth!' Quoth she, 'Sit, O
Abdullah, and Inshallah, I will talk with thee and acquaint thee
in full with the facts of my case and of this place and its
people; and there is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!' So I sat me down by her side and
she said to me, 'Know, O Abdullah, (may Allah have mercy on
thee!) that I am the daughter of the King of this city and that
it is my sire whom thou sawest seated on the high stead in the
Divan, and those who are round about him were the Lords of his
land and the Guards of his empery. He was a King of exceeding
prowess and had under his hand a thousand thousand and sixty
thousand troopers. The number of the Emirs of his Empire was
four-and-twenty thousand, all of them Governors and Dignitaries.
He was obeyed by a thousand cities, besides towns, hamlets and
villages; and sconces and citadels, and the Emirs[FN#515] of the
wild Arabs under his hand were a thousand in number, each
commanding twenty thousand horse. Moreover, he had monies and
treasures and precious stones and jewels and things of price,
such as eye never saw nor of which ear ever heard.'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Eight-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Princess, daughter to the King of the Stone-city, thus continued,
"Verily, O Abdullah my father had monies and hoards, such as eye
never saw and of which ear never heard. He used to debel Kings
and do to death champions and braves in battle and in the field
of fight, so that the Conquerors feared him and the
Chosroes[FN#516] humbled themselves to him. For all this, he was
a miscreant in creed ascribing to Allah partnership and adoring
idols, instead of the Lord of worship; and all his troops were of
images fain in lieu of the All-knowing Sovereign. One day of the
days as he sat on the throne of his Kingship, compassed about
with the Grandees of his realm, suddenly there came in to him a
Personage, whose face illumined the whole Divan with its light.
My father looked at him and saw him clad in a garb of
green,[FN#517] tall of stature and with hands that reached
beneath his knees. He was of reverend aspect and awesome and the
light[FN#518] shone from his face. Said he to my sire, 'O rebel,
O idolater, how long wilt thou take pride in worshipping idols
and abandoning the service of the All-knowing King? Say, 'I
testify that there is no god but the God and that Mohammed is His
servant and His messenger.' And embrace Al-Islam, thou and thy
tribe; and put away from you the worship of idols, for they
neither suffice man's need nor intercede. None is worshipful save
Allah alone, who raised up the heavens without columns and spread
out the earths like carpets in mercy to His creatures.'[FN#519]
Quoth my father, 'Who art thou, O man who rejectest the worship
of idols, that thou sayst thus? Fearest thou not that the idols
will be wroth with thee?' He replied, 'The idols are stones;
their anger cannot prejudice me nor their favour profit me. So do
thou set in my presence thine idol which thou adorest and bid all
thy folk bring each his image: and when they are all present, do
ye pray them to be wroth with me and I will pray my Lord to be
wroth with them, and ye shall descry the difference between the
anger of the creature and that of the Creator. For your idols, ye
fashioned them yourselves and the Satans clad themselves
therewith as with clothing, and they it is who spake to you from
within the bellies of the images,[FN#520] for your idols are made
and the maker is my God to whom naught is impossible. An the True
appear to you, do ye follow it, and if the False appear to you do
ye leave it.' Cried they, 'Give us a proof of thy god, that we
may see it;' and quoth he, 'Give me proof of your gods.' So the
King bade every one who worshipped his lord in image-form to
bring it, and all the armies brought their idols to the Divan.
Thus fared it with them; but as for me, I was sitting behind a
curtain, whence I could look upon my father's Divan, and I had an
idol of emeral