d whose bigness was as the bigness of a son of
Adam. My father demanded it, so I sent it to the Divan, where
they set it down beside that of my sire, which was of jacinth,
whilst the Wazir's idol was of diamond.[FN#521] As for those of
the Grandees and Notables, some were of balass-ruby and some of
carnelian, others of coral or Comorin aloes-wood and yet others
of ebony or silver or gold; and each had his own idol, after the
measure of his competence; whilst the idols of the common
soldiers and of the people were some of granite, some of wood,
some of pottery and some of mud; and all were of various hues
yellow and red; green, black and white. Then said the Personage
to my sire, 'Pray your idol and these idols to be wroth with me.'
So they aligned the idols in a Divan,[FN#522] setting my father's
idol on a chair of gold at the upper end, with mine by its side,
and ranking the others each according to the condition of him who
owned it and worshipped it. Then my father arose and prostrating
himself to his own idol, said to it, 'O my god, thou art the
Bountiful Lord, nor is there among the idols a greater than
thyself. Thou knowest that this person cometh to me, attacking
thy divinity and making mock of thee; yea, he avoucheth that he
hath a god stronger than thou and ordereth us leave adoring thee
and adore his god. So be thou wrath with him, O my god!' And he
went on to supplicate the idol; but the idol returned him no
reply neither bespoke him with aught of speech; whereupon quoth
he, 'O my god, this is not of thy wont, for thou usedst to answer
me, when I addressed thee. How cometh it that I see thee silent
and speaking not? Art thou unheeding or asleep?[FN#523] Awake;
succour me and speak to me!' And he shook it with his hand; but
it spake not neither stirred from its stead. Thereupon quoth the
Personage, 'What aileth thine idol that it speaketh not?'; and
quoth the King, 'Methinks he is absent-minded or asleep.'
Exclaimed the other, 'O enemy of Allah, how canst thou worship a
god that speaketh not nor availeth unto aught and not worship my
God, who to prayers deigns assent and who is ever present and
never absent, neither unheeding nor sleeping, whom conjecture may
not ween, who seeth and is not seen and who over all things
terrene is omnipotent? Thy god is powerless and cannot guard
itself from harm; and indeed a stoned Satan had clothed himself
therewith as with a coat that he might debauch thee and delude
thee. But now hath its devil departed; so do thou worship Allah
and testify that there is no god but He and that none is
worshipful nor worshipworth but Himself; neither is there any
good but His good. As for this thy god, it cannot ward off hurt
from it; so how shall it ward off harm from thee? See with thine
own eyes its impotence.' So saying, he went up to the idol and
dealt it a cuff on the neck, that it fell to the ground;
whereupon the King waxed wroth and cried to the bystanders, 'This
froward atheist hath smitten my god. Slay him!' So they would
have arisen to smite him, but none of them could stir from his
place. Then he propounded to them Al-Islam; but they refused to
become Moslems and he said, 'I will show you the wroth of my
Lord.' Quoth they, 'Let us see it!' So he spread out his hands
and said, 'O my God and my Lord, Thou art my stay and my hope;
answer Thou my prayer against these lewd folk, who eat of Thy
good and worship other gods. O Thou the Truth, O Thou of All-
might, O Creator of Day and Night, I beseech Thee to turn these
people into stones, for Thou art the Puissant nor is aught
impossible to Thee, and Thou over all things are omnipotent!' And
Allah transformed the people of this city into stones; but, as
for me, when I saw the manifest proof of His deity, I submitted
myself to Him and was saved from that which befel the rest. Then
the Personage drew near me and said 'Felicity[FN#524] was fore-
ordained of Allah to thee and in this a purpose had He.' And he
went on to instruct me and I took unto him the oath and
covenant.[FN#525] I was then seven years of age and am now thirty
years old. Then said I to him, 'O my lord, all that is in the
city and all its citizens are become stones by thine effectual
prayer, and I am saved, for that I embraced Al-Islam at thy
hands. Wherefore thou art become my Shaykh; so do thou tell me
thy name and succour me with thy security and provide me with
provision whereon I may subsist.' Quoth he, 'My name is Abu al-
'Abbas al-Khizr'; and he planted me a pomegranate-tree, which
forthright grew up and foliaged, flowered and fruited, and bare
one pomegranate; whereupon quoth he, 'Eat of that wherewith Allah
the Almighty provideth thee and worship Him with the worship
which is His due.' Then he taught me the tenets of Al-Islam and
the canons of prayer and the way of worship, together with the
recital of the Koran, and I have now worshipped Allah in this
place three-and-twenty years. Each day the tree yieldeth me a
pomegranate which I eat and it sustaineth me from tide to tide;
and every Friday, Al-Khizr (on whom be peace!) cometh to me and
'tis he who acquainted me with thy name and gave me the glad
tidings of thy soon coming hither, saying to me, 'When he shall
come to thee, entreat him with honour and obey his bidding and
gainsay him not; but be thou to him wife and he shall be to thee
man, and wend with him whitherso he will.' So, when I saw thee, I
knew thee and such is the story of this city and of its people,
and the Peace!'"--"Then she showed me the pomegranate-tree,
whereon was one granado, which she took and eating one-half
thereof herself, gave me the other to eat, and never did I taste
aught sweeter or more savoury or more satisfying than that
pomegranate. After this, I said to her, 'Art thou content, even
as the Shaykh Al-Khizr charged thee, to be my wife and take me to
mate; and art thou ready to go with me to my own country and
abide with me in the city of Bassorah?' She replied, 'Yes,
Inshallah: an it please Almighty Allah. I hearken to thy word and
obey thy hest without gainsaying.' Then I made a binding covenant
with her and she carried me into her father's treasury, whence we
took what we could carry and going forth that city, walked on
till we came to my brothers, whom I found searching for me. They
asked, 'Where hast thou been? Indeed thou hast tarried long from
us, and our hearts were troubled for thee.' And the captain of
the ship said to me, 'O merchant Abdullah, the wind hath been
fair for us this great while, and thou hast hindered us from
setting sail.' And I answered, 'There is no harm in that;
ofttimes slow[FN#526] is sure and my absence hath wrought us
naught but advantage, for indeed, there hath betided me therein
the attainment of our hopes and God-gifted is he who said,

'I weet not, whenas to a land I fare * In quest of good, what I
     shall there obtain;
Or gain I fare with sole desire to seek; * Or loss that seeketh
     me when seek I gain.'

Then said I to them, 'See what hath fallen to me in this mine
absence;' and displayed to them all that was with me of treasures
and told them what I had beheld in the City of Stone, adding,
'Had ye hearkened to me and gone with me, ye had gotten of these
things great gain.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Abdullah bin Fazil said to his shipmates and to his two brothers,
"Had ye gone with me, ye had gotten of these things great gain."
But they said, "By Allah, had we gone, we had not dared to go in
to the King of the city!"--"Then I said to my brothers, 'No harm
shall befal you; for that which I have will suffice us all and
this is our lot.'[FN#527] So I divided my booty into four parts
according to our number and gave one to each of my brothers and
to the Captain, taking the fourth for myself, setting aside
somewhat for the servants and sailors, who rejoiced and blessed
me: and all were content with what I gave them, save my brothers
who changed countenance and rolled their eyes. I perceived that
lust of lucre had gotten hold of them both; so I said to them, 'O
my brothers, methinketh what I have given you doth not satisfy
you; but we are brothers and there is no difference between us.
My good and yours are one and the same thing, and if I die none
will inherit of me but you.' And I went on to soothe them. Then I
bore the Princess on board the galleon and lodged her in the
cabin, where I sent her somewhat to eat and we sat talking, I and
my brothers. Said they, 'O our brother, what wilt thou do with
that damsel of surpassing beauty?' And I replied, 'I mean to
contract marriage with her, as soon as I reach Bassorah and make
a splendid wedding and go in to her there.' Exclaimed one of
them, 'O my brother, verily, this young lady excelleth in beauty
and loveliness and the love of her is fallen on my heart;
wherefore I desire that thou give her to me and I will espouse
her.' And the other cried, 'I too desire this: give her to me,
that I may espouse her.' 'O my brothers,' answered I, 'indeed she
took of me an oath and a covenant that I would marry her myself;
so, if I give her to one of you, I shall be false to my oath and
to the covenant between me and her, and haply she will be broken-
hearted, for she came not with me but on condition that I marry
her. So how can I wed her to other than myself? As for your both
loving her, I love her more than you twain, for she is my
treasure-trove, and as for my giving her to one of you, that is a
thing which may not be. But, if we reach Bassorah in safety, I
will look you out two girls of the best of the damsels of
Bassorah and demand them for you in marriage and pay the dower of
my own monies and make one wedding and we will all three go into
our brides on the same night. But leave ye this damsel, for she
is of my portion.' They held their peace, and I thought they were
content with that which I had said. Then we fared onwards for
Bassorah, and every day I sent her meat and drink; but she came
not forth of the cabin, whilst I slept between my brothers on
deck. We sailed thus forty days, till we sighted Bassorah city
and rejoiced that we were come near it. Now I trusted in my
brothers and was at my ease with them, for none knoweth the
hidden future save Allah the Most High; so I lay down to sleep
that night; but, as I abode drowned in slumber, I suddenly found
myself caught up by these my brothers, one seizing me by the legs
and the other by the arms, for they had taken counsel together to
drown me in the sea for the sake of the damsel. When I saw myself
in their hands, I said to them, 'O my brothers, why do ye this
with me?' And they replied, 'Ill-bred that thou art, wilt thou
barter our affection for a girl?; we will cast thee into the sea,
because of this.' So saying, they threw me overboard." (Here
Abdullah turned to the dogs and said to them, "Is this that I
have said true O my brothers or not?"; and they bowed their heads
and fell a-whining, as if confirming his speech; whereat the
Caliph wondered). Then Abdullah resumed, "O Commander of the
Faithful, when they threw me into the sea, I sank to the bottom;
but the water bore me up again to the surface, and before I could
think, behold a great bird, the bigness of a man, swooped down
upon me and snatching me up, flew up with me into upper air. I
fainted and when I opened my eyes, I found myself in a strong-
pillared place, a high-builded palace, adorned with magnificent
paintings and pendants of gems of all shapes and hues. Therein
were damsels standing with their hands crossed over their breasts
and, behold in their midst was a lady seated on a throne of red
gold, set with pearls and gems, and clad in apparel whereon no
mortal might open his eyes, for the lustre of the jewels
wherewith they were decked. About her waist she wore a girdle of
jewels no money could pay their worth and on her head a three-
fold tiara dazing thought and wit and dazzling heart and sight.
Then the bird which had carried me thither shook and became a
young lady bright as sun raying light. I fixed my eyes on her and
behold, it was she whom I had seen, in snake form on the mountain
and had rescued from the dragon which had wound his tail around
her. Then said to her the lady who sat upon the throne, 'Why hast
thou brought hither this mortal?'; and she replied, 'O my mother,
this is he who was the means of veiling my honour[FN#528] among
the maidens of the Jinn.' Then quoth she to me, 'Knowest thou who
I am?'; and quoth I, 'No.' Said she, 'I am she who was on such a
mountain, where the black dragon strave with me and would have
forced my honour, but thou slewest him.' And I said, 'I saw but a
white snake with the dragon.' She rejoined, "Tis I who was the
white snake; but I am the daughter of the Red King, Sovran of the
Jann and my name is Sa'idah.[FN#529] She who sitteth there is my
mother and her name is Mubarakah, wife of the Red King. The black
dragon who attacked me and would have done away my honour was
Wazir to the Black King, Darfil by name, and he was foul of
favour. It chanced that he saw me and fell in love with me; so he
sought me in marriage of my sire, who sent to him to say, 'Who
art thou, O scum of Wazirs, that thou shouldst wed with Kings'
daughters?' Whereupon he was wroth and sware an oath that he
would assuredly do away my honour, to spite my father. Then he
fell to tracking my steps and following me whithersoever I went,
designing to ravish me; wherefore there befel between him and my
parent mighty fierce wars and bloody jars, but my sire could not
prevail against him, for that he was fierce as fraudful and as
often as my father pressed hard upon him and seemed like to
conquer he would escape from him, till my sire was at his wits'
end. Every day I was forced to take new form and hue; for, as
often as I assumed a shape, he would assume its contrary, and to
whatsoever land I fled he would snuff my fragrance and follow me
thither, so that I suffered sore affliction of him. At last I
took the form of a snake and betook myself to the mountain where
thou sawest me; whereupon he changed himself to a dragon and
pursued me, till I fell into his hands, when he strove with me
and I struggled with him, till he wearied me and mounted me,
meaning to have his lustful will of me; but thou camest and smote
him with the stone and slewest him. Then I returned to my own
shape and showed myself to thee, saying, 'I am indebted to thee
for a service such as is not lost save with the son of
adultery.'[FN#530] So, when I saw thy brothers do with thee this
treachery and throw thee into the sea, I hastened to thee and
saved thee from destruction, and now honour is due to thee from
my mother and my father.' Then she said to the Queen, 'O my
mother, do thou honour him as deserveth he who saved my virtue.'
So the Queen said to me, 'Welcome, O mortal! Indeed thou hast
done us a kindly deed which meriteth honour.' Presently she
ordered me a treasure-suit,[FN#531] worth a mint of money, and
store of gems and precious stones, and said, 'Take him and carry
him in to the King.' Accordingly, they carried me into the King
in his Divan, where I found him seated on his throne, with his
Marids and guards before him; and when I saw him my sight was
blent for that which was upon him of jewels; but when he saw me,
he rose to his feet and all his officers rose also, to do him
worship. Then he saluted me and welcomed me and entreated me with
the utmost honour, and gave me of that which was with him of good
things; after which he said to some of his followers, 'Take him
and carry him back to my daughter, that she may restore him to
the place whence she brought him.' So they carried me back to the
Lady Sa'idah, who took me up and flew away with me and my
treasures. On this wise fared it with me and the Princess; but as
regards the Captain of the galleon, he was aroused by the splash
of my fall, when my brothers cast me into the sea, and said,
'What is that which hath fallen overboard?' Whereupon my brothers
fell to weeping and beating of breasts and replied, 'Alas, for
our brother's loss! He thought to do his need over the ship's
side[FN#532] and fell into the water!' Then they laid their hands
on my good, but there befel dispute between them because of the
damsel, each saying, 'None shall have her but I.' And they abode
jangling and wrangling each with other and remembered not their
brother nor his drowning and their mourning for him ceased. As
they were thus, behold Sa'idah alighted with me in the midst of
the galleon,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah
bin Fazil continued, "As they were thus, behold, Sa'idah alighted
with me in the midst of the galleon and when my brothers saw me,
they embraced me and rejoiced in me, saying, 'O our brother, how
hast thou fared in that which befel thee? Indeed our hearts have
been occupied with thee.' Quoth Sa'idah, 'Had ye any heart-
yearnings for him or had ye loved him, ye had not cast him into
the sea; but choose ye now what death ye will die.' Then she
seized on them and would have slain them; but they cried out,
saying, 'In thy safeguard, O our brother!' Thereupon I interceded
and said to her, 'I claim of thine honour not to kill my
brothers.' Quoth she, 'There is no help but that I slay them, for
they are traitors.' But I ceased not to speak her fair and
conciliate her till she said, 'To content thee, I will not kill
them, but I will enchant them.' So saying, she brought out a cup
and filling it with sea-water, pronounced over it words that
might not be understood; then saying, 'Quit this human shape for
the shape of a dog;' she sprinkled them with the water, and
immediately they were transmewed into dogs, as thou seest them, O
Vicar of Allah." Whereupon he turned to the dogs and said to
them, "Have I spoken the truth, O my brothers?" And they bowed
their heads, as they would say, "Thou hast spoken sooth." At this
he continued, "Then she said to those who were in the galleon,
'Know ye that Abdullah bin Fazil here present is become my
brother and I shall visit him once or twice every day: so, whoso
of you crosseth him or gainsayeth his bidding or doth him hurt
with hand or tongue, I will do with him even as I have done with
these two traitors and bespell him to a dog, and he shall end his
days in that form, nor shall he find deliverance.' And they all
said to her, 'O our lady, we are his slaves and his servants
every one of us and will not disobey him in aught.' Moreover, she
said to me, 'When thou comest to Bassorah, examine all thy
property and if there lack aught thereof, tell me and I will
bring it to thee, in whose hands and in what place soever it may
be, and will change him who took it into a dog. When thou hast
magazined thy goods, clap a collar[FN#533] of wood on the neck of
each of these two traitors and tie them to the leg of a couch and
shut them up by themselves. Moreover, every night, at midnight,
do thou go down to them and beat each of them a bout till he
swoon away; and if thou suffer a single night to pass without
beating them, I will come to thee and drub thee a sound drubbing,
after which I will drub them.' And I answered, 'To hear is to
obey.' Then said she, 'Tie them up with ropes till thou come to
Bassorah.' So I tied a rope about each dog's neck and lashed them
to the mast, and she went her way. On the morrow we entered
Bassorah and the merchants came out to meet me and saluted me,
and no one of them enquired of my brothers. But they looked at
the dogs and said to me, 'Ho, such and such,[FN#534] what wilt
thou do with these two dogs thou hast brought with thee?' Quoth
I, 'I reared them on this voyage and have brought them home with
me.' And they laughed at them, knowing not that they were my
brothers. When I reached my house, I put the twain in a closet
and busied myself all that night with the unpacking and
disposition of the bales of stuffs and jewels. Moreover, the
merchants were with me being minded to offer me the salam;
wherefore I was occupied with them and forgot to beat the dogs or
chain them up. Then without doing them aught of hurt, I lay down
to sleep, but suddenly and unexpectedly there came to me the Red
King's daughter Sa'idah and said to me, 'Did I not bid thee clap
chains on their necks and give each of them a bout of beating?'
So saying, she seized me and pulling out a whip, flogged me till
I fainted away, after which she went to the place where my
brothers were and with the same scourge beat them both till they
came nigh upon death. Then said she to me, 'Beat each of them a
like bout every night, and if thou let a night pass without doing
this, I will beat thee;' and I replied, 'O my lady, to-morrow I
will put chains on their necks, and next night I will beat them
nor will I leave them one night unbeaten.' And she charged me
strictly to beat them and disappeared. When the morning morrowed
it being no light matter for me to put fetters of iron on their
necks, I went to a goldsmith and bade him make them collars and
chains of gold. He did this and I put the collars on their necks
and chained them up, as she bade me; and next night I beat them
both in mine own despite. This befel in the Caliphate of Al-
Mahdi,[FN#535] third of the sons of Al-Abbas, and I commended
myself to him by sending him presents, so he invested me with the
government and made me viceroy of Bassorah. On this wise I abode
some time and after a while I said to myself, 'Haply her wrath is
grown cool;' and left them a night unbeaten, whereupon she came
to me and beat me a bout whose burning I shall never forget long
as I live. So, from that time to this, I have never left them a
single night unbeaten during the reign of Al-Mahdi; and when he
deceased and thou camest to the succession, thou sentest to me,
confirming me in the government of Bassorah. These twelve years
past have I beaten them every night, in mine own despite, and
after I have beaten them, I excuse myself to them and comfort
them and give them to eat and drink; and they have remained shut
up, nor did any of the creatures of Allah know of them, till thou
sentest to me Abu Ishak the boon-companion, on account of the
tribute, and he discovered my secret and returning to thee,
acquainted thee therewith. Then thou sentest him back to fetch me
and them; so I answered with 'Hearkening and obedience,' and
brought them before thee, whereupon thou questionedst me and I
told thee the truth of the case; and this is my history." The
Caliph marvelled at the case of the two dogs and said to
Abdullah, "Hast thou at this present forgiven thy two brothers
the wrong they did thee, yea or nay?" He replied, "O my lord, may
Allah forgive them and acquit them of responsibility in this
world and the next! Indeed, 'tis I who stand in need of their
forgiveness, for that these twelve years past I have beaten them
a grievous bout every night!" Rejoined the Caliph, "O Abdullah,
Inshallah, I will endeavour for their release and that they may
become men again, as they were before, and I will make peace
between thee and them; so shall you live the rest of your lives
as brothers loving one another; and like as thou hast forgiven
them, so shall they forgive thee. But now take them and go down
with them to thy lodging and this night beat them not, and to-
morrow there shall be naught save weal." Quoth Abdullah, "O my
lord, as thy head liveth, if I leave them one night unbeaten,
Sa'idah will come to me and beat me, and I have no body to brook
beating." Quoth the Caliph, "Fear not, for I will give thee a
writing under my hand.[FN#536] An she come to thee, do thou give
her the paper and if, when she has read it, she spare thee, the
favour will be hers; but, if she obey not my bidding, commit thy
business to Allah and let her beat thee a bout and suppose that
thou hast forgotten to beat them for one night and that she
beateth thee because of that: and if it fall out thus and she
thwart me, as sure as I am Commander of the Faithful, I will be
even with her." Then he wrote her a letter on a piece of paper,
two fingers broad, and sealing it with his signet-ring, gave it
to Abdullah, saying, "O Abdullah, if Sa'idah come, say to her,
'The Caliph, King of mankind, hath commanded me to leave beating
them and hath written me this letter for thee; and he saluteth
thee with the salam.' Then give her the warrant and fear no
harm." After which he exacted of him an oath and a solemn pledge
that he would not beat them. So Abdullah took the dogs and
carried them to his lodging, saying to himself, "I wonder what
the Caliph will do with the daughter of the Sovran of the Jinn,
if she cross him and trounce me to-night! But I will bear with a
bout of beating for once and leave my brothers at rest this
night, though for their sake I suffer torture." Then he bethought
himself awhile, and his reason said to him, "Did not the Caliph
rely on some great support, he had never forbidden me from
beating them." So he entered his lodging and doffed the collars
from the dogs' necks, saying, "I put my trust in Allah," and fell
to comforting them and saying, "No harm shall befal you; for the
Caliph, fifth[FN#537] of the sons of Al-Abbas, hath pledged
himself for your deliverance and I have forgiven you. An it
please Allah the Most High, the time is come and ye shall be
delivered this blessed night; so rejoice ye in the prospect of
peace and gladness." when they heard these words, they fell to
whining with the whining of dogs,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,
                                
She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah
bin Fazil said to his brothers, "Rejoice ye in the prospect of
comfort and gladness." And when they heard his words they fell to
whining with the whining of dogs, and rubbed their jowls against
his feet, as if blessing him and humbling themselves before him.
He mourned over them and took to stroking their backs till supper
time; and when they set on the trays he bade the dogs sit. So
they sat down and ate with him from the tray, whilst his officers
stood gaping and marvelling at his eating with dogs and all said,
"Is he mad or are his wits gone wrong? How can the Viceroy of
Bassorah city, he who is greater than a Wazir, eat with dogs?
Knoweth he not that the dog is unclean?[FN#538]" And they stared
at the dogs, as they ate with him as servants eat with their
lords,[FN#539] knowing not that they were his brothers; nor did
they cease staring at them, till they had made an end of eating,
when Abdullah washed his hands and the dogs also put out their
paws and washed; whereupon all who were present began to laugh at
them and to marvel, saying, one to other, "Never in our lives saw
we dogs eat and wash their paws after eating!" Then the dogs sat
down on the divans beside Abdullah, nor dared any ask him of
this; and thus the case lasted till midnight, when he dismissed
the attendants and lay down to sleep and the dogs with him, each
on a couch; whereupon the servants said one to other, "Verily, he
hath lain down to sleep and the two dogs are lying with him."
Quoth another, "Since he hath eaten with the dogs from the same
tray, there is no harm in their sleeping with him; and this is
naught save the fashion of madmen." Moreover, they ate not
anything of the food which remained in the tray, saying, "'Tis
unclean." Such was their case; but as for Abdullah, ere he could
think, the earth clave asunder and out rose Sa'idah, who said to
him, "O Abdullah, why hast thou not beaten them this night and
why hast thou undone the collars from their necks? Hast thou
acted on this wise perversely and in mockery of my commandment?
But I will at once beat thee and spell thee into a dog like
them." He replied, "O my lady, I conjure thee by the graving upon
the seal-ring of Solomon David-son (on the twain be peace!) have
patience with me till I tell thee my cause and after do with me
what thou wilt." Quoth she, "Say on," and quoth he, "The reason
of my not punishing them is only this. The King of mankind, the
Commander of the Faithful, the Caliph Harun al-Rashid, ordered me
not to beat them this night and took of me oaths and covenants to
that effect; and he saluteth thee with the salam and hath
committed to me a mandate under his own hand, which he bade me
give thee. So I obeyed his order for to obey the Commander of the
Faithful is obligatory; and here is the mandate. Take it and read
it and after work thy will." She replied "Hither with it!" So he
gave her the letter and she opened it and read as follows, "In
the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate! From
the King of mankind, Harun al-Rashid, to the daughter of the Red
King, Sa'idah! But, after. Verily, this man hath forgiven his
brothers and hath waived his claim against them, and we have
enjoined them to reconciliation. Now, when reconciliation ruleth,
retribution is remitted, and if you of the Jinn contradict us in
our commandments, we will contrary you in yours and traverse your
ordinances; but, an ye obey our bidding and further our orders,
we will indeed do the like with yours. Wherefore I bid thee hurt
them no hurt, and if thou believe in Allah and in His Apostle, it
behoveth thee to obey and us to command.[FN#540] So an thou spare
them, I will requite thee with that whereto my Lord shall enable
me; and the token of obedience is that thou remove thine
enchantment from these two men, so they may come before me to-
morrow, free. But an thou release them not, I will release them
in thy despite, by the aid of Almighty Allah." When she had read
the letter, she said, "O Abdullah, I will do nought till I go to
my sire and show him the mandate of the monarch of mankind and
return to thee with the answer in haste." So saying, she signed
with her hand to the earth, which clave open and she disappeared
therein, whilst Abdullah's heart was like to fly for joy and he
said, "Allah advance the Commander of the Faithful!" As for
Sa'idah, she went in to her father; and, acquainting him with
that which had passed, gave him the Caliph's letter, which he
kissed and laid on his head. Then he read it and understanding
its contents said, "O my daughter, verily, the ordinance of the
monarch of mankind obligeth us and his commandments are effectual
over us, nor can we disobey him: so go thou and release the two
men forth-with and say to them, 'Ye are freed by the intercession
of the monarch of mankind.' For, should he be wroth with us, he
would destroy us to the last of us; so do not thou impose on us
that which we are unable." Quoth she "O my father, if the monarch
of mankind were wroth with us, what could he do with us?"; and
quoth her sire, "He hath power over us for several reasons. In
the first place, he is a man and hath thus pre-eminence over
us[FN#541]; secondly he is the Vicar of Allah; and thirdly, he is
constant in praying the dawn-prayer of two bows[FN#542];
therefore were all the tribes of the Jinn assembled together
against him from the Seven Worlds they could do him no hurt. But
he, should he be wroth with us would pray the dawn-prayer of two
bows and cry out upon us one cry, when we should all present
ourselves before him obediently and be before him as sheep before
the butcher. If he would, he could command us to quit our
abiding-places for a desert country wherein we might not endure
to sojourn; and if he desired to destroy us, he would bid us
destroy ourselves, whereupon we should destroy one another.
wherefore we may not disobey his bidding for, if we did this, he
would consume us with fire nor could we flee from before him to
any asylum. Thus is it with every True Believer who is persistent
in praying the dawn-prayer of two bows; his commandment is
effectual over us: so be not thou the means of our destruction,
because of two mortals, but go forthright and release them, ere
the anger of the Commander of the Faithful fall upon us." So she
returned to Abdullah and acquainted him with her father's words,
saying, "Kiss for us the hands of the Prince of True Believers
and seek his approval for us." Then she brought out the tasse and
filling it with water, conjured over it and uttered words which
might not be understood; after which she sprinkled the dogs with
the water saying, "Quit the form of dogs and return to the shape
of men!" Whereupon they became men as before and the spell of the
enchantment was loosed from them. Quoth they, "I testify that
there is no god but the God and I testify that Mohammed is the
Apostle of God!" Then they fell on their brother's feet and
hands, kissing them and beseeching his forgiveness: but he said,
"Do ye forgive me;" and they both repented with sincere
repentance, saying, "Verily, the damned Devil lured us and
covetise deluded us: but our Lord hath requited us after our
deserts, and forgiveness is of the signs of the noble." And they
went on to supplicate their brother and weep and profess
repentance for that which had befallen him from them[FN#543].
Then quoth he to them, "What did ye with my wife whom I brought
from the City of Stone?" Quoth they, "When Satan tempted us and
we cast thee into the sea, there arose strife between us, each
saying, I will have her to wife. Now when she heard these words
and beheld our contention, she knew that we had thrown thee into
the sea; so she came up from the cabin and said to us, 'Contend
not because of me, for I will not belong to either of you. My
husband is gone into the sea and I will follow him.' So saying,
she cast herself overboard and died." Exclaimed Abdullah, "In
very sooth she died a martyr[FN#544]! But there is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" Then
he wept for her with sore weeping and said to his brothers, "It
was not well of you to do this deed and bereave me of my wife."
They answered, "Indeed, we have sinned, but our Lord hath
requited us our misdeed and this was a thing which Allah decreed
unto us, ere He created us." And he accepted their excuse; but
Sa'idah said to him, "Have they done all these things to thee and
wilt thou forgive them?" He replied, "O my sister, whoso hath
power[FN#545] and spareth, for Allah's reward he prepareth." Then
said she, "Be on thy guard against them, for they are traitors;"
and fare-welled him and fared forth.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abdullah,
when Sa'idah warned him and blessed him and went her ways, passed
the rest of the night with his brothers and on the morrow, he
sent them to the Hammam and clad each of them, on his coming
forth, in a suit worth a hoard of money. Then he called for the
tray of food and they set it before him and he ate, he and his
brothers. When his attendants saw the twain and knew them for his
brothers they saluted them and said to him, "O our lord, Allah
give thee joy of thy reunion with thy dear brothers! Where have
they been this while?" He replied, "It was they whom ye saw in
the guise of dogs; praise be to Allah who hath delivered them
from prison and grievous torment!" Then he carried them to the
Divan of the Caliph and kissing ground before Al-Rashid wished
him continuance of honour and fortune and surcease of evil and
enmity. Quoth the Caliph, "Welcome, O Emir Abdullah! Tell me what
hath befallen thee." And quoth he, "O Commander of the Faithful
(whose power Allah increase!) when I carried my brothers home to
my lodging, my heart was at rest concerning them, because thou
hadst pledged thyself to their release and I said in myself,
'Kings fail not to attain aught for which they strain, inasmuch
as the divine favour aideth them.' So I took off the collars from
their necks, putting my trust in Allah, and ate with them from
the same tray, which when my suite saw, they made light of my wit
and said each to other, 'He is surely mad! How can the governor
of Bassorah who is greater than the Wazir, eat with dogs?' Then
they threw away what was in the tray, saying, 'We will not eat
the dogs' orts.' And they went on to befool my reason, whilst I
heard their words, but returned them no reply because of their
unknowing that the dogs were my brothers. When the hour of sleep
came, I sent them away and addressed myself to sleep; but, ere I
was ware, the earth clave in sunder and out came Sa'idah, the Red
King's daughter, enraged against me, with eyes like fire." And he
went on to relate to the Caliph all what had passed between him
and her and her father and how she had transmewed his brothers
from canine to human form, adding, "And here they are before
thee, O Commander of the Faithful!" The Caliph looked at them and
seeing two young men like moons, said, "Allah requite thee for me
with good, O Abdullah, for that thou hast acquainted me with an
advantage[FN#546] I knew not! Henceforth, Inshallah, I will never
leave to pray these two-bow orisons before the breaking of the
dawn, what while I live." Then he reproved Abdullah's brothers
for their past transgressions against him and they excused
themselves before the Caliph, who said, "Join hands[FN#547] and
forgive one another and Allah pardon what is past!" Upon which he
turned to Abdullah and said to him, "O Abdullah, make thy
brothers thine assistants and be careful of them." Then he
charged them to be obedient to their brother and bade them return
to Bassorah after he had bestowed on them abundant largesse. So
they went down from the Caliph's Divan whilst he rejoiced in this
advantage he had obtained by the action aforesaid, to wit,
persistence in praying two inclinations before dawn, and
exclaimed, "He spake truth who said, 'The misfortune of one tribe
fortuneth another tribe.'"[FN#548] On this wise befel it to them
from the Caliph; but as regards Abdullah, he left Baghdad
carrying with him his brothers in all honour and dignity and
increase of quality, and fared on till they drew near Bassorah,
when the notables and chief men of the place came out to meet
them and after decorating the city brought them thereinto with a
procession which had not its match and all the folk shouted out
blessings on Abdullah as he scattered amongst them silver and
gold. None, however, took heed to his brothers; wherefore
jealousy and envy entered their hearts, for all he entreated them
tenderly as one tenders an ophthalmic eye; but the more he
cherished them, the more they redoubled in hatred and envy of
him: and indeed it is said on the subject,

"I'd win good will of every one, but whoso envies me * Will not
     be won on any wise and makes mine office hard:
How gain the gree of envious wight who coveteth my good, * When
     naught will satisfy him save to see my good go marr'd?"

Then he gave each a concubine that had not her like, and eunuchs
and servants and slaves white and black, of each kind forty. He
also gave each of them fifty steeds all thoroughbreds and they
got them guards and followers; and he assigned to them revenues
and appointed them solde and stipends and made them his
assistants, saying to them, "O my brothers, I and you are equal
and there is no distinction between me and you twain,"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Abdullah assigned stipends to his brothers and made them his
assistants, saying, "O my brothers, I and you are equal and there
is no distinction between me and you twain, and after Allah and
the Caliph, the commandment is mine and yours. So rule you at
Bassorah in my absence and in my presence, and your commandments
shall be effectual; but look that ye fear Allah in your
ordinances and beware of oppression, which if it endure
depopulateth; and apply yourselves to justice, for justice, if it
be prolonged, peopleth a land. Oppress not the True Believers, or
they will curse you and ill report of you will reach the Caliph,
wherefore dishonour will betide both me and you. Go not therefore
about to violence any, but whatso ye greed for of the goods of
the folk, take it from my goods, over and above that whereof ye
have need; for 'tis not unknown to you what is handed down in the
Koran of prohibition versets on the subject of oppression and
Allah-gifted is he who said these couplets,

'Oppression ambusheth in sprite of man * Whom naught withholdeth
     save the lack of might:
The sage shall ne'er apply his wits to aught * Until befitting
     time direct his sight:
The tongue of wisdom woneth in the heart; * And in his mouth the
     tongue of foolish wight.
Who at occasion's call lacks power to rise * Is slain by feeblest
     who would glut his spite.
A man may hide his blood and breed, but aye * His deeds on
     darkest hiddens cast a light.
Wights of ill strain with ancestry as vile * Have lips which
     never spake one word aright:
And who committeth case to hands of fool * In folly proveth self
     as fond and light;
And who his secret tells to folk at large * Shall rouse his foes
     to work him worst despight.
Suffice the generous what regards his lot * Nor meddles he with
     aught regards him not'" 

And he went on to admonish his brothers and bid them to equity
and forbid them from tyranny, doubting not but they would love
him the better for his boon of good counsel[FN#549] and he relied
upon them and honoured them with the utmost honour; but
notwithstanding all his generosity to them, they only waxed in
envy and hatred of him, till, one day, the two being together
alone, quoth Nasir to Mansur, "O my brother, how long shall we be
mere subjects of our brother Abdullah, and he in this estate of
lordship and worship? After being a merchant, he is become an
Emir, and from being little, he is grown great: but we, we grow
not great nor is there aught of respect or degree left us; for,
behold, he laugheth at us and maketh us his assistants! What is
the meaning of this? Is it not that we are his servants and under
his subjection? But, long as he abideth in good case, our rank
will never be raised nor shall we be aught of repute; wherefore
we shall not fulfil our wish, except we slay him and win to his
wealth, nor will it be possible to get his gear save after his
death. So, when we have slain him, we shall become lords and will
take all that is in his treasuries of gems and things of price
and divide them between us. Then will we send the Caliph a
present and demand of him the government of Cufah, and thou shalt
be governor of Cufah and I of Bassorah. Thus each of us shall
have formal estate and condition, but we shall never effect this,
except we put him out of the world!" Answered Mansur, "Thou
sayest sooth, but how shall we do to kill him?" Quoth Nasir, "We
will make an entertainment in the house of one of us and invite
him thereto and serve him with the uttermost service. Then will
we sit through the night with him in talk and tell him tales and
jests and rare stories till his heart melteth with sitting up
when we will spread him a bed, that he may lie down to sleep.
When he is asleep, we will kneel upon him and throttle him and
throw him into the river; and on the morrow, we will say, 'His
sister the Jinniyah came to him, as he sat chatting with us, and
said to him, 'O thou scum of mankind, who art thou that thou
shouldst complain of me to the Commander of the Faithful? Deemest
thou that we dread him? As he is a King, so we too are Kings, and
if he mend not his manners in our regard we will do him die by
the foulest of deaths. But meantime I will slay thee, that we may
see what the hand of the Prince of True Believers availeth to
do.' So saying, she caught him up and clave the earth and
disappeared with him which when we saw, we swooned away. Then we
revived and we reck not what is become of him.' And saying this
we will send to the Caliph and tell him the case and he will
invest us with the government in his room. After awhile, we will
send him a sumptuous present and seek of him the government of
Cufah, and one of us shall abide in Bassorah and the other in
Cufah. So shall the land be pleasant to us and we will be down
upon the True Believers and win our wishes." And quoth Mansur,
"Thou counsellest well, O my brother," and they agreed upon the
murther. So Nasir made an entertainment and said to Abdullah, "O
my brother, verily I am thy brother, and I would have thee
hearten my heart thou and my brother Mansur and eat of my banquet
in my house, so I may boast of thee and that it may be said, The
Emir Abdullah hath eaten of his brother Nasir's guest meal; when
my heart will be solaced by this best of boons." Abdullah
replied, "So be it, O my brother; there is no distinction between
me and thee and thy house is my house; but since thou invitest
me, none refuseth hospitality save the churl." Then he turned to
Mansur and said to him, "Wilt thou go with me to thy brother
Nasir's house and we will eat of his feast and heal his heart?"
Replied Mansur, "As thy head liveth, O my brother, I will not go
with thee, unless thou swear to me that, after thou comest forth
of brother Nasir's house, thou wilt enter my house and eat of my
banquet! Is Nasir thy brother and am not I thy brother? So, even
as thou heartenest his heart, do thou hearten mine." Answered
Abdullah, "There is no harm in that: with love and gladly gree!
When I come out from Nasir's house, I will enter thine, for thou
art my brother even as he." So he kissed his hand and going forth
of the Divan, made ready his feast. On the morrow, Abdullah took
horse and repaired, with his brother Mansur and a company of his
officers, to Nasir's house, where they sat down, he and Mansur
and his many. Then Nasir set the trays before them and welcomed
them; so they ate and drank and sat in mirth and merriment; after
which the trays and the platters were removed and they washed
their hands. They passed the day in feasting and wine-drinking
and diversion and delight till night-fall, when they supped and
prayed the sundown prayers, and the night orisons; after which
they sat conversing and carousing, and Nasir and Mansur fell to
telling stories whilst Abdullah hearkened. Now they three were
alone in the pavilion, the rest of the company being in another
place, and they ceased not to tell quips and tales and rare
adventures and anecdotes, till Abdullah's heart was dissolved
within him for watching and sleep overcame him.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Nine Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Abdullah was a-wearied with watching and wanted to sleep, they
also lay beside him on another couch and waited till he
wasdrowned in slumber and when they were certified thereof they
arose and knelt upon him: whereupon he awoke and seeing them
kneeling on his breast, said to them, "What is this, O my
brothers?" Cried they, "We are no brothers of thine, nor do we
know thee unmannerly that thou art! Thy death is become better
than thy life." Then they gripped him by the throat and throttled
him, till he lost his senses and abode without motion; so that
they deemed him dead. Now the pavilion wherein they were
overlooked the river; so they cast him into the water; but, when
he fell, Allah sent to his aid a dolphin[FN#550] who was
accustomed to come under that pavilion because the kitchen had a
window that gave upon the stream; and, as often as they
slaughtered any beast there, it was their wont to throw the
refuse into the river and the dolphin came and picked it up from
the surface of the water; wherefore he ever resorted to the
place. That day they had cast out much offal by reason of the
banquet; so the dolphin ate more than of wont and gained
strength. Hearing the splash of Abdullah's fall, he hastened to
the spot, where he saw a son of Adam and Allah guided him so that
he took the man on his back and crossing the current made with
him for the other bank, where he cast his burthen ashore. Now the
place where the dolphin cast up Abdullah was a well-beaten
highway, and presently up came a caravan and finding him lying on
the river bank, said, "Here is a drowned man, whom the river hath
cast up;" and the travellers gathered around to gaze at the
corpse. The Shaykh of the caravan was a man of worth, skilled in
all sciences and versed in the mystery of medicine and, withal,
sound of judgment: so he said to them, "O folk, what is the
news?" They answered, "Here is a drowned man;" whereupon he went
up to Abdullah and examining him, said to them, "O folk, there is
life yet in this young man, who is a person of condition and of
the sons of the great, bred in honour and fortune, and Inshallah
there is still hope of him." Then he took him and clothing him in
dry clothes warmed him before the fire; after which he nursed him
and tended him three days' march till he revived; but he was
passing feeble by reason of the shock, and the chief of the
caravan proceeded to medicine him with such simples as he knew,
what while they ceased not faring on till they had travelled
thirty days' journey from Bassorah and came to a city in the land
of the Persians, by name 'Auj.[FN#551] Here they alighted at a
Khan and spread Abdullah a bed, where he lay groaning all night
and troubling the folk with his groans. And when morning morrowed
the concierge of the Khan came to the chief of the caravan and
said to him, "What is this sick man thou hast with thee? Verily,
he disturbeth us." Quoth the chief, "I found him by the way, on
the river-bank and well nigh drowned; and I have tended him, but
to no effect, for he recovereth not." Said the porter, "Show him
to the Shaykhah[FN#552] Rajihah." "Who is this Religious?" asked
the chief of the caravan, and the door-keeper answered, "There is
with us a holy woman, a clean maid and a comely, called Rajihah,
to whom they present whoso hath any ailment; and he passeth a
single night in her house and awaketh on the morrow, whole and
ailing nothing." Quoth the chief, "Direct me to her;" quoth the
porter, "Take up thy sick man." So he and took up Abdullah and
the doorkeeper forewent him, till he came to a hermitage, where
he saw folk entering with many an ex voto offering and other folk
coming forth, rejoicing. The porter went in, till he came to the
curtain,[FN#553] and said, "Permission, O Shaykhah Rajihah! Take
this sick man." Said she, "Bring him within the curtain;" and the
porter said to Abdullah, "Enter." So he entered and looking upon
the holy woman, saw her to be his wife whom he had brought from
the City of Stone. And when he knew her she also knew him and
saluted him and he returned her salam. Then said he, "Who brought
thee hither?"; and she answered, "When I saw that thy brothers
had cast thee away and were contending concerning me, I threw
myself into the sea; but my Shaykh Al-Khizr Abu al-'Abbas took me
up and brought me to this hermitage, where he gave me leave to
heal the sick and bade cry in the city, 'Whoso hath any ailment,
let him repair to the Shaykhah Rajihah;' and he also said to me,
'Tarry in this hermitage till the time betide, and thy husband
shall come to thee here.' So all the sick used to flock to me and
I rubbed them and shampoo'd them and they awoke on the morrow
whole and sound; whereby the report of me became noised abroad
among the folk, and they brought me votive gifts, so that I have
with me abundant wealth. And now I live here in high honour and
worship, and all the people of these parts seek my prayers." Then
she rubbed him and by the ordinance of Allah the Most High, he
became whole. Now Al-Khizr used to come to her every Friday
night, and it chanced that the day of Abdullah's coming was a
Thursday.[FN#554] Accordingly, when the night darkened he and she
sat, after a supper of the richest meats, awaiting the coming of
Al-Khizr, who made his appearance anon and carrying them forth of
the hermitage, set t