in the wilder corners
of Al-Islam. It is also applied to the birth-festivals of great
Santons (as Ahmad al- Badawi) for which see Lane M. E. chaps.
xxiv. In the text it is used like the Span. "Funcion" or the Hind
"Tamasha," any great occasion of merry-making.

[FN#447]  Arab. "Sanajik" Plur. of Sanjak (Turk.) = a banner,
also applied to the bearer (ensign or cornet) and to a military
rank mostly corresponding with Bey or Colonel.

[FN#448] I have followed Mr. Payne's ordering of the text which,
both in the Mac. and Bull. Edits., is wholly inconsequent and has
not the excuse of rhyme.

[FN#449]  Arab. "Jilbab," a long coarse veil or gown which in
Barbary becomes a "Jallabiyah," in a striped and hooded cloak of
woollen stuff.

[FN#450]  i.e. a broken down pilgrim left to die on the road.

[FN#451]  These lines have occurred in vol. i. 272. I quote Mr.
Payne.

[FN#452]  Note the difference between "Zirt," the loud crepitus
and "Faswah" the susurrus which Captain Grose in his quaint
"Lexicum Balatronicum," calls a "fice" or a "foyse" (from the
Arabic Fas, faswah ?).

[FN#453] These lines have occurred in Night dcxix, vol. vi. 246;
where the pun on Khaliyah is explained. I quote Lane.

[FN#454]  The usual pretext of "God bizness," as the Comoro men
call it. For the title of the Ka'abah see my Pilgrimage vol. iii.
149.

[FN#455]  This was in order to travel as a respectable man, he
could also send the girl as a spy into the different Harims to
learn news of the lady who had eloped.

[FN#456]  A polite form of alluding to their cursing him.

[FN#457]  i.e. on account of the King taking offence at his
unceremonious departure.

[FN#458]  i.e. It will be the worse for him.

[FN#459]  I would here remind the reader that "'Arabiyyun" pl.
'Urb is a man of pure Arab race, whether of the Ahl al-Madar
(=people of mortar, i.e. citizens) or Ahl al-Wabar (=tents of
goat or camel's hair); whereas "A'rabiyyun" pl. A'rab is one who
dwells in the Desert whether Arab or not. Hence the verse:--

          "They name us Al-A'rab but Al-'Urb is our name."

[FN#460]  I would remind the reader that the Dinar is the golden
denarius (or solidus) of Eastern Rome while the Dirham is the
silver denarius, whence denier, danaro, dinheiro, etc., etc. The
oldest diners date from A.H. 91-92 (=714-15) and we find the
following description of one struck in A.H. 96 by Al-Walid the
VI. Ommiade:--

Obverse:
     Area.     "There is no ilah but Allah: He is one: He hath no
               partner."
     Circle.   "Mohammed is the Messenger of Allah who hath sent
               him with the true Guidance and Religion that he
               manifest it above all other Creeds."

Reverse:
     Area.     "Allah is one: Allah is Eternal: He begetteth not,
               nor is He begot."
     Circle.   "Bismillah: This Dinar was struck anno 96."

See "'Ilam-en-Nas" (warnings for Folk) a pleasant little volume
by Mr. Godfrey Clarke (London, King and Co., 1873), mostly
consisting of the minor tales from The Nights especially this
group between Nights ccxlvii. and cdlxi.; but rendered valuable
by the annotations of my old friend, the late Frederick Ayrton.

[FN#461]  The reader will note the persistency with which the
duty of universal benevolence is preached.

[FN#462]  Arab. from Pers. "Shah-bander": see vol. iv. 29.

[FN#463]  i.e. of thy coming, a popular compliment.

[FN#464]  This is the doctrine of the universal East; and it is
true concerning wives and widows, not girls when innocent or
rather ignorant. According to Western ideas Kamar al-Zaman was a
young scoundrel of the darkest dye whose only excuses were his
age, his inexperience and his passions.

[FN#465]  Arab. "Dayyus" prop. = a man who pimps for his own wife
and in this sense constantly occurring in conversation.

[FN#466]  This is taking the law into one's own hands with a
witness, yet amongst races who preserve the Pundonor in full and
pristine force, e.g. the Afghans and the Persian Iliyat, the
killing so far from being considered murder or even justifiable
homicide would be highly commended by public opinion.

[FN#467]  Arab. "Nakisatu'aklin wa din": the words are attributed
to the Prophet whom we find saying, "Verily in your wives and
children ye have an enemy, wherefore beware of them" (Koran lxiv.
14): compare 1 Cor. vii. 28, 32. But Maitre Jehan de Meung went
farther,

          "Toutes etez, serez ou fuses
           De faict ou de volonte, putes."

[FN#468]  Arab. "Habibi wa tabibi," the common jingle.

[FN#469]  Iblis and his connection with Diabolos has been noticed
in vol. i. 13. The word is foreign as well as a P.N. and
therefore is imperfectly declined, although some authorities
deduce it from "ablasa"=he despaired (of Allah's mercy). Others
call him Al-Haris (the Lion) hence Eve's first-born was named in
his honour Abd al-Harts. His angelic name was Azazil before he
sinned by refusing to prostrate himself to Adam, as Allah had
commanded the heavenly host for a trial of faith, not to worship
the first man, but to make him a Keblah or direction of prayer
addressed to the Almighty. Hence he was ejected from Heaven and
became the arch enemy of mankind (Koran xviii. 48). He was an
angel but related to the Jinn: Al-Bayzawi, however (on Koran ii.
82), opines that angelic by nature he became a Jinn by act. Ibn
Abbas held that he belonged to an order of angels who are called
Jinn and begot issue as do the nasnas, the Ghul and the Kutrub
which, however are male and female, like the pre-Adamite manwoman
of Genesis, the "bi-une" of our modern days. For this subject see
Terminal Essay.


[FN#470]  As usual in the East and in the West the husband was
the last to hear of his wife's ill conduct. But even Othello did
not kill Emilia.

[FN#471]  i.e. Star of the Morning: the first word occurs in Bar
Cokba Barchocheba=Son of the Star, i.e., which was to come out of
Jacob (Numbers xxiv. 17). The root, which does not occur in Heb.,
is Kaukab to thine. This Rabbi Akilah was also called Bar Cozla=
Son of the Lie.

[FN#472]  Here some excision has been judged advisable as the
names of the bridegrooms and the brides recur with damnable
iteration.

[FN#473]  See the note by Lane's Shaykh at the beginning of the
tale. The contrast between the vicious wife of servile origin and
the virtuous wife of noble birth is fondly dwelt upon but not
exaggerated.

[FN#474]  i.e. those of his water skins for the journey, which as
usual required patching and supplying with fresh handles after
long lying dry.

[FN#475]  A popular saying also applied to men. It is usually
accompanied with showing the open hand and a reference to the
size of the fingers. I find this story most interesting from an
anthropological point of view; suggesting how differently various
races regard the subject of adultery. In Northern Europe the
burden is thrown most unjustly upon the man, the woman who tempts
him being a secondary consideration; and in England he is
absurdly termed "a seducer." In former times he was "paraded" or
"called out," now he is called up for damages, a truly ignoble
and shopkeeper-like mode of treating a high offence against
private property and public morality. In Anglo-America, where
English feeling is exaggerated, the lover is revolver'd and the
woman is left unpunished. On the other hand, amongst Eastern and
especially Moslem peoples, the woman is cut down and scant
reckoning is taken from the man. This more sensible procedure has
struck firm root amongst the nations of Southern Europe where the
husband kills the lover only when he still loves his wife and
lover like is furious at her affection being alienated.

Practically throughout the civilised world there are only two
ways of treating women, Moslems keep them close, defend them from
all kinds of temptations and if they go wrong kill them.
Christians place them upon a pedestal, the observed of all
observers, expose them to every danger and if they fall, accuse
and abuse them instead of themselves.  And England is so grandly
logical that her law, under certain circumstances, holds that
Mrs. A. has committed adultery with Mr. B. but Mr. B. has not
committed adultery with Mrs. A. Can any absurdity be more absurd?
Only "summum jus, summa injuria." See my Terminal Essay. I shall
have more to say upon this curious subject, the treatment of
women who can be thoroughly guarded only by two things, firstly
their hearts and secondly by the "Spanish Padlock."

[FN#476] Lane owns that this is "one of the most entertaining tales
in the work," but he omits it "because its chief and best portion
is essentially the same as the story of the First of the Three
Ladies of Baghdad." The truth is he was straitened for space by
his publisher and thus compelled to cut out some of the best
stories in The Nights.

[FN#477] i.e. Ibrahim of Mosul, the musician poet often mentioned
in The Nights. I must again warn the reader that the name is
pronounced Is-hak (like Isaac with a central aspirate) not Ishak.
This is not unnecessary when we hear Tait-shill for Tait's hill
and "Frederick-shall" for Friedrich, shall.

[FN#478] i.e. He was a proficient, an adept.

[FN#479] Arab. from Pers. Dulab=a waterwheel, a buttery, a
cupboard.

[FN#480] Arab. "Futur," the chhoti haziri of Anglo-India or
breakfast proper, eaten by Moslems immediately after the dawn-
prayer except in Ramazan. Amongst sensible people it is a
substantial meal of bread and boiled beans, eggs, cheese, curded
milk and the pastry called fatirah, followed by coffee and a
pipe. See Lane M. E. chapt. v. and my Pilgrimage ii. 48.

[FN#481] This "off-with-his-head" style must not be understood
literally. As I have noted, it is intended by the writer to show
the Kingship and the majesty of the "Vicar of Allah."

[FN#482] Lit. "the calamity of man (insan) is from the tongue"
(lisan).

[FN#483] For Khatt Sharif, lit.=a noble letter, see vol. ii. 39.

[FN#484] Arab. "Allah yastura-k"=protect thee by hiding what had
better be hidden.

[FN#485] Arab. "Janazir"=chains, an Arabised plural of the Pers.
Zanjir with the metathesis or transposition of letters peculiar
to the vulgar; "Janazir" for "Zanajir."

[FN#486] Arab. "Safinah"=(Noah's) Ark, a myth derived from the
Baris of Egypt with subsequent embellishments from the Babylonian
deluge-legends: the latter may have been survivals of the days
when the waters of the Persian Gulf extended to the mountains of
Eastern Syria. Hence I would explain the existence of extinct
volcanoes within sight of Damascus (see Unexplored Syria i. p.
159) visited, I believe, for the first time by my late friend
Charles F. Tyrwhitt-Drake and myself in May, 1871.

[FN#487] Mansur and Nasir are passive and active participles from
the same root, Nasr=victory; the former means triumphant and the
latter triumphing.

[FN#488] The normal term of Moslem mourning, which Mohammed
greatly reduced disliking the abuse of it by the Jews who even in
the present day are the strictest in its observance.

[FN#489] An euphuistic and euphemistic style of saying, "No, we
don't know."

[FN#490] Arab. "Rahan," an article placed with him in pawn.

[FN#491] A Moslem is bound, not only by honour but by religion,
to discharge the debts of his dead father and mother and so save
them from punishment on Judgment-day. Mohammed who enjoined mercy
to debtors while in the flesh (chapt. ii. 280, etc.) said "Allah
covereth all faults except debt; that is to say, there will be
punishment therefor." Also "A martyr shall be pardoned every
fault but debt." On one occasion he refused to pray for a Moslem
who died insolvent. Such harshness is a curious contrast with the
leniency which advised the creditor to remit debts by way of
alms. And practically this mild view of indebtedness renders it
highly unadvisable to oblige a Moslem friend with a loan.

[FN#492] i.e. he did not press them for payment; and, it must be
remembered, he received no interest upon his monies, this being
forbidden in the Koran.

[FN#493] Al-Mas'udi (chap. xvii.) alludes to furs of Sable
(Samur), hermelline (Al-Farwah) and Bortas (Turkish) furs of
black and red foxes. For Samur see vol. iv. 57. Sinjab is Persian
for the skin of the grey squirrel (Mu. lemmus, the lemming), the
meniver, erroneously miniver, (menu vair) as opposed to the
ermine=(Mus Armenius, or mustela erminia.) I never visit England
without being surprised at the vile furs worn by the rich, and
the folly of the poor in not adopting the sheepskin with the wool
inside and the leather well tanned which keeps the peasant warm
and comfortable between Croatia and Afghanistan.

[FN#494] Arab. "Tajir Alfi" which may mean a thousand dinars
(Stearling500) or a thousand purses (=Stearling5,000). "Alfi" is
not an uncommon P.N., meaning that the bearer (Pasha or pauper)
had been bought for a thousand left indefinite.

[FN#495] Tigris-Euphrates.

[FN#496] Possibly the quarter of Baghdad so called and mentioned
in The Nights more than once.

[FN#497] For this fiery sea see Sind Revisited i. 19.

[FN#498] Arab. "Al-Ghayb" which may also mean "in the future"
(unknown to man).

[FN#499] Arab. "Jabal"; here a mountainous island: see vol. i.
140.

[FN#500] i.e. ye shall be spared this day's miseries. See my
Pilgrimage vol. i. 314, and the delight with which we glided into
Marsa Damghah.

[FN#501] Arab. "Suwan"="Syenite" (-granite) also used for flint
and other hard stones. See vol. i. 238.

[FN#502] Koran xxiv. Male children are to the Arab as much prized
an object of possession as riches, since without them wealth is
of no value to him. Mohammed, therefore, couples wealth with
children as the two things wherewith one wards off the ills of
this world, though they are powerless against those of the world
to come.

[FN#503] An exclamation derived from the Surat Nasr (cx. 1) one
of the most affecting in the Koran. It gave Mohammed warning of
his death and caused Al-Abbas to shed tears; the Prophet sings a
song of victory in the ixth year of the Hijrah (he died on the
xth) and implores the pardon of his Lord.

[FN#504] Arab. "Dairah," a basin surrounded by hills. The words
which follow may mean, "An hour's journey or more in breadth.

[FN#505] These petrified folk have occurred in the "Eldest Lady's
Tale" (vol. i. 165), where they are of "black stone."

[FN#506] Arab. "Taj Kisrawi," such as was worn by the Chosroes
Kings. See vol. i. 75.

[FN#507] The familiar and far-famed Napoleonic pose, with the
arms crossed over the breast, is throughout the East the attitude
assumed by slave and servant in presence of his master. Those who
send statues to Anglo-India should remember this.

[FN#508] Arab. "Ta alik"=hanging lamps, often in lantern shape
with coloured glass and profuse ornamentation; the Maroccan are
now familiar to England.

[FN#509] Arab. "Kidrah," lit.=a pot, kettle; it can hardly mean
"an interval."

[FN#510] The wicket or small doorway, especially by the side of a
gate or portal, is called "the eye of the needle" and explains
Matt. xix. 24, and Koran vii. 38. In the Rabbinic form of the
proverb the camel becomes an elephant. Some have preferred to
change the Koranic Jamal (camel) for Habl (cable) and much
ingenuity has been wasted by Christian commentators on Mark x.
25, and Luke xviii. 25.

[FN#511] i.e. A "Kanz" (enchanted treasury) usually hidden
underground but opened by a counter-spell and transferred to
earth's face. The reader will note the gorgeousness of the
picture.

[FN#512] Oriental writers, Indian and Persian, as well as Arab,
lay great stress upon the extreme delicacy of the skin of the
fair ones celebrated in their works, constantly attributing to
their heroines bodies so sensitive as to brook with difficulty
the contact of the finest shift. Several instances of this will
be found in the present collection and we may fairly assume that
the skin of an Eastern beauty, under the influence of constant
seclusion and the unremitting use of cosmetics and the bath,
would in time attain a pitch of delicacy and sensitiveness such
as would in some measure justify the seemingly extravagant
statements of their poetical admirers, of which the following
anecdote (quoted by Ibn Khellikan from the historian Et Teberi)
is a fair specimen. Ardeshir ibn Babek (Artaxerxes I.), the first
Sassanian King of Persia (A.D. 226-242), having long
unsuccessfully besieged El Hedr, a strong city of Mesopotamia
belonging to the petty King Es Satiroun, at last obtained
possession of it by the treachery of the owner's daughter Nezireh
and married the latter, this having been the price stipulated by
her for the betrayal to him of the place. "It happened afterwards
that, one night, as she was unable to sleep and turned from side
to side in the bed, Ardeshir asked her what prevented her from
sleeping. She replied, 'I never yet slept on a rougher bed than
this; I feel something irk me.' He ordered the bed to be changed,
but she was still unable to sleep. Next morning, she complained
of her side, and on examination, a myrtle-leaf was found adhering
to a fold of the skin, from which it had drawn blood. Astonished
at this circumstance, Ardeshir asked her if it was this that had
kept her awake and she replied in the affirmative. 'How then,'
asked he, 'did your father bring you up?' She answered, 'He
spread me a bed of satin and clad me in silk and fed me with
marrow and cream and the honey of virgin bees and gave me pure
wine to drink.' Quoth Ardeshir, 'The same return which you made
your father for his kindness would be made much more readily to
me'; and bade bind her by the hair to the tail of a horse, which
galloped off with her and killed her." It will be remembered that
the true princess, in the well-known German popular tale, is
discovered by a similar incident to that of the myrtle-leaf. I
quote this excellent note from Mr. Payne (ix. 148), only
regretting that annotation did not enter into his plan of
producing The Nights. Amongst Hindu story-tellers a phenomenal
softness of the skin is a lieu commun: see Vikram and the Vampire
(p.285, "Of the marvellous delicacy of their Queens"); and the
Tale of the Sybarite might be referred to in the lines given
above.

[FN#513] 
"(55) Indeed joyous on that day are the people of Paradise in
their employ; 
 (56) In shades, on bridal couches reclining they and their
wives: 
 (57) Fruits have they therein and whatso they desire. 
 (58) 'Peace!' shall be a word from a compassionating Lord."
Koran xxxvi. 55-58, the famous Chapt. "Ya Sin;" which most
educated Moslems learn by heart. See vol. iii. 19. In addition to
the proofs there offered that the Moslem Paradise is not wholly
sensual I may quote, "No soul wotteth what coolth of the eyes is
reserved (for the good) in recompense of their works" (Koran lxx.
17). The Paradise of eating, drinking, and copulating which Mr.
Palgrave (Arabia, i. 368) calls "an everlasting brothel between
forty celestial concubines" was preached solely to the baser sort
of humanity which can understand and appreciate only the
pleasures of the flesh. To talk of spiritual joys before the
Badawin would have been a non-sens, even as it would be to the
roughs of our great cities. 

[FN#514] Arab. "Lajlaj" lit.=rolling anything round the mouth
when eating; hence speaking inarticulately, being tongue-tied,
stuttering, etc.

[FN#515] The classical "Phylarchs," who had charge of the
Badawin.

[FN#516] "The Jababirah" (giant-rulers of Syria) and the
"Akasirah" (Chosroes-Kings of Persia).

[FN#517] This shows (and we are presently told) that the intruder
was Al-Khizr, the "Green Prophet," for whom see vol. iv. 175.

[FN#518] i.e. of salvation supposed to radiate from all Prophets,
esp. from Mohammed.

[FN#519] This formula which has occurred from the beginning
(vol.i.1) is essentially Koranic: See Chapt. li. 18-19 and
passim.

[FN#520] This trick of the priest hidden within the image may
date from the days of the vocal Memnon, and was a favourite in
India, especially at the shrine of Somnauth (Soma-nath), the
Moon-god, Atergatis Aphrodite, etc.

[FN#521] Arab. "Almas"=Gr. Adamas. In opposition to the learned
ex-Professor Maskelyne I hold that the cutting of the diamond is
of very ancient date. Mr. W. M. Flinders Patrie (The Pyramids and
Temples of Gizah, London: Field and Tuer, 1884) whose studies
have thoroughly demolished the freaks and unfacts, the fads and
fancies of the "Pyramidists," and who may be said to have raised
measurement to the rank of a fine art, believes that the Euritic
statues of old Egypt such as that of Khufu (Cheops) in the Bulak
Museum were drilled by means of diamonds. AthenFus tells us (lib.
v.) that the Indians brought pearls and diamonds to the
procession of Ptolemy Philadelphus; and this suggests cutting, as
nothing can be less ornamental than the uncut stone.

[FN#522] i.e. as if they were holding a "Durbar"; the King's idol
in the Sadr or place of honour and the others ranged about it in
their several ranks.

[FN#523] These words are probably borrowed from the taunts of
Elijah to the priests of Baal (1 Kings xviii. 27). Both Jews and
Moslems wilfully ignored the proper use of the image or idol
which was to serve as a Keblah or direction of prayer and an
object upon which to concentrate thought and looked only to the
abuse of the ignoble vulgus who believe in its intrinsic powers.
Christendom has perpetuated the dispute: Romanism affects statues
and pictures: Greek orthodoxy pictures and not statues and the
so-called Protestantism ousts both.

[FN#524] Arab. "Sa'adah"=worldly prosperity and future happiness.

[FN#525] Arab. "Al-Ahd wa al-Misak" the troth pledged between the
Murid or apprentice-Darwaysh and the Shaykh or Master-Darwaysh
binding the former to implicit obedience etc.

[FN#526] Arab. "Taakhir" lit. postponement and meaning acting
with deliberation as opposed to "Ajal" (haste), precipitate
action condemned in the Koran lxv. 38.

[FN#527] i.e. I have been lucky enough to get this and we will
share it amongst us.

[FN#528] i.e. of saving me from being ravished.

[FN#529] Sa'idah=the auspicious (fem.): Mubarakah,=the blessed;
both names showing that the bearers were Moslemahs.

[FN#530] i.e. the base-born from whom base deeds may be expected.

[FN#531] Arab. "Badlat Kunuziyah=such a dress as would be found
in enchanted hoards (Kunuz): .g. Prince Esterhazy's diamond
jacket.

[FN#532] The lieu d'aisance in Eastern crafts is usually a wooden
cage or framework fastened outside the gunwale very cleanly but
in foul weather very uncomfortable and even dangerous.

[FN#533] Arab. "Ghull," a collar of iron or other metal,
sometimes made to resemble the Chinese Kza or Cangue, a kind of
ambulant pillory, serving like the old stocks which still show in
England the veteris vestigia ruris. See Davis, "The Chinese," i.
241. According to Al-Siyuti (p. 362) the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil
ordered the Christians to wear these Ghulls round the neck,
yellow head-gear and girdles, to use wooden stirrups and to place
figures of devils before their houses. The writer of The Nights
presently changes Ghull to "chains" and "fetters of iron."

[FN#534] Arab. "Ya fulan," O certain person! See vol. iii. 191.

[FN#535] Father of Harun al-Rashid A.H. 158-169 (=775-785) third
Abbaside who both in the Mac. and the Bul. Edits. is called "the
fifth of the sons of Al-Abbas." He was a good poet and a man of
letters, also a fierce persecutor of the "Zindiks" (Al-Siyuti
278), a term especially applied to those who read the Zend books
and adhered to Zoroastrianism, although afterwards applied to any
heretic or atheist. He made many changes at Meccah and was the
first who had a train of camels laden with snow for his
refreshment along a measured road of 700 miles (Gibbon, chapt.
lii.). He died of an accident when hunting: others say he was
poisoned after leaving his throne to his sons Musa al-Hadi and
Harun al-Rashid. The name means "Heaven-directed" and must not be
confounded with the title of the twelfth Shi'ah Imam Mohammed Abu
al-Kasim born at Sarramanrai A.H. 255 whom Sale (sect. iv.) calls
"Mahdi or Director" and whose expected return has caused and will
cause so much trouble in Al-Islam.

[FN#536] This speciosum miraculum must not be held a proof that
the tale was written many years after the days of Al-Rashid.
Miracles grow apace in the East and a few years suffice to mature
them. The invasion of Abraha the Abyssinia took place during the
year of Mohammed's birth; and yet in an early chapter of the
Koran (No. cv.) written perhaps forty-five years afterwards, the
small-pox is turned into a puerile and extravagant miracle. I
myself became the subject of a miracle in Sind which is duly
chronicled in the family-annals of a certain Pir or religious
teacher. See History of Sindh (p. 23O) and Sind Revisited (i.
156).

[FN#537] In the texts, "Sixth."

[FN#538] Arab. "Najis"=ceremonially impure especially the dog's
month like the cow's month amongst the Hindus; and requiring
after contact the Wuzu-ablution before the Moslem can pray.

[FN#539] Arab. "Akl al-hashamah" (hashamah=retinue;
hishmah=reverence, bashfulness) which may also mean "decorously
and respectfully," according to the vowel-points.

[FN#540] i.e. as the Vice-regent of Allah and Vicar of the
Prophet.

[FN#541] For the superiority of mankind to the Jinn see vol.
viii. 5;44.

[FN#542] According to Al-Siyuti, Harun al-Rashid prayed every day
a hundred bows.

[FN#543] As the sad end of his betrothed was still to be
accounted for.

[FN#544] For the martyrdom of the drowned see vol. i, 171, to
quote no other places.

[FN#545] i.e. if he have the power to revenge himself. The
sentiment is Christian rather than Moslem.

[FN#546] i.e. the power acquired (as we afterwards learn) by the
regular praying of the dawn-prayer. It is not often that The
Nights condescend to point a moral or inculcate a lesson as here;
and we are truly thankful for the immunity.

[FN#547] Arab. "Musafahah" which, I have said, serves for our
shaking hands: and extends over wide regions. They apply the
palms of the right hands flat to each other without squeezing the
fingers and then raise the latter to the forehead. Pilgrimage ii.
332, has also been quoted.

[FN#548] Equivalent to our saying about an ill wind, etc.

[FN#549] A proof of his extreme simplicity and bonhomie.

[FN#550] Arab. "Darfil"=the Gr. {Greek} later {Greek}, suggesting
that the writer had read of Arion in Herodotus i. 23.

[FN#551] 'Auj; I can only suggest, with due diffidence, that this
is intended for Kuch the well-known Baloch city in Persian
Carmania (Kirman) and meant by Richardson's "Koch u buloch." But
as the writer borrows so much from Al-Mas'udi it may possibly be
Auk in Sistan where stood the heretical city "Shadrak," chapt.
cxxii.

[FN#552] i.e. The excellent (or surpassing) Religious. Shaykhah,
the fem. of Shaykh, is a she-chief, even the head of the dancing-
girls will be entitled "Shaykhah."

[FN#553] The curtain would screen her from the sight of men-
invalids and probably hung across the single room of the
"Zawiyah" or hermit's cell. The curtain is noticed in the tales
of two other reverend women; vols. iv. 155 and v. 257.

[FN#554] Abdullah met his wife on Thursday, the night of which
would amongst Moslems be Friday night.

[FN#555] i.e. with Sa'idah.









This etext was scanned by JC Byers
(http://www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and proofread by
Nancy Bloomquist, J.C. Byers, Diane Doerfler, P.J. LaBrocca,
Carrie R. Lorenz, Laura Shaffer, Coralie Sheehan, Robert Sinton,
and Charles Wilson.




This etext was scanned by JC Byers
(http://www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and proofread by
Nancy Bloomquist, J.C. Byers, Diane Doerfler, P.J. LaBrocca,
Carrie R. Lorenz, Laura Shaffer, Coralie Sheehan, Robert Sinton,
and Charles Wilson.





                        THE BOOK OF THE
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                A Plain and Literal Translation
              of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
                                
                  Translated and Annotated by
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                          VOLUME NINE
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                  To Alexander Baird of Urie.
                                
My Dear Baird,

     I avail my self of a privilege of authorship, not yet
utterly obsolete, to place your name at the head of this volume. 
Your long residence in Egypt and your extensive acquaintance with
its "politic," private and public, make you a thouroughly
competent judge of the merits and demerits of this volume; and
encourage me to hope that in reading it you will take something
of the pleasure I have had in writing it..

                    Ever yours sincerely,

                         Richard F. Burton.

Tangier, December 31, 1885.


                  Contents of the Ninth Volume


     Ali Nur Al-Din and Miriam the Girdle-Girl (continued)
159. The Man of Upper Egypt and His Frankish Wife
160. The Ruined Man of Baghdad and his Slave-Girl
161. King Jali'ad of Hind and His Wazir Shimas: Followed by the
History of King Wird Khan,    son of King Jali'ad with His Women
and Wizars
     a.   The Mouse and the Cat
     b.   The Fakir and His Jar of Butter
     c.   The Fishes and the Crab
     d.   The Crow and the Serpent
     e.   The Wild Ass and the Jackal
     f.   The Unjust King and the Pilgrim Prince
     g.   The Crows and the Hawk
     h.   The Serpent-Charmer and His Wife
     i.   The Spider and the Wind
     j.   The Two Kings
     k.   The Blind Man and the Cripple
     l.   The Foolish Fisherman
     m.   The Boy and the Thieves
     n.   The Man and his Wife
     o.   The Merchant and the Robbers
     p.   The Jackals and the Wolf
     q.   The Shepherd and the Rogue
     r.   The Francolin and the Tortoises
162. Abu Kir the Dyer and Abu Sir the Barber
163. Abdullah the Fisherman and Abdullah the Merman
164. Harun Al-Rashid and Abu Hasan, The Merchant of Oman
165. Ibrahim and Jamilah
166. Abu Al-Hasan of Khorasan
167. Kamar Al-Zaman and the Jeweller's Wife
168. Abdullah Bin Fazil and His Brothers



                        The Book Of The
                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT




     When it was the Eight Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

She pursued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nur
al-Din heard the voice singing these verses he said in himself,
"Verily this be the Lady Miriam chanting without hesitation or
doubt or suspicion of one from without.[FN#1] Would Heaven I knew
an my thought be true and if it be indeed she herself or other
self!" And regrets redoubled upon him and he bemoaned himself and
recited these couplets,

"When my blamer saw me beside my love * Whom I met in a site that
     lay open wide,
I spake not at meeting a word of reproach * Though oft it comfort
     sad heart to chide;
Quoth the blamer, 'What means this silence that bars * Thy making
     answer that hits his pride?'
And quoth I, 'O thou who as fool dost wake, * To misdoubt of
     lovers and Love deride;
The sign of lover whose love is true * When he meets his beloved
     is mum to bide.'"

When he had made an end of these verses, the Lady Miriam fetched
inkcase and paper and wrote therein: "After honour due to the
Basmalah,[FN#2] may the peace of Allah be upon thee and His mercy
and blessings be! I would have thee know that thy slavegirl
Miriam saluteth thee, who longeth sore for thee; and this is her
message to thee. As soon as this letter shall fall into thy
hands, do thou arise without stay and delay and apply thyself to
that we would have of thee with all diligence and beware with all
wariness of transgressing her commandment and of sleeping. When
the first third of the night is past, (for that hour is of the
most favourable of times) apply thee only to saddling the two
stallions and fare forth with them both to the Sultan's
Gate.[FN#3] If any ask thee whither thou wend, answer, 'I am
going to exercise the steeds,' and none will hinder thee; for the
folk of this city trust to the locking of the gates." Then she
folded the letter in a silken kerchief and threw it out of the
latticed window to Nur al-Din, who took it and reading it, knew
it for the handwriting of the Lady Miriam and comprehended all
its contents. So he kissed the letter and laid it between his
eyes; then, calling to mind that which had betided him with her
of the sweets of love-liesse, he poured forth his tears whilst he
recited these couplets,

"Came your writ to me in the dead of the night * And desire for
     you stirred heart and sprite;
And, remembered joys we in union joyed, * Praised the Lord who
     placed us in parting plight."

As soon as it was dark Nur al-Din busied himself with making
ready the stallions and patiented till the first watch of the
night was past; when, without a moment delay, Nur al-Din the
lover full of teen, saddled them with saddles of the goodliest,
and leading them forth of the stable, locked the door after him
and repaired with them to the city-gate, where he sat down to
await the coming of the Princess. Meanwhile, Miriam returned
forthright to her private apartment, where she found the one-eyed
Wazir seated, elbow-propt upon a cushion stuffed with
ostrich-down; but he was ashamed to put forth his hand to her or
to bespeak her. When she saw him, she appealed to her Lord in
heart, saying, "Allahumma-O my God-bring him not to his will of
me nor to me defilement decree after purity!" Then she went up to
him and made a show of fondness for him and sat down by his side
and coaxed him, saying, "O my lord, what is this aversion thou
displayest to me? Is it pride or coquetry on thy part? But the
current byword saith, 'An the salam-salutation be little in
demand, the sitters salute those who stand."[FN#4] So if, O my
lord, thou come not to me neither accost me, I will go to thee
and accost thee." Said he, "To thee belong favour and kindness, O
Queen of the earth in its length and breadth; and what am I but
one of thy slaves and the least of thy servants. Indeed, I was
ashamed to intrude upon thine illustrious presence, O unique
pearl, and my face is on the earth at thy feet." She rejoined,
"Leave this talk and bring us to eat and drink." Accordingly he
shouted to his eunuchs and women an order to serve food, and they
set before them a tray containing birds of every king that walk
and fly and in nests increase and multiply, such as sand-grouse
and quails and pigeon-poults and lambs and fatted geese and fried
poultry and other dishes of all sorts and colours. The Princess
put out her hand to the tray and began to eat and feed the Wazir
with her fair finger-tips and kiss him on the mouth. They ate
till they had enough and washed their hands, after which the
handmaidens removed the table of food and set on the service of
wine. So Princess Miriam filled the cup and drank and gave the
Wazir to drink and served him with assiduous service, so that he
was like to fly for joy and his breast broadened and he was of
the gladdest. When she saw that the wine had gotten the better of
his senses, she thrust her hand into her bosom and brought out a
pastil of virgin Cretan-Bhang, which she had provided against
such an hour, whereof if an elephant smelt a dirham's weight, he
would sleep from year to year. She distracted his attention and
crumbled the drug into the cup: then, filling it up, handed it to
the Wazir, who could hardly credit his senses for delight. So he
took it and kissing her hand, drank it off, but hardly had it
settled in his stomach when he fell head foremost to the ground.
Then she rose and filling two great pairs of saddle-bags with
what was light of weight and weighty of worth of jewels and
jacinths and precious stones, together with somewhat of meat and
drink, donned harness of war and armed herself for fight. She
also took with her for Nur al-Din what should rejoice him of rich
and royal apparel and splendid arms and armour, and shouldering
the bags (for indeed her strength equalled her valiancy),
hastened forth from the new palace to join her lover. On this
wise fared it with the Lady Miriam; but as regards Nur
al-Din,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say. 

       When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Lady Miriam left the new palace, she went straightways to meet
her lover for indeed she was as valiant as she was strong; but
Nur al-Din the distracted, the full of teen, sat at the city-gate
hending the horses' halters in hand, till Allah (to whom belong
Majesty and Might) sent a sleep upon him and he slept-glory be to
Him who sleepeth not! Now at that time the Kings of the Islands
had spent much treasure in bribing folk to steal the two steeds
or one of them; and in those days there was a black slave, who
had been reared in the islands skilled in horse-lifting;
wherefore the Kings of the Franks seduced him with wealth galore
to steal one of the stallions and promisted him, if he could
avail to lift the two, that they would give him a whole island
and endue him with a splendid robe of honour. He had long gone
about the city of France in disguise, but succeeded not in taking
the horses, whilst they were with the King; but, when he gave
them in free gift to the Wazir and the monocular one carried them
to his own stable, the blackamoor thief rejoiced with joy
exceeding and made sure of success, saying in himself, "By the
virtue of the Messiah and the Faith which is no liar, I will
certainly steal the twain of them!" Now he had gone out that very
night, intending for the stable, to lift them; but, as he walked
along, behold, he caught sight of Nur al-Din lying asleep, with
the halters in his hands. So he went up to the horses and loosing
the halters from their heads, was about to mount one of them and
drive the other before him, when suddenly up came the Princess
Miriam, carrying on her shoulders the couple of saddle-bags. She
mistook the black for Nur al-Din and handed him one pair of bags,
which he laid on one of the stallions: after which she gave him
the other and he set it on the second steed, without word said to
discover that it was not her lover. Then they mounted and rode
out of the gate[FN#5] in silence till presently she asked, "O my
lord Nur al-Din, what aileth thee to be silent?" Whereupon the
black turned to her and cried angrily, "What sayst thou, O
damsel?" When she heard the slave's barbarous accents, she knew
that the speech was not of Nur al-Din; so raising her eyes she
looked at him and saw that he was a black chattel, snub-nosed and
wide-mouthed, with nostrils like ewers; whereupon the light in
her eyes became night and she asked him, "Who art thou, O Shaykh
of the sons of Ham and what among men is thy name?" He answered,
"O daughter of the base, my name is Mas'úd, the lifter of horses,
when folk slumber and sleep." She made him no reply, but
straightway baring her blade, smote him on the nape and the blade
came out gleaming from his throat-tendons, whereupon he fell
earthwards, weltering in his blood, and Allah hurried his soul to
the Fire and abiding-place dire. Then she took the other horse by
the bridle and retraced her steps in search of Nur al-Din, whom
she found lying, asleep and snoring, in the place where she had
appointed him to meet her, hending the halters in hand, yet
knowing not his fingers from his feet. So she dismounted and gave
him a cuff,[FN#6] whereupon he awoke in affright and said to her,
"O m lady, praised be Allah for thy safe coming!" Said she "Rise
and back this steed and hold thy tongue!" So he rose and mounted
one of the stallions, whilst she bestrode the other, and they
went forth the city and rode on awhile in silence. Then said she
to him, "Did I not bid thee beware of sleeping? Verily, he
prospereth not who sleepeth." He rejoined, "O my lady, I slept
not but because of the cooling of my heart by reason of thy
promise. But what hath happened, O my lady?" So she told him her
adventure with the black, first and last, and he said, "Praised
be Allah for safety!" Then they fared on at full speed,
committing their affair to the Subtle, the All-wise and
conversing as they went, till they came to the place where the
black lay prostrate in the dust, as he were an Ifrit, and Miriam
said to Nur al-Din, "Dismount; strip him of his clothes and take
his arms." He answered, "By Allah, O my lady, I dare not dismount
nor approach him." And indeed he marvelled at the blackamoor's
stature and praised the Princess for her deed, wondering the
while at her valour and stout-heartedness. They fared on lustily
and ceased not so doing all that night and halted not till the
day broke with its shine and sheen and the sun shone bright upon
plain and height when they came to a wide riverino lea wherein
the gazelles were frisking gracefully. Its surface was clothed
with green and on all sides fruit trees of every kind were seen:
its slopes for flowers like serpents' bellies showed, and birds
sang on boughs aloud and its rills in manifold runnels flowed.
And indeed it was as saith the poet and saith well and
accomplisheth the hearer's desire,

"Rosy red Wady hot with summer-glow, * Where twofold tale of
     common growth was piled.
In copse we halted wherein bent to us * Branches, as bendeth
     nurse o'er weanling-child.
And pure cold water quenching thirst we sipped: * To cup-mate
     sweeter than old wine and mild: 
From every side it shut out sheen of sun * Screen-like, but wooed
     the breeze to cool the wild:
And pebbles, sweet as maidens deckt and dight * And soft as
     threaded pearls, the touch beguiled."

And as saith another,

"And when birdies o'er warble its lakelet, it gars *
     Longing[FN#7] lover to seek it where morning glows;
For likest to Paradise lie its banks * With shade and fruitage
     and fount that flows."

Presently Princess Miriam and Nur al-Din alighted to rest in this
Wady,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say. 

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hat reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Princess Miriam and Nur al-Din alighted in that valley, they ate
of its fruits and frank of its streams, after turning the
stallions loose to pasture: then they sat talking and recalling
their past and all that had befallen them and complaining one to
other of the pangs of parting and of the hardships suffered for
estrangement and love-longing. As they were thus engaged, behold,
there arose in the distance a dust-cloud which spread till it
walled the world, and they heard the neighing of horses and clank
of arms and armour. Now the reason of this was, that after the
Princess had been bestowed in wedlock upon the Wazir who had gone
in to her that night, the King went forth at daybreak, to give
the couple good morrow, taking with him, after the custom of
Kings with their daughters, a gift of silken stuffs and
scattering gold and silver among the eunuchs and tire-women, that
they might snatch at and scramble for it. And he fared on
escorted by one of his pages; but when he came to the new palace,
he found the Wazir prostrate on the carpet, knowing not his head
from his heels; so he searched the place right and left for his
daughter, but found her not; whereat he was troubled sore with
concern galore and his wits forlore. Then he bade bring hot water
and virgin vinegar and frankincense[FN#8] and mingling them
together, blew the mixture into the Wazir's nostrils and shook
him, whereupon he cast the Bhang forth of his stomach, as it were
a bit of cheese. He repeated the process, whereupon the Minister
came to himself and the King questioned him of his case and that
of his daughter. He replied, "O mighty King, I have no knowledge
of her save that she poured me out a cup of wine with her own
hand; and from that tide to this I have no recollection of aught
nor know I what is come of her." When the King heard this, the
light in his eyes became night, and he drew his scymitar and
smote the Wazir on the head, then the steel came out gleaming
from between his grinder teeth. Then, without an instant delay,
he called the groom sand syces and demanded of them the two
stallions: but they said, "O King, the two steeds were lost in
the night and together with them our chief, the Master of Horse;
for, when we awoke in the morning, we found all the doors wide
open." Cried the King, "By the faith of me and by all wherein my
belief is stablished on certainty, none but my daughter hath
taken the steeds, she and the Moslem captive which used to tend
the Church and which took her aforetime! Indeed I knew him right
well and none delivered him from my hand save this one-eyed
Wazir; but now he is requited his deed." Then the King called his
three sons, who were three doughty champions, each of whom could
withstand a thousand horse in the field of strife and the stead
where cut and thrust are rife; and bade them mount. So they took
horse forthwith and the King and the flower of his knights and
nobles and officers mounted with them and followed on the trail
of the fugitives till Miriam saw them, when she mounted her
charger and baldrick'd her blade and took her arms. Then she said
to Nur al-Din, "How is it with thee and how is thy heart for
fight and strife and fray?" Said he, "Verily, my steadfastness in
battle-van is as the steadfastness of the stake in bran."[FN#9]
And he improvised and said,

"O Miriam thy chiding I pray, forego; * Nor drive me to death or
     injurious blow: 
How e'er can I hope to bear fray and fight * Who quake at the
     croak of the corby-crow?
I who shiver for fear when I see the mouse * And for very funk I
     bepiss my clo'!
I loveno foin but the poke in bed, * When coynte well knoweth my
     prickle's prow;
This is rightful rede, and none other shows * Righteous as this
     in my sight, I trow."

Now when Miriam heard his speech and the verse he made, she
laughed and smilingly said, "O my lord Nur al-Din, abide in thy
place and I will keep thee from their ill grace, though they be
as the sea-sands in number. But mount and ride in rear of me, and
if we be defeated and put to flight, beware of falling, for none
can overtake thy steed." So saying, she turned her lance-head
towards foe in plain and gave her horse the rein, whereupon he
darted off under her, like the stormy gale or like waters that
from straitness of pipes outrail. Now Miriam was the doughtiest
of the folk of her time and the unique pearl of her age and tide;
for her father had taught her, whilst she was yet little, on
steeds to ride and dive deep during the darkness of the night in
the battle tide. When the King saw her charging down upon them,
he knew her but too well and turning to his eldest son, said, "O
Bartaut,[FN#10] thou who art surnamed Ras al-Killaut[FN#11] this
is assuredly thy sister Miriam who chargeth upon us, and she
seeketh to wage war and fight fray with us. So go thou out to
give her battle: and I enjoin thee by the Messiah and the Faith
which is no liar, an thou get the better of her, kill her not
till thou have propounded to her the Nazarene faith. An she
return to her old creed, bring her to me prisoner; but an she
refuse, do her die by the foulest death and make of her the
vilest of examples, as well as the accursed which is with her."
Quoth Bartaut, "Hearkening obedience"; and, rushing out
forthright to meet his sister, said to her, "O Miriam, doth not
what hath already befallen us on thine account suffice thee, but
thou must leave the faith of thy fathers and forefathers and
follow after the faith of the Vagrants in the lands, that is to
say, the faith of Al-Islam?  By the virtue of the Messiah and the
Faith which is no liar, except thou return to the creed of the
Kings thy Forebears and walk therein after the goodliest fashion,
I will put thee to an ill death and make of thee the most
shameful of ensamples!" But Miriam laughed at his speech and
replied, "Well-away! Far be it that the past should present stay
or that he who is dead should again see day! I will make thee
drink the sourest of regrets! By Allah, I will not turn back upon
the faith of Mohammed son of Abdullah, who made salvation
general; for his is the True Faith; nor will I leave the right
road though I drain the cup of ruin!"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

     When it was the Eight Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Miriam
exclaimed to her brother, "Well-away! Heaven forfend that I turn
back from the faith of Mohammed Abdullah-son who made salvation
general; for his is the Right Road nor will I leave it although I
drain the cup of ruin." When the accursed Bartaut heard this, the
light in his eyes became night, the matter was great and grievous
to him and between them there befel a sore fight. The twain
swayed to and fro battling throughout the length and breadth of
the valley and manfully enduring the stress of combat singular,
whilst all eyes upon them were fixed in admiring surprise:  after
which they wheeled about and foined and feinted for a long bout
and as often as Bartaut opened on his sister Miriam a gate of
war,[FN#12] she closed it to and put it to naught, of the
goodliness of her skill and her art in the use of arms and her
cunning of cavalarice. Nor ceased they so doing till the dust
overhung their heads vault-wise and they were hidden from men's
eyes; and she ceased not to baffle Bartaut and stop the way upon
him, till he was weary and his courage wavered and his resolution
was worsted and his strength weakened; whereupon she smote him on
the nape, that the sword came out gleaming from his throat
tendons and Allah hurried his soul to the Fire and the
abiding-place which is dire. Then Miriam wheeled about in the
battleplain and the stead where cut and thrust are fain; and
championed it and offered battle, crying out and saying, "Who is
for fighting? Who is for jousting? Let come forth to me to-day no
weakling or niderling; ay, let none come forth to me but the
champions who the enemies of The Faith represent, that I may give
them to drink the cup of ignominious punishment. O worshippers of
idols, O miscreants, O rebellious folk, this day verily shall the
faces of the people of the True Faith be whitened and theirs who
deny the Compassionate be blackened!" Now when the King saw his
eldest son slain, he smote his face and rent his dress and cried
out to his second son, saying, "O Batrús, thou who art surnamed
Khara al-Sús,[FN#13] go forth, O my son, in haste and do battle
with thy sister Miriam; avenge me the death of thy brother
Bartaut and bring her to me a prisoner, abject and humiliated!"
He answered, "Hearkening and obedience, O my sire, and charging
down drave at his sister, who met him in mid-career, and they
fought, he and she, a sore fight, yet sorer than the first.
Bartus right soon found himself unable to cope with her might and
would have sought safety in flight, but of the greatness of her
prowess could not avail unto this sleight; for, as often as he
turned to flee, she drave after him and still clave to him and
pressed him hard, till presently she smote him with the sword in
his throat, that it issued gleaming from his nape, and sent him
after his brother. Then she wheeled about in the mid-field and
plain where cut and thrust are dealed, crying out and saying,
"Where be the Knights? Where be the Braves? Where is the one-eyed
Wazir, the lameter, of the crooked faith[FN#14] the worthy
believer?" Thereupon the King her father cried out with heart in
bleeding guise and tear-ulcerated eyes, saying, "She hath slain
my second son, by the virtue of the Messiah and the Faith which
is no liar!" And he called aloud to his youngest son, saying, "O
Fasyán, surnamed Salh al-Subyán,[FN#15] go forth, O my son, to do
battle with thy sister and take of her the blood-wreak for thy
brothers and fall on her, come what may; and whether thou gain or
thou lose the day;[FN#16] and if thou conquer her, slay her with
foulest slaughter!" So he drave out to Miriam, who ran at him
with the best of her skill and charged him with the goodliness of
h