ent the third or fourth
subdivision of this first class respectively. The Tawil has one
other 'Aruz, Fa'ulun, with a twofold Zarb, either Fa'ulun also,
or Mafa'ilun.

The first instance of the Basit occurring in The Nights are the
lines translated vol. i. p. 25:

Containeth Time a twain of days, this of blessing, that of bane *
     And holdeth Life a twain of halves, this of pleasure, that
     of pain.

In Arabic (Mac. N. i. II):

             - - U - | - U - | - - U - | U U - |
          Al-Dahru yaumani za amnun wa za hazaru

             - - U - | - U - | - - U - | U U - |
          Wa'l-'Ayshu shatrani za safwun wa za kadaru.

Turning back to p. 243, where the A'ariz and Azrub of the Basit
are shown, the student will have no difficulty to recognise the
Bayt as one belonging to the first Zarb of the first 'Aruz.

As an example of the Madid we quote the original of the lines
(vol. v. 131):--

I had a heart, and with it lived my life * 'Twas seared with fire
     and burnt with loving-lowe.

They read in Arabic:--

                     - U - - | - U - | U U - |
                    Kana li kalbun a'ishu bihi

                       - U - - | - U - | U - |
                    Fa'ktawa bi'l-nari wa'htarak.

If we compare this with the formula (iii. A. 2. p. 242), we find
that either line of the couplet is shortened by a foot; it is,
therefore, majzu. The first 'Aruz of this abbreviated metre is
Fa'ilatun (- U - -), and is called sahihah (perfect) because it
consists of the normal third foot. In the second 'Aruz, Fa'ilatun
loses its end syllable tun by the 'Illah Hafz (suppression of a
final Sabab khafif), and becomes Fa'ila (- U -), for which
Fa'ilun is substituted. Shortening the first syllable of Fa'ilun,
i.e. eliminating the Alif by Khabn, we obtain the third 'Aruz
Fa'ilun (U U -) as that of the present lines, which has two
Azrub: Fa'ilun, like the 'Aruz, and Fa'lun (- -), here, again by
Khabn, further reduced to Fa'al (U -).

Ishak of Mosul, who improvises the piece, calls it "so difficult
and so rare, that it went nigh to deaden the quick and to quicken
the dead"; indeed, the native poets consider the metre Madid as
the most difficult of all, and it is scarcely ever attempted by
later writers. This accounts for its rare  occurrence in The
Nights, where only two more instances are to be found, Mac. N.
ii. 244 and iii.
404.


The second and third circle will best be spoken of together, as
the Wafir and Kamil have a natural affinity to the Hazaj and
Rajaz. Let us revert to the line:--

          U - - - | U - - - | U - - |
        Akamu 'l-wajda fi kalbi wa saru.

Translated, as it were, into the language of the Prosodists it
will be:--

          Mafa'ilun[FN#456] 'Mafa'ilun Fa'ulun,

and this, standing by itself, might prima facie be taken for a
line of the Hazaj (iii. C. I), with the third Mafa'ilun shortened
by Hafz (see above) into Mafa'i for which Fa'ulun would be
substituted. We have seen (p. 247) that and how the foot
Mufa'alatun can change into Mafa'ilun, and if in any poem which
otherwise would belong to the metre Hazaj, the former measure
appears even in one foot only along with the latter, it is
considered to be the original measure, and the poem counts no
longer as Hazaj but as Wafir. In the piece now under
consideration, it is the second Bayt where the characteristic
foot of the Wafir first appears:--

          U - - - | U - U U | U - - |
          Naat 'anni'l-rubu'u wa sakiniha

          U - U U - | U - U U - | U - - |
          Wa kad ba'uda 'l-mazaru fa-la mazaru.

Anglice (vol. iii. 296):--

Far lies the camp and those who camp therein; * Far is her tent
     shrine where I ne'er shall tent.

It must, however, be remarked that the Hazaj is not in use as a
hexameter, but only with an 'Aruz majzuah or shortened by one
foot. Hence it is only in the second 'Aruz of the Wafir, which is
likewise majzuah, that the ambiguity as to the real nature of the
metre can arise;[FN#457] and the isolated couplet:--

          U - - - | U - - -  | U - - |
          Yaridu 'l-mar-u an yu'ta munahu

          U - - - | U - - -  | U - - |
          Wa yaba 'llahu illa ma yuridu

Man wills his wish to him accorded be, * But Allah naught accords
     save what he wills (vol. iv. 157),

being hexametrical, forms undoubtedly part of a poem in Wafir
although it does not contain the foot Mufa'alatun at all. Thus
the solitary instance of Hazaj in The Nights is Abu Nuwas'
abomination, beginning with:--

          U - - -  | U - - - |

          Fa-la tas'au ila ghayri

          U - - -  | U - - - |
          Fa-'indi ma'dinu 'l-khayri (Mac. N. ii. 377).

Steer ye your steps to none but me * Who have a mine of luxury
     (vol. v. 65).

If in the second 'Aruz of the Wafir, Maf'ailun (U - - -) is
further shortened to Mafa'ilun (U - U -), the metre resembles the
second 'Aruz of Rajaz, where, as we have seen, the latter foot
can, by licence, take the place of the normal Mustaf'ilun (- - U
-).

The Kamil bears a similar relation to the Rajaz, as the Wafir
bears to the Hazaj. By way of illustration we quote from Mac. N.
ii. 8 the first two Bayts of a little poem taken from the 23rd
Assembly of Al Hariri:--

             - - U - | - - U - | U U - U - |
          Ya khatiba 'l-dunya 'l-daniyyati innaha

             U U - U - | U U - U - | - - - |
          Sharaku 'l-rada wa kararatu 'l-akdari

              - - U - | - - U - | - - U - |
          Darun mata ma azhakat fi yaumiha

               - - U - | - - U - | - - - |
          Abkat ghadan bu'dan laha min dari.

In Sir Richard Burton's translation (vol. iii. 319):--

O thou who woo'st a World unworthy, learn * 'Tis house of evils,
     'tis Perdition's net:
A house where whoso laughs this day shall weep * The next; then
     perish house of fume and fret.

The 'Aruz of the first couplet is Mutafa'ilun, assigning the
piece to the first or perfect (sahihah) class of the Kamil. In
the Hashw of the opening line and in that of the whole second
Bayt this normal Mutafa'ilun has, by licence, become Mustaf'ilun,
and the same change has taken place in the 'Aruz of the second
couplet; for it is a peculiarity which this metre shares with a
few others, to allow certain alterations of the kind Zuhaf in the
'Aruz and Zarb as well as in the Hashw. This class has three
subdivisions: the Zarb of the first is Mutafa'ilun, like the
'Aruz the Zarb of the second is Fa'alatun (U U - -), a
substitution for Mutafa'il which latter is obtained from
Mutafa'ilun by suppressing the final n and rendering the l
quiescent; the Zarb of the third is Fa'lun (- - -) for Mutfa,
derived from Mutafa'ilun by cutting off the Watad 'ilun and
dropping the medial a of the remaining Mutafa.

If we make the 'Ayn of the second Zarb Fa'alatun also quiescent
by the permitted Zuhaf Izmar, it changes into Fa'latun, by
substitution Maf 'ulun (- - -) which terminates the rhyming lines
of the foregoing quotation. Consequently the two couplets taken
together, belong to the second Zarb of the first 'Aruz of the
Kamil, and the metre of the poem with its licences may be
represensed by the scheme:


           -        | -        |  -        |
          U U - U - | U U - U - | U U - U - |

            -        | -        |  -      |
           U U - U - | U U - U - | U U - - |

Taken isolated, on the other hand, the second Bayt might be of
the metre Rajaz, whose first 'Aruz Mustaf'ilun has two Azrub: one
equal to the Aruz, the other Maf'ulun as above, but here
substituted for Mustaf'il after applying the 'Illah Kat' (see p
247) to Mustaf'ilun. If this were the metre of the poem
throughout the scheme with the licences peculiar to the Rajaz
would be:

          U U     | U U     | U U     |
          - - U U | - - U - | - - U - |

          U U     | U U     | U     |
          - - U - | - - U - | - - - |

The pith of Al-Hariri's Assembly is that the knight errant not to
say the arrant wight of the Romance, Abu Sayd of Saruj accuses
before the Wali of Baghdad his pretended pupil, in reality his
son, to have appropriated a poem of his by lopping off two feet
of every Bayt. If this is done in the quoted lines, they read:

              - - U - | - - U - |
          Ya khatiba 'l-dunya 'l-dandy.

          U U - U | U U - U - |
          Yati innaha sharaku 'l-rada

             - - U - | - - U - |
          Darun mata ma azhakat,

             - - U - | - - U - |
          Fi yaumiha abkat ghada,

with a different rhyme and of a different variation of metre. The
amputated piece belongs to the fourth Zarb of the third 'Aruz of
Kamil, and its second couplet tallies with the second subdivision
of the second class of Rajaz.

The Rajaz, an iambic metre pure and simple, is the most popular,
because the easiest, in which even the Prophet was caught napping
sometimes, at the dangerous risk of following the perilous
leadership of Imru 'l-Kays. It is the metre of improvisation, of
ditties, and of numerous didactic poems. In the latter case, when
the composition is called Urjuzah, the two lines of every Bayt
rhyme, and each Bayt has a rhyme of its own. This is the form in
which, for instance, Ibn Malik's Alfiyah is written, as well as
the remarkable grammatical work of the modern native scholar,
Nasif al-Yaziji, of which a notice will be found in Chenery's
Introduction to his Translation of Al-Hariri.

While the Hazaj and Rajaz connect the third circle with the first
and second, the Ramal forms the link between the third and fourth
Dairah. Its measure Fa'ilatun (- U - -) and the reversal of it,
Maf'ulatu (- - - U), affect the trochaic rhythm, as opposed to
the iambic of the two first-named metres. The iambic movement has
a ring of gladness about it, the trochaic a wail of sadness: the
former resembles a nimble pedestrian, striding apace with an
elastic step and a cheerful heart; the latter is like a man
toiling along on the desert path, where his foot is ever and anon
sliding back in the burning sand (Raml, whence probably the name
of the metre). Both combined in regular alternation, impart an
agitated character to the verse, admirably fit to express the
conflicting emotions of a passion stirred mind.

Examples of these more or less plaintive and pathetic metres are
numerous in the Tale of Uns al-Wujud and the Wazir's Daughter,
which, being throughout a story of love, as has been noted, vol.
v. 33, abounds in verse, and, in particular, contains ten out of
the thirty two instances of Ramal occurring in The Nights. We
quote:

Ramal, first Zarb of the first 'Aruz (Mac. N. ii. 361):

             - U - - | U U - - | - U - |
          Inna li 'l-bulbuli sautan fi 'l-sahar

             - U - - | U U - - | - U - |
          Ashghala 'l-ashika 'an husni 'l-water

The Bulbul's note, whenas dawn is nigh * Tells the lover from
strains of strings to fly (vol. v. 48).

Sari', second Zarb of the first 'Aruz (Mac. N. ii. 359):

           U - U - | - - U - | - U - |
          Wa fakhitin kad kala fi nauhihi

           - - U - | - - U - | - U - |
          Ya Daiman shukran 'ala balwati

I heard a ringdove chanting soft and plaintively, * "I thank
     Thee, O Eternal for this misery" (vol. v. 47).

Khafif, full or perfect form (sahih), both in Zarb and 'Aruz
(Mac. N. ii. 356):

           - U - - | U - U - | - U - - |
          Ya li-man ashtaki 'l-gharama 'llazi bi

           U U - - | U - U - | - U - - |
          Wa shujuni wa furkati 'an habibi

O to whom now of my desire complaining sore shall I * Bewail my
     parting from my fere compelled thus to fly (vol. v. 44).

Mujtass, the only 'Aruz (majzuah sahihah, i.e. shortened by one
foot and perfect) with equal Zarb (Mac. N. ii. 367):

            - - U - | U U - - |
          Ruddu 'alayya habibi

            - - U - | - U - - |
          La hajatan li bi-malin

To me restore my dear * I want not wealth untold (vol. v.  55).

As an instance of the Munsarih, I give the second occurring in
The Nights, because it affords me an opportunity to show the
student how useful a knowledge of the laws of Prosody frequently
proves for ascertaining the correct reading of a text. Mac. N. i.
33 we find the line:

          - U U - | - U U - | - U U - |
          Arba'atun ma 'jtama'at kattu iza.

This would be Rajaz with the licence Mufta'ilun for Mustaf'ilun.
But the following lines of the fragment evince, that the metre is
Munsarih; hence, a clerical error must lurk somewhere in the
second foot. In fact, on page 833 of the same volume, we find the
piece repeated, and here the first couplet reads

          - U U - | - U - U | - U U - |
          Arba'atun ma 'jtama'na kattu siwa

          U - U - | - U - U | - U U - |
          Ala aza mujhati wa safki dami

Four things which ne'er conjoin unless it be * To storm my vitals
     and to shed my blood (vol. iii. 237).

The Mutakarib, the last of the metres employed in The Nights, has
gained a truly historical importance by the part which it plays
in Persian literature. In the form of trimetrical double-lines,
with a several rhyme for each couplet, it has become the
"Nibelungen"-stanza of the Persian epos:
Firdausi's immortal "Book of Kings" and Nizami's Iskander-namah
are written in it, not to mention a host of Masnawis in which
Sufic mysticism combats Mohammedan orthodoxy. On account of its
warlike and heroical character, therefore, I choose for an
example the knightly Jamrakan's challenge to the single fight in
which he conquers his scarcely less valiant adversary Kaurajan,
Mac. N. iii. 296:

           U - - | U - U | U - - | U - - |
          Ana 'l-Jamrakanu kawiyyn 'l-janani

           U - - | U - U | U - - | U - - |
          Jami'u 'l-fawarisi takhsha kitali.

Here the third syllable of the second foot in each line is
shortened by licence, and the final Kasrah of the first line,
standing in pause, is long, the metre being the full form of the
Mutakarib as exhibited p. 246, iii. E. 1. If we suppress the
Kasrah of al-Janani, which is also allowable in pause, and make
the second line to rhyme with the first, saying, for instance:

             U - - | U - U | U - - | U -
          Ana 'l-Jamrakanu kawiyyu 'l-janan

             U - - | U - - | U - - | U -
          La-yaksha kitali shija'u 'l-zaman,

we obtain the powerful and melodious metre in which the Shahnamah
sings of Rustam's lofty deeds, of the tender love of Rudabah and
the tragic downfall of Siyawush

Shall I confess that in writing the foregoing pages it has been
my ambition to become a conqueror, in a modest way, myself: to
conquer, I mean, the prejudice frequently entertained, and shared
even by my accomplished countryman, Rueckert, that Arabic Prosody
is a clumsy and repulsive doctrine. I have tried to show that it
springs naturally from the character of the language, and,
intimately connected, as it is, with the grammatical system of
the Arabs, it appears to me quite worthy of the acumen of a
people, to whom, amongst other things, we owe the invention of
Algebra, the stepping-stone of our whole modern system of
Mathematics I cannot refrain, therefore, from concluding with a
little anecdote anent al-Khalil, which Ibn Khallikan tells in the
following words. His son went one day into the room where his
father was, and on finding him scanning a piece of poetry by the
rules of Prosody he ran out and told the people that his father
had lost his wits. They went in immediately and related to
al-Khalil what they had heard, on which he addressed his son in
these terms:

"Had you known what I was saying, you would have excused me, and
had you known what you said, I should have blamed you But you did
not understand me, so you blamed me, and I knew that you were
ignorant, so I pardoned you."





                            L'Envoi.



Here end, to my sorrow, the labours of a quarter-century, and
here I must perforce say with the "poets' Poet,"

          "Behold! I see the haven nigh at hand,
          To which I mean my wearie course to bend;
          Vere the main shete, and bear up with the land
          The which afore is fairly to be ken'd."

Nothing of importance now indeed remains for me but briefly to
estimate the character of my work and to take cordial leave of my
readers, thanking them for the interest they have accorded to
these volumes and for enabling me thus successfully to complete
the decade.

Without pudor malus or over-diffidence I would claim to have
fulfilled the promise contained in my Foreword. The
anthropological notes and notelets, which not only illustrate and
read between the lines of the text, but assist the student of
Moslem life and of Arabo-Egyptian manners, customs and language
in a multitude of matters shunned by books, form a repertory of
Eastern knowledge in its esoteric phase, sexual as well as
social.

To assert that such lore is unnecessary is to state, as every
traveller knows, an "absurdum." Few phenomena are more startling
than the vision of a venerable infant, who has lived half his
long life in the midst of the wildest anthropological vagaries
and monstrosities, and yet who absolutely ignores all that India
or Burmah enacts under his very eyes. This is crass ignorance,
not the naive innocence of Saint Francis who, seeing a man and a
maid in a dark corner, raised his hands to Heaven and thanked the
Lord that there was still in the world so much of Christian
Charity.

Against such lack of knowledge my notes are a protest; and I may
claim success despite the difficulty of the task. A traveller
familiar with Syria and Palestine, Herr Landberg, writes, "La
plume refuserait son service, la langue serait insuffisante, si
celui qui connait la vie de tous les jours des Orientaux, surtout
des classes elevees, voulait la devoiler. L'Europe est bien loin
d'en avoir la moindre idee."

In this matter I have done my best, at a time too when the
hapless English traveller is expected to write like a young lady
for young ladies, and never to notice what underlies the most
superficial stratum. And I also maintain that the free treatment
of topics usually taboo'd and held to be "alekta"--unknown and
unfitted for publicity--will be a national benefit to an "Empire
of Opinion," whose very basis and buttresses are a thorough
knowledge by the rulers of the ruled. Men have been crowned with
gold in the Capitol for lesser services rendered to the
Respublica.

That the work contains errors, shortcomings and many a lapsus, I
am the first and foremost to declare. Yet in justice to myself I
must also notice that the maculae are few and far between; even
the most unfriendly and interested critics have failed to point
out an abnormal number of slips. And before pronouncing the "Vos
plaudite!" or, as Easterns more politely say, "I implore that my
poor name may be raised aloft on the tongue of praise," let me
invoke the fair field and courteous favour which the Persian poet
expected from his readers.

          (Veil it, an fault thou find, nor jibe nor jeer:--
          None may be found of faults and failings clear!)

RICHARD F. BURTON.

Athenaeum Club, September 30, '86.





                            Appendix



                           Memorandum



I make no apology for the number and extent of bibliographical
and other lists given in this Appendix: they may cumber the book
but they are necessary to complete my design.  This has been to
supply throughout the ten volumes the young Arabist and student
of Orientalism and Anthropology with such assistance as I can
render him; and it is my conviction that if with the aid of this
version he will master the original text of the "Thousand Nights
and a Night," he will find himself at home amongst educated men
in Egypt and Syria, Najd and Mesopotamia, and be able to converse
with them like a gentleman; not, as too often happens in Anglo-
India, like a "Ghorawala" (groom).  With this object he will
learn by heart what instinct and inclination suggest of the
proverbs and instances, the verses, the jeux d'esprit and
especially the Koranic citations scattered about the text; and my
indices will enable him to hunt up the tale or the verses which
he may require for quotation wven when writing an ordinary letter
to a "native" correspondent.  Thus he will be spared the wasted
labour of wading through volumes in order to pick up a line.

The following is the list of indices:--

Appendix I.

I.   Index to the Tales in the ten Volumes.
II.  Alphabetical Table of the Notes (Anthropological, etc.)
     prepared by F. Steingass, Ph.D.
III. Alphabetical Table of First Lines (metrical portion) in
     English and Arabic, prepared by Dr. Steingass.
IV.  Tables of Contents of the various Arabic texts.
     A.   The Unfinished Calcutta Edition (1814-18).
     B.   The Breslau Text (1825-43) from Mr. Payne's Version.
     C.   The MacNaghten or Turner-Macan Text (A.D. 1839-42) and
          the Bulak Edition (A.H. 1251 = A.D. 1835-36), from Mr.
          Payne's Version.
     D.   The same with Mr. Lane's and my Version.

Appendix II.

Contributions to the Bibliography of the Thousand and One Nights,
and their Imitations, with a Table shewing the contents of the
principal editions and translations of The Nights.  By W. F.
Kirby, Author of "Ed-Dimiryaht, and Oriental Romance"; "The New
Arabian Nights," $c.





                           Appendix I



                            Index I

              Index to the Tales and Proper Names.



N.B.--The Roman numerals denote the volume {page numbers have
been omitted}



Abdullah the Fisherman and Abdullah the Merman, ix.
Abdullah bin Fazl and his brothers, ix.
Abdullah bin Ma'amar with the Man of Bassorah and his slave-girl,
v.
Abd al-Rahman the Moor's story of the Rukh, v.
Abu Hasan al-Ziyadi and the Khorasan Man, iv.
Abu Hasan, how he brake Wind, v.
Abu Isa and Kurrat al-Aye, The Loves of, v.
Abu Ja'afar the Leper, Abu al-Hasan al-Durraj and, v.
Abu Kir the Dyer and Abu Sir the Barber, ix.
Abu al-Aswad and his squinting slave-girl, v.
Abu al Husn and his slave-girl Tawaddud, v.
Abu al Hasan al-Durraj and Abu Ja'afar the Leper, v.
Abu al Hasan of Khorasan, ix.
Abu Mohammed highs Lazybones, iv.
Abu Nowas, Harun al-Rashid with the damsel and, iv.
Abu Nowas and the Three Boys, v.
Abu Sir the Barber, Abu Kir the Dyer and, ix.
Abu Suwayd and the handsome old woman, v.
Abu Yusuf with Harun al-Rashid and his Wazir Ja'afar, The Imam,
iv.
Abu Yusuf with Al-Rashid and Zubaydah, The Imam, iv.
Adam, The Birds and Beasts and the Son of, iii.
Adi bin Zayd and the Princess Hind, v.
Ajib, The History of Gharib and his brother, vi.
Ala al-Din Abu al-Shamat, iv.
Alexandria (The Sharper of) and the Master of Police, iv.
Ali bin Bakkar and Shams al-Nahar, iii.
Ali of Cairo, The Adventures of Mercury, vii.
Ali Nur al-Din and Miriam the Girdle-Girl, viii.
Ali the Persian and the Kurd Sharper, iv.
Ali Shar and Zumurrud, iv.
Ali bin Tahir and the girl Muunis, v.
Al Malik al-Nasir (Saladin) and the Three Chiefs of Police, iv.
Almsgiving, The Woman whose hands were cut off for, iv.
Amin (Al-) and his uncle Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi, v.
Anushirwan, Kisra, and the village damsel, v.
Anushirwan, The Righteousness of King, v.
Angel of Death and the King of the Children of Israel, The, v
Angel of Death with the Proud King and the Devout Man, The, v.
Angel of Death and the Rich King, The, v.
Anis al-Jalis, Nur al-Din Ali and the damsel, ii.
Ape, The King's daughter and the, iv.
Apples, The Three, i.
Arab Girl, Harun al-Rashid and the, vii.
Arab Youth, The Caliph Hisham and the, iv.
Ardashir and Hayat al-Nufus, vii.
Asma'i (Al-) and the three girls of Bassorah, vii.
Ass, The Ox and the, i.
Ass, The Wild, The Fox and, ix.
Ayishah, Musab bin al-Zubayr and his wife, v.
Aziz and Azizah, Tale of, ii.
Azizah, Aziz and. ii.
Badawi, Ja'afar the Barmecide and the old, v.
Badawi, Omar bin al-Khattab and the young, v.
Badawi, and his Wife, The, vii.
Badi'a al-Jamal, Sayf al-Muluk and, vii.
Badr Basim of Persia, Julnar the Sea-born, and her Son King, vii.
Badr al-Din Hasan, Nur al-Din Ali of Cairo and his son, i.
Baghdad, The Haunted House in, v.
Baghdad, Khalifah the Fisherman of, viii.
Baghdad, The Porter and the Three Ladies of, i.
Baghdad, (The ruined man of) and his slave-girl, ix.
Baghdad, The Sweep and the noble Lady of, iv.
Bakun's Story of the Hashish-Eater, ii.
Banu Tayy, The Lovers of the, v.
Banu Ozrah, The Lovers of the, v.
Barber's Tale of himself, The, i.
Barber's First Brother, Story of the, i.
Barber's Second Brother, Story of the, i
Barber's Third Brother, Story of the, i.
Barber's Fourth Brother, Story of the, i.
Barber's Fifth Brother, Story of the, i.
Barber's Sixth Brother, Story of the, i.
Barber, Abu Kir the Dyer and Abu Sir the, ix.
Barber-Surgeon, Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi and the, iv.
Barmecide. Ja'afar the, and the old Badawi, v
Bassorah (the man of ) and his slave-girl, Abdullah bin Ma'amar
with, v.
Bassorah, Al-Asma'i and the three girls of, vii.
Bassorah, (Hasan of) and the King's daughter of the Jinn, viii.
Bassorah, The Lovers of, vii.
Bath, Harun al-Rashid and Zubaydah in the, v.
Bathkeeper's Wife, The Wazir's Son and the, vi.
Beanselller, Ja'afar the Barmecide and the, iv.
Bear, Wardan the Butcher's adventure with the Lady and the, iv.
Beasts and the Son of Adam, The Birds and, iii.
Behram, Prince of Persia, and the Princess Al-Datma, vi.
Belvedere, The House with the, vi.
Birds and Beasts and the Carpenter, The, iii.
Birds, The Falcon and the, iii.
Birds (the Speech of), The page who feigned to know, vi.
Black Slave, The pious, v.
Blacksmith who could handle fire without hurt, The, v.
Blind Man and the Cripple, The, ix.
Boys, Abu Nowas and the Three, v.
Boy and Girl at School, The Loves of the, v.
Boy and the Thieves, The, ix.
Boy (The woman who had to lover a) and the other who had to lover
a man, v.
Brass, The City of, vi.
Broker's Story, The Christian, i.
Budur and Jubayr bin Umayr, The Loves of, iv.
Budur, Kamar al-Zaman and, iii.
Bukhayt, Story of the Eunuch, ii.
Bulak Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv.
Bull and the Ass (Story of), i.
Bulukiya, Adventures of, v.
Butcher's adventure with the Lady and the Bear, Wardan the, iv.
Butter, The Fakir and his pot of, ix.
Cairo (New) Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv.
Cairo (Old) Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv.
Cairo, The Adventures of Mercury Ali of, vii.
Caliph Al-Maamun and the Strange Doctor, iv.
Caliph, The mock, iv.
Cashmere Singing-girl, The Goldsmith and the, vi.
Cat and the Crow, The, iii.
Cat and the Mouse, The, ix.
Champion (The Moslem) and the Christian Lady, v.
Chaste Wife, The Rake's Trick against the, vi.
Christian Broker's Story, The, i.
City of Labtayt, The, vi.
Cloud (The saint to whom Allah gave a) to serve him, v.
Cobbler (Ma'aruf the) and his wife Fatimah, x.
Confectioner, his Wife and the Parrot, The, vi.
Crab, The Fishes and the, ix.
Craft and Malice of Women, The, vi.
Cripple, The Blind Man and the, ix.
Crow, The Fox and the, iii.
Crow and the Serpent, The, ix.
Crow, The Cat and the, iii.
Crows and the Hawk, The, ix.
Dalilah the Crafty and her daughter Zaynab the Coney-catcher, The
Rogueries of, vii.
Datma (The Princess Al-), Prince Behram of Persia and, vi.
Death (The Angel of) and the King of the Children of Israel, v.
Death (The Angel of) with the Proud King and the Devout Man, v.
Death (The Angel of) and the Rich King, v.
Debauchee and the Three-year-old Child, The, vi.
Desert (The old woman who dwelt in the) and the pilgrim, v.
Device (The Wife's) to cheat her husband, vi.
Devil, Ibrahim of Mosul and the, vii.
Devil, Isaac of Mosul and his mistress and the, vii.
Devout Israelite, The, iv.
Devout Tray-maker and his wife, The, v.
Devout Prince, The, v.
Devout woman and the two wicked elders, The, v.
Dibil al-Khazai and Muslim bin al-Walid, v.
Dish of Gold, The man who stole the Dog's, iv.
Doctor (The strange) and the Caliph Al-Maamun, iv
Dog's Dish of Gold, The man who stole the, iv.
Dream, The ruined man who became rich through a, iv.
Drop of Honey, The, vi.
Duban, The Physician, i.
Dunya, Taj al-Muluk and the Princess, ii.
Durraj (Abu al-Hasan al-) and Abu Ja'afar the Leper, v.
Dust, The woman who made her husband sift, vi.
Dyer, Abu Sir the Barber and Abu Kir the, ix
Eagle, The Sparrow and the, iii.
Ebony Horse, The, v.
Egypt (The man of Upper) and his Frankish wife, ix.
Elders, The Devout woman and the two wicked, v.
Eldest Lady's Story, The, i.
Enchanted Spring, The, vi.
Enchanted Youth, The, i.
Envied, The Envier and the, i.
Envier and the Envied, The, i.
Eunuch Bukhayt, Tale of the, ii.
Eunuch Kafur, Tale of the, ii.
Fakir and his jar of butter, The, ix.
Falcon and the Partridge, The, iii.
Falcon, King Sindibad and his, i.
Fatimah, Ma'aruf the Cobbler and his wife, x.
Fath bin Khakan (Al-) and Al-Mutawakkil, v.
Ferryman of the Nile and the Hermit, The, v.
First Old Man's Story, i.
Fisherman, Abdullah the Merman and Abdullah the, ix.
Fisherman of Baghdad, Khalifah the, viii.
Fisherman, The Foolish, ix.
Fisherman and the Jinni, The, i.
Fisherman, Khusrau and Shirin and the, v.
Fishes and the Crab, The, ix.
Five Suitors, The Lady and her, vi.
Flea and the Mouse, The, iii.
Folk, The Fox and the, vi.
Forger, Yahya bin Khalid and the, iv.
Fox and the Crow, The, iii.
Fox and the Folk, The, vi.
Fox, The Wolf and the, iii.
Francolin and the Tortoises, The, ix.
Frank King's Daughter, Ali Nur al-Din and the, viii.
Frank wife, The man of Upper Egypt and his, ix.
Fuller and his son, The, vi.
Generous friend, The poor man and his, iv.
Ghanim bin Ayyub the Thrall o' Love, ii.
Gharib and his brother Ajib, The History of, vi.
Girl, Harun al-Rashid and the Arab, vii.
Girl at School, The Loves of the Boy and, v.
Girls of Bassorah, Al-Asma'i and the three, vii.
Girls, Harun al-Rashid and the three, v.
Girls, Harun al-Rashid, and the two, v.
Goldsmith and the Cashmere Singing Girl, The, vi.
Goldsmith's wife, The water-carrier and the, v.
Hajjaj (Al-) Hind daughter of Al Nu'uman and, vii.
Hajjaj (Al-) and the pious man, v.
Hakim (The Caliph Al-) and the Merchant, v.
Hammad the Badawi, Tale of, ii.
Hariri (Al ) Abu Zayd's lament for his impotency. Final Note to
vol. viii
Harun al-Rashid and the Arab girl, vii.
Harun al-Rashid and the Slave-Girl and the Imam Abu Yusuf, iv.
Harun al-Rashid with the Damsel and Abu Nowas, iv.
Harun al-Rashid and Abu Hasan the Merchant of Oman, ix.
Harun al-Rashid and the three girls, v.
Harun al-Rashid and the two girls, v.
Harun al-Rashid and the three poets, v.
Harun al-Rashid and Zubaydah in the Bath, v.
Hashish-Eater, Bakun's tale of the, ii.
Hasan of Bassorah and the King's daughter of the Jinn, vii.
Hasan, King Mohammed bin Sabaik and the Merchant, vii.
Hatim al-Tayyi: his generosity after death, iv.
Haunted House in Baghdad, The, v.
Hawk, The Crows and the, ix.
Hayat al-Nufus, Ardashir and, vii.
Hedgehog and the wood Pigeons, The, iii.
Hermit, The Ferryman of the Nile and the, v.
Hermits, The, iii.
Hind, Adi bin Zayd and the Princess, v.
Hind daughter of Al-Nu'uman and Al-Hajjaj, vii.
Hind (King Jali'ad of ) and his Wazir Shimas, ix.
Hisham and the Arab Youth, The Caliph, iv.
Honey, The Drop of, vi.
Horse, The Ebony, v.
House with the Belvedere, The, vi.
Hunchback's Tale, The, i.
Husband and the Parrot, The, i.
Ibn al-Karibi, Masrur and, v.
Ibrahim al-Khawwas and the Christian King's Daughter, v.
Ibrahim.bin al-Khasib and Jamilah, ix.
Ibrahim.of Mosul and the Devil, vii.
Ibrahim.bin al-Mahdi and Al-Amin, v.
Ibrahim.bin al-Mahdi and the Barber Surgeon, iv.
Ibrahim.bin al-Mahdi and the Merchant's Sister, iv.
Ifrit's mistress and the King's Son, The, vi.
Ignorant man who set up for a Schoolmaster, The, v.
Ikrimah al-Fayyaz, Khuzaymah bin Bishr and, vii.
Imam Abu Yusuf with Al-Rashid and Zubaydah, The, iv.
Introduction. Story of King Shahryar and his brother, i.
Iram, The City of, iv.
Isaac of Mosul's Story of Khadijah and the Caliph Maamun, iv.
Isaac of Mosul and the Merchant, v.
Isaac of Mosul and his Mistress and the Devil, vii.
Island, The King of the, v.
Iskandar Zu Al-Karnayn and a certain Tribe of poor folk, v.
Israelite, The Devout, iv.
Jackals and the Wolf, The, ix.
Ja'afar the Barmecide and the Beanseller, iv.
Ja'afar the Barmecide and the old Badawi, v.
Ja'afar bin al-Had), Mohammed al-Amin, and, v.
Jamilah, Ibrahim bin al-Khasib, and, ix.
Janshah, The Story of, v.
Jali'ad of Hind and his Wazir Shimas, King, ix.
Jeweller's Wife, Kamar al-Zaman and the, ix.
Jewish Kazi and his pious Wife, The, v.
Jewish Doctor's Tale, The, i.
Jinni, The Fisherman and the, i.
Jinni, The Trader and the, i.
Jubayr bin Umayr and Budur, The Loves of, iv.
Judar and his brethren, vi.
Julnar the Sea-born and her son King Badr Basim of Persia, vii.
Justice of Providence, The, v.
Kafur, Story of the Eunuch, ii.
Kalandar's Tale, The first, i.
Kalandar's Tale The second, i.
Kalandar's Tale The third, i.
Kamar al-Zaman and Budur, iii.
Kamar al-Zaman and the Jeweller's Wife, ix.
Kazi, the Jewish, and his pious wife, v.
Khadijah and the Caliph Maamun, Isaac of Mosul's Story of, iv.
Khalif the Fisherman of Baghdad (note from Bresl. Edit.), viii.
Khalifah the Fisherman of Baghdad, viii.
Khawwas (Ibrahim al-) and the Christian King's daughter,v.
Khorasan, Abu Hasan al-Ziyadi and the man from, iv.
Khorasan, Abu al-Hasan of, ix.
Khusrau and Shirin and the Fisherman, v.
Khuzaymah bin Bishr and Ikrimah al-Fayyaz, vii.
King Jali'ad, Shimas his Wazir and his son Wird Khan, ix.
King of the Island, The, v.
King and the Pilgrim Prince, The Unjust, ix.
King and the virtuous wife, The, v.
King and his Wazir's wife, The, vi.
King's Daughter and the Ape, The, iv.
King's son and the Ifrit's Mistress, The, vi.
King's son and the Merchant's Wife, The, vi.
King's son and the Ghulah, The, vi.
Kings, The Two, ix.
Kisra Anushirwan and the Village Damsel,v.
Kurd Sharper, Ali the Persian and the, iv.
Kurrat al-Aye and Abu Isa, v.
Kus Police and the Sharper, Chief of the, iv
Labtayt, The City of, iv.
Lady of Baghdad, The Sweep and the noble, iv.
Lady's Story, The Eldest, i.
Lady and her five suitors, The, vi.
Do. and her two Lovers, The, vi.
Ladies of Baghdad, The Porter and the Three, i.
Laughed again, The man who never, vi.
Lazybones, Abu Mohammed highs, iv.
Leper, Abu al-Hasan al-Durraj and Abu Ja'afar the, v.
Lover, The mad, v.
Lover who feigned himself a thief (to save his mistress' honour),
The, iv.
Lover's trick against the chaste Wife, The, vi.
Lovers of Bassorah, The, vii.
Lovers of the Banu Tayy, The, v.
Lovers of the Banu Ozrah, The, v.
Lovers The Lady and her two, vi.
Lovers of Al-Medinah, The, vii.
Lovers The Three unfortunate, v.
Loves of the Boy and Girl at School, The, v.
Loves of Abu Isa and Kurrat al-Ayn, The, v.
Maamun, Isaac of Mosul's Story of Khadijah and the Caliph, iv.
Maamun (Al-) and the Pyramids of Egypt, v.
Maamun and the strange Scholar, The Caliph, iv.
Ma'an bin Zaidah and the Badawi, iv.
Ma'an the son of Zaidah and the Three Girls, iv.
Mad Lover, The, vii.
Magic Horse, The, v.
Mahbubah, Al-Mutawakkil and his favourite, iv.
Malik al-Nasir (Al-) and the three Masters of Police, iv.
Malik al-Nasir and his Wazir, vii.
Man and his Wife, The, ix.
Man who never laughed during the rest of his days, The, vi.
Man (The Woman who had to lover a ) and the other who had to
lover a boy, v.
Man of Upper Egypt and his Frankish Wife, ix.
Man of Al-Yaman and his six Slave-girls, iv.
Man who stole the dog's dish of gold, iv.
Man who saw the Night of Power (Three Wishes), vi.
Man's dispute with the learned Woman about boys and girls, v.
Ma'aruf the Cobb]er and his wife Fatimah, x.
Mansur, Yahya bin Khalid and, iv.
Masrur and Ibn al-Karibi, v.
Masrur and Zayn al-Mawasif, viii.
Medinah (Al-), The Lovers of, vii.
Merchant of Oman, The, ix.
Merchant and the Robbers, The, ix.
Merchant and the two Sharpers, The, iii.
Merchant's Sister, Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi and the, iv.
Merchant's Wife, The King's son and the, vi.
Merchant's Wife and the Parrot, The, i.
Mercury Ali of Cairo, The Adventures of, vii.
Merman, and Abdullah the Fisherman, Abdullah the, ix.
Miller and his wife, The, v.
Miriam, Ali Nur alDin and, viii.
Miser and Loaves of Bread, The, vi.
Mock Caliph, The, iv.
Mohammed al-Amin and Ja'afar bin al-Had), v.
Mohammed bin Sabaik and the Merchant Hasan, King, vii.
Money changer, The Thief and the, iv.
Monkey, The Thief and his, iii.
Moslem Champion and the Christian Lady, The, v.
Mouse, The, and the Cat, ix.
Mouse and the Flea, The, iii.
Mouse and the Ichneumon, The, iii.
Munnis, Ali bin Tahir and the girl, v.
Musab bin al-Zubayr and Ayishah his wife, v.
Muslim bin al-Walid and Dibil al-Khuzai, v.
Mutawakkil (Al-) and Al-Fath bin Khakan, v.
Mutawakkil and his favourite Mahbubah, iv.
Mutalammis (Al-) and his wife Umaymah, v.
Naomi, Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a and his Slave-girl; iv.
Nazarene Broker's Story, The, i.
Necklace, The Stolen, vi.
Niggard and the Loaves of Bread, The, vi.
Night of Power, The man who saw the, vi.
Nile (The Ferryman of the ) and the Hermit, v.
Ni'amah bin al-Rabi'a and Naomi his Slave-girl, iv.
Nur al-Din Ali and the damsel Anis al-Jalis, ii.
Nur al-Din of Cairo and his son Badr al-Din Hasan, i.
Ogress, The King's Son and the, vi.
Old Man's Story, The First, i.
Old Man's Story The Second, i.
Old Man's Story The Third, i.
Old Woman, Abu Suwayd and the handsome, v.
Omar bin al-Nu'uman and his Sons Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan, The
Tale of King, ii.
Omar bin al-Khattab and the young Badawi, v.
Oman, The Merchant of, ix.
Otbah and Rayya, vii.
Page who feigned to know the speech of birds, The, vi.
Paradise, The Apples of, v.
Parrot, The Merchant's wife and the, i.
Partridge, The Hawk and the, iii.
Peacock, The Sparrow and the, iii.
Persian and the Kurd Sharper, Ali the, iv.
Physician Duban, The, i.
Physician's Story, The Jewish, i.
Pilgrim and the old woman who dwelt in the desert, The, v.
Pilgrim Prince, The Unjust King and the, ix.
Pious black slave, The, v.
Pigeons, The Hedgehog and the, iii.
Pigeons, The Two, vi.
Platter-maker and his wife, The devout, v.
Poets, Harun al-Rashid and the three, v.
Police of Bulak, Story of the Chief of the, iv.
Police of Kus and the Sharper, the Chief of the, iv.
Police of New Cairo, Story of the Chief of the, iv.
Police of Old Cairo, Story of the Chief of the, iv.
Police (The Three Masters of ), Al-Malik, al-Nasir and, iv.
Poor man and his &friend in need, The, iv.
Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad, The, i.
Portress, The Tale of the, i.
Prince Behram and the Princess al-Datma, vi.
Prince the Ensorcelled, i.
Prince and the Ghulah, The, i.
Prince, The Devout, v.
Prince (the Pilgrim), The Unjust King and, ix.
Prior who became a Moslem, The, v.
Providence, The justice of, v.
Purse, The Stolen, vi.
Pyramids of Egypt, Al-Maamun and the, v.
Queen of the Serpents, The, v.
Rake's trick against the chaste Wife, The, vi.
Rayya, Otbah and, vii.
Reeve's Tale, The, i.
Rogueries of Dalilah the Crafty and her daughter Zaynab the Coney
catcher, The, vii.
Rose-in-Hood, Uns al-Wujud and the Wazir's Daughter, v.
Ruined Man of Baghdad and his Slave-girl, The, ix.
Ruined Man who became rich again through a dream, The, iv.
Rukh, Abd al-Rahman the Moor's Story of the, v.
Sa'id bin Salim and the Barmecides, v.
Saint to whom Allah gave a cloud to serve him, The, v.
Saker and the Birds, The, iii.
Sandalwood Merchant and the Sharpers, The, vi.
Sayf al-Muluk and Badi'a al-Jamal, vii.
School, The Loves of the Boy and the Girl at, v.
Schoolmaster who fell in love by report, The, v.
Schoolmaster The Foolish, v.
Schoolmaster The ignorant man who set up for a, v.
Serpent, The Crow and the, ix.
Serpent-charmer and his Wife, ix.
Serpents, The Queen of the, v.
Sexes, Relative excellence of the, v.
Shahryar and his brother, King (Introduction), i.
Shahryar (King) and his brother, i.
Shams al-Nahar, Ali bin Bakkar and, iii.
Sharper of Alexandria and the Chief of Police, The, iv.
Sharper, Ali the Persian and the Kurd, iv.
Sharper, The Chief of the Kus Police and the, iv.
Sharper, The Simpleton and the, v.
Sharpers, The Merchant and the Two, iii.
Do. The Sandalwood Merchant and the, vi.
Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan, The History of King Omar bin
Al-Nu'uman and his Sons, ii.
Shaykh's Story (The First), i.
Shaykh's Story (The Second), i.
Shaykh's Story (The Third), i.
Shepherd and the Thief, The, ix.
Shimas, King Jali'ad of Hind and his Wazir, ix.
Shipwrecked Woman and her child, The, v.
Shirin and the Fisherman, Khusrau and, v.
Simpleton and the Sharper, The, v.
Sindibad and his Falcon, King, i.
Sindbad the Seaman and Sindbad the Porter, vi.
Sindbad the Seaman First Voyage of, vi.
Sindbad the Seaman Second Voyage of, vi.
Sindbad the Seaman Third Voyage of, vi.
Sindbad the Seaman Fourth Voyage of, vi.
Sindbad the Seaman, Fifth Voyage of, vi.
Sindbad the Seaman Sixth Voyage of, vi.
Sindbad the Seaman Seventh Voyage of, vi.
Sindbad the Seaman  (note from Cal. Edit.) vi.
Singing girl, The Goldsmith and the Cashmere, vi.
Six Slave-girls, The Man of Al-Yaman and his, iv.
Slave, The pious black, v.
Slave-girl, The ruined man of Baghdad and his, ix.
Slave-girls, The Man of Al-Yaman and his six, iv.
Sparrow and the Eagle, The, iii.
Sparrow and the Peacock, The, iii.
Spider and the Wind, The, ix.
Spring, The Enchanted, vi.
Squinting slave-girl, Abu al-Aswad and his, v.
Sparrow Necklace, The, vi.
Sparrow Purse, The, vi.
Suitors, The Lady and her five, vi.
Sweep and Noble Lady of Baghdad, The, iv.
Tailor's Tale, The, i.
Taj al-Muluk and the Princess Dunya, The Tale of, ii.
Tawaddud, Abu al-Hasan and his slave-girl, v.
Thief, The Lover who feigned himself a, iv.
Thief and the Shroff, The, iv.
Thief and his Monkey, The, iii.
Thief The Shepherd and the, ix.
Thief turned Merchant and the other Thief, The, v.
Thieves, The Boy and the, ix.
Thieves, The Merchant and the, ix.
Thieves, The Two, v.
Three-year old-child, The Debauchee and the, vi.
Three Apples, The, i.
Three unfortunate Lovers, v.
Three Wishes, or the Man who longed to see the Night of Power,
The, vi.
Tortoise, The Waterfowl and the, iii.
Tortoises, The Heathcock and the, ix.
Trader (The) and the Jinni, i.
Trick (The Lover's ) against the chaste wife, vi.
Trick  (The Wife's ) against her husband, vi.
Two Kings, The, ix.
Two Pigeons, The, vi.
Umaymah, Al-Mutalammis and his wife, v.
Unfortunate Lovers, The Three, v.
Unjust King and the Pilgrim Prince, The, ix.
Uns al-Wujud and the Wazir's Daughter Rose-in-Hood, v.
Upper Egypt (The man of) and his Frank wife, ix.
Walid bin Sahl, Yunus the Scribe and the Caliph, vii.
Wardan, the Butcher, Adventure with the Lady and the Bear, iv.
Water-carrier and the Goldsmith's Wife, The, v.
Waterfowl and the Tortoise, The, iii.
Wazir and the Sage Duban, The, i.
Wazir, Al-Malik al-Nasir and his, vii.
Wazir of al-Yaman and his young brother, The, v.
Wazir's Son and the Hammam-Keeper's Wife, The, vi.
Wazir's Wife, The King and his, vi.
Weasel, The Mouse and the, iii.
Weaver, The Foolish, iii.
Wife, The Badawi and his, vii.
Wife, (the Chaste) The Lover's Trick against, vi.
Wife, The King and his Wazir's, vi.
Wife, The Man and his Wilful, ix.
Wife, (The Merchant's) and the Parrot, i.
Wife, (The Virtuous) and the King, v.
Wife's device to cheat her husband, The, vi.
Wife's trick against her husband, The, v.
Wild Ass, The Jackal and the, ix.
Wilful Wife, The Man and his, ix.
Wind, The Spider and the, ix.
Wird Khan (King) and his Women and Wazirs, ix.
Wolf and the Fox, The, iii.
Wolf, The Foxes and the, ix.
Woman (The shipwrecked) and her child, v.
Woman's trick against her husband, v.
Woman who made her husband sift dust, The, iv.
Woman whose hands were cut off for Almsgiving, The, iv.
Women, The Malice of, vi.
Women, The Two, v.
Yahya bin Khalid and the Forger, iv.
Yahya bin Khalid and Mansur, iv.
Yahya bin Khalid and the Poor Man, v.
Yaman (The Man of Al-) and his six slave-girls, iv.
Yaman (The Wazir of Al-) and his young brother, v.
Yunus the Scribe and the Caliph Walid bin Sahl, vii.
Zau al-Makan, The History of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and his
Sons Sharrkan and, ii.
Zayn al-Mawasif, Masrur and, viii.
Zaynab the Coney-catcher, The Rogueries of Dalilah the Wily, and
her Daughter, vii..
Zubaydah in the Bath, Harun al-Rashid and, v.
Zumurrud, Ali Shar and, iv.






                            Index II



                Alphabetical Table of the Notes
                     (Anthropological, &c.)

                Prepared by F. Steingass, Ph.D.



[Index II is not included]






                          Index III.-A



               Alphabetical Table of First Lines
                 (Metrical Portion) in English.

                   Prepared by Dr. Steingass.



A beloved familiar o'erreigns my heart viii. 70.
A boy of twice ten is fit for a king! iii. 303.
A breeze of love on my soul did blow viii. 222.
A damsel 'twas the firer's art had decked with snares and
sleight, i. 219, x. 59.
A dancer whose figure is like a willow branch, ix. 222.
A dancer whose form is like branch of Ban! ix. 221.
A dog, dog-fathered, by dog-grandsire bred, viii. 15.
A fan whose breath is fraught with fragrant scent, viii. 273.
A fair one, to idolaters if she her face should show, ix. 197.
A friend in need is he who, ever true iii. 149.
A guest hath stolen on my head and honour may he lack, viii. 295.
A hag to whom th' unlawful lawfullest, i. 174.
A heart bore thee off in chase of the fair ix. 282.
A heart, by Allah!- never soft to lover wight, vii. 222.
A Houri, by whose charms my heart is moved to sore distress, vii.
105.
A house where flowers from stones of granite grow, iii. 19.
A Jinniyah this, with her Jinn, to show, v. 149.
A King who when hosts of the foe invade, ii.l.
A lutanist to us inclined, viii. 283.
A maiden 'twas, the dresser's art had decked with cunning
sleight, viii. 32.
A merchant I spied whose lovers, viii. 264.
A messenger from thee came bringing union-hope, iii. 188.
A moon she rises, willow-wand she waves iii. 237, viii. 303.
A moon, when he bends him those eyes lay bare, viii. 284.
A moon which blights you if you dare behold, ii. 4.
A night whose stars refused to run their course, iii. 299
A palace whereon be blessings and praise, iv. 134.
A place secure from every thought of fear i. 114.
A sage, I feel a fool before thy charms iii. 272. ,
A slave of slaves there standeth at thy door, i. 89.
A sun on wand in knoll of sand she showed, i. 217; x. 58.
A thin-waist maid who shames the willow-wand, ii. 285.
A term decreed my lot I 'spy, viii. 83.
A trifle this an his eyes be sore, v. 127.
A tree whilere was I the Bulbul's home, viii. 281.
A wand uprising from a sandy knoll, ix.
A warrior showing such open hand, iv. 97.
A wasted body, heart empierced to core, ii. 314.
A youth slim waisted from whose locks and brow, i. 68.
A zephyr bloweth from the lover's site, viii. 90.
Above the rose of cheek is thorn of lance, iii. 331.
Act on sure grounds, nor hurry fast, iv. 189.
Add other wit to thy wit, counsel craving, iv. 189.
Affright me funerals at every time, v. 111.
After thy faring never chanced I 'spy, viii. 142.
Ah, fare thee not; for I've no force thy faring to endure, viii.
63.
Ah! for lowe of love and longing suffer ye as suffer we? viii.
68.
Ah Khalid! this one is a slave of love distraught, iv. 158.
Ah, often have I sought the fair! how often fief and fain, vii.
138.
Alack and alas! Patience taketh flight, viii. 263.
Alas, alack and wellaway for blamer's calumny! viii. 285.
Albe by me I had through day and night, iii. 267.
Albe to lover adverse be his love, iii. 266.
Albeit my vitals quiver 'neath this ban, iii. 62.
Alexandria's a frontier, viii. 289.
All crafts are like necklaces strung on a string, i. 308.
All drinks wherein is blood the Law unclean Doth hold, i. 89.
All sons of woman albe long preserved, iv. 63.
"Allah assain those eyne! What streams of blood they shed!" ii.
100.
Allah be good to him that gives glad tidings of thy steps, i.
239.
Allah holds Kingship! Whoso seeks without Him victory, iii. 86.
Allah, my patience fails: I have no word, iii.344.
Allah save the rose which yellows amorn, viii. 276.
Allah, where'er thou be, His aid impart, ii. 148.
Allah's peace on thee, House of Vacancy! viii. 237.
Although the Merciful be doubtless with me, ix. 278.
Al-Yaman's leven-gleam I see, ii. 179.
An but the house could know who cometh 'twould rejoice, i. 176.
An, by thy life, pass thee my funeral train, v. 70.
An fail I of my thanks to thee, i. 56.
An Fate afflict thee, with grief manifest, viii. 146.
An Fate some person 'stablish o'er thy head, iii. 89.
An faulty of one fault the beauty prove, ii.96.
An I be healed of disease in frame, viii. 70.
An I quit Cairo and her pleasaunces, i. 290.
An we behold a lover love-foredone, v. 73.
An my palm be full of wealth and my wealth I ne'er bestow, ii.
11.
An say I:--Patient I can bear his faring, iii. 187.
An tears of blood for me, friend, thou hast shed, i. 89.
An there be one who shares with me her love, i. 180.
An thou but deign consent, A wish to heart affied, iv. 247.
An thou of pious works a store neglect, ii. 202.
An thou wouldst know my name, whose day is done, vi. 94.
An through the whole of life, iv. 190.
An Time my lover restore me I'll blame him fain, ix. 192.
An were it asked me when by hell-fire burnt, iii. 279.
An what thou claimest were the real truth, v. 151.
An wouldst be life-long safe, vaunt not delight, viii. 94.
And Almond apricot suggesting swain, viii. 268.
And dweller in the tomb whose food is at his head, v. 238.
And eater lacking mouth and even maw, v. 240.
And fairest Fawn, we said to him Portray, viii. 272.
And haply whenas strait descends on lot of generous youth, iii.
131.
And in brunettes is mystery, couldst thou but read it right, iv.
258.
And in my liver higher flames the fire, vii. 366.
And loveling weareth on his cheek a mole, v. 65.
And pity one who erst in honour throve, ii. 149.
And shaddock mid the garden paths, on bough, viii. 272.
And Solomon, when Allah to him said, vi. 86.
And the lips girls, that are perfume sweet, v. 79.
And the old man crept o'er the worldly ways, iv. 41.
And trees of orange fruiting ferry fair, viii. 271.
And wand-like Houri who can passion heal, v. 149.
And 'ware her scorpions when pressing them, viii. 209.
And when birdies o'er-warble its lakelet it gars, ix. 6.
And, when she announceth the will to sing, viii. 166.
Albeit this thy case lack all resource, v. 69.
Allah watered a land, and upsprang a tree, v. 244.
Answer, by Allah! Sepulchre, are all his beauties gone? i. 239.
Appeared not my excuse till hair had clothed his cheek, iii. 57.
Apple which joins hues twain and brings to mind, viii. 268.
Apple whose hue combines in union mellow, i. 158.
As a crescent-moon in the garth her form, viii. 207.
As for me, of him I feel naught affright,vi. 98.
As long as palms shall shift the flower, v. 136.
As love waxt longer less met we sway, v. 78.
As one of you who mounted mule, viii. 297.
As she willed she was made, and in such a way that when, iv. 191.
As the Sage watched the stars, the semblance clear, i. 206.
As though ptisane of wine on her lips honey dew, iii. 57.
Ask (if needs thou ask) the compassionate, ix. 29.
Ask of my writ, what wrote my pen in dole, iii. 274.
Ass and Umm Amr' went their way, v. 118.

Bare hills and camp-ground desolate, v. 130.
Baulks me my Fate as tho' she were my foe, viii. 130.
Be as thou wilt, for Allah is bountiful, viii. 277.
Be as thou wilt, for Allah still is bounteous Lord, ii. 202.
Be mild to brother mingling, iv. 110.
Be mild what time thou'rt ta'en with anger and despite, iv. 221.
Be mild when rage shall come to afflict thy soul, iv. 54.
Be praises mine to all-praiseworthy Thee, ii. 261.
Be proud; I'll crouch! Bully; I'll bear! Despise; I'll pray! iii.
188.
Be sure all are villains and so bide safe iii. 142.
Bear our salams, O Dove, from this our stead, viii. 236.
Beareth for love a burden sore this soul of me, viii. 66.
Beauty they brought with him to make compare, i. 144.
Beguiled as Fortune who her guile displays, iv. 22.
Behind the veil a damsel sits with gracious beauty dight, viii.
210.
Behold a house that's like the Dwelling of Delight, viii. 183.
Behold this lovely garden! 'tis as though ii. 240.
Belike my Fortune may her bridle turn,i. 52.
Belike Who Yusuf to his kin restored, iv. 103.
Beloved, why this strangeness, why this hate? iv. 234.
Bethink thee not of worldly state, iii. 328
Bid thou thy phantom distance keep, vii 108.
Better ye 'bide and I take my leave, i. 154.
Beware her glance I rede thee 'tis like wizard wight, ii. 295.
B