ind feet of the gazelle. She then tied a rope to the
compasses in the roof, and the two ends to the other pairs. But
she made Saif Zul Yezn lie down in such a position that his head
was between the feet of the gazelle. She then said to him,
"Remain here till I come back"; and went to the King, with whom
she found a very numerous assemblage of the wise men. As soon as
she entered, the King made her sit beside him on the throne. "O
my mother Alka," he said, "I could not close an eye last night
from anxiety concerning yesterday's events." "Have you no wise
men," returned she, "who eat the bread of the divan?" She then
turned to them, saying, "Select the wisest among you!" and they
chose the wisest among them. She ordered them to take the
sandboard again, but they became so confused that they were
obliged to begin again three times from the beginning. "What do
you discover?" said the King angrily. "O our master," replied
they, "he whom we seek has been carried away by a beast of the
desert, which is flying with him between Heaven and earth." "How
is this?" said the King to Alka; "have you ever seen anything
like it?" He seized his sword in a rage, and three fled, and he
killed four of the others. When Alka went home, she released
Saif, and told him what had happened. Next morning Alka took the
gazelle, and slaughtered it in a copper kettle. She then took a
golden mortar, and reversed it over it, and said to Saif Zul
Yezn, "Sit on this mortar till I come back." She then went to the
divan, and chose out six wise men, who again took the sandboard,
and began again three times over in confusion. "Alas," said the
King, in anger, "What misfortune do you perceive?" "O our
master," they exclaimed in consternation, "our understanding is
confused, for we see him sitting on a golden mountain, which is
in the midst of a sea of blood, surrounded by a copper wall." The
King was enraged, and broke up the assembly, saying, "O Alka, I
will now depend on you alone." "To-morrow I will attempt to show
you the stranger," she replied. When she came home, she related
to Saif what had happened, and said, "I shall know by to-morrow
what to tell the King to engage his attention, and prevent him
from pursuing you." Next morning she found Taka speaking to Saif
Zul Yezn alone; and she asked her, "What does he wish?" "Mother,"
replied Taka, "he wishes to go to the King's palace, to see him
and the divan." "What you wish shall be done," said she to Saif,
"but you must not speak." He assented to the condition, and she
dressed him as her attendant, gave him a sandboard, and went with
him to the King, who said to her, "I could not sleep at all last
night, for thinking of the stranger for whom we are seeking."
"Now that the affair is in my hands," returned she, "you will
find me a sufficient protection against him." She immediately
ordered Saif to give her the sandboard. She took it, and when she
had made her calculations, she said joyfully to the King, "O my
lord, I can give you the welcome news of the flight of the
stranger, owing to his dread of you and your revenge." When the
King heard this, he rent his clothes, slapped his face, and said,
"He would not have departed, without having taken the book." "I
cannot see if he has taken anything," replied she. "This is the
first of the month," said the King, "come and let us see if it is
missing." He then went with a large company to the building where
the book was kept. Alka turned away from the King for a moment to
say to Saif, "Do not enter with us, for if you enter, the case
will open of itself, and the book will fall into your hands. This
would at once betray you, and you would be seized and put to
death, and all my labour would have been in vain." She then left
him, and rejoined the King. When they reached the building, the
doors were opened, and when the King entered, they found the
book. They immediately paid it the customary honours, and
protracted this species of worship, while Saif stood at the door,
debating with himself whether to enter or not. At last his
impatience overcame him, and he entered, and at the same instant
the casket was broken to pieces, and the book fell out. The King
then ordered all to stand up, and the book rolled to Saif Zul
Yezn. Upon this all drew their swords, and rushed upon him. Saif
drew his sword also, and cried "God is great!" as Shaikh Gyat had
taught him. He continued to fight and defend himself, and
struggled to reach the door. The entire town arose in tumult to
pursue him, when he stumbled over a dead body, and was seized.
"Let me not see his face," cried the King, "but throw him into
the mine." This mine was eighty yards deep, and had not been
opened for sixty years. It was closed by a heavy leaden cover,
which they replaced, after they had loaded him with chains, and
thrown him in. Saif sat there in the darkness, greatly troubled,
and lamenting his condition to Him who never sleeps. Suddenly, a
side wall of the mine opened, and a figure came forth which
approached and called him by his name. "Who are you?" asked Saif.
"I am a woman named Akissa, and inhabit the mountain where the
Nile rises. We are a nation who hold the faith of Abraham. A very
pious man lives below us in a beautiful palace. But an evil Jinni
named Mukhtatif lived near us also, who loved me, and demanded me
in marriage of my father. He consented from fear, but I was
unwilling to marry an evil being who was a worshipper of fire.
‘How can you promise me in marriage to an infidel?' said I to my
father. ‘I shall thereby escape his malice myself,' replied he. I
went out and wept, and complained to the pious man about the
affair. ‘Do you know who will kill him?' said he to me, and I
answered, ‘No.' ‘I will direct you to him who has cut off his
hand,' said he. ‘His name is Saif Zul Yezn, and he is now in the
city of King Kamrun, in the mine.' Thereupon he brought me to
you, and I come as you see me, to guide you to my country, that
you may kill Mukhtatif, and free the earth from his wickedness."
She then moved him, and shook him, and all his chains fell off.
She lifted him on her shoulders, and carried him to the palace of
the Shaikh, who was named Abbas Salam. Here he heard a voice
crying, "Enter, Saif Zul Yezn." He did so, and found a grave and
venerable old man, who gave him a very friendly reception,
saying, "Wait till to-morrow, when Akissa will come to guide you
to the castle of Mukhtatif." He remained with him for the night,
and when Akissa arrived next morning, the old man told her to
hasten, that the world might be soon rid of the monster. They
then left this venerable man, and when they had walked awhile,
Akissa said to Saif, "Look before you." He did so, and perceived
a black mass at some distance. "This is the castle of the evil-
doer," said she, "but I cannot advance a step further than this."
Saif therefore pursued his way alone, and when he came near the
castle, he walked round it to look for the entrance. As he was
noticing the extraordinary height of the castle, which was
founded on the earth, but appeared to overtop the clouds, he saw
a window open, and several people looked out, who pointed at him
with their fingers, exclaiming, "That is he, that is he!" They
threw him a rope, which they directed him to bind round him. They
drew him up by it, when he found himself in the presence of three
hundred and sixty damsels, who saluted him by his name.

                   *     *     *     *     *

(Here Habicht's fragment ends.)




                 SCOTT'S MSS. AND TRANSLATIONS.



In 1800, Jonathan Scott, LL.D., published a volume of "Tales,
Anecdotes, and Letters, translated from the Arabic and Persian,"
based upon a fragmentary MS., procured by J. Anderson in Bengal,
which included the commencement of the work (Nos. 1-3) in 29
Nights; two tales not divided into Nights (Nos. 264 and 135) and
No. 21.

Scott's work includes these two new tales (since republished by
Kirby and Clouston), with the addition of various anecedotes,
&c., derived from other sources. The "Story of the Labourer and
the Chair" has points of resemblance to that of "Malek and the
Princess Chirine" (Shirin?) in the Thousand and One Days; and
also to that of "Tuhfet El Culoub" (No. 183a) in the Breslau
Edition. The additional tales in this MS. and vol. of
translations are marked "A" under Scott in our Tables. Scott
published the following specimens (text and translation) in
Ouseley's Oriental Collections (1797 and following years) No.
135m (i. pp. 245-257) and Introduction (ii. pp. 160-172; 228-
257). The contents are fully given in Ouseley, vol. ii. pp. 34,
35.

Scott afterwards acquired an approximately complete MS. in 7
vols., written in 1764 which was brought from Turkey by E.
Wortley Montague. Scott published a table of contents (Ouseley,
ii. pp. 25-34), in which, however, the titles of some few of the
shorter tales, which he afterwards translated from it, are
omitted, while the titles of others are differently translated.
Thus "Greece" of the Table becomes "Yemen" in the translation;
and "labourer" becomes "sharper." As a specimen, he subsequently
printed the text and translation of No. 145 (Ouseley, ii. pp.
349-367).

This MS., which differs very much from all others known, is now
in the Bodleian Library at Oxford.

In 1811, Scott published an edition of the Arabian Nights'
Entertainments, in 6 vols., vol. 1 containing a long
introduction, and vol. 6, including a series of new tales from
the Oxford MS. (There is a small paper edition; and also a large
paper edition, the latter with frontispieces, and an Appendix
including a table of the tales contained in the MS.) It had
originally been Scott's intention to retranslate the MS.; but he
appears to have found it beyond his powers. He therefore
contented himself with re-editing Galland, altering little except
the spelling of the names, and saying that Galland's version is
in the main so correct that it would be useless repetition to go
over the work afresh. Although he says that he found many of the
tales both immoral and puerile, he translated most of those near
the beginning, and omitted much more (including several harmless
and interesting tales, such as No. 152) towards the end of his
MS. than near the beginning. The greater part of Scott's
additional tales, published in vol. 6, are included in the
composite French and German editions of Gauttier and Habicht;
but, except Nos. 208, 209, and 215, republished in my "New
Arabian Nights," they have not been reprinted in England, being
omitted in all the many popular versions which are professedly
based upon Scott, even in the edition in 4 vols., published in
1882, which reprints Scott's Preface.

The edition of 1882 was published about the same time as one of
the latest reissues of Lane's Thousand and One Nights; and the
Saturday Review of Nov. 4, 1882 (p. 609), published an article on
the Arabian Nights, containing the following amusing passage:
"Then Jonathan Scott, LL.D. Oxon, assures the world that he
intended to retranslate the tales given by Galland; but he found
Galland so adequate on the whole that he gave up the idea, and
now reprints Galland, with etchings by M. Lalauze, giving a
French view of Arab life. Why Jonathan Scott, LL.D., should have
thought to better Galland, while Mr. Lane's version is in
existence, and has just been reprinted, it is impossible to say."

The most interesting of Scott's additional tales, with reference
to ordinary editions of The Nights, are as follows:--

No. 204b is a variant of No. 37.

No. 204c is a variant of 3e, in which the wife, instead of the
husband, acts the part of a jealous tyrant. (Compare Cazotte's
story of Halechalbe.)

No. 204e. Here we have a reference to the Nesnás, which only
appears once in the ordinary versions of The Nights (No. 132b;
Burton, v., p. 333).

No. 206b. is a variant of No. 156.

No. 207c. This relates to a bird similar to that in the Jealous
Sisters (No. 198), and includes a variant of 3ba.

No. 207h. Another story of enchanted birds. The prince who seeks
them encounters an "Oone" under similar circumstances to those
under which Princess Parizade (No. 198) encounters the old
durwesh. The description is hardly that of a Marid, with which I
imagine the Ons are wrongly identified.

No. 208 contains the nucleus of the famous story of Aladdin (No.
193).

No. 209 is similar to No. 162; but we have again the well
incident of No. 3ba, and the exposure of the children as in No.
198.

No. 215. Very similar to Hasan of Bassorah (No. 155). As Sir R.
F. Burton (vol. viii., p. 60, note) has called in question my
identification of the Islands of WákWák with the Aru Islands near
New Guinea, I will quote here the passages from Mr. A. R.
Wallace's Malay Archipelago (chap. 31) on which I based it:--"The
trees frequented by the birds are very lofty. . . . . One day I
got under a tree where a number of the Great Paradise birds were
assembled, but they were high up in the thickest of the foliage,
and flying and jumping about so continually that I could get no
good view of them. . . . . Their voice is most extraordinary. At
early morn, before the sun has risen, we hear a loud cry of
‘Wawk--wawk--wawk, w k--w k--w k,' which resounds through the
forest, changing its direction continually. This is the Great
Bird of Paradise going to seek his breakfast. . . . . The birds
had now commenced what the people here call ‘sacaleli,' or
dancing-parties, in certain trees in the forest, which are not
fruit-trees as I at first imagined, but which have an immense
head of spreading branches and large but scattered leaves, giving
a clear space for the birds to play and exhibit their plumes. On
one of these trees a dozen or twenty full-plumaged male birds
assemble together, raise up their wings, stretch out their necks,
and elevate their exquisite plumes, keeping them in a continual
vibration. Between whiles they fly across from branch to branch
in great excitement, so that the whole tree is filled with waving
plumes in every variety of attitude and motion."

No. 216bc appears to be nearly the same as No. 42.

No. 225 is a variant of No. 135q.




                    WEIL'S TRANSLATION.



The only approximately complete original German translation is
"Tausend und eine Nacht. Arabische Erzählungen. Zum Erstenmale
aus dem Urtexte vollständig und treu übersetzt von Dr. Gustav
Weil," four vols., Stuttgart. The first edition was in roy. 8vo,
and was published at Stuttgart and Pforzheim in 1839-1842; the
last volume I have not seen; it is wanting in the copy in the
British Museum. This edition is divided into Nights, and includes
No. 25b. In the later editions, which are in small square 8vo,
but profusely illustrated, like the larger one, this story is
omitted (except No. 135m, which the French editors include with
it), though Galland's doubtful stories are retained; and there is
no division into Nights. The work has been reprinted several
times, and the edition quoted in our Table is described as
"Zweiter Abdruck der dritten vollstandig umgearbeiteten, mit
Anmerkungen und mit einer Einleitung versehenen Auflage" (1872).

Weil has not stated from what sources he drew his work, except
that No. 201 is taken from a MS. in the Ducal Library at Gotha.
This is unfortunate, as his version of the great transformation
scene in No. 3b (Burton, vol. i., pp. 134, 135), agrees more
closely with Galland than with any other original version. In
other passages, as when speaking of the punishment of Aziz (No.
9a, aa), Weil seems to have borrowed an expression from Lane, who
writes "a cruel wound;" Weil saying "a severe (schwere) wound."

Whereas Weil gives the only German version known to me of No. 9
(though considerably abridged) he omits many tales contained in
Zinserling and Habicht, but whether because his own work was
already too bulky, or because his original MSS. did not contain
them, I do not know; probably the first supposition is correct,
for in any case it was open to him to have translated them from
the printed texts, to which he refers in his Preface.

Two important stories (Nos. 200 and 201) are not found in any
other version; but as they are translated in my "New Arabian
Nights," I need not discuss them here. I will, however, quote a
passage from the story of Judar and Mahmood, which I omitted
because it is not required by the context, and because I thought
it a little out of place in a book published in a juvenile
series. It is interesting from its analogy to the story of
Semele.

When King Kashuk (a Jinni) is about to marry the daughter of King
Shamkoor, we read (New Arabian Nights, p. 182), "Shamkoor
immediately summoned my father, and said, ‘Take my daughter, for
you have won her heart.' He immediately provided an outfit for
his daughter, and when it was completed, my father and his bride
rode away on horseback, while the trousseau of the Princess
followed on three hundred camels." The passage proceeds (the
narrator being Daruma, the offspring of the marriage), "When my
father had returned home, and was desirous of celebrating his
marriage Kandarin (his Wazir) said to him, ‘Your wife will be
destroyed if you touch her, for you are created of fire, and she
is created of earth, which the fire devours. You will then bewail
her death when it is too late. To-morrow,' continued he, ‘I will
bring you an ointment with which you must rub both her and
yourself; and you may then live long and happily together.' On
the following day he brought him a white ointment, and my father
anointed himself and his bride with it, and consummated his
marriage without danger."

I may add that this is the only omission of the smallest
consequence in my rendering of either story.

I have heard from more than one source that a complete German
translation of The Nights was published, and suppressed; but I
have not been able to discover the name of the author, the date,
or any other particulars relating to the subject.




    VON HAMMER'S MS., AND THE TRANSLATIONS DERIVED FROM IT.




Several complete copies of The Nights were obtained by Europeans
about the close of the last or the beginning of the present
century; and one of these (in 4 vols.) fell into the bands of the
great German Orientalist, Joseph von Hammer. This MS. agrees
closely with the printed Bul. and Mac. texts, as well as with Dr.
Clarke's MS., though the names of the tales sometimes vary a
little. One story, "The two Wazirs," given in Von Hammer's list
as inedited, no doubt by an oversight, is evidently No. 7, which
bears a similar title in Torrens. One title, "Al Kavi," a story
which Von Hammer says was published in "Mag. Encycl.," and in
English (probably by Scott in Ouseley's Oriental Collections,
vide anteà p. 491) puzzled me for some time; but from its
position, and the title I think I have identified it as No. 145,
and have entered it as such. No. 9a in this as well as in several
other MSS., bears the title of the Two Lovers, or of the Lover
and the Beloved.

Von Hammer made a French translation of the unpublished tales,
which he lent to Caussin de Perceval, who extracted from it four
tales only (Nos. 21a, 22, 32 and 37), and only acknowledged his
obligations in a general way to a distinguished Orientalist,
whose name he pointedly suppressed. Von Hammer, naturally
indignant, reclaimed his MS., and had it translated into German
by Zinserling. He then sent the French MS. to De Sacy, in whose
hands it remained for some time, although he does not appear to
have made any use of it, when it was despatched to England for
publication; but the courier lost it on the journey, and it was
never recovered.

Zinserling's translation was published under the title, "Der
Tausend und einen Nacht noch nicht übersetzte Mährchen,
Erzählungen und Anekdoten, zum erstenmale aus dem Arabischen in's
Französische übersetzt von Joseph von Hammer, und aus dem
Französischen in's Deutsche von Aug. E. Zinserling, Professor."
(3 vols., Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1823.) The introductory matter
is of considerable importance, and includes notices of 12
different MSS., and a list of contents of Von Hammer's MS. The
tales begin with No. 23, Nos. 9-19 being omitted, because Von
Hammer was informed that they were about to be published in
France. (This possibly refers to Asselan Riche's "Scharkan,"
published in 1829.) The tales and anecdotes in this edition
follow the order of The Nights. No. 163 is incomplete, Zinserling
giving only the commencement; and two other tales (Nos. 132b and
168) are related in such a confused manner as to be
unintelligible, the former from transposition (perhaps in the
sheets of the original MS.) and the latter from errors and
omissions. On the other hand, some of the tales (No. 137 for
instance) are comparatively full and accurate.

A selection from the longer tales was published in English in 3
vols. in 1826, under the title of "New Arabian Nights
Entertainments, selected from the original Oriental MS. by Jos.
von Hammer, and now first translated into English by the Rev.
George Lamb." I have only to remark that No. 132b is here
detached from its connection with No. 132, and is given an
independent existence.

A complete French re-translation of Zinserling's work, also in 3
vols., by G. S. Trébutien (Contes inédits des Mille et une
Nuits), was published in Paris in 1828; but in this edition the
long tales are placed first, and all the anecdotes are placed
together last.

The various MSS. mentioned by Von Hammer are as follows:--

     I. Galland's MS. in Paris.

     II. Another Paris MS., containing 870 Nights. (No. 9 is
specially noticed as occurring in it.) This seems to be the same
as a MS. subsequently mentioned by Von Hammer as consulted by
Habicht.

     III. Scott's MS. (Wortley Montague).

     IV. Scott's MS. (Anderson).

     V. Dr. Russell's MS. from Aleppo (224 Nights).

     VI. Sir W. Jones' MS., from which Richardson extracted No.
6ee for his grammar.

     VII. A. MS. at Vienna (200 Nights).

     VIII. MS. in Italinski's collection.

     IX. Clarke's MS.

     X. An Egyptian MS. at Marseilles.

     XI. Von Hammer's MS.

     XII. Habicht's MS. (==Bres. text).

     XIII. Caussin's MS.

     XIV. De Sacy's MS.

     XV. One or more MSS. in the Vatican.




               TRANSLATIONS OF THE PRINTED TEXTS.



These are noticed by Sir R. F. Burton in his "Foreword" (vol. i.,
pp. x-xii.) and consequently can be passed over with a brief
mention here.

Torrens' edition (vol. 1) extends to the end of Night 50 (Burton,
ii., p. 118).

Lane's translation originally appeared in monthly half-crown
parts, from 1839 to 1841. It is obvious that he felt himself
terribly restricted in space; for the third volume, although much
thicker than the others, is not only almost destitute of notes
towards the end, but the author is compelled to grasp at every
excuse to omit tales, even excluding No. 168, which he himself
considered "one of the most entertaining tales in the work"
(chap. xxix., note 12), on account of its resemblance to Nos. 1b
and 3d. Part of the matter in Lane's own earlier notes is
apparently derived from No. 132a, which he probably did not at
first intend to omit. Sir R. F. Burton has taken 5 vols. to cover
the same ground which Lane has squeezed into his vol. 3. But it
is only fair to Lane to remark that in such cases the publisher
is usually far more to blame than the author.

In 1847 appeared a popular edition of Lane, entitled, "The
Thousand and One Nights, or the Arabian Nights Entertainments,
translated and arranged for family reading, with explanatory
notes. Second edition." Here Galland's old spelling is restored,
and the "explanatory notes," ostentatiously mentioned on the
title page, are entirely omitted. This edition was in 3 vols. I
have seen a copy dated 1850; and think I have heard of an issue
in 1 vol.; and there is an American reprint in 2 vols. The
English issue was ultimately withdrawn from circulation in
consequence of Lane's protests. (Mr. S. L. Poole's Life of E. W.
Lane, p. 95.) It contains the woodcut of the Flying Couch, which
is wanting in the later editions of the genuine work; but not
Galland's doubtful tales, as Poole asserts.

Several editions of the original work, edited by Messrs. E. S.
and S. L. Poole, have appeared at intervals from 1859 to 1882.
They differ little from the original edition except in their
slightly smaller size.

The short tales included in Lane's notes were published
separately as one of Knight's Weekly Volumes, in 1845, under the
title of "Arabian Tales and Anecdotes, being a selection from the
notes to the new translation of the Thousand and One Nights, by
E. W. Lane, Esq."

Finally, in 1883, Mr. Stanley Lane Poole published a classified
and arranged edition of Lane's notes under the title of "Arabian
Society in the Middle Ages."

Mr. John Payne's version of the Mac. edition was issued in 9
vols. by the Villon Society to subscribers only. It appeared from
1882 to 1884, and only 500 copies were printed. Judging from the
original prospectus, it seems to have been the author's intention
to have completed the work in 8 vols., and to have devoted vol. 9
to Galland's doubtful tales; but as they are omitted, he must
have found that the work ran to a greater length than he had
anticipated, and that space failed him. He published some
preliminary papers on the Nights in the New Quarterly Magazine
for January and April, 1879.

Mr. Payne subsequently issued "Tales from the Arabic of the
Breslau and Calcutta (1814-18) editions of the Thousand Nights
and One Night, not occurring in the other printed texts of the
work." (Three vols., London, 1884.) Of this work, issued, like
the other, by the Villon Society, to subscribers only, 750 copies
were printed, besides 50 on large paper. The third volume
includes indices of all the tales in the four principal printed
texts.

Finally we have Sir R. F. Burton's translation now in its
entirety before his subscribers. It is restricted to 1,000
copies. (Why not 1,001?) The five supplementary vols. are to
include tales wanting in the Mac. edition, but found in other
texts (printed and MS.), while Lady Burton's popular edition will
allow of the free circulation of Sir R. F. Burton's work among
all classes of the reading public.




                 COLLECTIONS OF SELECTED TALES.



There are many volumes of selections derived from Galland, but
these hardly require mention; the following may be noticed as
derived from other sources:

1. Caliphs and Sultans, being tales omitted in the usual editions
of the Arabian Nights' Entertainments. Re-written and re-arranged
by Sylvanus Hanley, F. L. S., etc., London, 1868; 2nd edition
1870.

Consists of portions of tales chiefly selected from Scott, Lamb,
Chavis and Cazotte, Trébutien and Lane; much abridged, and
frequently strung together, as follows:--

Nos. 246, 41, 32 (including Nos. 111, 21a, and 89); 9a (including
9aa [which Hanley seems, by the way, to have borrowed from some
version which I do not recognise], 22 and 248); 155, 156, 136,
162; Xailoun the Silly (from Cazotte); 132 and 132a; and 169
(including 134 and 135x).

2. Ilâm-en-Nâs. Historical tales and anecdotes of the time of the
early Kalîfahs. Translated from the Arabic and annotated by Mrs.
Godfrey Clerk, author of "The Antipodes, and Round the World."
London, 1873.

Many of these anecdotes, as is candidly admitted by the authoress
in her Preface, are found with variations in the Nights, though
not translated by her from this source.

3. The New Arabian Nights. Select tales not included by Galland
or Lane. By W. F. Kirby, London, 1882.

Includes the following tales, slightly abridged, from Weil and
Scott: Nos. 200, 201, 264, 215, 209, and 208.

Two editions have appeared in England, besides reprints in
America and Australia.




        SEPARATE EDITIONS OF SINGLE OR COMPOSITE TALES.



             6e (ee).--The Barber's Fifth Brother.


Mr. W. A. Clouston (in litt.) calls attention to the version of
this story by Addison in the "Spectator," No. 535, Nov. 13, 1712,
after Galland. There is good reason to suppose that this is
subsequent to the first English edition, which, however, Addison
does not mention. There is also an English version in Faris'
little Arabic Grammar (London, 1856), and likewise in
Richardson's Arabic Grammar. The latter author extracted it from
a MS. belonging to Sir W. Jones.



             5.--Nur Al-din and Badr Al-din Hasan.


There are two Paris editions of the "Histoire de Chems-Eddine et
de NourEddine," edited by Prof. Cherbonneau. The first (1852)
contains text and notes, and the second (1869) includes text,
vocabulary and translations.




               7.--Nur Al-din and Anis Al-jalis.


An edition by Kasimiraki of "Enis' el-Djelis, ou histoire de la
belle Persane," appeared in Paris in 1867. It includes text,
translation and notes.




                 9.--King Omar Bin Al-nu'aman.


There is a French abridgment of this story entitled, "Scharkan,
Conte Arabe, suivi de quelques anecdotes orientales; traduit par
M. Asselan Riche, Membre de la Société Asiatique de Paris" (Paris
and Marseilles, 12mo, 1829, pp. 240). The seven anecdotes
appended are as follows: (1) the well-known story of Omar's
prisoner and the glass of water; (2) Elhedjadj and a young Arab;
(3)=our No. 140; (4) Anecdote of Elhedjadj and a story-teller;
(5)=our No. 86; (6) King Bahman and the Moubed's parable of the
Owls; (7)=our No. 145.



                   133.--Sindbad the Seaman.


This is the proper place to call attention to a work specially
relating to this story, "Remarks on the Arabian Nights
Entertainments; in which the origin of Sindbad's Voyages and
other Oriental Fictions is particularly described. By Richard
Hole, LL.D." (London, 1797, pp. iv. 259.)

It is an old book, but may still be consulted with advantage.

There are two important critical editions of No. 133, one in
French and one in German.

1. Les Voyages de Sind-bâd le marin et la ruse des Femmes. Contes
arabes. Traduction littérale, accompagnée du Texte et des Notes.
Par L. Langlès (Paris, 1814).

The second story is our No. 184.

2. Die beiden Sindbad oder Reiseabenteuer Sindbads des
Seefabrers. Nach einer zum ersten Male in Europa bedruckten
Aegyptischen Handschrift unmittelbar und wortlich treu aus den
Arabischen übersetzt und mit erklärenden Anmerkungen, nebst zwei
sprachlichen Beilagen zum Gebrauch für abgehende Orientalisten
herausgegeben von J. G. H. Reinsch (Breslau, 1826).



              135.--The Craft and Malice of Women.


The literature of this cluster of tales would require a volume in
itself, and I cannot do better than refer to Mr. W. A. Clouston's
"Book of Sindibad" (8vo, Glasgow, 1884) for further information.
This book, though privately printed and limited to 300 copies, is
not uncommon.



                 136.--Judar and His Brethren.


An edition of this story, entitled "Histoire de Djouder le
Pêcheur," edited by Prof. Houdas, was published in the
Bibliothèque Algérienne, at Algiers, in 1865. It includes text
and vocabulary.



                     174.--The Ten Wazirs.


This collection of tales has also been frequently reprinted
separately. It is the Arabic version of the Persian Bakhtyar
Nameh, of which Mr. Clouston issued a privately-printed edition
in 1883.

The following versions have come under my notice:--

1. Nouveaux Contes Arabes, ou Supplement aux Mille et une Nuits
suivies de Mélanges de Littérature orientale et de lettres, par
l'Abbe * * * (Paris, 1788, pp. 425).

This work consists chiefly of a series of tales selected and
adapted from the Ten Vazirs. "Written in Europe by a European,
and its interest is found in the Terminal Essay, on the
Mythologia Aesopica" (Burton in litt.).

2. Historien om de ti Vezirer og hoorledes det gik dem med Kong
Azád Bachts Sön, oversat af Arabisk ved R. Rask (8vo, Kobenhavn,
1829).

3. Habicht, x. p. vi., refers to the following:--Historia decem
Vezirorum et filii regis Azad-Bacht insertis XIII. aliis
narrationibus, in usum tironum Cahirensem, edid. G. Knös,
Göttingen, 1807, 8vo.

He also states that Knös published the commencement in 1805, in
his "Disquisitio de fide Herodoti, quo perhibet Phoenices Africam
navibus circumvectos esse cum recentiorum super hac re sententiis
excussis.--Adnexurn est specimen sermonis Arabici vulgaris s.
initium historiae filii regis Azad-Bacht e Codice inedito."

4. Contes Arabes. Histoire des dix Vizirs (Bakhtyar Nameh)
Traduite et annotée par René Basset, Professeur A l'école
superieure des lettres d'Algérie. Paris, 1883.

Chavis and Cazotte (anteà pp. 471, 472) included a version of the
Ten Vazirs in their work; and others are referred to in our Table
of Tales.



                     248.--The Wise Heycar.


Subsequently to the publication of Gauttier's edition of The
Nights, Agoub republished his translation under the title of "Le
sage Heycar, conte Arabe" (Paris, 1824).

A few tales published by Scott in Ouseley's Oriental Collections
have already been noticed (anteà, pp. 434, 435).




     TRANSLATIONS OF COGNATE ORIENTAL ROMANCES ILLUSTRATIVE
                         OF THE NIGHTS.



1. Les Mille et Un Jours. Contes Persanes.

"In imitation of the Arabian Nights, was composed a Persian
collection entitled ‘Hazár Yek Rúz or the Thousand and One Days,'
of which Petis de la Croix published a French rendering [in
1710], which was done into English [by Dr. King, and published in
2 vols. (with the Turkish Tales=Forty Vezirs) as early as 1714;
and subsequently] by Ambrose Phillips" (in 1738) (Clouston, in
litt). Here, and occasionally elsewhere, I have quoted from some
MSS. notes on The Nights by Mr. W. A. Clouston, which Sir R. F.
Burton kindly permitted me to inspect. Mr. Clouston then quotes
Cazotte's Preface (not in my edition of the Thousand and One
Days), according to which the book was written by the celebrated
Dervis Moclès (Mukhlis), chief of the Sofis (Sufis?) of lspahan,
founded upon certain Indian comedies. Petis de la Croix was on
friendly terms with Mukhlis, who allowed him to take a copy of
his work in 1675, during his residence in Ispahan. (I find these
statements confirmed in the Cabinet des Fées, xxxvii. pp. 266,
274, 278, and in Weber's "Tales of the East," i. pp. xxxvi.,
xxxxii.)

The framework of the story is the same as Nos. 9a and 152: a
Princess, who conceives an aversion to men from dreaming of the
self-devotion of a doe, and the indifference and selfishness of a
stag. Mr. Clouston refers to Nakhshabí's Tútí Náma (No. 33 of
Káderí's abridgment, and 39 of India Office MS. 2,573 whence he
thinks it probable that Mukhlis may have taken the tale.) But the
tale itself is repeated over and over again in many Arabic,
Persian, and Turkish collections; in fact, there are few of
commoner occurrence.

The tales are told by the nurse in order to overcome the aversion
of the Princess to men. They are as follows:

Introduction and Conclusion: Story of the Princess of Cashmir.
1.   Story of Aboulcassem Bafry.
2.   Story of King Ruzvanchad and the Princess Cheheristani.
     a.   Story of the young King of Thibet and the Princess of
          the Naimans.
     b.   Story of the Vazir Cavercha.
3.   Story of Couloufe and the Beautiful Dilara.
4.   Story of Prince Calaf and the Princess of China.
     a.   Story of Prince Fadlallah, son of Bei-Ortoc, King of
          Moussel=Nos. 184 and 251.
5.   Story of King Bedreddin-Lolo, and his Vazir Atalmulk,
     surnamed the Sad Vazir.
     a.   Story of Atalmulk and the Princess Zelica Beghume.
     b.   Story of Prince Seyf-el-Molouk.
     c.   Story of Malek and the Princess Chirine.
     d.   Story of King Hormuz, surnamed the King without
          trouble.
          da.  Story of Avicenna.
     e.   Story of the fair Arouya. Cf. Nos. 135q and 225.
     f.   Singular Adventures of Aboulfawaris, surnamed the Great
          Traveller (2 Voyages).
6.   Story of the Two Brother Genii, Adis and Dahy.
7.   Story of Nasiraddolé, King of Moussel, of Abderrahman,
     Merchant of Bagdad, and the Beautiful Zeineb.
8.   Story of Repsima=No. 181r.

This work has many times been reprinted in France, where it holds
a place only second to The Nights.

Sir R. F. Burton remarks, concerning the Persian and Turkish
Tales of Petis de la Crois (the latter of which form part of the
Forty Vazirs, No. 251), "Both are weak and servile imitations of
Galland by an Orientalist who knew nothing of the East. In one
passage in the story of Fadlallah, we read of ‘Le Sacrifice du
Mont Arafáte,' which seems to have become a fixture in the
European brain. I found the work easy writing and exceedingly
hard reading."

The following tales require a passing notice:--

1. Story of Aboulcassem Bafry.--A story of concealed treasure; it
has also some resemblance to No. 31.

2. Ruzvanchad and Cheheristani.--Cheheristani is a jinniyah, who
is pursued by the King, under the form of a white doe; marries
him, and becomes the mother of Balkis, the Queen of Sheba. She
exacts a promise from him never to rebuke her for any of her
actions: he breaks it, and she leaves him for a time.

2a. The Young King of Thibet.--Two imposters obtain magic rings
by which they can assume the shapes of other persons.

2a, b. The Vazir Cavercha.--This is one of Scott's stories (No.
223 of our Table). It goes back at least as far as the Ring of
Polycrates. It is the 8th Vezir's Story in Mr. Gibbs' Forty
Vezirs (pp. 200-205).

4. Prince Calaf.--This story is well known, and is sometimes
played as a comedy. The Princess Turandot puts riddles to her
suitors, and beheads them if they fail to answer.

5b. Story of Prince Seyj-el-Molouk.--This story is perhaps an
older version than that which appears in The Nights (No. 154a).
It is placed long after the time of Solomon; Saad is devoured by
ants (Weber (ii. p. 426) has substituted wild beasts!); and when
Seyf enters the palace of Malika (=Daulet Khatoon), the jinni
surprises them, and is overpowered by Seyf's ring. He then
informs him of the death of Saad; and that Bedy al-Jernal was one
of the mistresses of Solomon; and has also long been dead.

5b. Malek and Chirine.--Resembles No. 264; Malek passes himself
off as the Prophet Mohammed; burns his box (not chair) with
fireworks on his weddingday, and is thus prevented from ever
returning to the Princess.

5f. Adventures of Aboulfawaris.--Romantic travels, resembling
Nos. 132a and 133.

2. Antar.--This is the most famous of the Badawi romances. It
resembles No. 137 in several particulars, but is destitute of
supernaturalism. An English abridgment in 4 vols. was published
in 1820; and the substance of vol. 1 had appeared, as a fragment,
in the previous year, under the title of "Antar, a Bedoueen
Romance translated from the Arabic by Terrick Hamilton, Esq.,
Oriental Secretary to the British Embassy at Constantinople." I
have also seen vol. 1 of a French translation, published about
1862, and extending to the death of Shas.

Lane (Modern Egyptians, ch. 21-23) describes several other Arab
romances, which have not yet been translated; viz. Aboo-Zeyd; Ez-
Zahir, and Delhemeh.

3. GLAIVE-DES-COURONNES (Seif el-Tidjân) Roman traduit de
l'Arabe. Par M. le Dr. Perron (Paris, 1862).

A romantic story of Arab chivalry, less overloaded with
supernaturalism than No. 137; but more supernatural than Antar.
The hero marries (among other wives) two jinniyahs of the
posterity of Iblis. In ch. 21 we have an account of a magical
city much resembling the City of Brass (No. 134) and defended by
similar talismans.

4. MEHEMET THE KURD, and other tales, from Eastern sources, by
Charles Wells, Turkish Prizeman of King's College, London, and
Member of the Royal Asiatic Society (London, 1865).

The first story, taken from an Arabic MS., is a narrative of a
handsome simpleminded man, with whom Princesses fall in love, and
who is raised to a mighty throne by their enchantments. Some of
the early incidents are not unlike those in the well-known German
story of Lucky Hans (Hans im Glück). In one place there is an
enchanted garden, where Princesses disport themselves in feather-
dresses (as in No. 155, &c.), and where magic apples grow. (Note
that apples are always held in extraordinary estimation in The
Nights, cf. Nos. 4 and 264.) Among the shorter stories we find
No. 251h; a version of Nos. 9a and 152 (probably that referred to
by Mr. Clouston as in the Tuti Nama); a story "The Prince
Tailor," resembling No. 251; No. 256, and one or two other tales
not connected with The Nights. (Most of Wells' shorter tales are
evidently taken from the Forty Vezirs.)

5. RECUEIL DES CONTES POPULAIRES de la Kabylie du Djardjara,
recueillis et traduits par J. Rivière (Paris, 1882). I have not
seen this book; but it can hardly fail to illustrate The Nights.

6. THE STORY OF JEWAD, Romance by 'Ali 'Aziz Efendi the Cretan.
Translated from the Turkish by E. J. W. Gibb, M.R.A.S., &c.
(Glasgow, 1884).

A modern Turkish work, written in A. H. 1211 (1796-97). It
contains the following tales:--



                      The Story of Jew d.


1.   The Story of Eb -'Ali-Sin ;.
2.   The Story of Monia Em n.
3.   The Story of Ferah-N z, the daughter of the King of China.
     a.   The Story of Khoja 'Abdu-llah.
4.   The Story told by Jew d to Iklilu'l Mulk.
     a.   The Story of Sh b r and Hum .
     c.   The Story of Ghazanfer and R hila.
5.   The Story of Qara Khan.

The following deserve notice from our present point of view:--

The Story of Jewad.--Here we have magical illusions, as in Nos.
247 and 251a. Such narratives are common in the East; Lane
(Nights, ch. i., note 15) is inclined to attribute such illusions
to the influence of drugs; but the narratives seem rather to
point to so-called electro-biology, or the Scotch Glamour (such
influences, as is notorious, acting far more strongly upon
Orientals than upon Europeans).

2.   The Story of Monia Em n corresponds to the Story of Naerdan
and Guzulbec, in Caylus' Oriental Tales. A story of magical
illusions.

3.   The Story of Ferah N z.--Here again we have a variant of
Nos. 9a and 152.

3a.  Khoja 'Abdu-ltab.--This is a version of the Story of
Aboulcassem in the Thousand and One Days.

4a.  Sh b r and Hum .--The commencement of this story might have
suggested to Southey the adventures of Thalaba and Oneida in the
Gardens of Aloadin; the remainder appears to be taken from the
Story of the young King of Thibet, in the Thousand and One Days.

5.   Qara Khan.--The principal part of this story is borrowed
from the First Voyage of Aboulfawaris in the Thousand and One
Days; it has some resemblance to the story of the Mountain of
Loadstone in No. 3c.

7.   FRÜCHTE DES ASIATISCHEN GEIST, von A. T. Hartmann. 2 vols.,
12mo (Münster) 1803. A collection of anecdotes, &c., from various
Eastern sources, Arabic, Indian, &c. I think it not impossible
that this may be the work referred to by Von Hammer in the
preface to Zinserling's "1001 Nacht" (p. xxvii. note) as
"Asiatische Perleuschnur von Hartmann." At least I have not yet
met with any work to which the scanty indication would apply
better.

8.   TUTI-NAMA. I could hardly pass over the famous Persian and
Turkish "Parrot-Book" quite without notice; but its tales have
rarely any direct connection with those in The Nights, and I have
not attempted to go into its very extensive bibliography.




DR. CLARKE'S M.S.



Dr. Edward Daniel Clarke has given an account of an important MS.
nearly agreeing with Bul. and Mac., which he purchased in Egypt,
in his "Travels in various countries of Europe, Asia and Africa."
Part ii. Greece, Egypt, and the Holy Land. Section i. (1812) App.
iii., pp. 701-704. Unfortunately, this MS. was afterwards so
damaged by water during a shipwreck that it was rendered totally
illegible. The list of tales (as will be seen by the numbers in
brackets, which correspond to our Table, as far as the
identifications are safe) will show the approximate contents of
the MS., but the list (which is translated into German by Habicht
in the preface to his vol. 12) was evidently compiled carelessly
by a person nearly ignorant of Arabic, perhaps with the aid of an
interpreter, Maltese, or other, and seems to abound with the most
absurd mistakes. The full text of Clarke's App. iii. is as
follows: "List of One Hundred and Seventy-two Tales, contained in
a manuscript copy of the 'Àlif Lila va Lilin,' or 'Arabian
Nights,' as it was procured by the Author in Egypt."

N.B.--The Arabic words mentioned in this list are given as they
appeared to be pronounced in English characters, and of course,
therefore, adapted to English pronunciation.

The number of tales amounts to 172, but one tale is supposed to
occupy many nights in the recital, so that the whole number is
divided into "One Thousand and One Nights." It rarely happens
that any two copies of the Alif Lila va Lilin resemble each
other. This title is bestowed upon any collection of Eastern
tales divided into the same number of parts. The compilation
depends upon the taste, the caprice, and the opportunities of the
scribe, or the commands of his employer. Certain popular stories
are common to almost all copies of the Arabian Nights, but almost
every collection contains some tales which are not found in every
other. Much depends upon the locality of the scribe. The popular
stories of Egypt will be found to differ materially from those of
Constantinople. A nephew of the late Wortley Montague, living in
Rosetta, had a copy of the Arabian Nights, and upon comparing the
two manuscripts it appeared that out of the 172 tales here
enumerated only 37 were found in his manuscript. In order to
mark, therefore, the stories which were common to the two
manuscripts, an asterisk has been prefixed to the thirty-seven
tales which appeared in both copies.

    1.  The Bull and the Ass (a).
    2.  The Merchant and the Hobgoblin (1; Habicht translates Kobold!).
    3.  The Man and the Antelope (1a).
    4.  The Merchant and Two Dogs (1b).
    5.  The Old Man and the Mule (1c).
   *6.  The History of the Hunters (2).
  7&8.  The History of King Unam and the Philosopher Reinan (2a).
   *9.  History of King Sinbad and Elbase (2a, ab).
  *10.  History of the Porter (3).
  *11.  History of Karanduli.
   12.  Story of the Mirror.
   13.  Story of the Three Apples (4).
  *14.  Of Shensheddin Mohammed, and his Brother Noureddin (5).
  *15.  Of the Taylor, Little Hunchback, the Jew and the Christian (6).
   16.  The History of Noureddin Ali (7).
   17.  Ditto of Gaumayub, &c. (8).
  *18.  The History of King Omar and Oman and his Children. (This tale
        is extremely long, and occupies much of the manuscript) (9).
  *19.  Of the Lover and the Beloved (9a).
   20.  Story of the Peacock, the Goose, the Ass, the Horse, &c. (10).
   21.  Of the Pious Man (11).
   22.  Of the Pious Shepherd.
   23.  Of the Bird and the Turtle (12).
   24.  Of the Fox, the Hawk, &c. (13).
   25.  Of the Lord of the Beasts.
  *26.  Of the Mouse and the Partridge (14).
   27.  Of the Raven and the Cat (15).
   28.  Of the Raven, the Fox, the Mouse, the Flea, &c., &c. (16).
   29.  Story of the Thief (18).
  *30.  Of Aul Hassan and the Slave Shemsney Har (20).
  *31.  Of Kamrasaman, &c. (21).
   32.  Of Naam and Nameto la (21a).
  *33.  Of Aladin Abuskelmat (22).
  *34.  Of Hallina Die (23).
   35.  Story of Maan Jaamnazida (24).
   36.  History of the Town Litta (26).
   37.  Story of Hassan Abdulmelac (27).
   38.  Of Ibrahim Elmachde, Brother of Haroun al Raschid (28).
   39.  History of the Famous Garden Ezem (Paradise) (29).
   40.  Of Isaac of Mossul (30).
   41.  Of Hasli Hasli.
   42.  Of Mohammed Eli Ali (32).
   43.  Of Ali the Persian (33).
   44.  History of the Raschid and his Judge (34).
   45.  Of Haled Immi Abdullah.
   46.  Of Jafaard the Bamasside (36).
   47.  Of Abokohammed Kurlan (37).
   48.  Of Haroun al-Raschid and Sala.
   49.  History of Mamoan (40).
   50.  Of Shar and the Slave Zemroud (41).
   51.  Of the Lady Bedoor (literally Mrs. Moon-face) and Mr.
        Victorious (42).
   52.  Of Mammon and Mohammed of Bassorah.
   53.  Of Haroun al-Raschid and his Slave (44).
   54.  Of the Merchant in Debt (45).
   55.  Of Hassoun Medin, the Governor (46).
   56.  Of King Nassir and his Three Children--the Governor of Cairo,
        the Governor of Bulac, and the Governor of Old Cairo (47).
   57.  History of the Banker and the Thief (48).
   58.  Of Aladin, Governor of Constantinople.
   59.  Of Mamoon and Ibrahim (50).
   60.  Of a certain King (51).
   61.  Of a Pious Man (52).
   62.  Of Abul Hassan Ezeada (53).
   63.  Of a Merchant (54).
   64.  Of a Man of Bagdad (55).
   65.  Of Modavikil (56).
  *66.  Of Virdan in the time of Hakim Veemrelack (N.B.--He built
        the Mosque in going from Cairo to Heliopolis) (57).
   67.  Of a Slave and an Ape (58).
  *68.  Story of the Horse of Ebony (59).
  *69.  Of Insilvujud (60).
   70.  Of Eban Vas (61).
   71.  Of an Inhabitant of Bassora (62).
   72.  History of a Man of the tribe of Arabs of Beucadda (63).
   73.  History of Benriddin, Vizir of Yemen (64).
   74.  Of a Boy and a Girl (65).
   75.  Of Mutelmis (66).
   76.  Of Haroun al Rashid and the Lady Zebeda (67).
   77.  Of Mussa ab imni Zibir (69).
   78.  Of the Black Father.
   79.  Of Haroun al Raschid.
   80.  Story of an Ass Keeper (74?).
   81.  Of Haroun al Rashid and Eboo Yussuf (75).
   82.  Of Hakim, Builder of the Mosque (76).
   83.  Of Melikel Horrais.
   84.  Of a Gilder and his Wife (78).
   85.  Of Hashron, &c. (79).
   86.  Of Yackyar, &c., the Barmadride (80).
   87.  Of Mussa, &c.
   88.  Of Said, &c.
   89.  Of the Whore and the Good Woman.
   90.  Of Raschid and Jacob his Favourite.
   91.  Of Sherif Hussein.
   92.  Of Mamoon, son of Haroun al Raschid (87).
   93.  Of the repenting Thief (88)
   94.  Of Haroun al Raschid (89).
   95.  Of a Divine, &c. (90).
   96.  Another story of a Divine.
   97.  The Story of the Neighbours.
   98.  Of Kings (94).
   99.  Of Abdo Rackman (95).
  100.  Of Hind, daughter of Nackinan (96).
  101.  Of Tabal (97).
  102.  Of Isaac son of Abraham (98).
  103.  Of a Boy and a Girl.
  104.  Story of Chassim Imni Addi.
  105.  Of Abul Abass.
  106.  Of Ebubecker Ben Mohammed.
  107.  Of Ebi Evar.
  108.  Of Emmin, brother of Mamon (105).
  109.  Of six Scheiks of Bagdad.
  110.  Of an Old Woman.
  111.  Of a Wild Girl.
  112.  Of Hasan Elgevire of Bagdad.
  113.  Of certain Kings.
  114.  Of a king of Israel (116).
  115.  Of Alexander (117).
  116.  Of King Nusharvian (118).
  117.  Of a Judge and his Wife (119).
  118.  Of an Emir.
  119.  Of Malek Imnidinar.
  120.  Of a devout man of the children of Israel (122).
  121.  Of Hedjage Himni Yussuf (123).
  122.  Of a Blacksmith (124).
  123.  Of a devout man (125).
  124.  Of Omar Imnilchatab.
  125.  Of Ibrahim Elchaber.
  126.  Of a Prophet (128).
  127.  Of a Pious Man (129).
  128.  Of a Man of the Children of Israel (130).
  129.  Of Abul Hassan Duradge (131).
  130.  Of Sultana Hayaat.
  131.  Of the Philosopher Daniel (132).
 *132.  Of Belukia (132A).
 *133.  The Travels of Sinbad--certain seven voyages, &c. (133).
  134.  Of the Town of Copper (134).
  135.  Of the Seven Virgins and the Slave (135).
 *136.  Story of Judais (136).
  137.  The Wonderful History.
  138.  Of Abdullah lmni Mohammi.
  139.  Of Hind Imni Haman (139).
  140.  Of Chazmimé Imni Bashés (140).
  141.  Of Jonas the Secretary (141).
  142.  Of Haroun al-Rashid (142).
  143.  Of ditto.
  144.  Of Ebon Isaac Ibrahim (144).
  145.  Of Haroun al Raschid, Misroor and the Poet.
  146.  Of the Caliph Moavia.
  147.  Of Haroun al Raschid.
  148.  Of Isaac Imni Ibrahim (148),
  149.  Of Ebwi Amér.
 *150.  Of Achmet Ezenth and the old Female Pimp.
  151.  Of the three Brothers.
  152.  Of Erdeshir and Hiaker, of Julmar El Bacharia (152).
  153.  Of Mahomet, &c.
  154.  Ditto (154?).
 *155.  Story of Safil Moluki (154A).
 *156.  Of Hassan, &c. (155).
 *157.  Of Caliph the Hunter (156).
 *158.  Of Mersir and his Mistress (157).
  159.  Of Noureddin and Mary (158).
  160.  Of a Bedouin and a Frank (159).
  161.  Of a Man of Baghdad and his Female Slave (160).
  162.  Of a King, his Son, and the Vizir Shemar (161).
 *163.  Of a Merchant and the Thieves.
 *164.  Of Abousir and Aboukir (162).
 *165.  Abdulak El Beri and Abdulak El Backari (163).
 *166.  Of Haroun al Raschid.
  16