called by the chronicles Nawjè or the Corpse. But in the
early part of the last century (1715-1733) a sect arose in the
circle of Uglitseh and in Moscow, at first called Clisti or
flagellants, which developed into the modern Skopzi. For this
extensive subject see De Stein (Zeitschrift für Ethn. Berlin,
1875) and Mantegazza, chaps. vi.

[FN#390] See the marvellously absurd description of the glorious
"Dead Sea" in the Purchas v. 84.

[FN#391] Jehovah here is made to play an evil part by destroying
men instead of teaching them better. But, "Nous faisons les Dieux
à notre image et nous portons dans le ciel ce que nous voyons sur
la terre." The idea of Yahweh, or Yah, is palpably Egyptian, the
Ankh or ever-living One: the etymon, however, was learned at
Babylon and is still found amongst the cuneiforms.

[FN#392] The name still survives in the Shajarát al-Ashará, a
clump of trees near the village Al-Ghájar (of the Gypsies?) at
the foot of Hermon.

[FN#393] I am not quite sure that Astarte is not primarily the
planet Venus; but I can hardly doubt that Prof. Max Müller and
Sir G. Cox are mistaken in bringing from India Aphrodite the Dawn
and her attendants, the Charites identified with the Vedic
Harits. Of Ishtar in Accadia, however, Roscher seems to have
proved that she is distinctly the Moon sinking into Amenti (the
west, the Underworld) in search of her lost spouse Izdubar, the
Sun-god. This again is pure Egyptianism.

[FN#394] In this classical land of Venus the worship of
Ishtar-Ashtaroth is by no means obsolete. The Metáwali heretics,
a people of Persian descent and Shiite tenets, and the peasantry
of "Bilád B'sharrah," which I would derive from Bayt Ashirah,
still pilgrimage to the ruins and address their vows to the
Sayyidat al-Kabírah, the Great Lady. Orthodox Moslems accuse them
of abominable orgies and point to the lamps and rags which they
suspend to a tree entitled Shajarat al-Sitt--the Lady's tree--an
Acacia Albida which, according to some travellers, is found only
here and at Sayda (Sidon) where an avenue exists. The people of
Kasrawán, a Christian province in the Libanus, inhabited by a
peculiarly prurient race, also hold high festival under the
far-famed Cedars, and their women sacrifice to Venus like the
Kadashah of the Phœnicians. This survival of old superstition is
unknown to missionary "Handbooks," but amply deserves the study
of the anthropologist.

[FN#395] Some commentators understand "the tabernacles sacred to
the reproductive powers of women;" and the Rabbis declare that
the emblem was the figure of a setting hen.

[FN#396] Dog" is applied by the older Jews to the Sodomite and
the Catamite, and thus they understand the "price of a dog" which
could not be brought into the Temple (Deut. xxiii. 18). I have
noticed it in one of the derivations of cinædus and can only
remark that it is a vile libel upon the canine tribe.

[FN#397] Her name was Maachah and her title, according to some,
"King's mother": she founded the sect of Communists who rejected
marriage and made adultery and incest part of worship in their
splendid temple. Such were the Basilians and the Carpocratians
followed in the xith century by Tranchelin, whose sectarians, the
Turlupins, long infested Savoy.

[FN#398] A noted exception is Vienna, remarkable for the enormous
development of the virginal bosoni, which soon becomes pendulent.

[FN#399] Gen. xxxviii. 2-11. Amongst the classics Mercury taught
the "Art of le Thalaba" to his son Pan who wandered about the
mountains distraught with love for the Nymph Echo and Pan passed
it on to the pastors. See Thalaba in Mirabeau.

[FN#400] The reader of The Nights has remarked how often the "he"
in Arabic poetry denotes a "she"; but the Arab, when
uncontaminated by travel, ignores pederasty, and the Arab poet is
a Badawi.

[FN#401] So Mohammed addressed his girl-wife Ayishah in the
masculine.

[FN#402] So amongst the Romans we have the Iatroliptæ, youths or
girls who wiped the gymnast's perspiring body with swan-down, a
practice renewed by the professors of "Massage"; Unctores who
applied perfumes and essences; Fricatrices and Tractatrices or
shampooers; Dropacistæ, corn-cutters; Alipilarii who plucked the
hair, etc., etc., etc.

[FN#403] It is a parody on the well-known song (Roebuck i. sect.
2, No. 1602):

The goldsmith knows the worth of gold, jewellers worth of
     jewelry;
The worth of rose Bulbul can tell and Kambar's worth his lord,
     Ali.

[FN#404] For "Sindí" Roebuck (Oriental Proverbs Part i. p. 99)
has Kunbu (Kumboh) a Panjábi peasant, and others vary the saying
ad libitum. See vol. vi. 156.

[FN#405] See "Sind Revisited" i. 133-35.

[FN#406] They must not be confounded with the grelots lascifs,
the little bells of gold or silver set by the people of Pegu in
the prepuce-skin, and described by Nicolo de Conti who however
refused to undergo the operation.

[FN#407] Relation des découvertes faites par Colomb, etc., p.
137: Bologna 1875; also Vespucci's letter in Ramusio (i. 131) and
Paro's Recherches philosophiques sur les Américains.

[FN#408] See Mantegazza loc. cit. who borrows from the Thèse de
Paris of Dr. Abel Hureau de Villeneuve, "Frictiones per coitum
productæ magnum mucosæ membranæ vaginalis turgorem, ac simul
hujus cuniculi coarctationem tam maritis salacibus quæritatam
afferunt."

[FN#409] Fascinus is the Priapus-god to whom the Vestal Virgins
of Rome, professed tribades, sacrificed, also the neck-charm in
phallus-shape. Fascinum is the male member.

[FN#410] Captain Grose (Lexicon Balatronicum) explains merkin as
"counterfeit hair for women's privy parts. See Bailey's Dict."
The Bailey of 1764, an "improved edition," does not contain the
word which is now generally applied to a cunnus succedaneus.

[FN#411] I have noticed this phenomenal cannibalism in my notes
to Mr. Albert Tootle's excellent translation of "The Captivity of
Hans Stade of Hesse:" London, Hakluyt Society, mdccclxxiv.

[FN#412] The Ostreiras or shell mounds of the Brazil, sometimes
200 feet high, are described by me in Anthropologia No. i. Oct.
1873.

[FN#413] The Native Races of the Pacific States of South America,
by Herbert Howe Bancroft, London, Longmans, 1875.

[FN#414] All Peruvian historians mention these giants, who were
probably the large-limbed Gribs (Caraíbes) of the Brazil: they
will be noticed in page 211.

[FN#415] This sounds much like a pious fraud of the missionaries,
a Europeo-American version of the Sodom legend.

[FN#416] Les Races Aryennes du Perou, Paris, Franck, 1871.

[FN#417] O Brazil e os Brazileiros, Santos, 1862.

[FN#418] Aethiopia Orientalis, Purchas ii. 1558.

[FN#419] Purchas iii. 243.

[FN#420] For a literal translation see 1re Série de la Curiosité
Littéraire et Bibliographique, Paris, Liseux, 1880.

[FN#421] His best-known works are (1) Praktisches Handbuch der
Gerechtlichen Medecin, Berlin, 1860; and (2) Klinische Novellen
zur Gerechtlichen Medecin, Berlin, 1863.

[FN#422] The same author printed another imitation of Petronius
Arbiter, the "Larissa" story of Théophile Viand. His cousin, the
Sévigné, highly approved of it. See Bayle's objections to
Rabutin's delicacy and excuses for Petronius' grossness in his
"Éclaircissement sur les obscénités" (Appendice au Dictionnaire
Antique).

[FN#423] The Boulgrin of Rabelais, which Urquhart renders Ingle
for Boulgre, an "indorser," derived from the Bulgarus or
Bulgarian, who gave to Italy the term bugiardo--liar. Bougre and
Bougrerie date (Littré) from the xiiith century. I cannot,
however, but think that the trivial term gained strength in the
xvith, when the manners of the Bugres or indigenous Brazilians
were studied by Huguenot refugees in La France Antartique and
several of these savages found their way to Europe. A grand Fête
in Rouen on the entrance of Henri II. and Dame Katherine de
Medicis (June 16, 1564) showed, as part of the pageant, three
hundred men (including fifty "Bugres" or Tupis) with parroquets
and other birds and beasts of the newly explored regions. The
procession is given in the four-folding woodcut "Figure des
Brésiliens" in Jean de Prest's Edition of 1551.

[FN#424] Erotika Biblion, chaps. Kadésch (pp. 93 et seq.),
Edition de Bruxelles, with notes by the Chevalier P. Pierrugues
of Bordeaux, before noticed.

[FN#425] Called Chevaliers de Paille because the sign was a straw
in the mouth, à la Palmerston.

[FN#426] I have noticed that the eunuch in Sind was as meanly
paid and have given the reason.

[FN#427] Centuria Librorum Absconditorum (by Pisanus Fraxi) 4to,
p. Ix. and 593. London. Privately printed, mdccclxxix.

[FN#428] A friend learned in these matters supplies me with the
following list of famous pederasts. Those who marvel at the wide
diffusion of such erotic perversion, and its being affected by so
many celebrities, will bear in mind that the greatest men have
been some of the worst: Alexander of Macedon, Julius Cæsar and
Napoleon Buonaparte held themselves high above the moral law
which obliges common-place humanity. All three are charged with
the Vice. Of Kings we have Henri iii., Louis xiii. and xviii.,
Frederick ii. Of Prussia Peter the Great, William ii. of Holland
and Charles ii. and iii. of Parma. We find also Shakespeare (i.,
xv., Edit. Francois Hugo) and Moliere, Theodorus Beza, Lully (the
Composer), D'Assoucy, Count Zintzendorff, the Grand Condé,
Marquis de Villette, Pierre Louis Farnese, Duc de la Vallière, De
Soleinne, Count D'Avaray, Saint  Mégrin, D'Epernon, Admiral de la
Susse La Roche-Pouchin Rochfort S. Louis, Henne (the
Spiritualist), Comte Horace de Viel Castel, Lerminin, Fievée,
Théodore Leclerc, Archi-Chancellier Cambacèrés, Marquis de
Custine, Sainte-Beuve and Count D'Orsay. For others refer to the
three volumes of Pisanus Fraxi, Index Librorum Prohibitorum
(London, 1877), Centuria Librorum Absconditorum (before alluded
to) and Catena Librorum Tacendorum, London, 1885. The indices
will supply the names.

[FN#429] 0f this peculiar character Ibn Khallikan remarks (ii.
43), "There were four poets whose works clearly contraried their
character. Abú al-Atahíyah wrote pious poems himself being an
atheist; Abú Hukayma's verses proved his impotence, yet he was
more salacious than a he-goat, Mohammed ibn Házim praised
contentment, yet he was greedier than a dog, and Abú Nowás hymned
the joys of sodomy, yet he was more passionate for women than a
baboon."

[FN#430] A virulently and unjustly abusive critique never yet
injured its object: in fact it is generally the greatest favour
an author's unfriends can bestow upon him. But to notice a
popular Review books which have been printed and not published is
hardly in accordance with the established courtesies of
literature. At the end of my work I propose to write a paper "The
Reviewer Reviewed" which will, amongst other things, explain the
motif of the writer of the critique and the editor of the
Edinburgh.

[FN#431] 1 For detailed examples and specimens see p. 10 of
Gladwin's "Dissertations on Rhetoric," etd., Calcutta, 1801.

[FN#432] For instance: I, M. | take thee N. | to my wedded wife,
| to have and to hold, | from this day forward, | for better for
worse, | for richer for poorer, | in sickness and in health, | to
love and to cherish, | till death do us part, etc. Here it
becomes mere blank verse which is, of course, a defect in prose
style. In that delightful old French the Saj'a frequently
appeared when attention was solicited for the titles of books:
e.g. Lea Romant de la Rose, ou tout lart damours est enclose.

[FN#433] See Gladwin loc. cit. p. 8: it also is = alliteration
(Ibn Khall. ii., 316).

[FN#434] He called himself "Nabiyun ummí" = illiterate prophet;
but only his most ignorant followers believe that he was unable
to read and write. His last words, accepted by all traditionists,
were "Aatíní dawáta wa kalam" (bring me ink-case and pen); upon
which the Shi'ah or Persian sectaries base, not without
probability, a theory that Mohammed intended to write down the
name of Ali as his Caliph or successor when Omar, suspecting the
intention, exclaimed, "The Prophet is delirious; have we not the
Koran?" thus impiously preventing the precaution. However that
may be, the legend proves that Mohammed could read and write even
when not "under inspiration." The vulgar idea would arise from a
pious intent to add miracle to the miraculous style of the Koran.

[FN#435] I cannot but vehemently suspect that this legend was
taken from much older traditions. We have Jubal the semi-mythical
who, "by the different falls of his hammer on the anvil,
discovered by the ear the first rude music that pleased the
antediluvian fathers." Then came Pythagoras, of whom Macrobius
(lib. ii ) relates how this Græco-Egyptian philosopher, passing
by a smithy, observed that the sounds were grave or acute
according to the weights of the hammers; and he ascertained by
experiment that such was the case when different weights were
hung by strings of the same size. The next discovery was that two
strings of the same substance and tension, the one being double
the length of the other, gave the diapason-interval, or an
eighth; and the same was effected from two strings of similar
length and size, the one having four times the tension of the
other. Belonging to the same cycle of invention-anecdotes are
Galileo's discovery of the pendulum by the lustre of the Pisan
Duomo; and the kettle-lid, the falling apple and the copper hook
which inspired Watt, Newton and Galvani.

[FN#436] To what an absurd point this has been carried we may
learn from Ibn Khallikán (i. 114). A poet addressing a single
individual does not say "My friend!" or "My friends!" but "My two
friends!" (in the dual) because a Badawi required a pair of
companions, one to tend the sheep and the other to pasture the
camels.

[FN#437] For further details concerning the Sabab, Watad and
Fasilah, see at the end of this Essay the learned remarks of Dr.
Steingass.


[FN#438] e.g., the Mu'allakats of "Amriolkais," Tarafah and
Zuhayr compared by Mr. Lyall (Introduction to Translations) with
the metre of Abt Vogler, e.g.,

     Ye know why the forms are fair, ye hear how the tale is told

[FN#439] e.g., the Poem of Hareth which often echoes the
hexameter

[FN#440] Gladwin, p. 80.

[FN#441] Gladwin (p. 77) gives only eight, omitting F ' l which
he or his author probably considers the Muzáhaf, imperfect or
apocopêd form of F ' l n, as M f ' l of M f ' l n. For the
infinite complications of Arabic prosody the Khafíf (soft
breathing) and Sahíh (hard breathing); the Sadr and Arúz (first
and last feet), the Ibtidá and Zarb (last foot of every line);
the Hashw (cushion-stuffing) or body part of verse, the 'Amúd
al-Kasídah or Al-Musammat (the strong) and other details I must
refer readers to such specialists as Freytag and Sam. Clarke
(Prosodia Arabica), and to Dr. Steingass's notes infra.

[FN#442] The Hebrew grammarians of the Middle Ages wisely copied
their Arab cousins by turning Fa'la into Pael and so forth.

[FN#443] Mr. Lyall, whose "Ancient Arabic Poetry" (Williams and
Norgate, 1885) I reviewed in The Academy of Oct. 3, '85, did the
absolute reverse of what is required: he preserved the metre and
sacrificed the rhyme even when it naturally suggested itself. For
instance in the last four lines of No. xii. what would be easier
than to write,

Ah sweet and soft wi' thee her ways: bethink thee well! The day
     shall be
When some one favoured as thyself shall find her fair and fain
     and free;
And if she swear that parting ne'er shall break her word of
     constancy,
When did rose-tinted finger-tip with pacts and pledges e'er
     agree?

[FN#444] See p. 439 Grammatik des Arabischen Vulgär Dialekts von
Ægyptian, by Dr. Wilhelm Spitta Bey, Leipzig, 1880. In pp.
489-493 he gives specimens of eleven Mawáwíl varying in length
from four to fifteen lines. The assonance mostly attempts
monorhyme: in two tetrastichs it is aa + ba, and it does not
disdain alternates, ab + ab + ab.

[FN#445] Al-Siyuti, p. 235, from Ibn Khallikan. Our knowledge of
oldest Arab verse is drawn chiefly from the Katáb al-Aghání
(Song-book) of Abu al-Faraj the Isfaháni who flourished A.H.
284-356 (= 897- 967): it was printed at the Bulak Press in 1868.

[FN#446] See Lyall loc. cit. p. 97.

[FN#447] His Diwán has been published with a French translation,
par R. Boucher, Paris, Labitte, 1870.

[FN#448] I find also minor quotations from the Imám Abu al-Hasan
al-Askari (of Sarra man raa) ob. A.D. 868; Ibn Makúla (murdered
in A.D. 862?), Ibn Durayd (ob. A.D. 933)
Al-Zahr the Poet (ob. A.D. 963); Abu Bakr al-Zubaydi (ob. A.D.
989), Kábús ibn Wushmaghir (murdered in A.D. 1012-13); Ibn
Nabatah the Poet (ob. A.D. 1015), Ibn al-Sa'ati (ob. A.D. 1028);
Ibn Zaydun al-Andalusi who died at Hums (Emessa, the Arab name
for Seville) in A.D. 1071; Al-Mu'tasim ibn Sumadih (ob. A.D.
1091), Al-Murtaza ibn al-Shahrozuri the Sufi (ob. A.D. 1117); Ibn
Sara al-Shantaráni (of Santarem) who sang of Hind and died A.D.
1123; Ibn al-Kházin (ob. A.D. 1124), Ibn Kalakis (ob. A D. 1172)
Ibn al-Ta'wizi (ob. A.D. 1188); Ibn Zabádah (ob. A.D. 1198), Bahá
al-Dín Zuhayr (ob A.D. 1249); Muwaffak al-Din Muzaffar (ob. A.D.
1266) and sundry others. Notices of Al-Utayyah (vol. i. 11), of
Ibn al-Sumám (vol. i. 87) and of Ibn Sáhib al-Ishbíli, of Seville
(vol. i. 100), are deficient. The most notable point in Arabic
verse is its savage satire, the language of excited
"destructiveness" which characterises the Badawi: he is "keen for
satire as a thirsty man for water:" and half his poetry seems to
consist of foul innuendo, of lampoons, and of gross personal
abuse.

[FN#449] If the letter preceding Wáw or Yá is moved by Fathah,
they produce the diphthongs au (aw), pronounced like ou in
"bout'" and se, pronounced as i in "bite."

[FN#450] For the explanation of this name and those of the
following terms, see Terminal Essay, p. 225.

[FN#451] This Fásilah is more accurately called sughrá, the
smaller one, there is another Fásilah kubrà, the greater,
consisting of four moved letters followed by a quiescent, or of a
Sabab sakíl followed by a Watad majmú'. But it occurs only as a
variation of a normal foot, not as an integral element in its
composition, and consequently no mention of it was needed in the
text.

[FN#452] It is important to keep in mind that the seemingly
identical feet 10 and 6, 7 and 3, are distinguished by the
relative positions of the constituting elements in either pair.
For as it will be seen that Sabab and Watad are subject to
different kinds of alterations it is evident that the effect of
such alterations upon a foot will vary, if Sabab and Watad occupy
different places with regard to each other.

[FN#453] i.e. vertical to the circumference.

[FN#454] This would be a Fásilah kubrá spoken of in the note p.
239.

[FN#455] In pause that is at the end of a line, a short vowel
counts either as long or is dropped according to the exigencies
of the metre. In the Hashw the u or i of the pronominal affix for
the third person sing., masc., and the final u of the enlarged
pronominal plural forms, humu and kumu, may be either short or
long, according to the same exigencies. The end-vowel of the
pronoun of the first person aná, I, is generally read short,
although it is written with Alif.

[FN#456] On p. 236 the word akámú, as read by itself, was
identified with the foot Fa'úlun. Here it must be read together
with the following syllable as "akámulwaj," which is Mafá'ílun.

[FN#457] Prof. Palmer, p. 328 of his Grammar, identifies this
form of the Wáfir, when every Mufá' alatum of the Hashw has
become Mafá'ílun, with the second form of the Rajaz It should be
Hazaj. Professor Palmer was misled, it seems, by an evident
misprint in one of his authorities, the Muhít al-Dáirah by Dr.
Van Dayk, p. 52.

[FN#458] Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac 134b "The Merchant's Wife
and the Parrot."

[FN#459] This will be found translated in my "Book of the
Thousand Nights and One Night," vol. vii. p. 307, as an Appendix
to the Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac version of the story, from
which it differs in detail.

[FN#460] Called "Bekhit" in Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac
Editions.

[FN#461] Yehya ben Khalid (Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac),

[FN#462] "Shar" (Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac).

[FN#463] "Jelyaad" (Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac.)

[FN#464] Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac, No. 63. See my "Book of
the Thousand Nights and One Night," vol. iv., p. 211.

[FN#465] Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac, "Jaafar the Barmecide."

[FN#466] Calcutta (1839-42) and Boulac, "The Thief turned
Merchant and the other Thief," No. 88.

[FN#467]  This story will be found translated in my "Book of the
Thousand Nights and One Night," vol. v., p. 345.

[FN#468] After this I introduce the Tale of the Husband and the
Parrot.

[FN#469] The Bulak Edition omits this story altogether.

[FN#470] After this I introduce How Abu Hasan brake wind.

[FN#471] Probably Wakksh al-Falák=Feral of the Wild.

[FN#472] This is the date of the Paris edition. There was an
earlier edition published at La Haye in 1743.

[FN#473] There are two other Oriental romances by Voltaire; viz.,
Babouc, and the Princess of Babylon.


[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This Etext was produced by Eve Sobol, South Bend, Indiana, USA





AUGUSTUS DOES HIS BIT: A TRUE-TO-LIFE FARCE

GEORGE BERNARD SHAW




I wish to express my gratitude for certain good offices which
Augustus secured for me in January,1917. I had been invited to
visit the theatre of war in Flanders by the Commander-in-Chief:
an invitation which was, under the circumstances, a summons to
duty. Thus I had occasion to spend some days in procuring
the necessary passport and other official facilities for
my journey. It happened just then that the Stage Society gave a
performance of this little play. It opened the heart of every
official to me. I have always been treated with distinguished
consideration in my contracts with bureaucracy during the war;
but on this occasion I found myself persona grata in the highest
degree. There was only one word when the formalities were
disposed of; and that was "We are up against Augustus all day."
The showing-up of Augustus scandalized one or two innocent and
patriotic critics who regarded the prowess of the British army as
inextricably bound up with Highcastle prestige. But our
Government departments knew better: their problem was how to win
the war with Augustus on their backs, well-meaning, brave,
patriotic, but obstructively fussy, self-important, imbecile, and
disastrous.

Save for the satisfaction of being able to laugh at Augustus in
the theatre, nothing, as far as I know, came of my dramatic
reduction of him to absurdity. Generals, admirals, Prime
Ministers and Controllers, not to mention Emperors, Kaisers and
Tsars, were scrapped remorselessly at home and abroad, for their
sins or services, as the case might be. But Augustus stood like
the Eddystone in a storm, and stands so to this day. He gave us
his word that he was indispensable and we took it.

Augustus Does His Bit was performed for the first time at
the Court Theatre in London by the Stage Society on the
21st January, 1917, with Lalla Vandervelde as The Lady, F.
B.J. Sharp as Lord Augustus Highcastle, and Charles Rock as
Horatio Floyd Beamish.


AUGUSTUS DOES HIS BIT

The Mayor's parlor in the Town Hall of Little Pifflington. Lord
Augustus Highcastle, a distinguished member of the governing
class, in the uniform of a colonel, and very well preserved at
forty-five, is comfortably seated at a writing-table with his
heels on it, reading The Morning Post. The door faces him, a
little to his left, at the other side of the room. The window is
behind him. In the fireplace, a gas stove. On the table a bell
button and a telephone. Portraits of past Mayors, in robes and
gold chains, adorn the walls. An elderly clerk with a short white
beard and whiskers, and a very red nose, shuffles in.

AUGUSTUS [hastily putting aside his paper and replacing his feet
on the floor]. Hullo! Who are you?

THE CLERK. The staff [a slight impediment in his speech adds to
the impression of incompetence produced by his age and
appearance].

AUGUSTUS. You the staff! What do you mean, man?

THE CLERK. What I say. There ain't anybody else.

AUGUSTUS. Tush! Where are the others?

THE CLERK. At the front.

AUGUSTUS. Quite right. Most proper. Why aren't you at the front?

THE CLERK. Over age. Fifty-seven.

AUGUSTUS. But you can still do your bit. Many an older man is in
the G.R.'s, or volunteering for home defence.

THE CLERK. I have volunteered.

AUGUSTUS. Then why are you not in uniform?

THE CLERK. They said they wouldn't have me if I was given away
with a pound of tea. Told me to go home and not be an old silly.
[A sense of unbearable wrong, till now only smouldering in him,
bursts into flame.] Young Bill Knight, that I took with me, got
two and sevenpence. I got nothing. Is it justice? This country is
going to the dogs, if you ask me.

AUGUSTUS [rising indignantly]. I do not ask you, sir; and I will
not allow you to say such things in my presence. Our statesmen
are the greatest known to history. Our generals are invincible.
Our army is the admiration of the world. [Furiously.] How dare
you tell me that the country is going to the dogs!

THE CLERK. Why did they give young Bill Knight two and
sevenpence, and not give me even my tram fare? Do you call that
being great statesmen? As good as robbing me, I call it.

AUGUSTUS. That's enough. Leave the room. [He sits down and takes
up his pen, settling himself to work. The clerk shuffles to the
door. Augustus adds, with cold politeness] Send me the Secretary.

THE CLERK. I'M the Secretary. I can't leave the room and send
myself to you at the same time, can I?

AUGUSTUS, Don't be insolent. Where is the gentleman I have been
corresponding with: Mr Horatio Floyd Beamish?

THE CLERK [returning and bowing]. Here. Me.

AUGUSTUS. You! Ridiculous. What right have you to call yourself
by a pretentious name of that sort?

THE CLERK. You may drop the Horatio Floyd. Beamish is good enough
for me.

AUGUSTUS. Is there nobody else to take my instructions?

THE CLERK. It's me or nobody. And for two pins I'd chuck it.
Don't you drive me too far. Old uns like me is up in the world
now.

AUGUSTUS. If we were not at war, I should discharge you on the
spot for disrespectful behavior. But England is in danger; and I
cannot think of my personal dignity at such a moment. [Shouting
at him.] Don't you think of yours, either, worm that you are; or
I'll have you arrested under the Defence of the Realm Act, double
quick.

THE CLERK. What do I care about the realm? They done me out of
two and seven--

AUGUSTUS. Oh, damn your two and seven! Did you receive my
letters?

THE CLERK. Yes.

AUGUSTUS. I addressed a meeting here last night--went straight to
the platform from the train. I wrote to you that I should expect
you to be present and report yourself. Why did you not do so?

THE CLERK. The police wouldn't let me on the platform.

AUGUSTUS. Did you tell them who you were?

THE CLERK. They knew who I was. That's why they wouldn't let me
up.

AUGUSTUS. This is too silly for anything. This town wants waking
up. I made the best recruiting speech I ever made in my life; and
not a man joined.

THE CLERK. What did you expect? You told them our gallant fellows
is falling at the rate of a thousand a day in the big push. Dying
for Little Pifflington, you says. Come and take their places, you
says. That ain't the way to recruit.

AUGUSTUS. But I expressly told them their widows would have
pensions.

THE CLERK. I heard you. Would have been all right if it had been
the widows you wanted to get round.

AUGUSTUS [rising angrily]. This town is inhabited by dastards. I
say it with a full sense of responsibility, DASTARDS! They call
themselves Englishmen; and they are afraid to fight.

THE CLERK. Afraid to fight! You should see them on a Saturday
night.

AUGUSTUS. Yes, they fight one another; but they won't fight the
Germans.

THE CLERK. They got grudges again one another: how can they have
grudges again the Huns that they never saw? They've no
imagination: that's what it is. Bring the Huns here; and they'll
quarrel with them fast enough.

AUGUSTUS [returning to his seat with a grunt of disgust]. Mf!
They'll have them here if they're not careful. [Seated.] Have you
carried out my orders about the war saving?

THE CLERK. Yes.

AUGUSTUS. The allowance of petrol has been reduced by three
quarters?

THE CLERK. It has.

AUGUSTUS. And you have told the motor-car people to come here and
arrange to start munition work now that their motor business is
stopped?

THE CLERK. It ain't stopped. They're busier than ever.

AUGUSTUS. Busy at what?

THE CLERK. Making small cars.

AUGUSTUS. NEW cars!

THE CLERK. The old cars only do twelve miles to the gallon.
Everybody has to have a car that will do thirty-five now.

AUGUSTUS. Can't they take the train?

THE CLERK. There ain't no trains now. They've tore up the rails
and sent them to the front.

AUGUSTUS. Psha!

THE CLERK. Well, we have to get about somehow.

AUGUSTUS. This is perfectly monstrous. Not in the least what I
intended.

THE CLERK. Hell--

AUGUSTUS. Sir!

THE CLERK [explaining]. Hell, they says, is paved with good
intentions.

AUGUSTUS [springing to his feet]. Do you mean to insinuate that
hell is paved with MY good intentions--with the good intentions
of His Majesty's Government?

THE CLERK. I don't mean to insinuate anything until the Defence
of the Realm Act is repealed. It ain't safe.

AUGUSTUS. They told me that this town had set an example to all
England in the matter of economy. I came down here to promise the
Mayor a knighthood for his exertions.

THE CLERK. The Mayor! Where do I come in?

AUGUSTUS. You don't come in. You go out. This is a fool of a
place. I'm greatly disappointed. Deeply disappointed. [Flinging
himself back into his chair.] Disgusted.

THE CLERK. What more can we do? We've shut up everything. The
picture gallery is shut. The museum is shut. The theatres and
picture shows is shut: I haven't seen a movie picture for six
months.

AUGUSTUS. Man, man: do you want to see picture shows when the Hun
is at the gate?

THE CLERK [mournfully]. I don't now, though it drove me
melancholy mad at first. I was on the point of taking a pennorth
of rat poison--

AUGUSTUS. Why didn't you?

THE CLERK. Because a friend advised me to take to drink instead.
That saved my life, though it makes me very poor company in the
mornings, as [hiccuping] perhaps you've noticed.

AUGUSTUS. Well, upon my soul! You are not ashamed to stand there
and confess yourself a disgusting drunkard.

THE CLERK. Well, what of it? We're at war now; and everything's
changed. Besides, I should lose my job here if I stood drinking
at the bar. I'm a respectable man and must buy my drink and take
it home with me. And they won't serve me with less than a quart.
If you'd told me before the war that I could get through a quart
of whisky in a day, I shouldn't have believed you. That's the
good of war: it brings out powers in a man that he never
suspected himself capable of. You said so yourself in your speech
last night.

AUGUSTUS. I did not know that I was talking to an imbecile. You
ought to be ashamed of yourself. There must be an end of this
drunken slacking. I'm going to establish a new order of things
here. I shall come down every morning before breakfast until
things are properly in train. Have a cup of coffee and two rolls
for me here every morning at half-past ten.

THE CLERK. You can't have no rolls. The only baker that baked
rolls was a Hun; and he's been interned.

AUGUSTUS. Quite right, too. And was there no Englishman to take
his place?

THE CLERK. There was. But he was caught spying; and they took him
up to London and shot him.

AUGUSTUS. Shot an Englishman!

THE CLERK. Well, it stands to reason if the Germans wanted to spy
they wouldn't employ a German that everybody would suspect, don't
it?

AUGUSTUS [rising again]. Do you mean to say, you scoundrel, that
an Englishman is capable of selling his country to the enemy for
gold?

THE CLERK. Not as a general thing I wouldn't say it; but there's
men here would sell their own mothers for two coppers if they got
the chance.

AUGUSTUS. Beamish, it's an ill bird that fouls its own nest.

THE CLERK. It wasn't me that let Little Pifflington get foul. I
don't belong to the governing classes. I only tell you why you
can't have no rolls.

AUGUSTUS [intensely irritated]. Can you tell me where I can find
an intelligent being to take my orders?

THE CLERK. One of the street sweepers used to teach in the school
until it was shut up for the sake of economy. Will he do?

AUGUSTUS. What! You mean to tell me that when the lives of the
gallant fellows in our trenches, and the fate of the British
Empire, depend on our keeping up the supply of shells, you are
wasting money on sweeping the streets?

THE CLERK. We have to. We dropped it for a while; but the infant
death rate went up something frightful.

AUGUSTUS. What matters the death rate of Little Pifflington in a
moment like this? Think of our gallant soldiers, not of your
squalling infants.

THE CLERK. If you want soldiers you must have children. You can't
buy em in boxes, like toy soldiers.

AUGUSTUS. Beamish, the long and the short of it is, you are no
patriot. Go downstairs to your office; and have that gas stove
taken away and replaced by an ordinary grate. The Board of Trade
has urged on me the necessity for economizing gas.

THE CLERK. Our orders from the Minister of Munitions is to use
gas instead of coal, because it saves material. Which is it to
be?

AUGUSTUS [bawling furiously at him]. Both! Don't criticize your
orders: obey them. Yours not to reason why: yours but to do and
die. That's war. [Cooling down.] Have you anything else to say?

THE CLERK. Yes: I want a rise.

AUGUSTUS [reeling against the table in his horror]. A rise!
Horatio Floyd Beamish, do you know that we are at war?

THE CLERK [feebly ironical]. I have noticed something about it in
the papers. Heard you mention it once or twice, now I come to
think of it.

AUGUSTUS. Our gallant fellows are dying in the trenches; and you
want a rise!

THE CLERK. What are they dying for? To keep me alive, ain't it?
Well, what's the good of that if I'm dead of hunger by the time
they come back?

AUGUSTUS. Everybody else is making sacrifices without a thought
of self; and you--

THE CLERK. Not half, they ain't. Where's the baker's sacrifice?
Where's the coal merchant's? Where's the butcher's? Charging me
double: that's how they sacrifice themselves. Well, I want to
sacrifice myself that way too. Just double next Saturday: double
and not a penny less; or no secretary for you [he stiffens
himself shakily, and makes resolutely for the door.]

AUGUSTUS [looking after him contemptuously]. Go, miserable
pro-German.

THE CLERK [rushing back and facing him]. Who are you calling a
pro-German?

AUGUSTUS. Another word, and I charge you under the Act with
discouraging me. Go.

The clerk blenches and goes out, cowed.

The telephone rings.

AUGUSTUS [taking up the telephone receiver. Hallo. Yes: who are
you?...oh, Blueloo, is it?...Yes: there's nobody in the room:
fire away. What?...A spy!...A woman!...Yes: brought it down with
me. Do you suppose I'm such a fool as to let it out of my hands?
Why, it gives a list of all our anti-aircraft emplacements from
Ramsgate to Skegness. The Germans would give a million for it--
what?... But how could she possibly know about it? I haven't
mentioned it to a soul, except, of course, dear Lucy...Oh, Toto
and Lady Popham and that lot: they don't count: they're all
right. I mean that I haven't mentioned it to any Germans....
Pooh! Don't you be nervous, old chap. I know you think me a fool;
but I'm not such a fool as all that. If she tries to get it out
of me I'll have her in the Tower before you ring up again. [The
clerk returns.] Sh-sh! Somebody's just come in: ring off.
Goodbye. [He hangs up the receiver.]

THE CLERK. Are you engaged? [His manner is strangely softened.]

AUGUSTUS. What business is that of yours? However, if you will
take the trouble to read the society papers for this week, you
will see that I am engaged to the Honorable Lucy Popham, youngest
daughter of--

THE CLERK. That ain't what I mean. Can you see a female?

AUGUSTUS. Of course I can see a female as easily as a male. Do
you suppose I'm blind?

THE CLERK. You don't seem to follow me, somehow. There's a female
downstairs: what you might call a lady. She wants to know can you
see her if I let her up.

AUGUSTUS. Oh, you mean am I disengaged. Tell the lady I have just
received news of the greatest importance which will occupy my
entire attention for the rest of the day, and that she must write
for an appointment.

THE CLERK. I'll ask her to explain her business to me. I ain't
above talking to a handsome young female when I get the chance
[going].

AUGUSTUS. Stop. Does she seem to be a person of consequence?

THE CLERK. A regular marchioness, if you ask me.

AUGUSTUS. Hm! Beautiful, did you say?

THE CLERK. A human chrysanthemum, sir, believe me.

AUGUSTUS. It will be extremely inconvenient for me to see her;
but the country is in danger; and we must not consider our own
comfort. Think how our gallant fellows are suffering in the
trenches! Show her up. [The clerk makes for the door, whistling
the latest popular ballad]. Stop whistling instantly, sir. This
is not a casino.

CLERK. Ain't it? You just wait till you see her. [He goes out.]

Augustus produces a mirror, a comb, and a pot of moustache pomade
from the drawer of the writing-table, and sits down before the
mirror to put some touches to his toilet.

The clerk returns, devotedly ushering a very attractive lady,
brilliantly dressed. She has a dainty wallet hanging from her
wrist. Augustus hastily covers up his toilet apparatus with The
Morning Post, and rises in an attitude of pompous condescension.

THE CLERK [to Augustus]. Here she is. [To the lady.] May I offer
you a chair, lady? [He places a chair at the writing-table
opposite Augustus, and steals out on tiptoe.]

AUGUSTUS. Be seated, madam.

THE LADY [sitting down]. Are you Lord Augustus Highcastle?

AUGUSTUS [sitting also]. Madam, I am.

TAE LADY [with awe]. The great Lord Augustus?

AUGUSTUS. I should not dream of describing myself so, Madam; but
no doubt I have impressed my countrymen--and [bowing gallantly]
may I say my countrywomen--as having some exceptional claims to
their consideration.

THE LADY [emotionally]. What a beautiful voice you have!

AUGUSTUS. What you hear, madam, is the voice of my country, which
now takes a sweet and noble tone even in the harsh mouth of high
officialism.

THE LADY. Please go on. You express yourself so wonderfully!

AUGUSTUS. It would be strange indeed if, after sitting on
thirty-seven Royal Commissions, mostly as chairman, I had not
mastered the art of public expression. Even the Radical papers
have paid me the high compliment of declaring that I am never
more impressive than when I have nothing to say.

THE LADY. I never read the Radical papers. All I can tell you is
that what we women admire in you is not the politician, but the
man of action, the heroic warrior, the beau sabreur.

AUGUSTUS [gloomily]. Madam, I beg! Please! My military exploits
are not a pleasant subject, unhappily.

THE LADY. Oh, I know I know. How shamefully you have been
treated! what ingratitude! But the country is with you. The women
are with you. Oh, do you think all our hearts did not throb and
all our nerves thrill when we heard how, when you were ordered to
occupy that terrible quarry in Hulluch, and you swept into it at
the head of your men like a sea-god riding on a tidal wave, you
suddenly sprang over the top shouting "To Berlin! Forward!";
dashed at the German army single-handed; and were cut off and
made prisoner by the Huns.

AUGUSTUS. Yes, madam; and what was my reward? They said I
had disobeyed orders, and sent me home. Have they forgotten
Nelson in the Baltic? Has any British battle ever been won except
by a bold initiative? I say nothing of professional jealousy, it
exists in the army as elsewhere; but it is a bitter thought to me
that the recognition denied me by my country--or rather by the
Radical cabal in the Cabinet which pursues my family with
rancorous class hatred--that this recognition, I say, came to me
at the hands of an enemy--of a rank Prussian.

THE LADY. You don't say so!

AUGUSTUS. How else should I be here instead of starving to death
in Ruhleben? Yes, madam: the Colonel of the Pomeranian regiment
which captured me, after learning what I had done, and conversing
for an hour with me on European politics and military strategy,
declared that nothing would induce him to deprive my country of
my services, and set me free. I offered, of course, to procure
the release in exchange of a German officer of equal quality; but
he would not hear of it. He was kind enough to say he could not
believe that a German officer answering to that description
existed. [With emotion.] I had my first taste of the ingratitude
of my own country as I made my way back to our lines. A shot from
our front trench struck me in the head. I still carry the
flattened projectile as a trophy [he throws it on the table; the
noise it makes testifies to its weight]. Had it penetrated to the
brain I might never have sat on another Royal Commission.
Fortunately we have strong heads, we Highcastles. Nothing has
ever penetrated to our brains.

THE LADY. How thrilling! How simple! And how tragic! But you will
forgive England? Remember: England! Forgive her.

AUGUSTUS [with gloomy magnanimity]. It will make no difference
whatever to my services to my country. Though she slay me, yet
will I, if not exactly trust in her, at least take my part in her
government. I am ever at my country's call. Whether it be the
embassy in a leading European capital, a governor-generalship in
the tropics, or my humble mission here to make Little Pifflington
do its bit, I am always ready for the sacrifice. Whilst England
remains England, wherever there is a public job to be done you
will find a Highcastle sticking to it. And now, madam, enough of
my tragic personal history. You have called on business. What can
I do for you?

THE LADY. You have relatives at the Foreign Office, have you not?

AUGUSTUS [haughtily]. Madam, the Foreign Office is staffed by my
relatives exclusively.

THE LADY. Has the Foreign Office warned you that you are being
pursued by a female spy who is determined to obtain possession of
a certain list of gun emplacements?

AUGUSTUS [interrupting her somewhat loftily]. All that is
perfectly well known to this department, madam.

THE LADY [surprised and rather indignant]. Is it? Who told you?
Was it one of your German brothers-in-law?

AUGUSTUS [injured, remonstrating]. I have only three German
brothers-in-law, madam. Really, from your tone, one would suppose
that I had several. Pardon my sensitiveness on that subject; but
reports are continually being circulated that I have been shot as
a traitor in the courtyard of the Ritz Hotel simply because I
have German brothers-in-law. [With feeling.] If you had a German
brother-in-law, madam, you would know that nothing else in the
world produces so strong an anti-German feeling. Life affords no
keener pleasure than finding a brother-in-law's name in the
German casualty list.

THE LADY. Nobody knows that better than I. Wait until you hear
what I have come to tell you: you will understand me as no one
else could. Listen. This spy, this woman--

AUGUSTUS [all attention]. Yes?

THE LADY. She is a German. A Hun.

AUGUSTUS. Yes, yes. She would be. Continue.

THE LADY. She is my sister-in-law.

AUGUSTUS [deferentially]. I see you are well connected, madam.
Proceed.

THE LADY. Need I add that she is my bitterest enemy?

AUGUSTUS. May I--[he proffers his hand. They shake, fervently.
>From this moment onward Augustus becomes more and more
confidential, gallant, and charming.]

THE LADY. Quite so. Well, she is an intimate friend of your
brother at the War Office, Hungerford Highcastle, Blueloo as you
call him, I don't know why.

AUGUSTUS [explaining]. He was originally called The Singing
Oyster, because he sang drawing-room ballads with such an
extraordinary absence of expression. He was then called the Blue
Point for a season or two. Finally he became Blueloo.

THE LADY. Oh, indeed: I didn't know. Well, Blueloo is simply
infatuated with my sister-in-law; and he has rashly let out to
her that this list is in your possession. He forgot himself
because he was in a towering rage at its being entrusted to you:
his language was terrible. He ordered all the guns to be shifted
at once.

AUGUSTUS. What on earth did he do that for?

THE LADY. I can't imagine. But this I know. She made a bet with
him that she would come down here and obtain possession of that
list and get clean away into the street with it. He took the bet
on condition that she brought it straight back to him at the War
Office.

AUGUSTUS. Good heavens! And you mean to tell me that Blueloo was
such a dolt as to believe that she could succeed? Does he take me
for a fool?

THE LADY. Oh, impossible! He is jealous of your intellect. The
bet is an insult to you: don't you feel that? After what you have
done for our country--

AUGUSTUS. Oh, never mind that. It is the idiocy of the thing I
look at. He'll lose his bet; and serve him right!

THE LADY. You feel sure you will be able to resist the siren? I
warn you, she is very fascinating.

AUGUSTUS. You need have no fear, madam. I hope she will come and
try it on. Fascination is a game that two can play at. For
centuries the younger sons of the Highcastles have had nothing to
do but fascinate attractive females when they were not sitting on
Royal Commissions or on duty at Knightsbridge barracks. By Gad,
madam, if the siren comes here she will meet her match.

THE LADY. I feel that. But if she fails to seduce you--

AUGUSTUS [blushing]. Madam!

THE LADY [continuing]--from your allegiance--

AUGUSTUS. Oh, that!

THE LADY. --she will resort to fraud, to force, to anything. She
will burgle your office: she will have you attacked and garotted
at night in the street.

AUGUSTUS. Pooh! I'm not afraid.

THE LADY. Oh, your courage will only tempt you into danger. She
may get the list after all. It is true that the guns are moved.
But she would win her bet.

AUGUSTUS [cautiously]. You did not say that the guns were moved.
You said that Blueloo had ordered them to be moved.

THE LADY. Well, that is the same thing, isn't it?

AUGUSTUS. Not quite--at the War Office. No doubt those guns WILL
be moved: possibly even before the end of the war.

THE LADY. Then you think they are there still! But if the German
War Office gets the list--and she will copy it before she gives
it back to Blueloo, you may depend on it--all is lost.

AUGUSTUS [lazily]. Well, I should not go as far as that.
[Lowering his voice.] Will you swear to me not to repeat what I
am going to say to you; for if the British public knew that I had
said it, I should be at once hounded down as a pro-German.

THE LADY. I will be silent as the grave. I swear it.

AUGUSTUS [again taking it easily]. Well, our people have for some
reason made up their minds that the German War Office is
everything that our War Office is not--that it carries
promptitude, efficiency, and organization to a pitch of
completeness and perfection that must be, in my opinion,
destructive to the happiness of the staff. My own view--which you
are pledged, remember, not to betray--is that the German War
Office is no better than any other War Office. I found that
opinion on my observation of the characters of my
brothers-in-law: one of whom, by the way, is on the German
general staff. I am not at all sure that this list of gun
emplacements would receive the smallest attention. You see, there
are always so many more important things to be attended to.
Family matters, and so on, you understand.

THE LADY. Still, if a question were asked in the House of
Commons--

AUGUSTUS. The great advantage of being at war, madam, is that
nobody takes the slightest notice of the House of Commons. No
doubt it is sometimes necessary for a Minister to soothe the more
seditious members of that assembly by giving a pledge or two; but
the War Office takes no notice of such things.

THE LADY [staring at him]. Then you think this list of gun
emplacements doesn't matter!!

AUGUSTUS. By no means, madam. It matters very much indeed. If
this spy were to obtain possession of the list, Blueloo would
tell the story at every dinner-table in London; and--

THE LADY. And you might lose your post. Of course.

AUGUSTUS [amazed and indignant]. I lose my post! What are you
dreaming about, madam? How could I possibly be spared? There are
hardly Highcastles enough at present to fill half the posts
created by this war. No: Blueloo would not go that far. He is at
least a gentleman. But I should be chaffed; and, frankly, I don't
like being chaffed.

THE LADY. Of course not. Who does? It would never do. Oh never,
never.

AUGUSTUS. I'm glad you see it in that light. And now, as a
measure of security, I shall put that list in my pocket. [He
begins searching vainly from drawer to drawer in the
writing-table.] Where on earth--? What the dickens did I--?
That's very odd: I--Where the deuce--? I thought I had put it in
the--Oh, here it is! No: this is Lucy's last letter.

THE LADY [elegiacally]. Lucy's Last Letter! What a title for a
picture play!

AUGUSTUS [delighted]. Yes: it is, isn't it? Lucy appeals to the
imagination like no other woman. By the way [handing over the
letter], I wonder could you read it for me? Lucy is a darling
girl; but I really can't read her writing. In London I get the
office typist to decipher it and make me a typed copy; but here
there is nobody.

THE LADY [puzzling over it]. It is really almost illegible. I
think the beginning is meant for "Dearest Gus."

AUGUSTUS [eagerly]. Yes: that is what she usually calls me.
Please go on.

THE LADY [trying to decipher it]. "What a"--"what a"--oh yes:
"what a forgetful old"--something--"you are!" I can't make out
the word.

AUGUSTUS [greatly interested]. Is it blighter? That is a favorite
expression of hers.

THE LADY. I think so. At all events it begins with a B.
[Reading.] "What a forgetful old"--[she is interrupted by a knock
at the door.]

AUGUSTUS [impatiently]. Come in. [The clerk enters, clean shaven
and in khaki, with an official paper and an envelope in his
hand.] What is this ridiculous mummery sir?

THE CLERK [coming to the table and exhibiting his uniform to
both]. They've passed me. The recruiting officer come for me.
I've had my two and seven.

AUGUSTUS [rising wrathfully]. I shall not permit it. What do they
mean by taking my office staff? Good God! they will be taking our
hunt servants next. [Confronting the clerk.] What did the man
mean? What did he say?

THE CLERK. He said that now you was on the job we'd want another
million men, and he was going to take the old-age pensioners or
anyone he could get.

AUGUSTUS. And did you dare to knock at my door and interrupt my
business with this lady to repeat this man's ineptitudes?

THE CLERK. No. I come because the waiter from the hotel brought
this paper. You left it on the coffeeroom breakfast-table this
morning.

THE LADY [intercepting it]. It is the list. Good heavens!

THE CLERK [proffering the envelope]. He says he thinks this is
the envelope belonging to it.

THE LADY [snatching the envelope also]. Yes! Addressed to you,
Lord Augustus! [Augustus comes back to the table to look at it.]
Oh, how imprudent! Everybody would guess its importance with your
name on it. Fortunately I have some letters of my own here
[opening her wallet.] Why not hide it in one of my envelopes?
then no one will dream that the enclosure is of any political
value. [Taking out a letter, she crosses the room towards the
window, whispering to Augustus as she passes him.] Get rid of
that man.

AUGUSTUS [ha