ughtily approaching the clerk, who humorously makes a
paralytic attempt to stand at attention]. Have you any further
business here, pray?

THE CLERK. Am I to give the waiter anything; or will you do it
yourself?

AUGUSTUS. Which waiter is it? The English one?

THE CLERK. No: the one that calls hisself a Swiss. Shouldn't
wonder if he'd made a copy of that paper.

AUGUSTUS. Keep your impertinent surmises to yourself, sir.
Remember that you are in the army now; and let me have no more of
your civilian insubordination. Attention! Left turn! Quick march!

THE CLERK [stolidly]. I dunno what you mean.

AUGUSTUS. Go to the guard-room and report yourself for disobeying
orders. Now do you know what I mean?

THE CLERK. Now look here. I ain't going to argue with you--

AUGUSTUS. Nor I with you. Out with you.

He seizes the clerk: and rushes him through the door. The moment
the lady is left alone, she snatches a sheet of official paper
from the stationery rack: folds it so that it resembles the list;
compares the two to see that they look exactly alike: whips the
list into her wallet: and substitutes the facsimile for it. Then
she listens for the return of Augustus. A crash is heard, as of
the clerk falling downstairs.

Augustus returns and is about to close the door when the voice of
the clerk is heard from below.

THE CLERK. I'll have the law of you for this, I will.

AUGUSTUS [shouting down to him]. There's no more law for you, you
scoundrel. You're a soldier now. [He shuts the door and comes to
the lady.] Thank heaven, the war has given us the upper hand of
these fellows at last. Excuse my violence; but discipline is
absolutely necessary in dealing with the lower middle classes.

THE LADY. Serve the insolent creature right! Look I have found
you a beautiful envelope for the list, an unmistakable lady's
envelope. [She puts the sham list into her envelope and hands it
to him.]

AUGUSTUS. Excellent. Really very clever of you. [Slyly.] Come:
would you like to have a peep at the list [beginning to take the
blank paper from the envelope]?

THE LADY [on the brink of detection]. No no. Oh, please, no.

AUGUSTUS. Why? It won't bite you [drawing it out further.]

THE LADY [snatching at his hand]. Stop. Remember: if there should
be an inquiry, you must be able to swear that you never showed
that list to a mortal soul.

AUGUSTUS. Oh, that is a mere form. If you are really curious--

THE LADY. I am not. I couldn't bear to look at it. One of my
dearest friends was blown to pieces by an aircraft gun; and since
then I have never been able to think of one without horror.

AUGUSTUS. You mean it was a real gun, and actually went off. How
sad! how sad! [He pushes the sham list back into the envelope,
and pockets it.]

THE LADY. Ah! [Great sigh of relief]. And now, Lord Augustus, I
have taken up too much of your valuable time. Goodbye.

AUGUSTUS. What! Must you go?

THE LADY. You are so busy.

AUGUSTUS. Yes; but not before lunch, you know. I never can do
much before lunch. And I'm no good at all in the afternoon. From
five to six is my real working time. Must you really go?

THE LADY. I must, really. I have done my business very
satisfactorily. Thank you ever so much [she proffers her hand].

AUGUSTUS [shaking it affectionately as he leads her to the door,
but fast pressing the bell button with his left hand]. Goodbye.
Goodbye. So sorry to lose you. Kind of you to come; but there was
no real danger. You see, my dear little lady, all this talk about
war saving, and secrecy, and keeping the blinds down at night,
and so forth, is all very well; but unless it's carried out with
intelligence, believe me, you may waste a pound to save a penny;
you may let out all sorts of secrets to the enemy; you may guide
the Zeppelins right on to your own chimneys. That's where the
ability of the governing class comes in. Shall the fellow call a
taxi for you?

THE LADY. No, thanks: I prefer walking. Goodbye. Again, many,
many thanks.

She goes out. Augustus returns to the writing-table smiling, and
takes another look at himself in the mirror. The clerk returns,
with his head bandaged, carrying a poker.

THE CLERK. What did you ring for? [Augustus hastily drops the
mirror]. Don't you come nigh me or I'll split your head with this
poker, thick as it is.

AUGUSTUS. It does not seem to me an exceptionally thick poker. I
rang for you to show the lady out.

THE CLERK. She's gone. She run out like a rabbit. I ask myself
why was she in such a hurry?

THE LADY'S VOICE [from the street]. Lord Augustus. Lord Augustus.

THE CLERK. She's calling you.

AUGUSTUS [running to the window and throwing it up]. What is it?
Won't you come up?

THE LADY. Is the clerk there?

AUGUSTUS. Yes. Do you want him?

THE LADY. Yes.

AUGUSTUS. The lady wants you at the window.

THE CLERK [rushing to the window and putting down the poker].
Yes, ma'am? Here I am, ma'am. What is it, ma'am?

THE LADY. I want you to witness that I got clean away into the
street. I am coming up now.

The two men stare at one another.

THE CLERK. Wants me to witness that she got clean away into the
street!

AUGUSTUS. What on earth does she mean?

The lady returns.

THE LADY. May I use your telephone?

AUGUSTUS. Certainly. Certainly. [Taking the receiver down.] What
number shall I get you?

THE LADY. The War Office, please.

AUGUSTUS. The War Office!?

THE LADY. If you will be so good.

AUGUSTUS. But--Oh, very well. [Into the receiver.] Hallo. This is
the Town Hall Recruiting Office. Give me Colonel Bogey, sharp.

A pause.

THE CLERK [breaking the painful silence]. I don't think I'm
awake. This is a dream of a movie picture, this is.

AUGUSTUS [his ear at the receiver]. Shut up, will you? [Into the
telephone.] What?...[To the lady.] Whom do you want to get on to?

THE LADY. Blueloo.

AUGUSTUS [into the telephone]. Put me through to Lord Hungerford
Highcastle...I'm his brother, idiot...That you, Blueloo? Lady
here at Little Pifflington wants to speak to you. Hold the line.
[To the lady.] Now, madam [he hands her the receiver].

THE LADY [sitting down in Augustus's chair to speak into the
telephone]. Is that Blueloo?...Do you recognize my voice?...I've
won our bet....

AUGUSTUS. Your bet!

THE LADY [into the telephone]. Yes: I have the list in my wallet
....

AUGUSTUS. Nothing of the kind, madam. I have it here in my
pocket. [He takes the envelope from his pocket: draws out the
paper: and unfolds it.]

THE LADY [continuing]. Yes: I got clean into the street with it.
I have a witness. I could have got to London with it. Augustus
won't deny it....

AUGUSTUS [contemplating the blank paper]. There's nothing written
on this. Where is the list of guns?

THE LADY [continuing]. Oh, it was quite easy. I said I was my
sister-in-law and that I was a Hun. He lapped it up like a kitten
....

AUGUSTUS. You don't mean to say that--

THE LADY [continuing]. I got hold of the list for a moment and
changed it for a piece of paper out of his stationery rack: it
was quite easy [she laughs: and it is clear that Blueloo is
laughing too].

AUGUSTUS. What!

THE CLERK [laughing slowly and laboriously, with intense
enjoyment]. Ha ha! Ha ha ha! Ha! [Augustus rushes at him; he
snatches up the poker and stands on guard.] No you don't.

THE LADY [still at the telephone, waving her disengaged hand
behind her impatiently at them to stop making a noise]. Sh-sh-sh-
sh-sh!!! [Augustus, with a shrug, goes up the middle of the room.
The lady resumes her conversation with the telephone.] What?...Oh
yes: I'm coming up by the 1.35: why not have tea with me at
Rumpelmeister's?...Rum-pel-meister's. You know: they call it
Robinson's now...Right. Ta ta. [She hangs up the receiver, and is
passing round the table on her way towards the door when she is
confronted by Augustus.]

AUGUSTUS. Madam, I consider your conduct most unpatriotic. You
make bets and abuse the confidence of the hardworked officials
who are doing their bit for their country whilst our gallant
fellows are perishing in the trenches--

THE LADY. Oh, the gallant fellows are not all in the trenches,
Augustus. Some of them have come home for a few days' hard-earned
leave; and I am sure you won't grudge them a little fun at your
expense.

THE CLERK. Hear! hear!

AUGUSTUS [amiably]. Ah, well! For my country's sake--!





The Project Gutenberg Etext of Augustus Does His Bit, by Bernard Shaw








THE ACHARNIANS
by Aristophanes


[Translator uncredited.  Footnotes have been retained because they
provide the meanings of Greek names, terms and ceremonies and explain
puns and references otherwise lost in translation.  Occasional Greek words
in the footnotes have not been included.  Footnote numbers, in brackets,
start anew at [1] for each piece of dialogue, and each footnote follows
immediately the dialogue to which it refers, labeled thus: f[1].




INTRODUCTION



This is the first of the series of three Comedies--'The Acharnians,' 'Peace'
and 'Lysistrata'--produced at intervals of years, the sixth, tenth and
twenty-first of the Peloponnesian War, and impressing on the Athenian
people the miseries and disasters due to it and to the scoundrels who by
their selfish and reckless policy had provoked it, the consequent ruin of
industry and, above all, agriculture, and the urgency of asking Peace.  In
date it is the earliest play brought out by the author in his own name and
his first work of serious importance.  It was acted at the Lenaean Festival,
in January, 426 B.C., and gained the first prize, Cratinus being second.

Its diatribes against the War and fierce criticism of the general policy of
the War party so enraged Cleon that, as already mentioned, he
endeavoured to ruin the author, who in 'The Knights' retorted by a direct
and savage personal attack on the leader of the democracy.

The plot is of the simplest.  Dicaeopolis, an Athenian citizen, but a native of
Acharnae, one of the agricultural demes and one which had especially
suffered in the Lacedaemonian invasions, sick and tired of the ill-success
and miseries of the War, makes up his mind, if he fails to induce the
people to adopt his policy of "peace at any price," to conclude a private and
particular peace of his own to cover himself, his family, and his estate.  The
Athenians, momentarily elated by victory and over-persuaded by the
demagogues of the day--Cleon and his henchmen, refuse to hear of such a
thing as coming to terms.  Accordingly Dicaeopolis dispatches an envoy to
Sparta on his own account, who comes back presently with a selection of
specimen treaties in his pocket.  The old man tastes and tries, special terms
are arranged, and the play concludes with a riotous and uproarious rustic
feast in honour of the blessings of Peace and Plenty.

Incidentally excellent fun is poked at Euripides and his dramatic methods,
which supply matter for so much witty badinage in several others of our
author's pieces.

Other specially comic incidents are: the scene where the two young
daughters of the famished Megarian are sold in the market at Athens as
suck[l]ing-pigs--a scene in which the convenient similarity of the Greek
words signifying a pig and the 'pudendum muliebre' respectively is
utilized in a whole string of ingenious and suggestive 'double entendres'
and ludicrous jokes; another where the Informer, or Market-Spy, is packed
up in a crate as crockery and carried off home by the Boeotian buyer.

The drama takes its title from the Chorus, composed of old
men of Acharnae.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE

DICAEOPOLIS
HERALD
AMPHITHEUS
AMBASSADORS
PSEUDARTABAS
THEORUS
WIFE OF DICAEOPOLIS
DAUGHTER OF DICAEOPOLIS
EURIPIDES
CEPHISOPHON, servant of Euripides
LAMACHUS
ATTENDANT OF LAMACHUS
A MEGARIAN
MAIDENS, daughters of the Megarian
A BOEOTIAN
NICARCHUS
A HUSBANDMAN
A BRIDESMAID
AN INFORMER
MESSENGERS
CHORUS OF ACHARNIAN ELDERS




SCENE: The Athenian Ecclesia on the Pnyx; afterwards Dicaeopolis' house in
the country.



DICAEOPOLIS[1] (alone)
What cares have not gnawed at my heart and how few have been the
pleasures in my life!  Four, to be exact, while my troubles have been
as countless as the grains of sand on the shore!  Let me see! of what
value to me have been these few pleasures?  Ah! I remember that I was
delighted in soul when Cleon had to disgorge those five talents;[2] I was
in ecstasy and I love the Knights for this deed; 'it is an honour to
Greece.'[3] But the day when I was impatiently awaiting a piece by
Aeschylus,[4] what tragic despair it caused me when the herald called,
"Theognis,[5] introduce your Chorus!" Just imagine how this blow struck
straight at my heart!  On the other hand, what joy Dexitheus caused
me at the musical competition, when he played a Boeotian melody
on the lyre!  But this year by contrast! Oh! what deadly torture
to hear Chaeris[6] perform the prelude in the Orthian mode![7]
--Never, however, since I began to bathe, has the dust hurt my
eyes as it does to-day.  Still it is the day of assembly; all should be
here at daybreak, and yet the Pnyx[8] is still deserted.  They are
gossiping in the marketplace, slipping hither and thither to avoid
the vermilioned rope.[9] The Prytanes[10] even do not come; they will be
late, but when they come they will push and fight each other for a
seat in the front row.  They will never trouble themselves with the
question of peace.  Oh!  Athens! Athens! As for myself, I do not fail to
come here before all the rest, and now, finding myself alone, I groan,
yawn, stretch, break wind, and know not what to do; I make sketches in
the dust, pull out my loose hairs, muse, think of my fields, long for
peace, curse town life and regret my dear country home,[11] which never
told me to 'buy fuel, vinegar or oil'; there the word 'buy,' which
cuts me in two, was unknown; I harvested everything at will.  Therefore
I have come to the assembly fully prepared to bawl, interrupt and
abuse the speakers, if they talk of anything but peace.  But here come the
Prytanes, and high time too, for it is midday!  As I foretold, hah! is it
not so?  They are pushing and fighting for the front seats.

f[1] A name invented by Aristophanes and signifying 'a just citizen.'
f[2] Clean had received five talents from the islanders subject to Athens,
on condition that he should get the tribute payable by them reduced; when
informed of this transaction, the knights compelled him to return
the money.
f[3] A hemistich borrowed from Euripides' 'Telephus.'
f[4] The tragedies of Aeschylus continued to be played even after the
poet's death, which occurred in 436 B.C., ten years before the production
of 'The Acharnians.'
f[5] A tragic poet, whose pieces were so devoid of warmth and life that he
was nicknamed [the Greek for] 'snow.'
f[6] A bad musician, frequently ridiculed by Aristophanes; he played both
the lyre and the flute.
f[7] A lively and elevated method.
f[8] A hill near the Acropolis, where the Assemblies were held.
f[9] Several means were used to force citizens to attend the assemblies;
the shops were closed; circulation was only permitted in those streets which
led to the Pnyx; finally, a rope covered with vermilion was drawn round those
who dallied in the Agora (the market-place), and the late-comers, ear-
marked by the imprint of the rope, were fined.
f[10] Magistrates who, with the Archons and the Epistatae, shared the care
of holding and directing the assemblies of the people; they were fifty
in number.
f[11] The Peloponnesian War had already, at the date of the representation
of 'The Acharnians,' lasted five years, 431-426 B.C.; driven from their lands
by the successive Lacedaemonian invasions, the people throughout the
country had been compelled to seek shelter behind the walls of Athens.

HERALD
Move on up, move on, move on, to get within the consecrated area.[1]

f[1] Shortly before the meeting of the Assembly, a number of young pigs
were immolated and a few drops of their blood were sprinkled on the
seats of the Prytanes; this sacrifice was in honour of Ceres.

AMPHITHEUS
Has anyone spoken yet?

HERALD
Who asks to speak?

AMPHITHEUS
I do.

HERALD
Your name?

AMPHITHEUS
Amphitheus.

HERALD
You are no man.[1]

f[1] The name, Amphitheus, contains [the Greek] word [for] 'god.'

AMPHITHEUS
No!  I am an immortal!  Amphitheus was the son of Ceres and
Triptolemus; of him was born Celeus.  Celeus wedded Phaenerete, my
grandmother, whose son was Lucinus, and, being born of him I am an
immortal; it is to me alone that the gods have entrusted the duty of
treating with the Lacedaemonians.  But, citizens, though I am immortal,
I am dying of hunger; the Prytanes give me naught.[1]

f[1] Amongst other duties, it was the office of the Prytanes to look after
the wants of the poor.

A PRYTANIS
Guards!

AMPHITHEUS
Oh, Triptolemus and Ceres, do ye thus forsake your own blood?

DICAEOPOLIS
Prytanes, in expelling this citizen, you are offering an outrage
to the Assembly.  He only desired to secure peace for us and to sheathe
the sword.

PRYTANIS
Sit down and keep silence!

DICAEOPOLIS
No, by Apollo, I will not, unless you are going to discuss the
question of peace.

HERALD
The ambassadors, who are returned from the Court of the King!

DICAEOPOLIS
Of what King?  I am sick of all those fine birds, the peacock
ambassadors and their swagger.

HERALD
Silence!

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh! oh! by Ecbatana,[1] what a costume!

f[1] The summer residence of the Great King.

AN AMBASSADOR
During the archonship of Euthymenes, you sent us to the Great King
on a salary of two drachmae per diem.

DICAEOPOLIS
Ah! those poor drachmae!

AMBASSADOR
We suffered horribly on the plains of the Cayster, sleeping under a tent,
stretched deliciously on fine chariots, half dead with weariness.

DICAEOPOLIS
And I was very much at ease, lying on the straw along the
battlements![1]

f[1] Referring to the hardships he had endured garrisoning the walls of
Athens during the Lacedaemonian invasions early in the War.

AMBASSADOR
Everywhere we were well received and forced to drink delicious
wine out of golden or crystal flagons....

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh, city of Cranaus,[1] thy ambassadors are laughing at thee!

f[1] Cranaus, the second king of Athens, the successor of Cecrops.

AMBASSADOR
For great feeders and heavy drinkers are alone esteemed as men
by the barbarians.

DICAEOPOLIS
Just as here in Athens, we only esteem the most drunken debauchees.

AMBASSADOR
At the end of the fourth year we reached the King's Court, but
he had left with his whole army to ease himself, and for the space of
eight months he was thus easing himself in the midst of the golden
mountains.[1]

f[1] Lucian, in his 'Hermotimus,' speaks of these golden mountains as an
apocryphal land of wonders and prodigies.

DICAEOPOLIS
And how long was he replacing his dress?

AMBASSADOR
The whole period of a full moon; after which he returned to his palace;
then he entertained us and had us served with oxen roasted whole
in an oven.

DICAEOPOLIS
Who ever saw an oxen baked in an oven?  What a lie!

AMBASSADOR
On my honour, he also had us served with a bird three
times as large as Cleonymus,[1] and called the Boaster.

f[1] Cleonymus was an Athenian general of exceptionally tall stature;
Aristophanes incessantly rallies him for his cowardice; he had cast away
his buckler in a fight.

DICAEOPOLIS
And do we give you two drachmae, that you should treat us to all
this humbug?

AMBASSADOR
We are bringing to you Pseudartabas[1], the King's Eye.

f[1] A name borne by certain officials of the King of Persia.  The actor of
this part wore a mask, fitted with a single eye of great size.

DICAEOPOLIS
I would a crow might pluck out thine with his beak, you cursed
ambassador!

HERALD
The King's Eye!

DICAEOPOLIS
Eh!  Great Gods!  Friend, with thy great eye, round like the hole through
which the oarsman passes his sweep, you have the air of a galley
doubling a cape to gain port.

AMBASSADOR
Come, Pseudartabas, give forth the message for the Athenians
with which you were charged by the Great King.

PSEUDARTABAS
Jartaman exarx 'anapissonia satra.[1]

f[1] Jargon, no doubt meaningless in all languages.

AMBASSADOR
Do you understand what he says?

DICAEOPOLIS
By Apollo, not I!

AMBASSADOR (TO THE PRYTANES)
He says that the Great King will send you gold.  Come, utter the word
'gold' louder and more distinctly.

PSEUDARTABAS
Thou shalt not have gold, thou gaping-arsed Ionian.[1]

f[1] The Persians styled all Greeks 'Ionians' without distinction; here
the Athenians are intended.

DICAEOPOLIS
Ah! may the gods forgive me, but that is clear enough!

AMBASSADOR
What does he say?

DICAEOPOLIS
That the Ionians are debauchees and idiots, if they expect to receive
gold from the barbarians.

AMBASSADOR
Not so, he speaks of medimni[1] of gold.

f[1] A Greek measure, containing about six modii.

DICAEOPOLIS
What medimni?  Thou are but a great braggart; but get your way; I
will find out the truth by myself.  Come now, answer me clearly, if you
do not wish me to dye your skin red.  Will the Great King send us gold?
(PSEUDARTABAS MAKES A NEGATIVE SIGN.) Then our ambassadors
are seeking to deceive us?  (PSEUDARTABAS SIGNS AFFIRMATIVELY.)
These fellows make signs like any Greek; I am sure that they are
nothing but Athenians.  Oh! ho! I recognize one of these eunuchs; it is
Clisthenes, the son of Sibyrtius.[1] Behold the effrontery of this shaven
rump!  How! great baboon, with such a beard do you seek to play the
eunuch to us?  And this other one?  Is it not Straton?

f[1] Noted for his extreme ugliness and his obscenity.  Aristophanes
frequently holds him to scorn in his comedies.

HERALD
Silence!  Let all be seated.  The Senate invites the King's Eye to the
Prytaneum.[1]

f[1] Ambassadors were entertained there at the public expense.

DICAEOPOLIS
Is this not sufficient to drive one to hang oneself?  Here I
stand chilled to the bone, whilst the doors of the Prytaneum fly
wide open to lodge such rascals.  But I will do something great and
bold.  Where is Amphitheus?  Come and speak with me.

AMPHITHEUS
Here I am.

DICAEOPOLIS
Take these eight drachmae and go and conclude a truce with the
Lacedaemonians for me, my wife and my children; I leave you free,
my dear citizens, to send out embassies and to stand gaping in the air.

HERALD
Bring in Theorus, who has returned from the Court of Sitalces.[1]

f[1] King of Thrace.

THEORUS
I am here.

DICAEOPOLIS
Another humbug!

THEORUS
We should not have remained long in Thrace...

DICAEOPOLIS
Forsooth, no, if you had not been well paid.

THEORUS
...if the country had not been covered with snow; the rivers were
ice-bound at the time that Theognis[1] brought out his tragedy here;
during the whole of that time I was holding my own with
Sitalces, cup in hand; and, in truth, he adored you to such a degree,
that he wrote on the walls, "How beautiful are the Athenians!" His
son, to whom we gave the freedom of the city, burned with desire to
come here and eat chitterlings at the feast of the Apaturia;[2] he prayed
his father to come to the aid of his new country and Sitalces swore on
his goblet that he would succour us with such a host that the Athenians
would exclaim, "What a cloud of grasshoppers!"

f[1] The tragic poet.
f[2] A feast lasting three days and celebrated during the month Pyanepsion
(November).  The Greek word contains the suggestion of fraud.

DICAEOPOLIS
May I die if I believe a word of what you tell us!  Excepting the
grasshoppers, there is not a grain of truth in it all!

THEORUS
And he has sent you the most warlike soldiers of all Thrace.

DICAEOPOLIS
Now we shall begin to see clearly.

HERALD
Come hither, Thracians, whom Theorus brought.

DICAEOPOLIS
What plague have we here?

THEORUS
'Tis the host of the Odomanti.[1]

f[1] A Thracian tribe from the right bank of the Strymon.

DICAEOPOLIS
Of the Odomanti?  Tell me what it means.  Who has mutilated them
like this?

THEORUS
If they are given a wage of two drachmae, they will put all
Boeotia[1] to fire and sword.

f[1] The Boeotians were the allies of Sparta.

DICAEOPOLIS
Two drachmae to those circumcised hounds!  Groan aloud, ye people
of rowers, bulwark of Athens!  Ah! great gods! I am undone; these
Odomanti are robbing me of my garlic![1] Will you give me back
my garlic?

f[1] Dicaeopolis had brought a clove of garlic with him to eat during
the Assembly.

THEORUS
Oh! wretched man! do not go near them; they have eaten garlic[1].

f[1] Garlic was given to game-cocks, before setting them at each other,
to give them pluck for the fight.

DICAEOPOLIS
Prytanes, will you let me be treated in this manner, in my own
country and by barbarians?  But I oppose the discussion of paying
a wage to the Thracians; I announce an omen; I have just felt a drop
of rain.[1]

f[1] At the lest unfavourable omen, the sitting of the Assembly was
declared at an end.

HERALD
Let the Thracians withdraw and return the day after tomorrow;
the Prytanes declare the sitting at an end.

DICAEOPOLIS
Ye gods, what garlic I have lost!  But here comes Amphitheus
returned from Lacedaemon.  Welcome, Amphitheus.

AMPHITHEUS
No, there is no welcome for me and I fly as fast as I can, for I
am pursued by the Acharnians.

DICAEOPOLIS
Why, what has happened?

AMPHITHEUS
I was hurrying to bring your treaty of truce, but some old dotards
from Acharnae[1] got scent of the thing; they are veterans of Marathon,
tough as oak or maple, of which they are made for sure--rough and
ruthless.  They all started a-crying: "Wretch!  you are the bearer of
a treaty, and the enemy has only just cut our vines!" Meanwhile they
were gathering stones in their cloaks, so I fled and they ran after
me shouting.

f[1] The deme of Acharnae was largely inhabited by charcoal-burners,
who supplied the city with fuel.

DICAEOPOLIS
Let 'em shout as much as they please!  But HAVE you brought me
a treaty?

AMPHITHEUS
Most certainly, here are three samples to select from,[1] this one is
five years old; take it and taste.

f[1] He presents them in the form of wines contained in three separate
skins.

DICAEOPOLIS
Faugh!

AMPHITHEUS
Well?

DICAEOPOLIS
It does not please me; it smells of pitch and of the ships they are
fitting out.[1]

f[1] Meaning, preparations for war.

AMPHITHEUS
Here is another, ten years old; taste it.

DICAEOPOLIS
It smells strongly of the delegates, who go around the towns
to chide the allies for their slowness.[1]

f[1] Meaning, securing allies for the continuance of the war.

AMPHITHEUS
This last is a truce of thirty years, both on sea and land.

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh! by Bacchus! what a bouquet!  It has the aroma of nectar and
ambrosia; this does not say to us, "Provision yourselves for three
days." But it lisps the gentle numbers, "Go whither you will."[1]
I accept it, ratify it, drink it at one draught and consign the
Acharnians to limbo.  Freed from the war and its ills, I shall
keep the Dionysia[2] in the country.

f[1] When Athens sent forth an army, the soldiers were usually ordered
to assemble at some particular spot with provisions for three days.
f[2] These feasts were also called the Anthesteria or Lenaea; the Lenaem
was a temple to Bacchus, erected outside the city.  They took place
during the month Anthesterion (February).

AMPHITHEUS
And I shall run away, for I'm mortally afraid of the Acharnians.

CHORUS
This way all!  Let us follow our man; we will demand him of
everyone we meet; the public weal makes his seizure imperative.  Ho,
there!  tell me which way the bearer of the truce has gone; he has escaped
us, he has disappeared.  Curse old age!  When I was young, in the days
when I followed Phayllus,[1] running with a sack of coals on my back, this
wretch would not have eluded my pursuit, let him be as swift as he will;
but now my limbs are stiff; old Lacratides[2] feels his legs are
weighty and the traitor escapes me.  No, no, let us follow him; old
Acharnians like ourselves shall not be set at naught by a
scoundrel, who has dared, great gods!  to conclude a truce, when I wanted
the war continued with double fury in order to avenge my ruined lands.
No mercy for our foes until I have pierced their hearts like sharp
reed, so that they dare never again ravage my vineyards.
Come, let us seek the rascal; let us look everywhere, carrying our
stones in our hands; let us hunt him from place to place until we trap
him; I could never, never tire of the delight of stoning him.

f[1] A celebrated athlete from Croton and a victor at Olympia; he was
equally good as a runner and at the 'five exercises.'
f[2] He had been Archon at the time of the battle of Marathon.

DICAEOPOLIS
Peace! profane men![1]

f[1] A sacred formula, pronounced by the priest before offering
the sacrifice.

CHORUS
Silence all!  Friends, do you hear the sacred formula?  Here is he,
whom we seek!  This way, all!  Get out of his way, surely he comes
to offer an oblation.

DICAEOPOLIS
Peace, profane men!  Let the basket-bearer[1] come forward, and thou
Xanthias, hold the phallus well upright.[2]

f[1] The maiden who carried the basket filled with fruits at the Dionysia
in honour of Bacchus.
f[2] The emblem of the fecundity of nature; it consisted of a representation,
generally grotesquely exaggerated, of the male genital organs;
the phallophori crowned with violets and ivy and their faces shaded
with green foliage, sang improvised airs, call 'Phallics,' full of obscenity
and suggestive 'double entendres.'

WIFE OF DICAEOPOLIS
Daughter, set down the basket and let us begin the sacrifice.

DAUGHTER OF DICAEOPOLIS
Mother, hand me the ladle, that I may spread the sauce on the
cake.

DICAEOPOLIS
It is well! Oh, mighty Bacchus, it is with joy that, freed from
military duty, I and all mine perform this solemn rite and offer
thee this sacrifice; grant that I may keep the rural Dionysia
without hindrance and that this truce of thirty years may be
propitious for me.

WIFE OF DICAEOPOLIS
Come, my child, carry the basket gracefully and with a grave, demure
face.  Happy he, who shall be your possessor and embrace you so firmly
at dawn,[1] that you belch wind like a weasel.  Go forward, and have a care
they don't snatch your jewels in the crowd.

f[1] The most propitious moment for Love's gambols, observes the
scholiast.

DICAEOPOLIS
Xanthias, walk behind the basket-bearer and hold the phallus well
erect; I will follow, singing the Phallic hymn; thou, wife, look on from
the top of the terrace.[1] Forward! Oh, Phales,[2] companion of the orgies
of Bacchus, night reveller, god of adultery, friend of young men, these
past six[3] years I have not been able to invoke thee.  With what joy I
return to my farmstead, thanks to the truce I have concluded, freed
from cares, from fighting and from Lamachuses![4] How much sweeter,
oh Phales, oh, Phales, is it to surprise Thratta, the pretty woodmaid,
Strymodorus' slave, stealing wood from Mount Phelleus, to catch her
under the arms, to throw her on the ground and possess her, Oh, Phales,
Phales! If thou wilt drink and bemuse thyself with me, we shall
to-morrow consume some good dish in honour of the peace, and I will
hang up my buckler over the smoking hearth.

f[1] Married women did not join in the processions.
f[2] The god of generation, worshipped in the form of a phallus.
f[3] A remark which fixes the date of the production of 'The Acharnians,'
viz. the sixth year of the Peloponnesian War, 426 B.C.
f[4] Lamachus was an Athenian general, who figures later in this comedy.

CHORUS
It is he, he himself.  Stone him, stone him, stone him, strike
the wretch.  All, all of you, pelt him, pelt him!

DICAEOPOLIS
What is this?  By Heracles, you will smash my pot.[1]

f[1] At the rural Dionysia a pot of kitchen vegetables was borne in
the procession along with other emblems.

CHORUS
It is you that we are stoning, you miserable scoundrel.

DICAEOPOLIS
And for what sin, Acharnian Elders, tell me that!

CHORUS
You ask that, you impudent rascal, traitor to your country; you
alone amongst us all have concluded a truce, and you dare to look us
in the face!

DICAEOPOLIS
But you do not know WHY I have treated for peace.  Listen!

CHORUS
Listen to you?  No, no, you are about to die, we will annihilate
you with our stones.

DICAEOPOLIS
But first of all, listen.  Stop, my friends.

CHORUS
I will hear nothing; do not address me; I hate you more than I
do Cleon,[1] whom one day I shall flay to make sandals for the Knights.
Listen to your long speeches, after you have treated with the
Laconians?  No, I will punish you.

f[1] Cleon the Demagogue was a currier originally by trade.  He was the
sworn foe and particular detestation of the Knights or aristocratic party
generally.

DICAEOPOLIS
Friends, leave the Laconians out of debate and consider only
whether I have not done well to conclude my truce.

CHORUS
Done well! when you have treated with a people who know neither
gods, nor truth, nor faith.

DICAEOPOLIS
We attribute too much to the Laconians; as for myself, I know that
they are not the cause of all our troubles.

CHORUS
Oh, indeed, rascal!  You dare to use such language to me and then
expect me to spare you!

DICAEOPOLIS
No, no, they are not the cause of all our troubles, and I who
address you claim to be able to prove that they have much to
complain of in us.

CHORUS
This passes endurance; my heart bounds with fury.  Thus you dare to
defend our enemies.

DICAEOPOLIS
Were my head on the block I would uphold what I say and rely on
the approval of the people.

CHORUS
Comrades, let us hurl our stones and dye this fellow purple.

DICAEOPOLIS
What black fire-brand has inflamed your heart!  You will not hear
me?  You really will not, Acharnians?

CHORUS
No, a thousand times, no.

DICAEOPOLIS
This is a hateful injustice.

CHORUS
May I die, if I listen.

DICAEOPOLIS
Nay, nay! have mercy, have mercy, Acharnians.

CHORUS
You shall die.

DICAEOPOLIS
Well, blood for blood!  I will kill your dearest friend.  I have
here the hostages of Acharnae;[1] I shall disembowel them.

f[1] That is, the baskets of charcoal.

CHORUS
Acharnians, what means this threat?  Has he got one of our children
in his house?  What gives him such audacity?

DICAEOPOLIS
Stone me, if it please you; I shall avenge myself on this.
(SHOWS A BASKET.) Let us see whether you have any love
for your coals.

CHORUS
Great Gods! this basket is our fellow-citizen.  Stop, stop,
in heaven's name!

DICAEOPOLIS
I shall dismember it despite your cries; I will listen to nothing.

CHORUS
How! will you kill this coal-basket, my beloved comrade?

DICAEOPOLIS
Just now, you would not listen to me.

CHORUS
Well, speak now, if you will; tell us, tell us you have a weakness
for the Lacedaemonians.  I consent to anything; never will I forsake
this dear little basket.

DICAEOPOLIS
First, throw down your stones.

CHORUS
There! 'tis done.  And you, do put away your sword.

DICAEOPOLIS
Let me see that no stones remain concealed in your cloaks.

CHORUS
They are all on the ground; see how we shake our garments.  Come,
no haggling, lay down your sword; we threw away everything while
crossing from one side of the stage to the other.[1]

f[1] The stage of the Greek theatre was much broader, and at the same
time shallower, than in a modern playhouse.

DICAEOPOLIS
What cries of anguish you would have uttered had these coals of
Parnes[1] been dismembered, and yet it came very near it; had they
perished, their death would have been due to the folly of their
fellow-citizens.  The poor basket was so frightened, look, it has
shed a thick black dust over me, the same as a cuttle-fish does.
What an irritable temper!  You shout and throw stones, you will not
hear my arguments--not even when I propose to speak in favour of the
Lacedaemonians with my head on the block; and yet I cling to life.

f[1] A mountain in Attica, in the neighbourhood of Acharnae.

CHORUS
Well then, bring out a block before your door, scoundrel, and
let us hear the good grounds you can give us; I am curious to know
them.  Now mind, as you proposed yourself, place your head on the block
and speak.

DICAEOPOLIS
Here is the block; and, though I am but a very sorry speaker, I
wish nevertheless to talk freely of the Lacedaemonians and without the
protection of my buckler.  Yet I have many reasons for fear.  I know our
rustics; they are delighted if some braggart comes, and rightly or
wrongly, loads both them and their city with praise and flattery; they
do not see that such toad-eaters[1] are traitors, who sell them for gain.
As for the old men, I know their weakness; they only seek to overwhelm
the accused with their votes.[2] Nor have I forgotten how Cleon treated
me because of my comedy last year;[3] he dragged me before the Senate
and there he uttered endless slanders against me; 'twas a tempest of
abuse, a deluge of lies.  Through what a slough of mud he dragged me!  I
almost perished.  Permit me, therefore, before I speak, to dress in the
manner most likely to draw pity.

f[1] Orators in the pay of the enemy.
f[2] Satire on the Athenians' addiction to law-suits.
f[3] 'The Babylonians.' Cleon had denounced Aristophanes to the Senate for
having scoffed at Athens before strangers, many of whom were present at
the performance.  The play is now lost.

CHORUS
What evasions, subterfuges and delays!  Hold! here is the sombre
helmet of Pluto with its thick bristling plume; Hieronymus[1] lends it to
you; then open Sisyphus'[2] bag of wiles; but hurry, hurry, pray, for
discussion does not admit of delay.

f[1] A tragic poet; we know next to nothing of him or his works.
f[2] Son of Aeolus, renowned in fable for his robberies, and for the tortures
to which he was put by Pluto.  He was cunning enough to break loose out
of hell, but Hermes brought him back again.

DICAEOPOLIS
The time has come for me to manifest my courage, so I will go
and seek Euripides.  Ho! slave, slave!

SLAVE
Who's there?

DICAEOPOLIS
Is Euripides at home?

SLAVE
He is and he isn't; understand that, if you have wit for't.

DICAEOPOLIS
How?  He is and he isn't![1]

f[1] This whole scene is directed at Euripides; Aristophanes ridicules the
subtleties of his poetry and the trickeries of his staging, which, according
to him, he only used to attract the less refined among his audience.

SLAVE
Certainly, old man; busy gathering subtle fancies here and
there, his mind is not in the house, but he himself is; perched aloft,
he is composing a tragedy.

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh, Euripides, you are indeed happy to have a slave so quick at
repartee!  Now, fellow, call your master.

SLAVE
Impossible!

DICAEOPOLIS
So much the worse.  But I will not go.  Come, let us knock at the door.
Euripides, my little Euripides, my darling Euripides, listen;
never had man greater right to your pity.  It is Dicaeopolis of the
Chollidan Deme who calls you.  Do you hear?

EURIPIDES
I have no time to waste.

DICAEOPOLIS
Very well, have yourself wheeled out here.[1]

f[1] "Wheeled out"--that is, by means of a mechanical contrivance of
the Greek stage, by which an interior was shown, the set scene
with performers, etc., all complete, being in some way, which cannot
be clearly made out from the descriptions, swung out or wheeled out
on to the main stage.

EURIPIDES
Impossible.

DICAEOPOLIS
Nevertheless...

EURIPIDES
Well, let them roll me out; as to coming down, I have not
the time.

DICAEOPOLIS
Euripides....

EURIPIDES
What words strike my ear?

DICAEOPOLIS
You perch aloft to compose tragedies, when you might just as
well do them on the ground.  I am not astonished at your introducing
cripples on the stage.[1] And why dress in these miserable tragic rags?
I do not wonder that your heroes are beggars.  But, Euripides, on my knees
I beseech you, give me the tatters of some old piece; for I have to
treat the Chorus to a long speech, and if I do it ill it is all over
with me.

f[1] Having been lamed, it is of course implied, by tumbling from the lofty
apparatus on which the Author sat perched to write his tragedies.

EURIPIDES
What rags do you prefer?  Those in which I rigged out Aeneus[1] on
the stage, that unhappy, miserable old man?

f[1] Euripides delighted, or was supposed by his critic Aristophanes to
delight, in the representation of misery and wretchedness on the stage.
'Aeneus,' 'Phoenix,' 'Philoctetes,' 'Bellerophon,' 'Telephus,' Ino' are titles
of six tragedies of his in this genre of which fragments are extant.

DICAEOPOLIS
No, I want those of some hero still more unfortunate.

EURIPIDES
Of Phoenix, the blind man?

DICAEOPOLIS
No, not of Phoenix, you have another hero more unfortunate than him.

EURIPIDES
Now, what tatters DOES he want?  Do you mean those of the beggar
Philoctetes?

DICAEOPOLIS
No, of another far more the mendicant.

EURIPIDES
Is it the filthy dress of the lame fellow, Bellerophon?

DICAEOPOLIS
No, 'tis not Bellerophon; he, whom I mean, was not only lame and a
beggar, but boastful and a fine speaker.

EURIPIDES
Ah! I know, it is Telephus, the Mysian.

DICAEOPOLIS
Yes, Telephus.  Give me his rags, I beg of you.

EURIPIDES
Slave! give him Telephus' tatters; they are on top of the rags
of Thyestes and mixed with those of Ino.

SLAVE
Catch hold! here they are.

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh! Zeus, whose eye pierces everywhere and embraces all, permit me
to assume the most wretched dress on earth.  Euripides, cap your
kindness by giving me the little Mysian hat, that goes so well with
these tatters.  I must to-day have the look of a beggar; "be what I am,
but not appear to be";[1] the audience will know well who I am, but
the Chorus will be fools enough not to, and I shall dupe 'em with my
subtle phrases.

f[1]
Line borrowed from Euripides.  A great number of verses are similarly
parodied in this scene.

EURIPIDES
I will give you the hat; I love the clever tricks of an ingenious
brain like yours.

DICAEOPOLIS
Rest happy, and may it befall Telephus as I wish.  Ah!  I already
feel myself filled with quibbles.  But I must have a beggar's staff.

EURIPIDES
Here you are, and now get you gone from this porch.

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh, my soul!  You see how you are driven from this house, when I
still need so many accessories.  But let us be pressing, obstinate,
importunate.  Euripides, give me a little basket with a lamp alight inside.

EURIPIDES
Whatever do you want such a thing as that for?

DICAEOPOLIS
I do not need it, but I want it all the same.

EURIPIDES
You importune me; get you gone!

DICAEOPOLIS
Alas! may the gods grant you a destiny as brilliant as your
mother's.[1]

f[1] Report said that Euripides' mother had sold vegetables on the market.

EURIPIDES
Leave me in peace.

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh, just a little broken cup.

EURIPIDES
Take it and go and hang yourself.  What a tiresome fellow!

DICAEOPOLIS
Ah! you do not know all the pain you cause me.  Dear, good
Euripides, nothing beyond a small pipkin stoppered with a sponge.

EURIPIDES
Miserable man!  You are robbing me of an entire tragedy.[1] Here, take it
and be off.

f[1] Aristophanes means, of course, to imply that the whole talent of
Euripides lay in these petty details of stage property.

DICAEOPOLIS
I am going, but, great gods! I need one thing more; unless I
have it, I am a dead man.  Hearken, my little Euripides, only give me
this and I go, never to return.  For pity's sake, do give me a few
small herbs for my basket.

EURIPIDES
You wish to ruin me then.  Here, take what you want; but it is
all over with my pieces!

DICAEOPOLIS
I won't ask another thing; I'm going.  I am too importunate and
forget that I rouse against me the hate of kings.--Ah! wretch that I am!
I am lost!  I have forgotten one thing, without which all the rest is
as nothing.  Euripides, my excellent Euripides, my dear little Euripides,
may I die if I ask you again for the smallest present; only one, the last,
absolutely the last; give me some of the chervil your mother left
you in her will.

EURIPIDES
Insolent hound!  Slave, lock the door!

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh, my soul!  I must go away without the chervil.  Art thou
sensible of the dangerous battle we are about to engage upon in
defending the Lacedaemonians?  Courage, my soul, we must plunge
into the midst of it.  Dost thou hesitate and art thou fully steeped
in Euripides?  That's right! do not falter, my poor heart, and let us risk
our head to say what we hold for truth.  Courage and boldly to
the front.  I wonder I am so brave.

CHORUS
What do you purport doing?  what are you going to say?  What an
impudent fellow!  what a brazen heart!  to dare to stake his head and
uphold an opinion contrary to that of us all!  And he does not
tremble to face this peril.  Come, it is you who desired it, speak!

DICAEOPOLIS
Spectators, be not angered if, although I am a beggar, I dare in
a Comedy to speak before the people of Athens of the public weal;
Comedy too can sometimes discern what is right.  I shall not please,
but I shall say what is true.  Besides, Cleon shall not be able to accuse
me of attacking Athens before strangers;[1] we are by ourselves at the
festival of the Lenaea; the period when our allies send us their tribute
and their soldiers is not yet.  Here is only the pure wheat
without chaff; as to the resident strangers settled among us, they
and the citizens are one, like the straw and the ear.

I detest the Lacedaemonians with all my heart, and may Posidon,
the god of Taenarus,[2] cause an earthquake and overturn their dwellings!
My vines also have been cut.  But come (there are only friends who
hear me), why accuse the Laconians of all our woes?  Some men (I do not
say the city, note particularly that I do not say the city), some
wretches, lost in vices, bereft of honour, who were not even
citizens of good stamp, but strangers, have accused the Megarians of
introducing their produce fraudulently, and not a cucumber, a leveret,
a suck[l]ing pig, a clove of garlic, a lump of salt was seen without its
being said, "Halloa!  these come from Megara," and their being
instantly confiscated.  Thus far the evil was not serious and we were
the only sufferers.  But now some young drunkards go to Megara and
carry off the courtesan Simaetha; the Megarians, hurt to the quick, run
off in turn with two harlots of the house of Aspasia; and so for three
gay women Greece is set ablaze.  Then Pericles, aflame with ire on his
Olympian height, let loose the lightning, caused the thunder to
roll, upset Greece and passed an edict, which ran like the song, "That
the Megarians be banished both from our land and from our markets
and from the sea and from the continent."[3] Meanwhile the Megarians,
who were beginning to die of hunger, begged the Lacedaemonians to bring
about the abolition of the decree, of which those harlots were the
cause; several times we refused their demand; and from that time there
was horrible clatter of arms everywhere.  You will say that Sparta
was wrong, but what should she have done?  Answer that.  Suppose that
a Lacedaemonian had seized a little Seriphian[4] dog on any pretext and
had sold it, would you have endured it quietly?  Far from it, you would
at once have sent three hundred vessels to sea, and what an uproar
there would have been through all the city!  there 'tis a band of
noisy soldiery, here a brawl about the election of a Trierarch;
elsewhere pay is being distributed, the Pallas figure-heads are
being regilded, crowds are surging under the market porticos,
encumbered with wheat that is being measured, wine-skins,
oar-leathers, garlic, olives, onions in nets; everywhere are chaplets,
sprats, flute-girls, black eyes; in the arsenal bolts are being
noisily driven home, sweeps are being made and fitted with leathers;
we hear nothing but the sound of whistles, of flutes and fifes to
encourage the work-folk.  That is what you assuredly would have done,
and would not Telephus have done the same?  So I come to my general
conclusion; we have no common sense.

f[1] 'The Babylonians' had been produced at a time of year when Athens
was crowded with strangers; 'The Acharnians,' on the contrary, was played
in December.
f[2] Sparta had been menaced with an earthquake in 427 B.C.  Posidon
was 'The Earthshaker,' god of earthquakes, as well as of the sea.
f[3] A song by Timocreon the Rhodian, the words of which were practically
identical with Pericles' decree.
f[4] A small and insignificant island, one of the Cyclades, allied with
the Athenians, like months of these islands previous to and during
the first part of the Peloponnesian War.

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS
Oh! wretch! oh! infamous man!  You are naught but a beggar and
yet you dare to talk to us like this!  you insult their worships
the informers!

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS
By Posidon! he speaks the truth; he has not lied in a single detail.

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS
But though it be true, need he say it?  But you'll have no great
cause to be proud of your insolence!

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS
Where are you running to?  Don't you move; if you strike this man,
I shall be at you.

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS
Lamachus, whose glance flashes lightning, whose plume
petrifies thy foes, help!  Oh! Lamachus, my friend, the hero of my
tribe and all of you, both officers and soldiers, defenders of our
walls, come to my aid; else is it all over with me!

LAMACHUS
Whence comes this cry of battle?  where must I bring my aid?
where must I sow dread?  who wants me to uncase my dreadful Gorgon's
head?[1]

f[1] A figure of Medusa's head, forming the centre of Lamachus' shield.

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh, Lamachus, great hero!  Your plumes and your cohorts terrify me.

CHORUS
This man, Lamachus, incessantly abuses Athens.

LAMACHUS
You are but a mendicant and you dare to use language of this sort?

DICAEOPOLIS
Oh, brave Lamachus, forgive a beggar who speaks at hazard.

LAMACHUS
But what have you said?  Let us hear.

DICAEOPOLIS
I know nothing about it; the sight of weapons makes me dizzy.
Oh! I adjure you, take that fearful Gorgon somewhat farther away.

LAMACHUS
There.

DICAEOPOLIS
Now place it face downwards on the ground.

LAMACHUS
It is done.

DICAEOPOLIS
Give me a plume out of your helmet.

LAMACHUS
Here is a feather.

DICAEOPOLIS
And hold my head while I vomit; the plumes have turned my stomach.

LAMACHUS
Hah! what are you proposing to do?  do you want to make yourself
vomit with this feather?

DICAEOPOLIS
Is it a feather?  what bird's?  a braggart's?

LAMACHUS
Ah! ah! I will rip you open.

DICAEOPOLIS
No, no, Lamachus!  Violence is out of place here!  But as you are so
strong, why did you not circumcise me?  You have all the tools you want
for the operation there.

LAMACHUS
A beggar dares thus address a general!

DICAEOPOLIS
How?  Am I a beggar?

LAMACHUS
What are you then?

DICAEOPOLIS
Who am I?  A good citizen, not ambitious; a soldier, who has fought
well since the outbreak of the war, whereas you are but a vile
mercenary.

LAMACHUS
They elected me...

DICAEOPOLIS
Yes, three cuckoos did![1] If I have concluded peace, 'twas
disgust that drove me; for I see men with hoary heads in the ranks and
young fellows of your age shirking service.  Some are in Thrace getting
an allowance of three drachmae, such fellows as Tisamenophoenippus
and Panurgipparchides.  The others are with Chares or in Chaonia, men
like Geretotheodorus and Diomialazon; there are some of the same
kidney, too, at Camarina and at Gela,[2] the laughing-stock of all and sundry.

f[1] Indicates the character of his election, which was arranged, so
Aristophanes implies, by his partisans.
f[2] Town in Sicily.  There is a pun on the name Gela and 'ridiculous'
which it is impossible to keep in English.  Apparently the Athenians
had sent embassies to all parts of the Greek world to arrange treaties
of alliance in view of the struggle with the Lacedaemonians; but only
young debauchees of aristocratic connections had been chosen as envoys.

LAMACHUS
They were elected.

DICAEOPOLIS
And why do you always receive your pay, when none of these
others ever gets any?  Speak, Marilades, you have grey hair; well then,
have you ever been entrusted with a mission?  See! he shakes his
head.  Yet he is an active as well as a prudent man.  And you, Dracyllus,
Euphorides or Prinides, have you knowledge of Ecbatana or
Chaonia?  You say no, do you not?  Such offices are good for the son
of Caesyra[1] and Lamachus, who, but yesterday ruined with debt, never
pay their shot, and whom all their friends avoid as foot passengers
dodge the folks who empty their slops out of window.

f[1] A contemporary orator apparently, otherwise unknown.

LAMACHUS
Oh! in freedom's name! are such exaggerations to be borne?

DICAEOPOLIS
Lamachus is well content; no doubt he is we