welers buy emeralds
abroad and sell them here at a profit? But my friends tell
me that the other two rings are well worth 6 ducats apiece,
for they say that they are fine and clear and contain no
flaws. And they say that instead of taking them to the
valuer you should enquire for such rings as they can show
you and then compare them and see whether they are like
them; and if when I got them by exchange I had been willing
to lose 2 ducats on the three rings, Bernard Holzbeck, who
was present at the transaction, would have bought them of
me. I have since sent you a sapphire ring by Franz Imhof, I
hope it has reached you. I think I made a good bargain at
that place, for they offered to buy it of me at a profit on
the spot. But I shall find out from you, for you know that I
understand nothing about such things and am forced to trust
those who advise me.

The painters here you must know are very unfriendly to me.
They have summoned me three times before the magistrates,
and I have had to pay 4 florins to their School. You must
know too that I might have gained much money if I had not
undertaken to make the painting for the Germans, for there
is a great deal of work in it and I cannot well finish it
before Whitsuntide; yet they only pay me 85 ducats for it.
[Editor's note: Bellini at this time received 100 ducats for
a large picture].  That, you know, will go in living
expenses, and then I have bought some things, and have sent
some money away, so that I have not much in hand now; but I
have made up my mind not to leave here until God enables me
to repay you with thanks and to have too florins over
besides. I should easily earn this if I had not got to do
the German picture, for, except the painters, everyone
wishes me well.

Please tell my mother to speak to Wolgemut about my brother,
and to ask him whether he can give him work until I get
back, or whether he can find employment with others.
[Editor's note: Dürer's brother was Hans Dürer, who was
fifteen at this date.  He became a painter of second-rate
ability, and afterwards helped Albrecht in the decoration of
the Emperor Maximilian's prayer book].  I should like to
have brought him with me to Venice, which would have been
useful both to me and to him and he would have learned the
language, but she was afraid that the sky would fall on him.
I pray you keep an eye on him: women are no use for that.
Tell the boy, as you can so well, to be studious and
independent till I come, and not to rely on his mother, for
I cannot do everything although I shall do my best. If it
were only for myself, I should not starve; but to provide
for so many is too hard for me, and nobody is throwing money
away.

Now I commend myself to you, and tell my mother to be ready
to sell at the Crown Fair. I am expecting my wife to come
home, and have written to her too about everything. I shall
not purchase the diamond ornament until you write.  I do not
think I shall be able to return home before next Autumn.
What I earn for the picture which was to have been ready by
Whitsuntide will all be gone in living expenses and
payments. But what I gain afterwards I hope to save.  If you
think it right, say nothing of this and I shall keep putting
it off from day to day and writing as though I was just
coming. Indeed I am quite irresolute; I do not know myself
what I shall do.

Write to me again soon.

Given on Thursday before Palm Sunday in the year 1506.

--Albrecht Dürer

[p.s.] Your servant


23rd April, 1506

First my willing service to you, dear Sir. I wonder why you
do not write to me to say how you like the sapphire ring
which Hans Imhof has sent you by the messenger Schon from
Augsburg. I do not know whether it has reached you or not. I
have been to Hans Imhof and enquired, and he says that he
knows no reason why it should not have reached you, and
there is a letter with it which I wrote to you, and the
stone is done up in a sealed packet and has the same size as
is drawn here, for 1 drew it in my note-book.  I managed to
get it only after hard bargaining.  The stone is clear and
fine, and my friends say it is very good for the money I
gave for it.  It weighs about 3 florins Rhenish, and I gave
for it 18 ducats and 4 marzelle, and if it should be lost I
should be half mad, for it has been valued at quite twice
what I gave for it. There were people who would have given
me more for it the moment I had bought it. So, dear Herr
Pirkheimer, tell Hans Imhof to enquire of the messenger what
he has done with the letter and packet. The messenger was
sent off by Hans Imhof the younger on the 11th March.

Now may God keep you, and let me commend my mother to you.
Tell her to take my brother to Wolgemut that he may work and
not be idle.

Ever your servant.

Read by the sense. I am in a hurry, for I have seven letters
to write, part written. I am sorry for Herr Lorenz. Greet
him and Stephen Paumgartner.

Given at Venice in the year 1506, on St. Mark's Day.

Write me an answer soon, for I shall have no rest till I
hear. Andreas Kunhofer is deadly ill as I have just heard.

--Albrecht Dürer



28th August, 1506

To the first greatest man in the world; your servant and
slave, Albert Dürer, sends salutation to his magnificent
Master Wilibaldo Pirkamer. By my faith, I hear gladly and
with great pleasure of your health and great honour, and I
marvel how it is possible for a man like you to stand
against so many, tyrants, bullies, and soldiers. Not
otherwise than by the grace of God. When I read your letter
about this strange abuse it gave me great fright; I thought
it was a serious matter. But I warrant you frighten even
Schott's men, for you look wild enough, especially on holy
days with your skipping gait! But it is very improper for
such a soldier to smear himself with civet. You want to be a
regular silk tail, and you think that if only you manage to
please the girls, it is all right. If you were only as
taking a fellow as I am, I should not be so provoked. You
have so many loves that it would take you a month and more
to visit each.

However, let me thank you for having arranged my affairs so
satisfactorily with my wife. I know there is no lack of
wisdom in you. If only you were as gentle as I am, you would
have all the virtues. Thank you, too, for everything you are
doing for me, if only you would not bother me about the
rings. If they do not please you, break off their heads and
throw them in the privy, as Peter Weisweber says.

What do you mean by setting me to such dirty work, I have
become a gentiluomo at Venice. I have heard that you can
make lovely rhymes; you would be a find for our fiddlers
here. They play so beautifully that they weep over their own
music. Would God that our Rechenmeister girl could hear
them, she would cry too. At your command I will again lay
aside my anger and behave even better than usual.

But I cannot get away from here in two months, for I have
not enough money yet to start myself off, as I have written
to you before; and so I pray you if my mother comes to you
for a loan, let her have 10 florins till God helps me out.
Then I will scrupulously repay you the whole.

With this I am sending you the glass things by the
messenger. And as for the two carpets, Anthon Kolb will help
me to buy the most beautiful, the broadest, and the
cheapest. As soon as I have them I'll give them to Imhof the
younger to pack off to you. I shall also look after the
crane's feathers. I have not been able to find any as yet.
But of swan's feathers for writing with there are plenty.
How would it do if you stuck them on your hats in the
meantime?

A book printer of whom I enquired tells me that he knows of
no Greek books that have been brought out recently, but any
that he comes across he will acquaint me with that I may
write to you about them.

And please inform me what sort of paper you want me to buy,
for I know of no finer quality than we get at home.

As to the Historical pieces, I see nothing extraordinary in
what the Italians make that would be especially useful for
your work. It is always the same thing. You yourself know
more than they paint. I have sent you a letter recently by
the messenger Kannengiesser. Also I should like to know how
you are managing with Kunz Imhof.

Herewith let me commend myself to you. Give my willing
service to our prior. Tell him to pray God for me that I may
be protected, and especially from the French sickness, for
there is nothing I fear more now and nearly everyone has it.
Many men are quite eaten up and die of it. And greet Stephen
Paumgartner and Herr Lorenz and those who kindly ask after
me.

Given at Venice on the 18th August, 1506

--Albrecht Dürer

Noricus civis

P.S. Lest I forget, Andreas is here and sends you his
service. He is not yet strong, and is in want of money. His
long illness and debts have eaten up everything he had. I
have myself lent him 8 ducats, but don't tell anyone, in
case it should come back to him. He might think I told you
in bad faith. You must know, too, that he behaves himself so
honourably that everyone wishes him well. I have a mind, if
the King comes to Italy, to go with him to Rome.




8th September, 1506

Most learned, approved, wise, master of many languages, keen
to detect all uttered lies, and quick to recognize real
truth, honourable, Herr Wilibald Pirkheimer, your humble
servant, Albrecht Dürer, wishes you all health, great and
worthy honour, with the devil as much of such nonsense as
you like.

I will wager that for this you too would think me an orator
of a hundred headings. A chamber must have more than four
corners which is to contain gods of memory. I will not addle
my pate with it. I will recommend it to you, but I believe
that however many chambers there may be in the head, you
would have a little bit in each of them. The Margrave would
not grant a long enough audience. A hundred headings and to
each head say a hundred words: that takes 9 days, 7 hours,
52 minutes, not counting the sighs, which I have not yet
reckoned; but you could not get through the whole in one go:
it would draw itself out like some dotard's speech.

I have taken every trouble about the carpets, but I cannot
find any wide ones; they are all narrow and long. However, I
still look out for them every day, and so does Anthon Kolb.

I gave your respects to Bernhard Hirschvogel and he sent you
his service. He is full of sorrow for the death of his son,
the nicest boy that I have ever seen. I can't get any of
your fool's feathers. Oh, if you were only here, how you
would admire these fine Italian soldiers! How often I think
of you! Would God that you and Kuntz Kamerer could see them!
They have scythe-shaped lances with 218 points; if they only
touch a man with them he dies, for they are all poisoned.
Heigho! but I can do it well, I'll be an Italian soldier.
The Venetians are collecting many men; so is the Pope and
the King of France. What will come of it I don't know, for
people scoff at our King a great deal.

Wish Stephen Paumgartner much happiness from me. I can't
wonder at his having taken a taken wife. My greeting to
Borsch, Herr Lorenz, and our fair friend, as well as to your
Rechenmeister girl, and thank your Club for its greeting;
says it's a dirty one. I sent you olive-wood from Venice to
Augsburg, where I let it stay, a full ten hundred weight.
But it says it won't wait, hence the stink.

My picture [the self-portrait Dürer painted?], you must
know, says it would give a ducat for you to see it. It is
well painted and finely coloured. I have got much praise but
little profit by it. I could have easily earned 200 ducats
in the time, and I have had to decline big commissions in
order to come home.

I have shut up all the painters, who used to say that I was
good at engraving, but that in painting I didn't know how to
handle my colours. Now they all say they never saw better
colouring.

My French mantle greets you, and so does my Italian coat. It
seems to me that you smell of gallantry. I can scent it from
here; and they say here, that when you go courting, you
pretend to be no more than 25 years old.  Oh, yes!  Multiply
that and I`ll believe it. My friend, there `s a devil of a
lot of Italians here who are just like you. I don't know how
it is!

The Doge and the Patriarch have seen my picture.  Herewith
let me commend myself as your servant. I really must sleep,
for it's striking seven at night, and I have already written
to the Prior of the Augustines, to my father-in-law, to
Mistress Dietrich, and to my wife, and they are all sheets
cram full. So I have had to hurry over this. Read according
to the sense. You would do it better if you were writing to
princes. Many good nights to you, and days too. Given at
Venice on Our Lady's Day in September.

You needn't lend my wife and mother anything.  They have got
money enough.

--Albert Dürer



23 Sept. 1506

Your letter telling me of the overflowing praise that you
received from princes and nobles gave me great allegrezza.
[Editor's note: Allegrezza means "joy;" in Venetian in
original].  You must have changed completely to have become
so gentle; I must do likewise when I meet you again. Know
also that my picture is finished, likewise another quadro,
[Editor's note: quadro is Venetian for "painting"] the like
of which I never made before. And as you are so pleased with
yourself, let me tell you now that there is no better
Madonna picture in all the land, for all the painters praise
it as the nobles do you. They say that they have never seen
a nobler, more charming painting.

The oil for which you wrote I am sending by Kannengiesser.
And burnt glass that I sent you by Farber--tell me if it
reached you safely. As for the carpets, I have not bought
any yet, for I cannot find any square ones. They are all
narrow and long. If you would like any of these, I will
willingly buy them; let me know about it.

Know also that in four weeks at the latest I shall be
finished here, for I have to paint first some portraits that
I have promised, and in order that I may get home soon, I
have refused, since my picture was finished, orders for more
than 2,000 ducats; all my neighbours know of this.

Now let me commend myself to you. I had much more to write,
but the messenger is ready to start: besides, I hope, if God
will, to be with you again soon and to learn new wisdom from
you. Bernhard Holzbeck told me great things of you, but I
believe that he did so because you have become his brother-
in-law. But nothing makes me more angry than to hear anyone
say that you are handsome, for then I should have to be
ugly; that would make me mad.

The other day I found a gray hair on my head, which was
produced by sheer misery and annoyance. I think I am fated
to have evil days. My French mantle and the doublet and the
brown coat send you a hearty greeting. But I should like to
see what your drinking club can do that you hold yourself so
high.

Given the year 1506 on Wednesday after St. Matthew's


--Albrecht Dürer



About the 13th October, 1506

Once I know that you are aware of my devotion to your
service, there is no need to write about it; but so much the
more necessary is it for me to tell you of the great delight
it gives me to hear of the high honour and fame that you
have attained to by your manly wisdom and learned skill.
This is the more to be wondered at, for seldom or never can
the like be found in a young body; but it comes to you by
the special grace of God, as it does to me. How pleased we
both feel when we think well of ourselves, I with my
picture, and you con vostra [with your] learning! When
anyone praises us we hold up our head and believe him, yet
perhaps he is only some false flatterer who is making fun of
us, so don't credit anyone who praises you, for you have no
notion how unmannerly you are.

I can readily portray you to myself standing before the
Margrave and making pretty speeches.  You carry on just as
though you were making love to the Rosentaler girl, cringing
so.

It did not escape me, when you wrote the last letter, you
were full of amorous thoughts. You ought to be ashamed of
yourself, for making yourself out so good looking when you
are so old. Your flirting is like a big shaggy dog playing
with a little kitten. If you were only as nice and sleek as
I am, I might understand it; but when I get to be a
burgomaster I will shame you with the Luginsland [Editor's
note: this was a Nuremberg prison], as you do the pious
Zamener and me. I will have you shut up there for once with
the Rechenmeister, Rosentaler, Gartner, Schlitz, and Por
girls, and many others whom for shortness I will not name.
They must deal with you.  They ask after me more than after
you, however, for you yourself write that both girls and
ladies ask after me--that is a sign of my virtue! But if God
brings me home again safely, I do not know how I shall get
along with you with your great wisdom: but I `m glad on
account of your virtue and good nature; and your dogs will
be the better for it, for you will not beat them lame any
more. But if you are so highly respected at home, you will
not dare to be seen speaking with a poor painter in the
streets, it would be a great disgrace, con poltrone di
pintore.

Oh, dear Herr Pirkheimer, this very minute, while I was
writing to you in good humour, the fire alarm sounded and
six houses over by Peter Pender's are burned, and woolen
cloth of mine, for which I paid only yesterday 8 ducats, is
burned; so I too am in trouble. There are often fire alarms
here.

As for your plea that I should come home quickly, I will
come just as soon as I can; but I must first gain money for
my expenses. I have paid out about 100 ducats for colours
and other things, and I have ordered two carpets which I
shall pay for tomorrow; but I could not get them cheaply. I
will pack them up with my linen.

As for your previous comment that I should come home soon or
else you would give my wife a "washing," you are not
permitted to do so, since you would ride her to death.

Know, too, that I decided to learn dancing and went twice to
the school, for which I had to pay the master a ducat. No
one could get me to go there again. To learn dancing, I
should have had to pay away all that I have earned, and at
the end I should have known nothing about it.

As for the glass, the messenger Farber will bring it to you.
I cannot find out anywhere that they are printing any new
Greek books. I will pack up a ream of your paper for you. I
thought Keppler had more like it; but I have not been able
to get the feathers you wanted, and so I bought white ones
instead. If I find the green ones, I will buy some and bring
them with me.

Stephen Paumgartner has written to me to buy him fifty
Carnelian beads for a rosary. I have ordered them, but they
are dear. I could not get any larger ones, and shall send
them to him by the next messenger.

As to your question as to when I shall come home, I tell
you, so that my lords may make their arrangements, that I
shall have finished here in ten days. After that I should
like to travel to Bologna to learn the secrets of the art of
perspective, which a man there is willing to teach me. I
should stay there about eight or ten days and then come back
to Venice; after that I should come with the next messenger.

How I shall freeze after this sun! Here I am a gentleman, at
home a parasite. Let me know how old Dame Kormer behaves as
a bride, and that you will not grudge her to me. There are
many things about which I should like to write to you, but I
shall soon be with you.

Given at Venice about the 14th day after Michaelmas, 1506.

--Albrecht Dürer

P.S. When will you let me know whether any of your children
have died?  You also wrote me once that Joseph Rummel had
married ----z's daughter, and forgot to mention whose. How
should I know what you mean? If I only had my cloth back! I
am afraid my mantle has been burned too. That would drive me
crazy. I seem doomed to bad luck; not more than three weeks
ago a man ran away who owed me 8 ducats.

PART II: DIARY OF A JOURNEY THE NETHERLANDS (July, 1520-
July, 1521)


Anno 1520

On Thursday after St. Kilian's Day, I, Albrecht Dürer, at my
own charges and costs, took myself and my wife from
Nuremberg away to the Netherlands, and the same day, after
we had passed through Eriangen, we put up for the night at
Baiersdorff, and spent there 3 crowns, less 6 pfennigs. From
thence on the next day, Friday, we came to Forchheim, and
there paid for the conveying thence on the journey to
Bamberg 22 pf., and presented to the Bishop a painted Virgin
and a "Life of the Virgin," an "Apocalypse," and a florin's
worth of engravings. He invited me to be his guest, gave me
a toll-pass and three letters of introduction, and settled
my bill at the inn, where I had spent about a florin. I paid
6 florins in gold to the boatmen who took me from Bamberg to
Frankfurt.  Master Lucas Benedict and Hans the painter sent
me a present of wine. Spent 4 pf. for bread and 13 pf. as
tips.

Then I journeyed from Bamberg to Eltman and showed my pass,
and they let me go free. And from there we passed by Zeil;
in the meantime I spent 21 pf. Next I came to Hassfurt, and
showed my pass, and they let me go without paying duty;
I paid 1 florin to the Bishop of Bamberg's chancery.  Next I
came to Theres to the monastery, and I showed my pass, and
they also let me go free; then we journeyed to Lower
Euerheim.  There I stayed the night and spent I pf. Thence
we went to Meinberg, and I showed my papers and was allowed
to pass. Then we came to Schweinfurt, where Dr. George
Rebart invited me, and he gave us wine in the boat: they let
me also pass free. 10 pf. for a roast fowl, 18 pf. in the
kitchen and to the boy. Then we traveled to Volkach and I
showed my pass, and we went on and came to Schwarzach, and
there we stopped the night and spent 22 pf., and on Monday
we were up early and went toward Tettelbach and came to
Kitzingen, and I showed my letter, and they let me go on,
and I spent 37 pf. After that we went past Sulzfeld to
Marktbreit, and I showed my letter and they let me through,
and we traveled by Frickenhausen to Ochsenfurth, where I
showed my pass and they let me go free: and we came to
Eibelstadt, and from that to Haidingsfeldt, and thence to
Wurzburg; there I showed my pass and they let me go free.
Thence we journeyed to Erlabrunn and stopped the night
there, and I spent 22 pf. From that we journeyed on past
Retzbath and Zellingen and came to Karlstadt; here I showed
my pass and they let me go on. Thence I traveled to Gmunden,
and there we breakfasted and spent 22 pf. I also showed my
pass, and they let me go free. We traveled thence to
Hofstetten; I showed my pass, and they let me through. We
came next to Lohr, where I showed my pass and passed on;
from there we came to Neustadt and showed our letter, and
they let us travel on; also I paid 10 pf. for wine and
crabs. From there we came to Rothenfels, and I showed my
pass, and they let me go free, and we stayed there for a
night, and spent 20 pf.; and on Wednesday early we started
and passed by St. Eucharius and came to Heidenfeld, and
thence to Triefenstein; from there we came to Homburg, where
I showed my pass and they let me through; from there we came
to Wertheim, and I showed my letter, and they let me go
free, and I spent 57 pf. From there we went to Prozelten;
here I showed my pass, and they let me through. Next we went
on past Freudenberg, where I showed my letter once more, and
they let me through; from there we came to Miltenberg and
stayed there over night, and I also showed my pass and they
let me go, and I spent 61 pf.; from there we came to
Klingenberg. I showed my pass and they let me through; and
we came to Worth and from there passed Obernburg to
Aschaffenburg; here I presented my pass and they let me
through, and I spent 52 pf.; from there we journeyed on to
Selgenstadt; from there to Steinheim, where I showed my
letter and they let me go on, and we stayed with Johannes
for the night, who showed us the town and was very friendly
to us; there I spent 16 pf., and so early on Friday morning
we traveled to Kesselstadt, where I showed my pass and they
let me go on; from there we came to Frankfurt, and I showed
my pass again, and they let me through, and I spent 6 white
pf. and one thaler and a half, and I gave the boy 2 white
pf. Herr Jacob Heller gave me some wine at the inn.  I
bargained to be taken with my goods from Frankfurt to Mainz
for 1 florin and 2 white pf., and I also gave the lad 5
Frankfurt thaler, and for the night we spent 8 white pf. On
Sunday I traveled by the early boat from Frankfurt to Mainz,
and midway there we came to Hochst, where I showed my pass
and they let me go on; I spent 8 Frankfurt pf. there. From
there we journeyed to Mainz; I have also paid I white pf.
for landing my things, besides 14 Frankfurt thaler to the
boatmen and 18 pf. for a girdle; and I took passage in the
Cologne boat for myself and my things for 3 florins, and at
Mainz also I spent 17 white pf. Peter Goldschmidt, the
warden there, gave me two bottles of wine. Veit Varnbuler
invited me, but his host would take no payment from him,
insisting on being my host himself; they showed me much
honour.

So I started from Mainz, where the Main flows into the
Rhine, and it was the Monday after Mary Magdalen's Day, and
I paid 10 thaler for meat and bread, and for eggs and pears
9 thaler. Here, too, Leonhard Goldschmidt gave me wine and
fowls in the boat to cook on the way to Cologne. Master
Jobst's brother likewise gave me a bottle of wine, and the
painters gave me two bottles of wine in the boat. From there
we came to Elfeld, where I showed my letter and they took no
toll; from there we came to Rudesheim and I gave 2 white pf.
for loading the boat; then we came to Ehrenfels, and there I
showed my letter, but I had to give two gold florins; if,
however, I were to bring them a free pass within two months,
the customs officer would give me back the 2 gold florins.
From there we came to Bacharach, and there I had to promise
in writing that I would either bring them a free pass in two
months, or pay the toll; from there we came to Caub, and
there again I showed my pass, but it would carry me no
further, and I had to promise in writing as before; there I
spent 11 thaler. Next we came to St. Goar, and here I showed
my pass, and the customs officer asked me how they had
treated me elsewhere, so I said I would pay him nothing; I
gave 2 white pf. to the messenger. From there we came to
Boppard, and I showed my pass to the Trier customhouse
officer, and they let me go through, only I had to certify
in writing under my seal that I carried no common
merchandise, and then the man let me go willingly.

From there we came to Lahnstein, and I showed my pass, and
the customs officer let me go through, but he asked me that
I should speak for him to my most gracious Lord of Mainz,
and he gave me a can of wine, too, for he knew my wife well
and he was glad to see me. From there we came to Engers,
which is in the Trier territory; I presented my pass and
they let me go through; I said, too, that I would mention it
to my Lord of Bamberg. From there we came to Andernach, and
I showed my pass, and they let me go through; and I spent
there 7 thaler and 4 thaler more; then on St. James's Day
early I traveled from Andernach to Linz; from there we went
to the custom house at Bonn, and there again they let me go
through; from there we came to Cologne, and in the boat I
spent 9 white pf. and I more, and 4 pf. for fruit. At
Cologne I spent 7 white pf. for unloading, to the boatmen 14
thaler, and to Nicolas, my cousin, I made a present of my
black fur-lined coat edged with velvet, and to his wife I
gave a florin; also at Cologne Fugger gave me wine: Johann
Grosserpecker also gave me wine, and my cousin Nicolas gave
me wine. They gave us also a collation at the Barefoot
Convent, and one of the monks gave me a handkerchief;
moreover, Herr Johann Grosserpecker has given me 12 measures
of the best wine, and I paid 2 white pf. and 8 thaler to the
boy; I have spent besides at Cologne 2 florins and 14 white
pf. and 10 white pf. for packing, and 3 pf. for fruit;
further, I gave I pf. at leaving, and I white pf. to the
messenger.

From there we journeyed on St. Pantaleon's Day from Cologne
to a village called Busdorf.  We lay there over night, and
spent 3 white pf.; and early on Sunday, we traveled to
Rodingen, where we had breakfast and spent 2 white pf. and 3
pf. more, and again 3 pf. Thence we came to Frei-Aldenhoven,
where we lay the night, and spent 3 white pf.; thence we
traveled early on Monday to Frelenberg, and passed the
little town of Gangelt, breakfasting at a village called
Stisterseel, and spent 2 white pf. 2 thaler, further 1 white
pf., and again 2 white pf. From there we journeyed to
Sittard, a pretty little town, and from there to Stocken,
which belongs to Liege; where we had a fine inn and stayed
there over night, and spent 4 white pf. And when we had
crossed over the Maas we started off early on Tuesday
morning and came to Merten Lewbehen [sic]: there we had
breakfast and spent 2 stivers and gave a white pf. for a
young fowl. From there we traveled across the heath and came
to Stosser, where we spent 2 stivers, and lay there the
night: from thence on Wednesday morning early we traveled to
West Meerbeck, where I paid 3 stivers for bread and wine;
and we went on as far as Branthoek, where we had breakfast
and spent 1 stiver; from there we traveled to Uylenberg,
where we stayed the night and spent 3 stivers; from there we
traveled on Thursday early to op ten Kouys, where we
breakfasted and spent 2 stivers; thence we came to Antwerp.

There I sent to Jobst Planckfelt's inn, and the same evening
the Fugger's factor, by name Bernhard Stecher, invited me
and gave us a costly meal--my wife dined at the inn. I paid
the driver for bringing us three, 3 florins in gold, and 2
stivers for carrying the goods.

On Saturday after the Feast of St. Peter in Chains, my host
took me to see the burgomaster's house at Antwerp, which is
newly built and large beyond measure, very well arranged
with extraordinarily beautiful large rooms; a tower,
splendidly ornamented; a very large garden; in short, such a
noble house as I have never seen in all German lands. A very
long new street has been built in his honour, and with his
assistance, leading up to the house on both sides. I gave 3
stivers to the messenger, and 2 pf. for bread and 2 pf. for
ink; and on Sunday, which was St. Oswald's Day, the Painters
invited me to their hall with my wife and maid, where
everything was of silver, and they had other costly
ornaments and very costly meats; and all their wives were
there too; and as I was being led to the table, everyone on
both sides stood up as if they were leading some great lord.
There were among them men of high position, who all showed
me the greatest respect and bowed low to me, and said they
would do everything in their power to serve and please me.
And as I sat there in honour, there came the messenger of
the Town Council of Antwerp with two servants and presented
to me four cans of wine from the Magistrates of Antwerp, who
told him to say that they wished thereby to show their
respect for me and to assure me of their good-will;
wherefore I returned them my humble thanks and offered my
humble services. Thereupon came Master Peter, the town
carpenter, and gave me two cans of wine with offer of his
willing service; so when we had spent a long time together
merrily, till late into the night, they accompanied us home
with lanterns in great honour. They begged me to be assured
of their good-will, and promised that in whatever I did they
would help me in every way; so I thanked them, and laid down
to sleep.

Also I have been in Master Quentin's house, and I have been
in all the three great shooting places. [Editor's note:
Quentin Matsys, the painter].  I had a very splendid dinner
at Staiber's. Another time at the Portuguese factor's, whose
portrait I have drawn in charcoal; I have made a portrait of
my host as well; Jobst Plankfelt gave me a branch of white
coral; paid 2 stivers for butter and 2 stivers to the joiner
at the Painters' armoury.

Also my host took me to the Painters' workshop in the
armoury at Antwerp, where they are making the triumphal
arches through which King Charles is to make his entry. It
is 400 bows in length and each arch is 40 feet wide: they
are to be set up on both sides of the streets, beautifully
arranged and two stories high, and on them they are to act
the plays; and this costs to make, 4,000 florins for the
joiners and painters, and the whole work is very
magnificently done.

I have dined again with the Portuguese factor, and once with
Alexander Imhof. Sebald Fischer bought of me at Antwerp
sixteen "Small Passions" for 4 florins, thirty-two of the
large books for 8 florins, also six engraved "Passions" for
3 florins, also twenty half-sheets of all kinds taken
together at 1 florin to the value of 3 florins, and again 5
1/4 florins' worth of quarter-sheets,--forty-five of all
kinds at 1 florin, and eight miscellaneous leaves at 1
florin; it is paid.

To my host I have sold a "Madonna" picture, painted on small
canvas, for 2 florins Rhenish. I took once more the portrait
of Felix the lute player. 1 stiver for pears and bread; 2
stivers to the surgeon-barber: besides I have given 14
stivers for three small panels, besides 4 stivers for laying
in the white and preparing them. I have dined once with
Alexander the goldsmith, and once with Felix Hungersberg;
once Master Joachim has eaten with me, and his partner also
once.

I have made a drawing in half colours for the Painters. I
have taken 1 florin for expenses. I made Peter Wolffgang a
present of four new little pieces. Master Joachim's partner
has again dined with me. I gave Master Joachim 1 florin's
worth of prints for lending me his apprentice and colours,
and I gave his apprentice 3 crowns' worth of prints. I have
sent the four new pieces to Alexander, the goldsmith. I made
charcoal portraits of these Genoese by name: Tomasin
Florianus Romanus, native of Lucca, and his two brothers,
named Vincentius and Gerhard, all three Bombelli.

I have dined with Tomasin so often: IIIIIIIIIIII. The
treasurer also gave me a "Child's Head" on linen and a
weapon from Calicut, and one of the light wood reeds.
Tomasin Imhof has also given me a plaited hat of elder pith.

I dined once more with the Portuguese; I also gave one of
Tomasin's brothers 3 florins' worth of engravings. Herr
Erasmus has given me a small Spanish mantilla and three
portraits of men. Tomasin's brother gave me a pair of gloves
for 3 florins' worth of engravings. I have once more made
the portrait of Tomasin's brother Vincentius; and I gave
Master Augustus Lombard two of the Imagines. Moreover, I
made a portrait of the crooked-nosed Italian named Opitius.
Also my wife and maid dined one day at Herr Tomasin's; that
makes four meals.

Our Lady's Church at Antwerp is so vast that many masses may
be sung there at one time without interfering one with
another. The altars are richly endowed; the best musicians
that can be had are employed; the Church has many devout
services and much stonework, and in particular a beautiful
tower. I also visited the rich Abbey of St. Michael, where
are the finest galleries of stonework that I have ever seen,
and a rich throne in the choir. But at Antwerp they spare no
cost in such things, for they have plenty of money.

I have made a portrait of Herr Nicolas, an astronomer who
lives with the King of England, and is very helpful and of
great service to me in many matters. He is a German, a
native of Munich. Also I have made the portrait of Tomasin's
daughter, Maid Zutta by name. Hans Pfaffroth gave me a
Philip's florin for taking his portrait in charcoal. I have
dined once more with Tomasin. My host's brother-in-law
entertained me and my wife once. I changed 2 light florins
for 24 stivers for living expenses; and I gave 1 stiver for
a tip to a man who let me see an altar-piece.

The Sunday after the Feast of the Assumption I saw the great
procession of Our Lady's Church at Antwerp, where all the
whole town was gathered together, with all the trades and
professions, and each was dressed in his best according to
his rank; every guild and profession had its sign by which
it might be recognized. Between the companies were carried
great costly gold pole-candlesticks and their long old
Frankish silver trumpets; and there were many pipers and
drummers in the German fashion; all were loudly and noisily
blown and beaten. I saw the procession pass along the
street, spread far apart so that they took up much space
crossways, but close behind one another: goldsmiths,
painters, stonecutters, broiderers, sculptors, joiners,
carpenters, sailors, fishermen, butchers, leather workers,
cloth makers, bakers, tailors, shoemakers, and all kinds of
craftsmen and workmen who work for their livelihood.
There were likewise shopkeepers and merchants with their
assistants of all sorts. After them came the marksmen with
their guns, bows, and cross-bows; then the horsemen and foot
soldiers; then came a large company of the town guard; then
a fine troop of very gallant men, nobly and splendidly
costumed. Before them, however, went all the religious
orders and the members of some foundations, very devoutly,
in their respective groups. There was, too, in this
procession, a great troop of widows, who support themselves
by their own labour and observe special rules, all dressed
from head to foot in white linen robes made expressly for
the occasion, very sorrowful to behold. Among them I saw
some very stately persons, the Canons of Our Lady's Church
with all their clergy, scholars, and treasures. Twenty
persons bore the image of the Virgin Mary and of the Lord
Jesus, adorned in the richest manner, to the honour of the
Lord God. The procession included many delightful things
splendidly got up, for example, many wagons were drawn along
with stagings of ships and other constructions. Then there
came the company of the Prophets in their order, and scenes
from the New Testament, such as the Annunciation, the Three
Magi riding great camels, and other strange beasts, very
skillfully arranged, and also how Our Lady fled into Egypt--
very conducive to devotion--and many other things which for
shortness I must leave out. Last of all came a great dragon,
which St. Margaret and her maidens led by a girdle; she was
extraordinarily beautiful. Behind her followed a St. George
with his squire, a very fine cuirassier. There also rode in
the procession many pretty and richly dressed boys and girls
in the costumes of many lands representing various saints.
This procession from beginning to end, where it passed our
house, lasted more than two hours; there were so many things
there that I could not write them in a book, so I let it
alone.

I visited Fugger's house in Antwerp, which is newly built,
with a wonderful tower, broad and high, and with a beautiful
garden, and I also saw his fine stallions. Tomasin has given
my wife fourteen ells of good thick arras for a mantle and
three and a half ells of half satin to line it. I drew a
design for a lady's forehead band for the goldsmith.

The Portuguese factor has given me a present of wine in the
inn, both Portuguese and French. Signor Rodrigo of Portugal
has given me a small cask full of all sorts of sweetmeats,
amongst them a box of sugar candy, besides two large dishes
of barley sugar, marchpane, many other kinds of sugar-work,
and some sugar-canes just as they grow; I gave his servant
in return 1 florin as a tip. I have again changed for my
expenses a light florin for 12 stivers.

The pillars in the Convent of St. Michael of Antwerp are all
made out of single blocks of a beautiful black touchstone.
Herr Egidius, King Charles's warden, has taken for me from
Antwerp the "St. Jerome in the Cell," the "Melancholy," and
three new "Marys," the "Anthony" and the "Veronica" for the
good sculptor, Master Conrad, whose like I have not seen; he
serves Lady Margaret, the Emperor's daughter. Also I gave
Master Figidius a "Eustace" and a "Nemesis." I owe my host 7
florins, 20 stivers, I thaler--that is, on Sunday before St.
Bartholomew: for sitting room, bedroom, and bedding I am to
pay him 11 florins a month.

I came to a new agreement with my host on the 20th August--
on the Monday before St, Bartholomew's, I am to eat with him
and pay 2 stivers for the meal, and extra for drink, but my
wife and the maid can cook and eat up here.

I gave the Portuguese factor a statuette of a child: besides
that, I gave him an "Adam and Eve," a "Jerome in his Cell,"
a "Hercules," a "Eustace," a "Melancholy," and a "Nemesis;"
then of the half-sheets, three new "Virgins," the
"Veronica," the "Anthony," "The Nativity," and "The
Crucifixion," also the best of the quarter-sheets, eight
pieces, and then the three books of the "Life of the
Virgin," "The Apocalypse," and the "Great Passion," also the
"Little Passion" and the "Passion" on copper, all together,
5 florins' worth. The same quantity I gave to Signor
Rodrigo, the other Portuguese. Rodrigo has given my wife a
small green parrot.



VISIT TO BRUSSELS

On the Sunday after St. Bartholomew's, I traveled with Herr
Tomasin from Antwerp to Mechlin, where we lay for the night;
there I invited Master Conrad and a painter with him to
supper, and this Master Conrad is the good carver in Lady
Margaret's service. From Mechlin we traveled through the
small town of Vilvorde and came to Brussels on Monday at
midday; I gave the messenger 3 stivers; I dined with my
lords at Brussels; also once with Herr Bannisis, and I gave
him a "Passion" on copper. I gave the Margrave Hansen of
Brussels the letter of recommendation which my lord of
Bamberg wrote for me, and I made him a present of a
"Passion," engraved on copper for a remembrance.

I have also dined once more with my lords of Nuremberg. I
saw in the town hall at Brussels, in the golden chamber,
four paintings which the great Master Rogier did; and behind
the King's palace in Brussels, the fountains, labyrinth,
zoological garden. Anything more beautiful and pleasing to
me, more like a paradise, I have never seen.

Erasmus is the name of the little man [Editor's note: not
Erasmus of Rotterdam, but a clerk of Bannisis] who wrote out
my supplication at Jacob Bannisis' house. At Brussels there
is a very splendid town hall, large and covered with
beautiful stonework, with a noble open tower. I have made a
portrait of Master Conrad of Brussels by candlelight; he is
my host. At the same time I drew Doctor Lamparter's son in
charcoal, and also the hostess.

Also I have seen the things which they have brought to the
King out of the new land of gold: a sun all of gold, a whole
fathom broad, and a moon, too, of silver, of the same size,
also two rooms full of armour, and the people there with all
manner of wondrous weapons, harness, darts, wonderful
shields, extraordinary clothing, beds, and all kinds of
wonderful things for human use, much finer to look at than
prodigies. These things are all so precious that they are
valued at 100,000 gulden, and all the days of my life I have
seen nothing that reaches my heart so much as these, for
among them I have seen wonderfully artistic things and have
admired the subtle ingenuity of men in foreign lands;
indeed, I don't know how to express what I there found.

I also saw many other beautiful things at Brussels, and
especially a great fish bone there, as vast as if it had
been built up of square stones; it was a fathom long, very
thick, weighs up to 1 cwt. (15 centner), and it has the form
as is here drawn; it stood behind on the fish's head.

I have also been in the Lord of Nassau's house, which is so
magnificently built and so beautifully decorated. I have
again dined twice with my lords. Lady Margaret sent after me
to Brussels and promised that she would speak in my behalf
to King Charles, and has shown herself quite exceptionally
kind to me: I sent her my engraved "Passion" and such
another to her treasurer, Jan Marnix by name, and I made his
portrait in charcoal. I paid 2 stivers for a buffalo ring,
and also 2 stivers for opening St. Luke's picture.  When I
was in Herr von Nassau's house I saw in the chapel the fine
painting that Master Hugo has made, and I also saw two large
beautiful halls, and all the treasures in various parts of
the house, and the large bed in which fifty men can lie. And
I also saw the great stone which the storm cast down in the
field close to Herr von Nassau. This house lies high, and
there is a most beautiful view at which one cannot but
wonder. And I think that in all German lands there is not
the like of it.

Master Bernhard, the painter, invited me to dinner, and had
prepared a meal so costly that I do not think 10 florins
will pay for it. Three friends invited themselves to it to
give me good company, to wit, Lady Margaret's treasurer,
whose portrait I made, and the King's steward, de Metenye,
and the town treasurer, Van Busleyden; I gave him a
"Passion" engraved on copper, and he gave me in return a
black Spanish bag worth 3 florins. And I also gave a
"Passion" engraved on copper to Erasmus of Rotterdam;
likewise one to Erasmus, the secretary of Bannisis. The man
at Antwerp who gave me the "Child's Head" is called Lorenz
Sterk. I took the portrait in charcoal of Master Bernhard,
Lady Margaret's painter. I have taken Erasmus of Rotterdam's
portrait once more. I gave Lorenz Sterk a sitting "St.
Jerome" and the "Melancholy," and I made a portrait of my
hostess's godmother. Six people whose portraits I painted at
Brussels gave me nothing. I paid 3 stivers for two buffalo
horns and 1 stiver for two Eulenspiegels.

So then on the Sunday after St. Giles', I traveled with Herr
Tomasin to Mechlin and took leave of Herr Hans Ebner, and he
would take nothing for my expenses while I was with him
seven days; I paid 1 stiver on behalf of Hans Geuder; I gave
1 stiver as a tip to the host's servant; and at Mechlin I
took supper with the Lady Nieuwekerke; and early on Monday I
traveled from Mechlin to Antwerp.

AT ANTWERP (September 3 - October 4, 1520)

I breakfasted with the Portuguese factor, who gave me three
porcelain dishes, and Rodrigo gave me some Calicut feathers.
I spent 1 florin and paid my messenger 2 stivers. I bought
Susanna a mantle for 2 florins, 10 stivers. My wife paid 4
florins Rhenish for a washtub, a bellows, a basin, a pair of
slippers, wood for cooking, stockings, a cage for the
parrot, 2 jugs, and for tips; she spent, moreover, for
eating, drinking, and various necessaries, 21 stivers.

Now on Monday after St. Giles' I am back again at Jobst
Planckfelter's, and have dined with him as many times as are
drawn here-IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII.  I gave Nicolas, Tomasin's
man, 1 stiver; I paid 5 stivers for the little frame, and 1
stiver more. My host gave me an Indian cocoanut and an old
Turkish whip; then I have dined IIIIIIIIIIIII more with
Tomasin. The two lords of Rogendorf have invited me; I have
dined once with them and made a large drawing of their coat
of arms on wood, for engraving. I gave away 1 stiver; my
wife changed a florin for 24 stivers; I gave 2 stivers as a
tip. I have dined once in Focker's house with the young
Jacob Rehlinger, and I have also dined once more with him.
My wife has changed a florin for 24 stivers for expenses. I
gave to Wilhelm Hauenhut, the servant of my lord Duke
Frederick, the Platzgraf, an engraved "Jerome," and the two
new half-sheets, the "Mary" and the "Anthony." I gave Herr
Jacob Bannisis a good painting of a "Veronica" face, a
"Eustace," a "Melancholy," and a sitting "Jerome," a "St.
Anthony," the two new "Marys," and the new "Peasants." And I
have given his secretary, Erasmus, who wrote my
supplication, a sitting "Jerome," a "Melancholy," an
"Anthony," the two new "Marys," and the "Peasants," and I
have given him also two small "Marys," and all together what
I have given is worth 7 florins, and I have given Master
Marc, the goldsmith, a "Passion" on copper, and he gave me 3
florins in payment; besides this I have received 3 florins,
20 stivers, for prints. To the glazier Honigen, I have given
four little engravings. I have dined with Herr Bannisis III.
I paid 4 stivers for carbon and black chalk; I have given 1
florin, 8 stivers for wood, and spent 3 stivers more. I have
dined with the lords of Nuremberg IIIIIIIIII. Master
Dietrich, the glass painter, sent me the red colour which is
found in the new bricks at Antwerp. I made charcoal portrait
of Jacob von Lubeck; he gave my wife a Philip's florin. I
have again changed a Philip's florin for expenses.

I presented to Lady Margaret a seated "Jerome" engraved on
copper. I sold a woodcut "Passion" for 12 stivers, besides
an "Adam and Eve" for 4 stivers. Felix, the captain and lute-
player, bought a whole set of copper-engravings and a
woodcut "Passion" and an engraved "Passion," two half-sheets
and two quarter-sheets, for 8 gold florins; so I gave him
another set of engravings. I have taken Herr Bannisis's
portrait in charcoal. Rodrigo gave me another parrot, and I
gave his boy 2 stivers for a tip. I gave Johann von den
Winckel, the trumpeter, a small woodcut "Passion," "St.
Jerome in his Cell," and a "Melancholy." I paid 6 stivers
for a pair of gloves. I paid 3 stivers for a bamboo rod, and
George Schlaudersbath gave me another which cost 6 stivers.

I have dined once with Wolff Haller, who is employed by the
Fuggers, when he had invited my lords of Nuremberg. I have
received for works of art, 2 Philip's florins, and 6
stivers. I have again dined once with my wife; I gave 1
stiver to Hans Denes' boy for a tip. I have taken 100
stivers for works of art.

I made a charcoal portrait of Master Jacob, Lord Rogendorf's
painter, and I have drawn for Lord Rogendorf his arms on
wood, for which he gave me seven ells of velvet.

I dined once more with the Portuguese; I took the portrait
of Master John Prost of Bruges, and he gave me 1 florin; it
was done in charcoal; 23 stivers for a fur coat of rabbit-
skin. I sent Hans Schwarz 2 golden florins for my picture in
a letter sent through the Antwerp Fuggers to Augsburg, I
gave 31 stivers for a red woolen shirt. I dined once more
with Rogendorf. I gave 2 stivers for the colour which is
found in the bricks; and I paid 9 stivers for an ox horn. I
made a charcoal portrait of a Spaniard. I have dined once
with my wife. I gave 2 stivers for a dozen little pipes; I
gave 3 stivers for two little maplewood bowls, two such
Felix gave my wife, and Master Jacob, the painter from
Lubeck, has given my wife another; dined once with
Rogendorf.  I paid 1 stiver for the printed "Entry into
Antwerp," showing how the King was received with a splendid
triumph; the gates were beautifully decorated, and there
were plays, much rejoicing, and beautiful maidens in
tableaux vivants, whose like I have seldom seen. Changed 1
florin for expenses.

I have seen the bones of the great giant at Antwerp; his leg
above his knee is five and a half feet long, and beyond
measure heavy; so were his shoulder blades--a single one is
broader than a strong man's back--and his other limbs. The
man was eighteen feet high, and reigned at Antwerp and did
great wonders, as is set out in an old book which belongs to
the town magistrates.

Raphael of Urbino's effects have been all dispersed after
his death, but one of his disciples, Tommaso of Bologna by
name, a good painter, desired to see me, so he came to me
and gave me a gold ring, an antique with a well-cut stone
worth 5 florins, but I have been already offered twice as
much for it; in return I gave him my best engravings, worth
6 florins. I bought a piece of calico for 3 stivers, I gave
the messenger 1 stiver, and spent 3 stivers in company.

I presented to Lady Margaret, the Emperor's sister [Editor's
note: Actually, she was his aunt], a whole set of all my
works, and have drawn her two pictures on parchment with the
greatest pains and care; all this I have put at 30 florins,
and I have had to draw the design of the house for her
physician, the doctor, according to which he intends to
build one, and for drawing that I would not willingly take
less than 10 florins. I have given the servant 1 stiver