, and
I paid 1 stiver for brick colour; I have given Herr Nicolas
Ziegler a "Christ lying dead," worth 3 florins. To the
Portuguese factor I gave a painting of a "Child's Head,"
worth 1 florin. I have given 10 stivers for a buffalo horn;
I gave 1 gold florin for an elk's hoof. I have done Master
Adrian's portrait in charcoal. I gave 2 stivers for the
"Condemnation" and the "Dialogue," 3 stivers to the
messenger; to Master Adrian I have given 2 florins' worth of
works of art; bought a piece of red chalk for 1 stiver. I
have done Herr Wolff von Rogendorf in silverpoint. Gave away
3 stivers; did the portrait of a noble lady at Tomasin's
house. I have given to Nicolas a "Jerome in the Cell," and
two new "Marys." On Monday after St. Michael's Day, 1520, I
gave to Tommaso of Bologna a whole set of prints to send for
me to Rome to another painter, who will send me Raphael's
work in return. I dined once with my wife; gave 3 stivers
for the little tract. The Bolognese has painted my portrait,
which he will take with him back to Rome. I bought an elk's
foot for 20 stivers, besides I paid 2 gold florins, 4
stivers, for Herr Hans Ebner's little panel; dined out;
changed a crown for expenses; dined out. Am taking 11
florins for my expenses to Aachen; have received 2 florins,
4 stivers, from Ebner; paid 9 stivers for wood; gave Meyding
20 stivers for sending my box.

I have taken the portrait of a lady of Bruges, who has given
me I Philip's florin. I gave away 3 stivers as a tip; paid 2
stivers for fir cones and I for stone colour; paid 13
stivers to the furrier, 1 stiver for leather; bought two
mussels for 2 stivers. In John Gabriel's house I have taken
the portrait of an Italian lord, who gave me 2 gold florins.
Bought a portmanteau for 2 florins, 4 stivers.


VISIT TO AACHEN

On Thursday after St. Michael's Day, I journeyed from
Antwerp to Aachen, and I took 1 gulden and I noble with me;
and after passing through Maestricht we came to Gulpen, and
from there to Aix on Sunday; there I have spent up till now,
with the fare and all, 3 florins. At Aachen I saw the well-
proportioned pillars with their good capitals of green and
red porphyry and granite which Carolus [Charlemagne] had
brought from Rome and set up there. These are made truly
according to Vitruvius's writings. At Aachen I bought an ox
horn for 1 gold florin. I have taken the portraits of Herr
Hans Ebner and George Schlaudersbach, and Hans Ebner's a
second time. I paid 2 stivers for a fine whetstone, also 5
stivers for a bath and drinking in company; changed 1 florin
for expenses. I gave the town servant who took me up into
the hall 2 white pf.; spent 5 white pf. With companions,
drinking and bathing; I have lost 7 stivers at play with
Herr Hans Ebner at the Mirror. I have made a charcoal
portrait of the young Christopher Groland, also of my host,
Peter von Enden. I spent 3 stivers in company, and gave the
messenger 1 stiver. I have taken the portraits of Paul
Topier and Martin Pfinzing in my sketch-book.

I have seen the arm of the Emperor Henry, the shirt and
girdle of Our Lady, and other holy relics. I have sketched
the Church of Our Lady with its surroundings. I took Sturm's
portrait. Made the portrait in charcoal of Peter von Enden's
brother-in-law. Have given 10 white pf. for a large ox horn;
gave 2 white pf. for a tip, and I have changed 1 florin for
expenses. I have lost 3 white pf. at play, also 2 stivers;
gave 2 white pf. to the messenger. 1 have given Tomasin's
daughter the painted "Trinity," it is worth 4 florins; paid
1 stiver for washing. I took the portrait in charcoal of the
Kopffrngrin's sister at Aachen, and another in silverpoint.
Spent 3 white pf. for a bath; paid 8 white pf. for a buffalo
horn; 2 white pf. for a girdle: paid I Philip's florin for a
scarlet shawl; 6 pf. for paper; changed 1 florin for
expenses; paid 2 white pf. for washing.

On the 23rd day of October King Charles was crowned at
Aachen; there I saw all manner of lordly splendour, the like
of which those who live in our parts have never seen--all,
as it has been described.

I gave Mathes works of art worth 2 florins, and presented
Stephen, Lady Margaret's chamberlain, with 3 prints. Paid 1
florin, 10 white pf. for a cedarwood rosary; gave 1 stiver
to little Hans in the stable, and 1 stiver to the child in
the house; lost 2% stivers at play; spent 2 stivers, gave 2
stivers to the barber. I have again changed 1 florin; I gave
away 7 white pf. in the house on leaving.

SECOND VISIT TO COLOGNE

And I traveled from Aachen to Julich, and thence to...; paid
4 stivers for two eye-glasses. I played away 2 stivers in an
embossed silver medal of the king. I have given 8 white pf.
for two ox horns. On the Friday before St. Simon and St.
Jude I left Aachen and traveled to Duren, where I visited
the church where St. Anne's head is. Thence we traveled and
came on Sunday, which was St. Simon and St. Jude's Day, to
Cologne. I had lodging, food, and drink at Brussels with my
lords of Nuremberg, and they would take nothing from me for
it, and at Aachen likewise I ate with them three weeks and
they brought me to Cologne, and would take nothing for it.

I have bought a tract of Luther's for 5 white pf. besides 1
white pf. for the "Condemnation of Luther," the pious man,
besides 1 white pf. for a Paternoster, and 2 white pf. for a
girdle, I white pf. for one pound of candles; changed 1
florin for expenses. I had to give Herr Leonhard Groland my
great ox horn, and to Hans Ebner I had to give my large
rosary of cedarwood. Paid 6 white pf. for a pair of shoes; I
gave 2 white pf. for a little skull; 1 white pf. I gave for
beer and bread; 1 white pf. for a "pertele" [braid]. I have
given 4 white pf. to two messengers; I have given 2 white
pf. to Nicolas's daughter for lace, also 1 white pf. to a
messenger. I gave prints worth 2 florins to Herr Ziegler
Linhard; paid the barber 2 white pf. paid 3 white pf. and
then 2 white pf. for opening the picture which Master
Stephan made at Cologne; I gave the messenger 1 white pf.,
and spent 2 white pf. drinking in company. I made the
portrait of Gottschalk's sister: 1 paid I white pf. for a
little tract.

At Cologne, on Sunday evening after All Saints' Day in the
year 1520, I saw the nobles dance and banquet in the Emperor
Charles's dancing saloon: it was splendidly arranged. I have
drawn for Staiber his coat of arms on wood. I gave a
"Melancholy" to a young count at Cologne, and a new "Mary"
to Duke Frederick.  I have made Nicolas Hailer's portrait in
charcoal; paid 2 white pf. to the door porter. I have given
3 white pf. for two little tracts, also 10 white pf. for a
cow horn. At Cologne I went to St. Ursula's Church and to
her grave, and saw the holy maiden and the other great
relics. Fernberger's portrait I took in charcoal; changed 1
florin for expenses. I gave Nicolas's wife 8 white pf. when
she invited me as a guest. I bought two prints for 1 stiver.
Herr Hans Ebner and Herr Nicolas Groland would take nothing
from me for eight days at Brussels, three weeks at Aachen,
and fourteen days at Cologne. I made the nun's portrait, and
gave 7 white pf. to the nun. I made her a present of three
half-sheet engravings on copper.

My Confirmation from the Emperor came to my lords of
Nuremberg the Monday after St. Martin's, the year 1520,
after great trouble and labour. I gave Nicolas's daughter 7
white pf. on departing, 1 florin to his wife, and again 1
ort to his daughter on leaving; and I started away from
Cologne. Before that, Staiber invited me once as his guest,
and so did my cousin Nicolas once, and old Wolfgang once,
and once besides I dined as his guest. I have given
Nicolas's man a "Eustace" on leaving, and his little
daughter another ort, as they took much trouble for me. I
have given 1 florin for a little ivory skull, and I white
pf. for a turned box, also 7 white pf. for a pair of shoes,
and I gave Nicolas's man a "Nemesis" on leaving.


SECOND JOURNEY FROM COLOGNE TO ANTWERP

I started off early by boat from Cologne on Wednesday after
St. Martin's, and went as far as . . . Paid 6 white pf. for
a pair of shoes. I gave 4 white pf. to the messenger. From
Cologne I traveled by the Rhine to Zons, from Zons to Neuss,
and from thence to Stain where we stayed the day, and I
spent 6 white pf. Thence we came to Dusseldorf, a little
town, where I spent 2 white pf.; from thence to
Kaiserswerth; from thence to Duisburg, another little town,
and we passed two castles, Angerort and Rurort; thence we
went to Orsoy, a little town; from thence we  went to
Rheinberg, another little town, where I lay overnight, and
spent 6 white pf.; from there I traveled to the following
towns, Burg Wesel, Rees, and from there to Emmerich. We came
next to Thomas, and from there to Nymwegen; there we stayed
over the night and spent 4 white pf.; from Nymwegen I
traveled to Tiel, and from there to Herzogenbusch. At
Emmerich I stopped and spent 3 white pf. on a very good
meal. There I took the portrait of a goldsmith's apprentice,
Peter Federmacher of Antwerp, and of a woman. The reason of
our staying was that a great storm of wind overtook us. I
spent besides 5 white pf., and I changed 1 florin for
expenses; also I took the host's portrait, and we did not
get to Nymwegen until Sunday; I gave the boatmen 20 white
pf. Nymwegen is a beautiful city, and has a fine church and
a well-situated castle; from there we traveled to Tiel,
where we left the Rhine and continued on the Maas to
Heerewarden, where the two towers stand; there we lay over
night, and during this day I spent 7 stivers. From there we
started early on Tuesday for Bommel on the Maas; there a
great storm of wind overtook us and we hired some peasant
horses and rode without saddles as far as Herzogenbusch, and
I paid 1 florin for the journey by boat and horse.
Herzogenbusch is a beautiful city, and has an extremely
beautiful church and a strong fortress; there I spent 10
stivers, although Arnold settled for the repast. The
goldsmiths came to me and showed me great honour. From there
we traveled on Our Lady's Day early and came through the
large and beautiful village of Oosterwyck. We breakfasted at
Tilborch and spent 4 white pf.; from there we came to
Baarle, lay the night there, and spent 3 stivers, and my
companions got into an argument with the innkeeper, so we
went on in the night to Hoogstraten; there we stopped two
hours and went by St. Leonhard Kirchen to Harscht. We
breakfasted there and spent 4 stivers.


SECOND STAY AT ANTWERP (November 22-December 3, 1520)

From there we journeyed to Antwerp and gave the driver 15
stivers. This was on Thursday after Our Lady's Assumption
[by error for Presentation]; and I gave an engraving of the
"Passion" to John, Jobst Schwager's man, and I made a
portrait of Nicolas Sopalis, and on the Thursday after Our
Lady's Assumption [Presentation], 1520, I was once more back
in Jobst Planckfelt's house; I have eaten with him IIII
times. My wife-II-changed 1 florin for expenses, besides a
crown; and the seven weeks that I have been away my wife and
maid have spent 7 crowns and bought another 4 florins' worth
of things. I spent 4 stivers in company. I have dined with
Tomasin IIIIII times. On St. Martin's Day my wife had her
purse cut off in Our Lady's Church at Antwerp; there were 2
florins in it, and the purse itself, besides what was in it,
was worth another florin, and some keys were in it, too. On
the eve before St. Catherine's I paid Jobst Planckfelt, my
host, 10 gold crowns for my reckoning. I dined two times
with the Portuguese. Rodrigo gave me six Indian nuts, so I
gave his boy 2 stivers for a tip. I paid 19 stivers for
parchment; changed 2 crowns for expenses.

I sold two "Adam and Eves," one "Sea Monster," one "Jerome,"
one "Knight," one "Nemesis," one "St. Eustace," one whole
sheet, besides seventeen etched pieces, eight quarter-
sheets, and ten wood-cuts, seven of the bad woodcuts, two
books, and ten small wood "Passions," the whole for 8
florins. Also I exchanged three large books for one ounce
[ell of?] camlet. I changed a Philip's florin for expenses
and my wife likewise changed a florin.

At Zierikzee in Zeeland a whale has been washed ashore by a
great tide and storm; it is much more than a hundred fathoms
long; no one in Zeeland has ever seen one even one-third as
long, and the fish cannot get off the land. The people would
be glad to see it gone, for they fear the great stink, for
it is so big they say it could not be cut in pieces and the
oil got out of it in half a year.

Stephen Capello has given me a cedarwood rosary, in return
for which I was to take and have taken his portrait. I paid
4 stivers for furnace brown and a pair of snuffers; I gave 3
stivers for paper; made a portrait of Felix, kneeling, in
his book in pen and ink, and Felix gave me one hundred
oysters. I gave Herr Lazarus, the great man, an engraved
"Jerome" and three large books. Rodrigo sent me some wine
and oysters. I paid 7 white pf. for black chalk. I have had
to dinner Tomasin, Gerhard, Tomasin's daughter, her husband,
the glass painter Hennick, Jobst and his wife, and Felix,
which cost 2 florins. Tomasin made me a gift of four ells of
gray damask for a doublet. I have changed a Philip's florin
for expenses.


VISIT TO ZEELAND (December 3-14, 1520)

On St. Barbara's Eve I traveled from Antwerp to Bergen-op-
Zoom; I paid 2 stivers for the horse, and I spent 1 florin 6
stivers here. At Bergen I bought my wife a thin
Netherlandish head cloth, which cost 1 florin, 7 stivers,
besides 6 stivers for three pairs of shoes, 1 stiver for
eyeglasses, and 6 stivers for an ivory button; gave 2
stivers for a tip. I have drawn the portraits in charcoal of
Jan de Has, his wife, and two daughters; and the maid and
the old woman in silverpoint, in my sketch-book. I saw the
Van Bergen house, which is a very large and beautiful
building. Bergen is a pleasant place in summer, and two
great fairs are held there yearly.

On Our Lady's Eve I started with my companions for Zeeland,
and Sebastian Imhof lent me five florins; and the first
night we lay at anchor in the sea; it was very cold and we
had neither food nor drink. On Saturday we came to Goes, and
there I drew a girl in the costume of the place. Thence we
traveled to Arnemuiden, and I paid 15 stivers for expenses.
We went by a sunken place, where we saw the tops of the
roofs standing up above the water, and we went by the island
of Wolfersdyk, and passed the little town Kortgene on
another island lying near. Zeeland has seven islands, and
Arnemuiden, where I lay the night, is the biggest. From
there I traveled to Middelburg. There in the abbey Jan de
Mabuse has made a great picture, not so good in the drawing
as in the colouring. From there I went to the Veere, where
ships from all lands lie. It is a very fine little town.

But at Arnemuiden, where I landed, there happened to me a
great misfortune. As we were coming to land and getting out
our rope, just as we were getting on shore, a great ship ran
into us so hard that in the crush I let everyone get out
before me, so that no one but myself, George Kotzler, two
old women, the sailor, and a little boy were left in the
ship. When now the other ship knocked against us and I with
those mentioned was on the ship and could not get out, the
strong rope broke, and at the same moment a violent storm of
wind arose which forcibly drove back our ship. So we all
called for help, but no one would risk himself, and the wind
carried us back out to sea. Then the skipper tore his hair
and cried aloud, for all his men had landed and the ship was
unmanned. It was a matter of fear and danger, for there was
a great wind and no more than six persons in the ship, so I
spoke to the skipper that he should take heart and have hope
in God, and should take thought for what was to be done. He
said that if he could pull up the small sail, he would try
if we could come again to land. So we all helped one another
and pulled it half-way up with difficulty, and went on again
towards the land. And when those on the land who had already
given us up saw how we helped ourselves, they too came to
our aid, and we got to land.

Middelburg is a good town; it has a very beautiful town hall
with a fine tower. There is much art shown in all things
here. There are very rich and beautiful stalls in the abbey,
and a splendid gallery of stone and a beautiful parish
church.  The town is excellent for sketching. Zeeland is
beautiful and wonderful to see on account of the water, for
it stands higher than the land.

I have made a portrait of my host at Arnemuiden. Master
Hugo, Alexander Imhof, and the Hirschvogel's servant
Frederick gave me each of them an Indian nut that they had
won at play, and the host gave me a sprouting bulb.

Early on Monday morning we went back to the ship and set out
for the Veere and for Zierikzee; I wanted to get sight of
the great fish, but the tide had carried it off again. I
paid 2 florins for fare and expenses and 2 florins for a
rug, 4 stivers for a fig-cheese and 3 stivers for carriage,
and I lost 6 stivers at play. When we came back to Bergen I
gave 10 stivers for an ivory comb.

I have taken Schnabhan's portrait, and I have also taken the
portrait of my host's son-in-law, Klautz. Gave 2 florins
less 5 stivers for a piece of tin; also 2 florins for a bad
piece of tin. I have also taken the portrait of little
Bernard of Brussels, George Kotzler, and the Frenchman from
Kamrick; each of them gave me 1 florin at Bergen. Jan de
Has' son-in-law gave me 1 Horn florin for his portrait, and
Kerpen of Cologne also gave me a florin, and besides this I
bought two bed-covers for 4 florins less 10 stivers. I have
made the portrait of Nicolas, the jeweler. These are the
number of times that I have dined at Bergen since I came
from Zeeland: IIIIIIIII and once for 4 stivers. I paid the
driver 3 stivers and spent 8 stivers, and came back to
Antwerp, to Jobst Planckfelt's, on Friday after St. Lucy's,
1520, and I have dined this number of times with him: IIII.
It is paid, and my wife: IIII, and that is paid.

AT ANTWERP (December, 1520 - April, 1521)

In return for the three books which I gave him, Herr Lazarus
of Ravensburg has given me a big fish scale, five snail
shells, four silver medals, five copper ones, two little
dried fishes and a white coral, four reed arrows and another
white coral. I changed 1 florin for expenses, and like-wise
1 crown. I have dined alone so many times: IIIIIIIII.  The
factor of Portugal has given me a brown velvet bag and a box
of good electuary; I gave his boy 3 stivers for wages. I
gave 1 Horn florin for two little panels, but they gave me
back 6 stivers. I bought a little monkey for 4 gulden, and
gave 14 stivers for five fish. I paid Jobst 10 stivers for
three dinners; I gave 2 stivers for two tracts; and 2
stivers to the messenger. I gave Lazarus of Ravensburg a
portrait head on panel which cost 6 stivers, and besides
that I have given him eight sheets of the large copper
engravings, eight of the half-sheets, an engraved "Passion,"
and other engravings and woodcuts, all together worth more
than 4 florins. I changed a Philip's florin for expenses,
and besides that a gold florin for expenses. I gave 6
stivers for a panel, and did the portrait of the servant of
the Portuguese on it in charcoal, and I gave him all that
for a New Year's present and 2 stivers for a tip. Changed 1
florin for expenses and gave Bernhard Stecher a whole set of
prints. I bought 31 stivers' worth of wood. I have made the
portraits of Gerhard Bombelli and Sebastian the procurator's
daughter. I have changed 1 florin for expenses. Have spent 3
stivers besides 3 more for a meal. I have given Herr Wolff
of Rogendorf a "Passion" on copper and one in woodcut.
Gerhard Bombelli has given me a printed Turkish cloth, and
Herr Wolff of Rogendorf gave me seven Brabant ells of
velvet, so I gave his man 1 Philip's florin for a tip. Spent
3 stivers on a meal; gave 4 stivers for tips. I have drawn
the new factor's portrait in charcoal. Gave 6 stivers for a
panel. Have dined with the Portuguese IIIIIII times, with
the treasurer 1, with Tomasin IIIIIIIIII times. Gave 4
stivers for tips. With Lazarus of Ravensburg 1, Wolff of
Rogendorf 1, Bernhard Stecher 1, Utz Hanolt Meyting 1,
Caspar Lewenter 1. I gave 3 stivers to the man whose
portrait I drew; gave the boy 2 stivers. I have given 4
florins for flax. Have taken 4 florins for prints; have
changed 1 crown for expenses. Paid the furrier 4 stivers and
again 2 stivers. Lost 4 stivers at play; spent 6 stivers. I
have changed 1 noble for expenses; gave 18 stivers for
raisins and three pairs of knives. I paid 2 florins for some
meals at Jobst's. Have lost 4 stivers at play, and gave 6
stivers to the furrier. Have given Master Jacob two engraved
"St. Jeromes." Lost 2 stivers at play: changed 1 crown for
expenses; lost 1 stiver at play. Have given to Tomasin's
three maids three pairs of knives, which cost 5 stivers.
Have taken 29 stivers for prints. Rodrigo gave me a muskball
just as it had been cut from the musk deer, also a 1/4 lb.
of persin [a dark red paint?] and a box full of quince
electuary and a big box of sugar, so I gave his boy 5
stivers for a tip.

Lost 2 stivers at play. I have done the portrait of Jobst's
wife in charcoal. I have got 4 florins, 5 stivers for three
small canvases. Changed 2 florins in succession for
expenses. Lost 2 stivers at play. My wife gave me 1 florin
for the child, and 4 stivers in the child's bed. I have
changed 1 crown for expenses; spent 4 stivers, lost 2
stivers at play, and gave 4 stivers to the messenger.
Changed 1 florin for expenses.

I gave Master Dietrich, the glass painter, an "Apocalypse"
and the six "Knots." Paid 40 stivers for flax. Lost 8
stivers at play. I have given the little Portuguese factor,
Signor Francisco, my small canvas with the small child, that
is worth 10 florins. I have given Dr. Loffen at Antwerp the
four books and an engraved "Jerome," and the same to Jobst
Planckfelt. I have done the arms of Staiber and another. I
have made a portrait of Tomasin's son and daughter in
silverpoint; also I have painted a small panel in oil of the
Duke. Have got 3 stivers for engravings. Rodrigo, the
Portuguese secretary, has given me two Calicut cloths, one
of them is silk, and he has given me an ornamented cap and a
green jug with myrobalans, and a branch of cedar tree, worth
10 florins altogether. And I gave the boy for a tip 5
stivers and 2 stivers for a brush.

I have made a drawing for a mask for the Fugger's people for
masquerade, and they have given me an angel. I have changed
1 florin for expenses. Gave 8 stivers for two little powder
horns. Lost 3 stivers at play. Changed an angel for
expenses. I have drawn two sheets full of beautiful little
masks for Tomasin. I have painted a good "Veronica" face in
oils; it is worth 12 florins. I gave it to Francisco, the
Portuguese factor. Since then I have painted Santa Veronica
in oils; it is better than the former, and I gave it to
Factor Brandan of Portugal. Francisco gave the maid 1
Philip's florin for a tip, and afterwards, because of the
"Veronica," 1 florin more, but the Factor Brandan gave her 1
florin. I paid Peter 8 stivers for two cases. I changed an
angel for expenses.

On Carnival Sunday early, the goldsmiths invited me to
dinner, with my wife. In their assembly were many notable
men. They prepared a very grand meal, and did me the
greatest honour. In the evening the old bailiff of the town
invited me and gave me a splendid meal, and did me great
honour. Thither came many strange maskers.

I have drawn the portrait of Florent Nepotis, Lady
Margaret's organist, in charcoal. On Monday night Herr Lopez
invited me to the great banquet on Shrove Tuesday, which
lasted till two o'clock, and was very grand. Herr Lorenz
Sterk has given me a Spanish fur. And to the above-mentioned
feast came many very splendid masks, especially Tomasin
Bombelli.

I have won 2 florins at play. Have changed an angel for
expenses: paid 14 stivers for a basket of raisins. I have
made the portrait in charcoal of Bernhard von Castell, from
whom I won the money. Tomasin's brother Gerhardt has given
me four Brabant ells of the best black satin, and has given
me three big boxes of candied citron, so I gave the maid 3
stivers for a tip. Paid 13 stivers for wood, and 2 stivers
for pine kernels. I drew the procurator's daughter very
carefully in silver-point.

Have changed 1 angel for expenses. I have drawn the portrait
in black chalk of the good marble worker, Master Johann, who
looks like Christopher Kohler; he has studied in Italy, and
comes from Metz. I have changed 1 Horn florin for expenses.
I have given 3 florins to Jan Turck for Italian works of
art; I gave him 12 ducats' worth of works of art for one
ounce of good ultramarine. I have sold a small woodcut of
the "Passion" for florins. I sold two reams and four books
of Schauflein's prints for 3 florins. Have given 3 florins
for two ivory salt-cellars from Calicut. Have taken 2
florins for prints; have changed 1 florin for expenses.
Rudiger von Gelern gave me a snail shell, together with
coins of gold and silver, with an ort. I gave him in return
the three large books and an engraved "Knight;" have taken
11 stivers for prints. I gave 2 Philip's florins for "SS.
Peter and Paul," which I shall present to Herr Kohler's
wife. Rodrigo has given me two boxes of quince Electuary and
all kinds of sweetmeats, and I gave 5 stivers for a tip,
Paid 16 stivers for boxes.

Lazarus of Ravensburg gave me a sugar loaf, so I gave his
boy 1 stiver. Paid 6 stivers for wood. Have eaten once with
the Frenchman; twice with the Hirschvogel's Fritz, and once
with Master Peter, the secretary, when Erasmus of Rotterdam
also dined with us. I paid 1 stiver to be allowed to go up
the tower at Antwerp, which is said to be higher than that
at Strasburg. From thence I saw the whole town on all sides,
which was very pleasant. Paid 1 stiver for a bath. Have
changed 1 angel for expenses. The Factor Brandon of Portugal
has given me two large beautiful white sugar loaves, a
dishful of sweetmeats, two green pots of preserves, and four
ells of black satin, so I gave the servant 10 stivers for a
tip.

Paid the messenger 3 stivers. I have drawn twice in the more
in silverpoint the beautiful maiden for Gerhardt. Again
changed an angel for expenses; took 4 florins for prints;
paid 10 stivers for Rodrigo's case. Dined with the
treasurer, Herr Lorenz Sterk, who gave me an ivory whistle
and a very beautiful piece of porcelain, and I have given
him a whole set of prints. I also gave a whole set to Herr
Adrian, the Antwerp town orator. Also I changed a Philip's
florin for expenses. I presented a sitting "St. Nicolas" to
the largest and richest guild of merchants at Antwerp, for
which they have made me a present of 3 Philip's florins. I
gave Peter Egidius the old frame of the "St. Jerome" besides
4 gulden for a frame for the treasurer's likeness. Paid 11
stivers for wood. Again changed a Philip's florin for
expenses. Gave 4 stivers for a bore. Gave 3 stivers for
three canes. I have handed over my bale to Jacob and Andreas
Hessler to take to Nuremberg, and I am to pay them 2 florins
per cwt., Nuremberg weight, and they are to take it to Herr
Hans Imhof, the elder, and I have paid 2 florins on it.
Moreover I have done it up in a packing case.  This was in
the year 1521, on the Saturday before Judicz.

Also on the Saturday before Judicz, Rodrigo gave me six
large Indian cocoanuts, a very fine piece of coral, and two
large Portuguese florins, one of which weighs 10 ducats, and
I gave the boy 15 stivers for a tip. I have bought a lode-
stone for 16 stivers. I have changed an angel for expenses.
Paid 6 stivers for packing. Sent Master Hugo at Brussels an
engraved "Passion" and some other prints for his little
porphyry stone. I have made for Tomasin a design drawn and
tinted in half-colours, from which he means to have his
house painted. I painted "Jerome" in oils with care and gave
it to Rodrigo of Portugal, who gave Susanna a ducat for a
tip. Have changed a Philip's florin for expenses and gave 10
stivers to my Father Confessor. Gave 4 stivers for the
little tortoise. I have dined with Herr Gilbert, who gave me
a Calicut target made of a fish skin, and two gloves as they
use them for fighting. I have given Peter 2 stivers. Gave 10
stivers for the fish fins, and 3 stivers for a tip. I have
made a very good portrait in hard chalk of Cornelius, the
secretary of Antwerp.

I have given 3 florins, 16 stivers, for the five silk
girdles which I mean to give away, besides 20 stivers for an
edging [lace?]. These six edgings I have sent as presents to
the wives of Kasperi Nutzel, Franz Imhof, Straub, the two
Spenglers, Loffelholz, besides a good pair of gloves to
each. To Pirkheimer I have sent a large cap, a very handsome
buffalo horn inkstand, a silver [medal of the] Emperor, a
pound of pistachios, and three sugar canes. To Kasper
Ntitzel I have sent a great elk's foot, ten large fir cones
with pine kernels. To Jacob Muffel I have sent a scarlet
breast cloth of one ell; to Hans Imhof's child an
embroidered scarlet cap and pine kernels; to Kramer's wife
four ells of taffeta, worth 4 florins. To Lochinger's wife
one ell of taffeta, of 1 florin's worth; to the two
Spenglers, each a bag and three fine horns; to Herr
Hieronimus Holzschuher, a very large horn.

Have eaten twice with the factor; dined with Master Adrian,
the secretary of the town council of Antwerp, who gave me
the small painted panel made by Master Joachim [de Patinir]:
it is of "Lot and his Daughters." Have taken 12 florins for
prints, also I have sold some of Hans Baldung Grun's works
for 1 florin. Rudiger von Gelern has given me a piece of
sandalwood; I gave his boy a stiver. I have painted the
portrait of Bernhard of Brussels in oils; he gave me 8
florins for it, and gave my wife a crown, and Susanna a
florin worth 24 stivers. I have given 3 stivers for the
Swiss jug, and 2 stivers for the ship, also 3 stivers for
the case and 4 stivers to the Father Confessor. I have
changed an angel for expenses; have taken 4 florins, 10
stivers for works of art: paid 3 stivers for salve; gave 12
1/2 stivers for wood; changed 1 florin for expenses; have
given 1 florin for 14 pieces of French wood. I gave Ambrozio
Hochstutter a "Life of Our Lady," and he gave me a model of
his ship. Rodrigo gave my wife a little ring which is worth
more than 5 florins. Have changed 1 florin for expenses.

I have done the portrait of Factor Brandon's secretary in
charcoal; I have done the portrait of his Moorish woman in
silverpoint, and I have done Rodrigo's portrait on a large
sheet of paper with the brush, in black and white. I have
given 16 florins for a piece of camlet measuring twenty-four
ells, and it cost 1 stiver to bring home. Have paid 2
stivers for gloves. I have done Lucas of Dantzic's portrait
in charcoal. He gave me 1 florin for it, and a piece of
sandalwood.


VISIT TO BRUGES AND GHENT (April 6-11, 1521)

On the Saturday after Easter, with Hans Luber and Master Jan
Prevost, a good painter born at Bruges, I set out from
Antwerp towards Bruges by way of the Scheldt and came to
Beveren, a large village. From there to Vracene, also a big
village; thence we passed through some villages and came to
a fine large village, where the rich farmers live, and there
we breakfasted. Thence we journeyed towards St. Paul's, the
rich abbey, and went through Caudenborn, a fine village;
thence through the large village of Kalve, and thence to
Ertvelde; there we lay the night and started early on Sunday
morning and came from Ertvelde to a small town. From that we
went to Ecloo, which is a mighty large village; it is
plastered, and has a square; there we breakfasted. Thence we
went to Maldegem, and then through other villages, and came
to Bruges--which is a fine noble town. I paid 21 stivers for
fare and other expenses. And arriving at Bruges, Jan Prevost
took me into his house to lodge, and the same night prepared
a costly meal, and asked much company to meet me.

The next day Marx, the goldsmith, invited me, and gave me a
costly meal and asked many to meet me; afterwards they took
me to see the Emperor's house, which is large and splendid.
There I saw the chapel which Roger painted, and some
pictures by a great old artist. I gave the man who showed
them to us 1 stiver; afterwards I bought two ivory combs for
30 stivers. Thence they took me to St. James's and let me
see the splendid paintings of Roger and Hugo, who are both
great masters. Afterwards I saw the alabaster Madonna in Our
Lady's Church that Michelangelo of Rome made; afterwards
they took me to many churches and let me see all the fine
paintings, of which there is abundance there, and when I had
seen the Jan [Van Eyck] and all the other things, we came at
last to the Painters' Chapel, in which there are good
things. Then they prepared a banquet for me, and I went
thence with them to their guildhall; there were many
honourable men gathered together, goldsmiths, painters, and
merchants, and they made me sup with them, and they gave me
presents and sought my acquaintance and did me great honour;
and the two brothers Jacob and Peter Mostaert, the town
councilors, gave me twelve cans of wine, and the whole
assembly, more than sixty persons, accompanied me home with
many torches. I also saw in their shooting gallery the great
fish tub from which they eat, which is 19 feet long, 7 high,
and 7 broad.

Early on Tuesday we departed, but before that, I did Jan
Prevost's portrait in silverpoint, and gave his wife 10
stivers at parting. And so we traveled to Ursel; there we
breakfasted. On the way there are three villages. Then we
traveled towards Ghent, again through three villages, and I
paid 4 stivers for the journey, and 4 stivers for expenses;
and on my arrival at Ghent, there came to me the dean of the
painters and brought with him the first masters in painting;
they showed me great honour, received me most courteously,
and commended to me their good-will and service, and supped
with me. On Wednesday early they took me to the tower of St.
John's, whence I looked all over the great and wonderful
town, where I had just been treated as a great person.
Afterwards I saw the Jan [Van Eyck's] picture, which is a
very splendid, deeply studied painting, and especially the
"Eve," the "Mary," and "God the Father" were extremely good.

Then I saw the lions and drew one of them in silverpoint;
also I saw on the bridge, where men are beheaded, two
pictures which were made as a sign that there a son had
beheaded his father. Ghent is beautiful and a wonderful
town; four great waters flow through it. I gave 3 stivers as
a tip to the sacristan and the lions' keeper. I saw many
other remarkable things in Ghent, and the painters with
their dean did not forget me, but ate with me morning and
evening, and paid for everything, and were very friendly. I
gave away 3 stivers at the inn on leaving. Then early on
Thursday I set out from Ghent and came through various
villages to the inn called "The Swan," where we breakfasted;
thence we passed through a beautiful village and came to
Antwerp, and I paid 8 stivers for the fare.


AT ANTWERP (April 11-May 17, 1521)

I have taken 4 florins for works of art; changed one florin
for expenses. Have taken the portrait of Hans Lieber of Ulm
in charcoal; he wished to pay me 1 florin, but I would not
take it. Gave 7 stivers for wood and 1 stiver for bringing
it; changed 1 florin for expenses. In the third week after
Easter a violent fever came upon me with great weakness,
nausea, and headache; and before, when I was in Zeeland, a
strange illness overcame me such as I never heard of from
anyone, and this illness I have still. I paid 6 stivers for
a case. The monk has bound two books for me for the prints
which I gave him. I have given 10 florins, 8 stivers for a
piece of arras for two mantles for my mother-in-law and my
wife. I gave the doctor 8 stivers, and 3 stivers to the
apothecary, also changed 1 florin for expenses and spent 3
stivers in company. Paid the doctor 10 stivers; again paid
the doctor 6 stivers.

During my illness Rodrigo sent me many sweetmeats; I gave
the boy 4 stivers for a tip. I have drawn Master Joachim
[Patinir] in silverpoint, and made him besides another
likeness in silverpoint. Again changed a crown for expenses,
and again 1 florin for expenses. Paid the doctor 6 stivers,
and 7 stivers at the apothecary's; changed 1 florin for
expenses. For packing the third bale, which I sent from
Antwerp to Nuremberg by a carrier called Hans Staber, I paid
13 stivers, and I paid the carrier 1 florin for it, and I
agreed with him to take it from Antwerp to Nuremberg for 1
florin, I ort, per cwt., and this bale is to be taken to
Herr Hans Imhof, the elder. I have paid the doctor, the
apothecary, and the barber 14 stivers. I gave Master Jacob,
the surgeon, 4 florins' worth of prints. I have made a
portrait in charcoal of Thomas Polonius of Rome.

My camlet cloak came to twenty-one Brabant ells, which are
three finger-breadths longer than the Nuremberg ells. I have
also bought four black  Spanish skins, which cost 3 stivers
each, and they come to 34, that makes 10 florins, 2 stivers;
I paid the skinner [furrier] 1 florin to make them up, then
there were two ells of velvet for trimming, 5 florins; also
for silk cord and thread, 34 stivers; then the tailor's
wage, 30 stivers; the camlet which is in the cloak cost 14
1/2 florins, and the boy 5 stivers for a tip.

Cross Sunday after Easter; from this I start a fresh
account. Again paid the doctor 6 stivers; I have gained 53
stivers for works of art, and have taken them for expenses.
On Sunday before Holy Cross Week, Master Joachim [Patinir],
the good landscape painter, asked me to his wedding, and
showed me all honour; there I saw two beautiful plays, the
first was especially pious and devout. I again paid the
doctor 6 stivers, and have changed 1 florin for expenses.

On Sunday after Our Lord's Ascension, Master Dietrich, the
glass painter of Antwerp, invited me and asked many other
people to meet me, and especially among them Alexander, the
goldsmith, a rich, stately man, and we had a splendid
dinner, and they did me great honour. I have done in
charcoal the portrait of Master Marx, the goldsmith, who
lives at Bruges. I bought a broad cap for 36 stivers. I paid
Paul Geiger 1 florin to take my little chest to Nuremberg,
and 4 stivers for the letter. I have taken the portrait of
Ambrosius Hochstatter in charcoal, and I dined with him: I
have dined at least six times with Tomasin. I bought some
wooden dishes and platters for 3 stivers. I have given the
apothecary 12 stivers. I have given two books of the "Life
of Our Lady," one to the foreign surgeon, the other to
Marx's house servant; I also paid the doctor 8 stivers, and
gave 4 stivers for cleaning an old cap. Lost 4 stivers at
play; have given 2 florins for a new cap. I have changed the
old cap because it was clumsy, and have given 6 stivers more
for another.

Painted a portrait of the duke in oils: have made a very
fine and careful portrait in oils of the treasurer, Lorenz
Sterk; it was worth 25 florins. I presented it to him, and
in return he gave me 20 florins, and to Susanna 1 florin for
a tip. Likewise I painted the portrait of Jobst, my host,
very well and carefully in oils; he has now given me [the
portrait I did of him before?] and I have done his wife
again and painted her portrait in oils.

On the Friday before Whitsuntide, 1521, tidings came to me
at Antwerp that Martin Luther had been so treacherously
taken prisoner, for he trusted the Emperor Charles's herald,
who had been granted to him with the Imperial safe conduct,
but as soon as the herald had brought him near Eisenach, to
an unfriendly place, he said that he would not need him any
more and rode away. Immediately there appeared ten knights,
who treacherously carried off the pious man, who had been
betrayed; a man enlightened by the Holy Ghost, a follower of
Christ and of the true Christian faith, and whether he lives
yet or whether they have put him to death, I know not. If he
has suffered, it is for the sake of Christian truth and
because he has fought with the un-Christlike papacy, which
strives with its heavy load of human laws against the
redemption of Christ; and if so, it is that we may be again
robbed and stripped of the fruit of our blood and sweat,
that the same may be shamelessly and scandalously squandered
while poor and sick men must therefore die of hunger. And
this is above all most grievous to me, that God perhaps will
let us remain yet under their false, blind doctrine,
invented and set forth by the men whom they call "Fathers,"
through whom the Word of God is in many places falsely
expounded or not taught at all.

[Editor's note: This form of abduction was the usual idea at
the time.  But Luther was really taken by the order of
Frederick the Wise in order to protect him].

O God of Heaven, have pity on us, O Lord Jesus Christ, pray
for Thy people. Deliver us in due time, uphold in us the
right and true Christian Faith. Gather together Thy far
scattered sheep by Thy voice, in the Scripture called Thy
godly Word. Help us that we may know this Thy voice and may
follow no other deceiving call of human error, that we may
not, Lord Jesus Christ, fall away from Thee. Call together
again the sheep of Thy pasture, who are still in part found
in the Roman Church, and with them, too, the Indians,
Muscovites, Russians, and Greeks, who have been thus cut off
by the oppression and pride of the pope and by false
appearance of holiness.

O God, redeem thy poor folk constrained by heavy ban and
edict which it no wise willingly obeys, whereby it is bound
continually to sin against its conscience if it disobeys
them. O God, never hast Thou so heavily burdened a people
under human laws as us poor ones beneath the Roman chair,
who daily long to be free Christians ransomed by Thy blood.

O Highest Heavenly Father, pour into our hearts through Thy
Son Jesus Christ such a light, that we may know thereby
which messenger we are to obey, so that with good conscience
we may lay aside the burdens of others, and may serve Thee,
Eternal Heavenly Father, with free and joyful heart.

And if we lose this man, who has written more clearly than
anyone in a hundred and forty years, and to whom Thou hast
given such an evangelic spirit, we pray Thee, O Heavenly
Father, that Thou give again Thy spirit to another, that he
may gather together anew from all parts the holy Christian
Church, that we may all live again in a pure and Christian
manner, so that from our good works all unbelievers, with
Turks, heathens, and Calicuts, may turn themselves to us and
embrace the Christian faith.

But, Lord, Thou willest, ere Thou judgest, that as Thy Son
Jesus Christ was constrained to die by the hands of the
priests and rise from the dead and after to ascend to
heaven, that so too, in like manner, it should be with Thy
follower, Martin Luther, whose life the pope compasses, with
money, treacherously towards God, him, Thou wilt quicken
again. And as Thou, Lord, ordainedst that Jerusalem should
be destroyed, so wilt Thou also destroy this self-assumed
authority of the Roman chair. O lord, give us thereafter the
new beautified Jerusalem, which descends from heaven,
whereof the Apocalypse writes, the holy pure gospel which is
not darkened by human doctrine.

Whoever reads Martin Luther's books may see how clear and
transparent his doctrine is, for he teaches the Holy Gospel.
Wherefore his writings are to be held in the greatest
honour, and not to be burned; unless, indeed, his opponents,
who always fight against the truth, were also cast into the
fire with all their opinions, they who would make gods out
of men, but then only if there were printed new Lutheran
books.

"O God, if Luther be dead, who will henceforth expound the
Holy Gospel so clearly to us! Ah, God, what might he not
have written for us in the next ten or twenty years!" Oh,
all ye pious Christian men, help me to lament this God-
inspired man and pray to Him that He will send us another
enlightened man.

Oh, Erasmus of Rotterdam, where wilt thou stay? Dost thou
see how the unjust tyranny of worldly power and the might of
darkness prevail? Hear, thou knight of Christ, ride on
beside the Lord Jesus; guard the truth, win the martyr's
crown! Thou art already only a little old man, and I have
heard thee say that thou givest thyself but two years more
in which thou mayest avail to accomplish something. Lay out
the same now well for the gospel and the true Christian
Faith and make thyself heard, so shall the gates of hell,
the Roman Chair, as Christ says, in no wise prevail against
thee: and if here, like thy Master Christ, thou were to
suffer shame at the hands of the liars of this time and
therefore were to die a little sooner, the sooner wouldst
thou come from death into life and be glorified through
Christ. For if thou drinkest out of the cup whereof He
drank, with Him thou shalt reign, and judge with justice
those who have dealt unrighteously.

Oh, Erasmus, hold to this, that God may be thy praise, even
as it is written of David, for verily thou mayest overthrow
Goliath. For God stands by the Holy Christian Church, as He
only upholds the Romish Church according to His Godly will
[text here corrupt]. May He help us to everlasting
happiness, Who is God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, one God, Amen.

Oh, ye Christian men, pray God for help, for His judgment
draws near and His justice shall appear. Then shall we
behold the innocent blood which the pope, priests, bishops,
and monks have shed, judged and condemned.

Apocalypse: "These are the slain who lie beneath the altar
of God and cry for vengeance, to whom the voice of God
answers, Await the full number of the innocent slain, then
will I judge."

Again changed 1 florin for expenses, and gave the doctor 8
stivers; dined twice with Rodrigo; dined with the rich
canon; changed 1 florin for expenses. I had Master Conrad,
the sculptor of Mechlin, as a guest on Whitsunday; paid 18
stivers for Italian prints: again 6 stivers to the doctor.
For Master Joachim I have drawn four "St. Christophers" on
gray paper, heightened with white.

On the last day of Whitsuntide I was at Antwerp at the great
yearly horsefair; there I saw a great number of beautiful
stallions ridden, and two stallions in particular were sold
for 700 florins. I have taken 1 florin, 3 ort, for prints
and used the money for expenses; 4 stivers to the doctor, 3
stivers for two little books. I have dined thrice with
Tomasin. I have designed three dagger grips for him, and he
gave me a small alabaster bowl. I have taken the portrait in
charcoal of an English nobleman, who gave me 1 florin which
I changed for expenses. Master Gerhardt, the miniature
painter, has a daughter about eighteen years old, called
Susanna, who has illuminated a little page with a Saviour,
for which I gave her 1 florin. It is very wonderful that a
woman's picture should be so good. Have lost 6 stivers at
play. I saw the great procession at Antwerp on Holy Trinity
Day. Master Conrad has given me a beautiful pair of knives,
and so I gave his little old man a "Life of Our Lady" in
return. I have taken the portrait in charcoal of Johann, the
Brussels goldsmith, likewise his wife's. I have received 2
florins for prints, also Master Johann, the Brussels
goldsmith, paid me 3 Philip's florins for what I did for
him, namely, the drawing for the seal and the two portraits.

I have given the "Veronica" which I painted in oils, and the
"Adam and Eve" that Franz did to Johann, the goldsmith, in
return for a jacinth and an agate with a Lucrecia engraved
in it. Each of us valued his portion at 14 florins. Further,
I gave him a whole set of engravings for a ring and six
stones; each valued his portion at 7 florins. Gave 14
stivers for two pairs of gloves; gave 2 stivers for two
small boxes; changed 2 Philip's florins for expenses. I drew
three "Bearing of the Cross" and two "Mount of Olives" on
five half-sheets. I have taken three portraits in black and
white on gray paper; also I drew in black and white on gray
paper, two Netherlandish costumes. For the Englishman I have
painted his arms in colours, for which he gave me 1 florin.
Besides this, one way and another, I have done many drawings
and other things to serve people, and for the greater part
of my work I have received nothing. Andreas of Cracow paid
me 1 Philip's florin for a shield and a child's head.
Changed 1 florin for expenses. Have given 2 stivers for
sweeping brushes. At Antwerp I saw the great procession on
Corpus Christi Day, which was very splendid. Gave in the 4
stivers for a tip and 6 stivers to the doctor; changed 1
florin for expenses; 1 stiver for a box. Have dined five
times with Tomasin; paid 10 stivers to the apothecary and to
his wife 14 stivers for the clyster, and 15 stivers to him
for the prescription. Again changed 2 Philip's florins for
expenses; 6 stivers again to the doctor, and once more 10
stivers for a clyster to the apothecary's wife, and 4
stivers to the apothecary. I gave the monk who confessed my
wife 8 stivers. I have given 8 florins for a whole piece of
arras, and again for fourteen ells of fine arras, 8 florins:
the apothecary 32 stivers for medicines; to the messenger I
have given 3 stivers and the tailor 4 stivers. I have dined
once with Hans Fehler, and thrice with Tomasin. Gave 10
stivers for packing.

On the Wednesday after Corpus Christi in the year 1521, I
gave over my great bale at Antwerp to be sent to Nuremberg,
to the carrier, by name Kunz Metz of Schlaudersdorf, and I
am to pay him for carrying it to Nuremberg 1 1/2 florins for
every cwt., and I paid him 1 gulden on account, and he is to
hand it over to Herr Hans Imhof, the elder. I have done the
portrait of young Jacob Rehlinger at Antwerp; have dined
three times with Tomasin.

On the eighth day after Corpus Christi I went with my wife
to Mechlin to Lady Margaret; took 5 florins with me for
expenses; my wife changed 1 florin for expenses. At Mechlin
I lodged with Master Heinrich, the painter, at the sign of
the Golden Head. The painters and sculptors made me their
guest at my inn, and did me great honour in their gathering;
and I visited the Poppenreuter's, the gun-maker's house, and
found wonderful things there. And I have been to Lady
Margaret's, and I let her see my Kaiser, and would have
presented it to her, but she disliked it so much that I took
it away again. And on Friday Lady Margaret showed me all her
beautiful things, and among them I saw about forty small
pictures in oils, the like of which for cleanness and
excellence I have never seen. And there I saw other good
works by Jan [Van Eyck] and Jacopo [de' Barbari]. I asked my
lady for Jacopo's little book, but she said she had promised
it to her painter; then I saw many other costly things and a
fine library. Master Hans Poppenreuter invited me as his
guest. I have had Master Conrad twice, and his wife once, as
my guests, also the chamberlain Stephen and his wife, both
as guests. 27 stivers and 2 stivers for fare. I have taken
in charcoal the portrait of Stephen, the chamberlain, and
Master Conrad, the carver, and on Saturday I came back from
Mechlin to Antwerp. My trunk started on the Saturday after
Corpus Christi week. Changed 1 florin for expenses, gave the
messenger 3 stivers. Dined twice with the Augustines; dined
with Alexander Imhof; paid 6 stivers at the apothecary's;
dined again with the Augustines.

I have drawn in charcoal Master Jacob, and had a little
panel made for it, which cost 6 stivers, and gave it to him.
I have done the portrait of Bernhard Stecher and his wife,
and gave him a whole set of prints, and I took his wife's
portrait again, and gave 6 stivers for making the little
panel, all of which I gave him, and he in return gave me 10
florins.

Master Lucas, who engraves in copper, invited me as his
guest. He is a little man, born at Leyden, in Holland, and
was at Antwerp. I have eaten with Master Bernhard Stecher.
Gave 1 1/2 stivers to the messenger; have taken 1 florin, 1
ort, for prints. I have drawn Master Lucas von Leyden in
silverpoint. I have lost 1 florin; paid the doctor 6 s