nst it.*
The abolition of slavery was at first an individual matter or a
church or a state policy. When the Constitution was formulated,
the separate States had been accustomed to regard themselves as
possessed of sovereign powers; hence there was no occasion for
the citizens of one State to have a sense of responsibility on
account of the domestic institutions of other States. The
consciousness of national responsibility was of slow growth, and
the conditions did not then exist which favored a general crusade
against slavery or a prolonged acrimonious debate on the subject,
such as arose forty years later.

* In the case of Georgia there was a prohibitory law, which was
disregarded.

In many of the States, however, there were organized abolition
societies, whose object was to promote the cause of emancipation
already in progress and to protect the rights of free negroes.
The Friends, or Quakers, were especially active in the promotion
of a propaganda for universal emancipation. A petition which was
presented to the first Congress in February, 1790, with the
signature of Benjamin Franklin as President of the Pennsylvania
Abolition Society, contained this concluding paragraph

"From a persuasion that equal liberty was originally, and is
still, the birthright of all men, and influenced by the strong
ties of humanity and the principles of their institutions, your
memorialists conceive themselves bound to use all justifiable
endeavors to loosen the bonds of slavery, and to promote the
general enjoyment of the blessings of freedom. Under these
impressions they earnestly entreat your attention to the subject
of slavery; that you will be pleased to countenance the
restoration to liberty of those unhappy men, who, alone, in this
land of freemen, are groaning in servile subjection; that you
will devise means for removing this inconsistency of character
from the American people; that you will promote mercy and justice
towards this distressed race; and that you will step to the very
verge of the power vested in you for discouraging every species
of traffic in the persons of our fellowmen."*

* William Goodell, "Slavery and Anti-Slavery," p. 99.

The memorialists were treated with profound respect. Cordial
support and encouragement came from representatives from Virginia
and other slave States. Opposition was expressed by members from
South Carolina and Georgia. These for the most part relied upon
their constitutional guaranties. But for these guaranties, said
Smith, of South Carolina, his State would not have entered the
Union. In the extreme utterances in opposition to the petition
there is a suggestion of the revolution which was to occur forty
years later.

Active abolitionists who gave time and money to the promotion of
the cause were always few in numbers. Previous to 1830 abolition
societies resembled associations for the prevention of cruelty to
animals--in fact, in one instance at least this was made one of
the professed objects. These societies labored to induce men to
act in harmony with generally acknowledged obligations, and they
had no occasion for violence or persecution. Abolitionists were
distinguished for their benevolence and their unselfish devotion
to the interests of the needy and the unfortunate. It was only
when the ruling classes resorted to mob violence and began to
defend slavery as a divinely ordained institution that there was
a radical change in the spirit of the controversy. The
irrepressible conflict between liberty and despotism which has
persisted in all ages became manifest when slave-masters
substituted the Greek doctrine of inequality and slavery for the
previously accepted Christian doctrine of equality and universal
brotherhood.



CHAPTER II. THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE CRUSADE

It was a mere accident that the line drawn by Mason and Dixon
between Pennsylvania and Maryland became known in later years as
the dividing line between slavery and freedom. The six States
south of that line ultimately neglected or refused to abolish
slavery, while the seven Northern States became free. Vermont
became a State in 1791 and Kentucky in 1792. The third State to
be added to the original thirteen was Tennessee in 1796. At that
time, counting the States as they were finally classified, eight
were destined to be slave and eight free. Ohio entered the Union
as a State in 1802, thus giving to the free States a majority of
one. The balance, however, was restored in 1812 by the admission
of Louisiana as a slave State. The admission of Indiana in 1816
on the one side and of Mississippi in 1817 on the other still
maintained the balance: ten free States stood against ten slave
States. During the next two years Illinois and Alabama were
admitted, making twenty-two States in all, still evenly divided.

The ordinance for the government of the territory north of the
Ohio River, passed in 1787 and reenacted by Congress after the
adoption of the Constitution, proved to be an act of great
significance in its relation to the limitation of slavery. By
this ordinance slavery was forever prohibited in the Northwest
Territory. In the territory south of the Ohio River slavery
became permanently established. The river, therefore, became an
extension of the original Mason and Dixon's Line with the new
meaning attached: it became a division between free and slave
territory.

It was apparently at first a mere matter of chance that a balance
was struck between the two losses of States. While Virginia
remained a slave State, it was natural that slavery should extend
into Kentucky, which had been a part of Virginia. Likewise
Tennessee, being a part of North Carolina, became slave
territory. When these two Territories became slave States, the
equal division began. There was yet an abundance of territory
both north and south to be taken into the Union and, without any
special plan or agitation, States were admitted in pairs, one
free and the other slave. In the meantime there was distinctly
developed the idea of the possible or probable permanence of
slavery in the South and of a rivalry or even a future conflict
between the two sections.

When in 1819 Missouri applied for admission to the Union with a
state constitution permitting slavery, there was a prolonged
debate over the whole question, not only in Congress but
throughout the entire country. North and South were distinctly
pitted against each other with rival systems of labor. The
following year Congress passed a law providing for the admission
of Missouri, but, to restore the balance, Maine was separated
from Massachusetts and was admitted to the Union as a State. It
was further enacted that slavery should be forever prohibited
from all territory of the United States north of the parallel 36
degrees 30', that is, north of the southern boundary of Missouri.
It is this part of the act which is known as the Missouri
Compromise. It was accepted as a permanent limitation of the
institution of slavery. By this act Mason and Dixon's Line was
extended through the Louisiana Purchase. As the western boundary
was then defined, slavery could still be extended into Arkansas
and into a part of what is now Oklahoma, while a great empire to
the northwest was reserved for the formation of free States.
Arkansas became a slave State in 1836 and Michigan was admitted
as a free State in the following year.

With the admission of Arkansas and Michigan, thirteen slave
States were balanced by a like number of free States. The South
still had Florida, which would in time become a slave State.
Against this single Territory there was an immense region to the
northwest, equal in area to all the slave States combined, which,
according to the Ordinance of 1787 and the Missouri Compromise,
had been consecrated to freedom. Foreseeing this condition, a few
Southern planters began a movement for the extension of territory
to the south and west immediately after the adoption of the
Missouri Compromise. When Arkansas was admitted in 1836, there
was a prospect of the immediate annexation of Texas as a slave
State. This did not take place until nine years later, but the
propaganda, the object of which was the extension of slave
territory, could not be maintained by those Who contended that
slavery was a curse to the country. Virginia, therefore, and
other border slave States, as they became committed to the policy
of expansion, ceased to tolerate official public utterances
against slavery.

Three more or less clearly defined sections appear in the later
development of the crusade. These are the New England States, the
Middle States, and the States south of North Carolina and
Tennessee. In New England, few negroes were ever held as slaves,
and the institution disappeared during the first years of the
Republic. The inhabitants had little experience arising from
actual contact with slavery. When slavery disappeared from New
England and before there had been developed in the country at
large a national feeling of responsibility for its continued
existence, interest in the subject declined. For twenty years
previous to the founding of Garrison's Liberator in 1831,
organized abolition movements had been almost unknown in New
England. In various ways the people were isolated, separated from
contact with slavery. Their knowledge of this subject of
discussion was academic, theoretical, acquired at second-hand.

In New York and New Jersey slaves were much more numerous than in
New England. There were still slaves in considerable numbers
until about 1825. The people had a knowledge of the institution
from experience and observation, and there was no break in the
continuity of their organized abolition societies. Chief among
the objects of these societies was the effort to prevent
kidnapping and to guard the rights of free negroes. For both of
these purposes there was a continuous call for activity.
Pennsylvania also had freedmen of her own whose rights called for
guardianship, as well as many freedmen from farther south who had
come into the State.

The movement of protest and protection did not stop at Mason and
Dixon's Line, but extended far into the South. In both North
Carolina and Tennessee an active protest against slavery was at
all times maintained. In this great middle section of the
country, between New England and South Carolina, there was no
cessation in the conflict between free and slave labor. Some of
these States became free while others remained slave; but between
the people of the two sections there was continuous
communication. Slaveholders came into free States to liberate
their slaves. Non-slaveholders came to get rid of the competition
of slave labor, and free negroes came to avoid reenslavement.
Slaves fled thither on their way to liberty. It was not a matter
of choice; it was an unavoidable condition which compelled the
people of the border States to give continuous attention to the
institution of slavery.

The modern anti-slavery movement had its origin in this great
middle section, and from the same source it derived its chief
support. The great body of active abolitionists were from the
slave States or else derived their inspiration from personal
contact with slavery. As compared with New England abolitionists,
the middlestate folk were less extreme in their views. They had a
keener appreciation of the difficulties involved in emancipation.
They were more tolerant towards the idea of letting the country
at large share the burdens involved in the liberation of the
slaves. Border-state abolitionists naturally favored the policy
of gradual emancipation which had been followed in New York, New
Jersey, and Pennsylvania. Abolitionists who continued to reside
in the slave States were forced to recognize the fact that
emancipation involved serious questions of race adjustment. From
the border States came the colonization society, a characteristic
institution, as well as compromise of every variety.

The southernmost section, including South Carolina, Georgia, and
the Gulf States, was even more sharply defined in the attitude it
assumed toward the anti-slavery movement. At no time did the
cause of emancipation become formidable in this section. In all
these States there was, of course, a large class of
non-slaveholding whites, who were opposed to slavery and who
realized that they were victims of an injurious system; but they
had no effective organ for expression. The ruling minority gained
an early and an easy victory and to the end held a firm hand. To
the inhabitants of this section it appeared to be a self-evident
truth that the white race was born to rule and the black race was
born to serve. Where negroes outnumbered the whites fourfold, the
mere suggestion of emancipation raised a race question which
seemed appalling in its proportions. Either in the Union or out
of the Union, the rulers were determined to perpetuate slavery.

Slavery as an economic institution became dependent upon a few
semitropical plantation crops. When the Constitution was framed,
rice and indigo, produced in South Carolina and Georgia, were the
two most important. Indigo declined in relative importance, and
the production of sugar was developed, especially after the
annexation of the Louisiana Purchase. But by far the most
important crop for its effects upon slavery and upon the entire
country was cotton. This single product finally absorbed the
labor of half the slaves of the entire country. Mr. Rhodes is not
at all unreasonable in his surmise that, had it not been for the
unforeseen development of the cotton industry, the expectation of
the founders of the Republic that slavery would soon disappear
would actually have been realized.

It was more difficult to carry out a policy of emancipation when
slaves were quoted in the market at a thousand dollars than when
the price was a few hundred dollars. All slave-owners felt
richer; emancipation appeared to involve a greater sacrifice.
Thus the cotton industry went far towards accounting for the
changed attitude of the entire country on the subject of slavery.
The North as well as the South became financially interested.

It was not generally perceived before it actually happened that
the border States would take the place of Africa in furnishing
the required supply of laborers for Southern plantations. The
interstate slave-trade gave to the system a solidarity of
interest which was new. All slave-owners became partakers of a
common responsibility for the system as a whole. It was the newly
developed trade quite as much as the system of slavery itself
which furnished the ground for the later anti-slavery appeal. The
consciousness of a common guilt for the sin of slavery grew with
the increase of actual interstate relations.

The abolition of the African slave-trade was an act of the
general Government. Congress passed the prohibitory statute in
1807, to go into effect January, 1808. At no time, however, was
the prohibition entirely effective, and a limited illegal trade
continued until slavery was eventually abolished. This
inefficiency of restraint furnished another point of attack for
the abolitionists. Through efforts to suppress the African
slave-trade, the entire country became conscious of a common
responsibility. Before the Revolutionary War, Great Britain had
been censured for forcing cheap slaves from Africa upon her
unwilling colonies. After the Revolution, New England was blamed
for the activity of her citizens in this nefarious trade both
before and after it was made illegal. All of this tended to
increase the sense of responsibility in every section of the
country. Congress had made the foreign slave-trade illegal; and
citizens in all sections gradually became aware of the
possibility that Congress might likewise restrict or forbid
interstate commerce in slaves.

The West Indies and Mexico were also closely associated with the
United States in the matter of slavery. When Jamestown was
founded, negro slavery was already an old institution in the
islands of the Caribbean Sea, and thence came the first slaves to
Virginia. The abolition of slavery in the island of Hayti, or San
Domingo, was accomplished during the French Revolution and the
Napoleonic Wars. As incidental to the process of emancipation,
the Caucasian inhabitants were massacred or banished, and a
republican government was established, composed exclusively of
negroes and mulattoes. From the date of the Missouri Compromise
to that of the Mexican War, this island was united under a single
republic, though it was afterwards divided into the two republics
of Hayti and San Domingo.

The "horrors of San Domingo" were never absent from the minds of
those in the United States who lived in communities composed
chiefly of slaves. What had happened on the island was accepted
by Southern planters as proof that the two races could live
together in peace only under the relation of master and slave,
and that emancipation boded the extermination of one race or the
other. Abolitionists, however, interpreted the facts differently:
they emphasized the tyranny of the white rulers as a primary
cause of the massacres; they endowed some of the negro leaders
with the highest qualities of statesmanship and self-sacrificing
generosity; and Wendell Phillips, in an impassioned address which
he delivered in 1861, placed on the honor roll above the chief
worthies of history--including Cromwell and Washington Toussaint
L'Ouverture, the liberator of Hayti, whom France had betrayed and
murdered.

Abolitionists found support for their position in the contention
that other communities had abolished slavery without such
accompanying horrors as occurred in Hayti and without serious
race conflict. Slavery had run its course in Spanish America, and
emancipation accompanied or followed the formation of independent
republics. In 1833 all slaves in the British Empire were
liberated, including those in the important island of Jamaica. So
it happened that, just at the time when Southern leaders were
making up their minds to defend their peculiar institution at all
hazards, they were beset on every side by the spirit of
emancipation. Abolitionists, on the other hand, were fully
convinced that the attainment of some form of emancipation in the
United States was certain, and that, either peaceably or through
violence, the slaves would ultimately be liberated.



CHAPTER III. EARLY CRUSADERS

At the time when the new cotton industry was enhancing the value
of slave labor, there arose from the ranks of the people those
who freely consecrated their all to the freeing of the slave.
Among these, Benjamin Lundy, a New Jersey Quaker, holds a
significant place.

Though the Society of Friends fills a large place in the
anti-slavery movement, its contribution to the growth of the
conception of equality is even more significant. This impetus to
the idea arises from a fundamental Quaker doctrine, announced at
the middle of the seventeenth century, to the erect that God
reveals Himself to mankind, not through any priesthood or
specially chosen agents; not through any ordinance, form, or
ceremony; not through any church or institution; not through any
book or written record of any sort; but directly, through His
Spirit, to each person. This direct enlightening agency they
deemed coextensive with humanity; no race and no individual is
left without the ever-present illuminating Spirit. If men of old
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit, what they spoke or
wrote can furnish no reliable guidance to the men of a later
generation, except as their minds also are enlightened by the
same Spirit in the same way. "The letter killeth; it is the
Spirit that giveth life."

This doctrine in its purity and simplicity places all men and all
races on an equality; all are alike ignorant and imperfect; all
are alike in their need of the more perfect revelation yet to be
made. Master and slave are equal before God; there can be no such
relation, therefore, except by doing violence to a personality,
to a spiritual being. In harmony with this fundamental principle,
the Society of Friends early rid itself of all connection with
slavery. The Friends' Meeting became a refuge for those who were
moved by the Spirit to testify against slavery.

Born in 1789 in a State which was then undergoing the process of
emancipating its slaves, Benjamin Lundy moved at the age of
nineteen to Wheeling, West Virginia, which had already become the
center of an active domestic slave-trade. The pious young Quaker,
now apprenticed to a saddler, was brought into personal contact
with this traffic in human flesh. He felt keenly the national
disgrace of the iniquity. So deep did the iron enter into his
soul that never again did he find peace of mind except in efforts
to relieve the oppressed. Like hundreds and thousands of others,
Lundy was led on to active opposition to the trade by an actual
knowledge of the inhumanity of the business as prosecuted before
his eyes and by his sympathy for human suffering.

His apprenticeship ended, Lundy was soon established in a
prosperous business in an Ohio village not far from Wheeling.
Though he now lived in a free State, the call of the oppressed
was ever in his ears and he could not rest. He drew together a
few of his neighbors, and together they organized the Union
Humane Society, whose object was the relief of those held in
bondage. In a few months the society numbered several hundred
members, and Lundy issued an address to the philanthropists of
the whole country, urging them to unite in like manner with
uniform constitutions, and suggesting that societies so formed
adopt a policy of correspondence and cooperation. At about the
same time, Lundy began to publish anti-slavery articles in the
Mount Pleasant Philanthropist and other papers.

In 1819 he went on a business errand to St. Louis, Missouri,
where he found himself in the midst of an agitation over the
question of the extension of slavery in the States. With great
zest he threw himself into the discussion, making use of the
newspapers in Missouri and Illinois. Having lost his property, he
returned poverty-stricken to Ohio, where he founded in January,
1821, the Genius of Universal Emancipation. A few months later he
transferred his paper to the more congenial atmosphere of
Jonesborough, Tennessee, but in 1824 he went to Baltimore,
Maryland. In the meantime, Lundy had become much occupied in
traveling, lecturing, and organizing societies for the promotion
of the cause of abolition. He states that during the ten years
previous to 1830 he had traveled upwards of twenty-five thousand
miles, five thousand of which were on foot. He now became
interested in plans for colonizing negroes in other countries as
an aid to emancipation, though he himself had no confidence in
the colonization society and its scheme of deportation to Africa.
After leading a few negroes to Hayti in 1829, he visited Canada,
Texas, and Mexico with a similar plan in view.

During a trip through the Middle States and New England in 1828,
Lundy met William Lloyd Garrison, and the following year he
walked all the way from Baltimore to Bennington, Vermont, for the
express purpose of securing the assistance of the youthful
reformer as coeditor of his paper. Garrison had previously
favored colonization, but within the few weeks which elapsed
before he joined Lundy, he repudiated all forms of colonization
and advocated immediate and unconditional emancipation. He at
once told Lundy of his change of views. "Well," said Lundy, "thee
may put thy initials to thy articles, and I will put my witness
to mine, and each will bear his own burden." The two editors
were, however, in complete accord in their opposition to the
slave-trade. Lundy had suffered a dangerous assault at the hands
of a Baltimore slave-trader before he was joined by Garrison.
During the year 1830, Garrison was convicted of libel and thrown
into prison on account of his scathing denunciation of Francis
Todd of Massachusetts, the owner of a vessel engaged in the
slave-trade.

These events brought to a crisis the publication of the Genius of
Universal Emancipation. The editors now parted company. Again
Lundy moved the office of the paper, this time to Washington,
D.C., but it soon became a peripatetic monthly, printed wherever
the editor chanced to be. In 1836 Lundy began the issue of an
anti-slavery paper in Philadelphia, called the National Inquirer,
and with this was merged the Genius of Universal Emancipation. He
was preparing to resume the issue of his original paper under the
old title, in La Salle County, Illinois, when he was overtaken by
death on August 22, 1839.

Here was a man without education, without wealth, of a slight
frame, not at all robust, who had undertaken, singlehanded and
without the shadow of a doubt of his ultimate success, to abolish
American slavery. He began the organization of societies which
were to displace the anti-slavery societies of the previous
century. He established the first paper devoted exclusively to
the cause of emancipation. He foresaw that the question of
emancipation must be carried into politics and that it must
become an object of concern to the general Government as well as
to the separate States. In the early part of his career he found
the most congenial association and the larger measure of
effective support south of Mason and Dixon's Line, and in this
section were the greater number of the abolition societies which
he organized. During the later years of his life, as it was
becoming increasingly difficult in the South to maintain a public
anti-slavery propaganda, he transferred his chief activities to
the North. Lundy serves as a connecting link between the earlier
and the later anti-slavery movements. Eleven years of his early
life belong to the century of the Revolution. Garrison recorded
his indebtedness to Lundy in the words: "If I have in any way,
however humble, done anything towards calling attention to
slavery, or bringing out the glorious prospect of a complete
jubilee in our country at no distant day, I feel that I owe
everything in this matter, instrumentally under God, to Benjamin
Lundy."

Different in type, yet even more significant on account of its
peculiar relations to the cause of abolition, was the life of
James Gillespie Birney, who was born in a wealthy slaveholding
family at Dansville, Kentucky, in the year 1792. The Birneys were
anti-slavery planters of the type of Washington and Jefferson.
The father had labored to make Kentucky a free State at the time
of its admission to the Union. His son was educated first at
Princeton, where he graduated in 1810, and then in the office of
a distinguished lawyer in Philadelphia. He began the practice of
law at his home at the age of twenty-two. His home training and
his residence in States which were then in the process of gradual
emancipation served to confirm him in the traditional conviction
of his family. While Benjamin Lundy, at the age of twenty-seven,
was engaged in organizing anti-slavery societies north of the
Ohio River, Birney at the age of twenty-four was influential as a
member of the Kentucky Legislature in the prevention of the
passing of a joint resolution calling upon Ohio and Indiana to
make laws providing for the return of fugitive slaves. He was
also conspicuous in his efforts to secure provisions for gradual
emancipation. Two years later he became a planter near
Huntsville, Alabama. Though not a member of the Constitutional
Convention preparatory to the admission of this Territory into
the Union, Birney used his influence to secure provisions in the
constitution favorable to gradual emancipation. As a member of
the first Legislature, in 1819, he was the author of a law
providing a fair trial by jury for slaves indicted for crimes
above petty larceny, and in 1826 he became a regular contributor
to the American Colonization Society, believing it to be an aid
to emancipation. The following year he was able to induce the
Legislature, although he was not then a member of it, to pass an
act forbidding the importation of slaves into Alabama either for
sale or for hire. This was regarded as a step preliminary to
emancipation.

The cause of education in Alabama had in Birney a trusted leader.
During the year 1830 he spent several months in the North
Atlantic States for the selection of a president and four
professors for the State University and three teachers for the
Huntsville Female Seminary. These were all employed upon his sole
recommendation. On his return he had an important interview with
Henry Clay, of whose political party he had for several years
been the acknowledged leader in Alabama. He urged Clay to place
himself at the head of the movement in Kentucky for gradual
emancipation. Upon Clay's refusal their political cooperation
terminated. Birney never again supported Clay for office and
regarded him as in a large measure responsible for the
pro-slavery reaction in Kentucky.

Birney, who had now become discouraged regarding the prospect of
emancipation, during the winter of 1831 and 1832 decided to
remove his family to Jacksonville, Illinois. He was deterred from
carrying out his plan, however, by his unexpected appointment as
agent of the colonization society in the Southwest--a mission
which he undertook from a sense of duty.

In his travels throughout the region assigned to him, Birney
became aware of the aggressive designs of the planters of the
Gulf States to secure new slave territories in the Southwest. In
view of these facts the methods of the colonization society
appeared utterly futile. Birney surrendered his commission and,
in 1833, returned to Kentucky with the intention of doing himself
what Henry Clay had refused to do three years earlier, still
hoping that Kentucky, Virginia, and Tennessee might be induced to
abolish slavery and thus place the slave power in a hopeless
minority. His disappointment was extreme at the pro-slavery
reaction which had taken place in Kentucky. The condition called
for more drastic measures, and Birney decided to forsake entirely
the colonization society and cast in his lot with the
abolitionists. He freed his slaves in 1834, and in the following
year he delivered the principal address at the annual meeting of
the American Anti-Slavery Society held in New York. His gift of
leadership was at once recognized. As vice-president of the
society he began to travel on its behalf, to address public
assemblies, and especially to confer with members of state
legislatures and to address the legislative bodies. He now
devoted his entire time to the service of the society, and as
early as September, 1835, issued the prospectus of a paper
devoted to the cause of emancipation. This called forth such a
display of force against the movement that he could neither find
a printer nor obtain the use of a building in Dansville,
Kentucky, for the publication. As a result he transferred his
activities to Cincinnati, where he began publication of the
Philanthropist in 1836. With the connivance of the authorities
and encouragement from leading citizens of Cincinnati, the office
of the Philanthropist was three times looted by the mob, and the
proprietor's life was greatly endangered. The paper, however,
rapidly grew in favor and influence and thoroughly vindicated the
right of free discussion of the slavery question. Another editor
was installed when Birney, who became secretary of the Anti-
slavery Society in 1837, transferred his residence to New York
City.

Twenty-three years before Lincoln's famous utterance in which he
proclaimed the doctrine that a house divided against itself
cannot stand, and before Seward's declaration of an irrepressible
conflict between slavery and freedom, Birney had said: "There
will be no cessation of conflict until slavery shall be
exterminated or liberty destroyed. Liberty and slavery cannot
live in juxtaposition." He spoke out of the fullness of his own
experience. A thoroughly trained lawyer and statesman, well
acquainted with the trend of public sentiment in both North and
South, he was fully persuaded that the new pro-slavery crusade
against liberty boded civil war. He knew that the white men in
North and South would not, without a struggle, consent to be
permanently deprived of their liberties at the behest of a few
Southern planters. Being himself of the slaveholding class, he
was peculiarly fitted to appreciate their position. To him the
new issue meant war, unless the belligerent leaders should be
shown that war was hopeless. By his moderation in speech, his
candor in statement, his lack of rancor, his carefully
considered, thoroughly fair arguments, he had the rare faculty of
convincing opponents of the correctness of his own view.

There could be little sympathy between Birney and William Lloyd
Garrison, whose style of denunciation appeared to the former as
an incitement to war and an excuse for mob violence. As soon as
Birney became the accepted leader in the national society, there
was friction between his followers and those of Garrison. To
denounce the Constitution and repudiate political action were,
from Birney's standpoint, a surrender of the only hope of
forestalling a dire calamity. He had always fought slavery by the
use of legal and constitutional methods, and he continued so to
fight. In this policy he had the support of a large majority of
abolitionists in New England and elsewhere. Only a few personal
friends accepted Garrison's injunction to forswear politics and
repudiate the Constitution.

The followers of Birney, failing to secure recognition for their
views in either of the political parties, organized the Liberty
party and, while Birney was in Europe in 1840, nominated him as
their candidate for the Presidency. The vote which he received
was a little over seven thousand, but four years later he was
again the candidate of the party and received over sixty thousand
votes. He suffered an injury during the following year which
condemned him to hopeless invalidism and brought his public
career to an end.

Though Lundy and Birney were contemporaries and were engaged in
the same great cause, they were wholly independent in their work.
Lundy addressed himself almost entirely to the non-slaveholding
class, while all of Birney's early efforts were "those of a
slaveholder seeking to induce his own class to support the policy
of emancipation. Though a Northern man, Lundy found his chief
support in the South until he was driven out by persecution.
Birney also resided in the South until he was forced to leave for
the same reason. The two men were in general accord in their main
lines of policy: both believed firmly in the use of political
means to effect their objects; both were at first
colonizationists, though Lundy favored colonization in adjacent
territory rather than by deportation to Africa.

Women were not a whit behind men in their devotion to the cause
of freedom. Conspicuous among them were Sarah and Angelina
Grimke, born in Charleston, South Carolina, of a slaveholding
family noted for learning, refinement, and culture. Sarah was
born in the same year as James G. Birney, 1792; Angelina was
thirteen years younger. Angelina was the typical crusader: her
sympathies from the first were with the slave. As a child she
collected and concealed oil and other simple remedies so that she
might steal out by night and alleviate the sufferings of slaves
who had been cruelly whipped or abused. At the age of fourteen
she refused to be confirmed in the Episcopal Church because the
ceremony involved giving sanction to words which seemed to her
untrue. Two years later her mother offered her a present of a
slave girl for a servant and companion. This gift she refused to
accept, for in her view the servant had a right to be free, and,
as for her own needs, Angelina felt quite capable of waiting upon
herself.

Of her own free will she joined the Presbyterian Church and
labored earnestly with the officers of the church to induce them
to espouse the cause of the slave. When she failed to secure
cooperation, she decided that the church was not Christian and
she therefore withdrew her membership. Her sister Sarah had gone
North in 1821 and had become a member of the Society of Friends
in Philadelphia. In Charleston, South Carolina, there was a
Friends' meeting-house where two old Quakers still met at the
appointed time and sat for an hour in solemn silence. Angelina
donned the Quaker garb, joined this meeting, and for an entire
year was the third of the silent worshipers. This quiet
testimony, however, did not wholly satisfy her energetic nature,
and when, in 1830, she heard of the imprisonment of Garrison in
Baltimore, she was convinced that effective labors against
slavery could not be carried on in the South. With great sorrow
she determined to sever her connection with home and family and
join her sister in Philadelphia. There the exile from the South
poured out her soul in an Appeal to the Christian Women of the
South. The manuscript was handed to the officers of the Anti-
slavery Society in the city and, as they read, tears filled their
eyes. The Appeal was immediately printed in large quantities for
distribution in Southern States.

Copies of the Appeal which had been sent to Charleston were
seized by a mob and publicly burned. When it became known soon
afterwards that the author of the offensive document was
intending to return to Charleston to spend the winter with her
family, there was intense excitement, and the mayor of the city
informed the mother that her daughter would not be permitted to
land in Charleston nor to communicate with any one there, and
that, if she did elude the police and come ashore, she would be
imprisoned and guarded until the departure of the next boat. On
account of the distress which she would cause to her friends,
Miss Grimke reluctantly gave up the exercise of her
constitutional right to visit her native city and in a very
literal sense she became a permanent exile.

The two sisters let their light shine among Philadelphia Quakers.
In the religious meetings negro women were consigned to a special
seat. The Grimkes, having first protested against this
discrimination, took their own places on the seat with the
colored women. In Charleston, Angelina had scrupulously adhered
to the Quaker garb because it was viewed as a protest against
slavery. In Philadelphia, however, no such meaning was attached
to the costume, and she adopted clothing suited to the climate
regardless of conventions. A series of parlor talks to women
which had been organized by the sisters grew in interest until
the parlors became inadequate, and the speakers were at last
addressing large audiences of women in the public meeting-places
of Philadelphia.

At this time when Angelina was making effective use of her
unrivaled power as a public speaker, she received in 1836 an
invitation from the Anti-slavery Society of New York to address
the women of that city. She informed her sister that she believed
this to be a call from God and that it was her duty to accept.
Sarah decided to be her companion and assistant in the work in
the new field, which was similar to that in Philadelphia. Its
fame soon extended to Boston, whence came an urgent invitation to
visit that city. It was in Massachusetts that men began to steal
into the women's meetings and listen from the back seats. In Lynn
all barriers were broken down, and a modest, refined, and
naturally diffident young woman found herself addressing immense
audiences of men and women. In the old theater in Boston for six
nights in succession, audiences filling all the space listened
entranced to the messenger of emancipation. There is uniform
testimony that, in an age distinguished for oratory, no more
effective speaker appeared than Angelina Grimke. It was she above
all others who first vindicated the right of women to speak to
men from the public platform on political topics. But it must be
remembered that scores of other women were laboring to the same
end and were fully prepared to utilize the new opportunity.

The great world movement from slavery towards freedom, from
despotism to democracy, is characterized by a tendency towards
the equality of the sexes. Women have been slaves where men were
free. In barbarous ages women have been ignored or have been
treated as mere adjuncts to the ruling sex. But wherever there
has been a distinct contribution to the cause of liberty there
has been a distinct recognition of woman's share in the work. The
Society of Friends was organized on the principle that men and
women are alike moral beings, hence are equal in the sight of
God. As a matter of experience, women were quite as often moved
to break the silence of a religious meeting as were the men.

For two hundred years women had been accustomed to talk to both
men and women in Friends' meetings and, when the moral war
against slavery brought religion and politics into close
relation, they were ready speakers upon both topics. When the
Grimke sisters came into the church with a fresh baptism of the
Spirit, they overcame all obstacles and, with a passion for
righteousness, moral and spiritual and political, they carried
the war against slavery into politics.

In 1833, at the organization of the American Anti-Slavery Society
in Philadelphia, a number of women were present. Lucretia Mott, a
distinguished "minister" in the Society of Friends, took part in
the proceedings. She was careful to state that she spoke as a
mere visitor, having no place in the organization, but she
ventured to suggest various modifications in the report of
Garrison's committee on a declaration of principles which
rendered it more acceptable to the meeting. It had not then been
seriously considered whether women could become members of the
Anti-Slavery Society, which was at that time composed exclusively
of men, with the women maintaining their separate organizations
as auxiliaries.

The women of the West were already better organized than the men
and were doing a work which men could not do. They were, for the
most part, unconscious of any conflict between the peculiar
duties of men and those of women in their relations to common
objects. The "library associations" of Indiana, which were in
fact effective anti-slavery societies, were to a large extent
composed of women. To the library were added numerous other
disguises, such as "reading circles," "sewing societies,"
"women's clubs." In many communities the appearance of men in any
of these enterprises would create suspicion or even raise a mob.
But the women worked on quietly, effectively, and unnoticed.

The matron of a family would be provided with the best
riding-horse which the neighborhood could furnish. Mounted upon
her steed, she would sally forth in the morning, meet her
carefully selected friends in a town twenty miles away, gain
information as to what had been accomplished, give information as
to the work in other parts of the district, distribute new
literature, confer as to the best means of extending their
labors, and return in the afternoon. The father of such a family
was quite content with the humbler task of cooperation by
supplying the sinews of war. There was complete equality between
husband and wife because their aims were identical and each
rendered the service most convenient and most needed. Women did
what men could not do. In the territory of the enemy the men were
reached through the gradual and tentative efforts of women whom
the uninitiated supposed to be spending idle hours at a sewing
circle. Interest was maintained by the use of information of the
same general character as that which later took the country by
storm in Uncle Tom's Cabin. In course of time all disguise was
thrown aside. A public speaker of national reputation would
appear, a meeting would be announced, and a rousing abolition
speech would be delivered; the mere men of the neighborhood would
have little conception how the surprising change had been
accomplished.

On rare occasions the public presentation of the anti-slavery
view would be undertaken prematurely, as in 1840 at Pendleton,
Indiana, when Frederick Douglass attempted to address a public
meeting and was almost slain by missiles from the mob. Pendleton,
however, was not given over to the enemy. The victim of the
assault was restored to health in the family of a leading
citizen. The outrage was judiciously utilized to convince the
fair-minded that one of the evils of slavery was the development
of minds void of candor and justice. On the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Pendleton disturbance there was another great
meeting in the town. Frederick Douglass was the hero of the
occasion. The woman who was the head of the family that restored
him to health was on the platform. Some of the men who threw the
brickbats were there to make public confession and to apologize
for the brutal deed.

In the minds of a few persons of rare intellectual and logical
endowment, democracy has always implied the equality of the
sexes. From the time of the French Revolution there have been
advocates of this doctrine. As early as 1820, Frances Wright, a
young woman in Scotland having knowledge of the Western republic
founded upon the professed principles of liberty and equality,
came to America for the express purpose of pleading the cause of
equal rights for women. To the general public her doctrine seemed
revolutionary, threatening the very foundations of religion and
morality. In the midst of opposition and persecution she
proclaimed views respecting the rights and duties of women which
today are generally accepted as axiomatic.

The women who attended the meetings for the organization of the
American Anti-Slavery Society were not suffragists, nor had they
espoused any special theories respecting the position of women.
They did not wish to be members of the men's organizations but
were quite content with their own separate one, which served its
purpose very well under prevailing local conditions. James G.
Birney, the candidate of the Liberty party for the Presidency in
1840, had good reasons for opposition to the inclusion of men and
women in the same organization. He knew that by acting separately
they were winning their way. The introduction of a novel theory
involving a different issue seemed to him likely to be a source
of weakness. The cause of women was, however, gaining ground and
winning converts. Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton were
delegates to the World's Anti-Slavery Convention at London. They
listened to the debate which ended in the refusal to recognize
them as members of the Convention because they were women. The
tone of the discussion convinced them that women were looked upon
by men with disdain and contempt. Because the laws of the land
and the customs of society consigned women to an inferior
position, and because there would be no place for effective
public work on the part of women until these laws were changed,
both these women became advocates of women's rights and
conspicuous leaders in the initiation of the propaganda. The
Reverend Samuel J. May, of Syracuse, New York, preached a sermon
in 1845 in which he stated his belief that women need not expect
to have their wrongs fully redressed until they themselves had a
hand in the making and in the administration of the laws. This is
an early suggestion that equal suffrage would become the ultimate
goal of the efforts for righting women's wrongs.

At the same time there were accessions to the cause from a
different source. In 1833 Oberlin College was founded in northern
Ohio. Into some of the first classes there women were admitted on
equal terms with men. In 1835 the trustees offered the presidency
to Professor Asa Mahan, of Lane Seminary. He was himself an
abolitionist from a slave State, and he refused to be President
of Oberlin College unless negroes were admitted on equal terms
with other students. Oberlin thus became the first institution in
the country which extended the privileges of the higher education
to both sexes of all races. It was a distinctly religious
institution devoted to radical reforms of many kinds. Not only
was the use of all intoxicating beverages discarded by faculty
and students but the use of tobacco as well was discouraged.

Within fifteen years after the founding of Oberlin, there were
women graduates who had something to say on numerous questions of
public interest. Especially was this true of the subject of
temperance. Intemperance was a vice peculiar to men. Women and
children were the chief sufferers, while men were the chief
sinners. It was important, therefore, that men should be reached.
In 1847 Lucy Stone, an Oberlin graduate, began to address public
audiences on the subject. At the same time Susan B. Anthony
appeared as a temperance lecturer. The manner of their reception
and the nature of their subject induced them to unite heartily in
the pending crusade for the equal rights of women. The three
causes thus became united in one.

Along with the crusade against slavery, intemperance, and women's
wrongs, arose a fourth, which was fundamentally connected with
the slavery question: Quakers and Southern and Western
abolitionists were ardently devoted to the interests of peace.
They would abolish slavery by peaceable means because they
believed the alternative was a terrible war. To escape an
impending war they were nerved to do and dare and to incur great
risks. New England abolitionists who labored in harmony with
those of the West and South were actuated by similar motives.
Sumner first gained public notice by a distinguished oration
against war. Garrison went farther: he was a professional
non-resistant, a root and branch opponent of both war and
slavery. John Brown was a fanatical antagonist of war until he
reached the conclusion that according to the Divine Will there
should be a short war of liberation in place of the continuance
of slavery, which was itself in his opinion the most cruel form
of war.

Slavery as a legally recognized institution disappeared with the
Civil War. The war against intemperance has made continuous
progress and this problem is apparently approaching a solution.
The war against war as a recognized institution has become the
one all-absorbing problem of civilization. The war against the
wrongs of women is being supplanted by efforts to harmonize the
mutual privileges and duties of men and women on the basis of
complete equality. As Samuel May predicted more than seventy
years ago, in the future women are certain to take a hand both in
the making and in the administration of law.



CHAPTER IV. THE TURNING-POINT

The year 1831 is notable for three events in the history of the
anti-slavery controversy: on the first day of January in that
year William Lloyd Garrison began in Boston the publication of
the Liberator; in August there occurred in Southampton, Virginia,
an insurrection of slaves led by a negro, Nat Turner, in which
sixty-one white persons were massacred; and in December the
Virginia Legislature began its long debate on the question of
slavery.

On the part of the abolitionists there was at no time any sudden
break in the principles which they advocated. Lundy did nothing
but revive and continue the work of the Quakers and other non-
slaveholding classes of the revolutionary period. Birney was and
continued to be a typical slaveholding abolitionist of the
earlier period. Garrison began his work as a disciple of Lundy,
whom he followed in the condemnation of the African colonization
scheme, though he went farther and rejected every form of
colonization. Garrison likewise repudiated every plan for gradual
emancipation and proclaimed the duty of immediate and
unconditional liberation of the slaves.

The first number of the Liberator contained an Address to the
Public, which sounded the keynote of Garrison's career. "I shall
contend for the immediate enfranchisement of our slave
population--I will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as
justice on this subject--I do not wish to think, or speak, or
write with moderation--I am in earnest--I will not equivocate--I
will not retreat a single inch, and I WILL BE HEARD!"

The New England Anti-Slavery Society, of which Garrison was the
chief organizer, was in essential harmony with the societies
which Lundy had organized i