n other sections. Its first address to
the public in 1833 distinctly recognized the separate States as
the sole authority in the matter of emancipation within their own
boundaries. Through moral suasion, eschewing all violence and
sedition, its authors proposed to secure their object. In the
spirit of civil and religious liberty and by appealing to the
Declaration of Independence, the Liberty party of 1840 and 1844,
by the Freesoil party of 1848, and later by the Republican party,
and that nearly all of the abolitionists continued to be faithful
adherents to those principles, are sufficient proof of the
essential unity of the great anti-slavery movement. The apparent
lack of harmony and the real confusion in the history of the
subject arose from the peculiar character of one remarkable man.

The few owners of slaves who had assumed the role of public
defenders of the institution were in the habit of using violent
and abusive language against anti-slavery agitators. This
appeared in the first debate on the subject during Washington's
administration. Every form of rhetorical abuse also accompanied
the outbreak of mob violence against the reformers at the time of
Garrison's advent into the controversy. He was especially fitted
to reply in kind. "I am accused," said he, "of using hard
language. I admit the charge. I have not been able to find a soft
word to describe villainy, or to identify the perpetrator of it."
This was a new departure which was instantly recognized by
Southern leaders. But from the beginning to the bitter end,
Garrison stands alone as preeminently the representative of this
form of attack. It was significant, also, that the Liberator was
published in Boston, the literary center of the country.

There is no evidence that there was any direct connection between
the publication of the Liberator and the servile insurrection
which occurred during the following August.* It was, however, but
natural that the South should associate the two events. A few
utterances of the paper were fitted, if not intended, to incite
insurrection. One passage reads: "Whenever there is a contest
between the oppressed and the oppressor--the weapons being equal
between the parties--God knows that my heart must be with the
oppressed, and always against the oppressor. Therefore, whenever
commenced, I cannot but wish success to all slave insurrections."
Again: "Rather than see men wearing their chains in a cowardly
and servile spirit, I would, as an advocate of peace, much rather
see them breaking the heads of the tyrant with their chains."

* Garrison himself denied any direct connection with the Nat
Turner insurrection. See "William Lloyd Garrison, the Story of
His Life told by His Children," vol. I, p. 251.

George Thompson, an English co-laborer with Garrison, is quoted
as saying in a public address in 1835 that "Southern slaves
ought, or at least had a right, to cut the throats of their
masters."* Such utterances are rare, and they express a passing
mood not in the least characteristic of the general spirit of the
abolition movement; yet the fact that such statements did emanate
from such a source made it comparatively easy for extremists of
the opposition to cast odium upon all abolitionists. The only
type of abolition known in South Carolina was that of the extreme
Garrisonian agitators, and it furnished at least a shadow of
excuse for mob violence in the North and for complete suppression
of discussion in the South. To encourage slaves to cut the
throats of their masters was far from being a rhetorical figure
of speech in communities where slaves were in the majority. Santo
Domingo was at the time a prosperous republic founded by former
slaves who had exterminated the Caucasian residents of the
island. Negroes from Santo Domingo had fomented insurrection in
South Carolina. The Nat Turner incident was more than a
suggestion of the dire possibilities of the situation. Turner was
a trusted slave, a preacher among the blacks. He succeeded in
concealing his plot for weeks. When the massacre began, slaves
not in the secret were induced to join. A majority of the slain
were women and children. Abolitionists who had lived in slave
States never indulged in flippant remarks fitted to incite
insurrection. This was reserved for the few agitators far removed
from the scene of action.

* Schouler, "History of the United States under the
Constitution," vol. V, p. 217.

Southern planters who had determined at all hazards to perpetuate
the institution of slavery were peculiarly sensitive on account
of what was taking place in Spanish America and in the British
West Indies. Mexico abolished slavery in 1829, and united with
Colombia in encouraging Cuba to throw off the Spanish yoke,
abolish slavery, and join the sisterhood of New World republics.
This led to an effective protest on the part of the United
States. Both Spain and Mexico were advised that the United States
could not with safety to its own interests permit the
emancipation of slaves in the island of Cuba. But with the
British Emancipation Act of 1833, Cuba became the only
neighboring territory in which slavery was legal. These acts of
emancipation added zeal to the determination of the Southern
planters to secure territory for the indefinite extension of
slavery to the southwest. When Lundy and Birney discovered these
plans, their desire to husband and extend the direct political
influence of abolitionists was greatly stimulated. To this end
they maintained a moderate and conservative attitude. They took
care that no abuse or misrepresentation should betray them into
any expression which would diminish their influence with
fair-minded, reasonable men. They were convinced that a clear and
complete revelation of the facts would lead a majority of the
people to adopt their views.

The debate in the Virginia Legislature in the session which met
three months after the Southampton massacre furnishes a
demonstration that the traditional anti-slavery sentiment still
persisted among the rulers of the Old Dominion. It arose out of a
petition from the Quakers of the State asking for an
investigation preparatory to a gradual emancipation of the
slaves. The debate, which lasted for several weeks, was able and
thorough. No stronger utterances in condemnation of slavery were
ever voiced than appear in this debate. Different speakers made
the statement that no one presumed to defend slavery on
principle--that apologists for slavery existed but no defenders.
Opposition to the petition was in the main apologetic in tone.

A darker picture of the blighting effects of slavery on the
industries of the country was never drawn than appears in these
speeches. Slavery was declared to be driving free laborers from
the State, to have already destroyed every industry except
agriculture, and to have exhausted the soil so that profitable
agriculture was becoming extinct, while pine brush was
encroaching upon former fruitful fields. "Even the wolf," said
one, "driven back long since by the approach of man, now returns,
after the lapse of a hundred years, to howl over the desolations
of slavery." Contrasts between free labor in northern industry
and that of the South were vividly portrayed. In a speech of
great power, one member referred to Kentucky and Ohio as States
"providentially designated to exhibit in their future histories
the differences which necessarily result from a country free
from, and a country afflicted with the curse of slavery."

The debate was by no means confined to industrial or material
considerations. McDowell, who was afterwards elected Governor of
the State, thus portrays the personal relations of master and
slave "You may place the slave where you please--you may put him
under any process, which, without destroying his value as a
slave, will debase and crush him as a rational being--you may do
all this, and the idea that he was born to be free will survive
it all. It is allied to his hope of immortality--it is the
ethereal part of his nature which oppression cannot reach--it is
a torch lit up in his soul by the hand of the Deity, and never
meant to be extinguished by the hand of man."

Various speakers assumed that the continuance of slavery involved
a bloody conflict; that either peaceably or through violence,
slavery as contrary to the spirit of the age must come to an end;
that the agitation against it could not be suppressed. Faulkner
drew a lurid picture of the danger from servile insurrection, in
which he referred to the utterances of two former speakers, one
of whom had said that, unless something effective was done to
ward off the danger, "the throats of all the white people of
Virginia will be cut." The other replied, "No, the whites cannot
be conquered--the throats of the blacks will be cut." Faulkner's
rejoinder was that the difference was a trifling one, "for the
fact is conceded that one race or the other must be
exterminated."

The public press joined in the debate. Leading editorials
appeared in the Richmond Enquirer urging that effective measures
be instituted to put an end to slavery. The debate aroused much
interest throughout the South. Substantially all the current
abolition arguments appeared in the speeches of the slave-owning
members of the Virginia Legislature. And what was done about it?
Nothing at all. The petition was not granted; no action looking
towards emancipation was taken. This was indeed a turning-point.
Men do not continue to denounce in public their own conduct
unless their action results in some effort toward corrective
measures.

Professor Thomas Dew, of the chair of history and metaphysics in
William and Mary College and later President of the College,
published an essay reviewing the debate in the Legislature and
arguing that any plan for emancipation in Virginia was either
undesirable or impossible. This essay was among the first of the
direct pro-slavery arguments. Statements in support of the view
soon followed. In 1885 the Governor of South Carolina in a
message to the Legislature said, "Domestic slavery is the
corner-stone of our republican edifice." Senator Calhoun,
speaking in the Senate two years later, declared slavery to be a
positive good. W. G. Simms, Southern poet and novelist, writing
in 1852, felicitates himself as being among the first who about
fifteen years earlier advocated slavery as a great good and a
blessing. Harriet Martineau, an English author who traveled
extensively in the South in 1885, found few slaveholders who
justified the institution as being in itself just. But after the
debates in the Virginia Legislature, there were few owners of
slaves who publicly advocated abolition. The spirit of mob
violence had set in, and, contrary to the utterances of Virginia
statesmen, free speech on the subject of slavery was suppressed
in the slave States. This did not mean that Southern statesmen
had lost the power to perceive the evil effects of slavery or
that they were convinced that their former views were erroneous.
It meant simply that they had failed to agree upon a policy of
gradual emancipation, and the only recourse left seemed to be to
follow the example of James G. Birney and leave the South or to
submit in silence to the new order.



CHAPTER V. THE VINDICATION OF LIBERTY

With the changed attitude of the South towards emancipation there
was associated an active hostility to dearly bought human
liberty. Freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of
worship, the right of assembly, trial by jury, the right of
petition, free use of the mails, and numerous other fundamental
human rights were assailed. Birney and other abolitionists who
had immediate knowledge of slavery early perceived that the real
question at issue was quite as much the continued liberty of the
white man as it was the liberation of the black man and that the
enslavement of one race involved also the ultimate essential
enslavement of the other.

In 1831 two slave States and six free States still extended to
free negroes the right to vote. During the pro-slavery crusade
these privileges disappeared; and not only so, but free negroes
were banished from certain States, or were not permitted to enter
them, or were allowed to remain only by choosing a white man for
a guardian. It was made a crime to teach negroes, whether slaves
or free men, to read and write. Under various pretexts free
negroes were reduced to slavery. Freedom of worship was denied to
negroes, and they were not allowed to assemble for any purpose
except under the strict surveillance of white men. Negro
testimony in a court of law was invalid where the rights of a
white man were involved. The right of a negro to his freedom was
decided by an arbitrary court without a jury, while the disputed
right of a white man to the ownership of a horse was conditioned
by the safeguard of trial by jury.

The maintenance of such policies carries with it of necessity the
suppression of free discussion. When Southern leaders adopted the
policy of defending slavery as a righteous institution,
abolitionists in the South either emigrated to the North or were
silenced. In either case they were deprived of a fundamental
right. The spirit of persecution followed them into the free
States. Birney could not publish his paper in Kentucky, nor even
at Cincinnati, save at the risk of his life. Elijah Lovejoy was
not allowed to publish his paper in Missouri, and, when he
persisted in publishing it in Illinois, he was brutally murdered.
Even in Boston it required men of courage and determination to
meet and organize an anti-slavery society in 1832, though only a
few years earlier Benjamin Lundy had traveled freely through the
South itself delivering anti-slavery lectures and organizing
scores of such societies. The New York Anti-Slavery Society was
secretly organized in 1832 in spite of the opposition of a
determined mob. Mob violence was everywhere rife. Meetings were
broken up, negro quarters attacked, property destroyed, murders
committed.

Fair-minded men became abolitionists on account of the crusade
against the rights of white men quite as much as from their
interest in the rights of negroes. Salmon P. Chase of Ohio was
led to espouse the cause by observing the attacks upon the
freedom of the press in Cincinnati. Gerrit Smith witnessed the
breaking up of an anti-slavery meeting in Utica, New York, and
thereafter consecrated his time, his talents, and his great
wealth to the cause of liberty. Wendell Phillips saw Garrison in
the hands of a Boston mob, and that experience determined him to
make common cause with the martyr. And the murder of Lovejoy in
1837 made many active abolitionists.

It is difficult to imagine a more inoffensive practice than
giving to negro girls the rudiments of an education. Yet a school
for this purpose, taught by Miss Prudence Crandall in Canterbury,
Connecticut, was broken up by persistent persecution, a special
act of the Legislature being passed for the purpose, forbidding
the teaching of negroes from outside the State without the
consent of the town authorities. Under this act Miss Crandall was
arrested, convicted, and imprisoned.

Having eliminated free discussion from the South, the Southern
States sought to accomplish the same object in the North. In
pursuance of a resolution of the Legislature, the Governor of
Georgia offered a reward of five thousand dollars to any one who
should arrest, bring to trial, and prosecute to conviction under
the laws of Georgia the editor of the Liberator. R. G. Williams,
publishing agent for the American Anti-Slavery Society, was
indicted by a grand jury of Tuscaloosa County, Alabama, and
Governor Gayle of Alabama made a requisition on Governor Marcy of
New York for his extradition. Williams had never been in Alabama.
His offense consisted in publishing in the New York Emancipator a
few rather mild utterances against slavery.

Governor McDuffie of South Carolina in an official message
declared that slavery was the very corner-stone of the republic,
adding that the laboring population of any country, "bleached or
unbleached," was a dangerous element in the body politic, and
predicting that within twenty-five years the laboring people of
the North would be virtually reduced to slavery. Referring to
abolitionists, he said: "The laws of every community should
punish this species of interference with death without benefit of
clergy." Pursuant to the Governor's recommendation, the
Legislature adopted a resolution calling upon non-slaveholding
States to pass laws to suppress promptly and effectively all
abolition societies. In nearly all the slave States similar
resolutions were adopted, and concerted action against
anti-slavery effort was undertaken. During the winter of 1835 and
1836, the Governors of the free States received these resolutions
from the South and, instead of resenting them as an uncalled-for
interference with the rights of free commonwealths, they treated
them with respect. Edward Everett, Governor of Massachusetts, in
his message presenting the Southern documents to the Legislature,
said: "Whatever by direct and necessary operation is calculated
to excite an insurrection among the slaves has been held, by
highly respectable legal authority, an offense against this
Commonwealth which may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor at common
law." Governor Marcy of New York, in a like document, declared
that "without the power to pass such laws the States would not
possess all the necessary means for preserving their external
relations of peace among themselves." Even before the Southern
requests reached Rhode Island, the Legislature had under
consideration a bill to suppress abolition societies.

When a committee of the Massachusetts Legislature had been duly
organized to consider the documents received from the slave
States, the abolitionists requested the privilege of a hearing
before the committee. Receiving no reply, they proceeded to
formulate a statement of their case; but before they could
publish it, they were invited to appear before the joint
committee of the two houses. The public had been aroused by the
issue and there was a large audience. The case for the
abolitionists was stated by their ablest speakers, among whom was
William Lloyd Garrison. They labored to convince the committee
that their utterances were not incendiary, and that any
legislative censure directed against them would be an
encouragement to mob violence and the persecution which was
already their lot. After the defensive arguments had been fully
presented, William Goodell took the floor and proceeded to charge
upon the Southern States which had made these demands a
conspiracy against the liberties of the North. In the midst of
great excitement and many interruptions by the chairman of the
committee, he quoted the language of Governor McDuffie's message,
and characterized the documents lying on the table before him as
"fetters for Northern freemen." Then, turning to the committee,
he began, "Mr. Chairman, are you prepared to attempt to put them
on?"--but the sentence was only half finished when the stentorian
voice of the chairman interrupted him: "Sit down, sir!" and he
sat down. The committee then arose and left the room. But the
audience did not rise; they waited till other abolitionists found
their tongues and gave expression to a fixed determination to
uphold the liberties purchased for them by the blood of their
fathers. The Massachusetts Legislature did not comply with the
request of Governor McDuffie of South Carolina to take the first
step towards the enslavement of all laborers, white as well as
black. And Rhode Island refused to enact into law the pending
bill for the suppression of anti-slavery societies. They declined
to violate the plain requirements of their Constitution that the
interests of slavery might be promoted. Not many years later they
were ready to strain or break the Constitution for the sake of
liberty.

In the general crusade against liberty churches proved more
pliable than States. The authority of nearly all the leading
denominations was directed against the abolitionists. The General
Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church passed in 1836 a
resolution censuring two of their members who had lectured in
favor of modern abolitionism. The Ohio Conference of the same
denomination had passed resolutions urging resistance to the
anti-slavery movement. In June, 1836, the New York Conference
decided that no one should be chosen as deacon or elder who did
not give pledge that he would refrain from agitating the church
on the subject.

The same spirit appeared in theological seminaries. The trustees
of Lane Seminary, near Cincinnati, Ohio, voted that students
should not organize or be members of anti-slavery societies or
hold meetings or lecture or speak on the subject. Whereupon the
students left in a body, and many of the professors withdrew and
united with others in the founding of an anti-slavery college at
Oberlin.

A persistent attack was also directed against the use of the
United States mails for the distribution of anti-slavery
literature. Mob violence which involved the post-office began as
early as 1830, when printed copies of Miss Grimke's Appeal to the
Christian Women of the South were seized and burned in
Charleston. In 1835 large quantities of anti-slavery literature
were removed from the Charleston office and in the presence of
the assembled citizens committed to the flames. Postmasters on
their own motion examined the mails and refused to deliver any
matter that they deemed incendiary. Amos Kendall,
Postmaster-General, was requested to issue an order authorizing
such conduct. He replied that he had no legal authority to issue
such an order. Yet he would not recommend the delivery of such
papers. "We owe," said he, "an obligation to the laws, but a
higher one to the communities in which we live, and if the former
be perverted to destroy the latter, it is patriotism to disregard
them. Entertaining these views, I cannot sanction, and will not
condemn, the step you have taken." This is an early instance of
the appeal to the "higher law" in the pro-slavery controversy.
The higher law was invoked against the freedom of the press. The
New York postmaster sought to dissuade the Anti-slavery Society
from the attempt to send its publications through the mails into
Southern States. In reply to a request for authorization to
refuse to accept such publications, the Postmaster-General
replied: "I am deterred from giving an order to exclude the whole
series of abolition publications from the Southern mails only by
a want of legal power, and if I were situated as you are, I would
do as you have done."

Mr. Kendall's letters to the postmasters of Charleston and New
York were written in July and August, 1835. In December of the
same year, presumably with full knowledge that a member of his
Cabinet was encouraging violations of law in the interest of
slavery, President Jackson undertook to supply the need of legal
authorization. In his annual message he made a savage attack upon
the abolitionists and recommended to Congress the "passing of
such a law as will prohibit, under severe penalties, the
circulation in the Southern States, through the mail, of
incendiary publications."

This part of the President's message was referred to a select
committee, of which John C. Calhoun was chairman. The chairman's
report was against the adoption of the President's recommendation
because a subject of such vital interest to the States ought not
to be left to Congress. The admission of the right of Congress to
decide what is incendiary, asserted the report, carries with it
the power to decide what is not incendiary and hence Congress
might authorize and enforce the circulation of abolition
literature through the mails in all the States. The States should
themselves severally decide what in their judgment is incendiary,
and then it would become the duty of the general Government to
give effect to such state laws. The bill recommended was in
harmony with this view. It was made illegal for any deputy
postmaster "to deliver to any person whatsoever, any pamphlet,
newspaper, handbill, or other printed paper, or pictorial
representation touching the subject of slavery, where by the laws
of the said State, territory, or district their circulation is
prohibited." The bill was defeated in the Senate by a small
margin. Altogether there was an enlightening debate on the whole
subject. The exposure of the abuse of tampering with the mail
created a general reaction, which enabled the abolitionists to
win a spectacular victory. Instead of a law forbidding the
circulation of anti-slavery publications, Congress enacted a law
requiring postal officials under heavy penalties to deliver
without discrimination all matter committed to their charge. This
act was signed by President Jackson, and Calhoun himself was
induced to admit that the purposes of the abolitionists were not
violent and revolutionary. Henceforth abolitionists enjoyed their
full privileges in the use of the United States mail.
An even more dramatic victory was thrust upon the abolitionists
by the inordinate violence of their opponents in their attack
upon the right of petition. John Quincy Adams, who became their
distinguished champion, was not himself an abolitionist. When, as
a member of the lower House of Congress in 1831, he presented
petitions from certain citizens of Pennsylvania, presumably
Quakers, requesting Congress to abolish slavery and the
slave-trade in the District of Columbia, he refused to
countenance their prayer, and expressed the wish that the
memorial might be referred without debate. At the very time when
a New England ex-President was thus advising abolitionists to
desist from sending petitions to Congress, the Virginia
Legislature was engaged in the memorable debate upon a similar
petition from Virginia Quakers, in which most radical abolition
sentiment was expressed by actual slaveowners. Adams continued to
present anti-slavery memorials and at the same time to express
his opposition to the demands of the petitioners. When in 1835
there arose a decided opposition to the reception of such
documents, Adams, still in apparent sympathy with the pro-slavery
South on the main issue, gave wise counsel on the method of
dealing with petitions. They should be received, said he, and
referred to a committee; because the right of petition is sacred.
This, he maintained, was the best way to avoid disturbing debate
on the subject of slavery. He quoted his own previous experience;
he had made known his opposition to the purposes of the
petitioners; their memorials were duly referred to a committee
and there they slept the sleep of death. At that time only one
voice had been raised in the House in support of the abolition
petitioners, that of John Dickson of New York, who had delivered
a speech of two hours in length advocating their cause; but not a
voice was raised in reply. Mr. Adams mentioned this incident with
approval. The way to forestall disturbing debate in Congress, he
said, was scrupulously to concede all constitutional rights and
then simply to refrain from speaking on the subject.

This sound advice was not followed. For several months a
considerable part of the time of the House was occupied with the
question of handling abolition petitions. And finally, in May,
1836, the following resolution passed the House: "Resolved, That
all petitions, memorials, resolutions, propositions, or papers
relating in any way or to any extent whatever to the subject of
slavery or the abolition of slavery, shall, without being either
printed or referred, be laid on the table, and that no further
action whatever shall be had thereon." This is commonly known as
the "gag resolution." During four successive years it was
reenacted in one form or another and was not repealed by direct
vote until 1844.

When the name of Mr. Adams was called in the vote upon the
passage of the above resolution, instead of answering in the
ordinary way, he said: "I hold the resolution to be a direct
violation of the Constitution of the United States, of the rules
of this House, and of the rights of my constituents." This was
the beginning of the duel between the "old man eloquent" and a
determined majority in the House of Representatives. Adams
developed undreamed-of resources as a debater and
parliamentarian. He made it his special business to break down
the barrier against the right of petition. Abolitionists
cooperated with zeal in the effort. Their champion was abundantly
supplied with petitions. The gag resolution was designed to
prevent all debate on the subject of slavery. Its effect in the
hands of the shrewd parliamentarian was to foment debate. On one
occasion, with great apparent innocence, after presenting the
usual abolition petitions, Adams called the attention of the
Speaker to one which purported to be signed by twenty-two slaves
and asked whether such a petition should be presented to the
House, since he was himself in doubt as to the rules applicable
in such a case. This led to a furious outbreak in the House which
lasted for three days. Adams was threatened with censure at the
bar of the House, with expulsion, with the grand jury, with the
penitentiary; and it is believed that only his great age and
national repute shielded him from personal violence. After
numerous passionate speeches had been delivered, Adams injected a
few important corrections into the debate. He reminded the House
that he had not presented a petition purporting to emanate from
slaves; on the contrary, he had expressly declined to present it
until the Speaker had decided whether a petition from slaves was
covered by the rule. Moreover, the petition was not against
slavery but in favor of slavery. He was then charged with the
crime of trifling with the sensibilities of the House; and
finally the champion of the right of petition took the floor in
his own defense. His language cut to the quick. His calumniators
were made to feel the force of his biting sarcasm. They were
convicted of injustice, and all their resolutions of censure were
withdrawn. The victory was complete.

After the year 1838 John Quincy Adams had the effective support
of Joshua R. Giddings from the Western Reserve, Ohio--who also
fought a pitched battle of his own which illustrates another
phase of the crusade against liberty. The ship Creole had sailed
from Baltimore to New Orleans in 1841 with a cargo of slaves. The
negroes mutinied on the high seas, slew one man, gained
possession of the vessel, sailed to Nassau, and were there set
free by the British Government. Prolonged diplomatic negotiations
followed in which our Government held that, as slaves were
property in the United States, they continued to be such on the
high seas. In the midst of the controversy, Giddings introduced a
resolution into the House, declaring that slavery, being an
abridgment of liberty, could exist only under local rules, and
that on the high seas there can be no slavery. For this act
Giddings was arraigned and censured by the House. He at once
resigned, but was reelected with instructions to continue the
fight for freedom of debate in the House.

In the campaign against the rights of freemen mob violence was
first employed, but in the South the weapon of repressive
legislation was soon substituted, and this was powerfully
supplemented by social and religious ostracism. Except in a few
districts in the border States, these measures were successful.
Public profession of abolitionism was suppressed. The violence of
the mob was of much longer duration in the North and reached its
height in the years 1834 and 1835. But Northern mobs only
quickened the zeal of the abolitionists and made converts to
their cause. The attempt to substitute repressive state
legislation had the same effect, and the use of church authority
for making an end of the agitation for human liberty was only
temporarily influential.

As early as 1838 the Presbyterian Church was divided over
questions of doctrine into Old School and New School
Presbyterians. This served to forestall the impending division on
the slavery question. The Old School in the South became
pro-slavery and the New School in the North became anti-slavery.
At the same time the Methodist Church of the entire country was
beset by a division on the main question. In 1844 Southern
Methodist Episcopalian conferences resolved upon separation and
committed themselves to the defense of slavery. The division in
the Methodist Church was completed in 1846. A corresponding
division took place in the Baptist Church in 1845. The
controversy was dividing the country into a free North and an
enslaved South, and Southern white men as well as negroes were
threatened with subjection to the demands of the dominant
institution.



CHAPTER VI. THE SLAVERY ISSUE IN POLITICS

Some who opposed mob violence became active abolitionists; others
were led to defend the rights of abolitionists because to do
otherwise would encourage anarchy and general disorder. The same
was true of those who defended the right of petition and the free
use of the mails and the entire list of the fundamental rights of
freemen which were threatened by the crusade against
abolitionists. Birney's contention that unless the slave is freed
no one can be free was thus vindicated: the issue involved vastly
more than the mere emancipation of slaves.

The attack made in defense of slavery upon the rights of freemen
was early recognized as involving civil war unless peaceable
emancipation could be attained. So soon as John Quincy Adams
faced the new spirit in Congress, he was convinced that it meant
probable war. As early as May, 1836, he warned the South, saying:
"From the instant that your slaveholding States become the
theater of war, civil, servile, or foreign, from that moment the
war powers of the Constitution extend to interference with the
institution of slavery." This sentiment he reiterated and
amplified on various occasions. The South was duly warned that an
attempt to disrupt the Union would involve a war of which
emancipation would be one of the consequences. With the exception
of Garrison and a few of his personal followers, abolitionists
were unionists: they stood for the perpetual union of the States.

This is not the place to give an extended account of the Mexican
War.* There are, however, certain incidents connected with the
annexation of Texas and the resulting war which profoundly
affected the crusade against slavery. Both Lundy and Birney in
their missions to promote emancipation through the process of
colonization believed that they had unearthed a plan on the part
of Southern leaders to acquire territory from Mexico for the
purpose of extending slavery. This discovery coincided with the
suppression of abolition propaganda in the South. Hitherto John
Quincy Adams had favored the western expansion of our territory.
He had labored diligently to make the Rio Grande the western
boundary of the Louisiana Purchase at the time of the treaty with
Spain in 1819. But though in 1825 he had supported a measure to
purchase Texas from Mexico, under the new conditions he threw
himself heartily against the annexation of Texas, and in 1838 he
defeated in the House of Representatives a resolution favoring
annexation. To this end Adams occupied the morning hour of the
House each day from the 16th of June to the 7th of July, within
two days of the time fixed for adjournment. This was only a
beginning of his fight against the extension of slavery. There
was no relenting in his opposition to pro-slavery demands until
he was stricken down with paralysis in the streets of Boston, in
November, 1846. He never again addressed a public assembly. But
he continued to occupy his seat in Congress until February 23,
1848.

* See "Texas and the Mexican War" (in "The Chronicles of
America").

The debate inaugurated in Congress by Adams and others over the
extension of slave territory rapidly spread to the country at
large, and interest in the question became general. Abolitionists
were thereby greatly stimulated to put into practice their
professed duty of seeking to accomplish their ends by political
action. Their first effort was to secure recognition in the
regular parties. The Democrats answered in their platform of 1840
by a plank specifically denouncing the abolitionists, and the
Whigs proved either noncommittal or unfriendly. The result was
that abolitionists organized a party of their own in 1840 and
nominated James G. Birney for the Presidency. Both of the older
parties during this campaign evaded the issue of the annexation
of Texas. In 1844 the Whigs again refrained from giving in their
platform any official utterance on the Texas issue, though they
were understood to be opposed to annexation. The Democrats
adroitly asserted in their platform their approval of the
re-annexation of Texas and reoccupation of Oregon. There was a
shadowy prior claim to both these regions, and by combining them
in this way the party avoided any odious partiality towards the
acquisition of slave territory. But the voters in both parties
had become interested in the specific question whether the
country was to enter upon a war of conquest whose primary object
should be the extension of slavery. In the North it became
generally understood that a vote for Henry Clay, the Whig
candidate, was an expression of opposition to annexation. This
issue, however, was not made clear in the South. In the absence
of telegraph and daily paper it was quite possible to maintain
contradictory positions in different sections of the country. But
since the Democrats everywhere openly favored annexation, the
election of their candidate, James K. Polk, was generally
accepted as a popular approval of the annexation of Texas.
Indeed, action immediately followed the election and, before the
President-elect had been inaugurated, the joint resolution for
the annexation of Texas passed both Houses of Congress.

The popular vote was almost equally divided between Whigs and
Democrats. Had the vote for Birney, who was again the candidate
of the Liberty party, been cast for Clay electors, Clay would
have been chosen President. The Birney vote was over sixty-two
thousand. The Liberty party, therefore, held the balance of power
and determined the result of the election.

The Liberty party has often been censured for defeating the Whigs
at this election of 1844. But many incidents, too early forgotten
by historians, go far to justify the course of the leaders.
Birney and Clay were at one time members of the same party. They
were personal friends, and as slave holders they shared the view
that slavery was a menace to the country and ought to be
abolished. It was just fourteen years before this election that
Birney made a visit to Clay to induce him to accept the
leadership of an organized movement to abolish slavery in
Kentucky. Three years later, when Birney returned to Kentucky to
do himself what Henry Clay had refused to do, he became convinced
that the reaction which had taken place in favor of slavery was
largely due to Clay's influence. This was a common impression
among active abolitionists. It is not strange, therefore, that
they refused to support him as a candidate for the Presidency,
and it is not at all certain that his election in 1844 would have
prevented the war with Mexico.

Northern Whigs accused the Democrats of fomenting a war with
Mexico with the intention of gaining territory for the purpose of
extending slavery. Democrats denied that the annexation of Texas
would lead to war, and many of them proclaimed their opposition
to the farther extension of slavery. In harmony with this
sentiment, when President Polk asked for a grant of two million
dollars to aid in making a treaty with Mexico, they attached to
the bill granting the amount a proviso to the effect that slavery
should forever be prohibited in any territory which might be
obtained from Mexico by the contemplated treaty. The proviso was
written by an Ohio Democrat and was introduced in the House by
David A. Wilmot, a Pennsylvania Democrat, after whom it is known.
It passed the House by a fair majority with the support of both
Whigs and Democrats. At the time of the original introduction in
August, 1846, the Senate did not vote upon the measure. Davis of
Massachusetts moved its adoption but inadvertently prolonged his
speech in its favor until the hour for adjournment. Hence there
was no vote on the subject. Subsequently the proviso in a new
form again passed the House but failed of adoption in the Senate.

During the war the Wilmot Proviso was the subject of frequent
debate in Congress and of continuous debate throughout the
country until the treaty with Mexico was signed in 1848. A vast
territory had been acquired as a result of the war, and no
decision had been reached as to whether it should remain free or
be opened to settlement by slave-owners. Another presidential
election was at hand. For fully ten years there had been
ever-increasing excitement over the question of the limitation or
the extension of slavery. This had clearly become the topic of
supreme interest throughout the country, and yet the two leading
parties avoided the issue. Their own membership was divided.
Northern Democrats, many of them, were decidedly opposed to
slavery extension. Southern Whigs with equal intensity favored
the extension of slavery into the new territory. The platforms of
the two parties were silent on the subject. The Whigs nominated
Taylor, a Southern general who had never voted their party
ticket, but they made no formal declaration of principles. The
Democrats repeated with colorless additions their platforms of
1840 anti 1844 and sought to win the election with a Northern
man, Lewis Cass of Michigan, as candidate.

There was, therefore, a clear field for a party having fully
defined views to express on a topic of commanding interest. The
cleavage in the Democratic party already begun by the debate over
the Wilmot Proviso was farther promoted by a factional division
of New York Democrats. Martin Van Buren became the leader of the
liberal faction, the "Barnburners," who nominated him for
President at a convention at Utica. The spirit of independence
now seized disaffected Whigs and Democrats everywhere in the
North and Northwest. Men of anti-slavery proclivities held
nonpartizan meetings and conventions. The movement finally
culminated in the famous Buffalo convention which gave birth to
the Freesoil party. The delegates of all political persuasions
united on the one principle of opposition to slavery. They
adopted a ringing platform closing with the words: "Resolved,
That we inscribe on our banner 'Free Soil, Free Speech, Free
Labor, and Free Men,' and under it will fight on, and fight ever,
until a triumphant victory shall reward our exertions." They
accepted Van Buren as their candidate. The vote at the ensuing
election was more than fourfold that given to Birney in 1844. The
Van Buren supporters held the balance of power between Whigs and
Democrats in twelve States. Taylor was elected by the vote of New
York, which except for the division in the party would have gone
to Cass. There was no longer any doubt of the fact that a
political force had arisen which could no longer be ignored by
the ruling parties. One of the parties must either support the
new issue or give place to a party which would do so.

A political party for the defense of liberty was the fulfillment
of the aspirations of all earnest anti-slavery men and of all
abolitionists not of the radical Garrisonian persuasion. The
national anti-slavery societies were for the most part limited in
their operations to the Atlantic seaboard. The West organized
local and state associations with little reference to the
national association. When the disruption occurred between
Garrison and his opponents in 1840, the Western abolitionists
continued their former methods of local organization. They
recognized no divisions in their ranks and continued to work in
harmony with all who in any way opposed the institution of
slavery. The political party was their first really effective
national organization. Through party committees, caucuses, and
conventions, they became a part of the forces that controlled the
nation. The older local clubs and associations were either
displaced by the party or became mere adjuncts to the party.

The lines for political action were now clearly defined. In the
States emancipation should be accomplished by state action. With
a few individual exceptions the leaders conceded that Congress
had no power to abolish slavery in the States. Upon the general
Government they urged the duty of abolishing both slavery and the
slave-trade in the District of Columbia and in all areas under
direct federal control. They further urged upon the Government
the strict enforcement of the laws prohibiting the foreign
slave-trade and the enactment of laws forbidding the interstate
slave-trade. The constitutionality of these main lines of action
has been generally conceded.

Abolitionists were pioneers in the formulation of political
platforms. The declaration of principles drawn up by Garrison in
1833 and adopted by the American Anti-Slavery Society was of the
nature of a political platform. The duty of voting in furtherance
of the policy of emancipation was inculcated. No platform was
adopted for the first political campaign, that of 1840; but four
years later there was an elaborate party platform of twenty-one
resolutions. Many things had happened in the eleven years
intervening since the declaration of principles of the American
Anti-Slavery Society. In the earlier platform the freedom of the
slave appears as the primary object. That of the Liberty party
assumes the broad principle of human brotherhood as the
foundation for a democracy or a republic. It denies that the
party is organized merely to free the slave. Slaveholding as the
grossest form of despotism must indeed be attacked first, but the
aim of the party is to carry the principle of equal rights into
all social relations. It is not a sectional party nor a party
organized for a single purpose. "It is not a new party, nor a
third party, but it is the party of 1776, reviving the principles
of that memorable era, and striving to carry them into practical
application." The spirit of '76 rings, indeed, throughout the
document, which declares that it was understood at the time of
the Declaration and the Constitution that the existence of
slavery was in derogation of the principles of American liberty.
The implied faith of the Nation and the States was pledged to
remove this stain upon the national character. Some States had
nobly fulfilled that pledge; others shamelessly had neglected to
do so.

These principles are reasserted in succeeding platforms. The
later opponents of slavery in their principles and policies thus
allied themselves with the founders of the republic. They claimed
the right to continue to repeat the words of Washington and
Jefferson and those of the members of the Virginia Legislature of
1832. No new doctrines were required. It was enough simply to
reaffirm the fundamental principles of democracy.

The names attached to the party are significant. It was at first
popularly styled the Abolition party, then officially in turn the
Liberty party, the Freesoil party, and finally the Republican
party. Republican was the name first applied to the Democratic
party--the party of Jefferson. The term Democrat was gradually
substituted under the leadership of Jackson before 1830. Some of
the men who participated in the organization of the later
Republican party had themselves been Republicans in the party of
Jefferson. They not only accepted the name which Jefferson gave
to his party, but they adopted the principles which Jefferson
proclaimed on the subject of slavery, free soil, and human rights
in general. This was the final stage in the identification of the
later anti-slavery crusade with the earlier contest for liberty.



CHAPTER VII. THE PASSING OF THE WHIG PARTY

The middle of the last century was marked by many incidents which
have left a permanent impress upon politics in general and upon
the slavery question in particular. Europe was again in the
throes of popular uprisings. New constitutions were adopted in
France, Switzerland, Prussia, and Austria. Reactions in favor of
autocracy in Austria and Germany sent multitudes of lovers of
liberty to America. Kossuth, the Hungarian revolutionist,
electrified American audiences by his appeals on behalf of the
downtrodden in Europe. Already the world was growing smaller.
America did not stop at the Pacific but crossed the ocean to
establish permanent political and commercial relations with Japan
and China.

The industries of the country were being reorganized to meet new
conditions created by recent inventions. The electric telegraph
was just coming into use, giving rise to a new era in
communication. The discovery of gold in California in 1848 was
followed by competing projects to construct railroads to the
Pacific with Chicago and St. Louis as the rival eastern
terminals. The telegraph, the railway, and the resulting
industrial development proved great nationalizing influences.
They served also to give increased emphasis to the contrast
between the industries of the free and those of the slave States.
The Census of 1850 became an effective anti-slavery argument.

The telegraph also gave new life to the public press. The
presidential campaign of 1848 was the last one in which it was
possible to carry on contradictory arguments in support of the
same candidate. If slavery could not endure the test of
untrammeled discussion when there were no means of rapid
intercommunication such as the telegraph supplied, how could it
contend against the revelations of the daily press with the new
type of reporter and interviewer which was now developed?

It is a remarkable coincidence that in the midst of the passing
of the old and the coming in of the new order there should be a
change in the political leadership of the country. Webster, Clay,
Calhoun, John Quincy Adams, not to mention others, all died near
the middle of the century, and their political power passed to
younger men. Adams gave his blessing to a young friend and
co-laborer, William H. Seward of New York, intimating that he
expected him to do much to curb the threatening power of the
slaveholding oligarchy; while Andrew Jackson, who died earlier,
had already conferred a like distinction upon young Stephen A.
Douglas. There was no lack of aspirants for the fallen mantles.

John C. Calhoun continued almost to the day of his death to
modify his interpretation of the Constitution in the interest of
his section. As a young man he avowed protectionist principles.
Becoming convinced that slave labor was not suited to
manufacture, he urged South Carolina to declare the protective
tariff laws null and void within her limits. When his section
seemed endangered by the distribution of anti-slavery literature
through the mail, he extemporized a theory that each State had a
right to pass statutes to protect itself in such an emergency, in
which case it became the duty of the general Government and of
all other States to respect such laws. When it finally appeared
that the territory acquired from Mexico was likely to remain
free, the same statesman made further discoveries. He found that
Congress had no right to exclude slavery from any Territory
belonging to the United States; that the owners of slaves had
equal rights with the owners of other property; that neither
Congress nor a territorial authority had any power to exclude
slaves from a Territory. This doctrine was accepted by extremists
in the South and was finally embodied in the Dred Scott decision
of 1857.

Abolitionists had meantime evolved a precisely contradictory
theory. They asserted that the Constitution gave no warrant for
property in man, except as held under state laws; that with this
exception freedom was guaranteed to all; that Congress had no
more right to make a slave than it had to make a king; and that
it was the duty of Congress to maintain freedom in all the
Territories. Extremists expressed the view that all past acts
whereby sla