very had been extended were unconstitutional and
therefore void. Between these extreme conflicting views was every
imaginable grade of opinion. The prevailing view of opponents of
slavery, however, was in harmony with their past conduct and
maintained that Congress had complete control over slavery in the
Territories.

When the Mexican territory was acquired, Stephen A. Douglas, as
the experienced chairman of the Committee on Territories in the
Senate, was already developing a theory respecting slavery in the
Territories which was destined to play a leading part in the
later crusade against slavery. Douglas was the most thoroughgoing
of expansionists and would acknowledge no northern boundary on
this side of the North Pole, no southern boundary nearer than
Panama. He regarded the United States, with its great principle
of local autonomy, as fitted to become eventually the United
States of the whole world, while he held it to be an immediate
duty to make it the United States of North America. As the son-
in-law of a Southern planter in North Carolina, and as the father
of sons who inherited slave property, Douglas, although born in
Vermont, knew the South as did no other Northern statesman. He
knew also the institution of slavery at first hand. As a
pronounced expansionist and as the congressional leader in all
matters pertaining to the Territories, he acquired detailed
information as to the qualities of these new possessions, and he
spoke, therefore, with a good degree of authority when he said,
"If there was one inch of territory in the whole of our
acquisitions from Mexico where slavery could exist, it was in the
valleys of the Sacramento and the San Joaquin." But this region
was at once preempted for freedom upon the discovery of gold.

Douglas did not admit that even the whole of Texas would remain
dedicated to slavery. Some of the States to be formed from it
would be free, by the same laws of climate and resources which
determined that the entire West would remain free. Before the
Mexican War the Senator had become convinced that the extension
of slavery had reached its limit; that the Missouri Compromise
was a dead letter except as a psychological palliative; that
Nature had already ordained that slave labor should be forever
excluded from all Western territory both north and south of that
line. His reply to Calhoun's contention that a balance must be
maintained between slave and free States was that he had plans
for forming seventeen new States out of the vast Western domains,
every one of which would be free. And besides, said he, "we all
look forward with confidence to the time when Delaware, Maryland,
Virginia, Kentucky, and Missouri, and probably North Carolina and
Tennessee will adopt a gradual system of emancipation." Douglas
was one of the first to favor the admission of California as a
free State. According to the Missouri Compromise law and the laws
of Mexico, all Western territory was free, and he was opposed to
interference with existing conditions. The Missouri Compromise
was still held sacred. Finally, however, it was with Douglas's
assistance that the Compromise measures of 1850 were passed, one
of which provided for territorial Governments for Utah and New
Mexico with the proviso that, when admitted as States, slavery
should be permitted or prohibited as the citizens of those States
should determine at the time. Congress refrained from any
declaration as to slavery in the Territories. It was this policy
of "non-intervention" which four years later furnished plausible
excuse for the repeal of the Missouri Compromise.

It was not strange that there was general ignorance in all parts
of the country as to the resources of the newly acquired
territory. The rush to the goldfields precipitated action in
respect to California. Before General Taylor, the newly elected
President, was inaugurated, there was imminent need of an
efficient government. An early act of the Administration was to
send an agent to assist in the formation of a state Government,
and a convention was immediately called to frame a constitution.
By unanimous vote of the convention, slavery was excluded. The
constitution was approved by popular vote and was presented to
Congress for final acceptance in December, 1849.

In the meantime a great commotion had arisen among the people.
Southern state legislatures passed resolutions demanding that the
rights of their peculiar institution should be recognized in the
new Territory. Northern legislatures responded with resolutions
favoring the admission of California as a State and the
application of the Wilmot Proviso to the remaining territory.
Northern Democrats had very generally denied that the affair with
Mexico had as a chief purpose the extension of slavery. Democrats
therefore united with Whigs in maintaining the principle of free
soil. In the South there was a corresponding fusion of the two
parties in support of the sectional issue.

General concern prevailed as to the attitude of the
Administration. Taylor's election had been effected by both a
Southern and a Northern split in the Democratic party. Northern
Democrats had voted for the Free-soil candidate because of the
alleged pro-slavery tendencies of their own party. Southern
Democrats voted for Taylor because of their distrust of Lewis
Cass, their own candidate. Some of these met in convention and
formally nominated Taylor, and Taylor accepted their nomination
with thanks. Northern anti-slavery Whigs had a difficult task to
keep their members in line. There is evidence that Taylor held
the traditional Southern view that the anti-slavery North was
disposed to encroach upon the rights of the South. Meeting fewer
Northern Whig supporters, he became convinced that the more
active spirit of encroachment was in the pro-slavery South.
California needed a state Government, and the President took the
most direct method to supply that need. As the inhabitants were
unanimous in their desire to exclude slavery, their wish should
be respected. New Mexico was in a similar situation. As slavery
was already excluded from the territory under Mexican law, and as
there was no wish on the part of the inhabitants to introduce
slavery, the President recognized existing facts and made no
change. When Southern leaders projected a scheme to enlarge the
boundaries of Texas so as to extend slavery over a large part of
New Mexico, President Taylor set a guard of United States troops
to maintain the integrity of the Territory. When a deputation of
Southern Whigs endeavored to dissuade him from his purpose,
threatening a dissolution of the Union and intimating that army
officers would refuse to act against citizens of Texas, the
soldier President replied that in such an event he would take
command in person and would hang any one caught in acts of
treason. When Henry Clay introduced an elaborate project for a
compromise between the North and the South, the President
insisted that each question should be settled on its own merits
and directed the forces of the Administration against any sort of
compromise. The debate over Clay's Omnibus Bill was long and
acrimonious. On July 4, 1850, the President seemed triumphant.
But upon that day, notwithstanding his apparent robust health, he
was stricken down with an acute disease and died five days later.
With his passing, the opposing Whig faction came into power. The
so-called compromise measures were at length one by one passed by
Congress and approved by President Fillmore.

California was admitted as a free State; but as a palliative to
the South, Congress passed bills for the organization of
territorial Governments for New Mexico and Utah without positive
declarations regarding the powers of the territorial Legislatures
over slavery. All questions relating to title to slaves were to
be left to the courts. Meantime it was left in doubt whether
Mexican law excluding slavery was still in force. Southern
malcontents maintained that this act was a mere hoax, using words
which suggested concession when no concession was intended.
Northern anti-slavery men criticized the act as the entering
wedge for another great surrender to the enemy. Because of the
uncertainty regarding the meaning of the law and the false hopes
likely to be created, they maintained that it was fitted to
foment discord and prolong the period of distrust between the two
sections. At all events such was its actual effect.

A third act in this unhappy series gave to Texas ten millions of
dollars for the alleged surrender of claims to a part of New
Mexico. This had little bearing on the general subject of
compromise; yet anti-slavery men criticized it on the ground that
the issue raised was insincere; that the appropriation was in
fact a bribe to secure votes necessary to pass the other
measures; that the bill was passed through Congress by shameless
bribery, and that even the boundaries conceded to Texas involved
the surrender of free territory.

The abolition of the slave-trade in the District of Columbia was
supported by both sections of the country. The removal of the
slave pens within sight of the Capitol to a neighboring city
deprived the abolitionists of one of their weapons for effective
agitation, but it did not otherwise affect the position of
slavery.

Of the five acts included in the compromise measures, the one
which provided for the return of fugitive slaves was most
effective in the promotion of hostility between the two sections.
During the six months of debate on the Omnibus Bill, numerous
bills were presented to take the place of the law of 1793.
Webster brought forward a bill which provided for the use of a
jury to establish the validity of a claim to an escaped slave.
But that which was finally adopted by a worn-out Congress is
characterized as one of the most barbarous pieces of legislation
ever enacted by a civilized country. A single incident may
indicate the nature of the act. James Hamlet, for three years a
resident of New York City, a husband and a father and a member of
the Methodist Church, was seized eight days after the law went
into effect by order of the agent of Mary Brown of Baltimore, cut
off from all communication with his friends, hurried before a
commissioner, and on ex parte testimony was delivered into the
hands of the agent, by whom he was handcuffed and secretly
conveyed to Baltimore. Mr. Rhodes accounts for the enactment in
the following words: "If we look below the surface we shall find
a strong impelling motive of the Southern clamor for this harsh
enactment other than the natural desire to recover lost property.
Early in the session it took air that a part of the game of the
disunionists was to press a stringent fugitive slave law, for
which no Northern man could vote; and when it was defeated, the
North would be charged with refusal to carry out a stipulation of
the Constitution . . . . The admission of California was a bitter
pill for the Southern ultras, but they were forced to take it.
The Fugitive Slave Law was a taunt and a reproach to that part of
the North where the anti-slavery sentiment ruled supremely, and
was deemed a partial compensation." Clay expressed surprise that
States from which few slaves escaped demanded a more stringent
law than Kentucky, from which many escaped.

Whatever may have been the motives leading to the enactment, its
immediate effect was the elimination of one of the great national
parties, thus paving the way for the formation of parties along
sectional lines. Two years after the passage of the compromise
acts the Democratic national convention assembled to nominate a
candidate for the Presidency. The platform adopted by the party
promised a faithful execution of the acts known as the compromise
measures and added "the act for reclaiming fugitives from service
or labor included; which act, being designed to carry out an
express provision of the Constitution, cannot, with fidelity
thereto, be repealed nor so changed as to destroy or impair its
efficiency." When this was read, the convention broke out in
uproarious applause. Then there was a demand that it should be
read again. Again there was loud applause.

Why was there this demand that a law which every one knew had
proved a complete failure should be made a permanent part of the
Constitution? And why the ungovernable hilarity over the demand
that its "efficiency" should never be impaired? Surely the motive
was something other than a desire to recover lost property. Upon
the Whig party had been fastened the odium for the enactment of
the law, and the act unrepealed meant the death of the party. The
Democrats saw good reason for laughter.



CHAPTER VIII. THE UNDERGROUND RAILROAD

Wherever there are slaves there are fugitives if there is an
available place of refuge. The wilds of Florida were such a
refuge during the early part of last century. When the Northern
States became free, fugitive slaves began to escape thither, and
Canada, when it could be reached, was, of course, the goal of
perfect security and liberty for all.

A professed object of the early anti-slavery societies was to
prevent the enslavement of free negroes and in other ways to
protect their rights. During the process of emancipation in
Northern States large numbers of colored persons were spirited
off to the South and sold into slavery. At various places along
the border there were those who made it their duty to guard the
rights of negroes and to prevent kidnapping. These guardians of
the border furnished a nucleus for the development of what was
later known as the Underground Railroad.

In 1796 President Washington wrote a letter to a friend in New
Hampshire with reference to obtaining the return of a negro
servant. He was careful to state that the servant should remain
unmolested rather than "excite a mob or riot or even uneasy
sensations in the minds of well disposed citizens." The result
was that the servant remained free. President Washington here
assumed that "well disposed citizens" would oppose her return to
slavery. Three years earlier the President had himself signed a
bill to facilitate by legal process the return of fugitives
escaping into other States. He was certainly aware that such an
act was on the statute books when he wrote his request to his
friend in New Hampshire, yet he expected that, if an attempt were
made to remove the refugee by force, riot and resistance by a mob
would be the result.

Not until after the foreign slave-trade had been prohibited and
the domestic trade had been developed, and not until there was a
pro-slavery reaction in the South which banished from the slave
States all anti-slavery propaganda, did the systematic assistance
rendered to fugitive slaves assume any large proportions or
arouse bitter resentment. It began in the late twenties and early
thirties of the nineteenth century, extended with the spread of
anti-slavery organization, and was greatly encouraged and
stimulated by the enactment of the law of 1850.

The Underground Railroad was never coextensive with the abolition
movement. There were always abolitionists who disapproved the
practice of assisting fugitives, and others who took no part in
it. Of those who were active participants, the larger proportion
confined their activities to assisting those who had escaped and
would take no part in seeking to induce slaves to leave their
masters. Efforts of that kind were limited to a few individuals
only.

Incidents drawn from the reminiscences of Levi Coffin, the
reputed president of the Underground Railroad, may serve to
illustrate the origin and growth of the system. He was seven
years old when he first saw near his home in North Carolina a
coffle of slaves being driven to the Southern market by a man on
horseback with a long whip. "The driver was some distance behind
with the wagon. My father addressed the slaves pleasantly and
then asked, 'Well, boys, why do they chain you?' One of the men
whose countenance betrayed unusual intelligence and whose
expression denoted the deepest sadness replied: 'They have taken
us from our wives and children and they chain us lest we should
make our escape and go back to them."' When Coffin was fifteen,
he rendered assistance to a man in bondage. Having an opportunity
to talk with the members of a gang in the hands of a trader bound
for the Southern market, he learned that one of the company,
named Stephen, was a freeman who had been kidnapped and sold.
Letters were written to Northern friends of Stephen who confirmed
his assertion. Money was raised in the Quaker meeting and men
were sent to recover the negro. Stephen was found in Georgia and
after six months was liberated.

During the year 1821 other incidents occurred in the Quaker
community at New Garden, near Greensboro, North Carolina, which
illustrate different phases of the subject. Jack Barnes was the
slave of a bachelor who became so greatly attached to his servant
that he bequeathed to him not only his freedom but also a large
share of his property. Relatives instituted measures to break the
will, and Jack in alarm took refuge among the Quakers at New
Garden. The suit went against the negro, and the newspapers
contained advertisements offering a hundred dollars for
information which should result in his recovery. To prevent his
return to bondage, it was decided that Jack should join a family
of Coffins who were moving to Indiana.

At the same time a negro by the name of Sam had for several
months been abiding in the Quaker neighborhood. He belonged to a
Mr. Osborne, a prototype of Simon Legree, who was so notoriously
cruel that other slave-owners assisted in protecting his victims.
After the Coffins, with Jack, had been on the road for a few
days, Osborne learned that a negro was with them and, feeling
sure that it was his Sam, he started in hot haste after them.
This becoming known to the Friends, young Levi Coffin was sent
after Osborne to forestall disaster. The descriptions given of
Jack and Sam were practically identical and it was surmised that
when Osborne should overtake the party and discover his mistake,
he would seize Jack for the sake of the offered reward. Coffin
soon came up with Osborne and decided to ride with him for a time
to learn his plans. In the course of their conversation, it was
finally agreed that Coffin should assist in the recovery of Sam.
Osborne was also generous and insisted that if it proved to be
the other "nigger" who was with the company, Coffin should have
half the reward. How the young Quaker outwitted the tyrant,
gained his point, sent Jack on his way to liberty, and at the
same time retained the confidence of Osborne so that upon their
return home he was definitely engaged to assist Osborne in
finding Sam, is a fascinating story. The abolitionist won from
the slaveholder the doubtful compliment that "there was not a man
in that neighborhood worth a d--n to help him hunt his negro
except young Levi Coffin."

Sam was perfectly safe so long as Levi Coffin was guide for the
hunting-party, but matters were becoming desperate. For the
fugitive something had to be done. Another family was planning to
move to Indiana, and in their wagon Sam was to be concealed and
thus conveyed to a free State. The business had now become
serious. The laws of the State affixed the death penalty for
stealing a slave. At night when young Coffin and his father, with
Sam, were on their way to complete arrangements for the
departure, horsemen appeared in the road near by. They had only
time to throw themselves flat on the ground behind a log. From
the conversation overheard, they were assured that they had
narrowly escaped the night-riders on the lookout for stray
negroes. The next year, 1822, Coffin himself joined a party going
to Indiana by the southern route through Tennessee and Kentucky.
In the latter State they were at one time overtaken by men who
professed to be looking for a pet dog, but whose real purpose was
to recover runaway slaves. They insisted upon examining the
contents of the wagons, for in this way only a short time
previous a fugitive had been captured.

These incidents show the origin of the system. The first case of
assistance rendered a negro was not in itself illegal, but was
intended merely to prevent the crime of kidnapping. The second
was illegal in form, but the aid was given to one who, having
been set free by will, was being reenslaved, it was believed, by
an unjust decision of a court. The third was a case of outrageous
abuse on the part of the owner. The negro Sam had himself gone to
a trader begging that he would buy him and preferring to take his
chances on a Mississippi plantation rather than return to his
master. The trader offered the customary price and was met with
the reply that he could have the rascal if he would wait until
after the enraged owner had taken his revenge, otherwise the
price would be twice the amount offered. A large proportion of
the fugitives belonged to this maltreated class. Others were
goaded to escape by the prospect of deportation to the Gulf
States. The fugitives generally followed the beaten line of
travel to the North and West.

In 1826 Levi Coffin became a merchant in Newport, Indiana, a town
near the Ohio line not far from Richmond. In the town and in its
neighborhood lived a large number of free negroes who were the
descendants of former slaves whom North Carolina Quakers had set
free and had colonized in the new country. Coffin found that
these blacks were accustomed to assist fugitives on their way to
Canada. When he also learnt that some had been captured and
returned to bondage merely through lack of skill on the part of
the negroes, he assumed active operations as a conductor on the
Underground Railroad.

Coffin used the Underground Railroad as a means of making
converts to the cause. One who berated him for negro-stealing was
adroitly induced to meet a newly arrived passenger and listen to
his pathetic story. At the psychological moment the objector was
skillfully led to hand the fugitive a dollar to assist him in
reaching a place of safety. Coffin then explained to this
benevolent non-abolitionist the nature of his act, assuring him
that he was liable to heavy damages therefor. The reply was in
this case more forcible than elegant: "Damn it! You've got me!"
This conversion he publicly proclaimed for the sake of its
influence upon others. Many were the instances in which those of
supposed pro-slavery convictions were brought face to face with
an actual case of the threatened reenslavement of a human being
escaping from bondage and were, to their own surprise, overcome
by the natural, humane sentiment which asserted itself. For
example, a Cincinnati merchant, who at the time was supposed to
be assisting one of his Southern customers to recover an escaped
fugitive, was confronted at his own home by the poor half-starved
victim. Yielding to the impulse of compassion, he gave the slave
food and personal assistance and directed the destitute creature
to a place of refuge.

The division in the Quaker meeting in Indiana with which Levi
Coffin was intimately associated may serve to exemplify a
corresponding attitude in other churches on the question of
slavery. The Quakers availed themselves of the first great anti-
slavery movement to rid themselves completely of the burden.
Their Society itself became an anti-slavery organization. Yet
even so the Friends had differences of opinion as to fit methods
of action. Not only did many of them disapprove of rendering aid
to fugitives but they also objected to the use of the
meetinghouses for anti-slavery lectures. The formation of the
Liberty party served to accentuate the division. The great body
of the Friends were anti-slavery Whigs.

A crisis in the affairs of the Society of Friends in the State of
Indiana was reached in 1843 when the radicals seceded and
organized an independent "Anti-Slavery Friends Society."
Immediately there appeared in numerous localities duplicate
Friends' meeting-houses. In and around one of these,
distinguished as "Liberty Hall," were gathered those whose
supreme religious interest was directed against the sin of
slavery. Never was there a church division which involved less
bad blood or sense of injury or injustice. Members of the same
family attended separate churches without the least difference in
their cordial relations. No important principle was involved;
there were apparently good reasons for both lines of policy, and
each party understood and respected the other's position. After
the adoption of the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 and the passing of
the Whig party, these differences disappeared, the separate
organization was disbanded, and all Friends' meetinghouses became
"liberty halls."

The disposition to aid the fugitive was by no means confined to
the North nor to Quakers in the South. Richard Dillingham, a
young Quaker who had yielded to the solicitations of escaped
fugitives in Cincinnati and had undertaken a mission to
Nashville, Tennessee, to rescue their relatives from a "hard
master," was arrested with three stolen slaves on his hands. He
made confession in open court and frankly explained his motives.
The Nashville Daily Gazette of April 13, 1849, has words of
commendation for the prisoner and his family and states that "he
was not without the sympathy of those who attended the trial."
Though Dillingham committed a crime to which the death penalty
was attached in some of the States, the jury affixed the minimum
penalty of three years' imprisonment for the offense. As
Nashville was far removed from Quaker influence or any sort of
anti-slavery propaganda, Dillingham was himself astonished and
was profoundly grateful for the leniency shown him by Court,
jury, and prosecutors. This incident occurred in the year before
the adoption of the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850. It is well known
that in all times and places which were free from partizan
bitterness there was a general natural sympathy for those who
imperiled their life and liberty to free the slave. Throughout
the South men of both races were ready to give aid to slaves
seeking to escape from dangers or burdens which they regarded as
intolerable. While such a man as Frederick Douglass, when still a
slave, was an agent of the Underground Railroad, Southern anti-
slavery people themselves were to a large extent the original
projectors of the movement. Even members of the families of
slaveholders have been known to assist fugitives in their escape
to the North.

The fugitives traveled in various ways which were determined
partly by geographical conditions and partly by the character of
the inhabitants of a region. On the Atlantic coast, from Florida
to Delaware, slaves were concealed in ships and were thus
conveyed to free States. Thence some made their way towards
Canada by steamboat or railroad, though most made the journey on
foot or, less frequently, in private conveyances. Stalwart slaves
sometimes walked from the Gulf States to the free States,
traveling chiefly by night and guided by the North Star. Having
reached a free State, they found friends among those of their own
race, or were taken in hand by officers of the Underground
Railroad and were thus helped across the Canadian border.

>From the seacoast the valley of the Connecticut River furnished
a
convenient route for completing the journey northward, though the
way of the fugitives was often deflected to the Lake Champlain
region. In later years, when New England became generally
sympathetic, numerous lines of escape traversed that entire
section. Other courses extended northward from the vicinity of
Philadelphia, Delaware, and Maryland. Here, through the center of
American Quakerdom, all conditions favored the escape of
fugitives, for slavery and freedom were at close quarters. The
activities of the Quakers, who were at first engaged merely in
preventing the reenslavement of those who had a legal right to
freedom, naturally expanded until aid was given without
reservation to any fugitive. From Philadelphia as a distributing
point the route went by way of New York and the Hudson River or
up the river valleys of eastern Pennsylvania through western New
York.

In addition to the routes to freedom which the seacoast and river
valleys afforded, the Appalachian chain of mountains formed an
attractive highway of escape from slavery, though these mountain
paths lead us to another branch of our subject not immediately
connected with the Underground Railroad--the escape from bondage
by the initiative of the slaves themselves or by the aid of their
own people. Mountains have always been a refuge and a defense for
the outlaw, and the few dwellers in this almost unknown
wilderness were not infrequently either indifferent or friendly
to the fugitives. The escaped slaves might, if they chose, adopt
for an indefinite time the free life of the hills; but in most
cases they naturally drifted northward for greater security until
they found themselves in a free State. Through the mountainous
regions of Virginia many thus escaped, and they were induced to
remain there by the example and advice of residents of their own
color. The negroes themselves excelled all others in furnishing
places of refuge to fugitives from slavery and in concealing
their status. For this reason John Brown and his associates were
influenced to select this region for their great venture in 1859.

But there were other than geographical conditions which helped to
determine the direction of the lines of the Underground Railroad.
West of the Alleghanies are the broad plains of the Mississippi
Valley, and in this great region human elements rather than
physical characteristics proved influential. Northern Ohio was
occupied by settlers from the East, many of whom were anti-
slavery. Southern Ohio was populated largely by Quakers and other
people from the slave States who abhorred slavery. On the east
and south the State bordered on slave territory, and every part
of the region was traversed by lines of travel for the slave. In
eastern and northern Indiana a favorable attitude prevailed.
Southwestern Indiana, however, and southern Illinois were
occupied by those less friendly to the slave, so that in these
sections there is little evidence of systematic aid to fugitives.
But with St. Louis, Missouri, as a starting-point, northern
Illinois became honeycombed with refuges for patrons of the
Underground Railroad. The negro also found friends in all the
settled portions of Iowa, and at the outbreak of the Civil War a
lively traffic was being developed, extending from Lawrence,
Kansas, to Keokuk, Iowa.

There is respectable authority for a variety of opinions as to
the requirements of the rendition clause in the Constitution and
of the Act of Congress of 1793 to facilitate the return of
fugitives from service or labor; but there is no respectable
authority in support of the view that neither the spirit nor the
letter of the law was violated by the supporters of the
Underground Railroad. This was a source of real weakness to
anti-slavery leaders in politics. It was always true that only a
small minority of their numbers were actual violators of the law,
yet such was their relation to the organized anti-slavery
movement that responsibility attached to all. The platform of the
Liberty party for 1844 declared that the provisions of the
Constitution for reclaiming fugitive slaves were dangerous to
liberty and ought to be abrogated. It further declared that the
members of the party would treat these provisions as void,
because they involved an order to commit an immoral act. The
platform thus explicitly committed the party to the support of
the policy of rendering aid to fugitive slaves. Four years later
the platform of the Free-soil party contained no reference
whatever to fugitive slaves, but that of 1852 denounced the
Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 as repugnant to the Constitution and
the spirit of Christianity and denied its binding force on the
American people. The Republican platform of 1856 made no
reference to the subject.

The Underground Railroad filled an insignificant place in the
general plan for emancipation, even in the minds of the
directors. It was a lesser task preparatory to the great work. As
to the numbers of slaves who gained their freedom by means of it,
there is a wide range of opinion. Statements in Congress by
Southern members that a hundred thousand had escaped must be
regarded as gross exaggerations. In any event the loss was
confined chiefly to the border States. Besides, it has been
stated with some show of reason that the danger of servile
insurrection was diminished by the escape of potential leaders.

>From the standpoint of the great body of anti-slavery men who
expected to settle the slavery question by peaceable means, it
was a calamity of the first magnitude that, just at the time when
conditions were most favorable for transferring the active
crusade from the general Government to the separate States,
public attention should be directed to the one point at which the
conflict was most acute and irrepressible.

Previous to 1850 there had been no general acrimonious debate in
Congress on the rendition of fugitive slaves. About half of those
who had previously escaped from bondage had not taken the trouble
to go as far as Canada, but were living at peace in the Northern
States. Few people at the North knew or cared anything about the
details of a law that had been on the statute books since 1793.
Members of Congress were duly warned of the dangers involved in
any attempt to enforce a more stringent law than the previous act
which had proved a dead letter. To those who understood the
conditions, the new law also was doomed to failure. So said
Senator Butler of South Carolina. An attempt to enforce it would
be met by violence.

This prediction came true. The twenty thousand potential victims
residing in Northern States were thrown into panic. Some rushed
off to Canada; others organized means for protection. A father
and son from Baltimore came to a town in Pennsylvania to recover
a fugitive. An alarm was sounded; men, mostly colored, rushed to
the protection of the one whose liberty was threatened. Two
Quakers appeared on the scene and warned the slavehunters to
desist and upon their refusal one slave-hunter was instantly
killed and the other wounded. The fugitive was conveyed to a
place of safety, and to the murderers no punishment was meted
out, though the general Government made strenuous efforts to
discover and punish them. In New York, though Gerrit Smith and a
local clergyman with a few assistants rescued a fugitive from the
officers of the law and sent him to Canada, openly proclaiming
and justifying the act, no attempt was made to punish the
offenders.

After a dozen years of intense and ever-increasing excitement,
when other causes of friction between North and South had
apparently been removed and good citizens in the two sections
were rejoicing at the prospect of an era of peace and harmony,
public attention was concentrated upon the one problem of conduct
which would not admit of peaceable legal adjustment.
Abolitionists had always been stigmatized as lawbreakers whose
aim was the destruction of slavery in utter disregard of the
rights of the States. This charge was absolutely false; their
settled program involved full recognition of state and municipal
control over slavery. Yet after public attention had become fixed
upon conduct on the part of the abolitionists which was illegal,
it was difficult to escape the implication that their whole
course was illegal. This was the tragic significance of the
Fugitive Slave Act of 1850.



CHAPTER IX. BOOKS AS ANTI-SLAVERY WEAPONS

Whittier offered up "thanks for the fugitive slave law; for it
gave occasion for 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.'" Mrs. Harriet Beecher
Stowe had been mistress of a station on the Underground Railroad
at Cincinnati, the storm-center of the West, and out of her
experience she has transmitted to the world a knowledge of the
elemental and tragic human experiences of the slaves which would
otherwise have been restricted to a select few. The mistress of a
similar station in eastern Indiana, though she held novel reading
a deadly sin, said: "'Uncle Tom's Cabin' is not a novel, it is a
record of facts. I myself have listened to the same stories." The
reading public in all lands soon became sympathetic participants
in the labors of those who, in defiance of law, were lending a
hand to the aspirants for liberty. At the time of the publication
of the story in book form in March, 1852, America was being
profoundly stirred by the stories of fugitives who had escaped
from European despotism. Mrs. Stowe refers to these incidents in
her question: "When despairing Hungarian fugitives make their
way, against all the search-warrants and authorities of their
lawful governments to America, press and political cabinet ring
with applause and welcome. When despairing African fugitives do
the same thing--it is--what IS it?" Little did she think that
when the eloquence of the Hungarian refugee had been forgotten,
the story of Eliza and Uncle Tom would ring throughout the world.

The book did far more than vindicate the conduct of those who
rendered assistance to the fugitive from slavery; it let in
daylight upon the essential nature of slavery. Humane and just
masters are shown to be forced into participation in acts which
result in intolerable cruelty. Full justice is done to the noble
and admirable character of Southern slave-owners. The author had
been a guest in the home of the "Shelbys," in Kentucky. She had
taken great pains to understand the Southern point of view on the
subject of slavery; she had entered into the real trials and
difficulties involved in any plan of emancipation. St. Clair,
speaking to Miss Ophelia, his New England cousin, says:

"If we emancipate, are you willing to educate? How many families
of your town would take in a negro man or woman, teach them, bear
with them, and seek to make them Christians? How many merchants
would take Adolph, if I wanted to make him a clerk; or mechanics,
if I wanted to teach him a trade? If I wanted to put Jane and
Rosa to a school, how many schools are there in the Northern
States that would take them in? How many families that would
board them? And yet they are as white as many a woman north or
south. You see, cousin, I want justice done us. We are in a bad
position. We are the more obvious oppressors of the negro; but
the unchristian prejudice of the north is an oppressor almost
equally severe."

Throughout the book the idea is elaborated in many ways. Miss
Ophelia is introduced for the purpose of contrasting Northern
ignorance and New England prejudice with the patience and
forbearance of the better class of slave-owners of the South. The
genuine affection of an unspoiled child for negro friends is made
especially emphatic. Miss Ophelia objected to Eva's expressions
of devotion to Uncle Tom. Her father insists that his daughter
shall not be robbed of the free utterance of her high regard,
observing that "the child is the only true democrat." There is
only one Simon Legree in the book, and he is of New England
extraction. The story is as distinctly intended to inform
Northern ignorance and to remove Northern prejudice as it is to
justify the conduct of abolitionists.

What was the effect of the publication? In European countries far
removed from local partizan prejudice, it was immediately
received as a great revelation of the spirit of liberty. It was
translated into twenty-three different languages. So devoted were
the Italians to the reading of the story that there was earnest
effort to suppress its circulation. As a drama it proved a great
success, not only in America and England but in France and other
countries as well. More than a million copies of the story were
sold in the British Empire. Lord Palmerston avers that he had not
read a novel for thirty years, yet he read Uncle Tom's Cabin
three times and commended the book for the statesmanship
displayed in it.

What is in the story to call forth such commendation from the
cold-blooded English statesman? The book revealed, in a way
fitted to carry conviction to every unprejudiced reader, the
impossibility of uniting slavery with freedom under the same
Government. Either all must be free or the mass subject to the
few--or there is actual war. This principle is finely brought out
in the predicament of the Quaker confronted by a fugitive with
wife and child who had seen a sister sold and conveyed to a life
of shame on a Southern plantation. "Am I going to stand by and
see them take my wife and sell her?" exclaimed the negro. "No,
God help me! I'll fight to the last breath before they shall take
my wife and son. Can you blame me?" To which the Quaker replied:
"Mortal man cannot blame thee, George. Flesh and blood could not
do otherwise. 'Woe unto the world because of offences but woe
unto them through whom the offence cometh.'" "Would not even you,
sir, do the same, in my place?" "I pray that I be not tried." And
in the ensuing events the Quaker played an important part.

Laws enacted for the protection of slave property are shown to be
destructive of the fundamental rights of freemen; they are
inhuman. The Ohio Senator, who in his lofty preserve at the
capital of his country could discourse eloquently of his
readiness to keep faith with the South in the matter of the
faithful execution of the Fugitive Slave Law, becomes, when at
home with his family, a flagrant violator of the law. Elemental
human nature is pitted against the apparent interests of a few
individual slaveowners. The story of Uncle Tom placed all
supporters of the new law on the defensive. It was read by all
classes North and South. "Uncle Tom's Cabin as it is" was called
forth from the South as a reply to Mrs. Stowe's book, and there
ensued a general discussion of the subject which was on the whole
enlightening. Yet the immediate political effect of the
publication was less than might have been expected from a book so
widely read and discussed. Its appearance early in the decade did
not prevent the apparent pro-slavery reaction already described.
But Mr. Rhodes calls attention to the different impression which
the book made upon adults and boys. Hardened sinners in partizan
politics could read the book, laugh and weep over the passing
incidents, and then go on as if nothing had happened. Not so with
the thirteen-year-old boy. He never could be the same again. The
Republican party of 1860 was especially successful in gaining the
first vote of the youthful citizen and undoubtedly owed much of
its influence to "Uncle Tom's Cabin."

Two lines of attack were rapidly rendering impossible the
continuance of slavery in the United States. Mrs. Stowe gave
effective expression to the moral, religious, and humanitarian
sentiment against slavery. In the year in which her work was
published, Frederick Law Olmsted began his extended journeys
throughout the South. He represents the impartial scientific
observer. His books were published during the years 1856, 1857,
and 1861. They constitute in their own way an indictment against
slavery quite as forcible as that of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," but an
indictment that rests chiefly upon the blighting influence of the
institution of slavery upon agriculture, manufactures, and the
general industrial and social order. The crisis came too soon for
these publications to have any marked effect upon the issue.
Their appeal was to the deliberate and thoughtful reader, and
political control had already drifted into the hands of those who
were not deliberate and composed.

In 1857, however, there appeared a book which did exert a marked
influence upon immediate political issues. There is no evidence
that Hinton Rowan Helper, the author of "The Impending Crisis,"
had any knowledge of the writings of Olmsted; but he was familiar
with Northern anti-slavery literature. "I have considered my
subject more particularly," he states in his preface, "with
reference to its economic aspects as regards the whites--not with
reference, except in a very slight degree, to its humanitarian or
religious aspects. To the latter side of the question, Northern
writers have already done full and timely justice . . . . Yankee
wives have written the most popular anti-slavery literature of
the day. Against this I have nothing to say; it is all well
enough for women to give the fictions of slavery; men should give
the facts." He denies that it had been his purpose to cast
unmerited opprobium upon slaveholders; yet a sense of personal
injury breathes throughout the pages. If he had no intention of
casting unmerited opprobrium upon slaveholders, it is difficult
to imagine what language he could have used if he had undertaken
to pass the limit of deserved reprobation. In this regard the
book is quite in line with the style of Southern utterance
against abolitionists.

Helper belonged to a slaveholding family, for a hundred years
resident in the Carolinas. The dedication is significant. It is
to three personal friends from three slave States who at the time
were residing in California, in Oregon, and in Washington
Territory, "and to the non-slaveholding whites of the South
generally, whether at home or abroad." Out of the South had come
the inspiration for the religious and humanitarian attack upon
slavery. From the same source came the call for relief of the
poverty-stricken white victims of the institution.

Helper's book revived the controversy which had been forcibly
terminated a quarter of a century before. He resumes the argument
of the members of the Virginia legislature of 1832. He reprints
extended selections from that memorable debate and then, by
extended references to later official reports, points out how
slavery is impoverishing the South. The South is shown to have
continuously declined, while the North has made immense gains. In
a few years the relation of the South to the North would resemble
that of Poland to Russia or of Ireland to England. The author
sees no call for any arguments against slavery as an economic
system; he would simply bring the earlier characterization of the
situation down to date.

Helper differs radically from all earlier speakers and writers in
that he outlines a program for definite action. He estimates that
for the entire South there are seven white non-slaveholders for
every three slaveholders. He would organize these
non-slaveholding whites into an independent political party and
would hold a general convention of non-slaveholders from every
slave State to adopt measures to restrain "the diabolical
excesses of the oligarchy" and to annihilate slavery.
Slaveholders should be entirely excluded from any share in
government. They should be treated as criminals ostracized from
respectable society. He is careful to state, however, that by
slaveholder he does not mean such men as Benton of Missouri and
many others throughout the slave States who retain the sentiments
on the slavery question of the "immortal Fathers of the
Republic." He has in mind only the new order of owners, who have
determined by criminal methods to inflict the crime of slavery
upon an overwhelming majority of their white fellow-citizens.

The publication of "The Impending Crisis" created a profound
sensation among Southern leaders. So long as the attack upon the
peculiar institution emanated from the North, the defenders had
the full benefit of local prejudice and resentment against
outside intrusion. Helper was himself a thorough-going believer
in state rights. Slavery was to be abolished, as he thought, by
the action of the separate States. Here he was in accord with
Northern abolitionists. If such literature as Helper's volume
should find its way into the South, it would be no longer
possible to palm off upon the unthinking public the patent
falsehood that abolitionists of the North were attempting to
impose by force a change in Southern institutions. All that
Southern abolitionists ever asked was the privilege of remaining
at home in their own South in the full exercise of their
constitutional rights.

Southern leaders were undoubtedly aware of the concurrent
publications of travelers and newspaper reporters, of which
Olmsted's books were conspicuous examples. Olmsted and Helper
were both sources of proof that slavery was bringing the South to
financial ruin. The facts were getting hold of the minds of the
Southern people. The debate which had been adjourned was on the
eve of being resumed. Complete suppression of the new scientific
industrial argument against slavery seemed to slave-owners to
furnish their only defense.

The Appalachian ranges of mountains drove a wedge of liberty and
freedom from Pennsylvania almost to the Gulf. In the upland
regions slavery could not flourish. There was always enmity
between the planters of the coast and the dwellers on the upland.
The slaveholding oligarchy had always ruled, but the day of the
uplanders was at hand. This is the explanation of the veritable
panic which Helper's publication created. A debate which should
follow the line of this old division between the peoples of the
Atlantic slave States would, under existing conditions, be fatal
to the institution of slavery. West Virginia did become a free
State at the first opportunity. Counties in western North
Carolina claim to have furnished a larger proportion of their men
to the Union army than any other counties in the country. Had the
plan for peaceable emancipation projected by abolitionists been
permitted to take its course, the uplands of South Carolina would
have been pitted against the lowlands, and Senator Tillman would
have appeared as a rampant abolitionist. There might have been
violence, but it would have been confined to limited areas in the
separate States. Had the crisis been postponed, there surely
would have been a revival of abolitionism within the Southern
States. Slavery in Missouri was already approaching a crisis.
Southern leaders had long foreseen that the State would abolish
slavery if a free State should be established on the western
boundary. This was actually taking place. Kansas was filling up
with free-state settlers and, by the act of its own citizens, a
few years later did abolish slavery.

Republicans naturally made use of Helper's book for party
purposes. A cheap abridged edition was brought out. Several
Republican leaders were induced to sign their names to a paper
commending the publication. Among these was John Sherman of Ohio,
who in the organization of the newly elected House of
Representatives in 1859 was the leading candidate of the
Republicans for the speakership. During the contest the fact that
his name was on this paper was made public, and Southern leaders
were furious. Extracts were read to prove that the book was
incendiary. Millson of Virginia said that "one who consciously,
deliberately, and of purpose lends his name and influence to the
propagation of such writings is not only not fit to be speaker,
but he is not-fit to live." It is one of the ironies of the
situation that the passage selected to prove the incendiary
character of the book is almost a literal quotation from the
debate in the Virginia Legislature of 1832.



CHAPTER X. "BLEEDING KANSAS"

Both the leading political parties were, in the campaign of 1852,
fully committed to the acceptance of the so-called Compromise of
1850 as a final settlement of the slavery question; both were
committed to the support of the Fugitive Slave Act. The Free-soil
party, with John P. Hale as its candidate, did make a vigorous
attack upon the Fugitive Slave Act, and opposed all compromises
respecting slavery, but Free-Boilers had been to a large extent
reabsorbed into the Democratic party, their vote of 1852 being
only about half that of 1848. Though the Whig vote was large and
only about two hundred thousand less than that of the Democrats,
yet it was so distributed that the Whigs carried only four
States, Massachusetts, Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee. The
other States gave a Democratic plurality.

Had there been time for readjustment, the Whig party might have
recovered lost ground, but no time was permitted. There was in
progress in Missouri a political conflict which was already
commanding national attention