. Thomas H. Benton, for thirty years
a Senator from Missouri, and a national figure, was the
storm-center. His enemies accused him of being a Free-Boiler, an
abolitionist in disguise. He was professedly a stanch and
uncompromising unionist, a personal and political opponent of
John C. Calhoun. According to his own statement he had been
opposed to the extension of slavery since 1804, although he had
advocated the admission of Missouri with a pro-slavery
constitution in 180. He was, from the first, senior Senator from
the State, and by a peculiar combination of influences incurred
his first defeat for reelection in 1851.

Benton's defeat in the Missouri Legislature was largely the
result of national pro-slavery influences. In a former chapter,
reference was made to the Ohio River as furnishing a
"providential argument against slavery." The Mississippi River as
the eastern boundary of Missouri furnished a like argument, but
on the north not even a prairie brook separated free labor in
Iowa from slave labor in Missouri. The inhabitants of western
Missouri, realizing that the tenure of their peculiar institution
was becoming weaker in the east and north, early became convinced
that the organization of a free State along their western
boundary would be followed by the abolition of slavery in their
own State. This condition attracted the attention of the national
guardians of pro-slavery interests. Calhoun, Davis, Breckinridge,
Toombs, and others were in constant communication with local
leaders. A certain Judge W. C. Price, a religious fanatic, and a
pro-slavery devotee, was induced to visit every part of the State
in 1844, calling the attention of all slaveholders to the perils
of the situation and preparing the way for the repeal of the
Missouri Compromise. Senator Benton, who was approached on the
subject, replied in such a way that all radical defenders of
slavery, both national leaders and local politicians, were moved
to unite for his political defeat.

David R. Atchison, junior Senator from Missouri, had been made
the leader of the pro-slavery forces. The defeat of Benton in the
Missouri Legislature did not end the strife. He at once became a
candidate for Atchison's place in the election which was to occur
in 1855, and he was in the meantime elected to the House of
Representatives in 1852. The most telling consideration in
Benton's favor was the general demand, in which he himself
joined, for the immediate organization of the western territory
in order to facilitate the building of a system of railways
reaching the Pacific, with St. Louis as the point of departure.
For a time, in 1859, and 1853, Benton was apparently triumphant,
and Atchison was himself willing to consent to the organization
of the new territory with slavery excluded. The national leaders,
however, were not of the same mind. The real issue was the
continuance of slavery in the State; the one thing which must not
be permitted was the transfer of anti-slavery agitation to the
separate States. Henry Clay's proposal of 1849 to provide for
gradual emancipation in Kentucky was bitterly resented. It had
long been an axiom with the slavocracy that the institution would
perish unless it had the opportunity to expand. Out of this
conviction arose Calhoun's famous theory that slaveowners had
under the Constitution an equal right with the owners of all
other forms of property in all the Territories. The theory itself
assumed that the act prohibiting slavery in the territory north
of the southern boundary of Missouri was unconstitutional and
void. But this theory had not yet received judicial sanction, and
the time was at hand when the question of freedom or slavery in
the western territory was to be determined. Between March and
December, 1853, the discovery was made that the Act of 1850
organizing the Territories of New Mexico and Utah had superseded
the Compromise of 1820; that a principle had been recognized
applicable to all the Territories; that all were open to
settlement on equal terms to slaveholders and non-slaveholders;
that the subject of slavery should be removed from Congress to
the people of the Territories; and that they should decide,
either when a territorial legislature was organized or at the
time of the adoption of a constitution preparatory to statehood,
whether or not slavery should be authorized. These ideas found
expression in various newspapers during the month of December,
1853. Though the authorship of the new theory is still a matter
of dispute, it is well known that Stephen A. Douglas became its
chief sponsor and champion. The real motives and intentions of
Douglas himself and of many of his supporters will always remain
obscure and uncertain. But no uncertainty attaches to the motives
of Senator Atchison and the leaders of the Calhoun section of the
Democratic party. For ten years at least they had been laboring
to get rid of the Missouri Compromise. Their motive was to defend
slavery and especially to forestall a successful movement for
emancipation in the State of Missouri.

From early in January, 1854, until late in May, Douglas's
Nebraska bill held the attention of Congress and of the entire
country. At first the measure simply assumed that the Missouri
Compromise had been superseded by the Act of 1850. Later the bill
was amended in such a way as to repeal distinctly that
time-honored act. At first the plan was to organize Nebraska as a
single Territory extending from Texas to Canada. Later it was
proposed to organize separate Territories, one west of Missouri
under the name of Kansas, the other west of Iowa under the name
of Nebraska. Opposition came from Free-soilers, from Northern
Whigs and a few Whigs from the South, and from a large proportion
of Northern Democrats. The repeal of the Missouri Compromise came
like a thunderbolt out of a clear sky to the people of the North.
For a time Douglas was the most unpopular of political leaders
and was apparently repudiated by his party. The first name
designating the opponents of the Douglas bill was "Anti Nebraska
men," for which the name Republican was gradually substituted and
in 1858 became the accepted title of the party.

The provision for two territorial governments instead of one
carried with it the idea of a continued balance between slave and
free States; Kansas, being on a geographical parallel with the
slave States, would probably permit slavery, while Nebraska would
be occupied by free-state immigrants. Though this was a commonly
accepted view, Eli Thayer of Worcester, Massachusetts, and a few
others took a different view. They proposed to make an end of the
discussion of the extension of slavery by sending free men who
were opposed to slavery to occupy the territory open for
settlement. To attain this object they organized an Emigrant Aid
Company incorporated under the laws of the State. Even before the
bill was passed, the corporation was in full working order.
Thayer himself traveled extensively throughout the Northern
States stimulating interest in western emigration, with the
conviction that the disturbing question could be peacefully
settled in this way. California had thus been saved to freedom;
why not all other Territories? The new company had as adviser and
co-laborer Dr. Charles Robinson, who had crossed the Kansas
Territory on his way to California and had acquired valuable
experience in the art of state-building under peculiar
conditions.

The first party sent out by the Emigrant Aid Company arrived in
Kansas early in August, 1854, and selected the site for the town
of Lawrence. During the later months of the year, four other
parties were sent out, in all numbering nearly seven hundred.
Through extensive advertisement by the company, through the
general interest in the subject and the natural flow of
emigration to the West, Kansas was receiving large accessions of
free-state settlers.

Meanwhile the men of Missouri, some of whom had striven for a
decade to secure the privilege of extending slavery into the new
Territory, were not idle. Instantly upon the removal of legal
barriers, they occupied adjacent lands, founded towns, staked out
claims, formed plans for preempting the entire region and for
forestalling or driving out all intruders. They had at first the
advantage of position, for they did not find it difficult to
maintain two homes, one in Kansas for purposes of voting and
fighting and another in Missouri for actual residence. Andrew H.
Reeder, a Pennsylvania Democrat of strong pro-slavery prejudices,
was appointed first Governor of the Territory. When he arrived in
Kansas in October, 1854, there were already several thousand
settlers on the ground and others were continually arriving. He
appointed the 29th of November for the election of a delegate to
Congress. On that day several hundred Missourians came into the
Territory and voted. There was no violence and no contest; the
free-state men had no separate candidate. Notwithstanding the
violence of language used by opposing factions, notwithstanding
the organization of secret societies pledged to drive out all
Northern intruders, there was no serious disturbance until March
30, 1855, the day appointed for the election of members of the
territorial Legislature. On that day the Missourians came full
five thousand strong, armed with guns, bowie-knives, and
revolvers. They met with no resistance from the residents, who
were unarmed. They took charge of the precincts and chose
pro-slavery delegates with one exception. Governor Reeder
protested and recommended to the precincts the filing of
protests. Only seven responded, however, and in these cases new
elections were held and contesting delegates elected.

The Governor issued certificates to these and to all those who in
other precincts had been chosen by the horde from Missouri. When
the Legislature met in July, the seven contests were decided in
favor of the pro-slavery party, the single freestate member
resigned, and the assembly was unanimous.

Governor Reeder fully expected that President Pierce would
nullify the election, and to this end he made a journey to
Washington in April. On the way he delivered a public address at
Easton, Pennsylvania, describing in lurid colors the outrage
which had been perpetrated upon the people of Kansas by the
"border ruffians" from Missouri, and asserting that the accounts
in the Northern press had not been exaggerated.

While Governor Reeder in contact with the actual events in Kansas
was becoming an active Free-Boiler, President Pierce in
association with Jefferson Davis and others of his party was
developing active sympathies with the people of western Missouri.
To the President this invasion of territory west of the slave
State by Northern men aided by Northern corporations seemed a
violation of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, and he sought to induce
Reeder to resign. This, however, the Governor positively refused
to do unless the President would formally approve his conduct in
Kansas--an endorsement which required more fortitude than
President Pierce possessed. On his return to Kansas, determined
to do what he could to protect the Kansas people from injustice,
he called the Legislature to meet at Pawnee, a point far removed
from the Missouri border. Immediately upon their organization at
that place the members of the Legislature adjourned to meet at
Shawnee, near the border of Missouri. The Governor, who decided
that this action was illegal, then refused to recognize the
Assembly at the new place. A deadlock thus ensued which was
broken on the 15th of August by the removal of Governor Reeder
and the appointment of Wilson Shannon of Ohio in his place.
In the meantime the territorial Legislature had adjourned, having
"enacted" an elaborate proslavery code made up from the slave
code of Missouri with a number of special adaptations. For
example, it was made a penitentiary offense to deny by speaking
or writing, or by printing, or by introducing any printed matter,
the right of persons to hold slaves in the Territory; no man was
eligible to jury service who was conscientiously opposed to
holding slaves; and lawyers were bound by oath to support the
territorial statutes.

The free-state men, with the approval of Reeder, refused to
recognize the Legislature and inaugurated a movement in the fall
of 1855 to adopt a constitution and to organize a provisional
territorial Government preparatory to admission as a State,
following in this respect the procedure in California and
Michigan. A convention met in Topeka in October, 1855, and
completed on the 11th of November the draft of a constitution
which prohibited slavery. On the 15th of December the
constitution was approved by a practically unanimous vote, only
free-state men taking part in the election. A month later a
Legislature was elected and at the same time Charles Robinson was
elected Governor of the new commonwealth. In the previous
October, Reeder had been chosen Free-soil delegate to Congress.
The Topeka freestate Legislature met on the 4th of March, 1856,
and after petitioning Congress to admit Kansas under the Topeka
constitution, adjourned until the 4th of July pending the action
of Congress. Thus at the end of two years two distinct
Governments had come into existence within the Territory of
Kansas. It speaks volumes for the self-control and moderation of
the two parties that no hostile encounter had occurred between
the contestants. When the armed Missourians came in March, 1855,
the unarmed settlers offered no resistance. Afterward, however,
they supplied themselves with Sharp's rifles and organized a
militia. With the advent of Governor Shannon in September, 1855,
the proslavery position was much strengthened. In November, in a
quarrel over a land claim, a free-state settler by the name of
Dow was killed. The murderer escaped, but a friend of the victim
was accused of uttering threats against a friend of the murderer.
For this offense a posse led by Sheriff Jones, a Missourian,
seized him, and would have carried him away if fourteen freestate
men had not "persuaded" the Sheriff to surrender his prisoner.
This interference was accepted by the Missourians as a signal for
battle. The rescuers must be arrested and punished. A large force
of infuriated Missourians and pro-slavery settlers assembled for
a raid upon the town of Lawrence. In the meantime the Lawrence
militia planned and executed a systematic defense of the town.
When the two armies came within speaking distance, a parley
ensued in which the Governor took a leading part in settling the
affair without a hostile shot. This is known in Kansas history as
the "Wakarusa War."

The progress of affairs in Kansas was followed with intense
interest in all parts of the country. North and South vied with
each other in the encouragement of emigration to Kansas. Colonel
Buford of Alabama sold a large number of slaves and devoted the
proceeds to meeting the expense of conducting a troop of three
hundred men to Kansas in the winter of 1856. They went armed with
"the sword of the spirit," and all provided with Bibles supplied
by the leading churches. Arrived in the territory, they were duly
furnished with more worldly weapons and were drilled for action.
About the same time a parallel incident is said to have occurred
in New Haven, Connecticut. A deacon in one of the churches had
enlisted a company of seventy bound for Kansas. A meeting was
held in the church to raise money to defray expenses. The leader
of the company declared that they also needed rifles for
self-defense. Forthwith Professor Silliman, of the University,
subscribed one Sharp's rifle, and others followed with like
pledges. Finally Henry Ward Beecher, who was the speaker of the
occasion, rose and promised that, if twenty-five rifles were
pledged on the spot, Plymouth Church in Brooklyn would be
responsible for the remaining twenty-five that were needed. He
had already said in a previous address that for the slaveholders
of Kansas, Sharp's rifles were a greater moral agency than the
Bible. This led to the designation of the weapons as "Beecher's
Bibles." Such was the spirit which prevailed in the two sections
of the country.

President Pierce had now become intensely hostile towards the
free-state inhabitants of Kansas. Having recognized the
Legislature elected on March 30, 1855, as the legitimate
Government, he sent a special message to Congress on January 24,
1856, in which he characterized as revolutionary the movement of
the free-state men to organize a separate Government in Kansas.
>From the President's point of view, the emissaries of the New
England Emigrant Aid Association were unlawful invaders. In this
position he not only had the support of the South, but was
powerfully seconded by Stephen A. Douglas and other Northern
Democrats.

The attitude of the Administration at Washington was a source of
great encouragement to Sheriff Jones and his associates, who were
anxious to wreak their vengeance on the city of Lawrence for the
outcome of the Wakarusa War. Jones came to Lawrence apparently
for the express purpose of picking a quarrel, for he revived the
old dispute about the rescuing party of the previous fall. As a
consequence one enraged opponent slapped him in the face, and at
last an unknown assassin entered the sheriff's tent by night and
inflicted a revolver wound in his back. Though the citizens of
Lawrence were greatly chagrined at this event and offered a
reward for the discovery of the assailant, the attack upon the
sheriff was made the signal for drastic procedure against the
town of Lawrence. A grand jury found indictments for treason
against Reeder, Robinson, and other leading citizens of the town.
The United States marshal gave notice that he expected resistance
in making arrests and called upon all law-abiding citizens of the
Territory to aid in executing the law. It was a welcome summons
to the pro-slavery forces. Not only local militia companies
responded but also Buford's company and various companies from
Missouri, in all more than seven hundred men, with two cannon. It
had always been the set purpose of the free-state men not to
resist federal authority by force, unless as a last resort, and
they had no intention of opposing the marshal in making arrests.
He performed his duty without hindrance and then placed the armed
troops under the command of Sheriff Jones, who proceeded first to
destroy the printing-press of the town of Lawrence. Then, against
the protest of the marshal and Colonel Buford, the vindictive
sheriff trained his guns upon the new hotel which was the pride
of the city; the ruin of the building was made complete by fire,
while a drunken mob pillaged the town.

On May 22, 1856, the day following the attack upon Lawrence,
Charles Sumner was struck down in the United States Senate on
account of a speech made in defense of the rights of Kansas
settlers. The two events, which were reported at the same time in
the daily press, furnished the key-note to the presidential
campaign of that year, for nominating conventions followed in a
few days and "bleeding Kansas" was the all-absorbing issue. In
spite of the destruction of property in Lawrence and the arrest
of the leaders of the free-state party, Kansas had not been
plunged into a state of civil war. The free-state party had fired
no hostile shot. Governor Robinson and his associates still
relied upon public opinion and they accepted the wanton attack
upon Lawrence as the best assurance that they would yet win their
cause by legal means.

A change, however, soon took place which is associated with the
entrance of John Brown into the history of Kansas. Brown and his
sons were living at Osawatomie, some thirty miles south of
Lawrence. They were present at the Wakarusa War in December,
1855, and were on their way to the defense of Lawrence on May 21,
1856, when they were informed that the town had been destroyed.
Three days after this event Brown and his sons with two or three
others made a midnight raid upon their pro-slavery neighbors
living in the Pottawatomie valley and slew five men. The authors
of this deed were not certainly known until the publication of a
confession of one of the party in 1879, twenty years after the
chief actor had won the reputation of a martyr to the cause of
liberty. The Browns, however, were suspected at the time;
warrants were out for their arrest; and their homes were
destroyed.

For more than three months after this incident, Kansas was in a
state of war; in fact, two distinct varieties of warfare were
carried on. Publicly organized companies on both sides engaged in
acts of attack and defense, while at the same time irresponsible
secret bands were busy in violent reprisals, in plunder and
assassination. In both of these forms of warfare, the free-state
men proved themselves fully equal to their opponents, and
Governor Shannon was entirely unable to cope with the situation.
It is estimated that two hundred men were slain and two million
dollars' worth of property was destroyed.

The state of affairs in Kansas served to win many Northern
Democrats to the support of the Republicans. The Administration
at Washington was held responsible for the violence and
bloodshed. The Democratic leaders in the political campaign,
determined now upon a complete change in the Government of the
Territory, appointed J. W. Geary as Governor and placed General
Smith in charge of the troops. The new incumbents, both from
Pennsylvania, entered upon their labors early in September, and
before the October state elections Geary was able to report that
peace reigned throughout the Territory. A prompt reaction in
favor of the Democrats followed. Buchanan, their presidential
candidate, rejoiced in the fact that order had been restored by
two citizens of his own State. It was now very generally conceded
that Kansas would become a free State, and intimate associates of
Buchanan assured the public that he was himself of that opinion
and that if elected he would insure to the free-state party
evenhanded justice. Thousands of voters were thus won to
Buchanan's support. There was a general distrust of the
Republican candidate as a man lacking political experience, and a
strong conservative reaction against the idea of electing a
President by the votes of only one section of the country. At the
election in November, Buchanan received a majority of sixty of
the electoral votes over Fremont, but in the popular vote he fell
short of a majority by nearly 400,000. Fillmore, candidate of the
Whig and the American parties, received 874,000 votes.

There was still profound distrust of the administration of the
Territory of Kansas, and the free-state settlers refused to vote
at the election set for the choosing of a new territorial
Legislature in October. The result was another pro-slavery
assembly. Governor Geary, however, determined to secure and
enforce just treatment of both parties. He was at once brought
into violent conflict with the Legislature in an experience which
was almost an exact counterpart of that of Governor Reeder; and
Washington did not support his efforts to secure fair dealings. A
pro-slavery deputation visited President Pierce in February,
1857, and returned with the assurance that Governor Geary would
be removed. Without waiting for the President to act, Geary
resigned in disgust on the 4th of March. Of the three Governors
whom President Pierce appointed, two became active supporters of
the free-state party and a third, Governor Shannon, fled from the
territory in mortal terror lest he should be slain by members of
the party which he had tried to serve.



CHAPTER XI. CHARLES SUMNER

The real successor to John Quincy Adams as the protagonist of the
anti-slavery cause in Congress proved to be not Seward but
Charles Sumner of Massachusetts. This newcomer entered the Senate
without previous legislative experience but with an unusual
equipment for the role he was to play. A graduate of Harvard
College at the age of nineteen, he had entered upon the study of
law in the newly organized law school in which Joseph Story held
one of the two professorships. He was admitted to the bar in
1834, but three years later he left his slender law practice for
a long period of European travel. This three years' sojourn
brought him into intimate touch with the leading spirits in arts,
letters, and public life in England and on the Continent, and
thus ripened his talents to their full maturity. He returned to
his law practice poor in pocket but rich in the possession of
lifelong friendships and happy memories.

Sumner's political career did not begin until 1847, when as a
Whig he not only opposed any further extension of slavery but
strove to commit his party to the policy of emancipation in all
the States. Failing in this attempt, Sumner became an active
Free-Boiler in 1848. He was twice a candidate for Congress on the
Free-soil ticket but failed of election. In 1851 he was elected
to the United States Senate by a coalition between his party and
the Democrats. This is the only public office he ever held, but
he was continuously reelected until his death in 1874.

John Quincy Adams had addressed audiences trained in the old
school, which did not defend slavery on moral grounds. Charles
Sumner faced audiences of the new school, which upheld the
institution as a righteous moral order. This explains the chief
difference in the attitude of the two leaders. Sumner, like
Adams, began as an opponent of pro-slavery aggression, but he
went farther: he attacked the institution itself as a great moral
evil.

As a constitutional lawyer Sumner is not the equal of his
predecessor, Daniel Webster. He is less original, less convincing
in the enunciation of broad general principles. He appears rather
as a special pleader marshaling all available forces against the
one institution which assailed the Union. In this particular
work, he surpassed all others, for, with his unbounded industry,
he permitted no precedent, no legal advantage, no incident of
history, no fact in current politics fitted to strengthen his
cause, to escape his untiring search. He showed a marvelous skill
in the selection, arrangement, and presentation of his materials,
and for his models he took the highest forms of classic forensic
utterance.

Sumner exhibited the ordinary aloofness and lack of familiarity
with actual conditions in the South which was characteristic of
the New England abolitionist. He perceived no race problem, no
peculiar difficulty in the readjustments of master and slave
which were involved in emancipation, and he ignored all obstacles
to the accomplishment of his ends. Webster's arraignment of South
Carolina was directed against an alleged erroneous dogma and only
incidentally affected personal morality. The reaction, therefore,
was void of bitter resentment. Sumner's charges were directed
against alleged moral turpitude, and the classic form and
scrupulous regard for parliamentary rules which he observed only
added to the feeling of personal resentment on the part of his
opponents. Some of the defenders of slavery were themselves
devoted students of the classics, but they found that the
orations of Demosthenes furnished nothing suited to their
purpose. The result was a humiliating exhibition of weakness,
personal abuse, and vindictiveness on their part.

There was a conspiracy of silence on the slavery question in
1852. Each of the national parties was definitely committed to
the support of the compromise and especially to the faithful
observance of the Fugitive Slave Law. Free-soilers had distinctly
declined in numbers and influence during the four preceding
years. Only a handful of members in each House of Congress
remained unaffiliated with the parties whose platforms had
ordained silence on the one issue of chief public concern. It was
by a mere accident in Massachusetts politics that Charles Sumner
was sent to the Senate as a man free on all public questions.

While the parties were making their nominations for the
Presidency, Sumner sought diligently for an opportunity in the
Senate to give utterance to the sentiments of his party on the
repeal of the Fugitive Slave Act. But not until late in August
did he overcome the resistance of the combined opposition and
gain the floor. The watchmen were caught off guard when Sumner
introduced an amendment to an appropriation bill which enabled
him to deliver a carefully prepared address, several hours in
length, calling for the repeal of the law.

The first part of this speech is devoted to the general topic of
the relation of the national Government to slavery and was made
in answer to the demand of Calhoun and his followers for the
direct national recognition of slavery. For such a demand Sumner
found no warrant. By the decision of Lord Mansfield, said he,
"the state of slavery" was declared to be "of such a nature, that
it is incapable of being introduced on any reasons, moral or
political, but ONLY BY POSITIVE LAW . . . . it is so odious, that
nothing can be suffered to support it but positive law." Adopting
the same principle, the Supreme Court of the State of
Mississippi, a tribunal of slaveholders, asserted that "slavery
is condemned by reason and the Laws of Nature. It exists, and can
ONLY exist, through municipal regulations." So also declared the
Supreme Court of Kentucky and numerous other tribunals. This
aspect of the subject furnished Sumner occasion for a masterly
array of all the utterances in favor of liberty to be found in
the Constitution, in the Declaration of Independence, in the
constitutional conventions, in the principles of common law. All
these led up to and supported the one grand conclusion that, when
Washington took the oath as President of the United States,
"slavery existed nowhere on the national territory" and therefore
"is in no respect a national institution." Apply the principles
of the Constitution in their purity, then, and "in all national
territories slavery will be impossible. On the high seas, under
the national flag, slavery will be impossible. In the District of
Columbia, slavery will instantly cease. Inspired by these
principles, Congress can give no sanction to slavery by the
admission of new slave States. Nowhere under the Constitution can
the Nation by legislation or otherwise, support slavery, hunt
slaves, or hold property in man . . . . As slavery is banished
from the national jurisdiction, it will cease to vex our national
politics. It may linger in the States as a local institution; but
it will no longer engender national animosities when it no longer
demands national support."

The second part of Sumner's address dealt directly with the
Fugitive Slave Act of 1860. It is much less convincing and
suggests more of the characteristics of the special pleader with
a difficult case. Sumner here undertook to prove that Congress
exceeded its powers when it presumed to lay down rules for the
rendition of fugitive slaves, and this task exceeded even his
power as a constitutional lawyer.

The circumstances under which Sumner attacked slavery were such
as to have alarmed a less self-centered man, for the two years
following the introduction of the Nebraska bill were marked by
the most acrimonious debate in the history of Congress, and by
physical encounters, challenges, and threats of violence. But
though Congressmen carried concealed weapons, Sumner went his way
unarmed and apparently in complete unconcern as to any personal
danger, though it is known that he was fully aware that in the
faithful performance of what he deemed to be his duty he was
incurring the risk of assassination.

The pro-slavery party manifested on all occasions a disposition
to make the most of the weak point in Sumner's constitutional
argument against the Fugitive Slave Law. He was accused of taking
an oath to support the Constitution though at the same time
intending to violate one of its provisions. In a discussion, in
June, 1854, over a petition praying for the repeal of the
Fugitive Slave Act, Senator Butler of South Carolina put the
question directly to Senator Sumner whether he would himself
unite with others in returning a fugitive to his master. Sumner's
quick reply was, "Is thy servant a dog that he should do this
thing?" Enraged Southerners followed this remark with a most
bitter onslaught upon Sumner which lasted for two days. When
Sumner again got the floor, he said in reference to Senator
Butler's remark: "In fitful phrase, which seemed to come from
unconscious excitement, so common with the Senator, he shot forth
various cries about 'dogs,' and, among other things, asked if
there was any 'dog' in the Constitution? The Senator did not seem
to bear in mind, through the heady currents of that moment that,
by the false interpretation he fastens upon the Constitution, he
has helped to nurture there a whole kennel of Carolina
bloodhounds, trained, with savage jaw and insatiable in scent,
for the hunt of flying bondmen. No, sir, I do not believe that
there is any 'kennel of bloodhounds,' or even any 'dog' in the
Constitution." Thereafter offensive personal references between
the Senators from Massachusetts and South Carolina became
habitual. These personalities were a source of regret to many of
Sumner's best friends, but they fill a small place, after all, in
his great work. Nor were they the chief source of rancor on the
part of his enemies, for Southern orators were accustomed to
personalities in debate. Sumner was feared and hated principally
because his presence in Congress endangered the institution of
slavery.

Sumner's speech on the crime against Kansas was perhaps the most
remarkable effort of his career. It had been known for many weeks
that Sumner was preparing to speak upon the burning question, and
his friends had already expressed anxiety for his personal
safety. For the larger part of two days, May 19 and 20, 1856, he
held the reluctant attention of the Senate. For the delivery of
this speech he chose a time which was most opportune. The crime
against Kansas had, in a sense, culminated in March of the
previous year, but the settlers had refused to submit to the
Government set up by hostile invaders. They had armed themselves
for the defense of their rights, had elected a Governor and a
Legislature by voluntary association, had called a convention,
and had adopted a constitution preparatory to admission to the
Union. That constitution was now before the Senate for approval.
President Pierce, Stephen A. Douglas, and all the Southern
leaders had decided to treat as treasonable acts the efforts of
Kansas settlers to secure an orderly government. Their plans for
the arrest of the leaders were well advanced and the arrests were
actually made on the day after Sumner had concluded his speech.

A paragraph in the address is prophetic of what occurred within a
week. Douglas had introduced a bill recognizing the Legislature
chosen by the Missourians as the legal Government and providing
for the formation of a constitution under its initiative at some
future date. After describing this proposed action as a
continuation of the crime against Kansas, Sumner declared: "Sir,
you cannot expect that the people of Kansas will submit to the
usurpation which this bill sets up and bids them bow before, as
the Austrian tyrant set up the ducal hat in the Swiss
market-place. If you madly persevere, Kansas will not be without
her William Tell, who will refuse at all hazards to recognize the
tyrannical edict; and this will be the beginning of civil war."

To keep historical sequence clear at this point, all thought of
John Brown should be eliminated, for he was then unknown to the
public. It must be remembered that Governor Robinson and the
free-state settlers were, as Sumner probably knew, prepared to
resist the general Government as soon as there should be a clear
case of outrage for which the Administration at Washington could
be held directly responsible. Such a case occurred when the
United States marshal placed federal troops in the hands of
Sheriff Jones to assist in looting the town of Lawrence. Governor
Robinson no longer had any scruples in advising forcible
resistance to all who used force to impose upon Kansas a
Government which the people had rejected.

In the course of his address Sumner compared Senators Butler and
Douglas to Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, saying: "The Senator
from South Carolina has read many books of chivalry, and believes
himself a chivalrous knight, with sentiments of honor and
courage. Of course he has chosen a mistress to whom he has made
his vows, and who, though ugly to others, is always lovely to
him; though polluted in the sight of the world, is chaste in his
sight. I mean the harlot Slavery. Let her be impeached in
character, or any proposition be made to shut her out from the
extension of her wantonness, and no extravagance of manner or
hardihood of assertion is then too great for the Senator."

When Sumner concluded, the gathering storm broke forth. Cass of
Michigan, after saying that he had listened to the address with
equal surprise and regret, characterized it as "the most
unAmerican and unpatriotic that ever grated on the ears of the
members of that high body." Douglas and Mason were personal and
abusive. Douglas, recalling Sumner's answer to Senator Butler's
question whether he would assist in returning a slave, renewed
the charge made two years earlier that Sumner had violated his
oath of office. This attack called forth from Sumner another
attempt to defend the one weak point in his speech of 1852, for
he was always irritated by reference to this subject, and at the
same time he enjoyed a fine facility in the use of language which
irritated others.

One utterance in Douglas's reply to Sumner is of special
significance in view of what occurred two days later: "Is it his
object to provoke some of us to kick him as we would a dog in the
street, that he may get sympathy upon the just chastisement?" Two
days later Sumner was sitting alone at his desk in the Senate
chamber after adjournment when Preston Brooks, a nephew of
Senator Butler and a member of the lower House, entered and
accosted him with the statement that he had read Sumner's speech
twice and that it was a libel on South Carolina and upon a
kinsman of his. Thereupon Brooks followed his words by striking
Sumner on the head with a cane. Though the Senator was dazed and
blinded by the unexpected attack, his assailant rained blow after
blow until he had broken the cane and Sumner lay prostrate and
bleeding at his feet. Brooks's remarks in the House of
Representatives almost a month after the event leave no doubt of
his determination to commit murder had he failed to overcome his
antagonist with a cane. He had also taken the precaution to have
two of his friends ready to prevent any interference before the
punishment was completed. Toombs of Georgia witnessed a part of
the assault and expressed approval of the act, and everywhere
throughout the South, in the public press, in legislative halls,
in public meetings, Brooks was hailed as a hero. The resolution
for his expulsion introduced in the House received the support of
only one vote from south of Mason and Dixon's Line. A large
majority favored the resolution, but not the required two-thirds
majority. Brooks, however, thought best to resign but was
triumphantly returned to his seat with only six votes against
him. Nothing was left undone to express Southern gratitude, and
he received gifts of canes innumerable as symbols of his valor.
Yet before his death, which occurred in the following January, he
confessed to his friend Orr that he was sick of being regarded as
the representative of bullies and disgusted at receiving
testimonials of their esteem.

With similar unanimity the North condemned and resented the
assault that had been made upon Sumner. From party
considerations, if for no other reasons, Democrats regretted the
event. Republicans saw in the brutal attack and in the manner of
its reception in the South another evidence of the irrepressible
conflict between slavery and freedom. They were ready to take up
the issue so forcibly presented by their fallen leader. A part of
the regular order of exercises at public meetings of Republicans
was to express sympathy with their wounded champion and with the
Kansas people of the pillaged town of Lawrence, and to adopt ways
and means to bring to an end the Administration which they held
responsible for these outrages. Sumner, though silenced, was
eloquent in a new and more effective way. A half million copies
of "The Crime against Kansas" were printed and circulated. On the
issue thus presented, Northern Democrats became convinced that
their defeat at the pending election was certain, and their
leaders instituted the change in their program which has been
described in a previous chapter. They had made an end of the war
in Kansas and drew from their candidate for the Presidency the
assurance that just treatment should at last be meted out to
harassed Kansas.

Though Sumner's injuries were at first regarded as slight, they
eventually proved to be extremely serious. After two attempts to
resume his place in the Senate, he found that he was unable to
remain; yet when his term expired, he was almost unanimously
reelected. Much of his time for three and a half years he spent
in Europe. In December, 1859, he seemed sufficiently recovered to
resume senatorial duties, but it was not until the following June
that he again addressed the Senate. On that occasion he delivered
his last great philippic against slavery. The subject under
discussion was still the admission of Kansas as a free State,
and, as he remarked in his opening sentences, he resumed the
discussion precisely where he had left off more than four years
before.

Sumner had assumed the task of uttering a final word against
slavery as barbarism and a barrier to civilization. He spoke
under the impelling power of a conviction in his God-given
mission to utilize a great occasion to the full and for a noble
end. For this work his whole life had been a preparation.
Accustomed from early youth to spend ten hours a day with books
on law, history, and classic literature, he knew as no other man
then knew what aid the past could offer to the struggle for
freedom. The bludgeon of the would-be assassin had not impaired
his memory, and four years of enforced leisure enabled him to
fulfill his highest ideals of perfect oratorical form.
Personalities he eliminated from this final address, and
blemishes he pruned away. In his earlier speeches he had been
limited by the demands of the particular question under
discussion, but in "The Barbarism of Slavery" he was free to deal
with the general subject, and he utilized incidents in American
slavery to demonstrate the general upward trend of history. The
orator was sustained by the full consciousness that his
utterances were in harmony with the grand sweep of historic truth
as well as with the spirit of the present age.

Sumner was not a party man and was at no time in complete harmony
with his coworkers. It was always a question whether his speeches
had a favorable effect upon the immediate action of Congress;
there can, however, be no doubt of the fact that the larger
public was edified and influenced. Copies of "The Crime against
Kansas" and "The Barbarism of Slavery" were printed and
circulated by the million and were eagerly read from beginning to
end. They gave final form to the thoughts and utterances of many
political leaders both in America and in Europe. More than any
other man it was Charles Sumner who, with a wealth of historical
learning and great skill in forensic art, put the irrepressible
conflict between slavery and freedom in its proper setting in
human history.



CHAPTER XII. KANSAS AND BUCHANAN

In view of the presidential election of 1856 Northern Democrats
entertained no doubts that Kansas, now occupied by a majority of
free-state men, would be received as a free State without further
ado. The case was different with the Democrats of western
Missouri, already for ten years in close touch with those
Southern leaders who were determined either to secure new
safeguards for slavery or to form an independent confederacy.
Their program was to continue their efforts to make Kansas a
slave State or at least to maintain the disturbance there until
the conditions appeared favorable for secession.

In February, 1857, the pro-slavery territorial Legislature
provided for the election of delegates to a constitutional
convention, but Governor Geary vetoed the act because no
provision was made for submitting the proposed constitution to
the vote of the people. The bill was passed over his veto, and
arrangements were made for registration which free-state men
regarded as imperfect, inadequate, or fraudulent.

President Buchanan undoubtedly intended to do full justice to the
people of Kansas. To this end he chose Robert J. Walker, a
Mississippi Democrat, as Governor of Kansas. Walker was a
statesman of high rank, who had been associated with Buchanan in
the Cabinet of James K. Polk. Three times he refused to accept
the office and finally undertook the mission only from a sense of
duty. Being aware of the fate of Governor Geary, Walker insisted
on an explicit understanding with Buchanan that his policies
should not be repudiated by the federal Administration. Late in
May he went to Kansas with high hopes and expectations. But the
free-state party had persisted in the repudiation of a Government
which had been first set up by an invading army and, as they
alleged, had since then been perpetuated by fraud. They had
absolutely refused to take part in any election called by that
Government and had continued to keep alive their own legislative
assembly. Despite Walker's efforts to persuade them to take part
in the election of delegates to the constitutional convention,
they resolutely held aloof. Yet, as they became convinced that he
was acting in good faith, they did participate in the October
elections to the territorial Legislature, electing nine out of
the thirteen councilors and twenty-four out of the thirty-nine
representatives. Gross frauds had been perpetrated in two
districts, and the Governor made good his promise by rejecting
the fraudulent votes. In one case a poll list had been made up by
copying an old Cincinnati register.

In the meantime, thanks to the abstention of the free-state
people, the pro-slavery party had secured absolute control of the
constitutional convention. Yet there was the most absolute
assurance by the Governor in the name of the President of the
United States that no constitution would be sent to Congress for
approval which had not received the sanction of a majority of the
voters of the Territory. This was Walker's reiterated promise,
and President Buchanan had on this point been equally explicit.

When, therefore, the pro-slavery constitutional convention met at
Lecompton in October, Kansas had a free-state Legislature duly
elected. To make Kansas still a slave State it was necessary to
get rid of that Legislature and of the Governor through whose
agency it had been chosen, and at the same time to frame a
constitution which would secure the approval of the Buchanan
Administration. Incredible as it may seem, all this was actually
accomplished.

John Calhoun, who had been chosen president of the Lecompton
convention, spent some time in Washington before the adjourned
meeting of the convention. He secured the aid of master-hands at
manipulation. Walker had already been discredited at the White
House on account of his rejection of fraudulent returns at the
October election of members to the Legislature. The convention
was unwilling to take further chances on a matter of that sort,
and it consequently made it a part of the constitution that the
president of the convention should have entire charge of the
election to be held for its approval. The free-state legislature
was disposed of by placing in the constitution a provision that
all existing laws should remain in force until the election of a
Legislature provided for under the constitution.

The master-stroke of the convention, however, was the provision
for submitting the constitution to the vote of the people. Voters
were not permitted to accept or reject the instrument; all votes
were to be for the constitution either "with slavery" or "with no
slavery." But the document itself recognized slavery as already
existing and declared the right of slave property like other
property "before and higher than any constitutional sanction."
Other provisions made emancipation difficult by providing in any
case for complete monetary remuneration and for the consent of
the owners. There were numerous other provisions offensive to
free-state men. It had been rightly surmised that they would take
no part in such an election and that "the constitution with
slavery" would be approved. The vote on the constitution was set
for the 21st of December. For the constitution with slavery 6226
votes were recorded and 569 for the constitution without slavery.

While these events were taking place, Walker went to Washington
to enter his protest but resigned after finding only a hostile
reception by the President and his Cabinet. Stanton, who was
acting Governor in the absence of Walker, then called together
the free-state Legislature, which set January 4, 1858, as the
date for approving or rejecting the Lecompton Constitution. At
this election the votes cast were 138 for the constitution with
slavery, 24 for the constitution without slavery, and 10,226
against the constitution. But President Buchanan had become
thoroughly committed to the support of the Lecompton
Constitution. Disregarding the advice of the new Governor, he
sent the Lecompton Constitution to Congress with the
recommendation that Kansas be admitted to the Union as a slave
State.

Here was a crisis big with the fate of the Democratic party, if
not of the Union. Stephen A. Douglas had already given notice
that he would oppose the Lecompton Constitution. In favor of its
rejection he made a notable speech which called forth the
bitterest enmity from the South and arrayed all the forces of the
Administration against him. Supporters of Douglas were removed
from office, and anti-Douglas men were put in their places. In
his fight against the fraudulent constitution Douglas himself,
however, still had the support of a majority of Northern
Democrats, especially in the Western States, and that of all the
Republicans in Congress. A bill to admit Kansas passed the
Senate, but in the House a proviso was attached requiring that
the constitution should first be submitted to the people of
Kansas for acceptance or rejection. This amendment was finally
accepted by the Senate with the modification that, if the people
voted for the constitution, the State should have a large
donation of public land, but that if they rejected it, they
should not be admitted as a State until they had a population
large enough to entitle them to a representative in the lower
House. The vote of the people was cast on August 2, 1858, and the
constitution was finally rejected by a majority of nearly twelve
thousand. Thus resulted the last effort to impose slavery on the
people of Kansas.

Although the war between slavery and freedom was fought out in
miniature in Kansas, the immediate issue was the preservation of
slavery in Missouri. This, however, involved directly the
prospect of emancipation in other border States and ultimate
complete emancipation in all the States. The issue is well stated
in a Fourth of July address which Charles Robinson delivered at
Lawrence, Kansas, in 1855, after the invasion of Missourians to
influence the March election of that year, but before the
beginning of bloody conflict:

"What reason is given for the cowardly invasion of our rights by
our neighbors? They say that if Kansas is allowed to be free the
institution of slavery in their own State will be in danger ....
If the people of Missouri make it necessary, by their unlawful
course, for us to establish freedom in that State in order to
enjoy the liberty of governing ourselves in Kansas, then let that
be the issue. If Kansas and the whole North must be enslaved, or
Missouri become free, then let 