l or literary era cannot always be
thus conveniently indicated by a date, there is no doubt that the
final quarter of the seventeenth century witnessed deep changes
in the outward life and the inner temper of the colonists. The
"first fine careless rapture" was over. Only a few aged men could
recall the memory of the first settlements. Between the founding
of Jamestown and the rebellion under the leadership of Nathaniel
Bacon almost seventy years had intervened, an interval
corresponding to that which separates us from the Mexican War.
Roger Williams ended his much-enduring and beneficent life in the
flourishing town of Providence in 1684. He had already outlived
Cotton and Hooker, Shepard and Winthrop, by more than thirty
years. Inevitably men began, toward the end of the century, to
take stock of the great venture of colonization, to scrutinize
their own history and present position, to ask searching
questions of themselves. "You have better food and raiment than
was in former times," wrote the aged Roger Clark, in 1676; "but
have you better hearts than your forefathers had?" Thomas
Walley's "Languishing Commonwealth" maintains that "Faith is
dead, and Love is cold, and Zeal is gone." Urian Oakes's election
sermon of 1670 in Cambridge is a condemnation of the prevalent
worldliness and ostentation. This period of critical inquiry and
assessment, however, also gives grounds for just pride. History,
biography, eulogy, are flourishing. The reader is reminded of
that epoch, one hundred and fifty years later, when the deaths of
John Adams and of Thomas Jefferson, falling upon the same
anniversary day, the Fourth of July, 1826, stirred all Americans
to a fresh recognition of the services wrought by the Fathers of
the Republic. So it was in the colonies at the close of the
seventeenth century. Old England, in one final paroxysm of
political disgust, cast out the last Stuart in 1688. That
Revolution marks, as we have seen, the close of a long and tragic
struggle which began in the autocratic theories of James the
First and in the absolutism of Charles. Almost every phase of
that momentous conflict had its reverberation across the
Atlantic, as the history of the granting and withdrawal of
colonial charters witnesses abundantly. The American pioneers
were quite aware of what was going on in England, and they
praised God or grumbled, thriftily profited by the results or
quietly nullified them, as the case might be. But all the time,
while England was rocked to its foundations, the colonists struck
steadily forward into their own independent life.

CHAPTER III. THE THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION

When the eighteenth century opened, many signs of change were in
the air. The third generation of native-born Americans was
becoming secularized. The theocracy of New England had failed. In
the height of the tragic folly over the supposed "witchcraft" in
Salem, Increase Mather and his son Cotton had held up the hands
of the judges in their implacable work. But before five years had
passed, Judge Sewall does public penance in church for his share
of the awful blunder, desiring "to take the shame and blame of
it." Robert Calef's cool pamphlet exposing the weakness of the
prosecutors' case is indeed burned by Increase Mather in the
Harvard Yard, but the liberal party are soon to force Mather from
the Presidency and to refuse that office to his son. In the town
of Boston, once hermetically sealed against heresy, there are
Baptist and Episcopal churches--and a dancing-master. Young
Benjamin Franklin, born in 1706, professes a high respect for the
Mathers, but he does not go to church, "Sunday being my studying
day," and neither the clerical nor the secular arm of Boston is
long enough and strong enough to compel that industrious
apprentice into piety.

If such was the state of New England, the laxity of New York and
Virginia needs little evidence. Contemporary travelers found the
New Yorkers singularly attached to the things of this present
world. Philadelphia was prosperous and therewith content.
Virginia was a paradise with no forbidden fruit. Hugh Jones,
writing of it in 1724, considers North Carolina "the refuge of
runaways," and South Carolina "the delight of buccaneers and
pirates," but Virginia "the happy retreat of true Britons and
true Churchmen." Unluckily these Virginians, well nourished "by
the plenty of the country," have "contemptible notions of
England!" We shall hear from them again. In the meantime the
witty William Byrd of Westover describes for us his amusing
survey of the Dismal Swamp, and his excursions into North
Carolina and to Governor Spotswood's iron mines, where he reads
aloud to the Widow Fleming, on a rainy autumn day, three acts of
the "Beggars' Opera," just over from London. So runs the world
away, south of the Potomac. Thackeray paints it once for all, no
doubt, in the opening chapters of "The Virginians."

To discover any ambitious literary effort in this period, we must
turn northward again. In the middle colonies, and especially in
Philadelphia, which had now outgrown Boston in population, there
was a quickened interest in education and science. But the New
Englanders were still the chief makers of books. Three great
names will sufficiently represent the age: Cotton Mather, a
prodigy of learning whose eyes turn back fondly to the provincial
past; Jonathan Edwards, perhaps the most consummate intellect of
the eighteenth century; and Benjamin Franklin, certainly the most
perfect exponent of its many-sided life.

When Cotton Mather was graduated from Harvard in 1678, in his
sixteenth year, he was publicly complimented by President Oakes,
in fulsome Latin, as the grandson of Richard Mather and John
Cotton. This atmosphere of flattery, this consciousness of
continuing in his own person the famous local dynasty, surrounded
and sustained him to the end. He had a less commanding
personality than his father Increase. His nervous sensibility was
excessive. His natural vanity was never subdued, though it was
often chastened by trial and bitter disappointment. But, like his
father, he was an omnivorous reader and a facile producer of
books, carrying daily such burdens of mental and spiritual
excitement as would have crushed a normal man. Increase Mather
published some one hundred and fifty books and pamphlets: Cotton
Mather not less than four hundred. The Rev. John Norton, in his
sketch of John Cotton, remarks that "the hen, which brings not
forth without uncessant sitting night and day, is an apt emblem
of students." Certainly the hen is an apt emblem of the
"uncessant" sitter, the credulous scratcher, the fussy cackler
who produced the "Magnalia."

Yet he had certain elements of greatness. His tribal loyalty was
perfect. His ascetic devotion to his conception of religious
truth was absolute. His Diary, which has recently been published
in full, records his concern for the chief political events in
Europe in his day, no less than his brooding solicitude for the
welfare of his townspeople, and his agony of spirit over the
lapses of his wayward eldest son. A "sincere" man, then, as
Carlyle would say, at bottom; but overlaid with such "Jewish old
clothes," such professional robings and personal plumage as makes
it difficult, save in the revealing "Diary," to see the man
himself.

The "Magnalia Christi Americana," treating the history of New
England from 1620 to 1698, was published in a tall London folio
of nearly 800 pages in 1702. It is divided into seven books, and
proceeds, by methods entirely unique, to tell of Pilgrim and
Puritan divines and governors, of Harvard College, of the
churches of New England, of marvelous events, of Indian wars; and
in general to justify, as only a member of the Mather dynasty
could justify, the ways of God to Boston men. Hawthorne and
Whittier, Longfellow and Lowell knew this book well and found
much honey in the vast carcass. To have had four such readers and
a biographer like Barrett Wendell must be gratifying to Cotton
Mather in Paradise.

The "Diary" of Mather's fellow-townsman Judge Samuel Sewall has
been read more generally in recent years than anything written by
Mather himself. It was begun in 1673, nine years earlier than the
first entry in Mather's "Diary," and it ends in 1729, while
Mather's closes in 1724. As a picture of everyday happenings in
New England, Sewall's "Diary" is as far superior to Mather's as
Pepys's "Diary" is to George Fox's "Journal" in painting the
England of the Restoration. Samuel Sewall was an admirably solid
figure, keen, forceful, honest. Most readers of his "Diary"
believe that he really was in luck when he was rejected by the
Widow Winthrop on that fateful November day when his eye
noted--in spite of his infatuation--that "her dress was not so
clean as sometime it had been. Jehovah Jireh!"

One pictures Cotton Mather as looking instinctively backward to
the Heroic Age of New England with pious nervous exaltation, and
Samuel Sewall as doing the day's work uprightly without taking
anxious thought of either past or future. But Jonathan Edwards is
set apart from these and other men. He is a lonely seeker after
spiritual perfection, in quest of that city "far on the world's
rim," as Masefield says of it, the city whose builder and maker
is God.

The story of Edwards's career has the simplicity and dignity of
tragedy. Born in a parsonage in the quiet Connecticut valley in
1703--the year of John Wesley's birth--he is writing at the age
of ten to disprove the doctrine of the materiality of the soul.
At twelve he is studying "the wondrous way of the working of the
spider," with a precision and enthusiasm which would have made
him a great naturalist. At fourteen he begins his notes on "The
Mind" and on "Natural Science." He is graduated from Yale in
1720, studies theology, and at twenty-four becomes the colleague
of his famous grandfather, Solomon Stoddard, in the church at
Northampton. He marries the beautiful Sarah Pierrepont, whom he
describes in his journal in a prose rhapsody which, like his
mystical rhapsodies on religion in the same youthful period,
glows with a clear unearthly beauty unmatched in any English
prose of that century. For twenty-three years he serves the
Northampton church, and his sermons win him the rank of the
foremost preacher in New England. John Wesley reads at Oxford his
account of the great revival of 1735. Whitefield comes to visit
him at Northampton. Then, in 1750, the ascetic preacher alienates
his church over issues pertaining to discipline and to the
administration of the sacrament. He is dismissed. He preaches his
"farewell sermon," like Wesley, like Emerson, like Newman, and
many another still unborn. He removes to Stockbridge, then a
hamlet in the wilderness, preaches to the Indians, and writes
treatises on theology and metaphysics, among them the world
famous "Freedom of the Will." In 1757, upon the death of his
son-in-law, President Aaron Burr of Princeton, Edwards is called
to the vacant Presidency. He is reluctant to go, for though he is
only fifty-four, his health has never been robust, and he has his
great book on the "History of Redemption" still to write. But he
accepts, finds the smallpox raging in Princeton upon his arrival
in January, 1758, is inoculated, and dies of the disease in
March--his dreams unfulfilled, his life-work once more thwarted.
Close by the tomb of this saint is the tomb of his grandson,
Aaron Burr, who killed Hamilton.

The literary reputation of Jonathan Edwards has turned, like the
vicissitudes of his life, upon factors that could not be
foreseen. His contemporary fame was chiefly as a preacher, and
was due to sermons like those upon "God Glorified in Man's
Dependence" and "The Reality of Spiritual Life," rather than to
such discourses as the Enfield sermon, "Sinners in the Hands of
an Angry God," which in our own day is the best known of his
deliverances. Legends have grown up around this terrific Enfield
sermon. Its fearful power over its immediate hearers cannot be
gainsaid, and it will long continue to be quoted as an example of
the length to which a Calvinistic logician of genius was
compelled by his own scheme to go. We still see the tall,
sweet-faced man, worn by his daily twelve hours of intense mental
toil, leaning on one elbow in the pulpit and reading from
manuscript, without even raising his gentle voice, those words
which smote his congregation into spasms of terror and which seem
to us sheer blasphemy.

Yet the "Farewell Sermon of 1750" gives a more characteristic
view of Edwards's mind and heart, and conveys an ineffaceable
impression of his nobility of soul. His diction, like
Wordsworth's, is usually plain almost to bareness; the formal
framework of his discourses is obtruded; and he hunts objections
to their last hiding place with wearisome pertinacity. Yet his
logic is incandescent. Steel sometimes burns to the touch like
this, in the bitter winters of New England, and one wonders
whether Edwards's brain was not of ice, so pitiless does it seem.
His treatise denying the freedom of the will has given him a
European reputation comparable with that enjoyed by Franklin in
science and Jefferson in political propaganda. It was really a
polemic demonstrating the sovereignty of God, rather than pure
theology or metaphysics. Edwards goes beyond Augustine and Calvin
in asserting the arbitrary will of the Most High and in "denying
to the human will any self-determining power." He has been
refuted by events and tendencies, such as the growth of
historical criticism and the widespread acceptance of the
doctrine of evolution, rather than by the might of any single
antagonist. So, too, the Dred Scott decision of Chief Justice
Taney, holding that the slave was not a citizen, was not so much
answered by opponents as it was superseded by the arbitrament of
war. But the idealism of this lonely thinker has entered deeply
and permanently into the spiritual life of his countrymen, and he
will continue to be read by a few of those who still read Plato
and Dante.

"My mother grieves," wrote Benjamin Franklin to his father in
1738, "that one of her sons is an Arian, another an Arminian.
What an Arminian or an Arian is, I cannot say that I very well
know. The truth is I make such distinctions very little my
study." To understand Franklin's indifference to such
distinctions, we must realize how completely he represents the
secularizing tendencies of his age. What a drama of worldly
adventure it all was, this roving life of the tallow-chandler's
son, who runs away from home, walks the streets of Philadelphia
with the famous loaves of bread under his arm, is diligent in
business, slips over to London, where he gives lessons in
swimming and in total abstinence, slips back to Philadelphia and
becomes its leading citizen, fights the long battle of the
American colonies in London, sits in the Continental Congress,
sails to Europe to arrange that French Alliance which brought our
Revolution to a successful issue, and comes home at last, full of
years and honors, to a bland and philosophical exit from the
stage!

He broke with every Puritan tradition. The Franklins were
relatively late comers to New England. They sprang from a long
line of blacksmiths at Ecton in Northamptonshire. The seat of the
Washingtons was not far away, and Franklin's latest biographer
points out that the pink-coated huntsmen of the Washington gentry
may often have stopped at Ecton to have their horses shod at the
Franklin smithy. Benjamin's father came out in 1685, more than
fifty years after the most notable Puritan emigration. Young
Benjamin, born in 1706, was as untouched by the ardors of that
elder generation as he would have been by the visions of
Dante--an author, by the way, whom he never mentions, even as he
never mentions Shakespeare. He had no reverence for Puritan New
England. To its moral beauty, its fine severity, he was wholly
blind. As a boy he thriftily sold his Pilgrim's "Progress." He
became, in the new fashion of that day, a Deist. Like a true
child of the eighteenth century, his attitude toward the
seventeenth was that of amused or contemptuous superiority.
Thackeray has somewhere a charming phrase about his own love for
the back seat of the stage-coach, the seat which, in the old
coaching days, gave one a view of the receding landscape.
Thackeray, like Burke before him, loved historical associations,
historical sentiment, the backward look over the long road which
humanity has traveled. But Franklin faced the other way. He would
have endorsed his friend Jefferson's scornful sentence, "The dead
have no rights." He joined himself wholly to that eighteenth
century in which his own lot was cast, and, alike in his
qualities and in his defects, he became one of its most perfect
representatives.

To catch the full spirit of that age, turn for an instant to the
London of 1724--the year of Franklin's arrival. Thirty-six years
have elapsed since the glorious Revolution of 1688; the Whig
principles, then triumphant, have been tacitly accepted by both
political parties; the Jacobite revolt of 1715 has proved a
fiasco; the country has accepted the House of Hanover and a
government by party leadership of the House of Commons, and it
does not care whether Sir Robert Walpole buys a few rotten
boroughs, so long as he maintains peace with Europe and
prosperity at home. England is weary of seventeenth century
"enthusiasm," weary of conflict, sick of idealism. She has found
in the accepted Whig principles a satisfactory compromise, a
working theory of society, a modus vivendi which nobody supposes
is perfect but which will answer the prayer appointed to be read
in all the churches, "Grant us peace in our time, O Lord." The
theories to which men gave their lives in the seventeenth century
seem ghostly in their unreality; but the prize turnips on Sir
Robert's Norfolk farm, and the wines in his cellar, and the
offices at his disposal--these are very real indeed. London
merchants are making money; the squire and the parson are
tranquilly ruling the country parishes; the philosophy of John
Locke is everywhere triumphant. Mr. Pope is the poet of the hour,
and his "Essay on Man," counseling acceptance of our mortal
situation, is considered to be the last word of human wisdom and
of poetical elegance. In prose, the style of the "Spectator"
rules--an admirable style, Franklin thought, and he imitated it
patiently until its ease and urbanity had become his own. And
indeed, how much of that London of the third decade of the
century passed into the mind of the inquisitive, roving,
loose-living printer's apprentice from Philadelphia! It taught
him that the tangible world is the real world, and that nothing
succeeds like success; but it never even whispered to him that
sometimes nothing damns like success.

In his limitations, no less than in his power of assimilation,
Franklin was the representative man of his era. He had no
artistic interests, no liking for metaphysics after his brief
devotion, in early manhood, to the dialogues of Plato. He taught
himself some Latin, but he came to believe that the classics had
little significance and that they should be superseded by the
modern languages. For the mediaeval world he had no patience or
understanding. To these defects of his century we must add some
failings of his own. He was not always truthful. He had an
indelible streak of coarseness. His conception of the "art of
virtue" was mechanical. When Carlyle called Franklin the "father
of all the Yankees," we must remember that the Scotch prophet
hated Yankees and believed that Franklin's smooth, plausible,
trader type of morality was only a broad way to the everlasting
bonfire.

But it is folly to linger over the limitations of the tallow-
chandler's son. The catalogue of his beneficent activity is a
vast one. Balzac once characterized him as the man who invented
the lightning-rod, the hoax, and the republic. His contributions
to science have to do with electricity, earthquakes, geology,
meteorology, physics, chemistry, astronomy, mathematics,
navigation of air and water, agriculture, medicine, and hygiene.
In some of these fields he did pioneer work of lasting
significance. His teachings of thrift and prudence, as formulated
in the maxims of Poor Richard, gave him a world-wide reputation.
He attacked war, like Voltaire, not so much for its wickedness as
for its folly, and cheerfully gave up many years of a long life
to the effort to promote a better understanding among the nations
of the world.

It is perhaps needless to add what all persons who love good
writing know, that Benjamin Franklin was a most delightful
writer. His letters cover an amusing and extraordinary variety of
topics. He ranges from balloons to summer hats, and from the
advantages of deep ploughing to bifocal glasses, which, by the
way, he invented. He argues for sharp razors and cold baths, and
for fresh air in the sleeping-room. He discusses the morals of
the game of chess, the art of swimming, the evils of smoky
chimneys, the need of reformed spelling. Indeed, his passion for
improvement led him not only to try his hand upon an abridgment
of the Book of Common Prayer, but to go even so far as to propose
seriously a new rendering of the Lord's Prayer. His famous
proposal for a new version of the Bible, however, which Matthew
Arnold solemnly held up to reprobation, was only a joke which
Matthew Arnold did not see-the new version of Job being, in fact,
a clever bit of political satire against party leadership in
England. Even more brilliant examples of his skill in political
satire are his imaginary "Edict of the King of Prussia against
England," and his famous "Rules for Reducing a Great Empire to a
Small One."But I must not try to call the roll of all the good
things in Franklin's ten volumes. I will simply say that those
who know Franklin only in his "Autobiography," charming as that
classic production is, have made but an imperfect acquaintance
with the range, the vitality, the vigor of this admirable
craftsman who chose a style "smooth, clear, and short," and made
it serve every purpose of his versatile and beneficent mind.

When the passage of the Stamp Act in 1765 startled the American
colonies out of their provincial sense of security and made them
aware of their real attitude toward the mother country, Franklin
was in London. Eleven years earlier, in 1754, he had offered a
plan for the "Union of the Colonies," but this had not
contemplated separation from England. It was rather what we
should call a scheme for imperial federation under the British
Crown. We may use his word union, however, in a different field
from that of politics. How much union of sentiment, of mental and
moral life, of literary, educational, and scientific endeavor,
was there in the colonies when the hour of self-examination came?
Only the briefest summary may be attempted here. As to race,
these men of the third and fourth generation since the planting
of the colonies were by no means so purely English as the first
settlers. The 1,600,000 colonists in 1760 were mingled of many
stocks, the largest non-English elements being German and
Scotch-Irish--that is, Scotch who had settled for a while in
Ulster before emigrating to America. "About one-third of the
colonists in 1760," says Professor Channing, "were born outside
of America." Crevecoeur's "Letters from an American Farmer" thus
defined the Americans: "They are a mixture of English, Scotch,
Irish, French, Dutch, Germans, and Swedes. From this promiscuous
breed that race now called Americans has arisen." The Atlantic
seaboard, with a narrow strip inland, was fairly well covered by
local communities, differing in blood, in religion, in political
organization--a congeries of separate experiments or young
utopias, waiting for that most utopian experiment of all, a
federal union. But the dominant language of the "promiscuous
breed" was English, and in the few real centers of intellectual
life the English tradition was almost absolute.

The merest glance at colonial journalism will confirm this
estimate. The "Boston News-Letter," begun in 1704, was the first
of the journals, if we omit the single issue of "Publick
Occurrences" in the same town in 1690. By 1765 there were nearly
fifty colonial newspapers and several magazines. Their influence
made for union, in Franklin's sense of that word, and their
literary models, like their paper, type, and even ink, were found
in London. The "New England Courant," established in Boston in
1721 by James Franklin, is full of imitations of the "Tatler,"
"Spectator," and "Guardian." What is more, the "Courant" boasted
of its office collection of books, including Shakespeare, Milton,
the "Spectator," and Swift's "Tale of a Tub."* This was in 1722.
If we remember that no allusion to Shakespeare has been
discovered in the colonial literature of the seventeenth century,
and scarcely an allusion to the Puritan poet Milton, and that the
Harvard College Library in 1723 had nothing of Addison, Steele,
Bolingbroke, Dryden, Pope, and Swift, and had only recently
obtained copies of Milton and Shakespeare, we can appreciate the
value of James Franklin's apprenticeship in London. Perhaps we
can even forgive him for that attack upon the Mathers which threw
the conduct of the "Courant," for a brief period, into the hands
of his brother Benjamin, whose turn at a London apprenticeship
was soon to come.

* Cook, E. C. "Literary Influences in Colonial Newspapers,
1704-1750." N. Y., 1912.

If we follow this younger brother to Philadelphia and to
Bradford's "American Mercury" or to Franklin's own "Pennsylvania
Gazette," or if we study the "Gazettes" of Maryland, Virginia,
and South Carolina, the impression is still the same. The
literary news is still chiefly from London, from two months to a
year late. London books are imported and reprinted. Franklin
reprints Pamela, and his Library Company of Philadelphia has two
copies of "Paradise Lost "for circulation in 1741, whereas there
had been no copy of that work in the great library of Cotton
Mather. American journalism then, as now, owed its vitality to a
secular spirit of curiosity about the actual world. It followed
England as its model, but it was beginning to develop a temper of
its own.

Colonial education and colonial science were likewise chiefly
indebted to London, but by 1751 Franklin's papers on electricity
began to repay the loan. A university club in New York in 1745
could have had but fifteen members at most, for these were all
the "academics" in town. Yet Harvard had then been sending forth
her graduates for more than a century. William and Mary was
founded in 1693, Yale in 1701, Princeton in 1746, King's (now
Columbia) in 1754, the University of Pennsylvania in 1755, and
Brown in 1764. These colonial colleges were mainly in the hands
of clergymen. They tended to reproduce a type of scholarship
based upon the ancient languages. The curriculum varied but
little in the different colonies, and this fact helped to produce
a feeling of fellowship among all members of the republic of
letters. The men who debated the Stamp Act were, with a few
striking exceptions, men trained in Latin and Greek, familiar
with the great outlines of human history, accustomed to the
discipline of academic disputation. They knew the ideas and the
vocabulary of cultivated Europe and were conscious of no
provincial inferiority. In the study of the physical sciences,
likewise, the colonials were but little behind the mother
country. The Royal Society had its distinguished members here.
The Mathers, the Dudleys, John Winthrop of Connecticut, John
Bartram, James Logan, James Godfrey, Cadwallader Colden, and
above all, Franklin himself, were winning the respect of European
students, and were teaching Americans to use their eyes and their
minds not merely upon the records of the past but in searching
out the inexhaustible meanings of the present. There is no more
fascinating story than that of the beginnings of American science
in and outside of the colleges, and this movement, like the
influence of journalism and of the higher education, counted for
colonial union.

Professor Tyler, our foremost literary student of the period,
summarizes the characteristics of colonial literature in these
words: "Before the year 1765, we find in this country, not one
American people, but many American peoples . . . . No cohesive
principle prevailed, no centralizing life; each little nation was
working out its own destiny in its own fashion." But he adds that
with that year the colonial isolation came to an end, and that
the student must thereafter "deal with the literature of one
multitudinous people, variegated, indeed, in personal traits, but
single in its commanding ideas and in its national destinies." It
is easy to be wise after the event. Yet there was living in
London in 1765, as the agent for Pennsylvania, a shrewd and bland
Colonial--an honorary M. A. from both Harvard and Yale, a D.C.L.
of Oxford and an LL.D. of St. Andrews who was by no means sure
that the Stamp Act meant the end of Colonialism. And Franklin's
uncertainty was shared by Washington. When the tall Virginian
took command of the Continental Army as late as 1775, he
"abhorred the idea of independence." Nevertheless John Jay,
writing the second number of the "Federalist" in 1787, only
twelve years later, could say: "Providence has been pleased to
give this one connected country to one united people; a people
descended from the same ancestors, speaking the same language,
professing the same religion, attached to the same principles of
government."

CHAPTER IV. THE REVOLUTION

If we turn, however, to the literature produced in America
between the passage of the Stamp Act in 1765 and the adoption of
the Constitution in 1787, we perceive that it is a literature of
discord and passion. Its spirit is not that of "one united
people." Washington could indeed declare in his "Farewell
Address" of 1796, "With slight shades of difference, you have the
same religion, manners, habits, and political principles"; yet no
one knew better than Washington upon what a slender thread this
political unity had often hung, and how impossible it had been to
foresee the end from the beginning.

It is idle to look in the writings of the Revolutionary period
for the literature of beauty, for a quiet harmonious unfolding of
the deeper secrets of life. It was a time of swift and pitiless
change, of action rather than reflection, of the turning of many
separate currents into one headlong stream. "We must, indeed, all
hang together," runs Franklin's well-known witticism in
Independence Hall, "or, most assuredly, we shall all hang
separately." Excellently spoken, Doctor! And that homely, cheery,
daring sentence gives the keynote of much of the Revolutionary
writing that has survived. It may be heard in the state papers of
Samuel Adams, the oratory of Patrick Henry, the pamphlets of
Thomas Paine, the satires of Freneau and Trumbull, and in the
subtle, insinuating, thrilling paragraphs of Thomas Jefferson.

We can only glance in passing at the literature of the Lost
Cause, the Loyalist or "Tory" pleadings for allegiance to
Britain. It was written by able and honest men, like Boucher and
Odell, Seabury, Leonard and Galloway. They distrusted what
Seabury called "our sovereign Lord the Mob." They represented, in
John Adams's opinion, nearly one-third of the people of the
colonies, and recent students believe that this estimate was too
low. In some colonies the Loyalists were clearly in the majority.
In all they were a menacing element, made up of the conservative,
the prosperous, the well-educated, with a mixture, of course, of
mere placemen and tuft-hunters. They composed weighty pamphlets,
eloquent sermons, and sparkling satire in praise of the old order
of things. When their cause was lost forever, they wrote gossipy
letters from their exile in London or pathetic verses in their
new home in Nova Scotia and Ontario. Their place in our national
life and literature has never been filled, and their talents and
virtues are never likely to receive adequate recognition. They
took the wrong fork of the road.

There were gentle spirits, too, in this period, endowed with
delicate literary gifts, but quite unsuited for the clash of
controversy--members, in Crevecoeur's touching words, of the
"secret communion among good men throughout the world." "I am a
lover of peace, what must I do?" asks Crevecoeur in his "Letters
from an American Farmer." "I was happy before this unfortunate
Revolution. I feel that I am no longer so, therefore I regret the
change. My heart sometimes seems tired with beating, it wants
rest like my eyelids, which feel oppressed with so many
watchings." Crevecoeur, an immigrant from Normandy, was certainly
no weakling, but he felt that the great idyllic American
adventure which he described so captivatingly in his chapter
entitled "What is an American"--was ending tragically in civil
war. Another whitesouled itinerant of that day was John Woolman
of New Jersey, whose "Journal," praised by Charles Lamb and
Channing and edited by Whittier, is finding more readers in the
twentieth century than it won in the nineteenth. "A man
unlettered," said Whittier, "but with natural refinement and
delicate sense of fitness, the purity of whose heart enters into
his language." Woolman died at fifty-two in far-away York,
England, whither he had gone to attend a meeting of the Society
of Friends.

The three tall volumes of the Princeton edition of the poems of
Philip Freneau bear the sub-title, "Poet of the American
Revolution." But our Revolution, in truth, never had an adequate
poet. The prose-men, such as Jefferson, rose nearer the height of
the great argument than did the men of rhyme. Here and there the
struggle inspired a brisk ballad like Francis Hopkinson's "Battle
of the Kegs," a Hudibrastic satire like Trumbull's "McFingal," or
a patriotic song like Timothy Dwight's "Columbia." Freneau
painted from his own experience the horrors of the British
prison-ship, and celebrated, in cadences learned from Gray and
Collins, the valor of the men who fell at Eutaw Springs. There
was patriotic verse in extraordinary profusion, but its literary
value is slight, and it reveals few moods of the American mind
that are not more perfectly conveyed through oratory, the
pamphlet, and the political essay. The immediate models of this
Revolutionary verse were the minor British bards of the
eighteenth century, a century greatly given to verse-writing, but
endowed by Heaven with the "prose-reason" mainly. The reader of
Burton E. Stevenson's collection of "Poems of American History"
can easily compare the contemporary verse inspired by the events
of the Revolution with the modern verse upon the same historic
themes. He will see how slenderly equipped for song were most of
the later eighteenth-century Americans and how unfavorable to
poetry was the tone of that hour.

Freneau himself suffered, throughout his long career, from the
depressing indifference of his public to the true spirit of
poetry. "An old college mate of mine," said James Madison--who
was by tradition Freneau's roommate at Princeton in the class of
1771--"a poet and man of literary and refined tastes, knowing
nothing of the world." When but three years out of college, the
cautious Madison wrote to another friend: "Poetry wit and
Criticism Romances Plays &c captivated me much: but I begin to
discover that they deserve but a moderate portion of a mortal's
Time and that something more substantial more durable more
profitable befits our riper age." Madison was then at the ripe
age of twenty-three! Professor Pattee, Freneau's editor, quotes
these words to illustrate the "common sense" atmosphere of the
age which proved fatal to Freneau's development. Yet the sturdy
young New Yorker, of Huguenot descent, is a charming figure, and
his later malevolence was shown only to his political foes. After
leaving Princeton he tries teaching, the law, the newspaper, the
sea; he is aflame with patriotic zeal; he writes, like most
American poets, far too much for his own reputation. As the
editor of the "National Gazette" in Philadelphia, he becomes
involved in the bitter quarrel between his chief, Jefferson, and
Alexander Hamilton. His attachment to the cause of the French
Revolution makes him publish baseless attacks upon Washington. By
and by he retires to a New Jersey farm, still toying with
journalism, still composing verses. He turns patriotic poet once
more in the War of 1812; but the public has now forgotten him. He
lives on in poverty and seclusion, and in his eightieth year
loses his way in a snowstorm and perishes miserably--this in
1832, the year of the death of the great Sir Walter Scott, who
once had complimented Freneau by borrowing one of his best lines
of poetry.

It is in the orations and pamphlets and state papers inspired by
the Revolutionary agitation that we find the most satisfactory
expression of the thought and feeling of that generation. Its
typical literature is civic rather than aesthetic, a sort of
writing which has been incidental to the accomplishing of some
political, social, or moral purpose, and which scarcely regards
itself as literature at all. James Otis's argument against the
Writs of Assistance in Massachusetts in 1761, and Patrick Henry's
speech in the Virginia House of Burgesses in 1765, mark epochs in
the emotional life of these communities. They were reported
imperfectly or not at all, but they can no more be ignored in an
assessment of our national experience than editorials, sermons,
or conversations which have expressed the deepest feelings of a
day and then have perished beyond resurrection.

Yet if natural orators like Otis and Henry be denied a strictly
"literary" rating because their surviving words are obviously
inadequate to account for the popular effect of their speeches,
it is still possible to measure the efficiency of the
pamphleteer. When John Adams tells us that "James Otis was Isaiah
and Ezekiel united," we must take his word for the impression
which Otis's oratory left upon his mind. But John Adams's own
writings fill ten stout volumes which invite our judgment. The
"truculent and sarcastic splendor" of his hyperboles need not
blind us to his real literary excellencies, such as clearness,
candor, vigor of phrase, freshness of idea. A testy, rugged,
"difficult" person was John Adams, but he grew mellower with age,
and his latest letters and journals are full of whimsical charm.

John Adams's cousin Samuel was not precisely a charming person.
Bigoted, tireless, secretive, this cunning manipulator of
political passions followed many tortuous paths. His ability for
adroit misstatement of an adversary's position has been equaled
but once in our history. But to the casual reader of his four
volumes, Samuel Adams seems ever to be breathing the liberal air
of the town-meeting: everything is as plainly obvious as a good
citizen can make it. He has, too, the large utterance of the
European liberalism of his day. "Resolved," read his Resolutions
of the House of Representatives of Massachusetts in 1765, "that
there are certain essential rights of the British constitution of
government which are founded in the law of God and nature and are
the common rights of mankind." In his statement of the Rights of
the Colonists (1772) we are assured that "among the natural
rights of the colonists are these, First, a right to Life;
secondly to Liberty; thirdly to Property .... All men have a
Right to remain in a State of Nature as long as they please . . .
. When Men enter into Society, it is by voluntary consent."
Jean-Jacques himself could not be more bland, nor at heart more
fiercely demagogic.

"Tom" Paine would have been no match for "Sam" Adams in a
town-meeting, but he was an even greater pamphleteer. He had
arrived from England in 1774, at the age of thirty-eight, having
hitherto failed in most of his endeavors for a livelihood.
"Rebellious Staymaker; unkempt," says Carlyle; but General
Charles Lee noted that there was "genius in his eyes," and he
bore a letter of introduction from Franklin commending him as an
"ingenious, worthy young man," which obtained for him a position
on the "Pennsylvania Magazine." Before he had been a year on
American soil, Paine was writing the most famous pamphlet of our
political literature, "Common Sense," which appeared in January,
1776. "A style hitherto unknown on this side of the Atlantic,"
wrote Edmund Randolph. Yet this style of familiar talk to the
crowd had been used seventy years earlier by Defoe and Swift, and
it was to be employed again by a gaunt American frontiersman who
was born in 1809, the year of Thomas Paine's death. "The Crisis,"
a series of thirteen pamphlets, of which the first was issued in
December, 1776, seemed to justify the contemporary opinion that
the "American cause owed as much to the pen of Paine as to the
sword of Washington. "Paine, who was now serving in the army,
might have heard his own words, "These are the times that try
men's souls," read aloud, by Washington's orders, to the ragged
troops just before they crossed the Delaware to win the victory
of Trenton. The best known productions of Paine's subsequent
career, "The Rights of Man" and "The Age of Reason," were written
in Europe, but they were read throughout America. The reputation
of the "rebellious Staymaker" has suffered from certain grimy
habits and from the ridiculous charge of atheism. He was no more
an atheist than Franklin or Jefferson. In no sense an original
thinker, he could impart to outworn shreds of deistic controversy
and to shallow generalizations about democracy a personal fervor
which transformed them and made his pages gay and bold and clear
as a trumpet.

Clear and bold and gay was Alexander Hamilton likewise; and his
literary services to the Revolution are less likely to be
underestimated than Thomas Paine's. They began with that boyish
speech in "the Fields" of New York City in 1774 and with "The
Farmer Refuted," a reply to Samuel Seabury's "Westchester
Farmer." They were continued in extraordinary letters, written
during Hamilton's military career, upon the defects of the
Articles of Confederation and of the finances of the
Confederation. Hamilton contributed but little to the actual
structure of the new Constitution, but as a debater he fought
magnificently and triumphantly for its adoption by the Convention
of the State of New York in 1788. Together with Jay and Madison
he defended the fundamental principles of the Federal Union in
the remarkable series of papers known as the "Federalist." These
eighty-five papers, appearing over the signature "Publius" in two
New York newspapers between October, 1787, and April, 1788, owed
their conception largely to Hamilton, who wrote more than half of
them himself. In manner they are not unlike the substantial Whig
literature of England, and in political theory they have little
in common with the Revolutionary literature which we have been
considering. The reasoning is close, the style vigorous but
neither warmed by passion nor colored by the individual emotions
of the author. The "Federalist" remains a classic example of the
civic quality of our post-Revolutionary American political
writing, broadly social in its outlook, well informed as to the
past, confident--but not reckless--of the future. Many Americans
still read it who would be shocked by Tom Paine and bored with
Edmund Burke. It has none of the literary genius of either of
those writers, but its formative influence upon successive
generations of political thinking has been steadying and sound.

In fact, our citizen literature cannot be understood aright if
one fails to observe that its effect has often turned, not upon
mere verbal skill, but upon the weight of character behind the
words. Thus the grave and reserved George Washington says of the
Constitution of 1787: "Let us raise a standard to which the wise
and the honest can repair; the event is in the hand of God." The
whole personality of the great Virginian is back of that simple,
perfect sentence. It brings us to our feet, like a national
anthem.

One American, no doubt our most gifted man of letters of that
century, passed most of the Revolutionary period abroad, in the
service of his country. Benjamin Franklin was fifty-nine in the
year of the Stamp Act. When he returned from France in 1785 he
was seventy-nine, but he was still writing as admirably as ever
when he died at eighty-four. We cannot dismiss this singular,
varied, and fascinating American better than by quoting the
letter which George Washington wrote to him in September, 1789.
It has the dignity and formality of the eighteenth century, but
it is warm with tested friendship and it glows with deep human
feeling: "If to be venerated for benevolence, if to be admired
for talents, if to be esteemed for patriotism, if to be beloved
for philanthropy, can gratify the human mind, you must have the
pleasing consolation to know that you have not lived in vain. And
I flatter myself that it will not be ranked among the least
grateful occurrences of your life to be assured, that, so long as
I retain my memory, you will be recollected with respect,
veneration, and affection by your sincere friend, George
Washington."

There remains another Virginian, the symbol of the Revolutionary
age, the author of words more widely known around the globe than
any other words penned by an American. "Thomas Jefferson," writes
the latest of his successors in the Presidency, "was not a man of
the people, but he was a man of such singular insight that he saw
that all the roots of generous power come from the people." On
his father's side Jefferson came from sound yeoman stock, in
which Welsh blood ran. His mother was a Virginia Randolph. Born
in Albemarle County, near the "little
mountain"--Monticello--where he built a mansion for his bride and
where he lies buried, the tall, strong, red-haired, gray-eyed,
gifted boy was reputed the best shot, the best rider, the best
fiddle-player in the county. He studied hard at William and Mary
over his Greek, Latin, French, Italian, and Spanish, but he also
frequented the best society of the little capital. He learned to
call himself a Deist and to theorize about ideal commonwealths.
There was already in him that latent radicalism which made him
strike down, as soon as he had the power, two of the fundamental
principles of the society into which he was born, the principle
of entailed property and that of church establishment.

Such was the youth of twenty-two who was thrilled in 1765 by the
Stamp Act. In the ten years of passionate discussion which
followed, two things became clear: first, that there had long
existed among the colonists very radical theoretical notions of
political freedom; and second, that there was everywhere a spirit
of practical conservatism. Jefferson illustrates the union of
these two tendencies.

He took his seat in the Continental Congress in June, 1775. He
was only thirty-two, but he had already written, in the summer of
1774, "A Summary View of the Rights of British America" which had
been published in England by Burke, himself a judge of good
writing and sound politics. Jefferson had also prepared in 1775
the "Address of the Virginia House of Burgesses." For these
reasons he was placed at the head of the Committee for drafting
the Declaration of Independence. We need not linger over the
familiar circumstances of its composition. Everybody knows how
Franklin and Adams made a few verbal alterations in the first
draft, how the committee of five then reported it to the
Congress, which proceeded to cut out about one-fourth of the
matter, while Franklin tried to comfort the writhing author with
his cheerful story about the sign of John Thompson the hatter.
Forty-seven years afterwards, in reply to the charge of lack of
originality brought against the Declaration by Timothy Pickering
and John Adams--charges which have been repeated at intervals
ever since--Jefferson replied philosophically: "Whether I
gathered my ideas from reading or reflection I do not know. I
know only that I turned neither to book nor pamphlet while
writing it. I did not consider it as any part of my charge to
invent new ideas altogether and to offer no sentiment which had
ever been expressed before." O wise young man, and fundamentally
Anglo-Saxon young man, to turn his back, in that crisis, to the
devil of mere cleverness, and stick to recognized facts and
accepted sentiments! But his pen retains its cunning in spite of
him; and the drop of hot Welsh blood tells; and the cosmopolitan
reading and thinking tell; and they transform what Pickering
called a "commonplace compilation, its sentiments hackneyed in
Congress for two years before," into an immortal manifesto to
mankind.

Its method is the simplest. The preamble is philosophical,
dealing with "self-evident" truths. Today the men who dislike or
doubt these truths dismiss the preamble as "theoretical," or, to
use another term of derogation favored by reactionaries,
"French." But if the preamble be French and philosophical, the
specific charges against the King are very English and practical.
Here are certain facts, presented no doubt with consummate
rhetorical skill, but facts, undeniably. The Anglo-Saxon in
Jefferson is basal, racial; the turn for academic philosophizing
after the French fashion is personal, acquired; but the range and
sweep and enduring vitality of this matchless state paper lie in
its illumination of stubborn facts by general principles, its
decent respect to the opinions of mankind, its stately and noble
utterance of national sentiments and national reasons to a
"candid world."

It has long been the fashion, among a certain school of
half-hearted Americans--and unless I am mistaken, the teaching
has increased during the last decades--to minimize the value of
Jefferson's "self-evident truths." Rufus Choate, himself a
consummate rhetorician, sneered at those "glittering
generalities," and countless college-bred men, some of them
occupying the highest positions, have echoed the sneer. The
essence of the objection to Jefferson's platform lies of course
in his phrase, "all men are created equal," with the subsidiary
phrase about governments "deriving their just powers from the
consent of the governed." Editors and congressmen and even
college professors have proclaimed themselves unable to assent to
these phrases of the Declaration, and unable even to understand
them. These objectors belong partly, I think, in Jefferson's
category of "nervous persons"--"anti-republicans," as he goes on
to define them--"whose languid fibres have more analogy with a
passive than an active state of things." Other objectors to the
phrase "all men are created equal" have had an obvious personal
or political motive for refusing assent to the proposition. But
"no intelligent man," says one of Jefferson's biographers, "has
ever misconstrued it [the Declaration] except intentionally."

Nobody would claim today that Thomas Jefferson's statement of the
sentiments and reasons for the independence of the thirteen
British colonies in 1776 was an adequate handbook of political
wisdom, fit for all the exigencies of contemporary American
democracy. It is not that. It is simply, in Lincoln's phrase, one
of "the standard maxims of free society" which no democracy can
safely disregard.

Jefferson's long life, so varied, so flexible, so responsive to
the touch of popular forces, illustrates the process by which the
Virginia mind of 1743 became the nationalized, unionized mind of
1826. It is needless here to dwell upon the traits of his
personal character: his sweetness of spirit, his
stout-heartedness in disaster, his scorn of money, his love for
the intellectual life. "I have no ambition to govern men," he
wrote to Edward Rutledge. He was far happier talking about Greek
and Anglo-Saxon with Daniel Webster before the fire-place of
Monticello than he ever was in the presidential chair. His
correspondence was enormous. His writings fill twenty volumes. In
his theories of education he was fifty years ahead of his time;
in his absolute trust in humanity he was generations ahead of it.
"I am not one of those who fear the people," he decla