poem,
his verse presents no ideas that are not found in his prose. In
metre and rhyme he is harsh and willful. Yet he has marvelous
single phrases and cadences. He ejaculates transports and
ecstasies, and though he cannot organize and construct in verse,
he is capable here and there of the true miracle of transforming
fact and thought into true beauty. Aldrich used to say that he
would rather have written Emerson's "Bacchus" than any American
poem.

That the pure, high, and tonic mind of Emerson was universal in
its survey of human forces, no one would claim. Certain
limitations in interest and sympathy are obvious. "That horrid
burden and impediment of the soul which the churches call sin,"
to use John Morley's words, occupied his attention but little.
Like a mountain climber in a perilous pass, he preferred to look
up rather than down. He does not stress particularly those old
human words, service and sacrifice. "Anti-scientific, antisocial,
anti-Christian" are the terms applied to him by one of his most
penetrating critics. Yet I should prefer to say "un-scientific,"
"unsocial," and "non-Christian," in the sense in which Plato and
Isaiah are non-Christian. Perhaps it would be still nearer the
truth to say, as Mrs. Lincoln said of her husband, "He was not a
technical Christian." He tends to underestimate institutions of
every kind; history, except as a storehouse of anecdote, and
culture as a steady mental discipline. This is the price he pays
for his transcendental insistence upon the supreme value of the
Now, the moment of insight. But after all these limitations are
properly set down, the personality of Ralph Waldo Emerson remains
a priceless possession to his countrymen. The austere serenity of
his life, and the perfection with which he represents the highest
type of his province and his era, will ultimately become blended
with the thought of his true Americanism. A democrat and
liberator, like Lincoln, he seems also destined like Lincoln to
become increasingly a world's figure, a friend and guide to
aspiring spirits everywhere. Differences of race and creed are
negligible in the presence of such superb confidence in God and
the soul.

Citizens of Concord in May, 1862, hearing that Henry Thoreau, the
eccentric bachelor, had just died of consumption in his mother's
house on Main Street, in his forty-fifth year, would have smiled
cannily at the notion that after fifty years their townsman's
literary works would be published in a sumptuous twenty-volume
edition, and that critics in his own country and in Europe would
rank him with Ralph Waldo Emerson. Yet that is precisely what has
happened. Our literature has no more curious story than the
evolution of this local crank into his rightful place of
mastership. In his lifetime he printed only two books, "A Week on
the Concord and Merrimac Rivers"--which was even more completely
neglected by the public than Emerson's "Nature"--and "Walden,"
now one of the classics, but only beginning to be talked about
when its shy, proud author penned his last line and died with the
words "moose" and "Indian" on his lips.

Thoreau, like all thinkers who reach below the surface of human
life, means many different things to men of various temperaments.
Collectors of human novelties, like Stevenson, rejoice in his
uniqueness of flavor; critics, like Lowell, place him, not
without impatient rigor. To some readers he is primarily a
naturalist, an observer, of the White of Selborne school; to
others an elemental man, a lover of the wild, a hermit of the
woods. He has been called the poet-naturalist, to indicate that
his powers of observation were accompanied, like Wordsworth's, by
a gift of emotional interpretation of the meaning of phenomena.
Lovers of literature celebrate his sheer force and penetration of
phrase. But to the student of American thought Thoreau's prime
value lies in the courage and consistency with which he
endeavored to realize the gospel of Transcendentalism in his own
inner life.

Lovers of racial traits like to remember that Thoreau's
grandfather was an immigrant Frenchman from the island of Jersey,
and that his grandmother was Scotch and Quaker. His father made
lead pencils and ground plumbago in his own house in Concord. The
mother was from New Hampshire. It was a high-minded family. All
the four children taught school and were good talkers. Henry,
born in 1817, was duly baptized by good Dr. Ripley of the Old
Manse, studied Greek and Latin, and was graduated at Harvard in
1837, the year of Emerson's Phi Beta Kappa address. Even in
college the young man was a trifle difficult. "Cold and
unimpressible," wrote a classmate. "The touch of his hand was
moist and indifferent. He did not care for people." "An
unfavorable opinion has been entertained of his disposition to
exert himself," wrote President Quincy confidentially to Emerson
in 1837, although the kindly President, a year later, in
recommending Thoreau as a school-teacher, certified that "his
rank was high as a scholar in all the branches and his morals and
general conduct unexceptionable and exemplary."

Ten years passed. The young man gave up school-keeping, thinking
it a loss of time. He learned pencil-making, surveying, and farm
work, and found that by manual labor for six weeks in the year he
could meet all the expenses of living. He haunted the woods and
pastures, explored rivers and ponds, built the famous hut on
Emerson's wood-lot with the famous axe borrowed from Alcott, was
put in jail for refusal to pay his polltax, and, to sum up much
in little, "signed off" from social obligations. "I, Henry D.
Thoreau, have signed off, and do not hold myself responsible to
your multifarious uncivil chaos named Civil Government." When his
college class held its tenth reunion in 1847, and each man was
asked to send to the secretary a record of achievement, Thoreau
wrote: "My steadiest employment, if such it can be called, is to
keep myself at the top of my condition and ready for whatever may
turn up in heaven or on earth." There is the motto of
Transcendentalism, stamped upon a single coin.

For "to be ready for whatever may turn up" is Thoreau's racier,
homelier version of Emerson's "endless seeker"; and Thoreau, more
easily than Emerson, could venture to stake everything upon the
quest. The elder man had announced the programme, but by 1847 he
was himself almost what Thoreau would call a "committed man,"
with family and household responsibilities, with a living to
earn, and bound, like every professional writer and speaker, to
have some measure of regard for his public. But Thoreau was ready
to travel lightly and alone. If he should fail in the great
adventure for spiritual perfection, it was his own affair. He had
no intimates, no confidant save the multitudinous pages of his
"Journal," from which--and here again he followed Emerson's
example--his future books were to be compiled. Many of his most
loyal admirers will admit that such a quest is bound, by the very
conditions of the problem, to be futile. Hawthorne allegorized it
in "Ethan Brand," and his quaint illustration of the folly of
romantic expansion of the self apart from the common interests of
human kind is the picture of a dog chasing its own tail. "It is
time now that I begin to live," notes Thoreau in the "Journal,"
and he continued to say it in a hundred different ways until the
end of all his journalizing, but he never quite captured the
fugitive felicity. The haunting pathos of his own allegory has
moved every reader of "Walden:" "I long ago lost a hound, a bay
horse, and a turtle-dove, and am still on their trail." Precisely
what he meant it is now impossible to say, but surely he betrays
a doubt in the ultimate efficacy of his own system of life. He
bends doggedly to the trail, for Henry Thoreau is no quitter, but
the trail leads nowhere, and in the latest volumes of the
"Journals" he seems to realize that he has been pursuing a
phantom. He dived fearlessly and deep into himself, but somehow
he failed to grasp that pearl of great price which all the
transcendental prophets assured him was to be had at the cost of
diving.

This is not to say that this austere and strenuous athlete came
up quite empty-handed. Far from it. The byproducts of his toil
were enough to have enriched many lesser men, and they have given
Thoreau a secure fame. From his boyhood he longed to make himself
a writer, and an admirable writer he became. "For along time," he
says in "Walden," "I was reporter to a journal, of no very wide
circulation, whose editor has never seen fit to print the bulk of
my contributions, and, as is too common with writers, I got only
my labor for my pains. However, in this case my pains were their
reward." Like so many solitaries, he experienced the joy of
intense, long-continued effort in composition, and he was artist
enough to know that his pages, carefully assembled from his note
books, had pungency, form, atmosphere. No man of his day, not
even Lowell the "last of the bookmen," abandoned himself more
unreservedly to the delight of reading. Thoreau was an
accomplished scholar in the Greek and Roman classics, as his
translations attest. He had some acquaintance with several modern
languages, and at one time possessed the best collection of books
on Oriental literature to be found in America. He was drenched in
the English poetry of the seventeenth century. His critical
essays in the "Dial," his letters and the bookish allusions
throughout his writings, are evidence of rich harvesting in the
records of the past. He left some three thousand manuscript pages
of notes on the American Indians, whose history and character had
fascinated him from boyhood. Even his antiquarian hobbies gave
him durable satisfaction. Then, too, he had deep delight in his
life-long studies in natural history, in his meticulous
measurements of river currents, in his notes upon the annual
flowering of plants and the migration of birds. The more
thoroughly trained naturalists of our own day detect him now and
again in error as to his birds and plants, just as specialists in
Maine woodcraft discover that he made amusing, and for him
unaccountable, blunders when he climbed Katahdin. But if he was
not impeccable as a naturalist or woodsman, who has ever had more
fun out of his enthusiasm than Thoreau, and who has ever
stimulated as many men and women in the happy use of their eyes?
He would have had slight patience with much of the sentimental
nature study of our generation, and certainly an intellectual
contempt for much that we read and write about the call of the
wild; but no reader of his books can escape his infection for the
freedom of the woods, for the stark and elemental in nature.
Thoreau's passion for this aspect of life may have been selfish,
wolflike, but it is still communicative.

Once, toward the close of his too brief life, Thoreau "signed on"
again to an American ideal, and no man could have signed more
nobly. It was the cause of Freedom, as represented by John Brown
of Harper's Ferry. The French and Scotch blood in the furtive
hermit suddenly grew hot. Instead of renouncing in disgust the
"uncivil chaos called Civil Government," Thoreau challenged it to
a fight. Indeed he had already thrown down the gauntlet in
"Slavery in Massachusetts," which Garrison had published in the
"Liberator" in 1854. And now the death upon the scaffold of the
old fanatic of Ossawatomie changed Thoreau into a complete
citizen, arguing the case and glorifying to his neighbors the
dead hero. "It seems as if no man had ever died in America
before; for in order to die you must first have lived . . . . I
hear a good many pretend that they are going to die . . . .
Nonsense! I'll defy them to do it. They haven't got life enough
in them. They'll deliquesce like fungi, and keep a hundred
eulogists mopping the spot where they left off. Only half a dozen
or so have died since the world began." Such passages as this
reveal a very different Thoreau from the Thoreau who is supposed
to have spent his days in the company of swamp-blackbirds and
woodchucks. He had, in fact, one of the highest qualifications
for human society, an absolute honesty of mind. "We select
granite," he says, "for the underpinning of our houses and barns;
we build fences of stone; but we do not ourselves rest on an
underpinning of granite truth, the lowest primitive rock. Our
sills are rotten . . . . In proportion as our inward life fails,
we go more constantly and desperately to the postoffice. You may
depend upon it, that the poor fellow who walks away with the
greatest number of letters, proud of his extensive
correspondence, has not heard from himself this long time."

This hard, basic individualism was for Thoreau the foundation of
all enduring social relations, and the dullest observer of
twentieth century America can see that Thoreau's doctrine is
needed as much as ever. His sharp-edged personality provokes
curiosity and pricks the reader into dissent or emulation as the
case may be, but its chief ethical value to our generation lies
in the fact that here was a Transcendentalist who stressed, not
the life of the senses, though he was well aware of their
seductiveness, but the stubborn energy of the will.

The scope of the present book prevents more than a glimpse at the
other members of the New England Transcendental group. They are a
very mixed company, noble, whimsical, queer, impossible. "The
good Alcott," wrote Carlyle, "with his long, lean face and
figure, with his gray worn temples and mild radiant eyes; all
bent on saving the world by a return to acorns and the golden
age; he comes before one like a venerable Don Quixote, whom
nobody can laugh at without loving." These words paint a whole
company, as well as a single man. The good Alcott still awaits an
adequate biographer. Connecticut Yankee, peddler in the South,
school-teacher in Boston and elsewhere, he descended upon
Concord, flitted to the queer community of Fruitlands, was
starved back to Concord, inspired and bored the patient Emerson,
talked endlessly, wrote ineffective books, and had at last his
apotheosis in the Concord School of Philosophy, but was chiefly
known for the twenty years before his death in 1888 as the father
of the Louisa Alcott who wrote "Little Women." "A tedious
archangel," was Emerson's verdict, and it is likely to stand.

Margaret Fuller, though sketched by Hawthorne, analyzed by
Emerson, and painted at full length by Thomas Wentworth
Higginson, is now a fading figure--a remarkable woman, no doubt,
one of the first of American feminists, suggesting George Eliot
in her physical unattractiveness, her clear brain, her touch of
sensuousness. She was an early-ripe, over-crammed scholar in the
classics and in modern European languages. She did loyal, unpaid
work as the editor of the "Dial," which from 1840 to 1844 was the
organ of Transcendentalism. She joined the community at Brook
Farm, whose story has been so well told by Lindsay Swift. For a
while she served as literary editor of the "New York Tribune"
under Horace Greeley. Then she went abroad, touched Rousseau's
manuscripts at Paris with trembling, adoring fingers, made a
secret marriage in Italy with the young Marquis Ossoli, and
perished by shipwreck, with her husband and child, off Fire
Island in 1850.

Theodore Parker, like Alcott and "Margaret," an admirable Greek
scholar, an idealist and reformer, still lives in Chadwick's
biography, in Colonel Higginson's delightful essay, and in the
memories of a few liberal Bostonians who remember his tremendous
sermons on the platform of the old Music Hall. He was a Lexington
farmer's son, with the temperament of a blacksmith, with
enormous, restless energy, a good hater, a passionate lover of
all excellent things save meekness. He died at fifty, worn out,
in Italy.

But while these three figures were, after Emerson and Thoreau,
the most representative of the group, the student of the
Transcendental period will be equally interested in watching its
influence upon many other types of young men: upon future
journalists and publicists like George William Curtis, Charles A.
Dana, and George Ripley; upon religionists like Orestes Brownson,
Father Hecker, and James Freeman Clarke; and upon poets like
Jones Very, Christopher. P. Cranch, and Ellery Channing. There
was a sunny side of the whole movement, as T. W. Higginson and F.
B. Sanborn, two of the latest survivors of the ferment, loved to
emphasize in their talk and in their books; and it was shadowed
also by tragedy and the pathos of unfulfilled desires. But as one
looks back at it, in the perspective of three-quarters of a
century, it seems chiefly something touchingly fine. For all
these men and women tried to hitch their wagon to a star.

CHAPTER VII. ROMANCE, POETRY, AND HISTORY

Moving in and out of the Transcendentalist circles, in that great
generation preceding the Civil War, were a company of other
men--romancers, poets, essayists, historians--who shared in the
intellectual liberalism of the age, but who were more purely
artists in prose and verse than they were seekers after the
unattainable. Hawthorne, for example, sojourned at Concord and at
Brook Farm with some of the most extreme types of transcendental
extravagance. The movement interested him artistically and he
utilized it in his romances, but personally he maintained an
attitude of cool detachment from it. Longfellow was too much of
an artist to lose his head over philosophical abstractions;
Whittier, at his best, had a too genuine poetic instinct for the
concrete; and Lowell and Holmes had the saving gift of humor.
Cultivated Boston gentlemen like Prescott, Motley, and Parkman
preferred to keep their feet on the solid earth and write
admirable histories. So the mellow years went by. Most of the
widely-read American books were being produced within twenty
miles of the Boston State House. The slavery issue kept growling,
far away, but it was only now and then, as in the enforcement of
the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, that it was brought sharply home
to the North. The "golden forties" were as truly golden for New
England as for idle California. There was wealth, leisure, books,
a glow of harvest-time in the air, though the spirit of the
writers is the spirit of youth.

Nathaniel Hawthorne, our greatest writer of pure romance, was
Puritan by inheritance and temperament, though not in doctrine or
in sympathy. His literary affiliations were with the English and
German Romanticists, and he possessed, for professional use, the
ideas and vocabulary of his transcendental friends. Born in Salem
in 1804, he was descended from Judge Hawthorne of Salem
Witchcraft fame, and from a long line of sea-faring ancestors. He
inherited a morbid solitariness, redeemed in some measure by a
physical endowment of rare strength and beauty. He read Spenser,
Rousseau, and the "Newgate Calendar," was graduated at Bowdoin,
with Longfellow, in the class of 1825, and returned to Salem for
thirteen brooding lonely years in which he tried to teach himself
the art of story-writing. His earliest tales, like Irving's, are
essays in which characters emerge; he is absorbed in finding a
setting for a preconceived "moral"; he is in love with allegory
and parable. His own words about his first collection of stories,
"Twice-Told Tales," have often been quoted: "They have the pale
tint of flowers that blossomed in too retired a shade." Yet they
are for the most part exquisitely written. After a couple of
years in the Boston Custom-House, and a residence at the
socialistic community of Brook Farm, Hawthorne made the happiest
of marriages to Sophia Peabody, and for nearly four years dwelt
in the Old Manse at Concord. He described it in one of the ripest
of his essays, the Preface to "Mosses from an Old Manse," his
second collection of stories. After three years in the
Custom-House at Salem, his dismissal in 1849 gave him leisure to
produce his masterpiece, "The Scarlet Letter," published in 1850.
He was now forty-six. In 1851, he published "The House of the
Seven Gables," "The Wonder-Book," and "The Snow Image, and Other
Tales." In 1852 came "The Blithedale Romance," a rich ironical
story drawn from his Brook Farm experience. Four years in the
American Consulate at Liverpool and three subsequent years of
residence upon the Continent saw no literary harvest except
carefully filled notebooks and the deeply imaginative moral
romance, "The Marble Faun." Hawthorne returned home in 1860 and
settled in the Wayside at Concord, busying himself with a new,
and, as was destined, a never completed story about the elixir of
immortality. But his vitality was ebbing, and in May, 1864, he
passed away in his sleep. He rests under the pines in Sleepy
Hollow, near the Alcotts and the Emersons.

It is difficult for contemporary Americans to assess the value of
such a man, who evidently did nothing except to write a few
books. His rare, delicate genius was scarcely touched by passing
events. Not many of his countrymen really love his writings, as
they love, for instance the writings of Dickens or Thackeray or
Stevenson. Everyone reads, at some time of his life, "The Scarlet
Letter," and trembles at its passionate indictment of the sin of
concealment, at its agonized admonition, "Be true! Be true!"
Perhaps the happiest memories of Hawthorne's readers, as of
Kipling's readers, hover about his charming stories for children;
to have missed "The Wonder-Book" is like having grown old without
ever catching the sweetness of the green world at dawn. But our
public has learned to enjoy a wholly different kind of style,
taught by the daily journals, a nervous, graphic, sensational,
physical style fit for describing an automobile, a department
store, a steamship, a lynching party. It is the style of our day,
and judged by it Hawthorne, who wrote with severity, conscience,
and good taste, seems somewhat old-fashioned, like Irving or
Addison. He is perhaps too completely a New Englander to be
understood by men of other stock, and has never, like Poe and
Whitman, excited strong interest among European minds.

Yet no American is surer, generation after generation, of finding
a fit audience. Hawthorne's genius was meditative rather than
dramatic. His artistic material was moral rather than physical;
he brooded over the soul of man as affected by this and that
condition and situation. The child of a new analytical age, he
thought out with rigid accuracy the precise circumstances
surrounding each one of his cases and modifying it. Many of his
sketches and short stories and most of his romances deal with
historical facts, moods, and atmospheres, and he knew the past of
New England as few men have ever known it. There is solid
historical and psychological stuff as the foundation of his
air-castles. His latent radicalism furnished him with a
touchstone of criticism as he interpreted the moral standards of
ancient communities; no reader of "The Scarlet Letter" can forget
Hawthorne's implicit condemnation of the unimaginative harshness
of the Puritans. His own judgment upon the deep matters of the
human conscience was stern enough, but it was a universalized
judgment, and by no means the result of a Calvinism which he
hated. Over-fond as he was in his earlier tales of elaborate,
fanciful, decorative treatment of themes that promised to point a
moral, in his finest short stories, such as "The Ambitious
Guest," "The Gentle Boy," "Young Goodman Brown," "The Snow
Image,"
"The Great Stone Face," "Drowne's Wooden Image," "Rappacini's
Daughter," the moral, if there be one, is not obtruded. He loves
physical symbols for mental and moral states, and was poet and
Transcendentalist enough to retain his youthful affection for
parables; but his true field as a story-teller is the erring,
questing, aspiring, shadowed human heart.

"The Scarlet Letter," for instance, is a study of a universal
theme, the problem of concealed sin, punishment, redemption. Only
the setting is provincial. The story cannot be rightly estimated,
it is true, without remembering the Puritan reverence for
physical purity, the Puritan reverence for the
magistrate-minister--differing so widely from the respect of
Latin countries for the priest--the Puritan preoccupation with
the
life of the soul, or, as more narrowly construed by Calvinism,
the problem of evil. The word Adultery, although suggestively
enough present in one of the finest symbolical titles ever
devised by a romancer, does not once occur in the book. The sins
dealt with are hypocrisy and revenge. Arthur Dimmesdale, Hester
Prynne, and Roger Chillingworth are developing, suffering, living
creatures, caught inextricably in the toils of a moral situation.
By an incomparable succession of pictures Hawthorne exhibits the
travail of their souls. In the greatest scene of all, that
between Hester and Arthur in the forest, the Puritan framework of
the story gives way beneath the weight of human passion, and we
seem on the verge of another and perhaps larger solution than was
actually worked out by the logic of succeeding events. But
though the book has been called Christless, prayerless, hopeless,
no mature person ever reads it without a deepened sense of the
impotence of all mechanistic theories of sin, and a new vision of
the intense reality of spiritual things. "The law we broke," in
Dimmesdale's ghostly words, was a more subtle law than can be
graven on tables of stone and numbered as the Seventh
Commandment.

The legacy of guilt is likewise the theme of "The House of the
Seven Gables," which Hawthorne himself was inclined to think a
better book than "The Scarlet Letter." Certainly this story of
old Salem is impeccably written and its subtle handling of tone
and atmosphere is beyond dispute. An ancestral curse, the
visitation of the sins of the fathers upon the children, the
gradual decay of a once sound stock, are motives that Ibsen might
have developed. But the Norseman would have failed to rival
Hawthorne's delicate manipulation of his shadows, and the no less
masterly deftness of the ultimate mediation of a dark inheritance
through the love of the light-hearted Phoebe for the latest
descendant of the Maules. In "The Blithedale Romance" Hawthorne
stood for once, perhaps, too near his material to allow the rich
atmospheric effects which he prefers, and in spite of the
unforgetable portrait of Zenobia and powerful passages of
realistic description, the book is not quite focussed. In "The
Marble Faun" Hawthorne comes into his own again. Its central
problem is one of those dark insoluble ones that he loves: the
influence of a crime upon the development of a soul. Donatello,
the Faun, is a charming young creature of the natural sunshine
until his love for the somber Miriam tempts him to the commission
of murder: then begins the growth of his mind and character.
Perhaps the haunting power of the main theme of the book has
contributed less to its fame than the felicity of its
descriptions of Rome and Italy. For Hawthorne possessed, like
Byron, in spite of his defective training in the appreciation of
the arts, a gift of romantic discernment which makes "The Marble
Faun," like "Childe Harold," a glorified guide-book to the
Eternal City.

All of Hawthorne's books, in short, have a central core of
psychological romance, and a rich surface finish of description.
His style, at its best, has a subdued splendor of coloring which
is only less wonderful than the spiritual perceptions with which
this magician was endowed. The gloom which haunts many of his
pages, as I have said elsewhere, is the long shadow cast by our
mortal destiny upon a sensitive soul. The mystery is our mystery,
perceived, and not created, by that finely endowed mind and
heart. The shadow is our shadow; the gleams of insight, the soft
radiance of truth and beauty, are his own.

A college classmate of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow summed up the
Portland boy's character in one sentence: "It appeared easy for
him to avoid the unworthy." Born in 1807, of Mayflower stock that
had distinguished itself for bravery and uprightness, the youth
was graduated from Bowdoin at eighteen. Like his classmate
Hawthorne, he had been a wide and secretly ambitious reader, and
had followed the successive numbers of Irving's "Sketch Book," he
tells us, "with ever increasing wonder and delight." His college
offered him in 1826 a professorship of the modern languages, and
he spent three happy years in Europe in preparation. He taught
successfully at Bowdoin for five or six years, and for eighteen
years, 1836 to 1854, served as George Ticknor's successor at
Harvard, ultimately surrendering the chair to Lowell. He early
published two prose volumes, "Hyperion" and "Outre-mer,"
Irvingesque romances of European travel. Then came, after ten
years of teaching and the death of his young wife, the sudden
impulse to write poetry, and he produced, "softly excited, I know
not why," "The Reaper and the Flowers, a Psalm of Death." From
that December morning in 1838 until his death in 1882 he was
Longfellow the Poet.

His outward life, like Hawthorne's, was barren of dramatic
incident, save the one tragic accident by which his second wife,
the mother of his children, perished before his eyes in 1861. He
bore the calamity with the quiet courage of his race and
breeding. But otherwise his days ran softly and gently, enriched
with books and friendships, sheltered from the storms of
circumstance. He had leisure to grow ripe, to remember, and to
dream. But he never secluded himself, like Tennyson, from normal
contacts with his fellowmen. The owner of the Craigie House was a
good neighbor, approachable and deferential. He was even
interested in local Cambridge politics. On the larger political
issues of his day his Americanism was sound and loyal. "It is
disheartening," he wrote in his Cambridge journal for 1851, "to
see how little sympathy there is in the hearts of the young men
here for freedom and great ideas." But his own sympathy never
wavered. His linguistic talent helped him to penetrate the
secrets of alien ways of thought and speech. He understood Italy
and Spain, Holland and France and Germany. He had studied them on
the lips of their living men and women and in the books where
soldier and historian, priest and poet, had inscribed the record
of five hundred years. From the Revival of Learning to the middle
of the nineteenth century, Longfellow knew the soul of Europe as
few men have known it, and he helped to translate Europe to
America. His intellectual receptivity, his quick eye for color
and costume and landscape, his ear for folklore and ballad, his
own ripe mastery of words, made him the most resourceful of
international interpreters. And this lover of children, walking
in quiet ways, this refined and courteous host and gentleman,
scholar and poet, exemplified without self-advertisement the
richer qualities of his own people. When Couper's statue of
Longfellow was dedicated in Washington, Hamilton Mabie said: "His
freedom from the sophistication of a more experienced country;
his simplicity, due in large measure to the absence of social
self-consciousness; his tranquil and deep-seated optimism, which
is the effluence of an unexhausted soil; his happy and confident
expectation, born of a sense of tremendous national vitality; his
love of simple things in normal relations to world-wide interests
of the mind; his courage in interpreting those deeper experiences
which craftsmen who know art but who do not know life call
commonplaces; the unaffected and beautiful democracy of his
spirit--these are the delicate flowers of our new world, and as
much a part of it as its stretches of wilderness and the
continental roll of its rivers."

Longfellow's poetic service to his countrymen has thus become a
national asset, and not merely because in his three best known
narrative poems, "Evangeline," "Hiawatha," and "The Courtship of
Miles Standish," he selected his themes from our own history.
"The Building of the Ship," written with full faith in the
troubled year of 1849, is a national anthem. "It is a wonderful
gift," said Lincoln, as he listened to it, his eyes filled with
tears, "to be able to stir men like that." "The Skeleton in
Armor," "A Ballad of the French Fleet," "Paul Revere's Ride,"
"The Wreck of the Hesperus," are ballads that stir men still. For
all of his skill in story-telling in verse--witness the "Tales of
a Wayside Inn"--Longfellow was not by nature a dramatist, and his
trilogy now published under the title of "Christus," made up of
"The Divine Tragedy," "The Golden Legend," and "New England
Tragedies," added little to a reputation won in other fields. His
sonnets, particularly those upon "Chaucer," "Milton," "The Divina
Commedia," "A Nameless Grave," "Felton," "Sumner," "Nature," "My
Books," are among the imperishable treasures of the English
language. In descriptive pieces like "Keramos" and "The Hanging
of the Crane," in such personal and occasional verses as "The
Herons of Elmwood," "The Fiftieth Birthday of Agassiz," and the
noble "Morituri Salutamus" written for his classmates in 1875, he
exhibits his tenderness of affection and all the ripeness of his
technical skill. But it was as a lyric poet, after all, that he
won and held his immense audience throughout the English-speaking
world. Two of the most popular of all his early pieces, "The
Psalm of Life" and "Excelsior," have paid the price of a too apt
adjustment to the ethical mood of an earnest moment in our
national life. We have passed beyond them. And many readers may
have outgrown their youthful pleasure in "Maidenhood," "The Rainy
Day," "The Bridge," "The Day is Done," verses whose simplicity
lent themselves temptingly to parody. Yet such poems as "The
Belfry of Bruges," "Seaweed," "The Fire of Driftwood," "The
Arsenal at Springfield," "My Lost Youth," "The Children's Hour,"
and many another lyric, lose nothing with the lapse of time.
There is fortunately infinite room for personal preference in
this whole matter of poetry, but the confession of a lack of
regard for Longfellow's verse must often be recognized as a
confession of a lessening love for what is simple, graceful, and
refined. The current of contemporary American taste, especially
among consciously clever, half-trained persons, seems to be
running against Longfellow. How soon the tide may turn, no one
can say. Meanwhile he has his tranquil place in the Poet's Corner
of Westminster Abbey. The Abbey must be a pleasant spot to wait
in, for the Portland boy.

Oddly enough, some of the over-sophisticated and
under-experienced people who affect to patronize Longfellow
assume toward John Greenleaf Whittier an air of deference. This
attitude would amuse the Quaker poet. One can almost see his dark
eyes twinkle and the grim lips tighten in that silent laughter in
which the old man so much resembled Cooper's Leather-Stocking.
Whittier knew that his friend Longfellow was a better artist than
himself, and he also knew, by intimate experience as a maker of
public opinion, how variable are its judgments. Whittier
represents a stock different from that of the Longfellows, but
equally American, equally thoroughbred: the Essex County Quaker
farmer of Massachusetts. The homestead in which he was born in
1807, at East Haverhill, had been built by his
great-great-grandfather in 1688. Mount Vernon in Virginia and the
Craigie House in Cambridge are newer than this by two
generations. The house has been restored to the precise aspect it
had in Whittier's boyhood: and the garden, lawn, and brook, even
the door-stone and bridle-post and the barn across the road are
witnesses to the fidelity of the descriptions in "Snow-Bound."
The neighborhood is still a lonely one. The youth grew up in
seclusion, yet in contact with a few great ideas, chief among
them Liberty. "My father," he said, "was an old-fashioned
Democrat, and really believed in the Preamble of the Bill of
Rights which reaffirmed the Declaration of Independence." The
taciturn father transmitted to his sons a hatred of kingcraft and
priestcraft, the inward moral freedom of the Quaker touched with
humanitarian passion. The spirit of a boyhood in this homestead
is veraciously told in "The Barefoot Boy," "School-Days,"
"Snow-Bound," "Ramoth Hill," and "Telling the Bees." It was a
chance copy of Burns that revealed to the farmer lad his own
desire and capacity for verse-writing. When he was nineteen, his
sister sent his "Exile's Departure" to William Lloyd Garrison,
then twenty, and the editor of the "Newburyport Free Press." The
neighbors liked it, and the tall frail author was rewarded with a
term at the Haverhill Academy, where he paid his way, in old
Essex County fashion, by making shoes.

He had little more formal schooling than this, was too poor to
enter college, but had what he modestly called a "knack at
rhyming," and much facility in prose. He turned to journalism and
politics, for which he possessed a notable instinct. For a while
he thought he had "done with poetry and literature." Then in
1833, at twenty-six, came Garrison's stirring letter bidding him
enlist in the cause of Anti-Slavery. He obeyed the call, not
knowing that this new allegiance to the service of humanity was
to transform him from a facile local verse-writer into a national
poet. It was the ancient miracle of losing one's life and finding
it. For the immediate sacrifice was very real to a youth trained
in quietism and non-resistance, and well aware, as a Whig
journalist, of the ostracism visited upon the active
Abolitionists. Whittier entered the fight with absolute courage
and with the shrewdest practical judgment of weapons and tactics.
He forgot himself. He turned aside from those pleasant fields of
New England legend and history to which he was destined to return
after his warfare was accomplished. He had read the prose of
Milton and of Burke. He perceived that negro emancipation in the
United States was only a single and immediate phase of a
universal movement of liberalism. The thought kindled his
imagination. He wrote, at white heat, political and social verse
that glowed with humanitarian passion: lyrics in praise of
fellow-workers, salutes to the dead, campaign songs, hymns,
satires against the clergy and the capitalists, superb sectional
poems like "Massachusetts to Virginia," and, more nobly still,
poems embodying what Wordsworth called "the sensation and image
of country and the human race."

Whittier had now "found himself" as a poet. It is true that his
style remained diffuse and his ear faulty, but his countrymen,
then as now uncritical of artistic form, overlooked the blemishes
of his verse, and thought only of his vibrant emotion, his scorn
of cowardice and evil, his prophetic exaltation. In 1847 came the
first general collection of his poems, and here were to be found
not merely controversial verses, but spirited "Songs of Labor,"
pictures of the lovely Merrimac countryside, legends written in
the mood of Hawthorne or Longfellow, and bright bits of foreign
lore and fancy. For though Whittier never went abroad, his quiet
life at Amesbury gave him leisure for varied reading, and he
followed contemporary European politics with the closest
interest. He emerged more and more from the atmosphere of faction
and section, and, though he retained to the last his Quaker
creed, he held its simple tenets in such undogmatic and winning
fashion that his hymns are sung today in all the churches.

When "The Atlantic Monthly" was established in 1857, Whittier was
fifty. He took his place among the contributors to the new
magazine not as a controversialist but as a man of letters, with
such poems as "Tritemius," and "Skipper Ireson's Ride."
Characteristic productions of this period are "My Psalm,"
"Cobbler Keezar's Vision," "Andrew Rykman's Prayer," "The Eternal
Goodness"--poems grave, sweet, and tender. But it was not until
the publication of "Snow-Bound" in 1866 that Whittier's work
touched its widest popularity. He had never married, and the
deaths of his mother and sister Elizabeth set him brooding, in
the desolate Amesbury house, over memories of his birthplace, six
miles away in East Haverhill. The homestead had gone out of the
hands of the Whittiers, and the poet, nearing sixty, set himself
to compose an idyll descriptive of the vanished past. No artist
could have a theme more perfectly adapted to his mood and to his
powers. There are no novel ideas in "Snow-Bound," nor is there
any need of them, but the thousands of annual pilgrims to the old
farmhouse can bear witness to the touching intimacy, the homely
charm, the unerring rightness of feeling with which Whittier's
genius recreated his own lost youth and painted for all time a
true New England hearthside.

Whittier was still to write nearly two hundred more poems, for he
lived to be eighty-five, and he composed until the last. But his
creative period was now over. He rejoiced in the friendly
recognition of his work that came to him from every section of a
reunited country. His personal friends were loyal in their
devotion. He followed the intricacies of American politics with
the keen zest of a veteran in that game, for in his time he had
made and unmade governors and senators. "The greatest politician
I have ever met," said James G. Blaine, who had certainly met
many. He had an income from his poems far in excess of his needs,
but retained the absolute simplicity of his earlier habits. When
his publishers first proposed the notable public dinner in honor
of his seventieth birthday he demurred, explaining to a member of
his family that he did not want the bother of "buying a new pair
of pants"--a petty anecdote, but somehow refreshing. So the
rustic, shrewd, gentle old man waited for the end. He had known
what it means to toil, to fight, to renounce, to eat his bread in
tears, and to see some of his dreams come true. We have had, and
shall have, more accomplished craftsmen in verse, but we have
never bred a more genuine man than Whittier, nor one who had more
kinship with the saints.

A few days before Whittier's death, he wrote an affectionate poem
in celebration of the eighty-third birthday of his old friend of
the Saturday Club, Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes. This was in 1892.
The little Doctor, rather lonely in his latest years, composed
some tender obituary verses at Whittier's passing. He had already
performed the same office for Lowell. He lingered himself until
the autumn of 1894, in his eighty-sixth year--"The Last Leaf," in
truth, of New England's richest springtime.

"No, my friends," he had said in "The Autocrat of the Breakfast
Table," "I go (always, other things being equal) for the man who
inherits family traditions and the cumulative humanities of at
least four or five generations." The Doctor came naturally by his
preference for a "man of family," being one himself. He was a
descendant of Anne Bradstreet, the poetess. "Dorothy Q.," whom he
had made the most picturesque of the Quincys, was his
great-grandmother. Wendell Phillips was his cousin. His father,
the Rev. Abiel Holmes, a Yale graduate, was the minister of the
First Church in Cambridge, and it was in its "gambrel-roofed"
parsonage that Oliver Wendell was born in 1809.

"Know old Cambridge? Hope you do--
Born there? Don't say so! I was, too.
Nicest place that was ever seen--
Colleges red and Common green."

So he wrote, in scores of passages of filial devotion, concerning
the village of his boyhood and the city of Boston. His best-known
prose sentence is: "Boston State House is the hub of the Solar
System." It is easy to smile, as indeed he did himself, at such
fond provinciality, but the fact remains that our literature as a
whole sadly needs this richness of local atmosphere. A nation of
restless immigrants, here today and "moved on" tomorrow, has the
fibres of its imagination uprooted, and its artists in their
eager quest of "local color" purchase brilliancy at the cost of
thinness of tone, poverty of association. Philadelphia and
Boston, almost alone among the larger American cities, yield the
sense of intimacy, or what the Autocrat would call "the
cumulative humanities. "

Young Holmes became the pet and the glory of his class of 1829 at
Harvard. It was only in 1838 that their reunions began, but
thereafter they held fifty-six meetings, of which Holmes attended
fifty and wrote poems for forty-three. Many of "the Boys" whom he
celebrated became famous in their own right, but they remain "the
Boys" to all lovers of Holmes's verses. His own career as a poet
had begun during his single year in the Law School. His later
years brought him some additional skill in polishing his lines
and a riper human wisdom, but his native verse-making talent is
as completely revealed in "Old Ironsides," published when he was
twenty-one, and in "The Last Leaf," composed a year or two later,
as in anything he was to write during the next half-century. In
many respects he was a curious survival of the cumulative
humanities of the eighteenth century. He might have been, like
good Dr. Arbuthnot, an ornament of the Augustan age. He shared
with the English Augustans a liking for the rhymed couplet, an
instinctive social sense, a feeling for the presence of an
imaginary audience of congenial listeners. One still catches the
"Hear! Hear!" between his clever lines. In many of the traits of
his mind this "Yankee Frenchman" resembled such a typical
eighteenth century figure as Voltaire. Like Voltaire, he was
tolerant--except toward Calvinism and Homeopathy. In some of the
tricks of his prose style he is like a kindlier Sterne. His knack
for vers de societe was caught from Horace, but he would not have
been a child of his own age without the additional gift of
rhetoric and eloquence which is to be seen in his patriotic poems
and his hymns. For Holmes possessed, in spite of all his
limitations in poetic range, true devotion, patriotism, humor,
and pathos.

His poetry was in the best sense of the word "occasional," and
his prose was only an incidental or accidental harvest of a long
career in which his chief duty was that of a professor of anatomy
in the Harvard Medical School. He had studied in Paris under
sound teachers, and after some years of private practice won the
appointment which he held, as active and emeritus professor, for
forty-seven years. He was a faithful, clear, and amusing
lecturer, and printed two or three notable medical essays, but
his chief Boston reputation, in the eighteen-fifties, was that of
a wit and diner-out and writer of verses for occasions. Then came
his great hour of good luck in 1857, when Lowell, the editor of
the newly-established "Atlantic Monthly," persuaded him to write
"The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table." It was the public's luck
also, for whoever had been so unfortunate as not to be born in
Boston could now listen--as if across the table--to Boston's best
talker. Few volumes of essays during the last sixty years have
given more pleasure to a greater variety of readers than is
yielded by "The Autocrat." It gave the Doctor a reputation in
England which he naturally prized, and which contributed to his
triumphal English progress, many years later, recorded pleasantly
in "Our Hundred Days." "The Professor at the Breakfast Table" and
"The Poet at the Breakfast Table" are less successful variations
of "The Autocrat." Neither professors nor poets are at their best
at this meal. Holmes wrote three novels--of which "Elsie Venner,"
a somewhat too medical story, is the best remembered--memoirs of
his friends Emerson and Motley, and many miscellaneous essays.
His life was exceptionally happy, and his cheery good opinion of
himself is still contagious. To pronounce the words Doctor Holmes
in any company of intelligent Americans is the prologue to a
smile of recognition, comprehension, sympathy. The word Goldsmith
has now lost, alas, this provocative quality; the word Stevenson
still possesses it. The little Doctor, who died in the same year
as Stevenson, belonged like him to the genial race of friends of
mankind, and a few of his poems, and some gay warm-hearted pages
of his prose, will long preserve his memory. But the Boston which
he loved has vanished as utterly as Sam Johnson's London.

James Russell Lowell was ten years younger than Holmes, and
though he died three years before the Doctor, he seems, for other
reasons than those of chronology, to belong more nearly to the
present. Although by birth as much of a New England Brahmin as
Holmes, and in his later years as much of a Boston and Cambridge
idol, he nevertheless touched our universal American life on many
sides, represented us worthily in foreign diplomacy, argued the
case of Democracy with convincing power, and embodied, as more
perfect artists like Hawthorne and Longfellow could never have
done, the subtleties and potencies of the national temperament.
He deserves and reveals the closest scrutiny, but his personality
is difficult to put on paper. Horace Scudder wrote his biography
with careful competence, and Ferris Greenslet has made him the
subject of a brilliant critical study. Yet readers differ widely
in their assessment of the value of his prose and verse, and in
their understanding of his personality.

The external facts of his career are easy to trace and must be
set down here with brevity. A minister's son, and descended from
a very old and distinguished family, he was born at Elmwood in
Cambridge in 1819. After a somewhat turbulent course, he was
graduated from Harvard in 1838, the year of Emerson's "Divinity
School Address." He studied law, turned Abolitionist, wrote
poetry, married the beautiful and transcendental Maria White, and
did magazine work in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. He was
thought by his friends in the eighteen-fifties to be "the most
Shakespearian" man in America. When he was ten years out of
college, in 1848, he published "The Biglow Papers" (First
Series), "A Fable for Critics," and "The Vision of Sir Launfal."
After a long visit to Europe and the death of his wife, he gave
some brilliant Lowell Institute lectures in Boston, and was
appointed Longfellow's successor at Harvard. He went to Europe
again to prepare himself, and after entering upon his work as a
teacher made a happy second marriage, served for four years as
the first editor of "The Atlantic," and helped his friend Charles
Eliot Norton edit "The North American Review." The Civil War
inspired a second series of "Biglow Papers" and the magnificent
"Commemoration Ode" of 1865. Then came volume after volume of
literary essays, such as "Among My Books" and "My Study Windows,"
and an occasional book of verse. Again he made a long sojourn in
Europe, resigned his Harvard professorship, and in 1877 was
appointed Minister to Spain. After three years he was transferred
to the most important post in our diplomatic service, London. He
performed his duties with extraordinary skill and success until
1885, when he was relieved. His last years were spent in Elmwood,
the Cambridge house where he was born, and he was still writing,
in almost as rich a vein as ever, when the end came in 1891.

Here was certainly a full and varied life, responsive to many
personal moods and many tides of public feeling. Lowell drew
intellectual stimulus from enormously wide reading in classical
and modern literatures. Puritanically earnest by inheritance, he
seems also to have inherited a strain of levity which he could
not always control, and, through his mother's family, a dash of
mysticism sometimes resembling second sight. His physical and
mental powers were not always in the happiest mutual adjustment:
he became easily the prey of moods and fancies, and knew the
alternations from wild gaiety of spirits to black despair. The
firm moral consistency of Puritanism was always his, yet his
playful remark about belonging in a hospital for incurable
children had a measure of truth in it also.

Both his poetry and his prose reveal a nature never quite
integrated into wholeness of structure, into harmony with itself.
His writing, at its best, is noble and delightful, full of human
charm, but it is difficult for him to master a certain
waywardness and to sustain any note steadily. This temperamental
flaw does not affect the winsomeness of his letters, unless to
add to it. It is lost to view, 