often, in the sincerity and pathos
of his lyrics, but it is felt in most of his longer efforts in
prose, and accounts for a certain dissatisfaction which many
grateful and loyal readers nevertheless feel in his criticism.
Lowell was more richly endowed by nature and by breadth of
reading than Matthew Arnold, for instance, but in the actual
performance of the critical function he was surpassed in method
by Arnold and perhaps in inerrant perception, in a limited field,
by Poe.

It was as a poet, however, that he first won his place in our
literature, and it is by means of certain passages in the "Biglow
Papers" and the "Commemoration Ode" that he has most moved his
countrymen. The effectiveness of The "Present Crisis" and "Sir
Launfal," and of the "Memorial Odes," particularly the "Ode to
Agassiz," is likewise due to the passion, sweetness, and splendor
of certain strophes, rather than to the perfection of these poems
as artistic wholes. Lowell's personal lyrics of sorrow, such as
"The Changeling," "The First SnowFall," "After the Burial," have
touched many hearts.

His later lyrics are more subtle, weighted with thought, tinged
with autumnal melancholy. He was a most fertile composer, and,
like all the men of his time and group, produced too much. Yet
his patriotic verse was so admirable in feeling and is still so
inspiring to his readers that one cannot wish it less in
quantity; and in the field of political satire, such as the two
series of "Biglow Papers," he had a theme and a method precisely
suited to his temperament. No American has approached Lowell's
success in this difficult genre: the swift transitions from rural
Yankee humor to splendid scorn of evil and to noblest idealism
reveal the full powers of one of our most gifted men. The
preacher lurked in this Puritan from first to last, and the war
against Mexico and the Civil War stirred him to the depths.

His prose, likewise, is a school of loyalty. There was much of
Europe in his learning, as his memorable Dante essay shows, and
the traditions of great English literature were the daily
companions of his mind. He was bookish, as a bookman should be,
and sometimes the very richness and whimsicality of his bookish
fancies marred the simplicity and good taste of his pages. But
the fundamental texture of his thought and feeling was American,
and his most characteristic style has the raciness of our soil.
Nature lovers like to point out the freshness and delicacy of his
reaction to the New England scene. Thoreau himself, whom Lowell
did not like, was not more veracious an observer than the author
of "Sunthin' in the Pastoral Line," "Cambridge Thirty Years Ago,"
and "My Garden Acquaintance." Yet he watched men as keenly as he
did "laylocks" and bobolinks, and no shrewder American essay has
been written than his "On a Certain Condescension in Foreigners."
Wit and humor and wisdom made him one of the best talkers of his
generation. These qualities pervade his essays and his letters,
and the latter in particular reveal those ardors and fidelities
of friendship which men like Emerson and Thoreau longed after
without ever quite experiencing. Lowell's cosmopolitan
reputation, which was greatly enhanced in the last decade of his
life, seemed to his old associates of the Saturday Club only a
fit recognition of the learning, wit, and fine imagination which
had been familiar to them from the first. To hold the old friends
throughout his lifetime, and to win fresh ones of a new
generation through his books, is perhaps the greatest of Lowell's
personal felicities.

While there are no other names in the literature of New England
quite comparable with those that have just been discussed, it
should be remembered that the immediate effectiveness and
popularity of these representative poets and prose writers were
dependent upon the existence of an intelligent and responsive
reading public. The lectures of Emerson, the speeches of Webster,
the stories of Hawthorne, the political verse of Whittier and
Lowell, presupposed a keen, reflecting audience, mentally and
morally exigent. The spread of the Lyceum system along the line
of westward emigration from New England as far as the Mississippi
is one tangible evidence of the high level of popular
intelligence. That there was much of the superficial and the
spread-eagle in the American life of the eighteen-forties is
apparent enough without the amusing comments of such English
travellers as Dickens, Miss Martineau, and Captain Basil Hall.
But there was also genuine intellectual curiosity and a general
reading habit which are evidenced not only by a steady growth of
newspapers and magazines but also by the demand for substantial
books. Biography and history began to be widely read, and it was
natural that the most notable productiveness in historical
writing should manifest itself in that section of the country
where there were libraries, wealth, leisure for the pursuits of
scholarship, a sense of intimate concern with the great issues
of the past, and a diffusion of intellectual tastes throughout
the community. It was no accident that Sparks and Ticknor,
Bancroft and Prescott, Motley and Parkman, were Massachusetts
men.

Jared Sparks, it is true, inherited neither wealth nor leisure.
He was a furious, unwearied toiler in the field of our national
history. Born in 1789, by profession a Unitarian minister, he
began collecting the papers of George Washington by 1825. John
Marshall, the great jurist, had published his five-volume life of
his fellow Virginian a score of years earlier. But Sparks
proceeded to write another biography of Washington and to edit
his writings. He also edited a "Library of American Biography,"
wrote lives of Franklin and Gouverneur Morris, was professor of
history and President of Harvard, and lived to be seventy-seven.
As editor of the writings of Franklin and Washington, he took
what we now consider unpardonable liberties in altering the text,
and this error of judgment has somewhat clouded his just
reputation as a pioneer in historical research.

George Bancroft, who was born in 1800, and died, a
horseback-riding sage, at ninety-one, inherited from his
clergyman father a taste for history. He studied in Germany after
leaving Harvard, turned schoolmaster, Democratic politician and
office-holder, served as Secretary of the Navy, Minister to
England and then to the German Empire, and won distinction in
each of his avocations, though the real passion of his life was
his "History of the United States," which he succeeded in
bringing down to the adoption of the Constitution. The first
volume, which appeared in 1834, reads today like a stump speech
by a sturdy Democratic orator of the Jacksonian period. But there
was solid stuff in it, nevertheless, and as Bancroft proceeded,
decade after decade, he discarded some of his rhetoric and
philosophy of democracy and utilized increasingly the vast stores
of documents which his energy and his high political positions
had made it possible for him to obtain. Late in life he condensed
his ten great volumes to six. Posterity will doubtless condense
these in turn, as posterity has a way of doing, but Bancroft the
historian realized his own youthful ambition with a completeness
rare in the history of human effort and performed a monumental
service to his country. He was less of an artist, however, than
Prescott, the eldest and in some ways the finest figure of the
well-known Prescott-Motley-Parkman group of Boston historians.
All of these men, together with their friend George Ticknor, who
wrote the "History of Spanish Literature" and whose own "Life and
Letters" pictures a whole generation, had the professional
advantages of inherited wealth, and the opportunity to make
deliberate choice of a historical field which offered freshness
and picturesqueness of theme. All were tireless workers in spite
of every physical handicap; all enjoyed social security and the
rich reward of full recognition by their contemporaries. They had
their world as in their time, as Chaucer makes the Wife of Bath
say of herself, and it was a pleasant world to live in.

Grandson of "Prescott the Brave" of Bunker Hill, and son of the
rich Judge Prescott of Salem, William Hickling Prescott was born
in 1796, and was graduated from Harvard in 1814. An accident in
college destroyed the sight of one eye, and left him but a
precarious use of the other. Nevertheless he resolved to emulate
Gibbon, whose "Autobiography" had impressed him, and to make
himself "an historian in the best sense of the term." He studied
arduously in Europe, with the help of secretaries, and by 1826,
after a long hesitation, decided upon a "History of the Reign of
Ferdinand and Isabella." In ten years the three volumes were
finished. "Pursuing the work in this quiet, leisurely way,
without over-exertion or fatigue," wrote Prescott, "or any sense
of obligation to complete it in a given time, I have found it a
continual source of pleasure." It was published at his own
expense on Christmas Day, 1837, and met with instantaneous
success. "My market and my reputation rest principally with
England," he wrote in 1838--a curious footnote, by the way, to
Emerson's Phi Beta Kappa Address of the year before. But America
joined with England, in praising the new book. Then Prescott
turned to the "Conquest of Mexico," the "Conquest of Peru," and
finally to his unfinished "History of the Reign of Philip II." He
had, as Dean Milman wrote him, "the judgment to choose noble
subjects." He wrote with serenity and dignity, with fine balance
and proportion. Some of the Spanish documents upon which he
relied have been proved less trustworthy than he thought, but
this unsuspected defect in his materials scarcely impaired the
skill with which this unhasting, unresting painter filled his
great canvases. They need retouching, perhaps, but the younger
historians are incompetent for the task. Prescott died in 1859,
in the same year as Irving, and he already seems quite as remote
from the present hour.

His young friend Motley, of "Dutch Republic" fame, was another
Boston Brahmin, born in the year of Prescott's graduation from
college. He attended George Bancroft's school, went to Harvard in
due course, where he knew Holmes, Sumner, and Wendell Phillips,
and at Gottingen became a warm friend of a dog-lover and duelist
named Bismarck. Young Motley wrote a couple of unsuccessful
novels, dabbled in diplomacy, politics, and review-writing, and
finally, encouraged by Prescott, settled down upon Dutch history,
went to Europe to work up his material in 1851, and, after five
years, scored an immense triumph with his "Rise of the Dutch
Republic." He was a brilliant partisan, hating Spaniards and
Calvinists; and wrote all the better for this bias. He was an
admirable sketcher of historical portraits, and had Macaulay's
skill in composing special chapters devoted to the tendencies and
qualities of an epoch or to the characteristics of a dynasty.
Between 1860 and 1868 he produced the four volumes of the
"History of the United Netherlands." During the Civil War he
served usefully as American minister to Vienna, and in 1869 was
appointed minister to London. Both of these appointments ended
unhappily for him. Dr. Holmes, his loyal admirer and biographer,
does not conceal the fact that a steadier, less excitable type of
public servant might have handled both the Vienna situation and
the London situation without incurring a recall. Motley continued
to live in England, where his daughters had married, and where,
in spite of his ardent Americanism, he felt socially at home. His
last book was "The Life and Death of John of Barneveld." His
"Letters," edited after his death in 1877 by George William
Curtis, give a fascinating picture of English life among the
cultivated and leisurely classes. The Boston merchant's son was a
high-hearted gentleman, and his cosmopolitan experiences used to
make his stay-at-home friend, Oliver Wendell Holmes, feel rather
dull and provincial in comparison. Both were Sons of Liberty, but
Motley had had the luck to find in "brave little Holland" a
subject which captivated the interest of Europe and gave the
historian international fame. He had more eloquence than the
Doctor, and a far more varied range of prose, but there may be
here and there a Yankee guesser about the taste of future
generations who will bet on "The Autocrat," after all.

The character and career of Francis Parkman afford curious
material to the student of New England's golden age. In the
seventy years of his heroic life, from 1823 to 1893, all the
characteristic forces of the age reached their culmination and
decline, and his own personality indicates some of the violent
reactions produced by the over-strain of Transcendentalism. For
here was a descendant of John Cotton, and a clergyman's son, who
detested Puritanism and the clergy; who, coming to manhood in the
eighteen-forties, hated the very words Transcendentalism,
Philosophy, Religion, Reform; an inheritor of property, trained
at Harvard, and an Overseer and Fellow of his University, who
disliked the ideals of culture and refinement; a member of the
Saturday Club who was bored with literary talk and literary
people; a staunch American who despised democracy as thoroughly
as Alexander Hamilton, and thought suffrage a failure; a
nineteenth century historian who cared nothing for philosophy,
science, or the larger lessons of history itself; a fascinating
realistic writer who admired Scott, Byron, and Cooper for their
tales of action, and despised Wordsworth and Thoreau as
effeminate sentimentalists who were preoccupied with themselves.
In Parkman "the wheel has come full circle," and a movement that
began with expansion of self ended in hard Spartan repression,
even in inhibition of emotion.

Becoming "enamoured of the woods" at sixteen, Parkman chose his
life work at eighteen, and he was a man who could say proudly: "I
have not yet abandoned any plan which I ever formed." "Before the
end of the sophomore year," he wrote in his autobiography, "my
various schemes had crystallized into a plan of writing the story
of what was then known as the 'Old French War,' that is, the war
that ended in the conquest of Canada, for here, as it seemed to
me, the forest drama was more stirring and the forest stage more
thronged with appropriate actors than in any other passage of our
history. It was not till some years later that I enlarged the
plan to include the whole course of the American conflict between
France and England, or, in other words, the history of the
American forest: for this was the light in which I regarded it.
My theme fascinated me, and I was haunted with wilderness images
day and night." To understand "the history of the American
forest" young Parkman devoted his college vacations to long trips
in the wilderness, and in 1846, two years after graduation, he
made the epoch-making journey described in his first book, "The
Oregon Trail."

"The Conspiracy of Pontiac," a highly-colored narrative in two
volumes appearing in 1851, marks the first stage of his
historical writing. Then came the tragedy of shattered health,
and for fourteen years Parkman fought for life and sanity, and
produced practically nothing. He had had to struggle from his
college days with an obscure disorder of the brain, aggravated by
the hardships of his Oregon Trail journey, and by ill-considered
efforts to harden his bodily frame by over-exertion. His disease
took many forms--insomnia, arthritis, weakness of sight,
incapacity for sustained thought. His biographer Farnham says
that "he never saw a perfectly well day during his entire
literary career." Even when aided by secretaries and copyists,
six lines a day was often the limit of his production. His own
Stoic words about the limitations of his eyesight are
characteristic: "By reading for one minute, and then resting for
an equal time, this alternate process may gradually be continued
for about half an hour. Then, after a sufficient interval, it may
be repeated, often three or four times in the course of the day.
By this means nearly the whole of the volume now offered has been
composed." There is no more piteous or inspiring story of a fight
against odds in the history of literature.

For after his fortieth year the enemy gave way a little, and book
after book somehow got itself written. There they stand upon the
shelves, a dozen of them--"The Pioneers of France," "The Jesuits
in North America," "La Salle," "The Old Regime," "Frontenac,"
"Montcalm and Wolfe," "A Half-Century of Conflict"--the boy's
dream realized, the man's long warfare accomplished. The history
of the forest, as Parkman saw it, was a pageant with the dark
wilderness for a background, and, for the actors, taciturn
savages, black-robed Jesuits, intrepid explorers, soldiers of
France--all struggling for a vast prize, all changing, passing,
with a pomp and color unknown to wearied Europe. It was a superb
theme, better after all for an American than the themes chosen by
Prescott and Ticknor and Motley, and precisely adapted to the
pictorial and narrative powers of the soldier-minded, soldier-
hearted author.

The quality which Parkman admired most in men--though he never
seems to have loved men deeply, even his own heroes--was strength
of will. That was the secret of his own power, and the sign, it
must be added, of the limitations of this group of historians who
came at the close of the golden age. Whatever a New England will
can accomplish was wrought manfully by such admirable men as
Prescott and Parkman. Trained intelligence, deliberate selection
of subject, skillful cultivation of appropriate story-telling and
picture-painting style, all these were theirs. But the "wild
ecstasy" that thrilled the young Emerson as he crossed the bare
Common at sunset, the "supernal beauty" of which Poe dreamed in
the Fordham cottage, the bay horse and hound and turtle-dove
which Thoreau lost long ago and could not find in his but at
Walden, these were something which our later Greeks of the New
England Athens esteemed as foolishness.

CHAPTER VIII. POE AND WHITMAN

Enter now two egotists, who have little in common save their
egotism, two outsiders who upset most of the conventional
American rules for winning the literary race, two men of genius,
in short, about whom we are still quarreling, and whose
distinctive quality is more accurately perceived in Europe than
it has ever been in the United States.

Both Poe and Whitman were Romanticists by temperament. Both
shared in the tradition and influence of European Romanticism.
But they were also late comers, and they were caught in the more
morbid and extravagant phases of the great European movement
while its current was beginning to ebb. Their acquaintance with
its literature was mainly at second-hand and through the medium
of British and American periodicals. Poe, who was older than
Whitman by ten years, was fifteen when Byron died, in 1824. He
was untouched by the nobler mood of Byron, though his verse was
colored by the influence of Byron, Moore, and Shelley. His prose
models were De Quincey, Disraeli, and Bulwer. Yet he owed more to
Coleridge than to any of the Romantics. He was himself a sort of
Coleridge without the piety, with the same keen penetrating
critical intelligence, the same lovely opium-shadowed dreams,
and, alas, with something of the same reputation as a deadbeat.

A child of strolling players, Poe happened to be born in Boston,
but he hated "Frog-Pondium"--his favorite name for the city of
his nativity--as much as Whistler hated his native town of
Lowell. His father died early of tuberculosis, and his mother,
after a pitiful struggle with disease and poverty, soon followed
her husband to the grave. The boy, by physical inheritance a
neurasthenic, though with marked bodily activity in youth, was
adopted by the Allans, a kindly family in Richmond, Virginia. Poe
liked to think of himself as a Southerner. He was sent to school
in England, and in 1826, at seventeen, he attended for nearly a
year the newly founded University of Virginia. He was a dark,
short, bow-legged boy, with the face of his own Roderick Usher.
He made a good record in French and Latin, read, wrote and
recited poetry, tramped on the Ragged Mountains, and did not
notably exceed his companions in drinking and gambling. But his
Scotch foster-father disapproved of his conduct and withdrew him
from the University. A period of wandering followed. He enlisted
in the army and was stationed in Boston in 1827, when his first
volume, "Tamerlane," was published. In 1829 he was in Fortress
Monroe, and published "Al Aaraf" at Baltimore. He entered West
Point in 1830, and was surely, except Whistler, the strangest of
all possible cadets. When he was dismissed in 1831, he had
written the marvellous lines "To Helen," "Israfel," and "The City
in the Sea." That is enough to have in one's knapsack at the age
of twenty-two.

In the eighteen years from 1831 to 1849, when Poe's unhappy life
came to an end in a Baltimore hospital, his literary activity was
chiefly that of a journalist, critic, and short story writer. He
lived in Baltimore, Richmond, Philadelphia, and New York. Authors
who now exploit their fat bargains with their publishers may have
forgotten that letter which Poe wrote back to Philadelphia the
morning after he arrived with his child-wife in New York: "We are
both in excellent spirits . . . . We have now got four dollars
and a half left. To-morrow I am going to try and borrow three
dollars, so that I may have a fortnight to go upon." When the
child-wife died in the shabby cottage at Fordham, her wasted body
was covered with the old army overcoat which Poe had brought from
West Point. If Poe met some of the tests of practical life
inadequately, it must be remembered that his health failed at
twenty-five, that he was pitiably poor, and that the slightest
indulgence in drink set his overwrought nerves jangling.
Ferguson, the former office-boy of the "Literary Messenger,"
judged this man of letters with an office-boy's firm and
experienced eye: "Mr. Poe was a fine gentleman when he was sober.
He was ever kind and courtly, and at such times everyone liked
him. But when he was drinking he was about one of the most
disagreeable men I have ever met." "I am sorry for him," wrote C.
F. Briggs to Lowell. "He has some good points, but taken
altogether, he is badly made up." "Badly made up," no doubt, both
in body and mind, but all respectable and prosperous Pharisees
should be reminded that Poe did not make himself; or rather, that
he could not make himself over. Very few men can. Given Poe's
temperament, and the problem is insoluble. He wrote to Lowell in
1844: "I have been too deeply conscious of the mutability and
evanescence of temporal things to give any continuous effort to
anything--to be consistent in anything. My life has been
WHIM--impulse--passion--a longing for solitude--a scorn of all
things present in an earnest desire for the future." It is the
pathetic confession of a dreamer. Yet this dreamer was also a
keen analyzer, a tireless creator of beautiful things. In them he
sought and found a refuge from actuality. The marvel of his
career is, as I have said elsewhere, that this solitary,
embittered craftsman, out of such hopeless material as negations
and abstractions, shadows and superstitions, out of disordered
fancies and dreams of physical horror and strange crime, should
have wrought structures of imperishable beauty.

Let us notice the critical instinct which he brought to the task
of creation. His theory of verse is simple, in fact too simple to
account for all of the facts. The aim of poetry, according to
Poe, is not truth but pleasure--the rhythmical creation of
beauty. Poetry should be brief, indefinite, and musical. Its
chief instrument is sound. A certain quaintness or grotesqueness
of tone is a means for satisfying the thirst for supernal beauty.
Hence the musical lyric is to Poe the only true type of poetry; a
long poem does not exist. Readers who respond more readily to
auditory than to visual or motor stimulus are therefore Poe's
chosen audience. For them he executes, like Paganini, marvels
upon his single string. He has easily recognizable devices: the
dominant note, the refrain, the "repetend," that is to say the
phrase which echoes, with some variation, a phrase or line
already used. In such poems as "To Helen," "Israfel," "The
Haunted Palace," "Annabel Lee," the theme, the tone, the melody
all weave their magic spell; it is like listening to a
lute-player in a dream.

That the device often turns into a trick is equally true. In "The
Bells" and "The Raven" we detect the prestidigitator. It is
jugglery, though such juggling as only a master-musician can
perform. In "Ulalume" and other showpieces the wires get crossed
and the charm snaps, scattering tinsel fragments of nonsense
verse. Such are the dangers of the technical temperament
unenriched by wide and deep contact with human feeling.

Poe's theory of the art of the short story is now familiar
enough. The power of a tale, he thought, turned chiefly if not
solely upon its unity, its harmony of effect. This is illustrated
in all of his finest stories. In "The Fall of the House of Usher"
the theme is Fear; the opening sentence strikes the key and the
closing sentence contains the climax. In the whole composition
every sentence is modulated to the one end in view. The autumn
landscape tones with the melancholy house; the somber chamber
frames the cadaverous face of Roderick Usher; the face is an
index of the tumultuous agitation of a mind wrestling with the
grim phantom Fear and awaiting the cumulative horror of the final
moment. In "Ligeia," which Poe sometimes thought the best of all
his tales, the theme is the ceaseless life of the will, the
potency of the spirit of the beloved and departed woman. The
unity of effect is absolute, the workmanship consummate. So with
the theme of revenge in "The Cask of Amontillado," the theme of
mysterious intrigue in "The Assignation." In Poe's detective
stories, or tales of ratiocination as he preferred to call them,
he takes to pieces for our amusement a puzzle which he has
cunningly put together. "The Gold Bug" is the best known of
these, "The Purloined Letter" the most perfect, "The Murders in
the Rue Morgue" the most sensational. Then there are the tales
upon scientific subjects or displaying the pretence of scientific
knowledge, where the narrator loves to pose as a man without
imagination and with "habits of rigid thought." And there are
tales of conscience, of which "The Black Cat" is the most fearful
and "William Wilson" the most subtle; and there are landscape
sketches and fantasies and extravaganzas, most of these poor
stuff.

It is ungrateful and perhaps unnecessary to dwell upon Poe's
limitations. His scornful glance caught certain aspects of the
human drama with camera-like precision. Other aspects of life,
and nobler, he never seemed to perceive. The human comedy
sometimes moved him to laughter, but his humor is impish and his
wit malign. His imagination fled from the daylight; he dwelt in
the twilight among the tombs. He closed his eyes to dream, and
could not see the green sunlit earth, seed-time and harvest, man
going forth to his toil and returning to his hearthstone, the
America that laughs as it labors. He wore upon his finger the
magic ring and the genii did his bidding. But we could wish that
the palaces they reared for him were not in such a somber land,
with such infernal lights gleaming in their windows, and crowded
with such horror-haunted forms. We could wish that his
imagination dealt less often with those primitive terrors that
belong to the childhood of our race. Yet when his spell is upon
us we lapse back by a sort of atavism into primal savagery and
shudder with a recrudescence of long forgotten fears. No doubt
Poe was ignorant of life, in the highest sense. He was caged in
by his ignorance, Yet he had beautiful dusky wings that bruised
themselves against his prison.

Poe was a tireless critic of his own work, and both his standards
of workmanship and his critical precepts have been of great
service to his careless countrymen. He turned out between four
and five short stories a year, was poorly paid for them, and
indeed found difficulty in selling them at all. Yet he was
constantly correcting them for the better. His best poems were
likewise his latest. He was tantalized with the desire for
artistic perfection. He became the pathbreaker for a long file of
men in France, Italy, England, and America. He found the way and
they brought back the glory and the cash.

I have sometimes imagined Poe, with four other men and one woman,
seated at a dinner-table laid for six, and talking of their art
and of themselves. What would the others think of Poe? I fancy
that Thackeray would chat with him courteously, but would not
greatly care for him. George Eliot, woman-like, would pity him.
Hawthorne would watch him with those inscrutable eyes and
understand him better than the rest. But Stevenson would be
immensely interested; he would begin an essay on Poe before he
went to sleep. And Mr. Kipling would look sharply at him: he has
seen that man before, in "The Gate of a Hundred Sorrows." All of
them would find in him something to praise, a great deal to
marvel at, and perhaps not much to love. And the sensitive,
shabby, lonely Poe--what would he think of them? He might not
care much for the other guests, but I think he would say to
himself with a thrill of pride: "I belong at this table." And he
does.

Walt Whitman, whom his friend O'Connor dubbed the "good gray
poet," offers a bizarre contrast to Edgar Allan Poe. There was
nothing distinctively American about Poe except his ingenuity; he
had no interest in American history or in American ideas; he was
a timeless, placeless embodiment of technical artistry. But
Whitman had a passion for his native soil; he was hypnotized by
the word America; he spent much of his mature life in brooding
over the question, "What, after all, is an American, and what
should an American poet be in our age of science and democracy?"
It is true that he was as untypical as Poe of the average citizen
of "these states." His personality is unique. In many respects he
still baffles our curiosity. He repels many of his countrymen
without arousing the pity which adds to their romantic interest
in Poe. Whatever our literary students may feel, and whatever
foreign critics may assert, it must be acknowledged that to the
vast majority of American men and women "good old Walt" is still
an outsider.

Let us try to see first the type of mind with which we are
dealing. It is fundamentally religious, perceiving the unity and
kinship and glory of all created things. It is this passion of
worship which inspired St. Francis of Assisi's "Canticle to the
Sun." It cries, "Benedicite, Omnia opera Domini: All ye Green
Things upon the Earth, bless ye the Lord!" That is the real motto
for Whitman's "Leaves of Grass." Like St. Francis, and like his
own immediate master, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Whitman is a mystic.
He cannot argue the ultimate questions; he asserts them. Instead
of marshaling and sifting the proofs for immortality, he chants
"I know I am deathless." Like Emerson again, Whitman shares that
peculiarly American type of mysticism known as Transcendentalism,
but he came at the end of this movement instead of at the
beginning of it. In his Romanticism, likewise, he is an end of an
era figure. His affiliations with Victor Hugo are significant;
and a volume of Scott's poems which he owned at the age of
sixteen became his "inexhaustible mine and treasury for more than
sixty years." Finally, and quite as uncompromisingly as Emerson,
Thoreau, and Poe, Whitman is an individualist. He represents the
assertive, Jacksonian period of our national existence. In a
thousand similes he makes a declaration of independence for the
separate person, the "single man" of Emerson's Phi Beta Kappa
address. "I wear my hat as I please, indoors and out." Sometimes
this is mere swagger. Sometimes it is superb.

So much for the type. Let us turn next to the story of Whitman's
life. It must here be told in the briefest fashion, for Whitman's
own prose and poetry relate the essentials of his biography. He
was born on Long Island, of New England and Dutch ancestry, in
1819. Lowell, W. W. Story, and Charles A. Dana were born in that
year, as was also George Eliot. Whitman's father was a carpenter,
who "leaned to the Quakers." There were many children. When
little "Walt"--as he was called, to distinguish him from his
father, Walter--was four, the family moved to Brooklyn. The boy
had scanty schooling, and by the time he was twenty had tried
typesetting, teaching, and editing a country newspaper on Long
Island. He was a big, dark-haired fellow, sensitive, emotional,
extraordinarily impressible.

The next sixteen years were full of happy vagrancy. At twenty-two
he was editing a paper in New York, and furnishing short stories
to the "Democratic Review," a literary journal which numbered
Bryant, Longfellow, Whittier, Poe, Hawthorne, and Thoreau among
its contributors. He wrote a novel on temperance, "mostly in the
reading-room of Tammany Hall," and tried here and there an
experiment in free verse. He was in love with the pavements of
New York and the Brooklyn ferryboats, in love with Italian opera
and with long tramps over Long Island. He left his position on
"The Brooklyn Eagle" and wandered south to New Orleans. By and by
he drifted back to New York, tried lecturing, worked at the
carpenter's trade with his father, and brooded over a book--"a
book of new things."

This was the famous "Leaves of Grass." He set the type himself,
in a Brooklyn printing-office, and printed about eight hundred
copies. The book had a portrait of the author--a meditative,
gray-bearded poet in workman's clothes--and a confused preface on
America as a field for the true poet. Then followed the new
gospel, "I celebrate myself," chanted in long lines of free
verse, whose patterns perplexed contemporary readers. For the
most part it was passionate speech rather than song, a
rhapsodical declamation in hybrid rhythms. Very few people bought
the book or pretended to understand what it was all about. Some
were startled by the frank sexuality of certain poems. But
Emerson wrote to Whitman from Concord: "I find it the most
extraordinary piece of wit and wisdom that America has yet
contributed."

Until the Civil War was half over, Whitman remained in Brooklyn,
patiently composing new poems for successive printings of his
book. Then he went to the front to care for a wounded brother,
and finally settled down in a Washington garret to spend his
strength as an army hospital nurse. He wrote "Drum Taps" and
other magnificent poems about the War, culminating in his
threnody on Lincoln's death, "When Lilacs last in the Dooryard
Bloomed." Swinburne called this "the most sonorous nocturn ever
chanted in the church of the world." After the war had ended,
Whitman stayed on in Washington as a government clerk, and saw
much of John Burroughs and W. D. O'Connor. John Hay was a staunch
friend. Some of the best known poets and critics of England and
the Continent now began to recognize his genius. But his health
had been permanently shattered by his heroic service as a nurse,
and in 1873 he suffered a paralytic stroke which forced him to
resign his position in Washington and remove to his brother's
home in Camden, New Jersey.

He was only fifty-four, but his best work was already done, and
his remaining years, until his death in 1892, were those of
patient and serene invalidism. He wrote some fascinating prose in
this final period, and his cluttered chamber in Camden became the
shrine of many a literary pilgrim, among them some of the
foremost men of letters of this country and of Europe. He was
cared for by loyal friends. Occasionally he appeared in public, a
magnificent gray figure of a man. And then, at seventy-three, the
"Dark mother always gliding near" enfolded him.

There are puzzling things in the physical and moral constitution
of Walt Whitman, and the obstinate questions involved in his
theory of poetry and in his actual poetical performance are still
far from solution. But a few points concerning him are by this
time fairly clear. They must be swiftly summarized.

The first obstacle to the popular acceptance of Walt Whitman is
the formlessness or alleged formlessness of "Leaves of Grass."
This is a highly technical question, involving a more accurate
notation than has thus far been made of the patterns and tunes of
free verse and of emotional prose. Whitman's "new and national
declamatory expression," as he termed it, cannot receive a final
technical valuation until we have made more scientific progress
in the analysis of rhythms. As regards the contents of his verse,
it is plain that he included much material unfused and
untransformed by emotion. These elements foreign to the nature of
poetry clog many of his lines. The enumerated objects in his
catalogue or inventory poems often remain inert objects only.
Like many mystics, he was hypnotized by external phenomena, and
he often fails to communicate to his reader the trancelike
emotion which he himself experienced. This imperfect transfusion
of his material is a far more significant defect in Whitman's
poetry than the relatively few passages of unashamed sexuality
which shocked the American public in 1855.

The gospel or burden of "Leaves of Grass" is no more difficult of
comprehension than the general drift of Emerson's essays, which
helped to inspire it. The starting point of the book is a
mystical illumination regarding the unity and blessedness of the
universe, an insight passing understanding, but based upon the
revelatory experience of love. In the light of this experience,
all created things are recognized as divine. The starting-point
and center of the Whitman world is the individual man, the
"strong person," imperturbable in mind, athletic in body,
unconquerable, and immortal. Such individuals meet in
comradeship, and pass together along the open roads of the world.
No one is excluded because of his poverty or his sins; there is
room in the ideal America for everybody except the doubter and
sceptic. Whitman does not linger over the smaller groups of human
society, like the family. He is not a fireside poet. He passes
directly from his strong persons, meeting freely on the open
road, to his conception of "these States." One of his typical
visions of the breadth and depth and height of America will be
found in "By Blue Ontario's Shore." In this and in many similar
rhapsodies Whitman holds obstinately to what may be termed the
three points of his national creed. The first is the newness of
America, and its expression is in his well-known chant of
"Pioneers, O Pioneers." Yet this new America is subtly related to
the past; and in Whitman's later poems, such as "Passage to
India," the spiritual kinship of orient and occident is
emphasized. The second article of the creed is the unity of
America. Here he voices the conceptions of Hamilton, Clay,
Webster, and Lincoln. In spite of all diversity in external
aspects the republic is "one and indivisible." This unity, in
Whitman's view, was cemented forever by the issue of the Civil
War. Lincoln, the "Captain," dies indeed on the deck of the
"victor ship," but the ship comes into the harbor "with object
won." Third and finally, Whitman insists upon the solidarity of
America with all countries of the globe. Particularly in his
yearning and thoughtful old age, the poet perceived that humanity
has but one heart and that it should have but one will. No
American poet has ever prophesied so directly and powerfully
concerning the final issue involved in that World War which he
did not live to see.

Whitman, like Poe, had defects of character and defects of art.
His life and work raise many problems which will long continue to
fascinate and to baffle the critics. But after all of them have
had their say, it will remain true that he was a seer and a
prophet, far in advance of his own time, like Lincoln, and like
Lincoln, an inspired interpreter of the soul of this republic.

CHAPTER IX. UNION AND LIBERTY

"There is what I call the American idea," declared Theodore
Parker in the Anti-Slavery Convention of 1850. "This idea
demands, as the proximate organization thereof, a democracy--that
is, a government of all the people, by all the people, for all
the people; of course, a government on the principle of eternal
justice, the unchanging law of God; for shortness' sake, I will
call it the idea of Freedom."

These are noble words, and they are thought to have suggested a
familiar phrase of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, thirteen years
later. Yet students of literature, no less than students of
politics, recognize the difficulty of summarizing in words a
national "idea." Precisely what was the Greek "idea"? What is
today the French "idea"? No single formula is adequate to express
such a complex of fact, theories, moods--not even the famous
"Liberty, Fraternity, Equality." The existence of a truly
national life and literature presupposes a certain degree of
unity, an integration of race, language, political institutions,
and social ideals. It is obvious that this problem of national
integration meets peculiar obstacles in the United States.
Divergencies of race, tradition, and social theory, and clashing
interests of different sections have been felt from the beginning
of the nation's life. There was well-nigh complete solidarity in
the single province of New England during a portion of the
seventeenth century, and under the leadership of the great
Virginians there was sufficient national fusion to make the
Revolution successful. But early in the nineteenth century, the
opening of the new West, and the increasing economic importance
of Slavery as a peculiar institution of the South, provoked again
the ominous question of the possibility of an enduring Union.
>From 1820 until the end of the Civil War, it was the chief
political issue of the United States. The aim of the present
chapter is to show how the theme of Union and Liberty affected
our literature.

To appreciate the significance of this theme we must remind
ourselves again of what many persons have called the civic note
in our national writing. Franklin exemplified it in his day. It
is far removed from the pure literary art of a Poe, a Hawthorne,
a Henry James. It aims at action rather than beauty. It seeks to
persuade, to convince, to bring things to pass. We shall observe
it in the oratory of Clay and Webster, as they pleaded for
compromise; in the editorials of Garrison, a foe to compromise
and like Calhoun an advocate, if necessary, of disunion; in the
epochmaking novel of Harriet Beecher Stowe; in the speeches of
Wendell Phillips, in verse white-hot with political passion, and
sermons blazing with the fury of attack and defense of principles
dear to the human heart. We must glance, at least, at the lyrics
produced by the war itself, and finally, we shall observe how
Abraham Lincoln, the inheritor of the ideas of Jefferson, Clay,
and Webster, perceives and maintains, in the noblest tones of our
civic speech, the sole conditions of our continuance as a nation.

Let us begin with oratory, an American habit, and, as many
besides Dickens have thought, an American defect. We cannot argue
that question adequately here. It is sufficient to say that in
the pioneer stages of our existence oratory was necessary as a
stimulus to communal thought and feeling. The speeches of Patrick
Henry and Samuel Adams were as essential to our winning
independence as the sessions of statesmen and the armed conflicts
in the field. And in that new West which came so swiftly and
dramatically into existence at the close of the Revolution, the
orator came to be regarded as the normal type of intellectual
leadership. The stump grew more potent than schoolhouse and
church and bench.

The very pattern, and, if one likes, the tragic victim of this
glorification of oratory was Henry Clay, "Harry of the West," the
glamour of whose name and the wonderful tones of whose voice
became for a while a part of the political system of the United
States. Union and Liberty were the master-passions of Clay's
life, but the greater of these was Union. The half-educated young
immigrant from Virginia hazarded his career at the outset by
championing Anti-Slavery in the Kentucky Constitutional
Convention; the last notable act of his life was his successful
management, at the age of seventy-three, of the futile Compromise
of 1850. All his life long he fought for national issues; for the
War of 1812, for a protective tariff and an "American system,"
for the Missouri Compromise of 1820 as a measure for national
safety; and he had plead generously for the young South American
republics and for struggling Greece. He had become the perpetual
candidate of his party for the Presidency, and had gone down
again and again in unforeseen and heart-rending defeat. Yet he
could say honorably: "If any one desires to know the leading and
paramount object of my public life, the preservation of this
union will furnish him the key." One could wish that the speeches
of this fascinating American were more readable today. They seem
thin, facile, full of phrases--such adroit phrases as would catch
the ear of a listening, applauding audience. Straight, hard
thinking was not the road to political preferment in Clay's day.
Calhoun had that power, as Lincoln had it. Webster had the
capacity for it, although he was too indolent to employ his great
gifts steadily. Yet it was Webster who analyzed kindly and a
little sadly, for he was talking during Clay's last illness and
just before his own, his old rival's defect in literary quality:
"He was never a man of books . . . . I could never imagine him
sitting comfortably in his library and reading quietly out of the
great books of the past. He has been too fond of excitement--he
has lived upon it; he has been too fond of company, not enough
alone; and has had few resources within himself." Were the
limitations of a typical oratorical temperament ever touched more
unerringly than in these words?

When Webster himself thundered, at the close of his reply to
Hayne in 1830, "Union AND Liberty, now and forever, one and
inseparable," the words sank deeper into the consciousness of the
American people than any similar sentiment uttered by Henry Clay.
For Webster's was the richer, fuller nature, nurtured by "the
great books of the past," brooding, as Lincoln was to brood
later, over the seemingly insoluble problem of preserving a union
of States half slave, half free. On the fateful seventh of March,
1850, Webster, like Clay, cast the immense weight of his
personality and prestige upon the side of compromise. It was the
ruin of his political fortune, for the mood of the North was
changing, and the South preferred other candidates for the
Presidency. Yet the worst that can fairly be said against that
speech today is that it lacked moral imagination to visualize, as
Mrs. Stowe was soon to visualize, the human results of slavery.
As a plea for the transcendent necessity of maintaining the old
Union it was consistent with Webster's whole development of
political thought.

What were the secrets of that power that held Webster's hearers
literally spellbound, and made the North think of him, after that
alienation of 1850, as a fallen angel? No one can say fully, for
we touch here the mysteries of personality and of the spoken
word. But enough survives from the Webster legend, from his
correspondence and political and legal oratory, to bring us into
the presence of a superman. The dark Titan face, painted by such
masters as Carlyle, Hawthorne, and Emerson; the magical voice,
remembered now but by a few old men; the bodily presence, with
its leonine suggestion of sleepy power only half put forth--these
aided Webster to awe men or allure them into personal idolatry.
Yet outside of New England he was admired rather than loved.
There is still universal recognition of the mental capacity of
this foremost lawyer and foremost statesman of his time. He was
unsurpassed in his skill for direct, simple, limpid statement;
but he could rise at will to a high Roman stateliness of diction,
a splendid sonorousness of cadence. His greatest public
appearances were in the Dartmouth College Case before the Supreme
Court, the Plymouth, Bunker Hill, and Adams-Jefferson
commemorative orations, the Reply to Hayne, and the Seventh of
March speeches in the Senate. Though he exhibited in his private
life something of the prodigal recklessness of the pioneer, his
mental operations were conservative, constructive. His lifelong
antagonist Calhoun declared that "The United States are not a
nation." Webster, in opposition to this theory of a confederation
of states, devoted his superb talents to the demonstration of the
thesis that the United States "IS," not "are." Thus he came to be
known as the typical expounder of the Constitution. When he
reached, in 1850, the turning point of his career, his countrymen
knew by heart his personal and political history, the New
Hampshire boyhood and education, the rise to mastery at the New
England bar, the service in the House of Representatives and the
Senate and as Secretary of State. His speeches were already in
the schoolbooks, and for twenty years boys had been declaiming
his arguments against nullification. He had helped to teach
America to think and to feel. Indeed it was through his oratory
that many of his fellow-citizens had gained their highest
conception of the beauty, the potency, and the dignity of human
speech. And in truth he never exhibited his logical power and
demonstrative skill more superbly than in the plea of the seventh
of March for the preservation of the status quo, for the
avoidance of mutual recrimination between North and South, for
obedience to the law of the land. It was his supreme effort to
reconcile an irreconcilable situation.

It failed, as we know. Whittier, Emerson, Theodore Parker, and
indeed most of the voters of New England, believed that Webster
had bartered his private convictions in the hope of securing the
Presidential nomination in 1852. They assailed him savagely, and
Webster died, a broken man, in the autumn of the Presidential
year. "I have given my life to law and politics," he wrote to
Professor Silliman. "Law is uncertain and politics are utterly
vain." The dispassionate judgment of the present hour frees him
from the charge of conscious treachery to principle. He was
rather a martyr to his own conception of the obligations imposed
by nationality. When these obligations run counter to human
realities, the theories of statesmen must give way. Emerson could
not refute that logic of Webster's argument for the Fugitive
Slave Law, but he could at least record in his private Journal:
"I WILL NOT OBEY IT, BY GOD!" So said hundreds of thousands of
obscure men in the North, but Webster did not or could not hear
them.

While no other orator of that period was so richly endowed as
Daniel Webster, the struggle for Union and Liberty enlisted on
both sides many eloquent men. John C. Calhoun's acute, ingenious,
masterly political theorizing can still be studied in speeches
that have lost little of their effectiveness through the lapse of
time. The years have dealt roughly with Edward Everett, once
thought to be the pattern of oratorical gifts and graces. In
commemorative oratory, indeed, he ranked with Webster, but the
dust is settling upon his learned and ornate pages. Rufus Choate,
another conservative Whig in politics, and a leader, like Wirt
and Pinkney, at the bar, had an exotic, almost Oriental fancy, a
gorgeousness of diction, and an intensity of emotion unrivaled
among his contemporaries. His Dartmouth College eulogy of Webster
in 1853 shows him at his best. The Anti-Slavery orators, on the
other hand, had the advantage of a specific moral issue in which
they led the attack. Wendell Phillips was the most polished, the
most consummate in his air of informality, and his example did
much to puncture the American tradition of high-flown oratory. H