I've no doubt it gave him ideas for me, or
about me, to see me sit as open-mouthed as I now figure myself.  Not
so the two ladies, who not only were very nearly dumb from beginning
to end of the meal, but who hadn't even the air of being struck with
such an exhibition of fancy and taste.  Mrs. Ambient, detached, and
inscrutable, met neither my eye nor her husband's; she attended to
her dinner, watched her servants, arranged the puckers in her dress,
exchanged at wide intervals a remark with her sister-in-law and,
while she slowly rubbed her lean white hands between the courses,
looked out of the window at the first signs of evening--the long June
day allowing us to dine without candles.  Miss Ambient appeared to
give little direct heed to anything said by her brother; but on the
other hand she was much engaged in watching its effect upon me.  Her
"die-away" pupils continued to attach themselves to my countenance,
and it was only her air of belonging to another century that kept
them from being importunate.  She seemed to look at me across the
ages, and the interval of time diminished for me the inconvenience.
It was as if she knew in a general way that he must be talking very
well, but she herself was so at home among such allusions that she
had no need to pick them up and was at liberty to see what would
become of the exposure of a candid young American to a high aesthetic
temperature.

The temperature was aesthetic certainly, but it was less so than I
could have desired, for I failed of any great success in making our
friend abound about himself.  I tried to put him on the ground of his
own genius, but he slipped through my fingers every time and shifted
the saddle to one or other of his contemporaries.  He talked about
Balzac and Browning, about what was being done in foreign countries,
about his recent tour in the East and the extraordinary forms of life
to be observed in that part of the world.  I felt he had reasons for
holding off from a direct profession of literary faith, a full
consistency or sincerity, and therefore dealt instead with certain
social topics, treating them with extraordinary humour and with a due
play of that power of ironic evocation in which his books abound.  He
had a deal to say about London as London appears to the observer who
has the courage of some of his conclusions during the high-pressure
time--from April to July--of its gregarious life.  He flashed his
faculty of playing with the caught image and liberating the wistful
idea over the whole scheme of manners or conception of intercourse of
his compatriots, among whom there were evidently not a few types for
which he had little love.  London in short was grotesque to him, and
he made capital sport of it; his only allusion that I can remember to
his own work was his saying that he meant some day to do an immense
and general, a kind of epic, social satire.  Miss Ambient's perpetual
gaze seemed to put to me:  "Do you perceive how artistic, how very
strange and interesting, we are?  Frankly now is it possible to be
MORE artistic, MORE strange and interesting, than this?  You surely
won't deny that we're remarkable."  I was irritated by her use of the
plural pronoun, for she had no right to pair herself with her
brother; and moreover, of course, I couldn't see my way to--at all
genially--include Mrs. Ambient.  Yet there was no doubt they were,
taken together, unprecedented enough, and, with all allowances, I had
never been left, or condemned, to draw so many rich inferences.

After the ladies had retired my host took me into his study to smoke,
where I appealingly brought him round, or so tried, to some
disclosure of fond ideals.  I was bent on proving I was worthy to
listen to him, on repaying him for what he had said to me before
dinner, by showing him how perfectly I understood.  He liked to talk;
he liked to defend his convictions and his honour (not that I
attacked them); he liked a little perhaps--it was a pardonable
weakness--to bewilder the youthful mind even while wishing to win it
over.  My ingenuous sympathy received at any rate a shock from three
or four of his professions--he made me occasionally gasp and stare.
He couldn't help forgetting, or rather couldn't know, how little, in
another and drier clime, I had ever sat in the school in which he was
master; and he promoted me as at a jump to a sense of its penetralia.
My trepidations, however, were delightful; they were just what I had
hoped for, and their only fault was that they passed away too
quickly; since I found that for the main points I was essentially, I
was quite constitutionally, on Mark Ambient's "side."  This was the
taken stand of the artist to whom every manifestation of human energy
was a thrilling spectacle and who felt for ever the desire to resolve
his experience of life into a literary form.  On that high head of
the passion for form the attempt at perfection, the quest for which
was to his mind the real search for the holy grail--he said the most
interesting, the most inspiring things.  He mixed with them a
thousand illustrations from his own life, from other lives he had
known, from history and fiction, and above all from the annals of the
time that was dear to him beyond all periods, the Italian cinque-
cento.  It came to me thus that in his books he had uttered but half
his thought, and that what he had kept back from motives I deplored
when I made them out later--was the finer and braver part.  It was
his fate to make a great many still more "prepared" people than me
not inconsiderably wince; but there was no grain of bravado in his
ripest things (I've always maintained it, though often contradicted),
and at bottom the poor fellow, disinterested to his finger-tips and
regarding imperfection not only as an aesthetic but quite also as a
social crime, had an extreme dread of scandal.  There are critics who
regret that having gone so far he didn't go further; but I regret
nothing--putting aside two or three of the motives I just mentioned--
since he arrived at a noble rarity and I don't see how you can go
beyond that.  The hours I spent in his study--this first one and the
few that followed it; they were not, after all, so numerous--seem to
glow, as I look back on them, with a tone that is partly that of the
brown old room, rich, under the shaded candle-light where we sat and
smoked, with the dusky delicate bindings of valuable books; partly
that of his voice, of which I still catch the echo, charged with the
fancies and figures that came at his command.  When we went back to
the drawing-room we found Miss Ambient alone in possession and prompt
to mention that her sister-in-law had a quarter of an hour before
been called by the nurse to see the child, who appeared rather
unwell--a little feverish.

"Feverish! how in the world comes he to be feverish?" Ambient asked.
"He was perfectly right this afternoon."

"Beatrice says you walked him about too much--you almost killed him."

"Beatrice must be very happy--she has an opportunity to triumph!"
said my friend with a bright bitterness which was all I could have
wished it.

"Surely not if the child's ill," I ventured to remark by way of
pleading for Mrs. Ambient.

"My dear fellow, you aren't married--you don't know the nature of
wives!" my host returned with spirit.

I tried to match it.  "Possibly not; but I know the nature of
mothers."

"Beatrice is perfect as a mother," sighed Miss Ambient quite
tremendously and with her fingers interlaced on her embroidered
knees.

"I shall go up and see my boy," her brother went on."  Do you suppose
he's asleep?"

"Beatrice won't let you see him, dear"--as to which our young lady
looked at me, though addressing our companion.

"Do you call that being perfect as a mother?" Ambient asked.

"Yes, from her point of view."

"Damn her point of view!" cried the author of "Beltraffio."  And he
left the room; after which we heard him ascend the stairs.

I sat there for some ten minutes with Miss Ambient, and we naturally
had some exchange of remarks, which began, I think, by my asking her
what the point of view of her sister-in-law could be.

"Oh it's so very odd.  But we're so very odd altogether.  Don't you
find us awfully unlike others of our class?--which indeed mostly, in
England, is awful.  We've lived so much abroad.  I adore 'abroad.'
Have you people like us in America?"

"You're not all alike, you interesting three--or, counting Dolcino,
four--surely, surely; so that I don't think I understand your
question.  We've no one like your brother--I may go so far as that."

"You've probably more persons like his wife," Miss Ambient desolately
smiled.

"I can tell you that better when you've told me about her point of
view."

"Oh yes--oh yes.  Well," said my entertainer, "she doesn't like his
ideas.  She doesn't like them for the child.  She thinks them
undesirable."

Being quite fresh from the contemplation of some of Mark Ambient's
arcana I was particularly in a position to appreciate this
announcement.  But the effect of it was to make me, after staring a
moment, burst into laughter which I instantly checked when I
remembered the indisposed child above and the possibility of parents
nervously or fussily anxious.

"What has that infant to do with ideas?" I asked.  "Surely he can't
tell one from another.  Has he read his father's novels?"

"He's very precocious and very sensitive, and his mother thinks she
can't begin to guard him too early."  Miss Ambient's head drooped a
little to one side and her eyes fixed themselves on futurity.  Then
of a sudden came a strange alteration; her face lighted to an effect
more joyless than any gloom, to that indeed of a conscious insincere
grimace, and she added "When one has children what one writes becomes
a great responsibility."

"Children are terrible critics," I prosaically answered.  "I'm really
glad I haven't any."

"Do you also write, then?  And in the same style as my brother?  And
do you like that style?  And do people appreciate it in America?  I
don't write, but I think I feel."  To these and various other
inquiries and observations my young lady treated me till we heard her
brother's step in the hall again and Mark Ambient reappeared.  He was
so flushed and grave that I supposed he had seen something
symptomatic in the condition of his child.  His sister apparently had
another idea; she gazed at him from afar--as if he had been a burning
ship on the horizon--and simply murmured "Poor old Mark!"

"I hope you're not anxious," I as promptly pronounced.

"No, but I'm disappointed.  She won't let me in.  She has locked the
door, and I'm afraid to make a noise."  I daresay there might have
been a touch of the ridiculous in such a confession, but I liked my
new friend so much that it took nothing for me from his dignity.
"She tells me--from behind the door--that she'll let me know if he's
worse."

"It's very good of her," said Miss Ambient with a hollow sound.

I had exchanged a glance with Mark in which it's possible he read
that my pity for him was untinged with contempt, though I scarce know
why he should have cared; and as his sister soon afterward got up and
took her bedroom candlestick he proposed we should go back to his
study.  We sat there till after midnight; he put himself into his
slippers and an old velvet jacket, he lighted an ancient pipe, but he
talked considerably less than before.  There were longish pauses in
our communion, but they only made me feel we had advanced in
intimacy.  They helped me further to understand my friend's personal
situation and to imagine it by no means the happiest possible.  When
his face was quiet it was vaguely troubled, showing, to my increase
of interest--if that was all that was wanted!--that for him too life
was the same struggle it had been for so many another man of genius.
At last I prepared to leave him, and then, to my ineffable joy, he
gave me some of the sheets of his forthcoming book--which, though
unfinished, he had indulged in the luxury, so dear to writers of
deliberation, of having "set up," from chapter to chapter, as he
advanced.  These early pages, the premices, in the language of
letters, of that new fruit of his imagination, I should take to my
room and look over at my leisure.  I was in the act of leaving him
when the door of the study noiselessly opened and Mrs. Ambient stood
before us.  She observed us a moment, her candle in her hand, and
then said to her husband that as she supposed he hadn't gone to bed
she had come down to let him know Dolcino was more quiet and would
probably be better in the morning.  Mark Ambient made no reply; he
simply slipped past her in the doorway, as if for fear she might
seize him in his passage, and bounded upstairs to judge for himself
of his child's condition.  She looked so frankly discomfited that I
for a moment believed her about to give him chase.  But she resigned
herself with a sigh and her eyes turned, ruefully and without a ray,
to the lamplit room where various books at which I had been looking
were pulled out of their places on the shelves and the fumes of
tobacco hung in mid-air.  I bade her good-night and then, without
intention, by a kind of fatality, a perversity that had already made
me address her overmuch on that question of her husband's powers, I
alluded to the precious proof-sheets with which Ambient had entrusted
me and which I nursed there under my arm.  "They're the opening
chapters of his new book," I said.  "Fancy my satisfaction at being
allowed to carry them to my room!"

She turned away, leaving me to take my candlestick from the table in
the hall; but before we separated, thinking it apparently a good
occasion to let me know once for all since I was beginning, it would
seem, to be quite "thick" with my host--that there was no fitness in
my appealing to her for sympathy in such a case; before we separated,
I say, she remarked to me with her quick fine well-bred inveterate
curtness:  "I daresay you attribute to me ideas I haven't got.  I
don't take that sort of interest in my husband's proof-sheets.  I
consider his writings most objectionable!"



CHAPTER III



I had an odd colloquy the next morning with Miss Ambient, whom I
found strolling in the garden before breakfast.  The whole place
looked as fresh and trim, amid the twitter of the birds, as if, an
hour before, the housemaids had been turned into it with their dust-
pans and feather-brushes.  I almost hesitated to light a cigarette
and was doubly startled when, in the act of doing so, I suddenly saw
the sister of my host, who had, at the best, something of the
weirdness of an apparition, stand before me.  She might have been
posing for her photograph.  Her sad-coloured robe arranged itself in
serpentine folds at her feet; her hands locked themselves listlessly
together in front; her chin rested on a cinque-cento ruff.  The first
thing I did after bidding her good-morning was to ask her for news of
her little nephew--to express the hope she had heard he was better.
She was able to gratify this trust--she spoke as if we might expect
to see him during the day.  We walked through the shrubberies
together and she gave me further light on her brother's household,
which offered me an opportunity to repeat to her what his wife had so
startled and distressed me with the night before.  WAS it the sorry
truth that she thought his productions objectionable?

"She doesn't usually come out with that so soon!" Miss Ambient
returned in answer to my breathlessness.

"Poor lady," I pleaded, "she saw I'm a fanatic."

"Yes, she won't like you for that.  But you mustn't mind, if the rest
of us like you!  Beatrice thinks a work of art ought to have a
'purpose.'  But she's a charming woman--don't you think her charming?
I find in her quite the grand air."

"She's very beautiful," I produced with an effort; while I reflected
that though it was apparently true that Mark Ambient was mismated it
was also perceptible that his sister was perfidious.  She assured me
her brother and his wife had no other difference but this--one that
she thought his writings immoral and his influence pernicious.  It
was a fixed idea; she was afraid of these things for the child.  I
answered that it was in all conscience enough, the trifle of a
woman's regarding her husband's mind as a well of corruption, and she
seemed much struck with the novelty of my remark.  "But there hasn't
been any of the sort of trouble that there so often is among married
people," she said.  "I suppose you can judge for yourself that
Beatrice isn't at all--well, whatever they call it when a woman kicks
over!  And poor Mark doesn't make love to other people either.  You
might think he would, but I assure you he doesn't.  All the same of
course, from her point of view, you know, she has a dread of my
brother's influence on the child on the formation of his character,
his 'ideals,' poor little brat, his principles.  It's as if it were a
subtle poison or a contagion--something that would rub off on his
tender sensibility when his father kisses him or holds him on his
knee.  If she could she'd prevent Mark from even so much as touching
him.  Every one knows it--visitors see it for themselves; so there's
no harm in my telling you.  Isn't it excessively odd?  It comes from
Beatrice's being so religious and so tremendously moral--so a cheval
on fifty thousand riguardi.  And then of course we mustn't forget,"
my companion added, a little unexpectedly, to this polyglot
proposition, "that some of Mark's ideas are--well, really--rather
impossible, don't you know?"

I reflected as we went into the house, where we found Ambient
unfolding The Observer at the breakfast-table, that none of them were
probably quite so "impossible, don't you know?" as his sister.  Mrs.
Ambient, a little "the worse," as was mentioned, for her
ministrations, during the night, to Dolcino, didn't appear at
breakfast.  Her husband described her, however, as hoping to go to
church.  I afterwards learnt that she did go, but nothing naturally
was less on the cards than that we should accompany her.  It was
while the church-bell droned near at hand that the author of
"Beltraffio" led me forth for the ramble he had spoken of in his
note.  I shall attempt here no record of where we went or of what we
saw.  We kept to the fields and copses and commons, and breathed the
same sweet air as the nibbling donkeys and the browsing sheep, whose
woolliness seemed to me, in those early days of acquaintance with
English objects, but part of the general texture of the small dense
landscape, which looked as if the harvest were gathered by the shears
and with all nature bleating and braying for the violence.
Everything was full of expression for Mark Ambient's visitor--from
the big bandy-legged geese whose whiteness was a "note" amid all the
tones of green as they wandered beside a neat little oval pool, the
foreground of a thatched and whitewashed inn, with a grassy approach
and a pictorial sign--from these humble wayside animals to the crests
of high woods which let a gable or a pinnacle peep here and there and
looked even at a distance like trees of good company, conscious of an
individual profile.  I admired the hedge-rows, I plucked the faint-
hued heather, and I was for ever stopping to say how charming I
thought the thread-like footpaths across the fields, which wandered
in a diagonal of finer grain from one smooth stile to another.  Mark
Ambient was abundantly good-natured and was as much struck, dear man,
with some of my observations as I was with the literary allusions of
the landscape.  We sat and smoked on stiles, broaching paradoxes in
the decent English air; we took short cuts across a park or two where
the bracken was deep and my companion nodded to the old woman at the
gate; we skirted rank coverts which rustled here and there as we
passed, and we stretched ourselves at last on a heathery hillside
where if the sun wasn't too hot neither was the earth too cold, and
where the country lay beneath us in a rich blue mist.  Of course I
had already told him what I thought of his new novel, having the
previous night read every word of the opening chapters before I went
to bed.

"I'm not without hope of being able to make it decent enough," he
said as I went back to the subject while we turned up our heels to
the sky.  "At least the people who dislike my stuff--and there are
plenty of them, I believe--will dislike this thing (if it does turn
out well) most."  This was the first time I had heard him allude to
the people who couldn't read him--a class so generally conceived to
sit heavy on the consciousness of the man of letters.  A being
organised for literature as Mark Ambient was must certainly have had
the normal proportion of sensitiveness, of irritability; the artistic
ego, capable in some cases of such monstrous development, must have
been in his composition sufficiently erect and active.  I won't
therefore go so far as to say that he never thought of his detractors
or that he had any illusions with regard to the number of his
admirers--he could never so far have deceived himself as to believe
he was popular, but I at least then judged (and had occasion to be
sure later on) that stupidity ruffled him visibly but little, that he
had an air of thinking it quite natural he should leave many simple
folk, tasting of him, as simple as ever he found them, and that he
very seldom talked about the newspapers, which, by the way, were
always even abnormally vulgar about him.  Of course he may have
thought them over--the newspapers--night and day; the only point I
make is that he didn't show it while at the same time he didn't
strike one as a man actively on his guard.  I may add that, touching
his hope of making the work on which he was then engaged the best of
his books, it was only partly carried out.  That place belongs
incontestably to "Beltraffio," in spite of the beauty of certain
parts of its successor.  I quite believe, however, that he had at the
moment of which I speak no sense of having declined; he was in love
with his idea, which was indeed magnificent, and though for him, as I
suppose for every sane artist, the act of execution had in it as much
torment as joy, he saw his result grow like the crescent of the young
moon and promise to fill the disk.  "I want to be truer than I've
ever been," he said, settling himself on his back with his hands
clasped behind his head; "I want to give the impression of life
itself.  No, you may say what you will, I've always arranged things
too much, always smoothed them down and rounded them off and tucked
them in--done everything to them that life doesn't do.  I've been a
slave to the old superstitions."

"You a slave, my dear Mark Ambient?  You've the freest imagination of
our day!"

"All the more shame to me to have done some of the things I have!
The reconciliation of the two women in 'Natalina,' for instance,
which could never really have taken place.  That sort of thing's
ignoble--I blush when I think of it!  This new affair must be a
golden vessel, filled with the purest distillation of the actual; and
oh how it worries me, the shaping of the vase, the hammering of the
metal!  I have to hammer it so fine, so smooth; I don't do more than
an inch or two a day.  And all the while I have to be so careful not
to let a drop of the liquor escape!  When I see the kind of things
Life herself, the brazen hussy, does, I despair of ever catching her
peculiar trick.  She has an impudence, Life!  If one risked a
fiftieth part of the effects she risks!  It takes ever so long to
believe it.  You don't know yet, my dear youth.  It isn't till one
has been watching her some forty years that one finds out half of
what she's up to!  Therefore one's earlier things must inevitably
contain a mass of rot.  And with what one sees, on one side, with its
tongue in its cheek, defying one to be real enough, and on the other
the bonnes gens rolling up their eyes at one's cynicism, the
situation has elements of the ludicrous which the poor reproducer
himself is doubtless in a position to appreciate better than any one
else.  Of course one mustn't worry about the bonnes gens," Mark
Ambient went on while my thoughts reverted to his ladylike wife as
interpreted by his remarkable sister.

"To sink your shaft deep and polish the plate through which people
look into it--that's what your work consists of," I remember
ingeniously observing.

"Ah polishing one's plate--that's the torment of execution!" he
exclaimed, jerking himself up and sitting forward.  "The effort to
arrive at a surface, if you think anything of that decent sort
necessary--some people don't, happily for them!  My dear fellow, if
you could see the surface I dream of as compared with the one with
which I've to content myself.  Life's really too short for art--one
hasn't time to make one's shell ideally hard.  Firm and bright, firm
and bright is very well to say--the devilish thing has a way
sometimes of being bright, and even of being hard, as mere tough
frozen pudding is hard, without being firm.  When I rap it with my
knuckles it doesn't give the right sound.  There are horrible sandy
stretches where I've taken the wrong turn because I couldn't for the
life of me find the right.  If you knew what a dunce I am sometimes!
Such things figure to me now base pimples and ulcers on the brow of
beauty!"

"They're very bad, very bad," I said as gravely as I could.

"Very bad?  They're the highest social offence I know; it ought--it
absolutely ought; I'm quite serious--to be capital.  If I knew I
should be publicly thrashed else I'd manage to find the true word.
The people who can't--some of them don't so much as know it when they
see it--would shut their inkstands, and we shouldn't be deluged by
this flood of rubbish!"

I shall not attempt to repeat everything that passed between us, nor
to explain just how it was that, every moment I spent in his company,
Mark Ambient revealed to me more and more the consistency of his
creative spirit, the spirit in him that felt all life as plastic
material.  I could but envy him the force of that passion, and it was
at any rate through the receipt of this impression that by the time
we returned I had gained the sense of intimacy with him that I have
noted.  Before we got up for the homeward stretch he alluded to his
wife's having once--or perhaps more than once--asked him whether he
should like Dolcino to read "Beltraffio."  He must have been unaware
at the moment of all that this conveyed to me--as well doubtless of
my extreme curiosity to hear what he had replied.  He had said how
much he hoped Dolcino would read ALL his works--when he was twenty;
he should like him to know what his father had done.  Before twenty
it would be useless; he wouldn't understand them.

"And meanwhile do you propose to hide them--to lock them up in a
drawer?" Mrs. Ambient had proceeded.

"Oh no--we must simply tell him they're not intended for small boys.
If you bring him up properly after that he won't touch them."

To this Mrs. Ambient had made answer that it might be very awkward
when he was about fifteen, say; and I asked her husband if it were
his opinion in general, then, that young people shouldn't read
novels.

"Good ones--certainly not!" said my companion.  I suppose I had had
other views, for I remember saying that for myself I wasn't sure it
was bad for them if the novels were "good" to the right intensity of
goodness.  "Bad for THEM, I don't say so much!" my companion
returned.  "But very bad, I'm afraid, for the poor dear old novel
itself."  That oblique accidental allusion to his wife's attitude was
followed by a greater breadth of reference as we walked home.  "The
difference between us is simply the opposition between two distinct
ways of looking at the world, which have never succeeded in getting
on together, or in making any kind of common household, since the
beginning of time.  They've borne all sorts of names, and my wife
would tell you it's the difference between Christian and Pagan.  I
may be a pagan, but I don't like the name; it sounds sectarian.  She
thinks me at any rate no better than an ancient Greek.  It's the
difference between making the most of life and making the least, so
that you'll get another better one in some other time and place.
Will it be a sin to make the most of that one, too, I wonder; and
shall we have to be bribed off in the future state as well as in the
present?  Perhaps I care too much for beauty--I don't know, I doubt
if a poor devil CAN; I delight in it, I adore it, I think of it
continually, I try to produce it, to reproduce it.  My wife holds
that we shouldn't cultivate or enjoy it without extraordinary
precautions and reserves.  She's always afraid of it, always on her
guard.  I don't know what it can ever have done to her, what grudge
it owes her or what resentment rides.  And she's so pretty, too,
herself!  Don't you think she's lovely?  She was at any rate when we
married.  At that time I wasn't aware of that difference I speak of--
I thought it all came to the same thing:  in the end, as they say.
Well, perhaps it will in the end.  I don't know what the end will be.
Moreover, I care for seeing things as they are; that's the way I try
to show them in any professed picture.  But you mustn't talk to Mrs.
Ambient about things as they are.  She has a mortal dread of things
as they are."

"She's afraid of them for Dolcino," I said:  surprised a moment
afterwards at being in a position--thanks to Miss Ambient--to be so
explanatory; and surprised even now that Mark shouldn't have shown
visibly that he wondered what the deuce I knew about it.  But he
didn't; he simply declared with a tenderness that touched me:  "Ah
nothing shall ever hurt HIM!"

He told me more about his wife before we arrived at the gate of home,
and if he be judged to have aired overmuch his grievance I'm afraid I
must admit that he had some of the foibles as well as the gifts of
the artistic temperament; adding, however, instantly that hitherto,
to the best of my belief, he had rarely let this particular cat out
of the bag.  "She thinks me immoral--that's the long and short of
it," he said as we paused outside a moment and his hand rested on one
of the bars of his gate; while his conscious expressive perceptive
eyes--the eyes of a foreigner, I had begun to account them, much more
than of the usual Englishman--viewing me now evidently as quite a
familiar friend, took part in the declaration.  "It's very strange
when one thinks it all over, and there's a grand comicality in it
that I should like to bring out.  She's a very nice woman,
extraordinarily well-behaved, upright and clever and with a
tremendous lot of good sense about a good many matters.  Yet her
conception of a novel--she has explained it to me once or twice, and
she doesn't do it badly as exposition--is a thing so false that it
makes me blush.  It's a thing so hollow, so dishonest, so lying, in
which life is so blinked and blinded, so dodged and disfigured, that
it makes my ears burn.  It's two different ways of looking at the
whole affair," he repeated, pushing open the gate.  "And they're
irreconcilable!" he added with a sigh.  We went forward to the house,
but on the walk, half-way to the door, he stopped and said to me:
"If you're going into this kind of thing there's a fact you should
know beforehand; it may save you some disappointment.  There's a
hatred of art, there's a hatred of literature--I mean of the genuine
kinds.  Oh the shams--those they'll swallow by the bucket!"  I looked
up at the charming house, with its genial colour and crookedness, and
I answered with a smile that those evil passions might exist, but
that I should never have expected to find them there.  "Ah it doesn't
matter after all," he a bit nervously laughed; which I was glad to
hear, for I was reproaching myself with having worked him up.

If I had it soon passed off, for at luncheon he was delightful;
strangely delightful considering that the difference between himself
and his wife was, as he had said, irreconcilable.  He had the art, by
his manner, by his smile, by his natural amenity, of reducing the
importance of it in the common concerns of life; and Mrs. Ambient, I
must add, lent herself to this transaction with a very good grace.  I
watched her at table for further illustrations of that fixed idea of
which Miss Ambient had spoken to me; for in the light of the united
revelations of her sister-in-law and her husband she had come to seem
to me almost a sinister personage.  Yet the signs of a sombre
fanaticism were not more immediately striking in her than before; it
was only after a while that her air of incorruptible conformity, her
tapering monosyllabic correctness, began to affect me as in
themselves a cold thin flame.  Certainly, at first, she resembled a
woman with as few passions as possible; but if she had a passion at
all it would indeed be that of Philistinism.  She might have been
(for there are guardian-spirits, I suppose, of all great principles)
the very angel of the pink of propriety--putting the pink for a
principle, though I'd rather put some dismal cold blue.  Mark
Ambient, apparently, ten years before, had simply and quite
inevitably taken her for an angel, without asking himself of what.
He had been right in calling my attention to her beauty.  In looking
for some explanation of his original surrender to her I saw more than
before that she was, physically speaking, a wonderfully cultivated
human plant--that he might well have owed her a brief poetic
inspiration.  It was impossible to be more propped and pencilled,
more delicately tinted and petalled.

If I had had it in my heart to think my host a little of a hypocrite
for appearing to forget at table everything he had said to me in our
walk, I should instantly have cancelled such a judgement on
reflecting that the good news his wife was able to give him about
their little boy was ground enough for any optimistic reaction.  It
may have come partly, too, from a certain compunction at having
breathed to me at all harshly on the cool fair lady who sat there--a
desire to prove himself not after all so mismated.  Dolcino continued
to be much better, and it had been promised him he should come
downstairs after his dinner.  As soon as we had risen from our own
meal Mark slipped away, evidently for the purpose of going to his
child; and no sooner had I observed this than I became aware his wife
had simultaneously vanished.  It happened that Miss Ambient and I,
both at the same moment, saw the tail of her dress whisk out of a
doorway; an incident that led the young lady to smile at me as if I
now knew all the secrets of the Ambients.  I passed with her into the
garden and we sat down on a dear old bench that rested against the
west wall of the house.  It was a perfect spot for the middle period
of a Sunday in June, and its felicity seemed to come partly from an
antique sun-dial which, rising in front of us and forming the centre
of a small intricate parterre, measured the moments ever so slowly
and made them safe for leisure and talk.  The garden bloomed in the
suffused afternoon, the tall beeches stood still for an example, and,
behind and above us, a rose tree of many seasons, clinging to the
faded grain of the brick, expressed the whole character of the scene
in a familiar exquisite smell.  It struck me as a place to offer
genius every favour and sanction--not to bristle with challenges and
checks.  Miss Ambient asked me if I had enjoyed my walk with her
brother and whether we had talked of many things.

"Well, of most things," I freely allowed, though I remembered we
hadn't talked of Miss Ambient.

"And don't you think some of his theories are very peculiar?"

"Oh I guess I agree with them all."  I was very particular, for Miss
Ambient's entertainment, to guess.

"Do you think art's everything?" she put to me in a moment.

"In art, of course I do!"

"And do you think beauty's everything?"

"Everything's a big word, which I think we should use as little as
possible.  But how can we not want beauty?"

"Ah there you are!" she sighed, though I didn't quite know what she
meant by it.  "Of course it's difficult for a woman to judge how far
to go," she went on.  "I adore everything that gives a charm to life.
I'm intensely sensitive to form.  But sometimes I draw back--don't
you see what I mean?--I don't quite see where I shall be landed.  I
only want to be quiet, after all," Miss Ambient continued as if she
had long been baffled of this modest desire.  "And one must be good,
at any rate, must not one?" she pursued with a dubious quaver--an
intimation apparently that what I might say one way or the other
would settle it for her.  It was difficult for me to be very original
in reply, and I'm afraid I repaid her confidence with an unblushing
platitude.  I remember, moreover, attaching to it an inquiry, equally
destitute of freshness and still more wanting perhaps in tact, as to
whether she didn't mean to go to church, since that was an obvious
way of being good.  She made answer that she had performed this duty
in the morning, and that for her, of Sunday afternoons, supreme
virtue consisted in answering the week's letters.  Then suddenly and
without transition she brought out:  "It's quite a mistake about
Dolcino's being better.  I've seen him and he's not at all right."

I wondered, and somehow I think I scarcely believed.  "Surely his
mother would know, wouldn't she?"

She appeared for a moment to be counting the leaves on one of the
great beeches.  "As regards most matters one can easily say what, in
a given situation, my sister-in-law will, or would, do.  But in the
present case there are strange elements at work."

"Strange elements?  Do you mean in the constitution of the child?"

"No, I mean in my sister-in-law's feelings."

"Elements of affection of course; elements of anxiety," I concurred.
"But why do you call them strange?"

She repeated my words.  "Elements of affection, elements of anxiety.
She's very anxious."

Miss Ambient put me indescribably ill at ease; she almost scared me,
and I wished she would go and write her letters.  "His father will
have seen him now," I said, "and if he's not satisfied he will send
for the doctor."

"The doctor ought to have been here this morning," she promptly
returned.  "He lives only two miles away."

I reflected that all this was very possibly but a part of the general
tragedy of Miss Ambient's view of things; yet I asked her why she
hadn't urged that view on her sister-in-law.  She answered me with a
smile of extraordinary significance and observed that I must have
very little idea of her "peculiar" relations with Beatrice; but I
must do her the justice that she re-enforced this a little by the
plea that any distinguishable alarm of Mark's was ground enough for a
difference of his wife's.  He was always nervous about the child, and
as they were predestined by nature to take opposite views, the only
thing for the mother was to cultivate a false optimism.  In Mark's
absence and that of his betrayed fear she would have been less easy.
I remembered what he had said to me about their dealings with their
son--that between them they'd probably put an end to him; but I
didn't repeat this to Miss Ambient:  the less so that just then her
brother emerged from the house, carrying the boy in his arms.  Close
behind him moved his wife, grave and pale; the little sick face was
turned over Ambient's shoulder and toward the mother.  We rose to
receive the group, and as they came near us Dolcino twisted himself
about.  His enchanting eyes showed me a smile of recognition, in
which, for the moment, I should have taken a due degree of comfort.
Miss Ambient, however, received another impression, and I make haste
to say that her quick sensibility, which visibly went out to the
child, argues that in spite of her affectations she might have been
of some human use.  "It won't do at all--it won't do at all," she
said to me under her breath.  "I shall speak to Mark about the
Doctor."

Her small nephew was rather white, but the main difference I saw in
him was that he was even more beautiful than the day before.  He had
been dressed in his festal garments--a velvet suit and a crimson
sash--and he looked like a little invalid prince too young to know
condescension and smiling familiarly on his subjects.

"Put him down, Mark, he's not a bit at his ease," Mrs. Ambient said.

"Should you like to stand on your feet, my boy?" his father asked.

He made a motion that quickly responded.  "Oh yes; I'm remarkably
well."

Mark placed him on the ground; he had shining pointed shoes with
enormous bows.  "Are you happy now, Mr. Ambient?"

"Oh yes, I'm particularly happy," Dolcino replied.  But the words
were scarce out of his mouth when his mother caught him up and, in a
moment, holding him on her knees, took her place on the bench where
Miss Ambient and I had been sitting.  This young lady said something
to her brother, in consequence of which the two wandered away into
the garden together.



CHAPTER IV



I remained with Mrs. Ambient, but as a servant had brought out a
couple of chairs I wasn't obliged to seat myself beside her.  Our
conversation failed of ease, and I, for my part, felt there would be
a shade of hypocrisy in my now trying to make myself agreeable to the
partner of my friend's existence.  I didn't dislike her--I rather
admired her; but I was aware that I differed from her inexpressibly.
Then I suspected, what I afterwards definitely knew and have already
intimated, that the poor lady felt small taste for her husband's so
undisguised disciple; and this of course was not encouraging.  She
thought me an obtrusive and designing, even perhaps a depraved, young
man whom a perverse Providence had dropped upon their quiet lawn to
flatter his worst tendencies.  She did me the honour to say to Miss
Ambient, who repeated the speech, that she didn't know when she had
seen their companion take such a fancy to a visitor; and she measured
apparently my evil influence by Mark's appreciation of my society.  I
had a consciousness, not oppressive but quite sufficient, of all
this; though I must say that if it chilled my flow of small-talk it
yet didn't prevent my thinking the beautiful mother and beautiful
child, interlaced there against their background of roses, a picture
such as I doubtless shouldn't soon see again.  I was free, I
supposed, to go into the house and write letters, to sit in the
drawing-room, to repair to my own apartment and take a nap; but the
only use I made of my freedom was to linger still in my chair and say
to myself that the light hand of Sir Joshua might have painted Mark
Ambient's wife and son.  I found myself looking perpetually at the
latter small mortal, who looked constantly back at me, and that was
enough to detain me.  With these vaguely-amused eyes he smiled, and I
felt it an absolute impossibility to abandon a child with such an
expression.  His attention never strayed; it attached itself to my
face as if among all the small incipient things of his nature
throbbed a desire to say something to me.  If I could have taken him
on my own knee he perhaps would have managed to say it; but it would
have been a critical matter to ask his mother to give him up, and it
has remained a constant regret for me that on that strange Sunday
afternoon I didn't even for a moment hold Dolcino in my arms.  He had
said he felt remarkably well and was especially happy; but though
peace may have been with him as he pillowed his charming head on his
mother's breast, dropping his little crimson silk legs from her lap,
I somehow didn't think security was.  He made no attempt to walk
about; he was content to swing his legs softly and strike one as
languid and angelic.

Mark returned to us with his sister; and Miss Ambient, repeating her
mention of the claims of her correspondence, passed into the house.
Mark came and stood in front of his wife, looking down at the child,
who immediately took hold of his hand and kept it while he stayed.
"I think Mackintosh ought to see him," he said; "I think I'll walk
over and fetch him."

"That's Gwendolen's idea, I suppose," Mrs. Ambient replied very
sweetly.

"It's not such an out-of-the-way idea when one's child's ill," he
returned.

"I'm not ill, papa; I'm much better now," sounded in the boy's silver
pipe.

"Is that the truth, or are you only saying it to be agreeable?
You've a great idea of being agreeable, you know."

The child seemed to meditate on this distinction, this imputation,
for a moment; then his exaggerated eyes, which had wandered, caught
my own as I watched him.  "Do YOU think me agreeable?" he inquired
with the candour of his age and with a look that made his father turn
round to me laughing and ask, without saying it, "Isn't he adorable?"

"Then why don't you hop about, if you feel so lusty?" Ambient went on
while his son swung his hand.

"Because mamma's holding me close!"

"Oh yes; I know how mamma holds you when I come near!" cried Mark
with a grimace at his wife.

She turned her charming eyes up to him without deprecation or
concession.  "You can go for Mackintosh if you like.  I think myself
it would be better.  You ought to drive."

"She says that to get me away," he put to me with a gaiety that I
thought a little false; after which he started for the Doctor's.

I remained there with Mrs. Ambient, though even our exchange of
twaddle had run very thin.  The boy's little fixed white face seemed,
as before, to plead with me to stay, and after a while it produced
still another effect, a very curious one, which I shall find it
difficult to express.  Of course I expose myself to the charge of an
attempt to justify by a strained logic after the fact a step which
may have been on my part but the fruit of a native want of
discretion; and indeed the traceable consequences of that perversity
were too lamentable to leave me any desire to trifle with the
question.  All I can say is that I acted in perfect good faith and
that Dolcino's friendly little gaze gradually kindled the spark of my
inspiration.  What helped it to glow were the other influences--the
silent suggestive garden-nook, the perfect opportunity (if it was not
an opportunity for that it was an opportunity for nothing) and the
plea I speak of, which issued from the child's eyes and seemed to
make him say:  "The mother who bore me and who presses me here to her
bosom--sympathetic little organism that I am--has really the kind of
sensibility she has been represented to you as lacking, if you only
look for it patiently and respectfully.  How is it conceivable she
shouldn't have it?  How is it possible that _I_ should have so much
of it--for I'm quite full of it, dear strange gentleman--if it
weren't also in some degree in her?  I'm my great father's child, but
I'm also my beautiful mother's, and I'm sorry for the difference
between them!"  So it shaped itself before me, the vision of
reconciling Mrs. Ambient with her husband, of putting an end to their
ugly difference.  The project was absurd of course, for had I not had
his word for it--spoken with all the bitterness of experience--that
the gulf dividing them was well-nigh bottomless?  Nevertheless, a
quarter of an hour after Mark had left us, I observed to my hostess
that I couldn't get over what she had told me the night before about
her thinking her husband's compositions "objectionable."  I had been
so very sorry to hear it, had thought of it constantly and wondered
whether it mightn't be possible to make her change her mind.  She
gave me a great cold stare, meant apparently as an admonition to me
to mind my business.  I wish I had taken this mute counsel, but I
didn't take it.  I went on to remark that it seemed an immense pity
so much that was interesting should be lost on her.

"Nothing's lost upon me," she said in a tone that didn't make the
contradiction less.  "I know they're very interesting."

"Don't you like papa's books?" Dolcino asked, addressing his mother
but still looking at me.  Then he added to me:  "Won't you read them
to me, American gentleman?"

"I'd rather tell you some stories of my own," I said.  "I know some
that are awfully good."

"When will you tell them?  To-morrow?"

"To-morrow with pleasure, if that suits you."

His mother took this in silence.  Her husband, during our walk, had
asked me to remain another day; my promise to her son was an
implication that I had consented, and it wasn't possible the news
could please her.  This ought doubtless to have made me more careful
as to what I said next, but all I can plead is that it didn't.  I
soon mentioned that just after leaving her the evening before, and
after hearing her apply to her husband's writings the epithet already
quoted, I had on going up to my room sat down to the perusal of those
sheets of his new book that he had been so good as to lend me.  I had
sat entranced till nearly three in the morning--I had read them twice
over.  "You say you haven't looked at them.  I think it's such a pity
you shouldn't.  Do let me beg you to take them up.  They're so very
remarkable.  I'm sure they'll convert you.  They place him in--
really--such a dazzling light.  All that's best in him is there.
I've no doubt it's a great liberty, my saying all this; but pardon
me, and DO read them!"

"Do read them, mamma!" the boy again sweetly shrilled.  "Do read
them!"

She bent her head and closed his lips with a kiss.  "Of course I know
he has worked immensely over them," she said; after which she made no
remark, but attached her eyes thoughtfully to the ground.  The tone
of these last words was such as to leave me no spirit for further
pressure, and after hinting at a fear that her husband mightn't have
caught the Doctor I got up and took a turn about the grounds.  When I
came back ten minutes later she was still in her place watching her
boy, who had fallen asleep in her lap.  As I drew near she put her
finger to her lips and a short time afterwards rose, holding him; it
being now best, she said, that she should take him upstairs.  I
offered to carry him and opened my arms for the purpose; but she
thanked me and turned away with the child still in her embrace, his
head on her shoulder.  "I'm very strong," was her last word as she
passed into the house, her slim flexible figure bent backward with
the filial weight.  So I never laid a longing hand on Dolcino.

I betook myself to Ambient's study, delighted to have a quiet hour to
look over his books by myself.  The windows were open to the garden;
the sunny stillness, the mild light of the English summer, filled the
room without quite chasing away the rich dusky tone that was a part
of its charm and that abode in the serried shelves where old morocco
exhaled the fragrance of curious learning, as well as in the brighter
intervals where prints and medals and miniatures were suspended on a
surface of faded stuff.  The place had both colour and quiet; I
thought it a perfect room for work and went so far as to say to
myself that, if it were mine to sit and scribble in, there was no
knowing but I might learn to write as well as the author of
"Beltraffio."  This distinguished man still didn't reappear, and I
rummaged freely among his treasures.  At last I took down a book that
detained me a while and seated myself in a fine old leather chair by
the window to turn it over.  I had been occupied in this way for half
an hour--a good part of the afternoon had waned--when I became
conscious of another presence in the room and, looking up from my
quarto, saw that Mrs. Ambient, having pushed open the door quite
again in the same noiseless way marking or disguising her entrance
the night before, had advanced across the threshold.  On seeing me
she stopped; she had not, I think, expected to find me.  But her
hesitation was only of a moment; she came straight to her husband's
writing-table as if she were looking for something.  I got up and
asked her if I could help her.  She glanced about an instant and then
put her hand upon a roll of papers which I recognised, as I had
placed it on that spot at the early hour of my descent from my room.

"Is this the new book?" she asked, holding it up.

"The very sheets," I smiled; "with precious annotations."

"I mean to take your advice"--and she tuc