ked the little bundle under
her arm.  I congratulated her cordially and ventured to make of my
triumph, as I presumed to call it, a subject of pleasantry.  But she
was perfectly grave and turned away from me, as she had presented
herself, without relaxing her rigour; after which I settled down to
my quarto again with the reflexion that Mrs. Ambient was truly an
eccentric.  My triumph, too, suddenly seemed to me rather vain.  A
woman who couldn't unbend at a moment exquisitely indicated would
never understand Mark Ambient.  He came back to us at last in person,
having brought the Doctor with him.  "He was away from home," Mark
said, "and I went after him to where he was supposed to be.  He had
left the place, and I followed him to two or three others, which
accounts for my delay."  He was now with Mrs. Ambient, looking at the
child, and was to see Mark again before leaving the house.  My host
noticed at the end of two minutes that the proof-sheets of his new
book had been removed from the table; and when I told him, in reply
to his question as to what I knew about them, that Mrs. Ambient had
carried them off to read he turned almost pale with surprise.  "What
has suddenly made her so curious?" he cried; and I was obliged to
tell him that I was at the bottom of the mystery.  I had had it on my
conscience to assure her that she really ought to know of what her
husband was capable.  "Of what I'm capable?  Elle ne s'en doute que
trop!" said Ambient with a laugh; but he took my meddling very good-
naturedly and contented himself with adding that he was really much
afraid she would burn up the sheets, his emendations and all, of
which latter he had no duplicate.  The Doctor paid a long visit in
the nursery, and before he came down I retired to my own quarters,
where I remained till dinner-time.  On entering the drawing-room at
this hour I found Miss Ambient in possession, as she had been the
evening before.

"I was right about Dolcino," she said, as soon as she saw me, with an
air of triumph that struck me as the climax of perversity.  "He's
really very ill."

"Very ill!  Why when I last saw him, at four o'clock, he was in
fairly good form."

"There has been a change for the worse, very sudden and rapid, and
when the Doctor got here he found diphtheritic symptoms.  He ought to
have been called, as I knew, in the morning, and the child oughtn't
to have been brought into the garden."

"My dear lady, he was very happy there," I protested with horror.

"He would be very happy anywhere.  I've no doubt he's very happy now,
with his poor little temperature--!"  She dropped her voice as her
brother came in, and Mark let us know that as a matter of course Mrs.
Ambient wouldn't appear.  It was true the boy had developed
diphtheritic symptoms, but he was quiet for the present and his
mother earnestly watching him.  She was a perfect nurse, Mark said,
and Mackintosh would come back at ten.  Our dinner wasn't very gay--
with my host worried and absent; and his sister annoyed me by her
constant tacit assumption, conveyed in the very way she nibbled her
bread and sipped her wine, of having "told me so."  I had had no
disposition to deny anything she might have told me, and I couldn't
see that her satisfaction in being justified by the event relieved
her little nephew's condition.  The truth is that, as the sequel was
to prove, Miss Ambient had some of the qualities of the sibyl and had
therefore perhaps a right to the sibylline contortions.  Her brother
was so preoccupied that I felt my presence an indiscretion and was
sorry I had promised to remain over the morrow.  I put it to Mark
that clearly I had best leave them in the morning; to which he
replied that, on the contrary, if he was to pass the next days in the
fidgets my company would distract his attention.  The fidgets had
already begun for him, poor fellow; and as we sat in his study with
our cigars after dinner he wandered to the door whenever he heard the
sound of the Doctor's wheels.  Miss Ambient, who shared this
apartment with us, gave me at such moments significant glances; she
had before rejoining us gone upstairs to ask about the child.  His
mother and his nurse gave a fair report, but Miss Ambient found his
fever high and his symptoms very grave.  The Doctor came at ten
o'clock, and I went to bed after hearing from Mark that he saw no
present cause for alarm.  He had made every provision for the night
and was to return early in the morning.

I quitted my room as eight struck the next day and when I came
downstairs saw, through the open door of the house, Mrs. Ambient
standing at the front gate of the grounds in colloquy with
Mackintosh.  She wore a white dressing-gown, but her shining hair was
carefully tucked away in its net, and in the morning freshness, after
a night of watching, she looked as much "the type of the lady" as her
sister-in-law had described her.  Her appearance, I suppose, ought to
have reassured me; but I was still nervous and uneasy, so that I
shrank from meeting her with the necessary challenge.  None the less,
however, was I impatient to learn how the new day found him; and as
Mrs. Ambient hadn't seen me I passed into the grounds by a roundabout
way and, stopping at a further gate, hailed the Doctor just as he was
driving off.  Mrs. Ambient had returned to the house before he got
into his cart.

"Pardon me, but as a friend of the family I should like very much to
hear about the little boy."

The stout sharp circumspect man looked at me from head to foot and
then said:  "I'm sorry to say I haven't seen him."

"Haven't seen him?"

"Mrs. Ambient came down to meet me as I alighted, and told me he was
sleeping so soundly, after a restless night, that she didn't wish him
disturbed.  I assured her I wouldn't disturb him, but she said he was
quite safe now and she could look after him herself."

"Thank you very much.  Are you coming back?"

"No, sir; I'll be hanged if I come back!" cried the honest
practitioner in high resentment.  And the horse started as he settled
beside his man.

I wandered back into the garden, and five minutes later Miss Ambient
came forth from the house to greet me.  She explained that breakfast
wouldn't be served for some time and that she desired a moment
herself with the Doctor.  I let her know that the good vexed man had
come and departed, and I repeated to her what he had told me about
his dismissal.  This made Miss Ambient very serious, very serious
indeed, and she sank into a bench, with dilated eyes, hugging her
elbows with crossed arms.  She indulged in many strange signs, she
confessed herself immensely distressed, and she finally told me what
her own last news of her nephew had been.  She had sat up very late--
after me, after Mark--and before going to bed had knocked at the door
of the child's room, opened to her by the nurse.  This good woman had
admitted her and she had found him quiet, but flushed and
"unnatural," with his mother sitting by his bed.  "She held his hand
in one of hers," said Miss Ambient, "and in the other--what do you
think?--the proof-sheets of Mark's new book!"  She was reading them
there intently:  "did you ever hear of anything so extraordinary?
Such a very odd time to be reading an author whom she never could
abide!"  In her agitation Miss Ambient was guilty of this vulgarism
of speech, and I was so impressed by her narrative that only in
recalling her words later did I notice the lapse.  Mrs. Ambient had
looked up from her reading with her finger on her lips--I recognised
the gesture she had addressed me in the afternoon--and, though the
nurse was about to go to rest, had not encouraged her sister-in-law
to relieve her of any part of her vigil.  But certainly at that time
the boy's state was far from reassuring--his poor little breathing so
painful; and what change could have taken place in him in those few
hours that would justify Beatrice in denying Mackintosh access?  This
was the moral of Miss Ambient's anecdote, the moral for herself at
least.  The moral for me, rather, was that it WAS a very singular
time for Mrs. Ambient to be going into a novelist she had never
appreciated and who had simply happened to be recommended to her by a
young American she disliked.  I thought of her sitting there in the
sick-chamber in the still hours of the night and after the nurse had
left her, turning and turning those pages of genius and wrestling
with their magical influence.

I must be sparing of the minor facts and the later emotions of this
sojourn--it lasted but a few hours longer--and devote but three words
to my subsequent relations with Ambient.  They lasted five years--
till his death--and were full of interest, of satisfaction and, I may
add, of sadness.  The main thing to be said of these years is that I
had a secret from him which I guarded to the end.  I believe he never
suspected it, though of this I'm not absolutely sure.  If he had so
much as an inkling the line he had taken, the line of absolute
negation of the matter to himself, shows an immense effort of the
will.  I may at last lay bare my secret, giving it for what it is
worth; now that the main sufferer has gone, that he has begun to be
alluded to as one of the famous early dead and that his wife has
ceased to survive him; now, too, that Miss Ambient, whom I also saw
at intervals during the time that followed, has, with her
embroideries and her attitudes, her necromantic glances and strange
intuitions, retired to a Sisterhood, where, as I am told, she is
deeply immured and quite lost to the world.

Mark came in to breakfast after this lady and I had for some time
been seated there.  He shook hands with me in silence, kissed my
companion, opened his letters and newspapers and pretended to drink
his coffee.  But I took these movements for mechanical and was little
surprised when he suddenly pushed away everything that was before him
and, with his head in his hands and his elbows on the table, sat
staring strangely at the cloth.

"What's the matter, caro fratello mio?" Miss Ambient quavered,
peeping from behind the urn.

He answered nothing, but got up with a certain violence and strode to
the window.  We rose to our feet, his relative and I, by a common
impulse, exchanging a glance of some alarm; and he continued to stare
into the garden.  "In heaven's name what has got possession of
Beatrice?" he cried at last, turning round on us a ravaged face.  He
looked from one of us to the other--the appeal was addressed to us
alike.

Miss Ambient gave a shrug.  "My poor Mark, Beatrice is always--
Beatrice!"

"She has locked herself up with the boy--bolted and barred the door.
She refuses to let me come near him!" he went on.

"She refused to let Mackintosh see him an hour ago!" Miss Ambient
promptly returned.

"Refused to let Mackintosh see him?  By heaven I'll smash in the
door!"  And Mark brought his fist down upon the sideboard, which he
had now approached, so that all the breakfast-service rang.

I begged Miss Ambient to go up and try to have speech of her sister-
in-law, and I drew Mark out into the garden.  "You're exceedingly
nervous, and Mrs. Ambient's probably right," I there undertook to
plead.  "Women know; women should be supreme in such a situation.
Trust a mother--a devoted mother, my dear friend!"  With such words
as these I tried to soothe and comfort him, and, marvellous to
relate, I succeeded, with the help of many cigarettes, in making him
walk about the garden and talk, or suffer me at least to do so, for
near an hour.  When about that time had elapsed his sister
reappeared, reaching us rapidly and with a convulsed face while she
held her hand to her heart.

"Go for the Doctor, Mark--go for the Doctor this moment!"

"Is he dying?  Has she killed him?" my poor friend cried, flinging
away his cigarette.

"I don't know what she has done!  But she's frightened, and now she
wants the Doctor."

"He told me he'd be hanged if he came back!"  I felt myself obliged
to mention.

"Precisely--therefore Mark himself must go for him, and not a
messenger.  You must see him and tell him it's to save your child.
The trap has been ordered--it's ready."

"To save him?  I'll save him, please God!" Ambient cried, bounding
with his great strides across the lawn.

As soon as he had gone I felt I ought to have volunteered in his
place, and I said as much to Miss Ambient; but she checked me by
grasping my arm while we heard the wheels of the dog-cart rattle away
from the gate.  "He's off--he's off--and now I can think!  To get him
away--while I think--while I think!"

"While you think of what, Miss Ambient?"

"Of the unspeakable thing that has happened under this roof!"

Her manner was habitually that of such a prophetess of ill that I at
first allowed for some great extravagance.  But I looked at her hard,
and the next thing felt myself turn white.  "Dolcino IS dying then--
he's dead?"

"It's too late to save him.  His mother has let him die!  I tell you
that because you're sympathetic, because you've imagination," Miss
Ambient was good enough to add, interrupting my expression of horror.
"That's why you had the idea of making her read Mark's new book!"

"What has that to do with it?  I don't understand you.  Your
accusation's monstrous."

"I see it all--I'm not stupid," she went on, heedless of my emphasis.
"It was the book that finished her--it was that decided her!"

"Decided her?  Do you mean she has murdered her child?" I demanded,
trembling at my own words.

"She sacrificed him; she determined to do nothing to make him live.
Why else did she lock herself in, why else did she turn away the
Doctor?  The book gave her a horror; she determined to rescue him--to
prevent him from ever being touched.  He had a crisis at two o'clock
in the morning.  I know that from the nurse, who had left her then,
but whom, for a short time, she called back.  The darling got munch
worse, but she insisted on the nurse's going back to bed, and after
that she was alone with him for hours."

I listened with a dread that stayed my credence, while she stood
there with her tearless glare.  "Do you pretend then she has no pity,
that she's cruel and insane?"

"She held him in her arms, she pressed him to her breast, not to see
him; but she gave him no remedies; she did nothing the Doctor
ordered.  Everything's there untouched.  She has had the honesty not
even to throw the drugs away!"

I dropped upon the nearest bench, overcome with my dismay--quite as
much at Miss Ambient's horrible insistence and distinctness as at the
monstrous meaning of her words.  Yet they came amazingly straight,
and if they did have a sense I saw myself too woefully figure in it.
Had I been then a proximate cause-- ?  "You're a very strange woman
and you say incredible things," I could only reply.

She had one of her tragic headshakes.  "You think it necessary to
protest, but you're really quite ready to believe me.  You've
received an impression of my sister-in-law--you've guessed of what
she's capable."

I don't feel bound to say what concession on this score I made to
Miss Ambient, who went on to relate to me that within the last half-
hour Beatrice had had a revulsion, that she was tremendously
frightened at what she had done; that her fright itself betrayed her;
and that she would now give heaven and earth to save the child.  "Let
us hope she will!" I said, looking at my watch and trying to time
poor Ambient; whereupon my companion repeated all portentously

"Let us hope so!"  When I asked her if she herself could do nothing,
and whether she oughtn't to be with her sister-in-law, she replied:
"You had better go and judge!  She's like a wounded tigress!"

I never saw Mrs. Ambient till six months after this, and therefore
can't pretend to have verified the comparison.  At the latter period
she was again the type of the perfect lady.  "She'll treat him better
after this," I remember her sister-in-law's saying in response to
some quick outburst, on my part, of compassion for her brother.
Though I had been in the house but thirty-six hours this young lady
had treated me with extraordinary confidence, and there was therefore
a certain demand I might, as such an intimate, make of her.  I
extracted from her a pledge that she'd never say to her brother what
she had just said to me, that she'd let him form his own theory of
his wife's conduct.  She agreed with me that there was misery enough
in the house without her contributing a new anguish, and that Mrs.
Ambient's proceedings might be explained, to her husband's mind, by
the extravagance of a jealous devotion.  Poor Mark came back with the
Doctor much sooner than we could have hoped, but we knew five minutes
afterwards that it was all too late.  His sole, his adored little son
was more exquisitely beautiful in death than he had been in life.
Mrs. Ambient's grief was frantic; she lost her head and said strange
things.  As for Mark's--but I won't speak of that.  Basta, basta, as
he used to say.  Miss Ambient kept her secret--I've already had
occasion to say that she had her good points--but it rankled in her
conscience like a guilty participation and, I imagine, had something
to do with her ultimately retiring from the world.  And, apropos of
consciences, the reader is now in a position to judge of my
compunction for my effort to convert my cold hostess.  I ought to
mention that the death of her child in some degree converted her.
When the new book came out (it was long delayed) she read it over as
a whole, and her husband told me that during the few supreme weeks
before her death--she failed rapidly after losing her son, sank into
a consumption and faded away at Mentone--she even dipped into the
black "Beltraffio."











This etext was scanned by JC Byers
(http://www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and proofread by
JC Byers, Diane Doerfler, Denis Barnden, and Robert Sinton.






                          SUPPLEMENTAL
                             NIGHTS
                  To The Book Of The Thousand
                   And One Nights With Notes
                      Anthropological And
                          Explanatory

                               By
                       Richard F. Burton

                           VOLUME ONE
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club



                  General Studholme J. Hodgson

My Dear General,

     To whom with more pleasure or propriety can I inscribe this
volume than to my preceptor of past times; my dear old friend,
whose deep study and vast experience of such light literature as
The Nights made me so often resort to him for good counsel and
right direction?  Accept this little token of gratitude, and
believe me, with the best of wishes and the kindest of memories,

                    Ever your sincere and attached
                    Richard F. Burton.

London, July 15, 1886.





"To the pure all things are pure"
           (Puris omnia pura)
                       -Arab Proverb.

"Niuna corrotta mente intese mai sanamente parole."
                       -"Decameron" -conclusion.

"Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
     sed coram Bruto.  Brute! recede, leget."
          -Martial.

"Mieulx est de ris que de larmes escripre,
     Pour ce que rire est le propre des hommes."
          -Rabelais.

"The pleasure we derive from perusing the Thousand-and-One
Stories makes us regret that we possess only a comparatively
small part of these truly enchanting fictions."
          -Crichton's "History of Arabia."






                Contents of the Eleventh Volume.



1.   The Sleeper and the Waker
          Story of the Larrikin and the Cook
2.   The Caliph Omar Bin Abd Al-Aziz and the Poets
3.   Al-Hajjaj and the Three Young Men
4.   Harun Al-Rashid and the Woman of the Barmecides
5.   The Ten Wazirs; or the History of King Azadbakht and His Son
     a.   Of the Uselessness of Endeavour Against Persistent Ill
          Fortune
          aa.  Story of the Merchant Who Lost His Luck
     b.   Of Looking To the Ends of Affairs
          bb.  Tale of the Merchant and His Sons
     c.   Of the Advantages of Patience
          cc.  Story of Abu Sabir
     d.   Of the Ill Effects of Impatience
          dd.  Story of Prince Bihzad
     e.   Of the Issues of Good and Evil Actions
          ee.  Story of King Dadbin and His Wazirs
     f.   Of Trust in Allah
          ff.  Story of King Bakhtzaman
     g.   Of Clemency
          gg.  Story of King Bihkard
     h.   Of Envy and Malice
          hh.  Story of Aylan Shah and Abu Tammam
     i.   Of Destiny or That Which Is Written On the Forehead
          ii.  Story of King Ibrahim and His Son
     j.   Of the Appointed Term, Which, if it be Advanced, May
          Not Be Deferred, and if it be Deferred, May Not Be
          Advanced
          jj.  Story of King Sulayman Shah and His Niece
     k.   Of the Speedy Relief of Allah
          kk.  Story of the Prisoner and How Allah Gave Him
Relief
6.   Ja'afar Bin Yahya and Abd Al-Malik Bin Salih the Abbaside
7.   Al-Rashid and the Barmecides
8.   Ibn Al-Sammak and Al-Rashid
9.   Al-Maamum and Zubaydah
10.  Al-Nu'uman and the Arab of the Banu Tay
11.  Firuz and His Wife
12.  King Shah Bakht and his Wazir Al-Rahwan
     a.   Tale of the Man of Khorasan, His Son and His Tutor
     b.   Tale of the Singer and the Druggist
     c.   Tale of the King Who Kenned the Quintessence of Things
     d.   Tale of the Richard Who Married His Beautiful Daughter
to the Poor Old Man
     e.   Tale of the Sage and His Three Sons
     f.   Tale of the Prince who Fell in Love With the Picture
     g.   Tale of the Fuller and His Wife and the Trooper
     h.   Tale of the Merchant, The Crone, and the King
     i.   Tale of the Simpleton Husband
     j.   Tale of the Unjust King and the Tither
          ja.  Story of David and Solomon
     k.   Tale of the Robber and the Woman
     l.   Tale of the Three Men and Our Lord Isa
          la.  The Disciple's Story
     m.   Tale of the Dethroned Ruler Whose Reign and Wealth Were
Restored to Him
     n.   Talk of the Man Whose Caution Slew Him
     o.   Tale of the Man Who Was Lavish of His House and His
          Provision to One Whom He Knew Not
     p.   Tale of the Melancholist and the Sharper
     q.   Tale of Khalbas and his Wife and the Learned Man
     r.   Tale of the Devotee Accused of Lewdness
     s.   Tale of the Hireling and the Girl
     t.   Tale of the Weaver Who Became a Leach by Order of His
Wife
     u.   Tale of the Two Sharpers Who Each Cozened His Compeer
     v.   Tale of the Sharpers With the Shroff and the Ass
     w.   Tale of the Chear and the Merchants
          wa.  Story of the Falcon and the Locust
     x.   Tale of the King and His Chamberlain's Wife
          xa.  Story of the Crone and the Draper's Wife
     y.   Tale of the Ugly Man and His Beautifule Wife
     z.   Tale of the King Who Lost Kingdom and Wife and Wealth
          and Allah Restored Them to Him
     aa.  Tale of Salim the Youth of Khorasan and Salma, His
Sister
     bb.  Tale of the King of Hind and His Wazir
Shahrazad and Shahryar




                   The Translator's Foreword.



After offering my cordial thanks to friends and subscribers who
have honoured "The Thousand Nights and a Night" (Kama Shastra
Society) with their patronage and approbation, I would inform
them that my "Anthropological Notes" are by no means exhausted,
and that I can produce a complete work only by means of a
somewhat extensive Supplement.  I therefore propose to print (not
publish), for private circulation only, five volumes, bearing the
title-

                      Supplemental Nights
                         to the book of
                The Thousand Nights and a Night

This volume and its successor (Nos. i. and ii.) contain Mr. John
Payne's Tales from the Arabic; his three tomes being included in
my two.  The stories are taken from the Breslau Edition where
they are distributed among the volumes between Nos. iv and xii.,
and from the Calcutta fragment of 1814.  I can say little for the
style of the story-stuff contained in this Breslau text, which
has been edited with phenomenal incuriousness.  Many parts are
hopelessly corrupted, whilst at present we have no means of
amending the commissions and of supplying the omissions by
comparison with other manuscripts.  The Arabic is not only
faulty, but dry and jejune, comparing badly with that of the
"Thousand Nights and a Night," as it appears in the Macnaghten
and the abridged Bulak Texts.  Sundry of the tales are futile;
the majority has little to recommend it, and not a few require a
diviner rather than a translator.  Yet they are valuable to
students as showing the different sources and the heterogeneous
materials from and of which the great Saga-book has been
compounded.  Some are, moreover, striking and novel, especially
parts of the series entitled King Shah Bakht and his Wazir Al-
Rahwan (pp. 191-355).  Interesting also is the Tale of the "Ten
Wazirs" (pp. 55-155), marking the transition of the Persian
Bakhtiyar-Nameh into Arabic.  In this text also and in this only
is found Galland's popular tale "Abou-Hassan; or, the Sleeper
Awakened," which I have entitled "The Sleeper and the Waker."

In the ten volumes of "The Nights" proper, I mostly avoided
parallels of folk-lore and fabliaux which, however interesting
and valuable to scholars, would have over-swollen the bulk of a
work especially devoted to Anthropology.  In the "Supplementals,"
however, it is otherwise; and, as Mr. W.A. Clouston, the
"Storiologist," has obligingly agreed to collaborate with me, I
shall pay marked attention to this subject, which will thus form
another raison d'ete for the additional volumes.

Richard F. Burton

Junior Travellers' Club,
December 1, 1886






                      Supplemental Nights

                       To The Book Of The

                  Thousand Nights And A Night






                The Sleeper and the Waker.[FN#1]




It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there was once at
Baghdad, in the Caliphate of Harun al-Rashid, a man and a
merchant, who had a son Abu al-Hasan-al-Khali'a by name.[FN#2]
The merchant died leaving great store of wealth to his heir who
divided it into two equal parts, whereof he laid up one and spent
of the other half; and he fell to companying with Persians[FN#3]
and with the sons of the merchants and he gave himself up to good
drinking and good eating, till all the wealth[FN#4] he had with
him was wasted and wantoned; whereupon he betook himself to his
friends and comrades and cup-companions and expounded to them his
case, discovering to them the failure of that which was in his
hand of wealth.  But not one of them took heed of him or even
deigned answer him.  So he returned to his mother (and indeed his
spirit was broken) and related to her that which had happened to
him and what had befallen him from his friends, how they had
neither shared with him nor required him with speech.  Quoth she,
"O Abu al-Hasan, on this wise are the sons[FN#5] of this time: an
thou have aught, they draw thee near to them,[FN#6] and if thou
have naught, they put thee away from them."  And she went on to
condole with him, what while he bewailed himself and his tears
flowed and he repeated these lines:--

"An wane my wealth, no mane will succour me, * When my wealth
     waxeth all men friendly show:
How many a friend, for wealth showed friendliness * Who, when my
     wealth departed, turned to foe!"

Then he sprang up and going to the place wherein was the other
half of his good, took it and lived with it well; and he sware
that he would never again consort with a single one of those he
had known, but would company only with the stranger nor entertain
even him but one night and that, when it morrowed, he would never
know him more.  Accordingly he fell to sitting every eventide on
the bridge over Tigris and looking at each one who passed by him;
and if he saw him to be a stranger, he made friends with him and
caroused with him all night till morning.  Then he dismissed him
and would never more salute him with the Salam nor ever more drew
near unto him neither invited him again.  Thus he continued to do
for the space of a full year, till, one day, while he sat on the
bridge, as was his wont, expecting who should come to him so he
might take him and pass the night with him, behold, up came the
Caliph and Masrur, the Sworder of his vengeance[FN#7] disguised
in merchants dress, according to their custom.  So Abu al-Hasan
looked at them and rising, because he knew them not, asked them,
"What say ye?  Will ye go with me to my dwelling-place, so ye may
eat what is ready and drink what is at hand, to wit, platter-
bread[FN#8] and meat cooked and wine strained?"  The Caliph
refused this, but he conjured him and said to him, "Allah upon
thee, O my lord, go with me, for thou art my guest this night,
and baulk not my hopes of thee!"  And he ceased not to press him
till he consented; whereat Abu al-Hasan rejoiced and walking on
before him, gave not over talking with him till they came to his
house and he carried the Caliph into the saloon.  Al-Rashid
entered a hall such as an thou sawest it and gazedst upon its
walls, thou hadst beheld marvels; and hadst thou looked narrowly
at its water-conduits thou would have seen a fountain cased with
gold.  The Caliph made his man abide at the door; and, as soon as
he was seated, the host brought him that eating might be grateful
to him.  Then he removed the tray and they washed their hands and
the Commander of the Faithful sat down again; whereupon Abu al-
Hasan set on the drinking vessels and seating himself by his
side, fell to filling and giving him to drink[FN#9] and
entertaining him with discourse.  And when they had drunk their
sufficiency the host called for a slave-girl like a branch of Ban
who took a lute and sang to it these two couplets:--

"O thou aye dwelling in my heart, * Whileas thy form is far from
     sight,
Thou art my sprite my me unseen, * Yet nearest near art thou, my
     sprite."

His hospitality pleased the Caliph and the goodliness of his
manners, and he said to him, O youth, who art thou?  Make me
acquainted with thyself, so I may requite thee thy kindness."
But Abu al-Hasan smiled and said, "O my lord, far be it, alas!
that what is past should again come to pass and that I company
with thee at other time than this time!"  The Prince of True
Believers asked, "Why so? and why wilt thou not acquaint me with
thy case?" and Abu al-Hasan answered, "Know, O my lord, that my
story is strange and that there is a cause for this affair."
Quoth Al-Rashid, "And what is the cause?" and quoth he, "The
cause hath a tail."  The Caliph[FN#10] laughed at his words and
Abu al-Hasan said, "I will explain to thee this saying by the
tale of the Larrikin and the Cook.  So hear thou, O my lord."


Story of the Larrikin[FN#11] and the Cook

One of the ne'er-do-wells found himself one fine morning without
aught and the world was straightened upon him and patience failed
him; so he lay down to sleep and ceased not slumbering till the
sun stang him and the foam came out upon his mouth, whereupon he
arose, and he was penniless and had not even so much as a single
dirham.  Presently he arrived at the shop of a Cook, who had set
his pots and pans over the fire and washed his saucers and wiped
his scales and swept his shop and sprinkled it; and indeed his
fats and oils were clear and clarified and his spices fragrant
and he himself stood behind his cooking pots ready to serve
customers.  So the Larrikin, whose wits had been sharpened by
hunger, went in to him and saluting him, said to him, "Weigh me
half a dirham's worth of meat and a quarter of a dirham's worth
of boiled grain[FN#12] and the like of bread."  So the Kitchener
weighed it out to him and the good-for-naught entered the shop,
whereupon the man set the food before him and he ate till he had
gobbled up the whole and licked the saucers and sat perplexed,
knowing not how he should do with the Cook concerning the price
of that he had eaten, and turning his eyes about upon everything
in the shop; and as he looked, behold, he caught sight of an
earthen pan lying arsy-versy upon its mouth; so he raised it from
the ground and found under it a horse's tail, freshly cut off and
the blood oozing from it; whereby he knew that the Cook
adulterated his meat with horseflesh.  When he discovered this
default, he rejoiced therein and washing his hands, bowed his
head and went out; and when the Kitchener saw that he went and
gave him naught, he cried out, saying, "Stay, O pest, O burglar!"
So the Larrikin stopped and said to him, "Dost thou cry out upon
me and call to me with these words, O cornute?"  Whereat the Cook
was angry and coming down from the shop, cried, "What meanest
thou by thy speech, O low fellow, thou that devourest meat and
millet and bread and kitchen and goest forth with 'the
Peace[FN#13] be on thee!' as it were the thing had not been, and
payest down naught for it?"  Quoth the Lackpenny, "Thou liest, O
accursed son of a cuckold!"  Whereupon the Cook cried out and
laying hold of his debtor's collar, said, "O Moslems, this fellow
is my first customer[FN#14] this day and he hath eaten my food
and given me naught."  So the folk gathered about them and blamed
the Ne'er-do-well and said to him, "Give him the price of that
which thou hast eaten."  Quoth he, "I gave him a dirham before I
entered the shop;" and quoth the Cook, "Be everything I sell this
day forbidden to me, if he gave me so much as the name of a coin!
By Allah, he gave me naught but ate my food and went out and
would have made off, without aught said."  Answered the Larrikin,
"I gave thee a dirham," and he reviled the Kitchener, who
returned his abuse; whereupon he dealt him a buffet and they
gripped and grappled and throttled each other.  When the folk saw
them fighting, they came up to them and asked them, "What is this
strife between you and no cause for it?" and the Lackpenny
answered, "Ay, by Allah, but there is a cause for  it, and the
cause hath a tail!"  Whereupon, cried the Cook, "Yea, by Allah,
now thou mindest me of thyself and thy dirham!  Yes, he gave me a
dirham and but a quarter of the coin is spent.  Come back and
take the rest of the price of thy dirham."  For he understood
what was to do, at the mention of the tail; "and I, O my brother"
(added Abu al-Hasan), "my story hath a cause, which I will tell
thee."  The Caliph laughed at his speech and said, "By Allah,
this is none other than a pleasant tale!  Tell me thy story and
the cause."  Replied the host, "With love and goodly gree!  Know,
O my lord, that my name is Abu al-Hasan al-Khali'a and that my
father died and left me abundant wealth of which I made two
parts.  One I laid up and with the other I betook myself to
enjoying the pleasures of friendship and conviviality and
consorting with intimates and boon-companions and with the sons
of the merchants, nor did I leave one but I caroused with him and
he with me, and I lavished all my money on comrades and good
cheer, till there remained with me naught;[FN#15] whereupon I
betook myself to the friends and fellow-topers upon whom I had
wasted my wealth, so perhaps they might provide for my case; but,
when I visited them and went round about to them all, I found no
vantage in one of them, nor would any so much as break a bittock
of bread in my face.  So I wept for myself and repairing to my
mother, complained to her of my case.  Quoth she:--'Such are
friends; an thou have aught, they frequent thee and devour thee,
but, an thou have naught, they cast thee off and chase thee
away.'  then I brought out the other half of my money and bound
myself to an oath that I would never entertain any save one
single night, after which I would never again salute him nor
notice him; hence my saying to thee:--'Far be it, alas! that what
is past should again come to pass, for I will never again company
with thee after this night.'"  when the Commander of the Faithful
heard this, he laughed a loud laugh and said, "By Allah, O my
brother, thou art indeed excused in this matter, now that I know
the cause and that the cause hath a tail.  Nevertheless,
Inshallah, I will not sever myself from thee."  replied Abu al-
Hasan, "O my guest, did I not say to thee, 'Far be it, alas! that
what is past should again come to pass?  For indeed I will never
again foregather with any!'"  then the Caliph rose and the host
set before him a dish of roast goose and a bannock of first-
bread[FN#16] and sitting down, fell to cutting off morsels and
morselling the Caliph therewith.  They gave not over eating till
they were filled, when Abu al-Hasan brought basin and ewer and
potash[FN#17] and they washed their hands.  Then he lighted three
wax-candles and three lamps, and spreading the drinking-cloth,
brought strained wine, clear, old and fragrant, whose scent was
as that of virgin musk.  He filled the first cup and saying, "O
my boon-companion, be ceremony laid aside between us by thy
leave!  Thy slave is by thee; may I not be afflicted with thy
loss!" drank it off and filled a second cup, which he handed to
the Caliph with due reverence.  His fashion pleased the Commander
of the Faithful, and the goodliness of his speech and he said to
himself, "By Allah, I will assuredly requite him for this!"  Then
Abu al-Hasan filled the cup again and handed it to the Caliph,
reciting these two couplets:[FN#18]--

"Had we thy coming known, we would for sacrifice * Have poured
     thee out heart's blood or blackness of the eyes;
Ay, and we would have spread our bosoms in thy way, * That so thy
     feet might fare on eyelids, carpet-wise."

When the Caliph heard his verses, he took the cup from his hand
and kissed it and drank it off and returned it to Abu al-Hasan,
who make him an obeisance and filled it and drank.  Then he
filled again and kissing the cup thrice, recited these lines:--

"Your presence honoureth the base, * And we confess the deed of
     grace;
An you absent yourself from us, * No freke we find to fill your
     place."

Then he gave the cup to the Caliph, saying, "Drink it in health
and soundness!  It doeth away malady and bringeth remedy and
setteth the runnels of health to flow free."  So they ceased not
carousing and conversing till middle-night, when the Caliph said
to his host, "O my brother, hast thou in they heart a
concupiscence thou wouldst have accomplished or a contingency
thou wouldst avert?"  said he, "By Allah, there is no regret in
my heart save that I am not empowered with bidding and
forbidding, so I might manage what is in my mind!"  Quoth the
Commander of the Faithful, "By Allah, and again by Allah,[FN#19]
O my brother, tell me what is in thy mind!"  and quoth Abu al-
Hasan, "Would Heaven I might be Caliph for one day and avenge
myself on my neighbors, for that in my vicinity is a mosque and
therein four shaykhs, who hold it a grievance when there cometh a
guest to my, and they trouble me with talk and worry me in words
and menace me that they will complain of me to the Prince of True
Believers, and indeed they oppress me exceedingly, and I crave of
Allah the Most High power for one day, that I may beat each and
every of them with four hundred lashes, as well as the Imam of
the mosque, and parade them round about the city of Baghdad and
bid cry before them: 'This is the reward and the lest of the
reward for whoso exceedeth in talk and vexeth the folk and
turneth their joy to annoy.'  This is what I wish, and no more."
Said the Caliph, "Allah grant thee that thou seekest!  Let us
crack one last cup and rise ere the dawn draw near, and to-morrow
night I will be with thee again."  Said Abu al-Hasan, "Far be
it!"  Then the Caliph crowned a cup, and putting therein a piece
of Cretan Bhang,[FN#20] gave it to his host and said to him, "My
life on thee, O my brother, drink this cup from my hand!" and Abu
al-Hasan answered, "Ay, by thy life, I will drink it from thy
hand."  So he took it and drank it off; but hardly had it settled
in his stomach, when his head forewent his heels and he fell to
the ground like one slain; whereupon the Caliph went out and said
to his slave Masrur, "Go in to yonder young man, the house
master, and take him up and bring him to me at the palace; and
when thou goest, shut the door."  So saying, he went away, whilst
Masrur entered, and taking up Abu al-Hasan, shut the door behind
him, and made after his master, till he reached with him the
palace what while the night drew to an end and the cocks began
crowing,[FN#21] and set him down before the Commander of the
Faithful, who laughed at him.[FN#22]  then he sent for Ja'afar
the Barmecide and when he came before him, said to him, "Note
thou yonder young man" (pointing to Abu al-Hasan), "and when thou
shalt see him to-morrow seated in my place of estate and on the
throne[FN#23] of my Caliphate and clad in my royal clothing,
stand thou in attendance upon him and enjoin the Emirs and
Grandees and the folk of my household and the officers of my
realm to be upon their feet, as in his service and obey him in
whatso he shall bid them do; and thou, if he speak to thee of
aught, do it and hearken unto his say and gainsay him not in
anything during this coming day."  Ja'afar acknowledged the order
with "Hearkening and obedience" and withdrew, whilst the Prince
of True Believers went in to the palace women, who came up to
him, and he said to them, "When this sleeper shall awake to-
morrow, kiss ye the ground between his hands, and do ye wait upon
him and gather round about him and clothe him in the royal
clothing and serve him with the service of the Caliphate and deny
not aught of his estate, but say to him, 'Thou art the Caliph.'"
Then he taught them what they should say to him and how they
should do with him and withdrawing to a retired room,[FN#24] let
down a curtain before himself and slept.  Thus fared it with the
Caliph; but as regards Abu al-Hasan, he gave not over snoring in
his sleep till the day brake clear, and the rising of the sun
drew near, when a woman in waiting came up to him and said to
him, "O our lord, the morning prayer!"  hearing these words he
laughed and opening his eyes, turned them about the palace and
found himself in an apartment whose walls were painted with gold
and lapis lazuli and its ceiling dotted and starred with red
gold.  Around it were sleeping chambers, with curtains of gold-
embroidered silk let down over their doors, and all about vessels
of gold and porcelain and crystal and furniture and carpets
dispread and lamps burning before the niche wherein men prayed,
and slave-girls and eunuchs and Mamelukes and black slaves and
boys and pages and attendants.  When he saw this he was
bewildered in his wit and said, "By Allah, either I am dreaming a
dream, or this is Paradise and the Abode of Peace!"[FN#25]  And
he shut his eyes and would have slept again.  Quoth one of the
eunuchs, "O my lord, this is not of thy wont, O Commander of the
Faithful!"  then the rest of the handmaids of the palace came up
to him and lifted him into a sitting posture, when he found
himself upon a mattrass raised a cubit's height from the ground
and all stuffed with floss silk.  So they seated him upon it and
propped his elbow with a pillow, and he looked at the apartment
and its vastness and saw those eunuchs and slave-girls in
attendance upon him and standing about his head, whereupon he
laughed at himself and said, "By Allah, 'tis not as I were on
wake, yet I am not asleep!  And in his perplexity he bowed his
chin upon his bosom and then opened his eyes, little by little,
smiling and saying, "What is this state wherein I find myself?"
then he arose and sat up, whilst the damsels laughed at him
privily; and he was bewildered in his wit, and bit his finger;
and as the bite pained him, he cried, "Oh!" and was vexed; and
the Caliph watched him, whence he saw him not, and laughed.
Presently Abu al-Hasan turned to a damsel and called to her;
whereupon she answered, "At thy service, O Prince of True
Believers!"  Quoth he, "what is thy name?" and quoth she,
"Shajarat al-Durr."[FN#26]  then he said to her, "By the
protection of Allah, O damsel, am I Commander of the Faithful?"
She replied, "Yes, indeed, by the protection of Allah thou in
this time art Commander of the Faithful."  quoth he, "By Allah,
thou liest, O thousandfold whore!"[FN#27]  Then he glanced at the
Chief Eunuch and called to him, whereupon he came to him and
kissing the ground before him, said, "Yes, O Commander of the
Faithful."  Asked Abu al-Hasan, "Who is Commander of the
Faithful?" and the Eunuch answered "Thou."  And Abu al-Hasan
said, "Thou liest, thousandfold he-whore that thou art!"  then he
turned to another eunuch and said to him, "O my chief,[FN#28] by
the protection of Allah, am I Prince of the True Believers?"
Said he, "Ay, by Allah, O my lord, thou art in this time
Commander of the Faithful and Viceregent of the Lord of the three
Worlds."  Abu al-Hasan laughed at himself and doubted of his
reason and was bewildered at what he beheld, and said, "In one
night do I become Caliph?  Yesterday I was Abu al-Hasan the Wag,
and to-day I am Commander of the Faithful."  then the Chief
Eunuch came up to him and said, "O Prince of True Believers (the
name of Allah encompass thee!), thou art indeed Commander of the
Faithful and Viceregent of the Lord of the three Worlds!"  and
the slave-girls and eunuchs flocked round about him, till he
arose and abode wondering at his case.  Hereupon the Eunuch
brought him a pair of sandals wrought with raw silk and green
silk and purfled with red gold, and he took them and after
examining them set them in his sleeve; whereat the Castrato cried
out and said, "Allah! Allah! O my lord, these are sandals for the
treading of thy feet, so thou mayst wend to the wardrobe."  Abu
al-Hasan was confounded, and shaking the sandals from his sleeve,
put them on his feet, whilst the Caliph died[FN#29] of laughter
at him.  The slave forewent him to the chapel of ease, where he
entered and doing his job,[FN#30] came out into the chamber,
whereupon the slave-girls brought him a basin of gold and a ewer
of silver and poured water on his hands[FN#31] and he made the
Wuzu-ablution.  Then they spread him a prayer-carpet and he
prayed.  Now he knew not how to pray[FN#32] and gave not over
bowing and prostrating for twenty inclinations,[FN#33] pondering
in himself the while and saying, "By Allah, I am none other than
the Commander of the Faithful in very truth!  This is assuredly
no dream, for all these things happen not in a dream."  And he
was convinced and determined in himself that he was Prince of
True Believers, so he pronounced the Salam[FN#34] and finished
his prayers; whereupon te Mamelukes and slave-girls came round
about him with bundled suits of silken and linen stuffs and clad
him in the costume of the Caliphate and gave the royal dagger in
his hand.  Then the Chief Eunuch came in and said, "O Prince of
True Believers, the Chamberlain is at the door craving permission
to enter."  Said he, "Let him enter!" whereupon he came in and
after kissing ground offered the salutation, "Peace be upon thee,
O Commander of the Faithful!"  at this Abu al-Hasan rose and
descended from the couch to the floor; whereupon the official
exclaimed, "Allah! Allah! O Prince of True Believers, wottest
thou not that all men are thy lieges and under thy rule and that
it is not meet for the Caliph to rise to any man?"  Presently the
Eunuch went out before him and the little white slaves behind
him, and they ceased not going till they raised the curtain and
brought him into the hall of judgment and the throne-room of the
Caliphate.  There he saw the curtains and the forty doors and Al-
'Ijli and  Al-Rakashi the poet, and 'Ibdan and Jadim and Abu
Ishak[FN#35] the cup-companion and beheld swords drawn and the
lions[FN#36] compassing the throne as the white of the eye
encircleth the black, and gilded glaives and death-dealing bows
and Ajams and Arabs and Turks and Daylamites and folk and peoples
and Emirs and Wazirs and Captains and Grandees and Lords of the
land and men of war in band, and in very sooth there appeared the
might of the house of Abbas[FN#37] and the majesty of the
Prophet's family.  So he sat down upon the throne of the
Caliphate and set the dagger[FN#38] on his lap, whereupon all
present came up to kiss ground between his hands and called down
on him length of life and continuance of weal.  Then came forward
Ja'afar the Barmecide and kissing the ground, said, "Be the wide
world of Allah the treading of thy feet and may Paradise be thy
dwelling-place and the Fire the home of thy foes!  Never may
neighbor defy thee nor the lights of fire die out for
thee,[FN#39] O Caliph of all cities and ruler of all countries!"
Therewith Abu al-Hasan cried out at him and said, "O dog of the
sons of Barmak, go down forthright, thou and the chief of the
city police, to such a place in such a street and deliver an
hundred dinars of gold to the mother of Abu al-Hasan the Wag and
bear her my salutations.  Then, go to such a mosque and take the
four Shaykhs and the Imam and scourge each of them with a
thousand[FN#40] lashes and mount them on beasts, face to tail,
and parade them round all the city and banish them to a place
other than this city; and bid the crier make cry before them,
saying:  'This is the reward and the least of the reward of whoso
multiplieth words and molesteth his neighbors and damageth their
delights and stinteth their eating and drinking!'"  Ja'afar
received the command and answered, "With obedience"; after which
he went down from before Abu al-Hasan to the city and did all he
had ordered him to do.  Meanwhile, Abu al-Hasan abode in the
Caliphate, taking and giving, bidding and forbidding, and
carrying out  his command till the end of the day, when he gave
leave and permission to withdraw, and the Emirs and Officers of
state departed to their several occupations and he looked towards
the Chamberlain and the rest of the attendants and said,
"Begone!"  Then the Eunuchs came to him and calling down on him
length of life and continuance of weal, walked in attendance upon
him and raised the curtain, and he entered the pavilion of the
Harem, where he found candles lighted and lamps burning and
singing-women smiting on instruments, and ten slave-girls, high-
bosomed maids.  When he saw this, he was confounded in his wit
and said to himself, "By Allah, I am in truth Commander of the
Faithful!" presently adding, "or haply these are of the Jann and
he who was my guest yesternight was one of their kings who saw no
way to requite my favours save by commanding his Ifrits to
address me as Prince of True Believers.  But an these be of the
Jann may Allah deliver me in safety from their mischief!"  As
soon as he appeared, the slave-girls rose to him and carrying him
up on to the dais,[FN#41] brought him a great tray, bespread with
the richest viands.  So he ate thereof with all his might and
main, till he had gotten his fill, when he called one of the
handmaids and said to her, "What is thy name?"  Replied she, "My
name is Miskah,"[FN#42] and he said to another, "What is thy
name?"  Quoth she, "My name is Tarkah."[FN#43]  Then he asked a
third, "What is thy name?" who answered, "My name is
Tohfah;"[FN#44] and he went on to question the damsels of their
names, one after other, till he had learned the ten, when he rose
from that place and removed to the wine-chamber.  He found it
every way complete and saw therein ten great trays, covered with
all fruits and cakes and every sort of sweetmeats.  So he sat
down and ate thereof after the measure of his competency, and
finding there three troops of singing-girls, was amazed and made
the girls eat.  Then he sat and the singers also seated
themselves, whilst the black slaves and the white slaves and the
eunuchs and pages and boys stood, and of the slave-girls some sat
and some stood.  The damsels sang and warbled all varieties of
melodies and the place rang with the sweetness of the songs,
whilst the pipes cried out and the lutes with them wailed, till
it seemed to Abu al-Hasan that he was in Paradise and his heart
was heartened and his breast broadened.  So he sported and
joyance grew on him and he bestowed robes of hon