. Edit.'s form of Shahryár=city-keeper
(like Marzbán, guardian of the Marches), for city-friend. The
learned Weil has preferred it to Shahryár.

[FN#527]  Sic: in the Mac. Edit. "Shahrázád" and here making
nonsense of the word. It is regretable that the king's
reflections do not run at times as in this text: his compunctions
lead well up to the dénoûement.

[FN#528]  The careless text says "couplets." It has occurred in
vol. i. 149: so I quote Torrens (p. 149).

[FN#529]  In the text Salma is made to speak, utterly confusing
the dialogue.

[FN#530]  The well-known Baloch province beginning west of Sind:
the term is supposed to be a corruption of
Máhí-Khorán=Ichthyophagi. The reader who wishes to know more
about it will do well to consult "Unexplored Baluchistan," etc.
(Griffith and Farran, 1882), the excellent work of my friend Mr.
Ernest A. Floyer, long Chief of the Telegraphic Department,
Cairo.

[FN#531]  Meaning the last city in Makran before entering Sind.
Al-Sharr would be a fancy name, "The Wickedness."

[FN#532]  i.e. think of nothing but his present peril.

[FN#533]  Arab. "Munkati'ah"=lit. "cut off" (from the weal of the
world). See Pilgrimage i. 22.

[FN#534]  The lines are in vol. i. 207 and iv. 189. 1 here quote
Mr. Payne.

[FN#535]  I have another proposal to make.

[FN#536]  i.e. In my heart's core: the figure has often occurred.

[FN#537]  These sudden elevations, so common in the East and not
unknown to the West in the Napoleonic days, explain how the
legend of "Joanna Papissa" (Pope John XIII), who succeeded Leo
IV. in A.D. 855 and was succeeded by Benedict III., found ready
belief amongst the enemies of papacy. She was an English woman
born in Germany who came to Rome and professed theology with
éclat, wherefore the people enthroned her. "Pope Joan" governed
with exemplary wisdom, but during a procession on Rogation Sunday
she was delivered of a fine boy in the street: some make her die
on the spot; others declare that she perished in prison.

[FN#538]  That such things should happen in times of famine is
only natural; but not at other seasons. This abomination on the
part of the butcher is, however, more than once alluded toin The
Nights: see vol. i. 332.

[FN#539]  Opinions differ as to the site of this city, so
celebrated in the mediæval history of Al-Islam: most probably it
stood where Hyderabad of Sind now is. The question has been ably
treated by Sir Henry M. Elliot in his "History of India," edited
from his posthumous papers by Professor Dowson.

[FN#540]  Which, by-the-by, the average Eastern does with even
more difficulty than the average European. For the most part the
charge to secrecy fixes the matter in his mind even when he has
forgotten that it is to be kept secret. Hence the most unpleasant
results.

[FN#541]  Such an act appears impossible, and yet history tells
us of a celebrated Sufi, Khayr al-Nassáj (the Weaver), who being
of dark complexion was stopped on return from his pilgrimage at
Kufah by a stranger that said, "Thou art my negro slave and thy
name is Khayr." He was kept at the loom for years, till at last
the man set him free, and simply said, "Thou wast not my slave"
(Ibn Khall. i. 513).

[FN#542]  These lines have occurred before. I quote Mr. Payne for
variety.

[FN#543]  Arab. "Tasill saliata 'l-Munkat'ín"=lit. "raining on
the drouth-hardened earth of the cut-off." The metaphor is
admissible in the eyes of an Arab who holds water to be the
chiefest of blessings, and makes it synonymous with bounty and
beneficence."

[FN#544]  Possibly this is said in mere fun; but, as Easterns are
practical physiognomists, it may hint the fact that a large nose
in womankind is the sign of a masculine nature.

[FN#545]  Arab. "Zakát wa Sadakat,"=lit. paying of poor rate and
purifying thy property by almsdeeds. See vol. i. 339.

[FN#546]  I have noted (i. 293) that Kamís (     , Chemise,
Cameslia, Camisa) is used in the Hindostani and Bengali dialects.
Like its synonyms prætexta and shift, it has an equivocal meaning
and here probably signifies the dress peculiar to Arab devotees
and devout beggars.

[FN#547]  I omit here and elsewhere the parenthetical formula
"Kála al-Ráwi," etc.=The Story-teller sayeth, reminding the
reader of its significance in a work collected from the mouths of
professional Tale-tellers and intended mainly for their own use.

[FN#548]  The usual sign of emotion, already often mentioned.

[FN#549]  It being no shame to Moslems if a slave become King.

[FN#550]  Arab. "Tarbiyatí," i.e., he was brought up in my house.

[FN#551]  There is no Salic law amongst Moslems; but the Rasm or
custom of AlIslam, established by the succession of the four
first Caliphs, to the prejudice of Ayishah and other masterful
women would be a strong precedent against queenly rule. It is the
reverse with the Hindus who accept a Rani as willingly as a Rajah
and who believe with Europeans that when kings reign women rule,
and vice versa. To the vulgar Moslem feminine government appears
impossible, and I was once asked by an Afghan, "What would happen
if the queen were in childbed?"

[FN#552]  Arab. "Khutbah," the sermon preached from the pulpit
(Mimbar) after the congregational prayers on Friday noon. It is
of two kinds, for which see Lane, M.E., chap. iii. This public
mention of his name and inscribing it upon the newly-minted money
are the special prerogatives of the Moslem king: hence it often
happens that usurpers cause a confusion of Khutbah and coinage.

[FN#553]  For a specimen of which, blowing a man up with bellows,
see Al-Mas'udi, chap. cxxiii.

[FN#554]  i.e. a long time: the idiom has been noted before more
than once.

[FN#555]  i.e. with what he had heard and what he was promised.

[FN#556]  Arab. "Shakhs mafsúd," i.e. an infidel.

[FN#557]  Arab. "Bunúd," plur. of Persian "band"=hypocrisy,
deceit.

[FN#558]  Arab. "Burúj" pl. of Burj. lit.=towers, an astrological
term equivalent to our "houses" or constellations which form the
Zodiacal signs surrounding the heavens as towers gird a city; and
applied also to the 28 lunar Mansions. So in Al-Hariri (Ass. of
Damascus) "I swear by the sky with its towers," the incept of
Koran chapt. lxxxv.; see also chapts. xv. 26 and xxv. 62. "Burj"
is a word with a long history: {Greek} burg, burgh, etc.

[FN#559]  Arab. "Bundukah"=a little bunduk, nut, filbert, pellet,
rule, musket bullet.

[FN#560]  See John Raister's "Booke of the Seven Planets; or,
Seven Wandering Motives," London, 1598.

[FN#561]  i.e. for the king whom I love as my own soul.

[FN#562]  The Bresl. Edit. (xi. 318-21) seems to assume that the
tales were told in the early night before the royal pair slept.
This is no improvement; we prefer to think that the time was
before peep of day when Easterns usally awake and have nothing to
do till the dawn-prayer.

[FN#563]  See vol. ii. 161.

[FN#564]  Arab. Al-Fákhir.  No wonder that the First Hand who
moulded the Man-mud is a lieu commun in Eastern thought.  The Pot
and the Potter began with the old Egyptians.  "Sitting as a
potter at the wheel, god Cneph (in Philæ) moulds clay, and gives
the spirit of life (the Genesitic "breath") to the nostrils of
Osiris."  Then we meet him in the Vedas, the Being, "by whom the
fictile vase is formed; the clay out of which it is fabricated."
We find him next in Jeremiah (xviii. 2) "Arise and go down unto
the Potter's house," etc., and in Romans (ix. 20), "Hath not the
Potter power over the clay?"  He appears in full force in Omar-i-
Khayyám (No. xxxvii.):--

     For I remember stopping by the way
     To watch a Potter thumping his wet Clay:
          An with its all obliterated Tongue
     I murmur'd–"Gently, Brother, gently, pray!"

Lastly the Potter shows in the Kasidah of Hají Abdú al-Yezid
(p.4):--

     "The first of pots the Potter made by Chrysorrhoas' blue-
green wave;
     Methinks I see him smile to see what guerdon to the world he
gave.







This Project Gutenberg Etext was prepared by:
Prof. Patricia C. Franks, Chairperson
Business Information Technologies Department
Lisa Carter, BIT Student
Danette Dulny, BIT Student
Charles Duvall, BIT Student
Cheri Ripley, BIT Student
Cheryl Sullivan, BIT Student
Broome Community College
Front Street
Binghamton, NY 13902
franks_p@mail.sunybroome.edu





Birds and Bees

Sharp Eyes

And Other Papers




By John Burroughs




With An Introduction

By Mary E. Burt


And A Biographical Sketch




CONTENTS



Biographical Sketch

Introduction By Mary E. Burt

Birds

  Bird Enemies

  The Tragedies of the Nests

Bees

  An Idyl of the Honey-Bee

  The Pastoral Bees




BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.



Nature chose the spring of the year for the time of John Burroughs's
birth.  A little before the day when the wake-robin shows itself,
that the observer might be on hand for the sight, he was born in
Roxbury, Delaware County, New York, on the western borders of the
Catskill Mountains; the precise date was April 3, 1837.  Until 1863
he remained in the country about his native place, working on his
father's farm, getting his schooling in the district school and
neighboring academies, and taking his turn also as teacher.  As he
himself has hinted, the originality, freshness, and wholesomeness of
his writings are probably due in great measure to the unliterary
surroundings of his early life, which allowed his mind to form itself
on unconventional lines, and to the later companionships with
unlettered men, which kept him in touch with the sturdy simplicities
of life.

>From the very beginnings of his taste for literature, the essay was his
favorite form.  Dr. Johnson was the prophet of his youth, but he soon
transferred his allegiance to Emerson, who for many years remained his
"master enchanter."  To cure himself of too close an imitation of the
Concord seer, which showed itself in his first magazine article,
Expression, he took to writing his sketches of nature, and about this
time he fell in with the writings of Thoreau, which doubtless confirmed
and encouraged him in this direction.  But of all authors and of all
men, Walt Whitman, in his personality and as a literary force, seems to
have made the profoundest impression upon Mr. Burroughs, though
doubtless Emerson had a greater influence on his style of writing.

Expression appeared in The Atlantic Monthly in 1860, and most of his
contributions to literature have been in the form of papers first
published in the magazines, and afterwards collected into books.
He more than once paid tribute to his teachers in literature.  His
first book, now out of print, was Notes on Walt Whitman, as Poet and
Person, published in 1867; and Whitman: A Study, which appeared in
1896, is a more extended treatment of the man and his poetry and
philosophy.  Birds and Poets, too, contains a paper on Whitman,
entitled The Flight of the Eagle, besides an essay on Emerson, whom he
also treated incidentally in his paper, Matthew Arnold on Emerson and
Carlyle, in Indoor Studies; and the latter volume contains his essay
on Thoreau.

In the autumn of 1863 he went to Washington, and in the following
January entered the Treasury Department.  He was for some years an
assistant in the office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and later
chief of the organization division of that Bureau.  For some time he
was keeper of one of the vaults, and for a great part of the day his
only duty was to be at his desk.  In these leisure hours his mind
traveled off into the country, where his previous life had been spent,
and with the help of his pen, always a faithful friend and magician,
he lived over again those happy days, now happier still with the
glamour of all past pleasures.  In this way he wrote Wake-Robin and
a part of Winter Sunshine.  It must not be supposed, however, that he
was deprived of outdoor pleasures while at Washington.  On the
contrary, he enjoyed many walks in the suburbs of the capital, and in
those days the real country came up to the very edges of the city.
His Spring at the Capital, Winter Sunshine, A March Chronicle, and
other papers bear the fruit of his life on the Potomac.  He went to
England in 1871 on business for the Treasury Department, and again on
his own account a dozen years later.  The record of the two visits is
to be found mainly in his chapters on An October Abroad, contained in
the volume Winter Sunshine, and in the papers gathered into the volume
Fresh Fields.

He resigned his place in the Treasury in 1873, and was appointed
receiver of a broken national bank.  Later, until 1885, his business
occupation was that of a National Bank Examiner.  An article
contributed by him to The Century Magazine for March, 1881, on Broken
Banks and Lax Directors, is perhaps the only literary outcome of this
occupation, but the keen powers of observation, trained in the field of
nature, could not fail to disclose themselves in analyzing columns of
figures.  After leaving Washington Mr. Burroughs bought a fruit farm at
West Park, near Esopus, on the Hudson, and there building his house
from the stones found in his fields, has given himself the best
conditions for that humanizing of nature which constitutes the charm
of his books.  He was married in 1857 to a lady living in the New York
village where he was at the time teaching.  He keeps his country home
the year round, only occasionally visiting New York.  The cultivation
of grapes absorbs the greater part of his time; but he has by no means
given over letters.  His work, which has long found ready acceptance
both at home and abroad, is now passing into that security of fame
which comes from its entrance into the school-life of American
children.

Besides his outdoor sketches and the other papers already mentioned,
Mr. Burroughs has written a number of critical essays on life and
literature, published in Indoor Studies, and other volumes.  He has
a1so taken his readers into his confidence in An Egotistical Chapter,
the final one of his Indoor Studies; and in the Introduction to the
Riverside Edition of his writings he has given us further glimpses of
his private intellectual life.

Probably no other American writer has a greater sympathy with, and a
keener enjoyment of, country life in all its phases--farming, camping,
fishing, walking--than has John Burroughs.  His books are redolent of
the soil, and have such "freshness and primal sweetness," that we need
not be told that the pleasure he gets from his walks and excursions is
by no means over when he steps inside his doors again.  As he tells us
on more than one occasion, he finds he can get much more out of his
outdoor experiences by thinking them over, and writing them out
afterwards.

Numbers 28, 36, and 92 of the Riverside Literature Series consist of
selections from Mr. Burroughs's books.  No. 28, which is entitled
Birds and Bees, is made up of Bird Enemies and The Tragedies of the
Nests from the volume Signs and Seasons, An Idyl of the Honey-Bee from
Pepacton, and The Pastoral Bees from Locusts and Wild Honey.
The Introduction, by Miss Mary E. Burt, gives an account of the use of
Mr. Burroughs's writings in Chicago schools.

In No. 36, Sharp Eyes, and Other Papers, the initial paper, Sharp Eyes,
is drawn from Locusts and Wild Honey, The Apple comes from Winter
Sunshine, A Taste of Maine Birch and Winter Neighbors from Signs and
Seasons, and Notes by the Way (on muskrats, squirrels, foxes, and
woodchucks) from Pepacton.

The collection called A Bunch of Herbs, and Other Papers, forming
No. 92 of the Series, was designed with special reference to what the
author has to say of trees and flowers, and contains A Bunch of Herbs
from Pepacton, Strawberries from Locusts and Wild Honey, A March
Chronicle and Autumn Tides from Winter Sunshine, A Spray of Pine and
A Spring Relish from Signs and Seasons, and English Woods: A Contrast
from Fresh Fields.




INTRODUCTION.



It is seldom that I find a book so far above children that I cannot
share its best thought with them.  So when I first took up one of
John Burroughs's essays, I at once foresaw many a ramble with my pupils
through the enchanted country that is found within its breezy pages.
To read John Burroughs is to live in the woods and fields, and to
associate intimately with all their little timid inhabitants; to learn
that--

   "God made all the creatures and gave them our love and our fear,
    To give sign, we and they are his children, one family here."

When I came to use Pepacton in my class of the sixth grade, I soon
found, not only that the children read better but that they came
rapidly to a better appreciation of the finer bits of literature in
their regular readers, while their interest in their new author grew
quickly to an enthusiasm.  Never was a little brother or sister more
real to them than was "Peggy Mel" as she rushed into the hive laden
with stolen honey, while her neighbors gossiped about it, or the
stately elm that played sly tricks, or the log which proved to be
a good bedfellow because it did not grumble.  Burroughs's way of
investing beasts, birds, insects, and inanimate things with human
motives is very pleasing to children.  They like to trace analogies
between the human and the irrational, to think of a weed as a tramp
stealing rides, of Nature as a tell-tale when taken by surprise.

The quiet enthusiasm of John Burroughs's essays is much healthier than
the over-wrought dramatic action which sets all the nerves a-quiver,
--nerves already stimulated to excess by the comedies and tragedies
forced upon the daily lives of children.  It is especially true of
children living in crowded cities, shut away from the woods and hills,
constant witnesses of the effects of human passion, that they need the
tonic of a quiet literature rather than the stimulant of a stormy or
dramatic one,--a literature which develops gentle feelings, deep
thought, and a relish for what is homely and homespun, rather than
a literature which calls forth excited feelings.

The essays in this volume are those in which my pupils have expressed
an enthusiastic interest, or which, after careful reading, I have
selected for future use.  I have found in them few pages so hard as to
require over much study, or a too frequent use of the dictionary.
John Burroughs, more than almost any other writer of the time, has a
prevailing taste for simple words and simple constructions.  "He that
runs may read" him.  I have found many children under eleven years
of age who could read a whole page without hesitating.  If I discover
some words which I foresee will cause difficulty, I place such on the
blackboard and rapidly pronounce and explain them before the reading.
Generally, however, I find the text the best interpreter of its words.
What follows explains what goes before, if the child is led to read on
to the end of the sentence.  It is a mistake to allow children to be
frightened away from choice reading by an occasional hard word.  There
is no better time than his reading lesson in which to teach a child
that the hard things of life are to be grappled with and overcome.
A mistake also, I think, is that toilsome process of explanation which
I sometimes find teachers following, under the impression that it will
be "parrot work" (as the stock phrase of the "institutes" has it) for
the pupils to read anything which they do not clearly and fully
comprehend.  Teachers' definitions, in such cases, I have often
noticed, are no better than dictionary definitions, and surely
everybody knows that few more fruitless things than dictionary
definitions are ever crammed into the memory of a child.  Better far
give free play to the native intelligence of the child, and trust it to
apprehend, though it may not yet comprehend nor be able to express its
apprehension in definition.  On this subject I am glad to quote so high
an authority as Sir Walter Scott: "Indeed I rather suspect that
children derive impulses of a powerful and important kind from reading
things which they do not comprehend, and therefore that to write down
to children's understanding is a mistake.  Set them on the scent and
let them puzzle it out."

>From time to time I have allowed my pupils to give me written reports
from memory of these essays, and have often found these little
compositions sparkling with pleasing information, or full of that
childlike fun which is characteristic of the author.  I have marked
the errors in these exercises, and have given them back to the children
to rewrite.  Sometimes the second papers show careful correction-and
sometimes the mistakes are partially neglected.  Very often the child
wishes to improve on the first composition, and so adds new blunders
as well as creates new interest.

There is a law of self-preservation in Nature, which takes care of
mistakes.  Every human soul reaches toward the light in the most direct
path open to it, and will correct its own errors as soon as it is
developed far enough.  There is no use in trying to force maturity;
teachers who trouble children beyond all reason, and worry over their
mistakes, are fumbling at the roots of young plants that will grow
if they are let alone long enough.

The average mechanical work (spelling, construction of sentences,
writing, etc.) is better under this method than when more time is
devoted to the mechanics and less to the thought of composition.
I have seen many reports of Burroughs's essays from the pens of
children more pleasing and reliable than the essays of some
professional reviewers; in these papers I often find the children
adding little suggestions of their own; as, "Do birds dream?"
One of the girls says her bird "jumps in its sleep."  A little ten year
old writes, "Weeds are unuseful flowers," and, "I like this book
because there are real things in it."  Another thinks she "will look
more carefully " if she ever gets out into the country again.  For the
development of close observation and good feeling toward the common
things of life, I know of no writings better than those of
John Burroughs.


MARY E. BURT

JONES SCHOOL, CHICAGO, Sept. 1, 1887.




BIRDS.


BIRD ENEMIES.


How surely the birds know their enemies!  See how the wrens and robins
and bluebirds pursue and scold the cat, while they take little or no
notice of the dog!  Even the swallow will fight the cat, and, relying
too confidently upon its powers of flight, sometimes swoops down so
near to its enemy that it is caught by a sudden stroke of the cat's
paw.  The only case I know of in which our small birds fail to
recognize their enemy is furnished by the shrike; apparently the little
birds do not know that this modest-colored bird is an assassin.
At least, I have never seen them scold or molest him, or utter any
outcries at his presence, as they usually do at birds of prey.
Probably it is because the shrike is a rare visitant, and is not found
in this part of the country during the nesting season of our songsters.

But the birds have nearly all found out the trick the jay, and when he
comes sneaking through the trees in May and June in quest of eggs,
he is quickly exposed and roundly abused.  It is amusing to see the
robins hustle him out of the tree which holds their nest.  They cry
"Thief, thief!" to the top of their voices as they charge upon him,
and the jay retorts in a voice scarcely less complimentary as he
makes off.

The jays have their enemies also, and need to keep an eye on their own
eggs.  It would be interesting to know if jays ever rob jays, or crows
plunder crows; or is there honor among thieves even in the feathered
tribes?  I suspect the jay is often punished by birds which are
otherwise innocent of nest-robbing.  One season I found a jay's nest in
a small cedar on the side of a wooded ridge.  It held five eggs, every
one of which had been punctured.  Apparently some bird had driven its
sharp beak through their shells, with the sole intention of destroying
them, for no part of the contents of the eggs had been removed.
It looked like a case of revenge; as if some thrush or warbler,
whose nest had suffered at the hands of the jays, had watched its
opportunity, and had in this way retaliated upon its enemies.  An egg
for an egg.  The jays were lingering near, very demure and silent, and
probably ready to join a crusade against nest-robbers.

The great bugaboo of the birds is the owl.  The owl snatches them from
off their roosts at night, and gobbles up the1r eggs and young in their
nests.  He is a veritable ogre to them, and his presence fills them
with consternation and alarm.

One season, to protect my early cherries I placed a large stuffed owl
amid the branches of the tree.  Such a racket as there instantly began
about my grounds is not pleasant to think upon!  The orioles and robins
fairly "shrieked out their affright."  The news instantly spread in
every direction, and apparently every bird in town came to see that
owl in the cherry-tree, and every bird took a cherry, so that I
lost more fruit than if I had left the owl in-doors.  With craning
necks and horrified looks the birds alighted upon the branches, and
between their screams would snatch off a cherry, as if the act was some
relief to their outraged feelings.

The chirp and chatter of the young of birds which build in concealed or
inclosed places, like the woodpeckers, the house wren, the high-hole,
the oriole, is in marked contrast to the silence of the fledglings of
most birds that build open and exposed nests.  The young of the
sparrows,--unless the social sparrow be an exception,--warblers,
fly-catchers, thrushes, never allow a sound to escape them; and on the
alarm note of their parents being heard, sit especially close and
motionless, while the young of chimney swallows, woodpeckers, and
orioles are very noisy.  The latter, in its deep pouch, is quite safe
from birds of prey, except perhaps the owl.  The owl, I suspect,
thrusts its leg into the cavities of woodpeckers and into the
pocket-like nest of the oriole, and clutches and brings forth the birds
in its talons.  In one case which I heard of, a screech-owl had thrust
its claw into a cavity in a tree, and grasped the head of a red-headed
woodpecker; being apparently unable to draw its prey forth, it had
thrust its own round head into the hole, and in some way became fixed
there, and had thus died with the woodpecker in its talons.

The life of birds is beset with dangers and mishaps of which we know
little.  One day, in my walk, I came upon a goldfinch with the tip of
one wing securely fastened to the feathers of its rump, by what
appeared to be the silk of some caterpillar.  The bird, though
uninjured, was completely crippled, and could not fly a stroke.
Its little body was hot and panting in my hands, as I carefully broke
the fetter.  Then it darted swiftly away with a happy cry.  A record of
all the accidents and tragedies of bird life for a single season would
show many curious incidents.  A friend of mine opened his box-stove one
fall to kindle a fire in it, when he beheld in the black interior the
desiccated forms of two bluebirds.  The birds had probably taken refuge
in the chimney during some cold spring storm, and had come down the
pipe to the stove, from whence they were unable to ascend.
A peculiarly touching little incident of bird life occurred to a caged
female canary.  Though unmated, it laid some eggs, and the happy bird
was so carried away by her feelings that she would offer food to the
eggs, and chatter and twitter, trying, as it seemed, to encourage them
to eat!  The incident is hardly tragic, neither is it comic.

Certain birds nest in the vicinity of our houses and outbuildings,
or even in and upon them, for protection from their enemies, but they
often thus expose themselves to a plague of the most deadly character.

I refer to the vermin with which their nests often swarm, and which
kill the young before they are fledged.  In a state of nature this
probably never happens; at least I have never seen or heard of it
happening to nests placed in trees or under rocks.  It is the curse
of civilization falling upon the birds which come too near man.
The vermin, or the germ of the vermin, is probably conveyed to the nest
in hen's feathers, or in straws and hairs picked up about the barn or
hen-house.  A robin's nest upon your porch or in your summer-house will
occasionally become an intolerable nuisance from the swarms upon swarms
of minute vermin with which it is filled.  The parent birds stem the
tide as long as they can, but are often compelled to leave the young to
their terrible fate.

One season a phoebe-bird built on a projecting stone under the eaves of
the house, and all appeared to go well till the young were nearly
fledged, when the nest suddenly became a bit of purgatory.  The birds
kept their places in their burning bed till they could hold no longer,
when they leaped forth and fell dead upon the ground.

After a delay of a week or more, during which I imagine the parent
birds purified themselves by every means known to them, the couple
built another nest a few yards from the first, and proceeded to rear
a second brood; but the new nest developed into the same bed of torment
that the first did, and the three young birds, nearly ready to fly,
perished as they sat within it.  The parent birds then left the place
as if it had been accursed.

I imagine the smaller birds have an enemy in our native white-footed
mouse, though I have not proof enough to convict him.  But one season
the nest of a chickadee which I was observing was broken up in a
position where nothing but a mouse could have reached it.  The bird had
chosen a cavity in the limb of an apple-tree which stood but a few
yards from the house.  The cavity was deep, and the entrance to it,
which was ten feet from the ground, was small.  Barely light enough was
admitted, when the sun was in the most favorable position, to enable
one to make out the number of eggs, which was six, at the bottom of
the dim interior.  While one was peering in and trying to get his head
out of his own light, the bird would startle him by a queer kind of
puffing sound.  She would not leave her nest like most birds, but
really tried to blow or scare the intruder away; and after repeated
experiments I could hardly refrain from jerking my head back when that
little explosion of sound came up from the dark interior.  One night,
when incubation was about half finished, the nest was harried.
A slight trace of hair or fur at the entrance led me to infer that some
small animal was the robber.  A weasel might have done it, as they
sometimes climb trees, but I doubt if either a squirrel or a rat could
have passed the entrance.

Probably few persons have ever suspected the cat-bird of being an
egg-sucker; I do not know that she has ever been accused of such
a thing, but there is something uncanny and disagreeable about her,
which I at once understood, when I one day caught her in the very act
of going through a nest of eggs.

A pair of the least fly-catchers, the bird which says chebec, chebec,
and is a small edition of the pewee, one season built their nest where
I had them for many hours each day under my observation.  The nest was
a very snug and compact structure placed in the forks of a small maple
about twelve feet from the ground.  The season before, a red squirrel
had harried the nest of a wood-thrush in this same tree, and I was
apprehensive that he would serve the fly-catchers the same trick;
so, as I sat with my book in a summer-house near by, I kept my loaded
gun within easy reach.  One egg was laid, and the next morning, as I
made my daily inspection of the nest, only a fragment of its empty
shell was to be found.  This I removed, mentally imprecating the rogue
of a red squirrel.  The birds were much disturbed by the event, but did
not desert the nest, as I had feared they would, but after much
inspection of it and many consultations together, concluded, it seems,
to try again.  Two more eggs were laid, when one day I heard the birds
utter a sharp cry, and on looking up I saw a cat-bird perched upon the
rim of the nest, hastily devouring the eggs.  I soon regretted my
precipitation in killing her, because such interference is generally
unwise.  It turned out that she had a nest of her own with five eggs in
a spruce-tree near my window.

Then this pair of little fly-catchers did what I had never seen birds
do before; they pulled the nest to pieces and rebuilt it in a
peach-tree not many rods away, where a brood was successfully reared.
The nest was here exposed to the direct rays of the noon-day sun, and
to shield her young when the heat was greatest, the mother-bird would
stand above them with wings slightly spread, as other birds have been
know to do under like circumstances.

To what extent the cat-bird is a nest-robber I have no evidence,
but that feline mew of hers, and that flirting, flexible tail, suggest
something not entirely bird-like.

Probably the darkest tragedy of the nest is enacted when a snake
plunders it.  All birds and animals, so far I have observed, behave
in a peculiar manner toward a snake.  They seem to feel something of
the loathing toward it that the human species experiences.  The bark of
a dog when he encounters a snake is different from that which he gives
out on any other occasion; it is a mingled note of alarm, inquiry,
and disgust.

One day a tragedy was enacted a few yards from where I was sitting with
a book; two song-sparrows trying to defend their nest against a black
snake.  The curious, interrogating note of a chicken who had suddenly
come upon the scene in his walk caused me to look up from my reading.
There were the sparrows, with wings raised in a way peculiarly
expressive of horror and dismay, rushing about a low clump of grass
and bushes.  Then, looking more closely, I saw the glistening form of
the black snake and the quick movement of his head as he tried to seize
the birds.  The sparrows darted about and through the grass and weeds,
trying to beat the snake off.  Their tails and wings were spread,
and, panting with the heat and the desperate struggle, they presented
a most singular spectacle.  They uttered no cry, not a sound escaped
them; they were plainly speechless with horror and dismay.  Not once
did they drop their wings, and the peculiar expression of those
uplifted palms, as it were, I shall never forget.  It occurred to me
that perhaps here was a case of attempted bird-charming on the part of
the snake, so I looked on from behind the fence.  The birds charged the
snake and harassed him from every side, but were evidently under no
spell save that of courage in defending their nest.  Every moment or
two I could see the head and neck of the serpent make a sweep at the
birds, when the one struck at would fall back, and the other would
renew the assault from the rear.  There appeared to be little danger
that the snake could strike and hold one of the birds, though I
rembled for them, they were so bold and approached so near to the
snake's head.  Time and again he sprang at them, but without success.
How the poor things panted, and held up their wings appealingly!
Then the snake glided off to the near fence, barely escaping the stone
which I hurled at him.  I found the nest rifled and deranged; whether
it had contained eggs or young I know not.  The male sparrow had
cheered me many a day with his song, and I blamed myself for not having
rushed at once to the rescue, when the arch enemy was upon him.
There is probably little truth in the popular notion that snakes charm
birds.  The black snake is the most subtle, alert, and devilish of our
snakes, and I have never seen him have any but young, helpless birds
in his mouth.

We have one parasitical bird, the cow-bird, so-called because it walks
about amid the grazing cattle and seizes the insects which their heavy
tread sets going, which is an enemy of most of the smaller birds.
It drops its egg in the nest of the song-sparrow, the social sparrow,
the snow-bird, the vireos, and the wood-warblers, and as a rule it is
the only egg in the nest that issues successfully.  Either the eggs of
the rightful owner of the nest are not hatched, or else the young are
overridden and overreached by the parasite and perish prematurely.

Among the worst enemies of our birds are the so-called "collectors,"
men who plunder nests and murder their owners in the name of science.
Not the genuine ornithologist, for no one is more careful of
squandering bird life than he; but the sham ornithologist, the man
whose vanity or affectation happens to take an ornithological turn.
He is seized with an itching for a collection of eggs and birds because
it happens to be the fashion, or because it gives him the air of a man
of science.  But in the majority of cases the motive is a mercenary
one; the collector expects to sell these spoils of the groves and
orchards.  Robbing the nests and killing birds becomes a business with
him.  He goes about it systematically, and becomes expert in
circumventing and slaying our songsters.  Every town of any
considerable size is infested with one or more of these bird
highwaymen, and every nest in the country round about that the wretches
can lay hands on is harried.  Their professional term for a nest of
eggs is "a clutch," a word that well  expresses the work of their
grasping, murderous fingers.  They clutch and destroy in the germ the
life and music of the woodlands.  Certain of our natural history
journals are mainly organs of communication between these human
weasels.  They record their exploits at nest-robbing and bird-slaying
in their columns.  One collector tells with gusto how he "worked
his way" through an orchard, ransacking every tree, and leaving, as he
believed, not one nest behind him.  He had better not be caught working
his way through my orchard.  Another gloats over the number of
Connecticut warblers--a rare bird--he killed in one season in
Massachusetts.  Another tells how a mocking-bird appeared in southern
New England and was hunted down by himself and friend, its eggs
"clutched," and the bird killed.  Who knows how much the bird lovers of
New England lost by that foul deed?  The progeny of the birds would
probably have returned to Connecticut to breed, and their progeny,
or a part of them, the same, till in time the famous songster would
have become a regular visitant to New England.  In the same journal
still another collector describes minutely how he outwitted three
humming birds and captured their nests and eggs,--a clutch he was very
proud of.  A Massachusetts bird harrier boasts of his clutch of the
egg's of that dainty little warbler, the blue yellow-back.  One season
he took two sets, the next five sets, the next four sets, besides some
single eggs, and the next season four sets, and says he might have
found more had he had more time.  One season he took, in about twenty
days, three from one tree.  I have heard of a collector who boasted of
having taken one hundred sets of the eggs of the marsh wren, in a
single day; of another, who took in the same time, thirty nests of the
yellow-breasted chat; and of still another, who claimed to have taken
one thousand sets of eggs of different birds in one season.  A large
business has grown up under the influence of this collecting craze.
One dealer in eggs has those of over five hundred species.  He says
that his business in 1883 was twice that of 1882; in 1884 it was twice
that of 1883, and so on.  Collectors vie with each other in the extent
and variety of their cabinets.  They not only obtain eggs in sets,
but aim to have a number of sets of the same bird so as to show all
possible variations.  I hear of a private collection that contains
twelve sets of kingbirds' eggs, eight sets of house-wrens' eggs,
four sets mocking-birds' eggs, etc.; sets of eggs taken in low trees,
high trees, medium trees; spotted sets, dark sets, plain sets, and
light sets of the same species of bird.  Many collections are made on
this latter plan.

Thus are our birds hunted and cut off and all in the name of science;
as if science had not long ago finished with these birds.  She has
weighed and measured, and dissected, and described them, and their
nests, and eggs, and placed them in her cabinet; and the interest of
science and of humanity now demands that this wholesale nest-robbing
cease.  These incidents I have given above, it is true, are but drops
in the bucket, but the bucket would be more than full if we could get
all the facts.  Where one man publishes his notes, hundreds, perhaps
thousands, say nothing, but go as silently about their nest-robbing
as weasels.

It is true that the student of ornithology often feels compelled to
take bird-life.  It is not an easy matter to "name all the birds
without a gun," though an opera-glass will often render identification
entirely certain, and leave the songster unharmed; but once having
mastered the birds, the true ornithologist leaves his gun at home.
This view of the case may not be agreeable to that desiccated mortal
called the "closet naturalist," but for my own part the closet
naturalist is a person with whom I have very little sympathy.
He is about the most wearisome and profitless creature in existence.
With his piles of skins, his cases of eggs, his laborious
feather-splitting, and his outlandish nomenclature, he is not only
the enemy of the birds but the enemy of all those who would know
them rightly.

Not the collectors alone are to blame for the diminishing numbers of
our wild birds, but a large share of the responsibility rests upon
quite a different class of persons, namely, the milliners.  False taste
in dress is as destructive to our feathered friends as are false aims
in science.  It is said that the traffic in the skins of our brighter
plumaged birds, arising from their use by the milliners, reaches to
hundreds of thousands annually.  I am told of one middleman who
collected from the shooters in one district, in four months, seventy
thousand skins.  It is a barbarous taste that craves this kind of
ornamentation.  Think of a woman or girl of real refinement appearing
upon the street with her head gear adorned with the scalps of
our songsters!

It is probably true that the number of our birds destroyed by man is
but a small percentage of the number cut off by their natural enemies;
but it is to be remembered that those he destroys are in addition to
those thus cut off, and that it is this extra or artificial destruction
that disturbs the balance of nature.  The operation of natural causes
keeps the birds in check, but the greed of the collectors and milliners
tends to their extinction.

I can pardon a man who wishes to make a collection of eggs and birds
for his own private use, if he will content himself with one or two
specimens of a kind, though he will find any collection much less
satisfactory and less valuable than he imagines, but the professional
nest-robber and skin collector should be put down, either by
legis1ation or with dogs and shotguns.

I have remarked above that there is probably very little truth in the
popular notion that snakes can "charm" birds.  But two of my
correspondents have each furnished me with an incident from his own
experience, which seems to confirm the popular belief.  One of them
writes from Georgia as follows:--

"Some twenty-eight years ago I was in Calaveras County, California,
engaged in cutting lumber.  One day in coming out of the camp or cabin,
my attention was attracted to the curious action of a quail in the air,
which, instead of flying low and straight ahead as usual, was some
fifty feet high, flying in a circle, and uttering cries of distress.
I watched the bird and saw it gradually descend, and following with my
eye in a line from the bird to the ground saw a large snake with head
erect and some ten or twelve inches above the ground, and mouth wide
open, and as far as I could see, gazing intently on the quail (I was
about thirty feet from the snake).  The quail gradually descended, its
circles growing smaller and smaller and all the time uttering cries of
distress, until its feet were within two or three inches of the mouth
of the snake; when I threw a stone, and though not hitting the snake,
yet struck the ground so near as to frighten him, and he gradually
started off.  The quail, however, fell to the ground, apparently
lifeless.  I went forward and picked it up and found it was thoroughly
overcome with fright, its little heart beating as if it would burst
through the skin.  After holding it in my hand a few moments it flew
away.  I then tried to find the snake, but could not.  I am unable to
say whether the snake was venomous or belonged to the constricting
family, like the black snake.  I can well recollect it was large and
moved off rather slow.  As I had never seen anything of the kind
before, it made a great impression on my mind, and after the lapse of
so long a time, the incident appears as vivid to me as though it had
occurred yesterday."

It is not probable that the snake had its mouth open; its darting
tongue may have given that impression.

The other incident comes to me from Vermont.  "While returning from
church in 1876," says the writer, "as I was crossing a bridge...
I noticed a striped snake in the act of charming a song-sparrow.
They were both upon the sand beneath the bridge.  The snake kept his
head swaying slowly from side to side, and darted his tongue out
continually.  The bird, not over a foot away, was facing the snake,
hopping from one foot to the other, and uttering a dissatisfied little
chirp.  I watched them till the snake seized the bird, having gradually
drawn nearer.  As he seized it, I leaped over the side of the bridge;
the snake glided away and I took up the bird, which he had dropped.
It was too frightened to try to fly and I carried it nearly a mile
before it flew from my open hand."

If these observers are quite sure of what they saw, then undoubtedly
snakes have the power to draw birds within their grasp.  I remember
that my mother told me that while gathering wild strawberries she
had on one occasion come upon a bird fluttering about the head of a
snake as if held there by a spell.  On her appearance, the snake
lowered its head and made off, and the panting bird flew away.
A neighbor of mine killed a black snake which had swallowed a
full-grown red squirrel, probably captured by the same power of
fascination.




THE TRAGEDIES OF THE NESTS



The life of the birds, especially of our migratory song-birds, is a
series of adventures and of hair-breadth escapes by flood and field.
Very few of them probably die a natural death, or even live out half
their appointed days.  The home instinct is strong in birds as it is in
most creatures; and I am convinced that every spring a large number of
those which have survived the Southern campaign return to their old
haunts to breed.  A Connecticut farmer took me out under his porch,
one April day, and showed me a phoebe bird's nest six stories high.
The same bird had no doubt returned year after year; and as there was
room for only one nest upon her favorite shelf, she had each season
reared a new superstructure upon the old as a foundation.  I have heard
of a white robin--an albino--that nested several years in succession in
the suburbs of a Maryland city.  A sparrow with a very marked
peculiarity of song I have heard several seasons in my own locality.
But the birds do not all live to return to their old haunts:
the bobolinks and starlings run a gauntlet of fire from the Hudson to
the Savannah, and the robins and meadow-larks and other song-birds are
shot by boys and pot-hunters in great numbers,--to say nothing of their
danger from hawks and owls.  But of those that do return, what perils
beset their nests, even in the most favored localities!  The cabins of
the early settlers, when the country was swarming with hostile Indians,
were not surrounded by such dangers.  The tender households of the
birds are not only exposed to hostile Indians in the shape of cats and
collectors, but to numerous murderous and bloodthirsty animals, against
whom they have no defense but concealment.  They lead the darkest kind
of pioneer life, even in our gardens and orchards, and under the walls
of our houses.  Not a day or a night passes, from the time the eggs are
laid till the young are flown, when the chances are not greatly in
favor of the nest being rifled and its contents devoured,--by owls,
skunks, minks, and coons at night, and by crows, jays, squirrels,
weasels, snakes, and rats during the day.  Infancy, we say, is hedged
about by many perils; but the infancy of birds is cradled and pillowed
in peril.  An old Michigan settler told me that the first six children
that were born to him died; malaria and teething invariably carried
them off when they had reached a certain age; but other children were
born, the country improved, and by and by the babies weathered the
critical period and the next six lived and grew up.  The birds, too,
would no doubt persevere six times and twice six times, if the season
were long enough, and finally rear their family, but the waning summer
cuts them short, and but a few species have the heart and strength to
make even the third trial.

The first nest-builders in spring, like the first settlers near hostile
tribes, suffer the most casualties.  A large portion of the nests of
April and May are destroyed; their enemies have been many months
without eggs and their appetites are keen for them.  It is a time,
too, when other food is scarce, and the crows and squirrels are hard
put.  But the second nests of June, and still more the nests of July
and August, are seldom molested.  It is rarely that the nest of the
goldfinch or the cedar-bird is harried.

My neighborhood on the Hudson is perhaps exceptionally unfavorable as
a breeding haunt for birds, owing to the abundance of fish-crows and
of red squirrels; and the season of which this chapter is mainly a
chronicle, the season of 1881, seems to have been a black-letter one
even for this place, for at least nine nests out of every ten that I
observed during that spring and summer failed of their proper issue.
>From the first nest I noted, which was that of a bluebird,--built
(very imprudently I thought at the time) in a squirrel-hole in a
decayed apple-tree, about the last of April, and which came to naught,
even the mother-bird, I suspect, perishing by a violent death,--to the
last, which was that of a snow-bird, observed in August, among the
Catskills, deftly concealed in a mossy bank by the side of a road that
skirted a wood, where the tall thimble blackberries grew in  abundance,
from which the last young one was taken, when it was about half grown,
by some nocturnal walker or daylight prowler, some untoward fate seemed
hovering about them.  It was a season of calamities, of violent deaths,
of pillage and massacre, among our feathered neighbors.  For the first
time I noticed that the orioles were not safe in their strong, pendent
nests.  Three broods were started in the apple-trees, only a few yards
from the house, where, for previous seasons, the birds had nested
without molestation; but this time the young were all destroyed when
about half grown.  Their chirping and chattering, which was so
noticeable one day, suddenly ceased the next.  The nests were probably
plundered at night, and doubtless by the little red screech-owl, which
I know is a denizen of these old orchards, living in the deeper
cavities of the trees.  The owl could alight on the top of the nest,
and easily thrust his murderous claw down into its long pocket and
seize the young and draw them forth.  The tragedy of one of the nests
was heightened, or at least made more palpable, by one of the
half-fledged birds, either in its attempt to escape or while in the
clutches of the enemy, being caught and entangled in one of the
horse-hairs by which the nest was stayed and held to the limb above.
There it hung bruised and dead, gibbeted to its own cradle.  This nest
was the theatre of another little tragedy later in the season.
Some time in August a bluebird, indulging its propensity to peep and
pry into holes and crevices, alighted upon it and probably inspected
the interior; but by some unlucky move it got its wings entangled in
this same fatal horse-hair.  Its efforts to free itself appeared only
to result in its