 being more securely and hopelessly bound; and there it
perished; and there its form, dried and embalmed by the summer heats,
was yet hanging in September, the outspread wings and plumage showing
nearly as bright as in life.

A correspondent writes me that one of his orioles got entangled in a
cord while building her nest, and that though by the aid of a ladder
he reached and liberated her, she died soon afterward.  He also found
a "chippie" (called also "hair bird") suspended from a branch by a
horse-hair, beneath a partly constructed nest.  I heard of a
cedar-bird caught and destroyed in the same way, and of two young
bluebirds, around whose legs a horse-hair had become so tightly wound
that the legs withered up and dropped off.  The birds became fledged,
and left the nest with the others.  Such tragedies are probably
quite common.

Before the advent of civilization in this country, the oriole probably
built a much deeper nest than it usually does at present.  When now it
builds in remote trees and along the borders of the woods, its nest,
I have noticed, is long and gourd-shaped; but in orchards and near
dwellings it is only a deep cup or pouch.  It shortens it up in
proportion as the danger lessens.  Probably a succession of disastrous
years, like the one under review, would cause it to lengthen it again
beyond the reach of owl's talons or jay-bird's beak.

The first song-sparrow's nest I observed in the spring of 1881 was in
the field under a fragment of a board, the board being raised from the
ground a couple of inches by two poles.  It had its full complement
of eggs, and probably sent forth a brood of young birds, though as to
this I cannot speak positively, as I neglected to observe it further.
It was well sheltered and concealed, and was not easily come at by any
of its natural enemies, save snakes and weasels.  But concealment often
avails little.  In May, a song-sparrow, that had evidently met with
disaster earlier in the season, built its nest in a thick mass of
woodbine against the side of my house, about fifteen feet from the
ground.  Perhaps it took the hint from its cousin, the English sparrow.
The nest was admirably placed, protected from the storms by the
overhanging eaves and from all eyes by the thick screen of leaves.
Only by patiently watching the suspicious bird, as she lingered near
with food in her beak, did I discover its whereabouts.  That brood is
safe, I thought, beyond doubt.  But it was not; the nest was pillaged
one night, either by an owl, or else by a rat that had climbed into the
vine, seeking an entrance to the house.  The mother-bird, after
reflecting upon her ill-luck about a week, seemed to resolve to
try a different system of tactics and to throw all appearances of
concealment aside.  She built a nest few yards from the house beside
the drive, upon a smooth piece of greensward.  There was not a weed or
a shrub or anything whatever to conceal it or mark its site.
The structure was completed and incubation had begun before I
discovered what was going on.  "Well, well," I said, looking down upon
the bird almost at my feet, "this is going to the other extreme indeed;
now, the cats will have you."  The desperate little bird sat there day
after day, looking like a brown leaf pressed down in the short green
grass.  As the weather grew hot, her position became very trying.
It was no longer a question of keeping the eggs warm, but of keeping
them from roasting.  The sun had no mercy on her, and she fairly panted
in the middle of the day.  In such an emergency the male robin has been
known to perch above the sitting female and shade her with his
outstretched wings.  But in this case there was no perch for the male
bird, had he been disposed to make a sunshade of himself.  I thought to
lend a hand in this direction myself, and so stuck a leafy twig beside
the nest.  This was probably an unwise interference; it guided disaster
to the spot; the nest was broken up, and the mother-bird was probably
caught, as I never saw her afterward.

For several previous summers a pair of kingbirds had reared,
unmolested, a brood of young in an apple-tree, only a few yards from
the house; but during this season disaster overtook them also.
The nest was completed, the eggs laid, and incubation had begun,
when, one morning about sunrise, I heard cries of distress and alarm
proceed from the old apple-tree.  Looking out of the window I saw a
crow, which I knew to be a fish-crow, perched upon the edge of the
nest, hastily bolting the eggs.  The parent birds, usually so ready for
the attack, seemed over-come with grief and alarm.  They fluttered
about in the most helpless and bewildered manner, and it was not till
the robber fled on my approach that they recovered themselves and
charged upon him.  The crow scurried away with upturned, threatening
head, the furious kingbirds fairly upon his back.  The pair lingered
around their desecrated nest for several days, almost silent,
and saddened by their loss, and then disappeared.  They probably made
another trial elsewhere.

The fish-crow only fishes when it has destroyed all the eggs and young
birds it can find.  It is the most despicable thief and robber among
our feathered creatures.  From May to August, it is gorged with the
fledglings of the nest.  It is fortunate that its range is so limited.
In size it is smaller than the common crow, and is a much less noble
and dignified bird.  Its caw is weak and feminine--a sort of split and
abortive caw, that stamps it the sneak-thief it is.  This crow is
common farther south, but is not found in this State, so far as I have
observed, except in the valley of the Hudson.

One season a pair of them built a nest in a Norway Spruce that stood
amid a dense growth of other ornamental trees near a large unoccupied
house.  They sat down amid plenty.  The wolf established himself in
the fold.  The many birds--robins, thrushes, finches, vireos, pewees--
that seek the vicinity of dwellings (especially of these large country
residences with their many trees and park-like grounds), for the
greater safety of their eggs and young, were the easy and convenient
victims of these robbers.  They plundered right and left, and were not
disturbed till their young were nearly fledged, when some boys, who had
long before marked them as their prize, rifled the nest.

The song-birds nearly all build low; their cradle is not upon the
tree-top.  It is only birds of prey that fear danger from below more
than from above, and that seek the higher branches for their nests.
A line five feet from the ground would run above more than half the
nests, and one ten feet would bound more than three fourths of them.
It is only the oriole and the wood pewee that, as a rule, go higher
than this.  The crows and jays and other enemies of the birds have
learned to explore this belt pretty thoroughly.  But the leaves and
the protective coloring of most nests baffle them as effectually,
no doubt as they do the professional oölogist.  The nest of the
red-eyed vireo is one of the most artfully placed in the wood.  It is
just beyond the point where the eye naturally pauses in its search;
namely, on the extreme end of the lowest branch of the tree, usually
four or five feet from the ground.  One looks up and down through the
tree,--shoots his eye-beams into it as he might discharge his gun at
some game hidden there, but the drooping tip of that low horizontal
branch--who would think of pointing his piece just there?  If a crow or
other marauder were to alight upon the branch or upon those above it,
the nest would be screened from him by the large leaf that usually
forms a canopy immediately above it.  The nest-hunter standing at the
foot of the tree and looking straight before him, might discover it
easily, were it not for its soft, neutral gray tint which blends so
thoroughly with the trunks and branches of trees.  Indeed, I think
there is no nest in the woods--no arboreal nest--so well concealed.
The last one I saw was a pendent from the end of a low branch of a
maple, that nearly grazed the clapboards of an unused hay-barn in a
remote backwoods clearing.  I peeped through a crack and saw the old
birds feed the nearly fledged young within a few inches of my face.
And yet the cow-bird finds this nest and drops her parasitical egg in
it.  Her tactics in this as in other cases are probably to watch the
movements of the parent bird.  She may often be seen searching
anxiously through the trees or bushes for a suitable nest, yet she may
still oftener be seen perched upon some good point of observation
watching the birds as they come and go about her.  There is no doubt
that, in many cases, the cow-bird makes room for her own illegitimate
egg in the nest by removing one of the bird's own.  When the cow-bird
finds two or more eggs in a nest in which she wishes to deposit her
own, she will remove one of them.  I found a sparrow's nest with two
sparrow's eggs and one cow-bird's egg, another egg lying a foot or so
below it on the ground.  I replaced the ejected egg, and the next day
found it again removed, and another cow-bird's egg in its place;
I put it back the second time, when it was again ejected, or destroyed,
for I failed to find it anywhere.  Very alert and sensitive birds like
the warblers often bury the strange egg beneath a second nest built on
top of the old.  A lady, living in the suburbs of an eastern city,
one morning heard cries of distress from a pair of house-wrens that had
a nest in a honeysuckle on her front porch.  On looking out of the
window, she beheld this little comedy--comedy from her point of view,
but no doubt grim-tragedy from the point of view of the wrens;
a cow-bird with a wren's egg in its beak running rapidly along the walk
with the outraged wrens forming a procession behind it, screaming,
scolding, and gesticulating as only these voluble little birds can.
The cow-bird had probably been surprised in the act of violating the
nest, and the wrens were giving her a piece of theirs minds.

Every cow-bird is reared at the expense of two or more song-birds.
For every one of these dusky little pedestrians there amid the grazing
cattle there are two more sparrows, or vireos, or warblers, the less.
It is a big price to pay--two larks for a bunting-two sovereigns for
a shilling; but Nature does not hesitate occasionally to contradict
herself in just this way.  The young of the cow-bird is
disproportionately large and aggressive, one might say hoggish.
When disturbed it will clasp the nest and scream, and snap its beak
threateningly.  One hatched out in a song-sparrow's nest which was
under my observation, and would soon have overridden and overborne the
young sparrow, which came out of the shell a few hours later, had I not
interfered from time to time and lent the young sparrow a helping hand.
Every day I would visit the nest and take the sparrow out from under
the pot-bellied interloper and place it on top so that presently it was
able to hold its own against its enemy.  Both birds became fledged and
left the nest about the same time.  Whether the race was an even one
after that, I know not.

I noted but two warblers' nests during that season, one of the
black-throated blue-back and one of the redstart,--the latter built
in an apple-tree but a few yards from a little rustic summer-house
where I idle away many summer days.  The lively little birds, darting
and flashing about, attracted my attention for a week before I
discovered their nest.  They probably built it by working early in the
morning, before I appeared upon the scene, as I never saw them with
material in their beaks.  Guessing from their movements that the nest
was in a large maple that stood near by, I climbed the tree and
explored it thoroughly, looking especially in the forks of the
branches, as the authorities say these birds build in a fork.
But no nest could I find.  Indeed, how can one by searching find a
bird's nest?  I overshot the mark; the nest was much nearer me, almost
under my very nose, and I discovered it, not by searching but by a
casual glance of the eye, while thinking of other matters.  The bird
was just settling upon it as I looked up from my book and caught her in
the act.  The nest was built near the end of a long, knotty, horizontal
branch of an apple-tree, but effectually hidden by the grouping of the
leaves; it had three eggs, one of which proved to be barren.  The two
young birds grew apace, and were out of the nest early in the second
week; but something caught one of them the first night.  The other
probably grew to maturity, as it disappeared from the vicinity with
its parents after some days.

The blue-back's nest was scarcely a foot from the ground, in a little
bush situated in a low, dense wood of hemlock and beech and maple,
amid the Catskills,--a deep, massive, elaborate structure, in which the
sitting bird sank till her beak and tail alone were visible above
the brim.  It was a misty, chilly day when I chanced to find the nest,
and the mother-bird knew instinctively that it was not prudent to leave
her four half incubated eggs uncovered and exposed for a moment.
When I sat down near the nest she grew very uneasy, and after trying in
vain to decoy me away by suddenly dropping from the branches and
dragging herself over the ground as if mortally wounded, she approached
and timidly and half doubtingly covered her eggs within two yards of
where I sat.  I disturbed her several times to note her ways.
There came to be something almost appealing in her looks and manner,
and she would keep her place on her precious eggs till my outstretched
hand was within a few feet of her.  Finally, I covered the cavity of
the nest with a dry leaf.  This she did not remove with her beak,
but thrust her head deftly beneath it and shook it off upon the ground.
Many of her sympathizing neighbors, attracted by her alarm note,
came and had a peep at the intruder and then flew away, but the male
bird did not appear upon the scene.  The final history of this nest I
am unable to give, as I did not again visit it till late in the season,
when, of course, it was empty.

Years pass without my finding a brown-thrasher's nest; it is not a nest
you are likely to stumble upon in your walk; it is hidden as a miser
hides his gold, and watched as jealously.  The male pours out his rich
and triumphant song from the tallest tree he can find, and fairly
challenges you to come and look for his treasures in his vicinity.
But you will not find them if you go.  The nest is somewhere on the
outer circle of his song; he is never so imprudent as to take up his
stand very near it.  The artists who draw those cosy little pictures of
a brooding mother-bird with the male perched but a yard away in full
song, do not copy from nature.  The thrasher's nest I found thirty or
forty rods from the point where the male was wont to indulge in his
brilliant recitative.  It was in an open field under a low
ground-juniper.  My dog disturbed the sitting bird as I was passing
near.  The nest could be seen only by lifting up and parting away
the branches.  All the arts of concealment had been carefully studied.
It was the last place you would think of looking, and, if you did look,
nothing was visible but the dense green circle of the low-spreading
juniper.  When you approached, the bird would keep her place till you
had begun to stir the branches, when she would start out, and,
just skimming the ground, make a bright brown line to the near fence
and bushes.  I confidently expected that this nest would escape
molestation, but it did not.  Its discovery by myself and dog probably
opened the door for ill luck, as one day, not long afterward, when I
peeped in upon it, it was empty.  The proud song of the male had ceased
from his accustomed tree, and the pair were seen no more in that
vicinity.

The phoebe-bird is a wise architect, and perhaps enjoys as great an
immunity from danger, both in its person and its nest, as any other
bird.  Its modest, ashen-gray suit is the color of the rocks where it
builds, and the moss of which it makes such free use gives to its nest
the look of a natural growth or accretion.  But when it comes into the
barn or under the shed to build, as it so frequently does, the moss is
rather out of place.  Doubtless in time the bird will take the hint,
and when she builds in such places will leave the moss out.  I noted
but two nests, the summer I am speaking of: one, in a barn, failed of
issue, on account of the rats, I suspect, though the little owl may
have been the depredator; the other, in the woods, sent forth three
young.  This latter nest was most charmingly and ingeniously placed.
I discovered it while in quest of pond-lilies, in a long, deep level
stretch of water in the woods.  A large tree had blown over at the edge
of the water, and its dense mass of up-turned roots, with the black,
peaty soil filling the interstices, was like the fragment of a wall
several feet high, rising from the edge of the languid current.  In a
niche in this earthy wall, and visible and accessible only from the
water, a phoebe had built her nest, and reared her brood.  I paddled my
boat up and came alongside prepared to take the family aboard.
The young, nearly ready to fly, were quite undisturbed by my presence,
having probably been assured that no danger need be apprehended from
that side.  It was not a likely place for minks, or they would not have
been so secure.

I noted but one nest of the wood pewee, and that, too, like so many
other nests, failed of issue.  It was saddled upon a small dry limb of
a plane-tree that stood by the roadside, about forty feet from the
ground.  Every day for nearly a week, as I passed by I saw the sitting
bird upon the nest.  Then one morning she was not in her place, and on
examination the nest proved to be empty--robbed, I had no doubt, by the
red squirrels, as they were very abundant in its vicinity, and appeared
to make a clean sweep of every nest.  The wood pewee builds an
exquisite nest, shaped and finished as if cast in a mould.  It is
modeled without and within with equal neatness and art, like the nest
of the humming-bird and the little gray gnat-catcher.  The material is
much more refractory than that used by either of these birds, being,
in the present case, dry, fine cedar twigs; but these were bound into
a shape as rounded and compact as could be moulded out of the most
plastic material.  Indeed, the nest of this bird looks precisely like
a large, lichen-covered, cup-shaped excrescence of the limb upon which
it is placed.  And the bird, while sitting, seems entirely at ease.
Most birds seem to make very hard work of incubation.  It is a kind of
martyrdom which appears to tax all their powers of endurance.
They have such a fixed, rigid, predetermined look, pressed down into
the nest and as motionless as if made of cast-iron.  But the wood pewee
is an exception.  She is largely visible above the rim of the nest.
Her attitude is easy and graceful; she moves her head this way and
that, and seems to take note of whatever goes on about her; and if her
neighbor were to drop in for a little social chat, she could doubtless
do her part.  In fact, she makes light and easy work of what, to most
other birds, is such a serious and engrossing matter.  If it does not
look like play with her, it at least looks like leisure and quiet
contemplation.

There is no nest-builder that suffers more from crows and squirrels and
other enemies than the wood-thrush.  It builds as openly and
unsuspiciously as if it thought the whole world as honest as itself.
Its favorite place is the fork of a sapling, eight or ten feet from the
ground, where it falls an easy prey to every nest-robber that comes
prowling through the woods and groves.  It is not a bird that skulks
and hides, like the cat-bird, the brown-thrasher, the chat, or the
cheewink, and its nest is not concealed with the same art as theirs.
Our thrushes are all frank, open-mannered birds; but the veery and the
hermit build upon the ground, where they at least escape the crows,
owls, and jays, and stand a better chance to be overlooked, by the
red squirrel and weasel also; while the robin seeks the protection of
dwellings and out-buildings.  For years I have not known the nest of a
wood-thrush to succeed.  During the season referred to I observed but
two, both apparently a second attempt, as the season was well advanced,
and both failures.  In one case, the nest was placed in a branch that
an apple tree, standing near a dwelling, held out over the highway.
The structure was barely ten feet above the middle of the road,
and would just escape a passing load of hay.  It was made conspicuous
by the use of a large fragment of newspaper in its foundation--an
unsafe material to build upon in most cases.  Whatever else the press
may guard, this particular newspaper did not guard this nest from harm.
It saw the egg and probably the chick, but not the fledgeling.
A murderous deed was committed above the public highway, but whether in
the open day or under cover of darkness I have no means of knowing.
The frisky red squirrel was doubtless the culprit.  The other nest was
in a maple sapling, within a few yards of the little rustic
summer-house already referred to.  The first attempt of the season,
I suspect, had failed in a more secluded place under the hill; so the
pair had come up nearer the house for protection.  The male sang in the
trees near by for several days before I chanced to see the nest.
The very morning, I think, it was finished, I saw a red squirrel
exploring a tree but a few yards away; he probably knew what the
singing meant as well as I did.  I did not see the inside of the nest,
for it was almost instantly deserted, the female having probably laid
a single egg, which the squirrel had devoured.

If I were a bird, in building my nest I should follow the example of
the bobolink, placing it in the midst of a broad meadow, where there
was no spear of grass, or flower or growth unlike another to mark its
site.  I judge that the bobolink escapes the dangers to which I have
adverted as few or no other birds do.  Unless the mowers come along at
an earlier date than she has anticipated, that is, before July lst,
or a skunk goes nosing through the grass, which is unusual, she is as
safe as bird well can be in the great open of nature.  She selects the
most monotonous and uniform place she can find amid the daisies or the
timothy and clover, and places her simple structure upon the ground in
the midst of it.  There is no concealment, except as the great conceals
the little, as the desert conceals the pebble, as the myriad conceals
the unit.  You may find the nest once, if your course chances to lead
you across it and your eye is quick enough to note the silent brown
bird as she darts quickly away; but step three paces in the wrong
direction, and your search will probably be fruitless.  My friend and I
found a nest by accident one day, and then lost it again one minute
afterward.  I moved away a few yards to be sure of the mother-bird,
charging my friend not to stir from his tracks.  When I returned,
he had moved two paces, he said (he had really moved four), and we
spent a half hour stooping over the daisies and the buttercups, looking
for the lost clew.  We grew desperate, and fairly felt the ground all
over with our hands, but without avail.  I marked the spot with a bush,
and came the next day, and with the bush as a centre, moved about it in
slowly increasing circles, covering, I thought, nearly every inch of
ground with my feet, and laying hold of it with all the visual power
that I could command, till my patience was exhausted, and I gave up,
baffled.  I began to doubt the ability of the parent birds themselves
to find it, and so secreted myself and watched.  After much delay,
the male bird appeared with food in his beak, and satisfying himself
that the coast was clear, dropped into the grass which I had trodden
down in my search.  Fastening my eye upon a particular meadow-lily,
I walked straight to the spot, bent down, and gazed long and intently
into the grass.  Finally my eye separated the nest and its young from
its surroundings.  My foot had barely missed them in my search, but by
how much they had escaped my eye I could not tell.  Probably not by
distance at all, but simply by unrecognition.  They were virtually
invisible.  The dark gray and yellowish brown dry grass and stubble of
the meadow-bottom were exactly copied in the color of the half-fledged
young.  More than that, they hugged the nest so closely and formed such
a compact mass, that though there were five of them, they preserved the
unit of expression,--no single head or form was defined; they were one,
and that one was without shape or color, and not separable, except by
closest scrutiny, from the one of the meadow-bottom.  That nest
prospered, as bobolinks' nests doubtless generally do;
for, notwithstanding the enormous slaughter of the birds during their
fall migrations by Southern sportsmen, the bobolink appears to hold its
own, and its music does not diminish in our Northern meadows.

Birds with whom the struggle for life is the sharpest seem to be more
prolific than those whose nest and young are exposed to fewer dangers.
The robin, the sparrow, the pewee, etc., will rear, or make the attempt
to rear, two and sometimes three broods in a season; but the bobolink,
the oriole, the kingbird, the goldfinch, the cedar-bird, the birds of
prey, and the woodpeckers, that build in safe retreats, in the trunks
of trees, have usually but a single brood.  If the boblink reared two
broods, our meadows would swarm with them.

I noted three nests of the cedar-bird in August in a single orchard,
all productive, but all with one or more unfruitful eggs in them.
The cedar-bird is the most silent of our birds having but a single fine
note, so far as I have observed, but its manners are very expressive
at times.  No bird known to me is capable of expressing so much silent
alarm while on the nest as this bird.  As you ascend the tree and draw
near it, it depresses its plumage and crest, stretches up its neck,
and becomes the very picture of fear.  Other birds, under like
circumstances, hardly change their expression at all till they launch
into the air, when by their voice they express anger rather than alarm.

I have referred to the red squirrel as a destroyer of the eggs and
young of birds.  I think the mischief it does in this respect can
hardly be over estimated.  Nearly all birds look upon it as their
enemy, and attack and annoy it when it appears near their breeding
haunts.  Thus, I have seen the pewee, the cuckoo, the robin, and
the wood-thrush pursuing it with angry voice and gestures.  A friend of
mine saw a pair of robins attack one in the top of a tall tree so
vigorously that they caused it to lose its hold, when it fell to the
ground, and was so stunned by the blow as to allow him to pick it up.
If you wish the birds to breed and thrive in your orchard and groves,
kill every red squirrel that infests the place; kill every weasel also.
The weasel is a subtle and arch enemy of the birds.  It climbs trees
and explores them with great ease and nimbleness.  I have seen it do so
on several occasions.  One day my attention was arrested by the angry
notes of a pair of brown-thrashers that were flitting from bush to bush
along an old stone row in a remote field.  Presently I saw what it was
that excited them--three large red weasels, or ermines coming along the
stone wall, and leisurely and half playfully exploring every tree that
stood near it.  They had probably robbed the thrashers.  They would go
up the trees with great ease, and glide serpent-like out upon the main
branches.  When they descended the tree they were unable to come
straight down, like a squirrel, but went around it spirally.
How boldly they thrust their heads out of the wall, and eyed me and
sniffed me, as I drew near,--their round, thin ears, their prominent,
glistening, bead-like eyes, and the curving, snake-like motions of the
head and neck being very noticeable.  They looked like blood-suckers
and egg-suckers.  They suggested something extremely remorseless and
cruel.  One could understand the alarm of the rats when they discover
one of these fearless, subtle, and circumventing creatures threading
their holes.  To flee must be like trying to escape death itself.
I was one day standing in the woods upon a flat stone, in what at
certain seasons was the bed of a stream, when one of these weasels came
undulating along and ran under the stone upon which I was standing.
As I remained motionless, he thrust his wedge-shaped head, and turned
it back above the stone as if half in mind to seize my foot; then he
drew back, and presently went his way.  These weasels often hunt in
packs like the British stoat.  When I was a boy, my father one day
armed me with an old musket and sent me to shoot chipmunks around the
corn.  While watching the squirrels, a troop of weasels tried to cross
a bar-way where I sat, and were so bent on doing it that I fired at
them, boy-like, simply to thwart their purpose.  One of the weasels was
disabled by my shot, but the troop was not discouraged, and, after
making several feints to cross, one of them seized the wounded one and
bore it over, and the pack disappeared in the wall on the other side.

Let me conclude this chapter with two or three notes about this alert
enemy of the birds and the lesser animals, the weasel.

A farmer one day heard a queer growling sound in the grass;
on approaching the spot he saw two weasels contending over a mouse;
each had hold of the mouse pulling in opposite directions, and were so
absorbed in the struggle that the farmer cautiously put his hands down
and grabbed them both by the back of the neck.  He put them in a cage,
and offered them bread and other food.  This they refused to eat,
but in a few days one of them had eaten the other up, picking his bones
clean and leaving nothing but the skeleton.

The same farmer was one day in his cellar when two rats came out of a
hole near him in great haste, and ran up the cellar wall and along its
top till they came to a floor timber that stopped their progress,
when they turned at bay, and looked excitedly back along the course
they had come.  In a moment a weasel, evidently in hot pursuit of them,
came out of the hole, and seeing the farmer, checked his course and
darted back.  The rats had doubtless turned to give him fight,
and would probably have been a match for him.

The weasel seems to track its game by scent.  A hunter of my
acquaintance was one day sitting in the woods, when he saw
a red squirrel run with great speed up a tree near him, and out
upon a long branch, from which he leaped to some rocks, and disappeared
beneath them.  In a moment a weasel came in fu1l course upon his trail,
ran up the tree, then out along the branch, from the end of which he
leaped to the rocks as the squirrel did, and plunged beneath them.

Doubtless the squirrel fell a prey to him.  The squirrel's best game
would have been to have kept to the higher tree-tops, where he could
easily have distanced the weasel.  But beneath the rocks he stood a
very poor chance.  I have often wondered what keeps such an animal as
the weasel in check, for weasels are quite rare.  They never need go
hungry, for rats and squirrels and mice and birds are everywhere.
They probably do not fall a prey to any other animal, and very rarely
to man.  But the circumstances or agencies that check the increase of
any species of animal are, as Darwin says, very obscure and but little
known.




BEES.



AN IDYL OF THE HONEY-BEE.



There is no creature with which man has surrounded himself that seems
so much like a product of civilization, so much like the result of
development on special lines and in special fields, as the honey-bee.
Indeed, a colony of bees, with their neatness and love of order, their
division of labor, their public spiritedness, their thrift, their
complex economies and their inordinate love of gain, seems as far
removed from a condition of rude nature as does a walled city or a
cathedral town.  Our native bee, on the other hand, "the burly, dozing
humble-bee," affects one more like the rude, untutored savage.  He has
learned nothing from experience.  He lives from hand to mouth.
He luxuriates in time of plenty, and he starves in times of scarcity.
He lives in a rude nest or in a hole in the ground, and in small
communities; he builds a few deep cells or sacks in which he stores
a little honey and bee-bread for his young, but as a worker in wax he
is of the most primitive and awkward.  The Indian regarded the
honey-bee as an ill-omen.  She was the white man's fly.  In fact she
was the epitome of the white man himself.  She has the white man's
craftiness, his industry, his architectural skill, his neatness and
love of system, his foresight; and above all his eager, miserly habits.
The honeybee's great ambition is to be rich, to lay up great stores,
to possess the sweet of every flower that blooms.  She is more than
provident.  Enough will not satisfy her, she must have all she can get
by hook or by crook.  She comes from the oldest country, Asia,
and thrives best in the most fertile and long-settled lands.

Yet the fact remains that the honey-bee is essentially a wild creature,
and never has been and cannot be thoroughly domesticated.  Its proper
home is the woods, and thither every new swarm counts on going;
and thither many do go in spite of the care and watchfulness of the
bee-keeper.  If the woods in any given locality are deficient in trees
with suitable cavities, the bees resort to all sorts of makeshifts;
they go into chimneys, into barns and outhouses, under stones, into
rocks, and so forth.  Several chimneys in my locality with disused
flues are taken possession of by colonies of bees nearly every season.
One day, while bee-hunting, I developed a line that went toward a
farm-house where I had reason to believe no bees were kept.  I followed
it up and questioned the farmer about his bees.  He said he kept no
bees, but that a swarm had taken possession of his chimney, and another
had gone under the clapboards in the gable end of his house.  He had
taken a large lot of honey out of both places the year before.  Another
farmer told me that one day his family had seen a number of bees
examining a knot-hole in the side of his house; the next day as they
were sitting down to dinner their attention was attracted by a loud
humming noise, when they discovered a swarm of bees settling upon the
side of the house and pouring into the knot-hole.  In subsequent years
other swarms came to the same place.

Apparently, every swarm of bees before it leaves the parent hive sends
out exploring parties to look up the future home.  The woods and groves
are searched through and through, and no doubt the privacy of many a
squirrel and many a wood mouse is intruded upon.  What cozy nooks and
retreats they do spy out, so much more attractive than the painted hive
in the garden, so much cooler in summer and so much warmer in winter!

The bee is in the main an honest citizen; she prefers legitimate to
illegitimate business; she is never an outlaw until her proper sources
of supply fail; she will not touch honey as long as honey-yielding
flowers can be found; she always prefers to go to the fountain-head,
and dislikes to take her sweets at second hand.  But in the fall, after
the flowers have failed, she can be tempted.  The bee-hunter takes
advantage of this fact; he betrays her with a little honey.  He
wants to steal her stores, and he first encourages her to steal his,
then follows the thief home with her booty.  This is the whole trick of
the bee-hunter.  The bees never suspect his game, else by taking a
circuitous route they could easily baffle him.  But the honey-bee has
absolutely no wit or cunning outside of her special gifts as a gatherer
and storer of honey.  She is a simple-minded creature, and can be
imposed upon by any novice.  Yet it is not every novice that can find
a bee-tree.  The sportsman may track his game to its retreat by the aid
of his dog, but in hunting the honey-bee one must be his own dog, and
track his game through an element in which it leaves no trail.  It is
a task for a sharp, quick eye, and may test the resources of the best
wood-craft.  One autumn when I devoted much time to this pursuit, as
the best means of getting at nature and the open-air exhilaration,
my eye became so trained that bees were nearly as easy to it as birds.
I saw and heard bees wherever I went.  One day, standing on a street
corner in a great city, I saw above the trucks and the traffic a line
of bees carrying off sweets from some grocery or confectionery shop.

One looks upon the woods with a new interest when he suspects they hold
a colony of bees.  What a pleasing secret it is; a tree with a heart of
comb-honey, a decayed oak or maple with a bit of Sicily or Mount
Hymettus stowed away in its trunk or branches; secret chambers where
lies hidden the wealth of ten thousand little freebooters, great
nuggets and wedges of precious ore gathered with risk and labor from
every field and wood about.

But if you would know the delights of bee-hunting, and how many sweets
such a trip yields beside honey, come with me some bright, warm, late
September or early October day.  It is the golden season of the year,
and any errand or pursuit that takes us abroad upon the hills or by the
painted woods and along the amber colored streams at such a time is
enough.  So, with haversacks filled with grapes and peaches and apples
and a bottle of milk,--for we shall not be home to dinner,--and armed
with a compass, a hatchet, a pail, and a box with a piece of comb-honey
neatly fitted into it--any box the size of your hand with a lid will do
nearly as well as the elaborate and ingenious contrivance of the
regular bee-hunter--we sally forth.  Our course at first lies along the
highway, under great chestnut-trees whose nuts are just dropping, then
through an orchard and across a little creek, thence gently rising
through a long series of cultivated fields toward some high, uplying
land, behind which rises a rugged wooded ridge or mountain, the most
sightly point in all this section.  Behind this ridge for several miles
the country is wild, wooded, and rocky, and is no doubt the home of
many wild swarms of bees.  What a gleeful uproar the robins,
cedar-birds, high-holes, and cow black-birds make amid the black
cherry-trees as we pass along.  The raccoons, too, have been here after
black cherries, and we see their marks at various points.  Several
crows are walking about a newly sowed wheat field we pass through,
and we pause to note their graceful movements and glossy coats.  I have
seen no bird walk the ground with just the same air the crow does.
It is not exactly pride; there is no strut or swagger in it, though
perhaps just a little condescension; it is the contented, complaisant,
and self-possessed gait of a lord over his domains.  All these acres
are mine, he says, and all these crops; men plow and sow for me, and I
stay here or go there, and find life sweet and good wherever I am.
The hawk looks awkward and out of place on the ground; the game birds
hurry and skulk, but the crow is at home and treads the earth as if
there were none to molest him or make him afraid.

The crows we have always with us, but it is not every day or every
season that one sees an eagle.  Hence I must preserve the memory of one
I saw the last day I went bee-hunting.  As I was laboring up the side
of a mountain at the head of a valley, the noble bird sprang from the
top of a dry tree above me and came sailing directly over my head.
I saw him bend his eye down upon me, and I could hear the low hum of
his plumage, as if the web off every quill in his great wings vibrated
in his strong, level flight.  I watched him as long as my eye could
hold him.  When he was fairly clear of the mountain he began that
sweeping spiral movement in which he climbs the sky.  Up and up he went
without once breaking his majestic poise till be appeared to sight some
far-off alien geography, when he bent his course thitherward and
gradually vanished in the blue depths.  The eagle is a bird of large
ideas, he embraces long distances; the continent is his home.  I never
look upon one without emotion; I follow him with my eye as long as
I can.  I think of Canada, of the Great Lakes, of the Rocky Mountains,
of the wild and sounding sea-coast.  The waters are his, and the woods
and the inaccessible cliffs.  He pierces behind the veil of the storm,
and his joy is height and depth and vast spaces.

We go out of our way to touch at a spring run in the edge of the woods,
and are lucky to find a single scarlet lobelia lingering there.
It seems almost to light up the gloom with its intense bit of color.
Beside a ditch in a field beyond we find the great blue lobelia
(Lobelia syphilitica), and near it amid the weeds and wild grasses and
purple asters the most beautiful of our fall flowers, the fringed
gentian.  What a rare and delicate, almost aristocratic look the
gentian has amid its coarse, unkempt surroundings.  It does not lure
the bee, but it lures and holds every passing human eye.  If we strike
through the corner of yonder woods, where the ground is moistened by
hidden springs and where there is a little opening amid the trees,
we shall find the closed gentian, a rare flower in this locality.
I had walked this way many times before I chanced upon its retreat;
and then I was following a line of bees.  I lost the bees but I got the
gentians.  How curiously this flower looks, with its deep blue petals
folded together so tightly--a bud and yet a blossom.  It is the nun
among our wild flowers, a form closely veiled and cloaked.
The buccaneer bumble-bee sometimes tries to rifle it of its sweets.
I have seen the blossom with the bee entombed in it.  He had forced his
way into the virgin corolla as if determined to know its secret, but he
had never returned with the knowledge he had gained.

After a refreshing walk of a couple of miles we reach a point where we
will make our first trial--a high stone wall that runs parallel with
the wooded ridge referred to, and separated from it by a broad field.
There are bees at work there on that goldenrod, and it requires but
little maneuvering to sweep one into our box.  Almost any other
creature rudely and suddenly arrested in its career and clapped into
a cage in this way would show great confusion and alarm.  The bee is
alarmed for a moment, but the bee has a passion stronger than its love
of life or fear of death, namely, desire for honey, not simply to eat,
but to carry home as booty.  "Such rage of honey in their bosom beats,"
says Virgil.  It is quick to catch the scent of honey in the box, and
as quick to fall to filling itself.  We now set the box down upon the
wall and gently remove the cover.  The bee is head and shoulders in one
of the half-filled cells, and is oblivious to everything else about it.
Come rack, come ruin, it will die at work.  We step back a few paces,
and sit down upon the ground so as to bring the box against the blue
sky as a background.  In two or three minutes the bee is seen rising
slowly and heavily from the box.  It seems loath to leave so much honey
behind and it marks the place well.  It mounts aloft in a rapidly
increasing spiral, surveying the near and minute objects first,
then the larger and more distant, till having circled about the spot
five or six times and taken all its bearings it darts away for home.
It is a good eye that holds fast to the bee till it is fairly off.
Sometimes one's head will swim following it, and often one's eyes are
put out by the sun.  This bee gradually drifts down the hill, then
strikes away toward a farm-house half a mile away, where I know bees
are kept.  Then we try another and another, and the third bee, much to
our satisfaction, goes straight toward the woods.  We could see the
brown speck against the darker background for many yards.  The regular
bee-hunter professes to be able to tell a wild bee from a tame one by
the color, the former, he says, being lighter.  But there is no
difference; they are both alike in color and in manner.  Young bees are
lighter than old, and that is all there is of it.  If a bee lived many
years in the woods it would doubtless come to have some distinguishing
marks, but the life of a bee is only a few months at the farthest,
and no change is wrought in this brief time.

Our bees are all soon back, and more with them, for we have touched
the box here and there with the cork of a bottle of anise oil, and this
fragrant and pungent oil will attract bees half a mile or more.  When
no flowers can be found, this is the quickest way to obtain a bee.

It is a singular fact that when the bee first finds the hunter's box
its first feeling is one of anger; it is as mad as a hornet; its tone
changes, it sounds its shrill war trumpet and darts to and fro,
and gives vent to its rage and indignation in no uncertain manner.
It seems to scent foul play at once.  It says, "Here is robbery;
here is the spoil of some hive, may be my own," and its blood is up.
But its ruling passion soon comes to the surface, its avarice gets the
better of its indignation, and it seems to say, "Well, I had better
take possession of this and carry it home."  So after many feints and
approaches and dartings off with a loud angry hum as if it would none
of it, the bee settles down and fills itself.

It does not entirely cool off and get soberly to work till it has made
two or three trips home with its booty.  When other bees come, even if
all from the same swarm, they quarrel and dispute over the box,
and clip and dart at each other like bantam cocks.  Apparently the ill
feeling which the sight of the honey awakens is not one of jealousy or
rivalry, but wrath.

A bee will usually make three or four trips from the hunter's box
before it brings back a companion.  I suspect the bee does not tell
its fellows what it has found, but that they smell out the secret;
it doubtless bears some evidence with it upon its feet or proboscis
that it has been upon honey-comb and not upon flowers, and its
companions take the hint and follow, arriving always many seconds
behind.  Then the quantity and quality of the booty would also betray
it.  No doubt, also, there are plenty of gossips about a hive that
note and tell everything.  "Oh, did you see that? Peggy Mel came in
a few moments ago in great haste, and one of the up-stairs packers says
she was loaded till she groaned with apple-blossom honey which she
deposited, and then rushed off again like mad.  Apple-blossom honey
in October!  Fee, fi, fo, fum!  I smell something!  Let's after."

In about half an hour we have three well-defined lines of bees
established --two to farm-houses and one to the woods, and our box is
being rapidly depleted of its honey.  About every fourth bee goes to
the woods, and now that they have learned the way thoroughly they do
not make the long preliminary whirl above the box, but start directly
from it.  The woods are rough and dense and the hill steep, and we do
not like to follow the line of bees until we have tried at least to
settle the problem as to the distance they go into the woods-whether
the tree is on this side of the ridge or in the depth of the forest on
the other side.  So we shut up the box when it is full of bees and
carry it about three hundred yards along the wall from which we are
operating.  When liberated, the bees, as they always will in such
cases, go off in the same directions they have been going; they do not
seem to know that they have been moved.  But other bees have followed
our scent, and it is not many minutes before a second line to the woods
is established.  This is called cross-lining the bees.  The new line
makes a sharp angle with the other line, and we know at once that the
tree is only a few rods into the woods.  The two lines we have
established form two sides of a triangle of which the wall is the base;
at the apex of the triangle, or where the two lines meet in the woods,
we are sure to find the tree.  We quickly follow up these lines,
and where they cross each other on the side of the hill we scan every
tree closely.  I pause at the foot of an oak and examine a hole near
the root; now the bees are in this tree and their entrance is on the
upper side near the ground, not two feet from the hole I peer into,
and yet so quiet and secret is their going and coming that I fail to
discover them and pass on up the hill.  Failing in this direction,
I return to the oak again, and then perceive the bees going out in
a small crack in the tree.  The bees do not know they are found out
and that the game is in our hands, and are as oblivious of our presence
as if we were ants or crickets.  The indications are that the swarm is
a small one, and the store of honey trifling.  In "taking up" a
bee-tree it is usual first to kill or stupefy the bees with the fumes
of burning sulfur or with tobacco smoke.  But this course is
impracticable on the present occasion, so we boldly and ruthlessly
assault the tree with an ax we have procured.  At the first blow
the bees set up a loud buzzing, but we have no mercy, and the side of
the cavity is soon cut away and the interior with its white-yellow mass
of comb-honey is exposed, and not a bee strikes a blow in defense of
its all.  This may seem singular, but it has nearly always been my
experience.  When a swarm of bees are thus rudely assaulted with an
ax, they evidently think the end of the world has come, and, like true
misers as they are, each one seizes as much of the treasure as it can
hold; in other words they all fall to and gorge themselves with honey,
and calmly await the issue.  When in this condition they make no
defense and will not sting unless taken hold of.  In fact they are as
harmless as flies. Bees are always to be managed with boldness and
decision.

Any half-way measures, any timid poking about, any feeble attempts to
reach their honey, are sure to be quickly resented.  The popular notion
that bees have a special antipathy toward certain persons and a liking
for certain others has only this fact at the bottom of it; they will
sting a person who is afraid of them and goes skulking and dodging
about, and they will not sting a person who faces them boldly and has
no dread of them.  They are like dogs.  The way to disarm a vicious dog
is to show him you do not fear him; it is his turn to be afraid then.
I never had any dread of bees and am seldom stung by them.  I have
climbed up into a large chestnut that contained a swarm in one of its
cavities and chopped them out with an ax, being obliged at times to
pause and brush the bewildered bees from my hands and face, and not
been stung once.  I have chopped a swarm out of an apple-tree in June
and taken out the cards of honey and arranged them in a hive, and then
dipped out the bees with a dipper, and taken the whole home with me in
pretty good condition, with scarcely any opposition on the part of the
bees.  In reaching your hand into the cavity to detach and remove the
comb you are pretty sure to get stung, for when you touch the
"business end" of a bee, it will sting even though its head be off.
But the bee carries the antidote to its own poison.  The best remedy
for bee sting is honey, and when your hands are besmeared with honey,
as they are sure to be on such occasions, the wound is scarcely more
painful than the prick of a pin.  Assault your bee-tree, then, boldly
with your ax, and you will find that when the honey is exposed every
bee has surrendered and the whole swarm is cowering in helpless
bewilderment and terror.  Our tree yields only a few pounds of honey,
not enough to have lasted the swarm till January, but no matter;
we have the less burden to carry.

In the afternoon we go nearly half a mile farther along the ridge to a
cornfield that lies immediately in front of the highest point of the
mountain.  The view is superb; the ripe autumn landscape rolls away to
the east, cut through by the great placid river; in the extreme north
the wall of the Cat