skills stands out clear and strong, while in the
south the mountains of the Highlands bound the view.  The day is warm
and the bees are very busy there in that neglected corner of the field,
rich in asters, flea-bane, and golden-rod.  The corn has been cut,
and upon a stout, but a few rods from the woods, which here drop
quickly down from the precipitous heights, we set up our bee-box,
touched again with the pungent oil.  In a few moments a bee has found
it; she comes up to leeward, following the scent.  On leaving the box
she goes straight toward the woods.  More bees quickly come, and it is
not long before the line is well established.  Now we have recourse to
the same tactics we employed before, and move along the ridge to
another field to get our cross line.  But the bees still go in almost
the same direction they did from the corn stout.  The tree is then
either on the top of the mountain or on the other or west side of it.
We hesitate to make the plunge into the woods and seek to scale those
precipices, for the eye can plainly see what is before us.  As the
afternoon sun gets lower the bees are seen with wonderful distinctness.
They fly toward and under the sun and are in a strong light, while the
near woods which form the background are in deep shadow.  They look
like large luminous motes.  Their swiftly vibrating, transparent wings
surround their bodies with a shining nimbus that makes them visible for
a long distance.  They seem magnified many times.  We see them bridge
the little gulf between us and the woods, then rise up over the
tree-tops with their burdens, swerving neither to the right hand nor to
the left.  It is almost pathetic to see them labor so, climbing the
mountain and unwittingly guiding us to their treasures.  When the sun
gets down so that his direction corresponds exactly with the course of
the bees, we make the plunge.  It proves even harder climbing than we
had anticipated; the mountain is faced by a broken and irregular wall
of rock, up which we pull ourselves slowly and cautiously by main
strength.  In half an hour, the perspiration streaming from every pore,
we reach the summit.  The trees here are all small, a second growth,
and we are soon convinced the bees are not here.  Then down we go on
the other side, clambering down the rocky stairways till we reach quite
a broad plateau that forms something like the shoulder of the mountain.
On the brink of this there are many large hemlocks, and we scan them
closely and rap upon them with our ax.  But not a bee is seen or heard;
we do not seem as near the tree as we were in the fields below; yet if
some divinity would only whisper the fact to us we are within a few
rods of the coveted prize, which is not in one of the large hemlocks or
oaks that absorb our attention, but in an old stub or stump not six
feet high, and which we have seen and passed several times without
giving it a thought.  We go farther down the mountain and beat about to
the right and left and get entangled in brush and arrested by
precipices, and finally as the day is nearly spent, give up the search
and leave the woods quite baffled, but resolved to return on the
morrow.  The next day we come back and commence operations in an
opening in the woods well down on the side of the mountain, where we
gave up the search.  Our box is soon swarming with the eager bees,
and they go back toward the summit we have passed.  We follow back and
establish a new line where the ground will permit; then another and
another, and yet the riddle is not solved.  One time we are south of
them, then north, then the bees get up through the trees and we cannot
tell where they go.  But after much searching, and after the mystery
seems rather to deepen than to clear up, we chance to pause beside the
old stump.  A bee comes out of a small opening, like that made by ants
in decayed wood, rubs its eyes and examines its antennae as bees always
do before leaving their hive, then takes flight.  At the same instant
several bees come by us loaded with our honey and settle home with that
peculiar low complacent buzz of the well-filled insect.  Here then is
our idyl, our bit of Virgil and Theocritus, in a decayed stump of a
hemlock tree.  We could tear it open with our hands, and a bear would
find it an easy prize, and a rich one too, for we take from it fifty
pounds of excellent honey.  The bees have been here many years,
and have of course sent out swarm after swarm into the wilds.  They
have protected themselves against the weather and strengthened their
shaky habitation by a copious use of wax.

When a bee-tree is thus "taken up" in the middle of the day, of course
a good many bees are away from home and have not heard the news.
When they return and find the ground flowing with honey, and piles of
bleeding combs lying about, they apparently do not recognize the place,
and their first instinct is to fall to and fill themselves; this done,
their next thought is to carry it home, so they rise up slowly through
the branches of the trees till they have attained an altitude that
enables them to survey the scene, when they seem to say, "Why, this is
home," and down they come again; beholding the wreck and ruins once
more they still think there is some mistake, and get up a second or
a third time and then drop back pitifully as before.  It is the most
pathetic sight of all, the surviving and bewildered bees struggling
to save a few drops of their wasted treasures.

Presently, if there is another swarm in the woods, robber-bees appear.
You may know them by their saucy, chiding, devil-may-care hum.  It is
an ill wind that blows nobody good, and they make the most of the
misfortune of their neighbors; and thereby pave the way for their own
ruin.  The hunter marks their course and the next day looks them up.
On this occasion the day was hot and the honey very fragrant, and a
line of bees was soon established S. S. W.  Though there was much
refuse honey in the old stub, and though little golden rills trickled
down the hill from it, and the near branches and saplings were
besmeared with it where we wiped our murderous hands, yet not a drop
was wasted.  It was a feast to which not only honey-bees came, but
bumble-bees, wasps, hornets, flies, ants.  The bumble-bees, which at
this season are hungry vagrants with no fixed place of abode, would
gorge themselves, then creep beneath the bits of empty comb or
fragments of bark and pass the night, and renew the feast next day.
The bumble-bee is an insect of which the bee-hunter sees much.
There are all sorts and sizes of them.  They are dull and clumsy
compared with the honey-bee.  Attracted in the fields by the
bee-hunter's box, they will come up the wind on the scent and blunder
into it in the most stupid, lubberly fashion.

The honey-bee that licked up our leavings on the old stub belonged to
a swarm, as it proved, about half a mile farther down the ridge,
and a few days afterward fate overtook them, and their stores in turn
became the prey of another swarm in the vicinity, which also tempted
Providence and were overwhelmed.  The first mentioned swarm I had lined
from several points, and was following up the clew over rocks and
through gulleys, when I came to where a large hemlock had been felled
a few years before and a swarm taken from a cavity near the top of it;
fragments of the old comb were yet to be seen.  A few yards away stood
another short, squatty hemlock, and I said my bees ought to be there.
As I paused near it I noticed where the tree had been wounded with an
ax a couple of feet from the ground many years before.  The wound had
partially grown over, but there was an opening there that I did not see
at the first glance.  I was about to pass on when a bee passed me
making that peculiar shrill, discordant hum that a bee makes when
besmeared with honey.  I saw it alight in the partially closed wound
and crawl home; then came others and others, little bands and squads of
them heavily freighted with honey from the box.  The tree was about
twenty inches through and hollow at the butt, or from the ax mark down.
This space the bees had completely filled with honey.  With an ax we
cut away the outer ring of live wood and exposed the treasure.  Despite
the utmost care, we wounded the comb so that little rills of the golden
liquid issued from the root of the tree and trickled down the hill.

The other bee-tree in the vicinity, to which I have referred, we found
one warm November day in less than half an hour after entering the
woods.  It also was a hemlock, that stood in a niche in a wall of
hoary, moss-covered rocks thirty feet high.  The tree hardly reached to
the top of the precipice.  The bees entered a small hole at the root,
which was seven or eight feet from the ground.  The position was a
striking one.  Never did apiary have a finer outlook or more rugged
surroundings.  A black, wood-embraced lake lay at our feet; the long
panorama of the Catskills filled the far distance, and the more broken
outlines of the Shawangunk range filled the rear.  On every hand were
precipices and a wild confusion of rocks and trees.

The cavity occupied by the bees was about three feet and a half long
and eight or ten inches in diameter.  With an ax we cut away one side
of the tree and laid bare its curiously wrought heart of honey.  It was
a most pleasing sight.  What winding and devious ways the bees had
through their palace!  What great masses and blocks of snow-white comb
there were!  Where it was sealed up, presenting that slightly dented,
uneven surface, it looked like some precious ore.  When we carried
a large pail full of it out of the woods, it seemed still more like
ore.

Your native bee-hunter predicates the distance of the tree by the time
the bee occupies in making its first trip.  But this is no certain
guide.  You are always safe in calculating that the tree is inside of a
mile, and you need not as a rule look for your bee's return under ten
minutes.  One day I picked up a bee in an opening in the woods and gave
it honey, and it made three trips to my box with an interval of about
twelve minutes between them; it returned alone each time; the tree,
which I afterward found, was about half a mile distant.

In lining bees through the woods, the tactics of the hunter are to
pause every twenty or thirty rods, lop away the branches or cut down
the trees, and set the bees to work again.  If they still go forward,
he goes forward also and repeats his observations till the tree is
found or till the bees turn and come back upon the trail.  Then he
knows be has passed the tree, and he retraces his steps to a convenient
distance and tries again, and thus quickly reduces the space to be
looked over till the swarm is traced home.  On one occasion, in a wild
rocky wood, where the surface alternated between deep gulfs and chasms
filled with thick, heavy growths of timber and sharp, precipitous,
rocky ridges like a tempest tossed sea, I carried my bees directly
under their tree, and set them to work from a high, exposed ledge of
rocks not thirty feet distant.  One would have expected them under such
circumstances to have gone straight home, as there were but few
branches intervening, but they did not; they labored up through the
trees and attained an altitude above the woods as if they had miles to
travel, and thus baffled me for hours.  Bees will always do this.
They are acquainted with the woods only from the top side, and from the
air above they recognize home only by land-marks here, and in every
instance they rise aloft to take their bearings.  Think how familiar to
them the topography of the forest summits must be-an umbrageous sea or
plain where every mask and point is known.

Another curious fact is that generally you will get track of a bee-tree
sooner when you are half a mile from it than when you are only a few
yards.  Bees, like us human insects, have little faith in the near at
hand; they expect to make their fortune in a distant field, they are
lured by the remote and the difficult, and hence overlook the flower
and the sweet at their very door.  On several occasions I have
unwittingly set my box within a few paces of a bee-tree and waited long
for bees without getting them, when, on removing to a distant field or
opening in the woods I have got a clew at once.

I have a theory that when bees leave the hive, unless there is some
special attraction in some other direction, they generally go against
the wind.  They would thus have the wind with them when they returned
home heavily laden, and with these little navigators the difference is
an important one.  With a full cargo, a stiff head-wind is a great
hindrance, but fresh and empty-handed they can face it with more ease.
Virgil says bees bear gravel stones as ballast, but their only ballast
is their honey bag.  Hence, when I go bee-hunting, I prefer to get to
windward of the woods in which the swarm is supposed to have taken
refuge.

Bees, like the milkman, like to be near a spring.  They do water their
honey, especially in a dry time.  The liquid is then of course thicker
and sweeter, and will bear diluting.  Hence, old bee-hunters look for
bee-trees along creeks and near spring runs in the woods.  I once found
a tree a long distance from any water, and the honey had a peculiar
bitter flavor imparted to it, I was convinced, by rainwater sucked from
the decayed and spongy hemlock tree, in which the swarm was found.
In cutting into the tree, the north side of it was found to be
saturated with water like a spring, which ran out in big drops, and had
a bitter flavor.  The bees had thus found a spring or a cistern in
their own house.

Bees are exposed to many hardships and many dangers.  Winds and storms
prove as disastrous to them as to other navigators.  Black spiders lie
in wait for them as do brigands for travelers.  One day as I was
looking for a bee amid some golden-rod, I spied one partly concealed
under a leaf.  Its baskets were full of pollen, and it did not move.
On lifting up the leaf I discovered that a hairy spider was ambushed
there and had the bee by the throat.  The vampire was evidently afraid
of the bee's sting, and was holding it by the throat till quite sure of
its death.  Virgil speaks of the painted lizard, perhaps a species of
salamander, as an enemy of the honey-bee.  We have no lizard that
destroys the bee; but our tree-toad, ambushed among the apple and
cherry blossoms, snaps them up wholesale.  Quick as lightning that
subtle but clammy tongue darts forth, and the unsuspecting bee is gone.
Virgil also accuses the titmouse and the woodpecker of preying upon the
bees, and our kingbird has been charged with the like crime, but the
latter devours only the drones.  The workers are either too small and
quick for it, or else it dreads their sting.

Virgil, by the way, had little more than a child's knowledge of the
honey-bee.  There is little fact and much fable in his fourth Georgic.
If he had ever kept bees himself, or even visited an apiary, it is hard
to see how he could have believed that the bee in its flight abroad
carried a gravel stone for ballast:--

   "And as when empty barks on billows float,
    With Sandy ballast sailors trim the boat;
    So bees bear gravel stones, whose poising weight
    Steers through the whistling winds their steady flight;"

or that when two colonies made war upon each other they issued forth
from their hives led by their kings and fought in the air, strewing the
ground with the dead and dying:--

   "Hard hailstones lie not thicker on the plain,
    Nor shaken oaks such show'rs of acorns rain."

It is quite certain he had never been bee-hunting.  If he had, we
should have had a fifth Georgic.  Yet he seems to have known that bees
sometimes escaped to the woods:--

   "Nor bees are lodged in hives alone, but found
    In chambers of their own beneath the ground:
    Their vaulted roofs are hung in pumices,
    And in the rotten trunks of hollow trees."

Wild honey is as near like tame as wild bees are like their brothers in
hive.  The only difference is that wild honey is flavored with your
adventure, which makes it a little more delectable than the domestic
article.




THE PASTORAL BEES



The honey-bee goes forth from the hive in spring like the dove from
Noah's ark, and it is not till after many days that she brings back the
olive leaf, which in this case is a pellet of golden pollen upon each
hip, usually obtained from the alder or the swamp willow.  In a country
where maple sugar is made, the bees get their first taste of sweet from
the sap as it flows from the spiles, or as it dries and is condensed
upon the sides of the buckets.  They will sometimes, in their
eagerness, come about the boiling place and be overwhelmed by the steam
and the smoke.  But bees appear to be more eager for bread in the
spring than for honey; their supply of this article, perhaps, does not
keep as well as their stores of the latter, hence fresh bread, in the
shape of new pollen, is diligently sought for.  My bees get their first
supplies from the catkins of the willows.  How quickly they find them
out.  If but one catkin opens anywhere within range, a bee is on hand
that very hour to rifle it, and it is a most pleasing experience to
stand near the hive some mild April day and see them come pouring in
with their little baskets packed with this first fruitage of the
spring.  They will have new bread now; they have been to mill in good
earnest; see their dusty coats, and the golden grist they bring home
with them.

When a bee brings pollen into the hive, he advances to the cell in
which it is to be deposited and kicks it off as one might his overalls
or rubber boots, making one foot help the other; then he walks off
without ever looking behind him; another bee, one of the indoor hands,
comes along and rams it down with his head and packs it into the cell
as the dairymaid packs butter into a firkin.

The first spring wild-flowers, whose shy faces among the dry leaves and
rocks are so welcome, yield no honey.  The anemone, the hepatica,
the bloodroot, the arbutus, the numerous violets, the spring beauty,
the corydalis, etc., woo lovers of nature, but do not woo the
honey-loving bee.  It requires more sun and warmth to develop the
saccharine element, and the beauty of these pale striplings of the
woods and groves is their sole and sufficient excuse for being.
The arbutus, lying low and keeping green all winter, attains to
perfume, but not to honey.

The first honey is perhaps obtained from the flowers of the red maple
and the golden willow.  The latter sends forth a wild, delicious
perfume.  The sugar maple blooms a little later, and from its silken
tassels a rich nectar is gathered.  My bees will not label these
different varieties for me as I really wish they would.  Honey from the
maples, a tree so clean and wholesome, and full of such virtues every
way, would be something to put one's tongue to.  Or that from the
blossoms of the apple, the peach, the cherry, the quince, the currant,
--one would like a card of each of these varieties to note their
peculiar qualities.  The apple-blossom is very important to the bees.
A single swarm has been known to gain twenty pounds in weight during
its continuance.  Bees love the ripened fruit, too, and in August and
September will suck themselves tipsy upon varieties such as
the sops-of-wine.

The interval between the blooming of the fruit-trees and that of the
clover and the raspberry is bridged over in many localities by the
honey locust.  What a delightful summer murmur these trees send forth
at this season.  I know nothing about the quality of the honey, but it
ought to keep well.  But when the red raspberry blooms, the fountains
of plenty are unsealed indeed; what a commotion about the hives then,
especially in localities where it is extensively cultivated, as in
places along the Hudson.  The delicate white clover, which begins to
bloom about the same time, is neglected; even honey itself is passed by
for this modest colorless, all but odorless flower.  A field of these
berries in June sends forth a continuous murmur like that of an
enormous hive.  The honey is not so white as that obtained from clover
but it is easier gathered; it is in shallow cups while that of the
clover is in deep tubes.  The bees are up and at it before sunrise,
and it takes a brisk shower to drive them in.  But the clover blooms
later and blooms everywhere, and is the staple source of supply of the
finest quality of honey.  The red clover yields up its stores only to
the longer proboscis of the bumble-bee, else the bee pasturage of our
agricultural districts would be unequaled.  I do not know from what the
famous honey of Chamouni in the Alps is made, but it can hardly surpass
our best products.  The snow-white honey of Anatolia in Asiatic Turkey,
which is regularly sent to Constantinople for the use of the grand
seignior and the ladies of his seraglio, is obtained from the cotton
plant, which makes me think that the white clover does not flourish
these.  The white clover is indigenous with us; its seeds seem latent
in the ground, and the application of certain stimulants to the soil,
such as wood ashes, causes them to germinate and spring up.

The rose, with all its beauty and perfume, yields no honey to the bee,
unless the wild species be sought by the bumble-bee.

Among the humbler plants, let me not forget the dandelion that so early
dots the sunny slopes, and upon which the bee languidly grazes,
wallowing to his knees in the golden but not over-succulent pasturage.
>From the blooming rye and wheat the bee gathers pollen, also from the
obscure blossoms of Indian corn.  Among weeds, catnip is the great
favorite.  It lasts nearly the whole season and yields richly.
It could no doubt be profitably cultivated in some localities,
and catnip honey would be a novelty in the market.  It would probably
partake of the aromatic properties of the plant from which it was
derived.

Among your stores of honey gathered before midsummer, you may chance
upon a card, or mayhap only a square inch or two of comb, in which the
liquid is as transparent as water, of a delicious quality, with a
slight flavor of mint.  This is the product of the linden or basswood,
of all the trees in our forest the one most beloved by the bees.
Melissa, the goddess of honey, has placed her seal upon this tree.
The wild swarms in the woods frequently reap a choice harvest from it.
I have seen a mountain side thickly studded with it, its straight,
tall, smooth, light-gray shaft carrying its deep-green crown far aloft,
like the tulip-tree or the maple.

In some of the Northwestern States there are large forests of it, and
the amount of honey reported stored by strong swarms in this section
during the time the tree is in bloom is quite incredible.  As a shade
and ornamental tree the linden is fully equal to the maple, and if it
were as extensively planted and cared for, our supplies of virgin honey
would be greatly increased. The famous honey of Lithuania in Russia is
the product of the linden.

It is a homely old stanza current among bee folk that--

   "A swarm of bees in May
    Is worth a load of hay;
    A swarm of bees in June
    Is worth a silver spoon;
    But a swarm in July
    Is not worth a fly."

A swarm in May is indeed a treasure; it is, like an April baby, sure
to thrive, and will very likely itself send out a swarm a month or two
later; but a swarm in July is not to be despised; it will store no
clover or linden honey for the  "grand seignior and the ladies of his
seraglio," but plenty of the rank and wholesome poor man's nectar, the
sun-tanned product of the plebeian buckwheat.  Buckwheat honey is the
black sheep in this white flock, but there is spirit and character in
it.  It lays hold of the taste in no equivocal manner, especially when
at a winter breakfast it meets its fellow, the russet buckwheat cake.
Bread with honey to cover it from the same stalk is double good
fortune.  It is not black, either, but nut-brown, and belongs to the
same class of goods as Herrick's

   "Nut-brown mirth and russet wit."

How the bees love it, and they bring the delicious odor of the blooming
plant to the hive with them, so that in the moist warm twilight the
apiary is redolent with the perfume of buckwheat.

Yet evidently it is not the perfume of any flower that attracts the
bees; they pay no attention to the sweet-scented lilac, or to
heliotrope, but work upon sumach, silkweed, and the hateful snapdragon.
In September they are hard pressed, and do well if they pick up enough
sweet to pay the running expenses of their establishment.  The purple
asters and the golden-rod are about all that remain to them.

Bees will go three or four miles in quest of honey, but it is a great
advantage to move the hive near the good pasturage, as has been the
custom from the earliest times in the 0ld World.  Some enterprising
person, taking a hint perhaps from the ancient Egyptians, who had
floating apiaries on the Nile, has tried the experiment of floating
several hundred colonies north on the Mississippi, starting from
New Orleans and following the opening season up, thus realizing a sort
of perpetual May or June, the chief attraction being the blossoms of
the river willow, which yield honey of rare excellence.  Some of the
bees were no doubt left behind, but the amount of virgin honey secured
must have been very great.  In September they should have begun the
return trip, following the retreating summer South.

It is the making of the wax that costs with the bee.  As with the poet,
the form, the receptacle, gives him more trouble than the sweet that
fills it, though, to be sure, there is always more or less empty comb
in both cases.  The honey he can have for the gathering, but the wax
he must make himself--must evolve from his own inner consciousness.
When wax is to be made the wax-makers fill themselves with honey and
retire into their chamber for private meditation; it is like some
solemn religious rite; they take hold of hands, or hook themselves
together in long lines that hang in festoons from the top of the hive,
and wait for the miracle to transpire.  After about twenty-four hours
their patience is rewarded, the honey is turned into wax, minute scales
of which are secreted from between the rings of the abdomen of each
bee; this is taken off and from it the comb is built up.  It is
calculated that about twenty-five pounds of honey are used in
elaborating one pound of comb, to say nothing of the time that is lost.
Hence the importance in an economical point of view, of a recent device
by which the honey is extracted and the comb returned intact to the
bees.  But honey without the comb is the perfume without the rose,--it
is sweet merely, and soon degenerates into candy.  Half the
delectableness is in breaking down these frail and exquisite walls
yourself, and tasting the nectar before it has lost its freshness by
the contact with the air.  Then the comb is a sort of shield or foil
that prevents the tongue from being overwhelmed by the shock of
the sweet.

The drones have the least enviable time of it.  Their foothold in the
hive is very precarious.  They look like the giants, the lords of the
swarm, but they are really the tools.  Their loud, threatening hum has
no sting to back it up, and their size and noise make them only the
more conspicuous marks for the birds.

Toward the close of the season, say in July or August, the fiat goes
forth that the drones must die; there is no further use for them.
Then the poor creatures, how they are huddled and hustled about, trying
to hide in corners and by-ways.  There is no loud, defiant humming now,
but abject fear seizes them.  They cower like hunted criminals.  I have
seen a dozen or more of them wedge themselves into a small space
between the glass and the comb, where the bees could not get hold of
them or where they seemed to be overlooked in the general slaughter.
They will also crawl outside and hide under the edges of the hive.
But sooner or later they are all killed or kicked out.  The drone makes
no resistance, except to pull back and try to get away; but
(putting yourself in his place) with one bee a-hold of your collar or
the hair of your head, and another a-hold of each arm or leg, and still
another feeling for your waistbands with his sting, the odds are
greatly against you.

It is a singular fact, also, that the queen is made, not born.  If the
entire population of Spain or Great Britain were the offspring of one
mother, it might be found necessary to hit upon some device by which a
royal baby could be manufactured out of an ordinary one, or else give
up the fashion of royalty.  All the bees in the hive have a common
parentage, and the queen and the worker are the same in the egg and in
the chick; the patent of royalty is in the cell and in the food; the
cell being much larger, and the food a peculiar stimulating kind of
jelly.  In certain contingencies, such as the loss of the queen with no
eggs in the royal cells, the workers take the larva of an ordinary bee,
enlarge the cell by taking in the two adjoining ones, and nurse it and
stuff it and coddle it, till at the end of sixteen days it comes out a
queen.  But ordinarily, in the natural course of events, the young
queen is kept a prisoner in her cell till the old queen has left with
the swarm.  Later on, the unhatched queen is guarded against the
reigning queen, who only wants an opportunity to murder every royal
scion in the hive.  At this time both the queens, the one a prisoner
and the other at large, pipe defiance at each other, a shrill, fine,
trumpet-like note that any ear will at once recognize.  This challenge,
not being allowed to be accepted by either party, is followed, in a day
or two by the abdication of the reigning queen; she leads out the
swarm, and her successor is liberated by her keepers, who, in her time,
abdicates in favor of the next younger.  When the bees have decided
that no more swarms can issue, the reigning queen is allowed to use her
stiletto upon her unhatched sisters.  Cases have been known where two
queens issued at the same time, when a mortal combat ensued, encouraged
by the workers, who formed a ring about them, but showed no preference,
and recognized the victor as the lawful sovereign.  For these and many
other curious facts we are indebted to the blind Huber.

It is worthy of note that the position of the queen cells is always
vertical, while that of the drones and workers is horizontal; majesty
stands on its head, which fact may be a part of the secret.

The notion has always very generally prevailed that the queen of the
bees is an absolute ruler, and issues her royal orders to willing
subjects.  Hence Napoleon the First sprinkled the symbolic bees over
the imperial mantle that bore the arms of his dynasty; and in the
country of the Pharaohs the bee was used as the emblem of a people
sweetly submissive to the orders of its king.  But the fact is, a swarm
of bees is an absolute democracy, and kings and despots can find no
warrant in their example.  The power and authority are entirely vested
in the great mass, the workers.  They furnish all the brains
and foresight of the colony, and administer its affairs.  Their word is
law, and both king and queen must obey.  They regulate the swarming,
and give the signal for the swarm to issue from the hive; they select
and make ready the tree in the woods and conduct the queen to it.

The peculiar office and sacredness of the queen consists in the fact
that she is the mother of the swarm, and the bees love and cherish her
as a mother and not as a sovereign.  She is the sole female bee in the
hive, and the swarm clings to her because she is their life.  Deprived
of their queen, and of all brood from which to rear one, the swarm
loses all heart and soon dies, though there be an abundance of honey in
the hive.

The common bees will never use their sting upon the queen; if she is to
be disposed of they starve her to death; and the queen herself will
sting nothing but royalty--nothing but a rival queen.

The queen, I say, is the mother bee; it is undoubtedly complimenting
her to call her a queen and invest her with regal authority, yet she is
a superb creature, and looks every inch a queen.  It is an event to
distinguish her amid the mass of bees when the swarm alights; it
awakens a thrill.  Before you have seen a queen you wonder if this or
that bee, which seems a little larger than its fellows, is not she, but
when you once really set eyes upon her you do not doubt for a moment.
You know that is the queen.  That long, elegant, shining,
feminine-looking creature can be none less than royalty.  How
beautifully her body tapers, how distinguished she looks, how
deliberate her movements!  The bees do not fall down before her, but
caress her and touch her person.  The drones or males, are large bees
too, but coarse, blunt, broad-shouldered, masculine-looking.  There is
but one fact or incident in the life of the queen that looks imperial
and authoritative:  Huber relates that when the old queen is restrained
in her movements by the workers, and prevented from destroying the
young queens in their cells, she assumes a peculiar attitude and utters
a note that strikes every bee motionless, and makes every head bow;
while this sound lasts not a bee stirs, but all look abashed and
humbled, yet whether the emotion is one of fear, or reverence, or of
sympathy with the distress of the queen mother, is hard to determine.
The moment it ceases and she advances again toward the royal cells,
the bees bite and pull and insult her as before.

I always feel that I have missed some good fortune if I am away from
home when my bees swarm.  What a delightful summer sound it is; how
they come pouring out of the hive, twenty or thirty thousand bees each
striving to get out first; it is as when the dam gives way and lets the
waters loose; it is a flood of bees which breaks upward into the air,
and becomes a maze of whirling black lines to the eye and a soft chorus
of myriad musical sounds to the ear.  This way and that way they drift,
now contracting, now expanding, rising, sinking, growing thick about
some branch or bush, then dispersing and massing at some other point,
till finally they begin to alight in earnest, when in a few moments the
whole swarm is collected upon the branch, forming a bunch perhaps as
large as a two-gallon measure.  Here they will hang from one to three
or four hours, or until a suitable tree in the woods is looked up,
when, if they have not been offered a hive in the mean time, they are
up and off.  In hiving them, if any accident happens to the queen the
enterprise miscarries at once.  One day I shook a swarm from a small
pear-tree into a tin pan, set the pan down on a shawl spread beneath
the tree, and put the hive over it.  The bees presently all crawled up
into it, and all seemed to go well for ten or fifteen minutes, when I
observed that something was wrong; the bees began to buzz excitedly and
to rush about in a bewildered manner, then they took to the wing and
all returned to the parent stock.  On lifting up the pan, I found
beneath it the queen with three or four other bees.  She had been one
of the first to fall, had missed the pan in her descent, and I had set
it upon her.  I conveyed her tenderly back to the hive, but either the
accident terminated fatally with her or else the young queen had been
liberated in the interim, and one of them had fallen in combat, for it
was ten days before the swarm issued a second time.

No one, to my knowledge, has ever seen the bees house-hunting in the
woods.  Yet there can be no doubt that they look up new quarters either
before or on the day the swarm issues.  For all bees are wild bees and
incapable of domestication; that is, the instinct to go back to nature
and take up again their wild abodes in the trees is never eradicated.
Years upon years of life in the apiary seems to have no appreciable
effect towards their final, permanent domestication.  That every new
swarm contemplates migrating to the woods, seems confirmed by the fact
that they will only come out when the weather is favorable to such an
enterprise, and that a passing cloud or a sudden wind, after the bees
are in the air, will usually drive them back into the parent hive.
Or an attack upon them with sand or gravel, or loose earth or water,
will quickly cause them to change their plans.  I would not even say
but that, when the bees are going off, the apparently absurd practice,
now entirely discredited by regular bee-keepers but still resorted to
by unscientific folk, of beating upon tin pans, blowing horns, and
creating an uproar generally, might not be without good results.
Certainly not by drowning the "orders" of the queen, but by impressing
the bees as with some unusual commotion in nature.  Bees are easily
alarmed and disconcerted, and I have known runaway swarms to be brought
down by a farmer ploughing in the field who showered them with handfuls
of loose soil.

I love to see a swarm go off--if it is not mine, and if mine must go I
want to be on hand to see the fun.  It is a return to first principles
again by a very direct route.  The past season I witnessed two such
escapes.  One swarm had come out the day before, and, without
alighting, had returned to the parent hive--some hitch in the plan,
perhaps, or may be the queen had found her wings too weak.  The next
day they came out again, and were hived.  But something offended them,
or else the tree in the woods--perhaps some royal old maple or birch
holding its head high above all others, with snug, spacious, irregular
chambers and galleries--had too many attractions; for they were
presently discovered filling the air over the garden, and whirling
excitedly around.  Gradually they began to drift over the street;
a moment more, and they had become separated from the other bees,
and, drawing together in a more compact mass or cloud, away they went,
a humming, flying vortex of bees, the queen in the centre, and the
swarm revolving around her as a pivot,--over meadows, across creeks and
swamps, straight for the heart of the mountain, about a mile distant,
--slow at first, so that the youth who gave chase kept up with them,
but increasing their speed till only a fox hound could have kept them
in sight.  I saw their pursuer laboring up the side of the mountain;
saw his white shirt-sleeves gleam as he entered the woods; but he
returned a few hours afterward without any clew as to the particular
tree in which they had taken refuge out of the ten thousand that
covered the side of the mountain.

The other swarm came out about one o'clock of a hot July day, and at
once showed symptoms that alarmed the keeper, who, however, threw
neither dirt nor water.  The house was situated on a steep side-hill.
Behind it the ground rose, for a hundred rods or so, at an angle of
nearly forty-five degrees, and the prospect of having to chase them up
this hill, if chase them we should, promised a good trial of wind at
least; for it soon became evident that their course lay in this
direction.  Determined to have a hand, or rather a foot, in the chase,
I threw off my coat and hurried on, before the swarm was yet fairly
organized and under way.  The route soon led me into a field of
standing rye, every spear of which held its head above my own.
Plunging recklessly forward, my course marked to those watching from
below by the agitated and wriggling grain, I emerged from the miniature
forest just in time to see the runaways disappearing over the top of
the hill, some fifty rods in advance of me.  Lining them as well as I
could, I soon reached the hill-top, my breath utterly gone and the
perspiration streaming from every pore of my skin.  On the other side
the country opened deep and wide.  A large valley swept around to the
north, heavily wooded at its head and on its sides.  It became evident
at once that the bees had made good their escape, and that whether they
had stopped on one side of the valley or the other, or had indeed
cleared the opposite mountain and gone into some unknown forest beyond,
was entirely problematical.  I turned back, therefore, thinking of the
honey-laden tree that some of these forests would hold before the
falling of the leaf.

I heard of a youth in the neighborhood, more lucky than myself on a
like occasion.  It seems that he had got well in advance of the swarm,
whose route lay over a hill, as in my case, and as he neared the
summit, hat in hand, the bees had just come up and were all about him.
Presently he noticed them hovering about his straw hat, and alighting
on his arm; and in almost as brief a time as it takes to relate it, the
whole swarm had followed the queen into his hat.  Being near a stone
wall, he coolly deposited his prize upon it, quickly disengaged himself
from the accommodating bees, and returned for a hive.  The explanation
of this singular circumstance no doubt is, that the queen, unused to
such long and heavy flights, was obliged to alight from very
exhaustion.  It is not very unusual for swarms to be thus found in
remote fields, collected upon a bush or branch of a tree.

When a swarm migrates to the woods in this manner, the individual bees,
as I have intimated, do not move in right lines or straight forward,
like a flock of birds, but round and round, like chaff in a whirlwind.
Unitedly they form a humming, revolving, nebulous mass, ten or fifteen
feet across, which keeps just high enough to clear all obstacles,
except in crossing deep valleys, when, of course, it may be very high.
The swarm seems to be guided by a line of couriers, which may be seen
(at least at the outset) constantly going and coming.  As they take a
direct course, there is always some chance of following them to the
tree, unless they go a long distance, and some obstruction, like a
wood, or a swamp, or a high hill, intervenes--enough chance, at any
rate, to stimulate the lookers-on to give vigorous chase as long as
their wind holds out.  If the bees are successfully followed to their
retreat, two plans are feasible: either to fell the tree at once, and
seek to hive them, perhaps bring them home in the section of the tree
that contains the cavity; or to leave the tree till fall, then invite
your neighbors, and go and cut it, and see the ground flow with honey.
The former course is more business-like; but the latter is the one
usually recommended by one's friends and neighbors.

Perhaps nearly one third of all the runaway swarms leave when no one is
about, and hence are unseen and unheard, save, perchance, by some
distant laborers in the field, or by some youth ploughing on the side
of the mountain, who hears an unusual humming noise, and sees the swarm
dimly whirling by overhead, and, may be, gives chase; or he may simply
catch the sound, when he pauses, looks quickly around, but sees
nothing.  When he comes in at night he tells how he heard or saw a
swarm of bees go over; and, perhaps from beneath one of the hives in
the garden a black mass of bees has disappeared during the day.

They are not partial as to the kind of tree,--pine, hemlock, elm,
birch, maple, hickory,--any tree with a good cavity high up or low
down.  A swarm of mine ran away from the new patent hive I gave them,
and took up their quarters in the hollow trunk of an old apple-tree
across an adjoining field.  The entrance was a mouse-hole near the
ground.

Another swarm in the neighborhood deserted their keeper and went into
the cornice of an out-house that stood amid evergreens in the rear of a
large mansion.  But there is no accounting for the taste of bees, as
Samson found when he discovered the swarm in the carcass, or more
probably the skeleton, of the lion he had slain.

In any given locality, especially in the more wooded and mountainous
districts, the number of swarms that thus assert their independence
forms quite a large per cent.  In the Northern States these swarms very
often perish before spring; but in such a country as Florida they seem
to multiply, till bee-trees are very common.  In the West, also, wild
honey is often gathered in large quantities.  I noticed not long since,
that some wood-choppers on the west slope of the Coast Range felled a
tree that had several pailfuls in it.

One night on the Potomac a party of us unwittingly made our camp near
the foot of a bee-tree, which next day the winds of heaven blew down,
for our special delectation, at least so we read the sign.  Another
time while sitting by a waterfall in the leafless April woods I
discovered a swarm in the top of a large hickory.  I had the season
before remarked the tree as a likely place for bees, but the screen of
leaves concealed them from me.  This time my former presentiment
occurred to me, and, looking sharply, sure enough there were the bees,
going out and in a large, irregular opening.  In June a violent tempest
of wind and rain demolished the tree, and the honey was all lost in the
creek into which it fell.  I happened along that way two or three days
after the tornado, when I saw a remnant of the swarm, those, doubtless,
that escaped the flood and those that were away when the disaster came,
hanging in a small black mass to a branch high up near where their home
used to be.  They looked forlorn enough.  If the queen was saved the
remnant probably sought another tree; otherwise the bees have soon
died.

I have seen bees desert their hive in the spring when it was infested
with worms, or when the honey was exhausted; at such times the swarm
seems to wander aimlessly, alighting here and there, and perhaps in the
end uniting with some other colony.   In case of such union, it would
be curious to know if negotiations were first opened between the
parties, and if the houseless bees are admitted at once to all the
rights and franchises of their benefactors.  It would be very like the
bees to have some preliminary plan and understanding about the matter
on both sides.

Bees will accommodate themselves to almost any quarters, yet no hive
seems to please them so well as a section of a hollow tree--"gums" as
they are called in the South and West where the sweet gum grows.  In
some European countries the hive is always made from the trunk of a
tree, a suitable cavity being formed by boring.  The old-fashioned
straw hive is picturesque, and a great favorite with the bees also.

The life of a swarm of bees is like an active and hazardous campaign of
an army; the ranks are being continually depleted, and continually
recruited.  What adventures they have by flood and field, and what
hair-breadth escapes!  A strong swarm during the honey season loses, on
an average, about four or five thousand per month, or one hundred and
fifty per day.  They are overwhelmed by wind and rain, caught by
spiders, benumbed by cold, crushed by cattle, drowned in rivers and
ponds, and in many nameless ways cut off or disabled.  In the spring
the principal mortality is from the cold.  As the sun declines they get
chilled before they can reach home.  Many fall down outside the hive,
unable to get in with their burden.  One may see them come utterly
spent and drop hopelessly into the grass in front of their very doors.
Before they can rest the cold has stiffened them.  I go out in April
and May and pick them up by the handfuls, their baskets loaded with
pollen, and warm them in the sun or in the house, or by the simple
warmth of my hand, until they can crawl into the hive.  Heat is their
life, and an apparently lifeless bee may be revived by warming him.
I have also picked them up while rowing on the river and seen them
safely to shore.  It is amusing to see them come hurrying home when
there is a thunderstorm approaching.  They come piling in till the rain
is upon them.  Those that are overtaken by the storm doubtless weather
it as best they can in the sheltering trees or grass.  It is not
probable that a bee ever gets lost by wandering into strange and
unknown parts.  With their myriad eyes they see everything; and then,
their sense of locality is very acute, is, indeed, one of their ruling
traits.  When a bee marks the place of his hive, or of a bit of good
pasturage in the fields or swamps, or of the bee-hunter's box of honey
on the hills or in the woods, he returns to it as unerringly as fate.

Honey was a much more important article of food with the ancients than
it is with us.  As they appear to have been unacquainted with sugar,
honey, no doubt, stood them instead.  It is too rank and pungent for
the modern taste; it soon cloys upon the palate.  It demands the
appetite of youth, and the strong, robust digestion of people who live
much in the open air.  It is a more wholesome food than sugar, and
modern confectionery is poison beside it.  Beside grape sugar, honey
contains manna, mucilage, pollen, acid, and other vegetable odoriferous
substances and juices.  It is a sugar with a kind of wild natural bread
added.  The manna of itself is both food and medicine, and the pungent
vegetable extracts have rare virtues.  Honey promotes the excretions
and dissolves the glutinous and starchy impedimenta of the system.

Hence it is not without reason that with the ancients a land flowing
with milk and honey should mean a land abounding in all good things;
and the queen in the nursery rhyme, who lingered in the kitchen to eat
"bread and honey" while the "king was in the parlor counting out his
money," was doing a very sensible thing.  Epaminondas is said to have
rarely eaten anything but bread and honey.  The Emperor Augustus one
day inquired of a centenarian how he had kept his vigor of mind and
body so long; to which the veteran replied that it was by "oil without
and honey within."  Cicero, in his "Old Age," classes honey with meat
and milk and cheese as among the staple articles with which a well-kept
farm-house will be supplied.

Italy and Greece, in fact all the Mediterranean countries, appear to
have been famous lands for honey.  Mount Hymettus, Mount Hybla, and
Mount Ida produced what may be called the classic honey of antiquity,
an article doubtless in nowise superior to our best products.
Leigh Hunt's "Jar of Honey" is mainly distilled from Sicilian history
and literature, Theocritus furnishing the best yield.  Sicily has
always been rich in bees.  Swinburne (the traveler of a hundred years
ago) says the woods on this island abounded in wild honey, and that the
people also had many hives near their houses.  The idyls of Theocritus
are native to the island in this respect, and abound in bees--
"Flat-nosed bees" as he calls them in the Seventh Idyl--and comparisons
in which comb-honey is the standard of the most delectable of this
world's goods.  His goatherds can think of no greater bliss than that
the mouth be filled with honey-combs, or to be inclosed in a chest like
Daphnis and fed on the combs of bees; and among the delectables with
which Arsinoe cherishes Adonis are "honey-cakes," and other tid-bits
made of "sweet honey."  In the country of Theocritus this custom is
said still to prevail: when a couple are married the attendants place
honey in their mouths, by which they would symbolize the hope that
their love may be as sweet to their souls as honey to the palate.

It was fabled that Homer was suckled by a priestess whose breasts
distilled honey; and that once when Pindar lay asleep the bees dropped
honey upon his lips.  In the Old Testament the food of the promised
Immanuel was to be butter and honey (there is much doubt about the
butter in the original), that he might know good from evil; and
Jonathan's eyes were enlightened, by partaking of some wood or wild
honey: "See, I pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I
tasted a little of this honey."  So far as this part of his diet was
concerned, therefore, John the Baptist, during his sojourn in the
wilderness, his divinity school-days in the mountains and plains of
Judea, fared extremely well.  About the other part, the locusts,
or, not to put too fine a point on it, the grasshoppers, as much cannot
be said, though they were among the creeping and leaping things the
children of Israel were permitted to eat.  They were probably not eaten
raw, but roasted in that most primitive of 