ovens, a hole in the ground
made hot by building a fire in it.  The locusts and honey may have been
served together, as the Bedas of Ceylon are said to season their meat
with honey.  At any rate, as the locust is often a great plague in
Palestine, the prophet in eating them found his account in the general
weal, and in the profit of the pastoral bees; the fewer locusts,
the more flowers.  Owing to its numerous wild-flowers and flowering
shrubs, Palestine has always been a famous country for bees.  They
deposit their honey in hollow trees as our bees do when they escape
from the hive, and in holes in the rocks as ours do not.  In a tropical
or semi-tropical climate bees are quite apt to take refuge in the
rocks, but where ice and snow prevail, as with us, they are much safer
high up in the trunk of a forest tree.

The best honey is the product of the milder parts of the temperate
zone.  There are too many rank and poisonous plants in the tropics.
Honey from certain districts of Turkey produces headache and vomiting,
and that from Brazil is used chiefly as medicine.  The honey of Mount
Hymettus owes its fine quality to wild thyme.  The best honey in Persia
and in Florida is collected from the orange blossom.  The celebrated
honey of Narbonne in the south of France is obtained from a species of
rosemary.  In Scotland good honey is made from the blossoming heather.

California honey is white and delicate and highly perfumed, and now
takes the lead in the market.  But honey is honey the world over; and
the bee is the bee still.  "Men may degenerate," says an old traveler,
"may forget the arts by which they acquired renown; manufactories may
fail, and commodities be debased, but the sweets of the wild-flowers of
the wilderness, the industry and natural mechanics of the bee, will
continue without change or derogation."




II

SHARP EYES

AND OTHER PAPERS



CONTENTS


SHARP EYES

THE APPLE

A TASTE OF MAINE BIRCH

WINTER NEIGHBORS

NOTES BY THE WAY.

    I. The Weather-wise Muskrat
   II. Cheating the Squirrels
  III. Fox and Hound
   IV. The Woodchuck



SHARP EYES AND OTHER PAPERS.



SHARP EYES.



Noting how one eye seconds and reinforces the other, I have often
amused myself by wondering what the effect would be if one could go
on opening eye after eye to the number say of a dozen or more.  What
would he see?  Perhaps not the invisible--not the odors of flowers nor
the fever germs in the air--not the infinitely small of the microscope
nor the infinitely distant of the telescope.  This would require, not
more eyes so much as an eye constructed with more and different lenses;
but would he not see with augmented power within the natural limits of
vision?  At any rate some persons seem to have opened more eyes than
others, they see with such force and distinctness; their vision
penetrates the tangle and obscurity where that of others fails like a
spent or impotent bullet.  How many eyes did Gilbert White open?
how many did Henry Thoreau?  how many did Audubon?  how many does the
hunter, matching his sight against the keen and alert sense of a deer
or a moose, or a fox or a wolf?  Not outward eyes, but inward.  We open
another eye whenever we see beyond the first general features or
outlines of things--whenever we grasp the special details and
characteristic markings that this mask covers.  Science confers new
powers of vision.

Whenever you have learned to discriminate the birds, or the plants,
or the geological features of a country, it is as if new and keener
eyes were added.

Of course one must not only see sharply, but read aright what he sees.
The facts in the life of Nature that are transpiring about us are like
written words that the observer is to arrange into sentences.  Or the
writing is in cipher and he must furnish the key.  A female oriole was
one day observed very much preoccupied under a shed where the refuse
from the horse stable was thrown.  She hopped about among the barn
fowls, scolding them sharply when they came too near her.  The stable,
dark and cavernous, was just beyond.  The bird, not finding what she
wanted outside, boldly ventured into the stable, and was presently
captured by the farmer.  What did she want? was the query.  What,
but a horsehair for her nest which was in an apple-tree near by;
and she was so bent on having one that I have no doubt she would have
tweaked one out of the horse's tail had he been in the stable.  Later
in the season I examined her nest and found it sewed through and
through with several long horse hairs, so that the bird persisted in
her search till the hair was found.

Little dramas and tragedies and comedies, little characteristic scenes,
are always being enacted in the lives of the birds, if our eyes are
sharp enough to see them.  Some clever observer saw this little comedy
played among some English sparrows and wrote an account of it in his
newspaper; it is too good not to be true: A male bird brought to his
box a large, fine goose feather, which is a great find for a sparrow
and much coveted.  After he had deposited his prize and chattered his
gratulations over it he went away in quest of his mate.  His next-door
neighbor, a female bird, seeing her chance, quickly slipped in and
seized the feather,--and here the wit of the bird came out, for instead
of carrying it into her own box she flew with it to a near tree and hid
it in a fork of the branches, then went home, and when her neighbor
returned with his mate was innocently employed about her own affairs.
The proud male, finding his feather gone, came out of his box in a high
state of excitement, and, with wrath in his manner and accusation on
his tongue, rushed into the cot of the female.  Not finding his goods
and chattels there as he had expected, he stormed around a while,
abusing everybody in general and his neighbor in particular, and then
went away as if to repair the loss.  As soon as he was out of sight,
the shrewd thief went and brought the feather home and lined her own
domicile with it.

I was much amused one summer day in seeing a bluebird feeding her young
one in the shaded street of a large town.  She had captured a cicada or
harvest-fly, and after bruising it a while on the ground flew with it
to a tree and placed it in the beak of the young bird.  It was a large
morsel, and the mother seemed to have doubts of her chick's ability to
dispose of it, for she stood near and watched its efforts with great
solicitude.  The young bird struggled valiantly with the cicada, but
made no head way in swallowing it, when the mother took it from him and
flew to the sidewalk, and proceeded to break and bruise it more
thoroughly.  Then she again placed it in his beak, and seemed to say,
"There, try it now," and sympathized so thoroughly with his efforts
that she repeated many of his motions and contortions.  But the great
fly was unyielding, and, indeed, seemed ridiculously disproportioned to
the beak that held it.  The young bird fluttered and fluttered and
screamed, "I'm stuck, I'm stuck," till the anxious parent again seized
the morsel and carried it to an iron railing, where she came down upon
it for the space of a minute with all the force and momentum her beak
could command.  Then she offered it to her young a third time, but with
the same result as before, except that this time the bird dropped it;
but she was at the ground as soon as the cicada was, and taking it in
her beak flew some distance to a high board fence where she sat
motionless for some moments.  While pondering the problem how that fly
should be broken, the male bluebird approached her, and said very
plainly, and I thought rather curtly, "Give me that bug," but she
quickly resented his interference and flew farther away, where she sat
apparently quite discouraged when I last saw her.

The bluebird is a home bird, and I am never tired of recurring to him.
His coming or reappearance in the spring marks a new chapter in the
progress of the season; things are never quite the same after one has
heard that note.  The past spring the males came about a week in
advance of the females.  A fine male lingered about my grounds and
orchard all the time, apparently waiting the arrival of his mate.
He called and warbled every day, as if he felt sure she was within
ear-shot, and could be hurried up.  Now he warbled half-angrily or
upbraidingly, then coaxingly, then cheerily and confidently, the next
moment in a plaintive, far-away manner.  He would half open his wings,
and twinkle them caressingly, as if beckoning his mate to his heart.
One morning she had come, but was shy and reserved.  The fond male flew
to a knot-hole in an old apple-tree, and coaxed her to his side.
I heard a fine confidential warble, --the old, old story.  But the
female flew to a near tree, and uttered her plaintive, homesick note.
The male went and got some dry grass or bark in his beak, and flew
again to the hole in the old tree, and promised unremitting devotion,
but the other said "nay," and flew away in the distance.  When he saw
her going, or rather heard her distant note, he dropped his stuff, and
cried out in a tone that said plainly enough, "Wait a minute. One word,
please," and flew swiftly in pursuit.  He won her before long, however,
and early in April the pair were established in one of the four or five
boxes I had put up for them, but not until they had changed their minds
several times.  As soon as the first brood had flown, and while they
were yet under their parents' care, they began another nest in one of
the other boxes, the female, as usual, doing all the work, and the male
all the complimenting.

A source of occasional great distress to the mother-bird was a white
cat that sometimes followed me about.  The cat had never been known to
catch a bird, but she had a way of watching them that was very
embarrassing to the bird.  Whenever she appeared, the mother bluebird
would set up that pitiful melodious plaint.  One morning the cat was
standing by me, when the bird came with her beak loaded with building
material, and alighted above me to survey the place before going into
the box.  When she saw the cat, she was greatly disturbed, and in her
agitation could not keep her hold upon all her material.  Straw after
straw came eddying down, till not half her original burden remained.
After the cat had gone away, the bird's alarm subsided, till, presently
seeing the coast clear, she flew quickly to the box and pitched in her
remaining straws with the greatest precipitation, and, without going in
to arrange them, as was her wont, flew away in evident relief.

In the cavity of an apple-tree but a few yards off, and much nearer the
house than they usually build, a pair of high-holes, or golden-shafted
woodpeckers, took up their abode.  A knot-hole which led to the decayed
interior was enlarged, the live wood being cut away as clean as a
squirrel would have done it.  The inside preparations I could not
witness, but day after day, as I passed near, I heard the bird
hammering away, evidently beating down obstructions and shaping and
enlarging the cavity.  The chips were not brought out, but were used
rather to floor the interior.  The woodpeckers are not nest-builders,
but rather nest-carvers.

The time seemed very short before the voices of the young were heard in
the heart of the old tree,--at first feebly, but waxing stronger day by
day until they could be heard many rods distant.  When I put my hand
upon the trunk of the tree, they would set up an eager, expectant
chattering; but if I climbed up it toward the opening, they soon
detected the unusual sound and would hush quickly, only now and then
uttering a warning note.  Long before they were fully fledged they
clambered up to the orifice to receive their food.  As but one could
stand in the opening at a time, there was a good deal of elbowing and
struggling for this position.  It was a very desirable one aside from
the advantages it had when food was served; it looked out upon the
great shining world, into which the young birds seemed never tired of
gazing.  The fresh air must have been a consideration also, for the
interior of a high-hole's dwelling is not sweet.  When the parent birds
came with food the young one in the opening did not get it all, but
after he had received a portion, either on his own motion or on a hint
from the old one, he would give place to the one behind him.  Still,
one bird evidently outstripped his fellows, and in the race of life,
was two or three days in advance of them.  His voice was loudest and
his head oftenest at the window.  But I noticed that when he had kept
the position too long, the others evidently made it uncomfortable in
his rear, and, after "fidgeting" about a while, he would be compelled
to "back down."  But retaliation was then easy, and I fear his mates
spent few easy moments at that lookout.  They would close their eyes
and slide back into the cavity as if the world had suddenly lost all
its charms for them.

This bird was, of course, the first to leave the nest. For two days
before that event he kept his position in the opening most of the time
and sent forth his strong voice incessantly.  The old ones abstained
from feeding him almost entirely, no doubt to encourage his exit.  As I
stood looking at him one afternoon and noting his progress, he suddenly
reached a resolution,--seconded, I have no doubt, from the rear,--and
launched forth upon his untried wings.  They served him well and
carried him about fifty yards up-hill the first heat.  The second day
after, the next in size and spirit left in the same manner; then
another, till only one remained.  The parent birds ceased their visits
to him, and for one day he called and called till our ears were tired
of the sound.  His was the faintest heart of all.  Then he had none to
encourage him from behind.  He left the nest and clung to the outer
bowl of the tree, and yelped and piped for an hour longer; then he
committed himself to his wings and went his way like the rest.

A young farmer in the western part of New York, who has a sharp,
discriminating eye, sends me some interesting notes about a tame
high-hole he once had.

"Did you ever notice," says he, "that the high-hole never eats anything
that he cannot pick up with his tongue?  At least this was the case
with a young one I took from the nest and tamed.  He could thrust out
his tongue two or three inches, and it was amusing to see his efforts
to eat currants from the hand.  He would run out his tongue and try to
stick it to the currant; failing in that, he would bend his tongue
around it like a hook and try to raise it by a sudden jerk.  But he
never succeeded, the round fruit would roll and slip away every time.
He never seemed to think of taking it in his beak.  His tongue was in
constant use to find out the nature of everything he saw; a nail-hole
in a board or any similar hole was carefully explored.  If he was held
near the face he would soon be attracted by the eye and thrust his
tongue into it.  In this way he gained the respect of a number of
half-grown cats that were around the house.  I wished to make them
familiar to each other, so there would be less danger of their killing
him.  So I would take them both on my knee, when the bird would soon
notice the kitten's eyes, and leveling his bill as carefully as a
marksman levels his rifle, he would remain so a minute when he would
dart his tongue into the cat's eye.  This was held by the cats to be
very mysterious: being struck in the eye by something invisible to
them.  They soon acquired such a terror of him that they would avoid
him and run away whenever they saw his bill turned in their direction.
He never would swallow a grasshopper even when it was placed in his
throat; he would shake himself until he had thrown it out of his mouth.
His 'best hold' was ants.  He never was surprised at anything, and
never was afraid of anything.  He would drive the turkey gobbler and
the rooster.  He would advance upon them holding one wing up as high as
possible, as if to strike with it, and shuffle along the ground toward
them, scolding all the while in a harsh voice.  I feared at first that
they might kill him, but I soon found that he was able to take care of
himself.  I would turn over stones and dig into ant-hills for him, and
he would lick up the ants so fast that a stream of them seemed going
into his mouth unceasingly.  I kept him till late in the fall, when he
disappeared, probably going south, and I never saw him again."

My correspondent also sends me some interesting observations about the
cuckoo.  He says a large gooseberry bush standing in the border of an
old hedgerow, in the midst of open fields, and not far from his house,
was occupied by a pair of cuckoos for two seasons in succession, and,
after an interval of a year, for two seasons more.  This gave him a
good chance to observe them.  He says the mother-bird lays a single
egg, and sits upon it a number of days before laying the second, so
that he has seen one young bird nearly grown, a second just hatched,
and a whole egg all in the nest at once.  "So far as I have seen, this
is the settled practice,--the young leaving the nest one at a time to
the number of six or eight.  The young have quite the look of the young
of the dove in many respects.  When nearly grown they are covered with
long blue pin-feathers as long as darning-needles, without a bit of
plumage on them.  They part on the back and hang down on each side by
their own weight.  With its curious feathers and misshapen body the
young bird is anything but handsome.  They never open their mouths when
approached, as many young birds do, but sit perfectly still, hardly
moving when touched."  He also notes the unnatural indifference of the
mother-bird when her nest and young are approached.  She makes no
sound, but sits quietly on a near branch in apparent perfect unconcern.

These observations, together with the fact that the egg of the cuckoo
is occasionally found in the nests of other birds, raise the inquiry
whether our bird is slowly relapsing into the habit of the European
species, which always foists its egg upon other birds; or whether,
on the other hand, it is not mending its manners in this respect.
It has but little to unlearn or to forget in the one case, but great
progress to make in the other.  How far is its rudimentary nest--a mere
platform of coarse twigs and dry stalks of weeds--from the deep,
compact, finely woven and finely modeled nest of the goldfinch or
king-bird, and what a gulf between its indifference toward its young
and their solicitude!  Its irregular manner of laying also seems better
suited to a parasite like our cow-bird, or the European cuckoo, than to
a regular nest-builder.

This observer, like most sharp-eyed persons, sees plenty of interesting
things as he goes about his work.  He one day saw a white swallow,
which is of rare occurrence.  He saw a bird, a sparrow he thinks, fly
against the side of a horse and fill his beak with hair from the
loosened coat of the animal.  He saw a shrike pursue a chickadee, when
the latter escaped by taking refuge in a small hole in a tree.  One day
in early spring he saw two hen-hawks that were circling and screaming
high in air, approach each other, extend a claw, and, clasping them
together, fall toward the earth flapping and struggling as if they were
tied together; on nearing the ground they separated and soared aloft
again.  He supposed that it was not a passage of war but of love,
and that the hawks were toying fondly with each other.

He further relates a curious circumstance of finding a humming-bird in
the upper part of a barn with its bill stuck fast in a crack of one of
the large timbers, dead, of course, with wings extended, and as dry as
a chip.  The bird seems to have died as it had lived, on the wing, and
its last act was indeed a ghastly parody of its living career.  Fancy
this nimble, flashing sprite, whose life was passed probing the honeyed
depths of flowers, at last thrusting its bill into a crack in a dry
timber in a hayloft, and, with spread wings, ending its existence.

When the air is damp and heavy, swallows frequently hawk for insects
about cattle and moving herds in the field.  My farmer describes how
they attended him one foggy day, as he was mowing in the meadow with a
mowing-machine.  It had been foggy for two days, and the swallows were
very hungry, and the insects stupid and inert.  When the sound of his
machine was heard, the swallows appeared and attended him like a brood
of hungry chickens.  He says there was a continued rush of purple wings
over the "cut-bar," and just where it was causing the grass to tremble
and fall.  Without his assistance the swallows would doubtless have
gone hungry yet another day.

Of the hen-hawk, he has observed that both male and female take part in
incubation.  "I was rather surprised," he says, "on one occasion, to
see how quickly they change places on the nest.  The nest was in a tall
beech, and the leaves were not yet fully out.  I could see the head and
neck of the hawk over the edge of the nest, when I saw the other hawk
coming down through the air at full speed. I expected he would alight
near by, but instead of that he struck directly upon the nest, his mate
getting out of the way barely in time to avoid being hit; it seemed
almost as if he had knocked her off the nest.  I hardly see how they
can make such a rush on the nest without danger to the eggs."

The king-bird will worry the hawk as a whiffet dog will worry a bear.
It is by his persistence and audacity, not by any injury he is capable
of dealing his great antagonist.  The king-bird seldom more than dogs
the hawk, keeping above and between his wings, and making a great ado;
but my correspondent says he once "saw a king-bird riding on a hawk's
back.  The hawk flew as fast as possible, and the king-bird sat upon
his shoulders in triumph until they had passed out of sight,"--tweaking
his feathers, no doubt, and threatening to scalp him the next moment.

That near relative of the king-bird, the great crested fly-catcher,
has one well known peculiarity: he appears never to consider his nest
finished until it contains a cast-off snake-skin.  My alert
correspondent one day saw him eagerly catch up an onion skin and make
off with it, either deceived by it or else thinking it a good
substitute for the coveted material.

One day in May, walking in the woods, I came upon the nest of a
whippoorwill, or rather its eggs, for it builds no nest,--two
elliptical whitish spotted eggs lying upon the dry leaves.  My foot
was within a yard of the mother-bird before she flew.  I wondered what
a sharp eye would detect curious or characteristic in the ways of the
bird, so I came to the place many times and had a look.  It was always
a task to separate the bird from her surroundings though I stood within
a few feet of her, and knew exactly where to look.  One had to bear on
with his eye, as it were, and refuse to be baffled.  The sticks and
leaves, and bits of black or dark-brown bark, were all exactly copied
in the bird's plumage.  And then she did sit so close, and simulate so
well a shapeless decaying piece of wood or bark!  Twice I brought a
companion, and guiding his eye to the spot, noted how difficult it was
for him to make out there, in full view upon the dry leaves, any
semblance to a bird.  When the bird returned after being disturbed,
she would alight within a few inches of her eggs, and then, after a
moment's pause, hobble awkwardly upon them.

After the young had appeared, all the wit of the bird came into play.
I was on hand the next day, I think.  The mother-bird sprang up when I
was within a pace of her, and in doing so fanned the leaves with her
wings till they sprang up too; as the leaves started the young started,
and, being of the same color, to tell which was the leaf and which the
bird was a trying task to any eye.  I came the next day, when the same
tactics were repeated.  Once a leaf fell upon one of the young birds
and nearly hid it.  The young are covered with a reddish down like a
young partridge, and soon follow their mother about.  When disturbed,
they gave but one leap, then settled down, perfectly motionless and
stupid, with eyes closed.  The parent bird, on these occasions made
frantic efforts to decoy me away from her young.  She would fly a few
paces and fall upon her breast, and a spasm, like that of death, would
run through her tremulous outstretched wings and prostrate body.  She
kept a sharp eye out the meanwhile to see if the ruse took, and if it
did not, she was quickly cured, and moving about to some other point
tried to draw my attention as before.  When followed she always
alighted upon the ground, dropping down in a sudden peculiar way.
The second or third day both old and young had disappeared.

The whippoorwill walks as awkwardly as a swallow, which is as awkward
as a man in a bag, and yet she manages to lead her young about the
woods.  The latter, I think, move by leaps and sudden spurts, their
protective coloring shielding them most effectively.  Wilson once came
upon the mother-bird and her brood in the woods, and, though they were
at his very feet, was so baffled by the concealment of the young that
he was about to give up the search, much disappointed, when he
perceived something "like a slight moldiness among the withered leaves,
and, on stooping down, discovered it to be a young whippoorwill
seemingly asleep."  Wilson's description of the young is very accurate,
as its downy covering does look precisely like a "slight moldiness."
Returning a few moments afterward to the spot to get a pencil he had
forgotten, he could find neither old nor young.

It takes an eye to see a partridge in the woods motionless upon the
leaves; this sense needs to be as sharp as that of smell in hounds and
pointers; and yet I know an unkempt youth that seldom fails to see the
bird and shoot it before it takes wing.  I think he sees it as soon as
it sees him and before it suspects itself seen.  What a training to the
eye is hunting!  To pick out the game from its surroundings, the grouse
from the leaves, the gray squirrel from the mossy oak limb it hugs so
closely, the red fox from the ruddy or brown or gray field, the rabbit
from the stubble, or the white hare from the snow requires the best
powers of this sense.  A woodchuck, motionless in the fields or upon a
rock, looks very much like a large stone or bowlder, yet a keen eye
knows the difference at a glance, a quarter of a mile away.

A man has a sharper eye than a dog, or a fox, or than any of the wild
creatures, but not so sharp an ear or nose.  But in the birds he finds
his match.  How quickly the old turkey discovers the hawk, a mere speck
against the sky, and how quickly the hawk discovers you if you happen
to be secreted in the bushes or behind the fence near which he alights!
One advantage the bird surely has, and that is, owing to the form,
structure, and position of the eye, it has a much larger field of
vision--indeed, can probably see in nearly every direction at the same
instant, behind as well as before.  Man's field of vision embraces less
than half a circle horizontally, and still less vertically; his brow
and brain prevent him from seeing within many degrees of the zenith
without a movement of the head; the bird on the other hand, takes in
nearly the whole sphere at a glance.

I find I see almost without effort nearly every bird within sight in
the field or wood I pass through (a flit of the wing, a flirt of the
tail are enough, though the flickering leaves do all conspire to hide
them), and that with like ease the birds see me, though,
unquestionably, the chances are immensely in their favor.  The eye sees
what it has the means of seeing, truly.  You must have the bird in your
heart before you can find it in the bush.  The eye must have purpose
and aim.  No one ever yet found the walking fern who did not have the
walking fern in his mind.  A person whose eye is full of Indian relics
picks them up in every field he walks through.

One season I was interested in the tree-frogs; especially the tiny
piper that one hears about the woods and brushy fields--the hyla of the
swamps become a denizen of the trees; I had never seen him in this new
role.  But this season, having hylas in mind, or rather being ripe for
them, I several times came across them.  One Sunday, walking amid some
bushes, I captured two.  They leaped before me as doubtless they had
done many times before; but though I was not looking for or thinking of
them, yet they were quickly recognized, because the eye had been
commissioned to find them.  On another occasion, not long afterward,
I was hurriedly loading my gun in the October woods in hopes of
overtaking a gray squirrel that was fast escaping through the
tree-tops, when one of these lilliput frogs, the color of the
fast-yellowing leaves, leaped near me.  I saw him only out of the
corner of my eye and yet bagged him, because I had already made him
my own.

Nevertheless, the habit of observation is the habit of clear and
decisive gazing.  Not by a first casual glance, but by a steady
deliberate aim of the eye are the rare and characteristic things
discovered.  You must look intently and hold your eye firmly to the
spot, to see more than do the rank and file of mankind.
The sharp-shooter picks out his man and knows him with fatal certainty
from a stump, or a rock, or a cap on a pole.  The phrenologists do well
to locate, not only form, color, and weight, in the region of the eye,
but also a faculty which they call individuality--that which separates,
discriminates, and sees in every object its essential character.
This is just as necessary to the naturalist as to the artist or the
poet.  The sharp eye notes specific points and differences,--it seizes
upon and preserves the individuality of the thing.  Persons frequently
describe to me some bird they have seen or heard and ask me to name it,
but in most cases the bird might be any one of a dozen, or else it is
totally unlike any bird found in this continent.  They have either seen
falsely or else vaguely.  Not so the farm youth who wrote me one winter
day that he had seen a single pair of strange birds, which he describes
as follows: "They were about the size of the 'chippie,' the tops of
their heads were red, and the breast of the male was of the same color,
while that of the female was much lighter; their rumps were also
faintly tinged with red.  If I have described them so that you would
know them, please write me their names."  There can be little doubt but
the young observer had seen a pair of red-polls,--a bird related to the
goldfinch, and that occasionally comes down to us in the winter from
the far north.  Another time, the same youth wrote that he had seen a
strange bird, the color of a sparrow, that alighted on fences and
buildings as well as upon the ground, and that walked.  This last fact
shoved the youth's discriminating eye and settled the case.  I knew it
to be a species of the lark, and from the size, color, season, etc.,
the tit-lark.  But how many persons would have observed that the bird
walked instead of hopped?

Some friends of mine who lived in the country tried to describe to me a
bird that built a nest in a tree within a few feet of the house.  As it
was a brown bird, I should have taken it for a wood-thrush, had not the
nest been described as so thin and loose that from beneath the eggs
could be distinctly seen.  The most pronounced feature in the
description was the barred appearance of the under side of the bird's
tail.  I was quite at sea, until one day, when we were driving out,
a cuckoo flew across the road in front of us, when my friends
exclaimed, "There is our bird!"  I had never known a cuckoo to build
near a house, and I had never noted the appearance the tail presents
when viewed from beneath; but if the bird had been described in its
most obvious features, as slender, with a long tail, cinnamon brown
above and white beneath, with a curved bill, anyone who knew the bird
would have recognized the portrait.

We think we have looked at a thing sharply until we are asked for its
specific features.  I thought I knew exactly the form of the leaf of
the tulip-tree, until one day a lady asked me to draw the outline of
one.  A good observer is quick to take a hint and to follow it up.
Most of the facts of nature, especially in the life of the birds and
animals, are well screened.  We do not see the play because we do not
look intently enough.  The other day I was sitting with a friend upon a
high rock in the woods, near a small stream, when we saw a water-snake
swimming across a pool toward the opposite bank.  Any eye would have
noted it, perhaps nothing more.  A little closer and sharper gaze
revealed the fact that the snake bore something in its mouth, which,
as we went down to investigate, proved to be a small cat-fish, three or
four inches long.  The snake had captured it in the pool, and, like any
other fisherman, wanted to get its prey to dry land, although itself
lived mostly in the water.  Here, we said, is being enacted a little
tragedy, that would have escaped any but sharp eyes.  The snake, which
was itself small, had the fish by the throat, the hold of vantage among
all creatures, and clung to it with great tenacity.  The snake knew
that its best tactics was to get upon dry land as soon as possible.
It could not swallow its victim alive, and it could not strangle it in
the water.  For a while it tried to kill its game by holding it up out
of the water, but the fish grew heavy, and every few moments its
struggles brought down the snake's head.  This would not do.
Compressing the fish's throat would not shut off its breath under such
circumstances, so the wily serpent tried to get ashore with it, and
after several attempts succeeded in effecting a landing on a flat rock.
But the fish died hard.  Cat-fish do not give up the ghost in a hurry.
Its throat was becoming congested, but the snake's distended jaws must
have ached.  It was like a petrified gape.  Then the spectators became
very curious and close in their scrutiny, and the snake determined to
withdraw from the public gaze and finish the business in hand to its
own notions.  But, when gently but firmly remonstrated with by my
friend with his walking-stick, it dropped the fish and retreated in
high dudgeon beneath a stone in the bed of the creek.  The fish, with
a swollen and angry throat, went its way also.

Birds, I say, have wonderfully keen eyes.  Throw a fresh bone or a
piece of meat upon the snow in winter, and see how soon the crows will
discover it and be on hand.  If it be near the house or barn, the crow
that first discovers it will alight near it, to make sure he is not
deceived; then he will go away, and soon return with a companion.
The two alight a few yards from the bone, and after some delay, during
which the vicinity is sharply scrutinized, one of the crows advances
boldly to within a few feet of the coveted prize.  Here he pauses, and
if no trick is discovered, and the meat be indeed meat, he seizes it
and makes off.

One midwinter I cleared away the snow under an apple-tree near the
house and scattered some corn there.  I had not seen a blue-jay for
weeks, yet that very day one found my corn, and after that several came
daily and partook of it, holding the kernels under their feet upon the
limbs of the trees and pecking them vigorously.

Of course the woodpecker and his kind have sharp eyes; still I was
surprised to see how quickly Downy found out some bones that were
placed in a convenient place under the shed to be pounded up for the
hens.  In going out to the barn I often disturbed him making a meal off
the bite of meat that still adhered to them.

"Look intently enough at anything," said a poet to me one day, "and you
will see something that would otherwise escape you."  I thought of the
remark as I sat on a stump in an opening of the woods one spring day.
I saw a small hawk approaching; he flew to a tall tulip-tree and
alighted on a large limb near the top.  He eyed me and I eyed him.
Then the bird disclosed a trait that was new to me: he hopped along the
limb to a small cavity near the trunk, when he thrust in his head and
pulled out some small object and fell to eating it.  After he had
partaken of it for some minutes he put the remainder back in his larder
and flew away.  I had seen something like feathers eddying slowly down
as the hawk ate, and on approaching the spot found the feathers of a
sparrow here and there clinging to the bushes beneath the tree.
The hawk then--commonly called the chicken hawk--is as provident as
a mouse or a squirrel, and lays by a store against a time of need,
but I should not have discovered the fact had I not held my eye on him.

An observer of the birds is attracted by any unusual sound or commotion
among them.  In May or June, when other birds are most vocal, the jay
is a silent bird; he goes sneaking about the orchards and the groves as
silent as a pickpocket; he is robbing bird's-nests and he is very
anxious that nothing should be said about it; but in the fall none so
quick and loud to cry "Thief, thief!" as he.  One December morning a
troop of jays discovered a little screech-owl secreted in the hollow
trunk of an old apple-tree near my house.  How they found the owl out
is a mystery, since it never ventures forth in the light of day;
but they did, and proclaimed the fact with great emphasis.  I suspect
the bluebirds first told them, for these birds are constantly peeping
into holes and crannies, both spring and fall.  Some unsuspecting bird
had probably entered the cavity prospecting for a place for next year's
nest, or else looking out a likely place to pass a cold night, and then
had rushed out with important news.  A boy who should unwittingly
venture into a bear's den when Bruin was at home could not be more
astonished and alarmed than a bluebird would be on finding itself in
the cavity of a decayed tree with an owl.  At any rate the bluebirds
joined the jays in calling the attention of all whom it might concern
to the fact that a culprit of some sort was hiding from the light of
day in the old apple-tree.  I heard the notes of warning and alarm and
approached to within eye-shot.  The bluebirds were cautious and hovered
about uttering their peculiar twittering calls; but the jays were
bolder and took turns looking in at the cavity, and deriding the poor
shrinking owl.  A jay would alight in the entrance of the hole and
flirt and peer and attitudinize, and then flyaway crying "Thief, thief,
thief!" at the top of his voice.

I climbed up and peered into the opening, and could just descry the owl
clinging to the inside of the tree.  I reached in and took him out,
giving little heed to the threatening snapping of his beak.  He was as
red as a fox and as yellow-eyed as a cat.  He made no effort to escape,
but planted his claws in my forefinger and clung there with a grip that
soon grew uncomfortable.  I placed him in the loft of an out-house in
hopes of getting better acquainted with him.  By day he was a very
willing prisoner, scarcely moving at all, even when approached and
touched with the hand, but looking out upon the world with half-closed,
sleepy eyes.  But at night what a change; how alert, how wild, how
active!  He was like another bird; he darted about with wide, fearful
eyes, and regarded me like a cornered cat.  I opened the window, and
swiftly, but as silent as a shadow, he glided out into the congenial
darkness, and perhaps, ere this, has revenged himself upon the sleeping
jay or bluebird that first betrayed his hiding-place.




THE APPLE.



   Lo! sweetened with the summer light,
   The full-juiced apple, waxing over-mellow,
   Drops in a silent autumn night. --TENNYSON.


Not a little of the sunshine of our northern winters is surely wrapped
up in the apple.  How could we winter over without it!  How is life
sweetened by its mild acids!  A cellar well filled with apples is more
valuable than a chamber filled with flax and wool.  So much sound ruddy
life to draw upon, to strike one's roots down into, as it were.

Especially to those whose soil of life is inclined to be a little
clayey and heavy, is the apple a winter necessity.  It is the natural
antidote of most of the ills the flesh is heir to.  Full of vegetable
acids and aromatics, qualities which act as refrigerants and
antiseptics, what an enemy it is to jaundice, indigestion, torpidity of
liver, etc.  It is a gentle spur and tonic to the whole biliary system.
Then I have read that it has been found by analysis to contain more
phosphorus than any other vegetable.  This makes it the proper food of
the scholar and the sedentary man; it feeds his brain and it stimulates
his liver.  Nor is this all.  Besides its hygienic properties,
the apple is full of sugar and mucilage, which make it highly
nutritious.  It is said, "The operators of Cornwall, England, consider
ripe apples nearly as nourishing as bread, and far more so than
potatoes.  In the year 1801--which was a year of much scarcity--apples,
instead of being converted into cider, were sold to the poor, and the
laborers asserted that they could 'stand their work' on baked apples
without meat; whereas a potato diet required either meat or some other
substantial nutriment.  The French and Germans use apples extensively,
so do the inhabitants of all European nations.  The laborers depend
upon them as an article of food, and frequently make a dinner of sliced
apples and bread."

Yet the English apple is a tame and insipid affair compared with the
intense, sun-colored and sun-steeped fruit our orchards yield.
The English have no sweet apple, I am told, the saccharine element
apparently being less abundant in vegetable nature in that sour and
chilly climate than in our own.  It is well known that the European
maple yields no sugar, while both our birch and hickory have sweet in
their veins.  Perhaps this fact accounts for our excessive love of
sweets, which may be said to be a national trait.

The Russian apple has a lovely complexion, smooth and transparent, but
the Cossack is not yet all eliminated from it.  The only one I have
seen--the Duchess of Oldenburg--is as beautiful as a Tartar princess,
with a distracting odor, but it is the least bit puckery to the taste.

The best thing I know about Chili is not its guano beds, but this fact
which I learn from Darwin's "Voyage," namely, that the apple thrives
well there.  Darwin saw a town there so completely buried in a wood of
apple-trees, that its streets were merely paths in an orchard.
The tree indeed thrives so well, that large branches cut off in the
spring and planted two or three feet deep in the ground send out roots
and develop into fine full-bearing trees by the third year.  The people
know the value of the apple too.  They make cider and wine of it and
then from the refuse a white and finely flavored spirit; then by
another process a sweet treacle is obtained called honey.  The children
and the pigs eat little or no other food.  He does not add that the
people are healthy and temperate, but I have no doubt they are.
We knew the apple had many virtues, but these Chilians have really
opened a deep beneath a deep.  We had found out the cider and the
spirits, but who guessed the wine and the honey, unless it were the
bees?  There is a variety in our orchards called the winesap, a doubly
liquid name that suggests what might be done with this fruit.

The apple is the commonest and yet the most varied and beautiful of
fruits.  A dish of them is as becoming to the centre-table in winter as
was the vase of flowers in the summer,--a bouquet of spitzenbergs and
greenings and northern spies.  A rose when it blooms, the apple is a
rose when it ripens.  It pleases every sense to which it can be
addressed, the touch, the smell, the sight, the taste; and when it
falls in the still October days it pleases the ear.  It is a call to a
banquet, it is a signal that the feast is ready.  The bough would fain
hold it, but it can now assert its independence; it can now live a life
of its own.

Daily the stem relaxes its hold, till finally it lets go completely,
and down comes the painted sphere with a mellow thump to the earth,
towards which it has been nodding so long.  It bounds away to seek its
bed, to hide under a leaf, or in a tuft of grass.  It will now take
time to meditate and ripen!  What delicious thoughts it has there
nestled with its fellows under the fence, turning acid into sugar,
and sugar into wine!

How pleasing to the touch!  I love to stroke its polished rondure with
my hand, to carry it in my pocket on my tramp over the winter hills, or
through the early spring woods.  You are company, you red-cheeked
spitz, or you salmon-fleshed greening!  I toy with you; press your face
to mine, toss you in the air, roll you on the ground, see you shine out
where you lie amid the moss and dry leaves and sticks.  You are so
alive!  You glow like a ruddy flower.  You look so animated I almost
expect to see you move.  I postpone the eating of you, you are so
beautiful!  How compact; how exquisitely tinted!  Stained by the sun
and varnished against the rains.  An independent vegetable existence,
alive and vascular as my own flesh; capable of being wounded, bleeding,
wasting away, and almost of repairing damages!

How it resists the cold! holding out almost as long as the red cheeks
of the boys do.  A frost that destroys the potatoes and other roots
only makes the apple more crisp and vigorous; it peeps out from the
chance November snows unscathed.  When I see the fruit-vender on the
street corner stamping his feet and beating his hands to keep them
warm, and his naked apples lying exposed to the blasts, I wonder if
they do not ache too to clap their hands and enliven their circulation.
But they can stand it nearly as long as the vender can.

Noble common fruit, best friend of man and most loved by him, following
him like his dog or his cow, wherever he goes.  His homestead is not
planted till you are planted, your roots intertwine with his; thriving
best where he thrives best, loving the limestone and the frost,
the plow and the pruning-knife, you are indeed suggestive of hardy,
cheerful industry, and a healthy life in the open air.  Temperate,
chaste fruit! you mean neither luxury nor sloth, neither satiety nor
indolence, neither enervating heats nor the Frigid Zones.  Uncloying
fruit, fruit whose best sauce is the open air, whose finest flavors
only he whose taste is sharpened by brisk work or walking knows;
winter fruit, when the fire of life burns brightest; fruit always a
little hyperborean, leaning towards the cold; bracing, sub-acid, active
fruit.  I think you must come from the north, you are so frank and
honest, so sturdy and appetizing.  You are stocky and homely like the
northern races.  Your quality is Saxon.  Surely the fiery and impetuous
south is not akin to you.  Not spices or olives or the sumptuous liquid
fruits, but the grass, the snow, the grains, the coolness is akin to
you.  I think if I could subsist on you or the like of you, I should
never have an intemperate or ignoble thought, never be feverish or
despondent.  So far as I could absorb or transmute your quality I
should be cheerful, continent, equitable, sweet-blooded, long-lived,
and should shed warmth and contentment around.

Is there any other fruit that has so much facial expression as the
apple?  What boy does not more than half believe they can see with that
single eye of theirs?  Do they not look and nod to him from the bough?
The swaar has one look, the rambo another, the spy another.  The youth
recognizes the seek-no-further buried beneath a dozen other varieties,
the moment he catches a glance of its eye, or the bonny-cheeked Newtown
pippin, or the gentle but sharp-nosed gilliflower.  He goes to the
great bin in the cellar and sinks his shafts here and there in the
garnered wealth of the orchards, mining for his favorites, sometimes
coming plump upon them, sometimes catching a glimpse of them to the
right or left, or uncovering them as keystones in an arch made up of
many varieties.  In the dark he can usually tell them by the sense of
touch.  There is not only the size and shape, but there is the texture
and polish.  Some apples are coarse grained and some are fine; some are
thin-skinned and some are thick.  One variety is quick and vigorous
beneath the touch; another gentle and yielding.  The pinnock has a
thick skin with a spongy lining, a bruise in it becomes like a piece of
cork.  The tallow apple has an unctuous feel, as its name suggests.
It sheds water like a duck.  What apple is that with a fat curved stem
that blends so prettily with its own flesh,--the wine-apple?  Some
varieties impress me as masculine,--weather-stained, freckled, lasting
and rugged; others are indeed lady apples, fair, delicate, shining,
mild-flavored, white-meated, like the egg-drop and the lady-finger.
The practiced hand knows each kind by the touch.  Do you remember the
apple hole in the garden or back of the house, Ben Bolt?  In the fall
after the bins in the cellar had been well stocked, we excavated a
circular pit in the warm, mellow earth, and covering the bottom with
clean rye straw, emptied in basketful after basketful of hardy choice
varieties, till there was a tent-shaped mound several feet high of
shining variegated fruit.  Then wrapping it about with a thick layer of
long rye straw, and tucking it up snug and warm, the mound was covered,
with a thin coating of earth, a flat stone on the top holding down the
straw.  As winter set in, another coating of earth was put upon it,
with perhaps an overcoat of coarse dry stable manure, and the precious
pile was left in silence and darkness till spring.  No marmot
hibernating under-ground in his nest of leaves and dry grass, more cosy
and warm.  No frost, no wet, but fragrant privacy and quiet.  Then how
the earth tempers and flavors the apples!  It draws out all the acrid
unripe qualities, and infuses into them a subtle refreshing taste of
the soil.  Some varieties perish; but the ranker, hardier kinds, like
the northern spy, the greening, or the black apple, or the russet,
or the pinnock, how they ripen and grow in grace, how the green becomes
gold, and the bitter becomes sweet!

As the supply in the bins and barrels gets low and spring approaches,
the buried treasures in the garden are remembered.  With spade and axe
we go out and penetrate through the snow and frozen earth till the
inner dressing of straw is laid bare.  It is not quite as clear and
bright as when we placed it there last fall, but the fruit beneath,
which the hand soon exposes, is just as bright and far more luscious.
Then, as day after day you resort to the hole, and, removing the straw
and earth from the opening, thrust your arm into the fragrant pit, you
have a better chance than ever before to become acquainted with your
favorites by the sense of touch.  How you feel for them, reaching to
the right and left!  Now you have got a Tolman sweet; you imagine you
can feel that single meridian line that divides it into two
hemispheres.  Now a greening fills your hand, you feel its fine quality
beneath its rough coat.   Now you have hooked a swaar, you recognize
its full face; now a Vandevere or a King rolls down from the apex
above, and you bag it at once.  When you were a school-boy you stowed
these away in your pockets and ate them along the road and at recess,
and again at noon time; and they, in a measure, corrected the effects
of the cake and pie with which your indulgent mother filled your
lunch-basket.

The boy is indeed the true apple-eater, and is not to be questioned how
he came by the fruit with which his pockets are filled.  It belongs to
him. . .His own juicy flesh craves the juicy flesh of the apple.  Sap
draws sap.  His fruit-eating has little reference to the state of his
appetite.   Whether he be full of meat or empty of meat he wants the
apple just the same.  Before meal or after meal it never comes amiss.
The farm-boy munches apples all day long.  He has nests of them in the
hay-mow, mellowing, to which he makes frequent visits.  Sometimes old
Brindle, h