aving access through the open door, smells them out and makes
short work of them.

In some countries the custom remains of placing a rosy apple in the
hand of the dead that they may find it when they enter paradise.
In northern mythology the giants eat apples to keep off old age.

The apple is indeed the fruit of youth.  As we grow old we crave apples
less.  It is an ominous sign.  When you are ashamed to be seen eating
them on the  street; when you can carry them in your pocket and your
hand not constantly find its way to them; when your neighbor has apples
and you have none, and you make no nocturnal visits to his orchard;
when your lunch-basket is without them, and you can pass a winter's
night by the fireside with no thought of the fruit at your elbow, then
be assured you are no longer a boy, either in heart or years.

The genuine apple-eater comforts himself with an apple in their season
as others with a pipe or cigar.  When he has nothing else to do, or is
bored, he eats an apple.  While he is waiting for the train he eats an
apple, sometimes several of them.  When he takes a walk, he arms
himself with apples.  His traveling bag is full of apples.  He offers
an apple to his companion, and takes one himself.  They are his chief
solace when on the road.  He sows their seed all along the route.
He tosses the core from the car-window and from the top of the
stage-coach.  He would, in time, make the land one vast orchard.
He dispenses with a knife.  He prefers that his teeth shall have the
first taste.   Then he knows the best flavor is immediately beneath the
skin, and that in a pared apple this is lost.  If you will stew the
apple, he says, instead of baking it, by all means leave the skin on.
It improves the color and vastly heightens the flavor of the dish.

The apple is a masculine fruit; hence women are poor apple-eaters.
It belongs to the open air, and requires an open-air taste and relish.

I instantly sympathized with that clergyman I read of, who on pulling
out his pocket-handkerchief in the midst of his discourse, pulled out
two bouncing apples with it that went rolling across the pulpit floor
and down the pulpit stairs.  These apples were, no doubt, to be eaten
after the sermon on his way home, or to his next appointment.  They
would take the taste of it out of  his mouth.  Then, would a minister
be apt to grow tiresome with two big apples in his coat-tail pockets?
Would he not naturally hasten along to "lastly," and the big apples?
If they were the dominie apples, and it was April or May, he certainly

How the early settlers prized the apple!  When their trees broke down
or were split asunder by the storms, the neighbors turned out,
the divided tree was put together again and fastened with iron bolts.
In some of the oldest orchards one may still occasionally see a large
dilapidated tree with the rusty iron bolt yet visible.  Poor, sour
fruit, too, but sweet in those early pioneer days.  My grandfather,
who was one of these heroes of the stump, used every fall to make a
journey of forty miles for a few apples, which he brought home in a bag
on horseback.  He frequently started from home by two or three o'clock
in the morning, and at one time both he and his horse were much
frightened by the screaming of panthers in a narrow pass in the
mountains through which the road led.

Emerson, I believe, has spoken of the apple as the social fruit of
New England.  Indeed, what a promoter or abettor of social intercourse
among our rural population the apple has been, the company growing more
merry and unrestrained as soon as the basket of apples was passed
round!  When the cider followed, the introduction and good
understanding were complete.  Then those rural gatherings that
enlivened the autumn in the country, known as " apple cuts," now, alas!
nearly obsolete, where so many things were cut and dried besides
apples!  The larger and more loaded the orchard, the more frequently
the invitations went round and the higher the social and convivial
spirit ran.   Ours is eminently a country of the orchard.
Horace Greeley said he had seen no land in which the orchard formed
such a prominent feature in the rural and agricultural districts.
Nearly every farmhouse in the Eastern and Northern States has its
setting or its background of apple-trees, which generally date back to
the first settlement of the farm.  Indeed, the orchard, more than
almost any other thing, tends to soften and humanize the country,
and to give the place of which it is an adjunct, a settled, domestic
look.  The apple-tree takes the rawness and wildness off any scene.
On the top of a mountain, or in remote pastures, it sheds the sentiment
of home.  It never loses its domestic air, or lapses into a wild state.
And in planting a homestead, or in choosing a building site for the new
house, what a help it is to have a few old, maternal apple-trees near
by; regular old grandmothers, who have seen trouble, who have been sad
and glad through so many winters and summers, who have blossomed till
the air about them is sweeter than elsewhere, and borne fruit till the
grass beneath them has become thick and soft from human contact, and
who have nourished robins and finches in their branches till they have
a tender, brooding look.  The ground, the turf, the atmosphere of an
old orchard, seem several stages nearer to man than that of the
adjoining field, as if the trees had given back to the soil more than
they had taken from it; as if they had tempered the elements and
attracted all the genial and  beneficent influences in the landscape
around.

An apple orchard is sure to bear you several crops beside the apple.
There is the crop of sweet and tender reminiscences dating from
childhood and spanning the seasons from May to October, and making the
orchard a sort of outlying part of the household.  You have played
there as a child, mused there as a youth or lover, strolled there as a
thoughtful, sad-eyed man.  Your father, perhaps, planted the trees,
or reared them from the seed, and you yourself have pruned and grafted
them, and worked among them, till every separate tree has a peculiar
history and meaning in your mind.  Then there is the never-failing crop
of birds--robins, goldfinches, king-birds, cedar-birds, hair-birds,
orioles, starlings--all nesting and breeding in its branches, and fitly
described by Wilson Flagg as "Birds of the Garden and Orchard."
Whether the pippin and sweetbough bear or not, the "punctual birds" can
always be depended on.  Indeed, there are few better places to study
ornithology than in the orchard.  Besides its regular occupants, many
of the birds of the deeper forest find occasion to visit it during the
season.  The cuckoo comes for the tent-caterpillar, the jay for frozen
apples, the ruffed grouse for buds, the crow foraging for birds' eggs,
the woodpecker and chickadees for their food, and the high-hole for
ants.  The red-bird comes too, if only to see what a friendly covert
its branches form; and the wood-thrush now and then comes out of the
grove near by, and nests alongside of its cousin, the robin.
The smaller hawks know that this is a most likely spot for their prey;
and in spring the shy northern warblers may be studied as they pause to
feed on the fine insects amid its branches.  The mice love to dwell
here also, and hither comes from the near woods the squirrel and the
rabbit.  The latter will put his head through the boy's slipper-noose
any time for taste of the sweet apple, and the red squirrel and
chipmunk esteem its seeds a great rarity.

All the domestic animals love the apple, but none so much so as the
cow.  The taste of it wakes her up as few other things do, and bars and
fences must be well looked after.  No need to assort them or pick out
the ripe ones for her.  An apple is an apple, and there is no best
about it.  I heard of a quick-witted old cow that learned to shake them
down from the tree.  While rubbing herself she had observed that an
apple sometimes fell.  This stimulated her to rub a little harder, when
more apples fell.   She then took the hint and rubbed her shoulder with
such vigor that the farmer had to check her and keep an eye on her to
save his fruit.

But the cow is the friend of the apple.  How many trees she has planted
about the farm, in the edge of the woods, and in remote fields and
pastures.  The wild apples, celebrated by Thoreau, are mostly of her
planting.  She browses them down to be sure, but they are hers, and why
should she not?

What an individuality the apple-tree has, each variety being nearly as
marked by its form as by its fruit.  What a vigorous grower, for
instance, is the Ribston pippin, an English apple.  Wide branching like
the oak, and its large ridgy fruit, in late fall or early winter,
is one of my favorites.  Or the thick and more pendent top of the
belleflower, with its equally rich, sprightly uncloying fruit.

Sweet apples are perhaps the most nutritious, and when baked are a
feast in themselves.  With a tree of the Jersey sweet or of Tolman's
sweeting in bearing, no man's table need be devoid of luxuries and one
of the most wholesome of all deserts.  Or the red astrachan, an August
apple, what a gap may be filled in the culinary department of a
household at this season, by a single tree of this fruit!  And what a
feast is its shining crimson coat to the eye before its snow-white
flesh has reached the tongue.  But the apple of apples for the
household is the spitzenberg.  In this casket Pomona has put her
highest flavors.  It can stand the ordeal of cooking and still remain a
spitz.  I recently saw a barrel of these apples from the orchard of a
fruit-grower in the northern part of New York, who has devoted special
attention to this variety.  They were perfect gems.  Not large, that
had not been the aim, but small, fair, uniform, and red to the core.
How intense, how spicy and aromatic!

But all the excellences of the apple are not confined to the cultivated
fruit.  Occasionally a seedling springs up about the farm that produces
fruit of rare beauty and worth.  In sections peculiarly adapted to the
apple, like a certain belt along the Hudson River, I have noticed that
most of the wild unbidden trees bear good, edible fruit.  In cold and
ungenial districts, the seedlings are mostly sour and crabbed, but in
more favorable soils they are oftener mild and sweet.  I know wild
apples that ripen in August, and that do not need, if it could be had,
Thoreau's sauce of sharp November air to be eaten with.  At the foot of
a hill near me and striking its roots deep in the shale, is a giant
specimen of native tree that bears an apple that has about the
clearest, waxiest, most transparent complexion I ever saw.  It is good
size, and the color of a tea-rose.  Its quality is best appreciated in
the kitchen.  I know another seedling of excellent quality and so
remarkable for its firmness and density, that it is known on the farm
where it grows as the "heavy apple."

I have alluded to Thoreau, to whom all lovers of the apple and its tree
are under obligation.  His chapter on Wild Apples is a most delicious
piece of writing.  It has a "tang and smack " like the fruit it
celebrates, and is dashed and streaked with color in the same manner.
It has the hue and perfume of the crab, and the richness and raciness
of the pippin.  But Thoreau loved other apples than the wild sorts and
was obliged to confess that his favorites could not be eaten in-doors.
Late in November he found a blue-pearmain tree growing within the edge
of a swamp, almost as good as wild.  "You would not suppose," he says,
"that there was any fruit left there on the first survey, but you must
look according to system.  Those which lie exposed are quite brown and
rotten now, or perchance a few still show one blooming cheek here and
there amid the wet leaves.  Nevertheless, with experienced eyes I
explore amid the bare alders, and the huckleberry bushes, and the
withered sedge, and in the crevices of the rocks, which are full of
leaves, and pry under the fallen and decayed ferns which, with apple
and alder leaves, thickly strew the ground.  For I know that they lie
concealed, fallen into hollows long since, and covered up by the leaves
of the tree itself--a proper kind of packing.  From these lurking
places, everywhere within the circumference of the tree, I draw forth
the fruit all wet and glossy, maybe nibbled by rabbits and hollowed out
by crickets, and perhaps a leaf or two cemented to it (as Curzon an old
manuscript from a monastery's mouldy cellar), but still with a rich
bloom on it, and at least as ripe and well kept, if no better than
those in barrels, more crisp and lively than they.  If these resources
fail to yield anything, I have learned to look between the leaves of
the suckers which spring thickly from some horizontal limb, for now and
then one lodges there, or in the very midst of an alder-clump, where
they are covered by leaves, safe from cows which may have smelled them
out.  If I am sharp-set, for I do not refuse the blue-pearmain, I fill
my pockets on each side; and as I retrace my steps, in the frosty eve
being perhaps four or five miles from home, I eat one first from this
side, and then from that, to keep my balance."




A TASTE OF MAINE BIRCH.



The traveler and camper-out in Maine, unless he penetrates its more
northern portions, has less reason to remember it as a pine-tree State
than a birch-tree State.  The white-pine forests have melted away like
snow in the spring and gone down stream, leaving only patches here and
there in the more remote and inaccessible parts.  The portion of the
State I saw--the valley of the Kennebec and the woods about Moxie Lake
--had been shorn of its pine timber more than forty years before, and
is now covered with a thick growth of spruce and cedar and various
deciduous trees.  But the birch abounds.  Indeed, when the pine goes
out the birch comes in; the race of men succeeds the race of giants.
This tree has great stay-at-home virtues.  Let the sombre, aspiring,
mysterious pine go; the birch has humble every-day uses.  In Maine,
the paper or canoe birch is turned to more account than any other tree.
I read in Gibbon that the natives of ancient Assyria used to celebrate
in verse or prose the three hundred and sixty uses to which the various
parts and products of the palm-tree were applied.  The Maine birch is
turned to so many accounts that it may well be called the palm of this
region.  Uncle Nathan, our guide, said it was made especially for the
camper-out; yes, and for the wood-man and frontiersman generally.
It is a magazine, a furnishing store set up in the wilderness, whose
goods are free to every comer.  The whole equipment of the camp lies
folded in it, and comes forth at the beck of the woodman's axe; tent,
waterproof roof, boat, camp utensils, buckets, cups, plates, spoons,
napkins, table cloths, paper for letters or your journal, torches,
candles, kindling-wood, and fuel.  The canoe-birch yields you its
vestments with the utmost liberality.  Ask for its coat, and it gives
you its waistcoat also.  Its bark seems wrapped about it layer upon
layer, and comes off with great ease.  We saw many rude structures and
cabins shingled and sided with it, and haystacks capped with it.
Near a maple-sugar camp there was a large pile of birch-bark
sap-buckets,--each bucket made of a piece of bark about a yard square,
folded up as the tinman folds up a sheet of tin to make a square
vessel, the corners bent around against the sides and held by a wooden
pin.  When, one day, we were overtaken by a shower in traveling through
the woods, our guide quickly stripped large sheets of the bark from a
near tree, and we had each a perfect umbrella as by magic.  When the
rain was over, and we moved on, I wrapped mine about me like a large
leather apron, and it shielded my clothes from the wet bushes.  When we
came to a spring, Uncle Nathan would have a birch-bark cup ready before
any of us could get a tin one out of his knapsack, and I think water
never tasted so sweet as from one of these bark cups.  It is exactly
the thing.  It just fits the mouth and it seems to give new virtues to
the water.  It makes me thirsty now when I think of it.  In our camp at
Moxie we made a large birch-bark box to keep the butter in; and the
butter in this box, covered with some leafy boughs, I think improved in
flavor day by day.  Maine butter needs something to mollify and sweeten
it a little, and I think birch bark will do it.  In camp Uncle Nathan
often drank his tea and coffee from a bark cup; the china closet in the
birch-tree was always handy, and our vulgar tin ware was generally a
good deal mixed, and the kitchen-maid not at all particular about
dish-washing.  We all tried the oatmeal with the maple syrup in one of
these dishes, and the stewed mountain cranberries, using a birch-bark
spoon, and never found service better.  Uncle Nathan declared he could
boil potatoes in a bark kettle, and I did not doubt him.  Instead of
sending our soiled napkins and table-spreads to the wash, we rolled
them up into candles and torches, and drew daily upon our stores in the
forest for new ones.

But the great triumph of the birch is of course the bark canoe.  When
Uncle Nathan took us out under his little wood-shed, and showed us,
or rather modestly permitted us to see, his nearly finished canoe,
it was like a first glimpse of some new and unknown genius of the woods
or streams.  It sat there on the chips and shavings and fragments of
bark like some shy delicate creature just emerged from its
hiding-place, or like some wild flower just opened.  It was the first
boat of the kind I had ever seen, and it filled my eye completely.
What woodcraft it indicated, and what a, wild free life, sylvan life,
it promised!  It had such a fresh, aboriginal look as I had never
before seen in any kind of handiwork.  Its clear yellow-red color
would have become the cheek of an Indian maiden.  Then its supple
curves and swells, its sinewy stays and thwarts, its bow-like contour,
its tomahawk stem and stern rising quickly and sharply from its frame,
were all vividly suggestive of the race from which it came.  An old
Indian had taught Uncle Nathan the art, and the soul of the ideal
red man looked out of the boat before us.  Uncle Nathan had spent two
days ranging the mountains looking for a suitable tree, and had worked
nearly a week on the craft.  It was twelve feet long, and would seat
and carry five men nicely.  Three trees contribute to the making of a
canoe besides the birch, namely, the white cedar for ribs and lining,
the spruce for roots and fibres to sew its joints and bind its frame,
and the pine for pitch or rosin to stop its seams and cracks.  It is
hand-made and home-made, or rather wood-made, in a sense that no other
craft is, except a dug-out, and it suggests a taste and a refinement
that few products of civilization realize.  The design of a savage,
it yet looks like the thought of a poet, and its grace and fitness
haunt the imagination.  I suppose its production was the inevitable
result of the Indian's wants and surroundings, but that does not
detract from its beauty.  It is, indeed, one of the fairest flowers the
thorny plant of necessity ever bore.  Our canoe, as I have intimated,
was not yet finished when we first saw it, nor yet when we took it up,
with its architect, upon our metaphorical backs and bore it to the
woods.  It lacked part of its cedar lining and the rosin upon its
joints, and these were added after we reached our destination.

Though we were not indebted to the birch-tree for our guide,
Uncle Nathan, as he was known in all the country, yet he matched well
these woodsy products and conveniences.  The birch-tree had given him a
large part of his tuition, and kneeling in his canoe and making it
shoot noiselessly over the water with that subtle yet indescribably
expressive and athletic play of the muscles of the back and shoulders,
the boat and the man seemed born of the same spirit.  He had been a
hunter and trapper for over forty years; he had grown gray in the
woods, had ripened and matured there, and everything about him was as
if the spirit of the woods had had the ordering of it; his whole
make-up was in a minor and subdued key, like the moss and the lichens,
or like the protective coloring of the game,--everything but his quick
sense and penetrative glance.  He was as gentle and modest as a girl;
his sensibilities were like plants that grow in the shade.  The woods
and the solitudes had touched him with their own softening and refining
influence; had indeed shed upon his soil of life a rich deep leaf mould
that was delightful, and that nursed, half concealed, the tenderest and
wildest growths.  There was grit enough back of and beneath it all, but
he presented none of the rough and repelling traits of character of the
conventional backwoods-man.  In the spring he was a driver of logs on
the Kennebec, usually having charge of a large gang of men; in the
winter he was a solitary trapper and hunter in the forests.

Our first glimpse of Maine waters was Pleasant Pond, which we found by
following a white, rapid, musical stream from the Kennebec three miles
back into the mountains.  Maine waters are for the most part
dark-complexioned, Indian-colored streams, but Pleasant Pond is a
pale-face among them both in name and nature.  It is the only strictly
silver lake I ever saw.  Its waters seem almost artificially white and
brilliant, though of remarkable transparency.  I think I detected
minute shining motes held in suspension in it.   As for the trout they
are veritable bars of silver until you have cut their flesh, when they
are the reddest of gold.  They have no crimson or other spots, and the
straight lateral line is but a faint pencil mark.  They appeared to be
a species of lake trout peculiar to these waters, uniformly from ten to
twelve inches in length.  And these beautiful fish, at the time of our
visit (last of August) at least, were to be taken only in deep water
upon a hook baited with salt pork.  And then you needed a letter of
introduction to them.  They were not to be tempted or cajoled by
strangers.  We did not succeed in raising a fish, although instructed
how it was to be done, until one of the natives, a young and obliging
farmer living hard by, came and lent his countenance to the enterprise.
I sat in one end of the boat and he in the other; my pork was the same
as his, and I maneuvered it as directed, and yet those fish knew his
hook from mine in sixty feet of water, and preferred it four times in
five.  Evidently they did not bite because they were hungry, but solely
for old acquaintance' sake.

Pleasant Pond is an irregular sheet of water, two miles or more in its
greatest diameter, with high, rugged mountains rising up from its
western shore, and low rolling hills sweeping back from its eastern and
northern, covered by a few sterile farms.  I was never tired, when the
wind was still, of floating along its margin and gazing down into its
marvelously translucent depths.  The boulders and fragments of rocks
were seen, at a depth of twenty-five or thirty feet, strewing its
floor, and apparently as free from any covering of sediment as when
they were dropped there by the old glaciers aeons ago.  Our camp was
amid a dense grove of second growth of white pine on the eastern shore,
where, for one, I found a most admirable cradle in a little depression,
outside of the tent, carpeted with pine needles, in which to pass the
night.  The camper-out is always in luck if he can find, sheltered by
the trees, a soft hole in the ground, even if he has a stone for a
pillow.  The earth must open its arms a little for us even in life, if
we are to sleep well upon its bosom.  I have often heard my
grand-father, who was a soldier of the Revolution, tell with great
gusto how he once bivouacked in a little hollow made by the overturning
of a tree, and slept so soundly that he did not wake up till his cradle
was half full of water from a passing shower.

What bird or other creature might represent the divinity of Pleasant
Pond I do not know, but its demon, as of most northern inland waters,
is the loon, and a very good demon he is too, suggesting something not
so much malevolent, as arch, sardonic, ubiquitous, circumventing, with
just a tinge of something inhuman and uncanny.  His fiery red eyes
gleaming forth from that jet-black head are full of meaning.  Then his
strange horse laughter by day and his weird, doleful cry at night, like
that of a lost and wandering spirit, recall no other bird or beast.
He suggests something almost supernatural in his alertness and amazing
quickness, cheating the shot and the bullet of the sportsman out of
their aim.  I know of but one other bird so quick, and that is the
humming-bird, which I have never been able to kill with a gun.
The loon laughs the shot-gun to scorn, and the obliging young farmer
above referred to told me he had shot at them hundreds of times with
his rifle, without effect,--they always dodged his bullet.  We had in
our party a breach-loading rifle, which weapon is perhaps an
appreciable moment of time quicker than the ordinary muzzleloader,
and this the poor loon could not or did not dodge.  He had not timed
himself to that species of fire-arm, and when, with his fellow, he swam
about within rifle range of our camp, letting off volleys of his wild
ironical ha-ha, he little suspected the dangerous gun that was matched
against him.  As the rifle cracked both loons made the gesture of
diving, but only one of them disappeared beneath the water; and when he
came to the surface in a few moments, a hundred or more yards away,
and saw his companion did not follow, but was floating on the water
where he had last seen him, he took the alarm and sped away in the
distance.  The bird I had killed was a magnificent specimen, and I
looked him over with great interest.  His glossy checkered coat,
his banded neck, his snow-white breast, his powerful lance- shaped
beak, his red eyes, his black, thin, slender, marvelously delicate feet
and legs, issuing from his muscular thighs, and looking as if they had
never touched the ground, his strong wings well forward while his legs
were quite at the apex, and the neat, elegant model of the entire bird,
speed and quickness and strength stamped upon every feature,--all
delighted and lingered in the eye.  The loon appears like anything but
a silly bird, unless you see him in some collection, or in the shop of
the taxidermist, where he usually looks very tame and goose-like.
Nature never meant the loon to stand up, or to use his feet and legs
for other purposes than swimming.  Indeed, he cannot stand except upon
his tail in a perpendicular attitude, but in the collections he is
poised upon his feet like a barn-yard fowl, all the wildness and grace
and alertness goes out of him.  My specimen sits upon a table as upon
the surface of the water, his feet trailing behind him, his body low
and trim, his head elevated and slightly turned as if in the act of
bringing that fiery eye to bear upon you, and vigilance and power
stamped upon every lineament.

The loon is to the fishes what the hawk is to the birds; he swoops down
to unknown depths upon them, and not even the wary trout can elude him.
Uncle Nathan said he had seen the loon disappear and in a moment come
up with a large trout, which he would cut in two with his strong beak,
and swallow piecemeal.  Neither the loon nor the otter can bolt a fish
under the water; he must come to the surface to dispose of it.  (I once
saw a man eat a cake under water in London.)  Our guide told me he had
seen the parent loon swimming with a single young one upon its back.
When closely pressed it dove, or "div" as he would have it, and left
the young bird sitting upon the water.  Then it too disappeared, and
when the old one returned and called, it came out from the shore.
On the wing overhead, the loon looks not unlike a very large duck, but
when it alights it ploughs into the water like a bombshell.
It probably cannot take flight from the land, as the one Gilbert White
saw and describes in his letters was picked up in a field, unable to
launch itself into the air.

>From Pleasant Pond we went seven miles through the woods to Moxie Lake,
following an overgrown lumberman's "tote" road, our canoe and supplies,
etc., hauled on a sled by the young farmer with his three-year-old
steers.  I doubt if birch-bark ever made rougher voyage than that.
As I watched it above the bushes, the sled and the luggage being
hidden, it appeared as if tossed in the wildest and most tempestuous
sea.  When the bushes closed above it I felt as if it had gone down,
or been broken into a hundred pieces.  Billows of rocks and logs, and
chasms of creeks and spring runs, kept it rearing and pitching in the
most frightful manner.  The steers went at a spanking pace; indeed, it
was a regular bovine gale; but their driver clung to their side amid
the brush and boulders with desperate tenacity, and seemed to manage
them by signs and nudges, for he hardly uttered his orders aloud.
But we got through without any serious mishap, passing Mosquito Creek
and Mosquito Pond, and flanking Mosquito Mountain, but seeing no
mosquitoes, and brought up at dusk at a lumberman's old hay-barn,
standing in the midst of a lonely clearing on the shores of Moxie Lake.

Here we passed the night, and were lucky in having a good roof over our
heads, for it rained heavily.  After we were rolled in our blankets and
variously disposed upon the haymow, Uncle Nathan lulled us to sleep by
a long and characteristic yarn.

I had asked him, half jocosely, if he believed in "spooks"; but he took
my question seriously, and without answering it directly, proceeded to
tell us what he himself had known and witnessed.  It was, by the way,
extremely difficult either to surprise or to steal upon any of
Uncle Nathan's private opinions and beliefs about matters and things.
He was as shy of all debatable subjects as a fox is of a trap.
He usually talked in a circle, just as he hunted moose and caribou,
so as not to approach his point too rudely and suddenly.  He would keep
on the lee side of his interlocutor in spite of all one could do.
He was thoroughly good and reliable, but the wild creatures of the
woods, in pursuit of which he had spent so much of his life, had taught
him a curious gentleness and indirection, and to keep himself in the
back-ground; he was careful that you should not scent his opinions upon
any subject at all polemic, but he would tell you what he had seen and
known.  What he had seen and known about spooks was briefly this:--In
company with a neighbor he was passing the night with an old recluse
who lived somewhere in these woods.  Their host was an Englishman, who
had the reputation of having murdered his wife some years before in
another part of the country, and, deserted by his grown-up children,
was eking out his days in poverty amid these solitudes.  The three men
were sleeping upon the floor, with Uncle Nathan next to a rude
partition that divided the cabin into two rooms.  At his head there was
a door that opened into this other apartment.  Late at night,
Uncle Nathan said, he awoke and turned over, and his mind was occupied
with various things, when he heard somebody behind the partition.
He reached over and felt that both of his companions were in their
places beside him, and he was somewhat surprised.  The person, or
whatever it was, in the other room moved about heavily, and pulled the
table from its place beside the wall to the middle of the floor.
"I was not dreaming," said Uncle Nathan;" I felt of my eyes twice to
make sure, and they were wide open."  Presently the door opened; he was
sensible of the draught upon his head, and a woman's form stepped
heavily past him; he felt the "swirl" of her skirts as she went by.
Then there was a loud noise in the room as if some one had fallen their
whole length upon the floor.  "It jarred the house," said he, "and woke
everybody up.  I asked old Mr.----- if he heard that noise.  'Yes,'
said he, 'it was thunder.'  But it was not thunder, I know that;"
and then added, "I was no more afraid than I am this minute.  I never
was the least mite afraid in my life.  And my eyes were wide open," he
repeated; "I felt of them twice; but whether that was the speret of
that man's murdered wife or not I cannot tell.  They said she was an
uncommon heavy woman."  Uncle Nathan was a man of unusually quick and
acute senses, and he did not doubt their evidence on this occasion any
more than he did when they prompted him to level his rifle at a bear or
a moose.

Moxie Lake lies much lower than Pleasant Pond, and its waters compared
with those of the latter are as copper compared with silver.  It is
very irregular in shape; now narrowing to the dimensions of a slow
moving grassy creek, then expanding into a broad deep basin with rocky
shores, and commanding the noblest mountain scenery.  It is rarely that
the pond-lily and the speckled trout are found together,--the fish the
soul of the purest spring water, the flower the transfigured spirit of
the dark mud and slime of sluggish summer streams and ponds; yet in
Moxie they were both found in perfection.  Our camp was amid the
birches, poplars, and white cedars near the head of the lake, where the
best fishing at this season was to be had.  Moxie has a small oval
head, rather shallow, but bumpy with rocks; a long, deep neck, full of
springs, where the trout lie; and a very broad chest, with two islands
tufted with pine-trees for breasts.  We swam in the head, we fished in
the neck, or in a
 small section of it, a space about the size of the
Adam's apple, and we paddled across and around the broad expanse below.
Our birch bark was not finished and christened till we reached Moxie.
The cedar lining was completed at Pleasant Pond, where we had the use
of a bateau, but the rosin was not applied to the seams till we reached
this lake.  When I knelt down in it for the first time and put its
slender maple paddle into the water, it sprang away with such quickness
and speed that it disturbed me in my seat.  I had spurred a more
restive and spirited steed than I was used to.  In fact, I had never
been in a craft that sustained so close a relation to my will, and was
so responsive to my slightest wish.  When I caught my first large trout
from it, it sympathized a little too closely, and my enthusiasm started
a leak, which, however, with a live coal and a piece of rosin, was
quickly ended.  You cannot perform much of a war-dance in a birch-bark
canoe: better wait till you get on dry land.  Yet as a boat it is not
so shy and "ticklish" as I had imagined.  One needs to be on the alert,
as becomes a sportsman and an angler, and in his dealings with it must
charge himself with three things,--precision, moderation, and
circumspection.

Trout weighing four and five pounds have been taken at Moxie, but none
of that size came to our hand.  I realized the fondest hopes I had
dared to indulge in when I hooked the first two-pounder of my life, and
my extreme solicitude lest he get away I trust was pardonable.  My
friend, in relating the episode in camp, said I implored him to row me
down in the middle of the lake that I might have room to manœuver my
fish.  But the slander has barely a grain of truth in it.  The water
near us showed several old stakes broken off just below the surface,
and my fish was determined to wrap my leader about one of these stakes;
it was only for the clear space a few yards farther out that I prayed.
It was not long after that my friend found himself in an anxious frame
of mind.  He hooked a large trout, which came home on him so suddenly
that he had not time to reel up his line, and in his extremity he
stretched his tall form into the air and lifted up his pole to an
incredible height.  He checked the trout before it got under the boat,
but dared not come down an inch, and then began his amusing further
elongation in reaching for his reel with one hand while he carried it
ten feet into the air with the other.  A step-ladder would perhaps have
been more welcome to him just then than at any other moment during his
life.  But the trout was saved, though my friend's buttons and
suspenders suffered.

We learned a new trick in fly-fishing here, worth disclosing.  It was
not one day in four that the trout would take the fly on the surface.
When the south wind was blowing and the clouds threatened rain, they
would at times, notably about three o'clock, rise handsomely.  But on
all other occasions it was rarely that we could entice them up through
the twelve or fifteen feet of water.  Earlier in the season they are
not so lazy and indifferent, but the August languor and drowsiness were
now upon them.  So we learned by a lucky accident to fish deep for
them, even weighting our leaders with a shot, and allowing the flies to
sink nearly to the bottom.  After a moment's pause we would draw them
slowly up, and when half or two thirds of the way to the top the trout
would strike, when the sport became lively enough.  Most of our fish
were taken in this way.  There is nothing like the flash and the strike
at the surface, and perhaps only the need of food will ever tempt the
genuine angler into any more prosaic style of fishing; but if you must
go below the surface, a shotted leader is the best thing to use.

Our camp-fire at night served more purposes than one; from its embers
and flickering shadows, Uncle Nathan read us many a tale of his life in
the woods.  They were the same old hunter's stories, except that they
evidently had the merit of being strictly true, and hence were not very
thrilling or marvelous.  Uncle Nathan's tendency was rather to tone
down and belittle his experiences than to exaggerate them.  If he ever
bragged at all (and I suspect he did just a little, when telling us how
he outshot one of the famous riflemen of the American team, whom he was
guiding through these woods), he did it in such a sly, round-about way
that it was hard to catch him at it.  His passage with the rifleman
referred to shows the difference between the practical off-hand skill
of the hunter in the woods and the science of the long-range target
hitter.  Mr. Bull's Eye had heard that his guide was a capital shot and
had seen some proof of it, and hence could not rest till he had had a
trial of skill with him.  Uncle Nathan, being the challenged party, had
the right to name the distance and the conditions.  A piece of white
paper the size of a silver dollar was put upon a tree twelve rods off,
the contestants to fire three shots each off-hand.  Uncle Nathan's
first bullet barely missed the mark, but the other two were planted
well into it.  Then the great rifleman took his turn, and missed every
time.

"By hemp!" said Uncle Nathan," I was sorry I shot so well, Mr.-----
took it so to heart; and I had used his own rifle, too.  He did not get
over it for a week."

But far more ignominious was the failure of Mr. Bull's Eye when he saw
his first bear.  They were paddling slowly and silently down Dead
River, when the guide heard a slight noise in the bushes just behind a
little bend.  He whispered to the rifleman, who sat kneeling in the bow
of the boat, to take his rifle.  But instead of doing so he picked up
his two-barreled shot-gun.  As they turned the point, there stood a
bear not twenty yards away, drinking from the stream.  Uncle Nathan
held the canoe, while the man who had come so far in quest of this very
game was trying to lay down his shot-gun and pick up his rifle.  "His
hand moved like the hand of a clock," said Uncle Nathan, "and I could
hardly keep my seat.  I knew the bear would see us in a moment more,
and run.  Instead of laying his gun by his side, where it belonged, he
reached it across in front of him and laid it upon his rifle, and in
trying to get the latter from under it a noise was made; the bear heard
it and raised his head.  Still there was time, for as the bear sprang
into the woods he stopped and looked back,--"as I knew he would," said
the guide; yet the marksman was not ready.  "By hemp! I could have shot
three bears," exclaimed Uncle Nathan, "while he was getting that rifle
to his face!"

Poor Mr. Bull's Eye was deeply humiliated.  "Just the chance I had been
looking for," he said, "and my wits suddenly left me."

As a hunter Uncle Nathan always took the game on its own terms, that of
still-hunting.  He even shot foxes in this way, going into the fields
in the fall just at break of day, and watching for them about their
mousing haunts.  One morning, by these tactics, he shot a black fox;
a fine specimen, he said, and a wild one, for he stopped and looked and
listened every few yards.

He had killed over two hundred moose, a large number of them at night
on the lakes.  His method was to go out in his canoe and conceal
himself by some point or island, and wait till he heard the game.
In the fall the moose comes into the water to eat the large fibrous
roots of the pond-lilies.  He splashes along till he finds a suitable
spot, when he begins feeding, sometimes thrusting his bead and neck
several feet under water.  The hunter listens, and when the moose lifts
his head and the rills of water run from it, and he hears him "swash"
the lily roots about to get off the mud, it is his time to start.
Silently as a shadow he creeps up on the moose, who by the way,
it seems, never expects the approach of danger from the water side.
If the hunter accidentally makes a noise the moose looks toward the
shore for it.  There is always a slight gleam on the water,
Uncle Nathan says, even in the darkest night, and the dusky form of the
moose can be distinctly seen upon it.  When the hunter sees this darker
shadow he lifts his gun to the sky and gets the range of its barrels,
then lowers it till it covers the mark, and fires.

The largest moose Uncle Nathan ever killed is mounted in the State
House at Augusta.  He shot him while hunting in winter on snow-shoes.
The moose was reposing upon the ground, with his head stretched out in
front of him, as one may sometimes see a cow resting.  The position was
such that only a quartering shot through the animal's hip could reach
its heart.  Studying the problem carefully, and taking his own time,
the hunter fired.  The moose sprang into the air, turned, and came with
tremendous strides straight toward him.  "I knew he had not seen or
scented me," said Uncle Nathan, "but, by hemp, I wished myself
somewhere else just then; for I was lying right down in his path."
But the noble animal stopped, a few yards short, and fell dead with a
bullet-hole through his heart.

When the moose yard in the winter, that is, restrict their wanderings
to a well-defined section of the forest or mountain, trampling down the
snow and beating paths in all directions, they browse off only the most
dainty morsels first; when they go over the ground a second time they
crop a little cleaner; the third time they sort still closer, till by
and by nothing is left.  Spruce, hemlock, poplar, the barks of various
trees, everything within reach, is cropped close.  When the hunter
comes upon one of these yards the problem for him to settle is, Where
are the moose? for it is absolutely necessary that he keep on the lee
side of them.  So he considers the lay of the land, the direction of
the wind, the time of day, the depth of the snow, examines the spoor,
the cropped twigs, and studies every hint and clew like a detective.
Uncle Nathan said he could not explain to another how he did it, but
he could usually tell in a few minutes in what direction to look for
the game.  His experience had ripened into a kind of intuition or
winged reasoning that was above rules.

He said that most large game, deer, caribou, moose, bear, when started
by the hunter and not much scared, were sure to stop and look back
before disappearing from sight: he usually waited for this last and
best chance to fire.  He told us of a huge bear he had seen one morning
while still-hunting foxes in the fields; the bear saw him, and got into
the woods before he could get a good shot.  In her course some distance
up the mountain was a bald, open spot, and he felt sure when she
crossed this spot she would pause and look behind her; and sure enough,
like Lot's wife, her curiosity got the better of her; she stopped to
have a final look, and her travels ended there and then.

Uncle Nathan had trapped and shot a great many bears, and some of his
experiences revealed an unusual degree of sagacity in this animal.
One April, when the weather began to get warm and thawy, an old bear
left her den in the rocks and built a large, warm nest of grass,
leaves, and the bark of the white cedar, under a tall balsam fir that
stood in a low, sunny, open place amid the mountains.  Hither she
conducted her two cubs, and the family began life in what might be
called their spring residence.  The tree above them was for shelter,
and for refuge for the cubs in case danger approached, as it soon did
in the form of Uncle Nathan.  He happened that way soon after the bear
had moved.  Seeing her track in the snow, he concluded to follow it.
When the bear had passed, the snow had been soft and sposhy, and she
had "slumped," he said, several inches.  It was now hard and slippery.
As he neared the tree the track turned and doubled, and tacked this way
and that, and led through the worst brush and brambles to be found.
This was a shrewd thought of the old bear; she could thus hear her
enemy coming a long time before he drew very near.  When Uncle Nathan
finally reached the nest, he found it empty, but still warm.  Then he
began to circle about and look for the bear's footprints or nail-prints
upon the frozen snow.  Not finding them the first time, he took a
larger circle, then a still larger; finally he made a long detour,
and spent nearly an hour searching for some clew to the direction the
bear had taken, but all to no purpose.  Then he returned to the tree
and scrutinized it.  The foliage was very dense, but presently he made
out one of the cubs near the top, standing up amid the branches, and
peering down at him.  This he killed.  Further search only revealed a
mass of foliage apparently more dense than usual, but a bullet sent
into it was followed by loud whimpering and crying, and the other baby
bear came tumbling down.  In leaving the place, greatly puzzled as to
what had become of the mother bear, Uncle Nathan followed another of
her frozen tracks, and after about a quarter of a mile saw beside it,
upon the snow, the fresh trail he had been in search of.  In making her
escape the bear had stepped exactly in her old tracks that were hard
and icy, and had thus left no mark till she took to the snow again.

During his trapping expeditions into the woods in midwinter, I was
curious to know how Uncle Nathan passed the nights, as we were twice
pinched with the cold at that season in our tent and blankets.  It was
no trouble to keep warm, he said, in the coldest weather.  As night
approached, he would select a place for his camp on the side of a hill.
With one of his snow-shoes he would shovel out the snow till the ground
was reached, carrying the snow out in front, as we scrape the earth out
of the side of a hill to level up a place for the house and yard.
On this level place, which, however, was made to incline slightly
toward the hill, his bed of boughs was made.  On the ground he had
uncovered he built his fire.  His bed was thus on a level with the
fire, and the heat could not thaw the snow under him and let him down,
or the burning logs roll upon him.  With a steep ascent behind it the
fire burned better, and the wind was not so apt to drive the smoke and
blaze in upon him.  Then, with the long, curving branches of the spruce
stuck thickly around three sides of the bed, and curving over and
uniting their tops above it, a shelter was formed that would keep out
the cold and the snow, and that would catch and retain the warmth of
the fire.  Rolled in his blanket in such a nest, Uncle Nathan
had passed hundreds of the most frigid winter nights.

One day we made an excursion of three miles through the woods to Bald
Mountain, following a dim trail.  We saw, as we filed silently along,
plenty of signs of caribou, deer, and bear, but were not blessed with a
sight of either of the animals themselves.  I noticed that
Uncle Nathan, in looking through the woods, did not hold his head as we
did, but thrust it slightly forward, and peered under the branches like
a deer or other wild creature.

The summit of Bald Mountain was the most impressive mountain-top I had
ever seen, mainly, perhaps, because it was one enormous crown of nearly
naked granite.  The rock had that gray, elemental, eternal look which
granite alone has.  One seemed to be face to face with the gods of the
fore-world.  Like an atom, like a breath of to-day, we were suddenly
confronted by abysmal geologic time,--the eternities past and the
eternities to come.  The enormous cleavage of the rocks, the appalling
cracks and fissures, the rent boulders, the smitten granite floors,
gave one a new sense of the power of heat and frost.  In one place we
noticed several deep parallel grooves, made by the old glaciers.
In the depressions on the summit there was a hard, black, peaty-like
soil that looked indescribably ancient and unfamiliar.  Out of this
mould, that might have come from the moon or the interplanetary spaces,
were growing mountain cranberries and blueberries or huckleberries.
We were soon so absorbed in gathering the latter that we were quite
oblivious of the grandeurs about us.  It is these blueberries that
attract the bears.  In eating them, Uncle Nathan said, they take the
bushes in their mouths, and by an upward movement strip them clean of
both leaves and berries.  We were constantly on the lookout for the
bears, but failed to see any.  Yet a few days afterward, when two of
our party returned here and encamped upon the mountain, they saw five
during their stay, but failed to get a good shot.  The rifle was in the
wrong place each time.  The man with the shot-gun saw an old bear and
two cubs lift themselves from behind a rock and twist their noses
around for his scent, and then shrink away.  They were too far off for
his buckshot.  I must not forget the superb view that lay before us,
a wilderness of woods and waters stretching away to the horizon on
every band.  Nearly a dozen lakes and ponds could be seen, and in a
clearer atmosphere the foot of Moosehead Lake would have been visible.
The highest and most striking mountain to be seen was Mount Bigelow,
rising above Dead River, far to the west, and its two sharp peaks
notching the horizon like enormous saw-teeth.  We walked around and
viewed curiously a huge boulder on the top of the mountain that had
been split in two vertically, and one of the halves moved a few feet
out of its bed.  It looked recent and familiar, but suggested gods
instead of men.  The force that moved the rock had plainly come from
the north.  I thought of a similar boulder I had seen not long before
on the highest point of the Shawangunk Mountains in New York, one side
of which is propped up with a large stone, as wall-builders prop up a
rock to wrap a chain around it.  The rock seems poised lightly, and has
but a few points of bearing.  In this instance, too, the power had come
from the north.

The prettiest botanical specimen my trip yielded was a little plant
that bears the ugly name of horned bladderwort  (Utricularia cornuta),
and  which I found growing in marshy places along the shores of Moxie
Lake.  It has a slender, naked stem nearly a foot high, crowned by two
or more large deep yellow flowers,--flowers the shape of little bonnets
or hoods.  One almost expected to see tiny faces looking out of them.
This illusion is heightened by the horn or spur of the flower, which
projects from the hood like a long tapering chin,--some masker's
device.  Then the cape behind,--what a smart upward curve it has, as if
spurned by the fairy shoulders it was meant to cover!  But perhaps the
most notable thing about the flower was its fragrance,--the richest and
strongest perfume I 