eel of the churning-machine, and that some turn or other brought him
a happy thought, for next time he showed himself a strategist.  Instead
of giving chase to the woodchuck when first discovered, he crouched
down to the ground, and, resting his head on his paws, watched him.
The woodchuck kept working away from the hole, lured by the tender
clover, but, not unmindful of his safety, lifted himself up on his
haunches every few moments and surveyed the approaches.  Presently,
after the woodchuck had let himself down from one of these attitudes of
observation, and resumed his feeding, Cuff started swiftly but
stealthily up the hill, precisely in the attitude of
a cat when she is stalking a bird.  When the woodchuck rose up again,
Cuff was perfectly motionless and half hid by the grass.  When he again
resumed his clover, Cuff sped up the hill as before, this time crossing
a fence, but in a low place, and so nimbly that he was not discovered.
Again the wood chuck was on the outlook, again Cuff was motionless and
hugging the ground.  As the dog nears his victim he is partially hidden
by a swell in the earth, but still the woodchuck from his outlook
reports "all right," when Cuff, having not twice as far to run as the
'chuck, throws all stealthiness aside and rushes directly for the hole.
At that moment the woodchuck discovers his danger, and, seeing that it
is a race for life, leaps as I never saw marmot leap before.  But he is
two seconds too late, his retreat is cut off, and the powerful jaws of
the old dog close upon him.

The next season Cuff tried the same tactics again with like success;
but when the third woodchuck had taken up his abode at the fatal hole,
the old churner's wits and strength had begun to fail him, and he was
baffled in each attempt to capture the animal.

The woodchuck always burrows on a side-hill.  This enables him to guard
against being drowned out, by making the termination of the hole higher
than the entrance.  He digs in slantingly for about two or three feet,
then makes a sharp upward turn and keeps nearly parallel with the
surface of the ground for a distance of eight or ten feet farther,
according to the grade.  Here he makes his nest and passes the winter,
holing up in October or November and coming out again in April.  This
is a long sleep, and is rendered possible only by the amount of fat
with which the system has become stored during the summer.  The fire of
life still burns, but very faintly and slowly, as with the draughts all
closed and the ashes heaped up.  Respiration is continued, but at
longer intervals, and all the vital processes are nearly at a
standstill.  Dig one out during hibernation (Audubon did so), and you
find it a mere inanimate ball, that suffers itself to be moved and
rolled about without showing signs of awakening.  But bring it in by
the fire, and it presently unrolls and opens its eyes, and crawls
feebly about, and if left to itself will seek some dark hole or corner,
roll itself up again, and resume its former condition.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





Prepared by:
David J. Cole
E-mail david_j_cole@yahoo.com





Barchester Towers

by Anthony Trollope




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I	Who will Be the New Bishop?

II	Hiram's Hospital, According to Act of Parliament

III	Dr. and Mrs. Proudie

IV	The Bishop's Chaplain

V	A Morning Visit

VI	War

VII	The Dean and Chapter Take Counsel

VIII	The Ex-Warden Rejoices in His Probable Return to the Hospital

IX	The Stanhope Family

X	Mrs. Proudie's Reception--Commenced

XI	Mrs. Proudie's Reception--Concluded

XII	Slope versus Harding

XIII	The Rubbish Cart

XIV	The New Champion

XV	The Widow's Suitors

XVI	Baby Worship

XVII	Who Shall Be Cock of the Walk?

XVIII	The Widow's Persecution

XIX	Barchester by Moonlight

XX	Mr. Arabin

XXI	St Ewold's Parsonage

XXII	The Thornes of Ullathorne

XXIII	Mr. Arabin Reads Himself in at St. Ewold's

XXIV	Mr. Slope Manages Very Cleverly at Puddingdale

XXV	Fourteen Arguments in Favour of Mr. Quiverful's Claims

XXVI	Mrs. Proudie Wrestles and Gets a Fall

XXVII	A Love Scene

XXVIII	Mrs. Bold is Entertained by Dr. and Mrs. Grantly at Plumstead

XXIX	A Serious Interview

XXX	Another Love Scene

XXXI	The Bishop's Library

XXXII	A New Candidate for Ecclesiastical Honours

XXXIII	Mrs. Proudie Victrix

XXXIV	Oxford--The Master and Tutor of Lazarus

XXXV	Miss Thorne's F?te Champ?tre

XXXVI	Ullathorne Sports--Act I.

XXXVII	The Countess De Courcy, Mrs. Proudie, and the Signora
Neroni Meet Each Other at Ullathorne

XXXVIII	The Bishop Sits Down to Breakfast, and the Dean Dies

XXXIX	The Lookalofts and the Greenacres

XL	Ullathorne Sports--Act II.

XLI	Mrs. Bold Confides Her Sorrow to Her Friend Miss Stanhope

XLII	Ullathorne Sports--Act III.

XLIII	Mr. and Mrs. Quiverful Are Made Happy.  Mr. Slope Is
Encouraged by the Press

XLIV	Mrs. Bold at Home

XLV	The Stanhopes at Home

XLVI	Mr. Slope's Parting Interview with the Signora

XLVII	The Dean Elect

XLVIII	Miss Thorne Shows Her Talent at Match-making

XLIX	The Beelzebub Colt

L	The Archdeacon Is Satisfied with the State of Affairs

LI	Mr. Slope Bids Farewell to the Palace and Its Inhabitants

LII	The New Dean Takes Possession of the Deanery, and the New
Warden of the Hospital

LIII	Conclusion




CHAPTER I

Who Will Be the New Bishop?


In the latter days of July in the year 185-, a most important
question was for ten days hourly asked in the cathedral city of
Barchester, and answered every hour in various ways--Who was to be
the new bishop?

The death of old Dr. Grantly, who had for many years filled that
chair with meek authority, took place exactly as the ministry of Lord
----- was going to give place to that of Lord ----.  The illness of
the good old man was long and lingering, and it became at last a
matter of intense interest to those concerned whether the new
appointment should be made by a conservative or liberal government.

It was pretty well understood that the outgoing premier had made his
selection and that if the question rested with him, the mitre would
descend on the head of Archdeacon Grantly, the old bishop's son.  The
archdeacon had long managed the affairs of the diocese, and for some
months previous to the demise of his father rumour had confidently
assigned to him the reversion of his father's honours.

Bishop Grantly died as he had lived, peaceably, slowly, without pain
and without excitement.  The breath ebbed from him almost
imperceptibly, and for a month before his death it was a question
whether he were alive or dead.

A trying time was this for the archdeacon, for whom was designed the
reversion of his father's see by those who then had the giving away
of episcopal thrones.  I would not be understood to say that the
prime minister had in so many words promised the bishopric to Dr.
Grantly.  He was too discreet a man for that.  There is a proverb
with reference to the killing of cats, and those who know anything
either of high or low government places will be well aware that a
promise may be made without positive words and that an expectant may
be put into the highest state of encouragement, though the great man
on whose breath he hangs may have done no more than whisper that "Mr.
So-and-So is certainly a rising man."

Such a whisper had been made, and was known by those who heard it to
signify that the cures of the diocese of Barchester should not be
taken out of the hands of the archdeacon.  The then prime minister
was all in all at Oxford, and had lately passed a night at the house
of the Master of Lazarus.  Now the Master of Lazarus--which is, by
the by, in many respects the most comfortable as well as the richest
college at Oxford--was the archdeacon's most intimate friend and most
trusted counsellor.  On the occasion of the prime minister's visit,
Dr. Grantly was of course present, and the meeting was very gracious. 
On the following morning Dr. Gwynne, the master, told the archdeacon
that in his opinion the thing was settled.

At this time the bishop was quite on his last legs; but the ministry
also were tottering.  Dr. Grantly returned from Oxford, happy and
elated, to resume his place in the palace and to continue to perform
for the father the last duties of a son, which, to give him his due,
he performed with more tender care than was to be expected from his
usual somewhat worldly manners.

A month since, the physicians had named four weeks as the outside
period during which breath could be supported within the body of the
dying man.  At the end of the month the physicians wondered, and
named another fortnight.  The old man lived on wine alone, but at the
end of the fortnight he still lived, and the tidings of the fall of
the ministry became more frequent.  Sir Lamda Mewnew and Sir Omicron
Pie, the two great London doctors, now came down for the fifth time
and declared, shaking their learned heads, that another week of life
was impossible; and as they sat down to lunch in the episcopal
dining-room, whispered to the archdeacon their own private knowledge
that the ministry must fall with five days.  The son returned to his 
father's room and, after administering with his own hands the
sustaining modicum of madeira, sat down by the bedside to calculate
his chances.

The ministry were to be out within five days: his father was to be
dead within--no, he rejected that view of the subject.  The ministry
were to be out, and the diocese might probably be vacant at the same
period.  There was much doubt as to the names of the men who were to
succeed to power, and a week must elapse before a cabinet was formed. 
Would not vacancies be filled by the outgoing men during this week? 
Dr. Grantly had a kind of idea that such would be the case but did
not know, and then he wondered at his own ignorance on such a
question.

He tried to keep his mind away from the subject, but he could not. 
The race was so very close, and the stakes were so very high.  He
then looked at the dying man's impassive, placid face.  There was no
sign there of death or disease; it was something thinner than of
yore, somewhat grayer, and the deep lines of age more marked; but, as
far as he could judge, life might yet hang there for weeks to come. 
Sir Lamda Mewnew and Sir Omicron Pie had thrice been wrong, and might
yet be wrong thrice again.  The old bishop slept during twenty of the
twenty-four hours, but during the short periods of his waking
moments, he knew both his son and his dear old friend, Mr. Harding,
the archdeacon's father-in-law, and would thank them tenderly for
their care and love.  Now he lay sleeping like a baby, resting easily
on his back, his mouth just open, and his few gray hairs straggling
from beneath his cap; his breath was perfectly noiseless, and his
thin, wan hand, which lay above the coverlid, never moved.  Nothing
could be easier than the old man's passage from this world to the
next.

But by no means easy were the emotions of him who sat there watching. 
He knew it must be now or never.  He was already over fifty, and
there was little chance that his friends who were now leaving office
would soon return to it.  No probable British prime minister but he
who was now in, he who was so soon to be out, would think of making a
bishop of Dr. Grantly.  Thus he thought long and sadly, in deep
silence, and then gazed at that still living face, and then at last
dared to ask himself whether he really longed for his father's death.

The effort was a salutary one, and the question was answered in a
moment.  The proud, wishful, worldly man sank on his knees by the
bedside and, taking the bishop's hand within his own, prayed eagerly
that his sins might be forgiven him

His face was still buried in the clothes when the door of the bedroom
opened noiselessly and Mr. Harding entered with a velvet step.  Mr.
Harding's attendance at that bedside had been nearly as constant as
that of the archdeacon, and his ingress and egress was as much a
matter of course as that of his son-in-law.  He was standing close
beside the archdeacon before he was perceived, and would also have
knelt in prayer had he not feared that his doing so might have caused
some sudden start and have disturbed the dying man.  Dr. Grantly,
however, instantly perceived him and rose from his knees.  As he did
so Mr. Harding took both his hands and pressed them warmly.  There
was more fellowship between them at that moment than there had ever
been before, and it so happened that after circumstances greatly
preserved the feeling.  As they stood there pressing each other's
hands, the tears rolled freely down their cheeks.

"God bless you, my dears," said the bishop with feeble voice as he
woke.  "God bless you--may God bless you both, my dear children." 
And so he died.

There was no loud rattle in the throat, no dreadful struggle, no
palpable sign of death, but the lower jaw fell a little from its
place, and the eyes which had been so constantly closed in sleep now
remained fixed and open.  Neither Mr. Harding nor Dr. Grantly knew
that life was gone, though both suspected it

"I believe it's all over," said Mr. Harding, still pressing the
other's hands.  "I think--nay, I hope it is."

"I will ring the bell," said the other, speaking all but in a
whisper.  "Mrs. Phillips should be here."

Mrs. Phillips, the nurse, was soon in the room, and immediately, with
practised hand, closed those staring eyes.

"It's all over, Mrs. Phillips?" asked Mr. Harding.

"My lord's no more," said Mrs. Phillips, turning round and curtseying
low with solemn face; "his lordship's gone more like a sleeping babby
than any that I ever saw."

"It's a great relief, Archdeacon," said Mr. Harding, "a great relief-
-dear, good, excellent old man.  Oh that our last moments may be as
innocent and as peaceful as his!"

"Surely," said Mrs. Phillips.  "The Lord be praised for all his
mercies; but, for a meek, mild, gentle-spoken Christian, his lordship
was---" and Mrs. Phillips, with unaffected but easy grief, put up her
white apron to her flowing eyes.

"You cannot but rejoice that it is over," said Mr. Harding, still
consoling his friend.  The archdeacon's mind, however, had already
travelled from the death chamber to the closet of the prime minister. 
He had brought himself to pray for his father's life, but now that
that life was done, minutes were too precious to be lost. It was now
useless to dally with the fact of the bishop's death--useless to lose
perhaps everything for the pretence of a foolish sentiment.

But how was he to act while his father-in-law stood there holding his
hand?  How, without appearing unfeeling, was he to forget his father
in the bishop--to overlook what he had lost and think only of what he
might possibly gain?

"No, I suppose not," said he at last in answer to Mr. Harding.  "We
have all expected it so long."

Mr. Harding took him by the arm and led him from the room.  "We will
see him again to-morrow morning," said he; "we had better leave the
room now to the women."  And so they went downstairs.

It was already evening and nearly dark.  It was most important that
the prime minister should know that night that the diocese was
vacant.  Everything might depend on it, and so, in answer to Mr.
Harding's further consolation, the archdeacon suggested that a
telegraph message should be immediately sent off to London.  Mr.
Harding, who had really been somewhat surprised to find Dr. Grantly,
as he thought, so much affected, was rather taken aback, but he made
no objection.  He knew that the archdeacon had some hope of
succeeding to his father's place, though he by no means knew how
highly raised that hope had been.

"Yes," said Dr. Grantly, collecting himself and shaking off his
weakness, "we must send a message at once; we don't know what might
be the consequence of delay.  Will you do it?'

"I!  Oh, yes; certainly.  I'll do anything, only I don't know exactly
what it is you want."

Dr. Grantly sat down before a writing-table and, taking pen and ink,
wrote on a slip of paper as follows:

By Electric Telegraph.

For the ---- Earl of ----, Downing Street, or elsewhere.

The Bishop of Barchester is dead.

Message sent by the Rev. Septimus Harding.

"There," said he.  "Just take that to the telegraph office at the
railway station and give it in as it is; they'll probably make you
copy it on to one of their own slips; that's all you'll have to do;
then you'll have to pay them half a crown."  And the archdeacon put
his hand in his pocket and pulled out the necessary sum.

Mr. Harding felt very much like an errand-boy and also felt that he
was called on to perform his duties as such at rather an unseemly
time, but he said nothing and took the slip of paper and the
proffered coin.

"But you've put my name into it", Archdeacon."

"Yes," said the other, "there should be the name of some clergyman,
you know, and what name so proper as that of so old a friend as
yourself?  The earl won't look at the name, you may be sure of that;
but my dear Mr. Harding, pray don't lose any time."

Mr. Harding got as far as the library door on his way to the station
when he suddenly remembered the news with which he was fraught when
he entered the poor bishop's bedroom.  He had found the moment so
inopportune for any mundane tidings that he had repressed the words
which were on his tongue, and immediately afterwards all recollection
of the circumstance was for the time banished by the scene which had
occurred.

"But, Archdeacon," said he, turning back, "I forgot to tell you--the
ministry are out."

"Out!" ejaculated the archdeacon in a tone which too plainly showed
his anxiety and dismay, although under the circumstances of the
moment he endeavoured to control himself.  "Out!  Who told you so?"

Mr. Harding explained that news to this effect had come down by
electric telegraph and that the tidings had been left at the palace
door by Mr. Chadwick.

The archdeacon sat silent for awhile meditating, and Mr. Harding
stood looking at him.  "Never mind," said the archdeacon at last;
"send the message all the same.  The news must be sent to someone,
and there is at present no one else in a position to receive it.  Do
it at once, my dear friend; you know I would not trouble you, were I
in a state to do it myself.  A few minutes' time is of the greatest
importance."

Mr. Harding: went out and sent the message, and it may be as well
that we should follow it to its destination.  Within thirty minutes
of its leaving Barchester it reached the Ear1 of ---- in his inner
library.  What elaborate letters, what eloquent appeals, what
indignant remonstrances he might there have to frame, at such a
moment, may be conceived but not described!  How he was preparing his
thunder for successful rivals, standing like a British peer with his
back to the sea-coal fire, and his hands in his breeches pockets--how
his fine eye was lit up with anger, and his forehead gleamed with
patriotism--how he stamped his foot as he thought of his heavy
associates--how he all but swore as be remembered how much too clever
one of them had been--my creative readers may imagine.  But was he so
engaged?  No: history and truth compel me to deny it.  He was sitting
easily in a lounging chair, conning over a Newmarket list, and by his
elbow on the table was lying open an uncut French novel on which he
was engaged.

He opened the cover in which the message was enclosed and, having
read it, he took his pen and wrote on the back of it--

For the Earl of ----,

With the Earl of ----'s compliments,

and sent it off again on its journey.

Thus terminated our unfortunate friend's chances of possessing the
glories of a bishopric.

The names of many divines were given in the papers as that of the
bishop-elect  The British Grandmother declared that Dr. Gwynne was to
be the man, in compliment to the late ministry.  This was a heavy
blow to Dr. Grantly, but he was not doomed to see himself superseded
by his friend.  The Anglican Devotee put forward confidently the
claims of a great London preacher of austere doctrines; and The
Eastern Hemisphere, an evening paper supposed to possess much
official knowledge, declared in favour of an eminent naturalist, a
gentleman most completely versed in the knowledge of rocks and
minerals but supposed by many to hold on religious subjects no
special doctrines whatever.  The Jupiter, that daily paper which, as
we all know, is the only true source of infallibly correct
information on all subjects, for awhile was silent but at last spoke
out.  The merits of all these candidates were discussed and somewhat
irreverently disposed of, and then The Jupiter declared that Dr.
Proudie was to be the man.

Dr. Proudie was the man.  Just a month after the demise of the late
bishop, Dr. Proudie kissed the Queen's hand as his successor-elect.

We must beg to be allowed to draw a curtain over the sorrows of the
archdeacon as he sat, sombre and sad at heart, in the study of his
parsonage at Plumstead Episcopi.  On the day subsequent to the
dispatch of the message he heard that the Earl of ---- had consented
to undertake the formation of a ministry, and from that moment he
knew that his chance was over.  Many will think that he was wicked to
grieve for the loss of episcopal power, wicked to have coveted it,
nay, wicked even to have thought about it, in the way and at the
moments he had done so.

With such censures I cannot profess that I completely agree.  The
nolo episcopari, though still in use, is so directly at variance with 
the tendency of all human wishes that it cannot be thought to express
the true aspirations of rising priests in the Church of England.  A
lawyer does not sin in seeking to be a judge, or in compassing his
wishes by all honest means.  A young diplomat entertains a fair
ambition when he looks forward to be the lord of a first-rate
embassy, and a poor novelist, when he attempts to rival Dickens or
rise above Fitzjeames, commits no fault, though he may be foolish. 
Sydney Smith truly said that in these recreant days we cannot expect
to find the majesty of St. Paul beneath the cassock of a curate.  If
we look to our clergymen to be more than men, we shall probably teach
ourselves to think that they are less, and can hardly hope to raise
the character of the pastor by denying to him the right to entertain
the aspirations of a man.

Our archdeacon was worldly--who among us is not so?  He was
ambitious--who among us is ashamed to own that "last infirmity of
noble minds!"  He was avaricious, my readers will say.  No--it was
for no love of lucre that he wished to be Bishop of Barchester.  He
was his father's only child, and his father had left him great
wealth.  His preferment brought him in nearly three thousand a year. 
The bishopric, as cut down by the Ecclesiastical Commission, was only
five.  He would be a richer man as archdeacon than he could be as
bishop.  But he certainly did desire to play first fiddle; he did
desire to sit in full lawn sleeves among the peers of the realm; and
he did desire, if the truth must out, to be called "My lord" by his
reverend brethren.

His hopes, however, were they innocent or sinful, were not fated to
be realized, and Dr. Proudie was consecrated Bishop of Barchester.



CHAPTER II

Hiram's Hospital According to Act of Parliament


It is hardly necessary that I should here give to the public any
lengthened biography of Mr. Harding up to the period of the
commencement of this tale.  The public cannot have forgotten how ill
that sensitive gentleman bore the attack that was made on him in the
columns of The Jupiter, with reference to the income which he
received as warden of Hiram's Hospital, in the city of Barchester. 
Nor can it yet be forgotten that a lawsuit was instituted against him
on the matter of that charity by Mr. John Bold, who afterwards
married his, Mr. Harding's, younger and then only unmarried daughter. 
Under pressure of these attacks, Mr. Harding had resigned his
wardenship, though strongly recommended to abstain from doing so both
by his friends and by his lawyers.  He did, however, resign it and
betook himself manfully to the duties of the small parish of St.
Cuthbert's, in the city, of which he was vicar, continuing also to
perform those of precentor of the cathedral, a situation of small
emolument which had hitherto been supposed to be joined, as a matter
of course, to the wardenship of the hospital above spoken of.

When he left the hospital from which he had been so ruthlessly driven
and settled himself down in his own modest manner in the High Street
of Barchester, he had not expected that others would make more fuss
about it than he was inclined to do himself; extent of his hope was
that the movement might have been made in time to prevent any further
paragraphs in The Jupiter.  His affairs, however, were not allowed to
subside thus quietly, and people were quite as much inclined to talk
about the disinterested sacrifice he had made as they had before been
to upbraid him for his cupidity.

The most remarkable thing that occurred was the receipt of an
autographed letter from the Archbishop of Canterbury, in which the
primate very warmly praised his conduct and begged to know what his
intentions were for the future.  Mr. Harding replied that he intended
to be rector of St. Cuthbert's, in Barchester, and so that matter
dropped.  Then the newspapers took up his case, The Jupiter among the
rest, and wafted his name in eulogistic strains through every
reading-room in the nation.  It was discovered also that he was the
author of that great musical work, Harding's Church Music--and a new
edition was spoken of, though, I believe, never printed.  It is,
however, certain that the work was introduced into the Royal Chapel
at St. James's and that a long criticism appeared in the Musical
Scrutator, declaring that in no previous work of the kind had so much
research been joined with such exalted musical ability and asserting
that the name of Harding would henceforward be known wherever the
arts were cultivated, or religion valued.

This was high praise, and I will not deny that Mr. Harding was
gratified by such flattery, for if Mr. Harding was vain on any
subject, it was on that of music.  But here the matter rested.  The
second edition, if printed, was never purchased; the copies which had
been introduced into the Royal Chapel disappeared again and were laid
by in peace, with a load of similar literature.  Mr. Towers of The
Jupiter and his brethren occupied themselves with other names, and
the undying fame promised to our friend was clearly intended to be
posthumous.

Mr. Harding had spent much of his time with his friend the bishop;
much with his daughter Mrs. Bold, now alas, a widow; and had almost
daily visited the wretched remnant of his former subjects, the few
surviving bedesmen now left at Hiram's Hospital.  Six of them were
still living.  The number, according to old Hiram's will, should
always have been twelve.  But after the abdication of their warden,
the bishop had appointed no successor to him, no new occupants of the
charity had been nominated, and it appeared as though the hospital at
Barchester would fall into abeyance, unless the powers that be should
take some steps towards putting it once more into working order.

During the past five years, the powers that be had not overlooked
Barchester Hospital, and sundry political doctors had taken the
matter in hand.  Shortly after Mr. Harding's resignation The Jupiter
had very clearly shown what ought to be done.  In about half a column
it had distributed the income, rebuilt the buildings, put an end to
all bickerings, regenerated kindly feeling, provided for Mr. Harding,
and placed the whole thing on a footing which could not but be
satisfactory to the city and Bishop of Barchester, and to the nation
at large.  The wisdom of this scheme was testified by the number of
letters which "Common Sense," "Veritas," and "One that loves fair
play" sent to The Jupiter, all expressing admiration and amplifying
on the details given.  It is singular enough that no adverse letter
appeared at all, and, therefore, none of course was written.

But Cassandra was not believed, and even the wisdom of The Jupiter
sometimes falls on deaf ears.  Though other plans did not put
themselves forward in the columns of The Jupiter, reformers of church
charities were not slack to make known in various places their
different nostrums for setting Hiram's Hospital on its feet again.  A
learned bishop took occasion, in the Upper House, to allude to the
matter, intimating that he had communicated on the subject with his
right reverend brother of Barchester.  The radical member for
Staleybridge had suggested that the funds should be alienated for the
education of the agricultural poor of the country, and he amused the
house by some anecdotes touching the superstition and habits of the
agriculturists in question.  A political pamphleteer had produced a
few dozen pages which he called "Who are John Hiram's heirs?"
intended to give an infallible rule for the governance of all such
establishments; at last, a member of the government promised that in
the next session a short bill should be introduced for regulating the
affairs of Barchester and other kindred concerns.

The next session came, and, contrary to custom, the bill came also. 
Men's minds were then intent on other things.  The first threatenings
of a huge war hung heavily over the nation, and the question as to
Hiram's heirs did not appear to interest very many people either in
or out of the house.  The bill, however, was read and re-read, and in
some undistinguished manner passed through its eleven stages without
appeal or dissent.  What would John Hiram have said in the matter,
could he have predicted that some forty-five gentlemen would take on
themselves to make a law altering the whole purport of his will
without in the least knowing at the moment of their making it what it
was that they were doing?  It is however to be hoped that the under-
secretary for the Home Office knew, for to him had the matter been
confided.

The bill, however, did pass, and at the time at which this history is
supposed to commence it had been ordained that there should be, as
heretofore, twelve old men in Barchester Hospital, each with 1s.  4d. 
a day; that there should also be twelve old women to be located in a
house to be built, each with 1s.  2d.  a day; that there should be a
matron, with a house and £70 a year; a steward with £150 a year; and
latterly a warden with £450 a year, who should have the spiritual
guidance of both establishments and the temporal guidance of that
appertaining to the male sex.  The bishop, dean, and warden were, as
formerly, to appoint in turn the recipients of the charity, and the
bishop was to appoint the officers.  There was nothing said as to the
wardenship being held by the precentor of the cathedral, nor a word
as to Mr. Harding's right to the situation.

It was not, however, till some months after the death of the old
bishop, and almost immediately consequent on the installation of his
successor, that notice was given that the reform was about to be
carried out.  The new law and the new bishop were among the earliest
works of a new ministry, or rather of a ministry who, having for
awhile given place to their opponents, had then returned to power;
and the death of Dr. Grantly occurred, as we have seen, exactly at
the period of the change.

Poor Eleanor Bold!  How well does that widow's cap be-come her, and
the solemn gravity with which she devotes herself to her new duties. 
Poor Eleanor!

Poor Eleanor!  I cannot say that with me John Bold was ever a
favourite.  I never thought him worthy of the wife he had won.  But
in her estimation he was most worthy.  Hers was one of those feminine
hearts which cling to a husband, not with idolatry, for worship can
admit of no defect in its idol, but with the perfect tenacity of ivy. 
As the parasite plant will follow even the defects of the trunk which
it embraces, so did Eleanor cling to and love the very faults of her
husband.  She had once declared that whatever her father did should
in her eyes be right.  She then transferred her allegiance and became
ever ready to defend the worst failings of her lord and master.

And John Bold was a man to be loved by a woman; he was himself
affectionate; he was confiding and manly; and that arrogance of
thought, unsustained by first-rate abilities, that attempt at being
better than his neighbours which jarred so painfully on the feelings
of his acquaintance did not injure him in the estimation of his wife.

Could she even have admitted that he had a fault, his early death
would have blotted out the memory of it.  She wept as for the loss of
the most perfect treasure with which mortal woman had ever been
endowed; for weeks after he was gone the idea of future happiness in
this world was hateful to her; consolation, as it is called, was
insupportable, and tears and sleep were her only relief.

But God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb.  She knew that she had
within her the living source of other cares.  She knew that there was
to be created for her another subject of weal or woe, of unutterable
joy or despairing sorrow, as God in his mercy might vouchsafe to her. 
At first this did but augment her grief!  To be the mother of a poor
infant, orphaned before it was born, brought forth to the sorrows of
an ever desolate hearth, nurtured amidst tears and wailing, and then
turned adrift into the world without the aid of a father's care! 
There was at first no joy in this.

By degrees, however, her heart became anxious for another object,
and, before its birth, the stranger was expected with all the
eagerness of a longing mother.  Just eight months after the father's
death a second John Bold was born, and if the worship of one creature
can be innocent in another, let us hope that the adoration offered
over the cradle of the fatherless infant may not be imputed as a sin.

It will not be worth our while to define the character of the child,
or to point out in how far the faults of the father were redeemed
within that little breast by the virtues of the mother.  The baby, as
a baby, was all that was delightful, and I cannot foresee that it
will be necessary for us to inquire into the facts of his after-life. 
Our present business at Barchester will not occupy us above a year or
two at the furthest, and I will leave it to some other pen to
produce, if necessary, the biography of John Bold the Younger.

But, as a baby, this baby was all that could be desired.  This fact
no one attempted to deny.  "Is he not delightful?" she would say to
her father, looking up into his face from her knees, her lustrous
eyes overflowing with soft tears, her young face encircled by her
close widow's cap, and her hands on each side of the cradle in which
her treasure was sleeping.  The grandfather would gladly admit that
the treasure was delightful, and the uncle archdeacon himself would
agree, and Mrs. Grantly, Eleanor's sister, would re-echo the word
with true sisterly energy, and Mary Bold--but Mary Bold was a second
worshipper at the same shrine.

The baby was really delightful; he took his food with a will, struck
out his toes merrily whenever his legs were uncovered, and did not
have fits.  These are supposed to be the strongest points of baby
perfection, and in all these our baby excelled.

And thus the widow's deep grief was softened, and a sweet balm was
poured into the wound which she had thought nothing but death could
heal.  How much kinder is God to us than we are willing to be to
ourselves!  At the loss of every dear face, at the last going of
every well-beloved one, we all doom ourselves to an eternity of
sorrow and look to waste ourselves away in an ever-running fountain
of tears.  How seldom does such grief endure!  How blessed is the
goodness which forbids it to do so!  "Let me ever remember my living
friends, but forget them as soon as dead," was the prayer of a wise
man who understood the mercy of God.  Few perhaps would have the
courage to express such a wish, and yet to do so would only be to ask
for that release from sorrow which a kind Creator almost always
extends to us.

I would not, however, have it imagined that Mrs. Bold forgot her
husband.  She daily thought of him with all conjugal love and
enshrined his memory in the innermost centre of her heart.  But yet
she was happy in her baby.  It was so sweet to press the living toy
to her breast and feel that a human being existed who did owe, and
was to owe, everything to her; whose daily food was drawn from
herself; whose little wants could all be satisfied by her; whose
little heart would first love her and her only; whose infant tongue
would make its first effort in calling her by the sweetest name a
woman can hear.  And so Eleanor's bosom became tranquil, and she set
about her new duties eagerly and gratefully.

As regards the concerns of the world, John Bold had left his widow in
prosperous circumstances.  He had bequeathed to her all that he
possessed, and that comprised an income much exceeding what she or
her friends thought necessary for her.  It amounted to nearly a
thousand a year; when she reflected on its extent, her dearest hope
was to hand it over not only unimpaired but increased to her
husband's son, to her own darling, to the little man who now lay
sleeping on her knee, happily ignorant of the cares which were to be
accumulated in his behalf.

When John Bold died, she earnestly implored her father to come and
live with her, but this Mr. Harding declined, though for some weeks
he remained with her as a visitor.  He could not be prevailed upon to
forego the possession of some small home of his own and so remained
in the lodgings he had first selected over a chemist's shop in the
High Street of Barchester.



CHAPTER III

Dr. and Mrs. Proudie



This narrative is supposed to commence immediately after the
installation of Dr. Proudie.  I will not describe the ceremony, as I
do not precisely understand its nature.  I am ignorant whether a
bishop be chaired like a member of Parliament, or carried in a gilt
coach like a lord mayor, or sworn like a justice of peace, or
introduced like a peer to the upper house, or led between two
brethren like a knight of the garter; but I do know that everything
was properly done that nothing fit or becoming to a young bishop was
omitted on the occasion.

Dr. Proudie was not the man to allow anything to be omitted that
might be becoming to his new dignity.  He understood well the value
of forms and knew that the due observance of rank could not be
maintained unless the exterior trappings belonging to it were held in
proper esteem.  He was a man born to move in high circles; at least
so he thought himself, and circumstances had certainly sustained him
in this view.  He was the nephew of an Irish baron by his mother's
side, and his wife was the niece of a Scotch earl.  He had for years
held some clerical office appertaining to courtly matters, which had
enabled him to live in London and to entrust his parish to his
curate.  He had been preacher to the royal beefeaters, curator of
theological manuscripts in the Ecclesiastical Courts, chaplain to the
Queen's yeomanry guard, and almoner to his Royal Highness the Prince
of Rappe-Blankenberg.

His residence in the metropolis, rendered necessary by duties thus
entrusted to him, his high connexions, and the peculiar talents and
nature of the man recommended him to persons in power, and Dr.
Proudie became known as a useful and rising clergyman.

Some few years since, even within the memory of many who are not yet
willing to call themselves old, a liberal clergyman was a person not
frequently to be met.  Sydney Smith was such and was looked on as
little better than an infidel; a few others also might be named, but
they were rarae aves and were regarded with doubt and distrust by
their brethren.  No man was so surely a Tory as a country rector--
nowhere were the powers that be so cherished as at Oxford.

When, however, Dr. Whately was made an archbishop, and Dr. Hampden
some years afterwards regius professor, many wise divines saw that a
change was taking place in men's minds and that more liberal ideas
would henceforward be suitable to the priests as well as to the
laity.  Clergymen began to be heard of who had ceased to anathematize
papists on the one hand, or vilify dissenters on the other.  It
appeared clear that High Church principles, as they are called, were
no longer to be surest claims to promotion with at any rate one
section of statesmen, and Dr. Proudie was one among those who early
in life adapted himself to the views held by the Whigs on most
theological and religious subjects.  He bore with the idolatry of
Rome, tolerated even the infidelity of Socianianism, and was hand and
glove with the Presbyterian Synods of Scotland and Ulster.

Such a man at such a time was found to be useful, and Dr. Proudie's
name began to appear in the newspapers.  He was made one of a
commission who went over to Ireland to arrange matters preparative to
the working of the national board; be became honorary secretary to
another commission nominated to inquire into the revenues of
cathedral chapters; he had had something to do with both the regium
donum and the Maynooth grant.

It must not on this account be taken as proved that Dr. Proudie was a
man of great mental powers, or even of much capacity for business,
for such qualities had not been required in him.  In the arrangement
of those church reforms with which he was connected, the ideas and
original conception of the work to be done were generally furnished
by the liberal statesmen of the day, and the labour of the details
was borne by officials of a lower rank.  It was, however, thought
expedient that the name of some clergyman should appear in such
matters, and as Dr. Proudie had become known as a tolerating divine,
great use of this sort was made of his name.  If he did not do much
active good, he never did any harm; he was amenable to those who were
really in authority and, at the sittings of the various boards to
which he belonged, maintained a kind of dignity which had its value.

He was certainly possessed of sufficient tact to answer the purpose
for which he was required without making himself troublesome, but it
must not therefore be surmised that he doubted his own power, or
failed to believe that be could himself take a high part in high
affairs when his own turn came.  He was biding his time and patiently
looking forward to the days when he himself would sit authoritative
at some board, and talk and direct, and rule the roost, while lesser
stars sat round and obeyed, as he had so well accustomed himself to
do.

His reward and his time had now come.  He was selected for the vacant
bishopric and, on the next vacancy which might occur in any diocese,
would take his place in the House of Lords, prepared to give not a
silent vote in all matters concerning the weal of the church
establishment.  Toleration was to be the basis on which he was to
fight his battles, and in the honest courage of his heart he thought
no evil would come to him in encountering even such foes as his
brethren of Exeter and Oxford.

Dr. Proudie was an ambitious man, and before he was well consecrated
Bishop of Barchester he had begun to look up to archiepiscopal
splendour, and the glories of Lambeth, or at any rate of
Bishopsthorpe.  He was comparatively young, and had, as he fondly
flattered himself, been selected as possessing such gifts, natural
and acquired, as must be sure to recommend him to a yet higher
notice, now that a higher sphere was opened to him.  Dr. Proudie was,
therefore, quite prepared to take a conspicuous part in all
theological affairs appertaining to these realms, and having such
views, by no means intended to bury himself at Barchester as his
predecessor had done.  No!  London should still be his ground: a
comfortable mansion in a provincial city might be well enough for the
dead months of the year.  Indeed, Dr. Proudie had always felt it
necessary to his position to retire from London when other great and
fashionable people did so; but London should still be his fixed
residence, and it was in London that he resolved to exercise that
hospitality so peculiarly recommended to all bishops by St. Paul. 
How otherwise could he keep himself before the world?  How else give
to the government, in matters theological, the full benefit of his
weight and talents?

This resolution was no doubt a salutary one as regarded the world at
large, but was not likely to make him popular either with the clergy
or people of Barchester.  Dr. Grantly had always lived there--in
truth, it was hard for a bishop to be popular after Dr. Grantly.  His
income had averaged £9,000 a year; his successor was to be rigidly
limited to £5,000.  He had but one child on whom to spend his money;
Dr. Proudie had seven or eight.  He had been a man of few personal
expenses, and they had been confined to the tastes of a moderate
gentleman, but Dr. Proudie had to maintain a position in fashionable
society and had that to do with comparatively small means.  Dr.
Grantly had certainly kept his carriage as became a bishop, but his
carriage, horses, and coachman, though they did very well for
Barchester, would have been almost ridiculous at Westminster.
Mrs. Proudie determined that her husband's equipage should not shame
her, and things on which Mrs. Proudie resolved were generally
accomplished.

From all this it was likely to result that Dr. Proudie would not
spend much money at Barchester, whereas his predecessor had dealt
with the tradesmen of the city in a manner very much to their
satisfaction.  The Grantlys, father and son, had spent their money
like gentlemen, but it soon became whispered in Barchester that Dr.
Proudie was not unacquainted with those prudent devices by which the
utmost show of wealth is produced from limited means.

In person Dr. Proudie is a good-looking man, spruce and dapper and
very tidy.  He is somewhat below middle height, being about five feet
four, but he makes up for the inches which he wants by the dignity
with which he carries those which he has.  It is no fault of his own
if he has not a commanding eye, for he studies hard to assume it. 
His features are well formed, though perhaps the sharpness of his
nose may give to his face in the eyes of some people an air of
insignificance.  If so, it is greatly redeemed by his mouth and chin,
of which he is justly proud.

Dr. Proudie may well be said to have been a fortunate man, for he was
not born to wealth, and he is now Bishop of Barchester; nevertheless,
he has his cares.  He has a large family, of whom the three eldest
are daughters, now all grown up and fit for fashionable life, and he
has a wife.  It is not my intention to breathe a word against the
character of Mrs. Proudie, but still I cannot think that with all her
virtues she adds much to her husband's happiness.  The truth is that
in matters domestic she rules supreme over her titular lord, and
rules with a rod of iron.  Nor is this all.  Things domestic Dr.
Proudie might have abandoned to her, if not voluntarily, yet
willingly.  But Mrs. Proudie is not satisfied with such home
dominion, and stretches her power over all his movements, and will
not even abstain from things spiritual.  In fact, the bishop is hen-
pecked.

The archdeacon's wife, in her happy home at Plumstead, knows how to
assume the full privileges of her rank and express her own mind in
becoming tone and place.  But Mrs. Grantly's sway, if sway she has,
is easy and beneficent.  She never shames her husband; before the
world she is a pattern of obedience; her voice is never loud, nor her
looks sharp: doubtless she values power, and has not unsuccessfully
striven to acquire it; but she knows what should be the limits of a
woman's rule.

Not so Mrs. Proudie.  This lady is habitually authoritative to all,
but to her poor husband she is despotic.  Successful as has been his
career in the eyes of the world, it would seem that in the eyes of
his wife he is never right.  All hope of defending himself has long
passed from him; indeed he rarely even attempts self-justification,
and is aware that submission produces the nearest approach to peace
which his own house can ever attain.

Mrs. Proudie has not been able to sit at the boards and committees to
which her husband has been called by the State, nor, as he often
reflects, can she make her voice heard in the House of Lords.  It may
be that she will refuse to him permission to attend to this branch of
a bishop's duties; it may be that she will insist on his close
attendance to his own closet.  He has never whispered a word on the
subject to living ears, but he has already made his fixed resolve. 
Should such attempt be made he will rebel.  Dogs have turned against
their masters, and even Neapolitans against their rulers, when
oppression has been too severe.  And Dr. Proudie feels within himself
that if the cord be drawn too tight, he also can muster courage and
resist

The state of vassalage in which our bishop has been kept by his wife
has not tended to exalt his character in the eyes of his daughters,
who assume in addressing their father too much of that authority
which is not properly belonging, at any rate, to them.  They are, on
the whole, fine engaging young ladies.  They are tall and robust like
their mother, whose high cheek-bones, and--we may say auburn hair
they all inherit.  They think somewhat too much of their grand-
uncles, who have not hitherto returned the compliment by thinking
much of them.  But now that their father is a bishop, it is probable
that family ties will be drawn closer.  Considering their connexion
with the church, they entertain but few prejudices against the
pleasures of the world, and have certainly not distressed their
parents, as too many English girls have lately done, by any
enthusiastic wish to devote themselves to the seclusion of a
Protestant nunnery.  Dr. Proudie's sons are still at school.

One other marked peculiarity in the character of the bishop's wife
must be mentioned.  Though not averse to the society and manners of
the world, she is in her own way a religious woman, and the form in
which this tendency shows itself in her is by a strict observance of
Sabbatarian rule.  Dissipation and low dresses during the week are,
under her control, atoned for by three services, an evening sermon
read by herself, and a perfect abstinence from any cheering
employment on the Sunday.  Unfortunately for those under her roof to
whom the dissipation and low dresses are not extended, her servants
namely and her husband, the compensating strictness of the Sabbath
includes all.  Woe betide the recreant housemaid who is found to have
been listening to the honey of a sweetheart in the Regent's park
instead of the soul-stirring evening discourse of Mr. Slope.  Not
only is she sent adrift, but she is so sent with a character which
leaves her little hope of a decent place.  Woe betide the six-foot
hero who escorts Mrs. Proudie to her pew in red plush breeches if he
slips away to the neighbouring beer-shop instead of falling into the
back seat appropriated to his use.  Mrs. Proudie has the eyes of
Argus for such offenders.  Occasional drunkenness in the week may be
overlooked, for six feet on low wages are hardly to be procured if
the morals are always kept at a high pitch, but not even for grandeur
or economy will Mrs. Proudie forgive a desecration of the Sabbath.

In such matters Mrs. Proudie allows herself to be often guided by
that eloquent preacher, the Rev. Mr. Slope, and as Dr. Proudie is
guided by his wife, it necessarily follows that the eminent man we
have named has obtained a good deal of control over Dr. Proudie in
matters concerning religion.  Mr. Slope's only preferment has
hitherto been that of reader and preacher in a London district
church, and on the consecration of his friend the new bishop, he
readily gave this up to und