ertake the onerous but congenial duties of
domestic chaplain to his lordship.

Mr. Slope, however, on his first introduction must not be brought
before the public at the tail of a chapter.



CHAPTER IV

The Bishop's Chaplain


Of the Rev. Mr. Slope's parentage I am not able to say much.  I have
heard it asserted that he is lineally descended from that eminent
physician who assisted at the birth of Mr. T.  Shandy and that in
early years he added an "e" to his name, for the sake of euphony, as
other great men have done before him.  If this be so, I presume he
was christened Obadiah, for that is his name, in commemoration of the
conflict in which his ancestor so distinguished himself.  All my
researches on the subject have, however, failed in enabling me to fix
the date on which the family changed its religion.

He had been a sizar at Cambridge and had there conducted himself at 
any rate successfully, for in due process of time he was an M.A.,
having university pupils under his care.  From thence he was
transferred to London, and became preacher at a new district church
built on the confines of Baker Street.  He was in this position when
congenial ideas on religious subjects recommended him to Mrs.
Proudie, and the intercourse had become close and confidential.

Having been thus familiarly thrown among the Misses Proudie, it was
no more than natural that some softer feeling than friendship should
be engendered.  There have been some passages of love between him and
the eldest hope, Olivia, but they have hitherto resulted in no
favourable arrangement.  In truth, Mr. Slope, having made a
declaration of affection, afterwards withdrew it on finding that the
doctor had no immediate worldly funds with which to endow his child,
and it may easily be conceived that Miss Proudie, after such an
announcement on his part, was not readily disposed to receive any
further show of affection.  On the appointment of Dr. Proudie to the
bishopric of Barchester, Mr. Slope's views were in truth somewhat
altered.  Bishops, even though they be poor, can provide for clerical
children, and Mr. Slope began to regret that he had not been more
disinterested.  He no sooner heard the tidings of the doctor's
elevation than he recommenced his siege, not violently, indeed, but
respectfully and at a distance.  Olivia Proudie, however, was a girl
of spirit: she had the blood of two peers in her veins, and better
still she had another lover on her books, so Mr. Slope sighed in
vain, and the pair soon found it convenient to establish a mutual
bond of inveterate hatred.

It may be thought singular that Mrs. Proudie's friendship for the
young clergyman should remain firm after such an affair, but, to tell
the truth, she had known nothing of it.  Though very fond of Mr.
Slope herself, she had never conceived the idea that either of her
daughters would become so, and remembering their high birth and
social advantages, expected for them matches of a different sort. 
Neither the gentleman nor the lady found it necessary to enlighten
her.  Olivia's two sisters had each known of the affair, as had all
the servants, as had all the people living in the adjoining houses on
either side, but Mrs. Proudie had been kept in the dark.

Mr. Slope soon comforted himself with the reflexion that, as he had
been selected as chaplain to the bishop, it would probably be in his
power to get the good things in the bishop's gift without troubling
himself with the bishop's daughter, and he found himself able to
endure the pangs of rejected love.  As he sat himself down in the
railway carriage, confronting the bishop and Mrs. Proudie as they
started on their first journey to Barchester, he began to form in his
own mind a plan of his future life.  He knew well his patron's strong
points, but he knew the weak ones as well.  He understood correctly
enough to what attempts the new bishop's high spirit would soar, and
he rightly guessed that public life would better suit the great man's
taste than the small details of diocesan duty.

He, therefore, he, Mr. Slope, would in effect be Bishop of
Barchester.  Such was his resolve, and to give Mr. Slope his due, he
had both courage and spirit to bear him out in his resolution.  He
knew that he should have a hard battle to fight, for the power and
patronage of the see would be equally coveted by another great mind--
Mrs. Proudie would also choose to be Bishop of Barchester.  Mr.
Slope, however, flattered himself that he could outmanoeuvre the
lady.  She must live much in London, while he would always be on the
spot.  She would necessarily remain ignorant of much, while he would
know everything belonging to the diocese.  At first, doubtless, he
must flatter and cajole, perhaps yield in some things, but he did not
doubt of ultimate triumph.  If all other means failed, he could join
the bishop against his wife, inspire courage into the unhappy man,
lay an axe to the root of the woman's power, and emancipate the
husband.

Such were his thoughts as he sat looking at the sleeping pair in the
railway carriage, and Mr. Slope is not the man to trouble himself
with such thoughts for nothing.  He is possessed of more than average
abilities and is of good courage.  Though he can stoop to fawn, and
stoop low indeed, if need be, he has still within him the power to
assume the tyrant--and with the power he has certainly the wish.  His
acquirements are not of the highest order, but such as they are, they
are completely under control, and he knows the use of them.  He is
gifted with a certain kind of pulpit eloquence, not likely indeed to
be persuasive with men, but powerful with the softer sex.  In his
sermons he deals greatly in denunciations, excites the minds of his
weaker hearers with a not unpleasant terror, and leaves an impression
on their minds that all mankind are in a perilous state, and all
womankind, too, except those who attend regularly to the evening
lectures in Baker Street.  His looks and tones are extremely severe,
so much so that one cannot but fancy that he regards the greater part
of the world as being infinitely too bad for his care.  As he walks
through the streets his very face denotes his horror of the world's
wickedness, and there is always an anathema lurking in the corner of
his eye.

In doctrine he, like his patron, is tolerant of dissent, if so strict 
a mind can be called tolerant of anything.  With Wesleyan-Methodists
he has something in common, but his soul trembles in agony at the
iniquities of the Puseyites.  His aversion is carried to things
outward as well as inward.  His gall rises at a new church with a
high-pitched roof; a full-breasted black silk waistcoat is with him a
symbol of Satan; and a profane jest-book would not, in his view, more
foully desecrate the church seat of a Christian than a book of prayer
printed with red letters and ornamented with a cross on the back. 
Most active clergymen have their hobby, and Sunday observances are
his.  Sunday, however, is a word which never pollutes his mouth--it
is always "the Sabbath." The "desecration of the Sabbath," as he
delights to call it, is to him meat and drink: he thrives upon that
as policemen do on the general evil habits of the community.  It is
the loved subject of all his evening discourses, the source of all
his eloquence, the secret of all his power over the female heart.  To
him the revelation of God appears only in that one law given for
Jewish observance.  To him the mercies of our Saviour speak in vain,
to him in vain has been preached that sermon which fell from divine
lips on the mountain--"Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the earth"--"Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." 
To him the New Testament is comparatively of little moment, for from
it can he draw no fresh authority for that dominion which he loves to
exercise over at least a seventh part of man's allotted time here
below.

Mr. Slope is tall and not ill-made.  His feet and hands are large, as
has ever been the case with all his family, but he has a broad chest
and wide shoulders to carry off these excrescences, and on the whole
his figure is good.  His countenance, however, is not specially
prepossessing.  His hair is lank and of a dull pale reddish hue.  It
is always formed into three straight, lumpy masses, each brushed with
admirable precision and cemented with much grease; two of them adhere
closely to the sides of his face, and the other lies at right angles
above them.  He wears no whiskers and is always punctiliously shaven. 
His face is nearly of the same colour as his hair, though perhaps a
little redder: it is not unlike beef--beef, however, one would say,
of a bad quality.  His forehead is capacious and high, but square and
heavy and unpleasantly shining.  His mouth is large, though his lips
are thin and bloodless, and his big, prominent, pale-brown eyes
inspire anything but confidence.  His nose, however, is his redeeming
feature: it is pronounced, straight and well-formed; though I myself
should have liked it better did it not possess a somewhat spongy,
porous appearance, as though it had been cleverly formed out of a
red-coloured cork.

I never could endure to shake hands with Mr. Slope.  A cold, clammy
perspiration always exudes from him, the small drops are ever to be
seen standing on his brow, and his friendly grasp is unpleasant.

Such is Mr. Slope--such is the man who has suddenly fallen into the
midst of Barchester Close, and is destined there to assume the
station which has heretofore been filled by the son of the late
bishop.  Think, oh, my meditative reader, what an associate we have
here for those comfortable prebendaries, those gentlemanlike clerical
doctors, those happy, well-used, well-fed minor canons who have grown
into existence at Barchester under the kindly wings of Bishop
Grantly!

But not as a mere associate for these does Mr. Slope travel down to
Barchester with the bishop and his wife.  He intends to be, if not
their master, at least the chief among them.  He intends to lead and
to have followers; he intends to hold the purse-strings of the
diocese and draw round him an obedient herd of his poor and hungry
brethren.

And here we can hardly fail to draw a comparison between the
archdeacon and our new private chaplain, and despite the manifold
faults of the former, one can hardly fail to make it much to his
advantage.

Both men are eager, much too eager, to support and increase the power
of their order.  Both are anxious that the world should be priest-
governed, though they have probably never confessed so much, even to
themselves.  Both begrudge any other kind of dominion held by man
over man.  Dr. Grantly, if he admits the Queen's supremacy in things
spiritual, only admits it as being due to the quasi-priesthood
conveyed in the consecrating qualities of her coronation, and he
regards things temporal as being by their nature subject to those
which are spiritual.  Mr. Slope's ideas of sacerdotal rule are of
quite a different class.  He cares nothing, one way or the other, for
the Queen's supremacy; these to his ears are empty words, meaning
nothing.  Forms he regards but little, and such titular expressions
as supremacy, consecration, ordination, and the like convey of
themselves no significance to him.  Let him be supreme who can.  The
temporal king, judge, or gaoler can work but on the body.  The
spiritual master, if he have the necessary gifts and can duly use
them, has a wider field of empire.  He works upon the soul.  If he
can make himself be believed, he can be all powerful over those who
listen.  If he be careful to meddle with none who are too strong in
intellect, or too weak in flesh, he may indeed be supreme.  And such
was the ambition of Mr. Slope.

Dr. Grantly interfered very little with the worldly doings of those
who were in any way subject to him.  I do not mean to say that he
omitted to notice misconduct among his clergy, immorality in his
parish, or omissions in his family, but he was not anxious to do so
where the necessity could be avoided.  He was not troubled with a
propensity to be curious, and as long as those around him were
tainted with no heretical leaning towards dissent, as long as they
fully and freely admitted the efficacy of Mother Church, he was
willing that that mother should be merciful and affectionate, prone
to indulgence, and unwilling to chastise.  He himself enjoyed the
good things of this world and liked to let it be known that he did
so.  He cordially despised any brother rector who thought harm of
dinner-parties, or dreaded the dangers of a moderate claret-jug;
consequently, dinner-parties and claret-jugs were common in the
diocese.  He liked to give laws and to be obeyed in them implicitly,
but he endeavoured that his ordinances should be within the compass
of the man and not unpalatable to the gentleman.  He had ruled among
his clerical neighbours now for sundry years, and as he had
maintained his power without becoming unpopular, it may be presumed
that he had exercised some wisdom.

Of Mr. Slope's conduct much cannot be said, as his grand career is
yet to commence, but it may be premised that his tastes will be very
different from those of the archdeacon.  He conceives it to be his
duty to know all the private doings and desires of the flock
entrusted to his care.  From the poorer classes he exacts an
unconditional obedience to set rules of conduct, and if disobeyed he
has recourse, like his great ancestor, to the fulminations of an
Ernulfus: "Thou shalt be damned in thy going in and in thy coming
out--in thy eating and thy drinking," &c. &c. &c.  With the rich,
experience has already taught him that a different line of action is
necessary.  Men in the upper walks of life do not mind being cursed,
and the women, presuming that it be done in delicate phrase, rather
like it.  But he has not, therefore, given up so important a portion
of believing Christians.  With the men, indeed, he is generally at
variance; they are hardened sinners, on whom the voice of the
priestly charmer too often falls in vain; but with the ladies, old
and young, firm and frail, devout and dissipated, he is, as he
conceives, all powerful.  He can reprove faults with so much flattery
and utter censure in so caressing a manner that the female heart, if
it glow with a spark of Low Church susceptibility, cannot withstand
him.  In many houses he is thus an admired guest: the husbands, for
their wives' sake, are fain to admit him; and when once admitted it
is not easy to shake him off.  He has, however, a pawing, greasy way
with him, which does not endear him to those who do not value him for
their souls' sake, and he is not a man to make himself at once
popular in a large circle such as is now likely to surround him at
Barchester.



CHAPTER V

A Morning Visit


It was known that Dr. Proudie would immediately have to reappoint to
the wardenship of the hospital under the act of Parliament to which
allusion has been made; no one imagined that any choice was left to
him--no one for a moment thought that he could appoint any other than
Mr. Harding.  Mr. Harding himself, when he heard how the matter had
been settled, without troubling himself much on the subject,
considered it as certain that he would go back to his pleasant house
and garden.  And though there would be much that was melancholy, nay,
almost heartrending, in such a return, he still was glad that it was
to be so.  His daughter might probably be persuaded to return there
with him.  She had, indeed, all but promised to do so, though she
still entertained an idea that that greatest of mortals, that
important atom of humanity, that little god upon earth, Johnny Bold
her baby, ought to have a house of his own over his head.

Such being the state of Mr. Harding's mind in the matter, he did not
feel any peculiar personal interest in the appointment of Dr. Proudie
to the bishopric.  He, as well as others at Barchester, regretted
that a man should be sent among them who, they were aware, was not of
their way of thinking; but Mr. Harding himself was not a bigoted man
on points of church doctrine, and he was quite prepared to welcome
Dr. Proudie to Barchester in a graceful and becoming manner.  He had
nothing to seek and nothing to fear; he felt that it behoved him to
be on good terms with his bishop, and he did not anticipate any
obstacle that would prevent it.

In such a frame of mind he proceeded to pay his respects at the
palace the second day after the arrival of the bishop and his
chaplain.  But he did not go alone.  Dr. Grantly proposed to
accompany him and Mr. Harding was not sorry to have a companion, who
would remove from his shoulders the burden of the conversation in
such an interview.  In the affair of the consecration Dr. Grantly had
been introduced to the bishop, and Mr. Harding had also been there. 
He had, however, kept himself in the background, and he was now to he
presented to the great man for the first time.

The archdeacon's feelings were of a much stronger nature.  He was not
exactly the man to overlook his own slighted claims, or to forgive
the preference shown to another.  Dr. Proudie was playing Venus to
his Juno, and he was prepared to wage an internecine war against the
owner of the wished-for apple, and all his satellites, private
chaplains, and others.

Nevertheless, it behoved him also to conduct himself towards the
intruder as an old 'archdeacon should conduct himself to an incoming
bishop; and though he was well aware of all Dr. Proudie's abominable
opinions as regarded dissenters, church reform, the hebdomadal
council, and such like; though he disliked the man, and hated the
doctrines, still he was prepared to show respect to the station of
the bishop.  So he and Mr. Harding called together at the palace.

His lordship was at home, and the two visitors were shown through the
accustomed hall into the well-known room where the good old bishop
used to sit.  The furniture had been bought at a valuation, and every
chair and table, every bookshelf against the wall, and every square
in the carpet was as well known to each of them as their own
bedrooms.  Nevertheless they at once felt that they were strangers
there.  The furniture was for the most part the same, yet the place
had been metamorphosed.  A new sofa had been introduced, a horrid
chintz affair, most unprelatical and almost irreligious; such a sofa
as never yet stood in the study of any decent High Church clergyman
of the Church of England.  The old curtains had also given way.  They
had, to be sure, become dingy, and that which had been originally a
rich and goodly ruby had degenerated into a reddish brown.  Mr.
Harding, however, thought the old reddish-brown much preferable to
the gaudy buff-coloured trumpery moreen which Mrs. Proudie had deemed
good enough for her husband's own room in the provincial city of
Barchester.

Our friends found Dr. Proudie sitting on the old bishop's chair,
looking very nice in his new apron; they found, too, Mr. Slope
standing on the hearth-rug, persuasive and eager, just as the
archdeacon used to stand; but on the sofa they also found Mrs.
Proudie, an innovation for which a precedent might in vain be sought
in all the annals of the Barchester bishopric!

There she was, however, and they could only make the best of her. 
The introductions were gone through in much form.  The archdeacon
shook hands with the bishop, and named Mr. Harding, who received such
an amount of greeting as was due from a bishop to a precentor.  His
lordship then presented them to his lady wife; the archdeacon first,
with archidiaconal honours, and then the precentor with diminished
parade.  After this Mr. Slope presented himself.  The bishop, it is
true, did mention his name, and so did Mrs. Proudie too, in a louder
tone, but Mr. Slope took upon himself the chief burden of his own
introduction.  He had great pleasure in making himself acquainted
with Dr. Grantly; he had heard much of the archdeacon's good works in
that part of the diocese in which his duties as archdeacon had been
exercised (thus purposely ignoring the archdeacon's hitherto
unlimited dominion over the diocese at large).  He was aware that his
lordship depended greatly on the assistance which Dr. Grantly would
be able to give him in that portion of his diocese.  He then thrust
out his hand and, grasping that of his new foe, bedewed it
unmercifully.  Dr. Grantly in return bowed, looked stiff, contracted
his eyebrows, and wiped his hand with his pocket-handkerchief. 
Nothing abashed, Mr. Slope then noticed the precentor and descended
to the grade of the lower clergy; He gave him a squeeze of the hand,
damp indeed, but affectionate, and was very glad to make the
acquaintance of Mr.--oh yes, Mr. Harding; he had not exactly caught
the name.  "Precentor in the cathedral," surmised Mr. Slope.  Mr.
Harding confessed that such was the humble sphere of his work.  "Some
parish duty as well," suggested Mr. Slope.  Mr. Harding acknowledged
the diminutive incumbency of St. Cuthbert's.  Mr. Slope then left him
alone, having condescended sufficiently, and joined the conversation
among the higher powers.

There were four persons there, each of whom considered himself the
most important personage in the diocese--himself, indeed, or herself,
as Mrs. Proudie was one of them--and with such a difference of
opinion it was not probable  that they would get on pleasantly
together.  The bishop himself actually wore the visible apron and
trusted mainly to that--to that and his title, both being facts which
could not be overlooked.  The archdeacon knew his subject and really
understood the business of bishoping, which the others did not, and
this was his strong ground.  Mrs. Proudie had her sex to back her,
and her habit of command, and was nothing daunted by the high tone of
Dr. Grantly's face and figure.  Mr. Slope had only himself and his
own courage and tact to depend on, but he nevertheless was perfectly
self-assured and did not doubt but that he should soon get the better
of weak men who trusted so much to externals, as both bishop and
archdeacon appeared to do.

"Do you reside in Barchester, Dr. Grantly?" asked the lady with her
sweetest smile.

Dr. Grantly explained that he lived in his own parish of Plumstead
Episcopi, a few miles out of the city.  Whereupon the lady hoped that
the distance was not too great for country visiting, as she would be
so glad to make the acquaintance of Mrs. Grantly.  She would take the
earliest opportunity, after the arrival of her horses at Barchester;
their horses were at present in London; their horses were not
immediately coming down, as the bishop would be obliged, in a few
days, to return to town.  Dr. Grantly was no doubt aware that the
bishop was at present much called upon by the "University Improvement
Committee:" indeed, the committee could not well proceed without him,
as their final report had now to be drawn up.  The bishop had also to
prepare a scheme for the "Manufacturing Towns Morning and Evening
Sunday School Society," of which he was a patron, or president, or
director, and therefore the horses would not come down to Barchester
at present; but whenever the horses did come down, she would take the
earliest opportunity of calling at Plumstead Episcopi, providing the
distance was not too great for country visiting.

The archdeacon made his fifth bow--he had made one at each mention of
the horses--and promised that Mrs. Grantly would do herself the
honour of calling at the palace on an early day.  Mrs. Proudie
declared that she would be delighted: she hadn't liked to ask, not
being quite sure whether Mrs. Grantly had horses; besides, the
distance might have been, &c. &c.

Dr. Grantly again bowed but said nothing.  He could have bought every
individual possession of the whole family of the Proudies and have
restored them as a gift, without much feeling the loss; and had kept
a separate pair of horses for the exclusive use of his wife since the
day of his marriage, whereas Mrs. Proudie had been hitherto jobbed
about the streets of London at so much a month, during the season,
and at other times had managed to walk, or hire a smart fly from the
livery stables.

"Are the arrangements with reference to the Sabbath-day schools
generally pretty good in your archdeaconry?" asked Mr. Slope.

"Sabbath-day schools!" repeated the archdeacon with an affectation of
surprise.  "Upon my word, I can't tell; it depends mainly on the
parson's wife and daughters.  There is none at Plumstead."

This was almost a fib on the part of the archdeacon, for Mrs. Grantly
has a very nice school.  To be sure it is not a Sunday-school
exclusively and is not so designated, but that exemplary lady always
attends there for an hour before church, and hears the children say
their catechism, and sees that they are clean and tidy for church,
with their hands washed and their shoes tied; and Grisel and
Florinda, her daughters, carry thither a basket of large buns, baked
on the Saturday afternoon, and distribute them to all the children
not especially under disgrace, which buns are carried home after
church with considerable content, and eaten hot at tea, being then
split and toasted.  The children of Plumstead would indeed open their
eyes if they heard their venerated pastor declare that there was no
Sunday-school in his parish.

Mr. Slope merely opened his wide eyes wider and slightly shrugged his
shoulders.  He was not, however, prepared to give up his darling
project.

"I fear there is a great deal of Sabbath travelling here," said he. 
"On looking at the 'Bradshaw,' I see that there are three trains in
and three out every Sabbath.  Could nothing be done to induce the
company to withdraw them?  Don't you think, Dr. Grantly, that a
little energy might diminish the evil?"

"Not being a director, I really can't say.  But if you can withdraw
the passengers, the company I dare say will withdraw the trains,"
said the doctor.  "It's merely a question of dividends."

"But surely, Dr. Grantly," said the lady; "surely we should look at
it differently.  You and I, for instance, in our position: surely we
should do all that we can to control so grievous a sin.  Don't you
think so, Mr. Harding?" and she turned to the precentor, who was
sitting mute and unhappy.

Mr. Harding thought that all porters and stokers, guards, brakesmen,
and pointsmen ought to have an opportunity of going to church, and he
hoped that they all had.

"But surely, surely," continued Mrs. Proudie, "surely that is not
enough.  Surely that will not secure such an observance of the
Sabbath as we are taught to conceive is not only expedient but
indispensable; surely--"

Come what come might, Dr. Grantly was not to be forced into a
dissertation on a point of doctrine with Mrs. Proudie, nor yet with
Mr. Slope, so without much ceremony he turned his back upon the sofa
and began to hope that Dr. Proudie had found that the palace repairs
had been such as to meet his wishes.

"Yes, yes," said his lordship; upon the whole he thought so--upon the
whole, he didn't know that there was much ground for complaint; the
architect, perhaps, might have--but his double, Mr. Slope, who had
sidled over to the bishop's chair, would not allow his lordship to
finish his ambiguous speech.

"There is one point I would like to mention, Mr. Archdeacon.  His
lordship asked me to step through the premises, and I see that the
stalls in the second stable are not perfect."

"Why--there's standing there for a dozen horses," said the
archdeacon.

"Perhaps so," said the other; "indeed, I've no doubt of it; but
visitors, you know, often require so much accommodation.  There are
so many of the bishop's relatives who always bring their own horses."

Dr. Grantly promised that due provision for the relatives' horses
should be made, as far at least as the extent of the original stable
building would allow.  He would himself communicate with the
architect.

"And the coach-house, Dr. Grantly," continued Mr. Slope; "there is
really hardly room for a second carriage in the large coach-house,
and the smaller one, of course, holds only one."

"And the gas," chimed in the lady; "there is no gas through the
house, none whatever, but in the kitchen and passages.  Surely the
palace should have been fitted through with pipes for gas, and hot
water too.  There is no hot water laid on anywhere above the ground-
floor; surely there should be the means of getting hot water in the
bedrooms without having it brought in jugs from the kitchen."

The bishop had a decided opinion that there should be pipes for hot
water.  Hot water was very essential for the comfort of the palace. 
It was, indeed, a requisite in any decent gentleman's house.

Mr. Slope had remarked that the coping on the garden wall was in many
places imperfect.

Mrs. Proudie had discovered a large hole, evidently the work of rats,
in the servants' hall.

The bishop expressed an utter detestation of rats.  There was
nothing, he believed, in this world that he so much hated as a rat.

Mr. Slope had, moreover, observed that the locks of the outhouses
were very imperfect: he might specify the coal-cellar and the
woodhouse.

Mrs. Proudie had also seen that those on the doors of the servants'
bedrooms were in an-equally bad condition; indeed, the locks all
through the house were old-fashioned and unserviceable.

The bishop thought that a great deal depended on a good lock and
quite as much on the key.  He had observed that the fault very often
lay with the key, especially if the wards were in any way twisted.

Mr. Slope was going on with his catalogue of grievances when he was
somewhat loudly interrupted by the archdeacon, who succeeded in
explaining that the diocesan architect, or rather his foreman, was
the person to be addressed on such subjects, and that he, Dr.
Grantly, had inquired as to the comfort of the palace merely as a
point of compliment.  He was sorry, however, that so many things had
been found amiss: and then he rose from his chair to escape.

Mrs. Proudie, though she had contrived to lend her assistance in
recapitulating the palatial dilapidations, had not on that account
given up her hold of Mr. Harding, nor ceased from her cross-
examinations as to the iniquity of Sabbatical amusements.  Over and
over again had she thrown out her "Surely, surely," at Mr. Harding's
devoted head, and ill had that gentleman been able to parry the
attack.

He had never before found himself subjected to such a nuisance. 
Ladies hitherto, when they had consulted him on religious subjects,
had listened to what he might choose to say with some deference, and
had differed, if they differed, in silence.  But Mrs. Proudie
interrogated him and then lectured.  "Neither thou, nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant," said she
impressively, and more than once, as though Mr. Harding had forgotten
the words.  She shook her finger at him as she quoted the favourite
law, as though menacing him with punishment, and then called upon him
categorically to state whether he did not think that travelling on
the Sabbath was an abomination and a desecration.

Mr. Harding had never been so hard pressed in his life.  He felt that
he ought to rebuke the lady for presuming so to talk to a gentleman
and a clergyman many years her senior, but he recoiled from the idea
of scolding the bishop's wife, in the bishop's presence, on his first
visit to the palace; moreover, to tell the truth, he was somewhat
afraid of her.  She, seeing him sit silent and absorbed, by no means
refrained from the attack.

"I hope, Mr. Harding," said she, shaking her head slowly and
solemnly, "I hope you will not leave me to think that you approve of
Sabbath travelling," and she looked a look of unutterable meaning
into his eyes.

There was no standing this, for Mr. Slope was now looking at him, and
so was the bishop, and so was the archdeacon, who had completed his
adieux on that side of the room.  Mr. Harding therefore got up also
and, putting out his hand to Mrs. Proudie, said: "If you will come to
St. Cuthbert's some Sunday, I will preach you a sermon on that
subject."

And so the archdeacon and the precentor took their departure, bowing
low to the lady, shaking hands with the lord, and escaping from Mr.
Slope in the best manner each could.  Mr. Harding was again
maltreated, but Dr. Grantly swore deeply in the bottom of his heart,
that no earthly consideration should ever again induce him to touch
the paw of that impure and filthy animal.

And now, had I the pen of a mighty poet, would I sing in epic verse
the noble wrath of the archdeacon.  The palace steps descend to a
broad gravel sweep, from whence a small gate opens out into the
street, very near the covered gateway leading into the close.  The
road from the palace door turns to the left, through the spacious
gardens, and terminates on the London road, half a mile from the
cathedral.

Till they had both passed this small gate and entered the close,
neither of them spoke a word, but the precentor clearly saw from his
companion's face that a tornado was to be expected, nor was he
himself inclined to stop it.  Though by nature far less irritable
than the archdeacon, even he was angry: he even--that mild and
courteous man--was inclined to express himself in anything but
courteous terms.



CHAPTER VI

War


"Good heavens!" exclaimed the archdeacon as he placed his foot on the
gravel walk of the close, and raising his hat with one hand, passed
the other somewhat violently over his now grizzled locks; smoke
issued forth from the uplifted beaver as it were a cloud of wrath,
and the safety valve of his anger opened, and emitted a visible
steam, preventing positive explosion and probable apoplexy.  "Good
heavens!"--and the archdeacon looked up to the gray pinnacles of the
cathedral tower, making a mute appeal to that still living witness
which had looked down on the doings of so many bishops of Barchester.

"I don't think I shall ever like that Mr. Slope," said Mr. Harding.

"Like him!" roared the archdeacon, standing still for a moment to
give more force to his voice; "like him!"  All the ravens of the
close cawed their assent.  The old bells of the tower, in chiming the
hour, echoed the words, and the swallows flying out from their nests
mutely expressed a similar opinion.  Like Mr. Slope!  Why no, it was
not very probable that any Barchester-bred living thing should like
Mr. Slope!

"Nor Mrs. Proudie either," said Mr. Harding.

The archdeacon hereupon forgot himself.  I will not follow his 
example, nor shock my readers by transcribing the term in which he
expressed his feeling as to the lady who had been named.  The ravens
and the last lingering notes of the clock bells were less scrupulous
and repeated in correspondent echoes the very improper exclamation. 
The archdeacon again raised his hat, and another salutary escape of
steam was effected.

There was a pause, during which the precentor tried to realize the
fact that the wife of a Bishop of Barchester had been thus
designated, in the close of the cathedral, by the lips of its own
archdeacon; but he could not do it.

"The bishop seems to be a quiet man enough," suggested Mr. Harding,
having acknowledged to himself his own failure.

"Idiot!" exclaimed the doctor, who for the nonce was not capable of
more than such spasmodic attempts at utterance.

"Well, he did not seem very bright," said Mr. Harding, "and yet he
has always had the reputation of a clever man.  I suppose he's
cautious and not inclined to express himself very freely."

The new Bishop of Barchester was already so contemptible a creature
in Dr. Grantly's eyes that he could not condescend to discuss his
character.  He was a puppet to be played by others; a mere wax doll,
done up in an apron and a shovel hat, to be stuck on a throne or
elsewhere and pulled about by wires as others chose.  Dr. Grantly did
not choose to let himself down low enough to talk about Dr. Proudie,
but he saw that he would have to talk about the other members of his
household, the coadjutor bishops, who had brought his lordship down,
as it were, in a box, and were about to handle the wires as they
willed.  This in itself was a terrible vexation to the archdeacon. 
Could he have ignored the chaplain and have fought the bishop, there
would have been, at any rate, nothing degrading in such a contest. 
Let the Queen make whom she would Bishop of Barchester; a man, or
even an ape, when once a bishop, would be a respectable adversary, if
he would but fight, himself.  But what was such a person as Dr.
Grantly to do when such another person as Mr. Slope was put forward
as his antagonist?

If he, our archdeacon, refused the combat, Mr. Slope would walk
triumphant over the field and have the diocese of Barchester under
his heel.

If, on the other hand, the archdeacon accepted as his enemy the man
whom the new puppet bishop put before him as such, he would have to
talk about Mr. Slope, and write about Mr. Slope, and in all matters
treat with Mr. Slope, as a being standing, in some degree, on ground
similar to his own.  He would have to meet Mr. Slope, to--Bah! the
idea was sickening.  He could not bring himself to have to do with
Mr. Slope.

"He is the most thoroughly bestial creature that ever I set my eyes
upon," said the archdeacon.

"Who--the bishop?" asked the other innocently.

"Bishop! no--I'm not talking about the bishop.  How on earth such a
creature got ordained!--they'll ordain anybody now, I know, but he's
been in the church these ten years, and they used to be a little
careful ten years ago."

"Oh!  You mean Mr. Slope."

"Did you ever see any animal less like a gentleman?" asked Dr.
Grantly.

"I can't say I felt myself much disposed to like him."

"Like him!" again shouted the doctor, and the assenting ravens again
cawed an echo; "of course, you don't like him: it's not a question of
liking.  But what are we to do with him?"

"Do with him?" asked Mr. Harding.

"Yes--what are we to do with him?  How are we to treat him?  There he
is, and there he'll stay.  He has put his foot in that palace, and
he'll never take it out again till he's driven.  How are we to get
rid of him?"

"I don't suppose he can do us much harm."

"Not do harm!--Well, I think you'll find yourself of a different
opinion before a month is gone.  What would you say now, if he got
himself put into the hospital?  Would that be harm?"

Mr. Harding mused awhile and then said he didn't think the new bishop
would put Mr. Slope into the hospital.

"If he doesn't put him there, he'll put him somewhere else where
he'll be as bad.  I tell you that that man, to all intents and
purposes, will be Bishop of Barchester!"  And again Dr. Grantly
raised his hat and rubbed his hand thoughtfully and sadly over his
head.

"Impudent scoundrel!" he continued after a while.  "To dare to cross-
examine me about the Sunday-schools in the diocese, and Sunday
travelling too: I never in my life met his equal for sheer impudence. 
Why, he must have thought we were two candidates for ordination!"

"I declare I thought Mrs. Proudie was the worst of the two," said Mr.
Harding.

"When a woman is impertinent, one must only put up with it and keep
out of her way in future, but I am not inclined to put up with Mr.
Slope.  'Sabbath travelling!' " and the doctor attempted to imitate
the peculiar drawl of the man he so much disliked: "'Sabbath
travelling!'  Those are the sort of men who will ruin the Church of
England and make the profession of a clergyman disreputable.  It is
not the dissenters or the papists that we should fear, but the set of
canting, low-bred hypocrites who are wriggling their way in among us;
men who have no fixed principle, no standard ideas of religion or
doctrine, but who take up some popular cry, as this fellow has done
about 'Sabbath travelling.'"

Dr. Grantly did not again repeat the question aloud, but he did so
constantly to himself: What were they to do with Mr. Slope?  How was
he openly, before the world, to show that he utterly disapproved of
and abhorred such a man?

Hitherto Barchester had escaped the taint of any extreme rigour of
church doctrine.  The clergymen of the city and neighbourhood, though
very well inclined to promote High Church principles, privileges, and
prerogatives, had never committed themselves to tendencies which are
somewhat too loosely called Puseyite practices.  They all preached in
their black gowns, as their fathers had done before them; they wore
ordinary black cloth waistcoats; they had no candles on their altars,
either lighted or unlighted; they made no private genuflexions, and
were contented to confine themselves to such ceremonial observances
as had been in vogue for the last hundred years.  The services were
decently and demurely read in their parish churches, chanting was
confined to the cathedral, and the science of intoning was unknown. 
One young man who had come direct from Oxford as a curate to
Plumstead had, after the lapse of two or three Sundays, made a faint
attempt, much to the bewilderment of the poorer part of the
congregation.  Dr. Grantly had not been present on the occasion, but
Mrs. Grantly, who had her own opinion on the subject, immediately
after the service expressed a hope that the young gentleman had not
been taken ill, and offered to send him all kinds of condiments
supposed to be good for a sore throat.  After that there had been no
more intoning at Plumstead Episcopi.

But now the archdeacon began to meditate on some strong measures of
absolute opposition.  Dr. Proudie and his crew were of the lowest
possible order of Church of England clergymen, and therefore it
behoved him, Dr. Grantly, to be of the very highest.  Dr. Proudie 
would abolish all forms and ceremonies, and therefore Dr. Grantly
felt the sudden necessity of multiplying them.  Dr. Proudie would
consent to deprive the church of all collective authority and rule,
and therefore Dr. Grantly would stand up for the full power of
convocation and the renewal of all its ancient privileges.

It was true that he could not himself intone the service, but he
could procure the co-operation of any number of gentlemanlike curates
well trained in the mystery of doing so.  He-would not willingly
alter his own fashion of dress, but he could people Barchester with
young clergymen dressed in the longest frocks and in the highest-
breasted silk waistcoats.  He certainly was not prepared to cross
himself, or to advocate the real presence, but without going this
length there were various observances, by adopting which he could
plainly show his antipathy to such men as Dr. Proudie and Mr. Slope.

All these things passed through his mind as he paced up and down the
close with Mr. Harding.  War, war, internecine war was in his heart. 
He felt that, as regarded himself and Mr. Slope, one of the two must
be annihilated as far as the city of Barchester was concerned, and he
did not intend to give way until there was not left to him an inch of
ground on which he could stand.  He still flattered himself that he
could make Barchester too hot to hold Mr. Slope, and he had no
weakness of spirit to prevent his bringing about such a consummation
if it were in his power.

"I suppose Susan must call at the palace," said Mr. Harding.

"Yes, she shall call there, but it shall be once and once only. 
I dare say 'the horses' won't find it convenient to come out to
Plumstead very soon, and when that once is done the matter may drop."

"I don't suppose Eleanor need call.  I don't think Eleanor would get
on at all well with Mrs. Proudie."

"Not the least necessity in life," replied the archdeacon, not
without the reflexion that a ceremony which was necessary for his
wife might not be at all binding on the widow of John Bold.  "Not the
slightest reason on earth why she should do so, if she doesn't like
it.  For myself, I don't think that any decent young woman should be
subjected to the nuisance of being in the same room with that man."

And so the two clergymen parted, Mr. Harding going to his daughter's
house and the archdeacon seeking the seclusion of his brougham.

The new inhabitants of the palace did not express any higher opinion
of their visitors than their visitors had expressed of them.  Though
they did not use quite such strong language as Dr. Grantly had done,
they felt as much personal aversion and were quite as well aware as
he was that there would be a battle to be fought, that there was
hardly room for Proudieism in Barchester as long as Grantlyism was
predominant.

Indeed, it may be doubted whether Mr. Slope had not already within
his breast a better prepared system of strategy, a more accurately
defined line of hostile conduct than the archdeacon.  Dr. Grantly was
going to fight because he found that he hated the man.  Mr. Slope had
predetermined to hate the man because he foresaw the necessity of
fighting him.  When he had first reviewed the carte du pays previous
to his entry into Barchester, the idea had occurred to him of
conciliating the archdeacon, of cajoling and flattering him into
submission, and of obtaining the upper hand by cunning instead of
courage.  A little inquiry, however, sufficed to convince him that
all his cunning would fail to win over such a man as Dr. Grantly to
such a mode of action as that to be adopted by Mr. Slope, and then he
determined to fall back upon his courage.  He at once saw that open
battle against Dr. Grantly and all Dr. Grantly's adherents was a
necessity of his position, and he deliberately planned the most
expedient methods of giving offence.

Soon after his arrival the bishop had intimated to the dean that,
with the permission of the canon then in residence, his chaplain
would preach in the cathedral on the next Sunday.  The canon in
residence happened to be the Hon. and Rev. Dr. Vesey Stanhope, who at
this time was very busy on the shores of the Lake of Como, adding to
that unique collection of butterflies for which he is so famous.
Or rather, he would have been in residence but for the butterflies
and other such summer-day considerations; and the vicar-choral, who
was to take his place in the pulpit, by no means objected to having
his work done for him by Mr. Slope.

Mr. Slope accordingly preached, and if a preacher can have
satisfaction in being listened to, Mr. Slope ought to have been
gratified.  I have reason to think that he was gratified and that he
left the pulpit with the conviction that he had done what he intended
to do when he entered it.

On this occasion the new bishop took his seat for the first time in
the throne alloted to him.  New scarlet cushions and drapery had been
prepared, with new gilt binding and new fringe.  The old carved oak-
wood of the throne, ascending with its numerous grotesque pinnacles
half-way up to the roof of the choir, had been washed, and dusted,
and rubbed, and it all looked very smart.  Ah! how often sitting
there, in happy early days, on those lowly benches in front of the
altar, have I whiled away the tedium of a sermon in considering how
best I might thread my way up amidst those wooden towers and climb
safely to the topmost pinnacle!

All Barchester went to hear Mr. Slope; either for that or to gaze at
the new bishop.  All the best bonnets of the city were there, and
moreover all the best glossy clerical hats.  Not a stall but had its
fitting occupant, for though some of the prebendaries might be away
in Italy or elsewhere, their places were filled by brethren who
flocked into Barchester on the occasion.  The dean was there, a heavy
old man, now too old, indeed, to attend frequently in his place, and
so was the archdeacon.  So also were the chancellor, the treasurer,
the precentor, sundry canons and minor canons, and every lay member
of the choir, prepared to sing the new bishop in with due melody and
harmonious expression of sacred welcome.

The service was certainly very well performed.  Such was always the
case at Barchester, as the musical education of the choir had been
good, and the voices had been carefully selected.  The psalms were
beautifully chanted; the Te Deum was magnificently sung; and the
litany was given in a manner which is still to be found at Barchester
but, if my taste be correct, is to be found nowhere else.  The litany
in Barchester cathedral has long been the special task to which Mr.
Harding's skill and voice have been devoted.  Crowded audiences
generally make good performers, and though Mr. Harding was not aware
of any extraordinary exertion on his part, yet probably he rather
exceeded his usual mark.  Others were doing their best, and it was
natural that he should emulate his brethren.  So the service went on,
and at last Mr. Slope got into the pulpit.

He chose for his text a verse from the precepts addressed by St. Paul
to Timothy, as to the conduct necessary in a spiritual pastor and
guide, and it was immediately evident that the good clergy of
Barchester were to have a lesson.

"Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not
to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth."  These were the
words of his text, and with such a subject in such a place, it may be
supposed that such a preacher would be listened to by such an
audience.  He was listened to with breathless attention and not
without considerable surprise.  Whatever opinion of Mr. Slope might
have been held in Barchester before he commenced his discourse, none
of his hearers, when it was over, could mistake him either for a fool
or a coward.

It would not be becoming were I to travesty a sermon, or even to
repeat the language of it in the pages of a novel.  In endeavouring
to depict the characters of the persons of whom I write, I am to a
certain extent forced to speak of sacred things.  I trust, however,
that I shall not be thought to scoff at the pulpit, though some may
imagine that I do not feel all the reverence that is due to the
cloth.  I may question the infallibility of the teachers, but I hope
that I shall not therefore be accused of doubt as to the thing to be
taught.

Mr. Slope, in commencing his sermon, showed no slight tact in his
ambiguous manner of hinting that, humble as he was himself, he stood
there as the mouth-piece of the illustrious divine who sat opposite
to him; and having premised so much, he gave forth a very accurate
definition of the conduct which that prelate would rejoice to see in
the clergymen now brought under his jurisdiction.  It is only
necessary to say that the peculiar points insisted upon were exactly
those which were most distasteful to the clergy of the diocese and
most averse to their practice and opinions, and that all those
peculiar habits and privileges which have always been dear to High
Church priests, to that party which is now scandalously called the
"high and dry church," were ridiculed, abused, and anathematized. 
Now, the clergymen of the diocese of Barchester are all of the high
and dry church.

Having thus, according to his own opinion, explained how a clergyman
should show himself approved unto God, as a workman that needeth not
to be ashamed, he went on to explain how the word of truth should be
divided; and here he took a rather narrow view of the question and
fetched his arguments from afar.  His object was to express his
abomination of all ceremonious modes of utterance, to cry down any
religious feeling which might be excited, not by the sense, but by
the sound of words, and in fact to insult cathedral practices.  Had
St. Paul spoken of rightly pronouncing, instead of rightly dividing
the word of truth, this part of his sermon would have been more to
the purpose, but the preacher's immediate object was to preach Mr.
Slope's doctrine, and not St. Paul's, and he contrived to give the
necessary twist to the text with some skill.

He could not exactly say, preaching from a cathedral pulpit, that
chanting should be abandoned in cathedral services.  By such an
assertion he would have overshot his mark and rendered himself
absurd, to the delight of his hearers.  He could, however, and did
allude with heavy denunciations to the practice of intoning in parish
churches, although the practice was all but unknown in the diocese;
and from thence he came round to the undue preponderance which, he
asserted, music had over meaning in the beautiful serv