ice which they
had just heard.  He was aware, he said, that the practices of our
ancestors could not be abandoned at a moment's notice; the feelings
of the aged would be outraged, and the minds of respectable men would
be shocked.  There were many, he was aware, of not sufficient calibre
of thought to perceive, of not sufficient education to know, that a
mode of service which was effective when outward ceremonies were of
more moment than inward feelings had become all but barbarous at a
time when inward conviction was everything, when each word of the
minister's lips should fall intelligibly into the listener's heart. 
Formerly the religion of the multitude had been an affair of the
imagination: now, in these latter days, it had become necessary that
a Christian should have a reason for his faith--should not only
believe, but digest--not only hear, but understand.  The words of our
morning service, how beautiful, how apposite, how intelligible they
were, when read with simple and distinct decorum!  But how much of
the meaning of the words was lost when they were produced with all
the meretricious charms of melody! &c. &c.

Here was a sermon to be preached before Mr. Archdeacon Grantly, Mr.
Precentor Harding, and the rest of them!  Before a whole dean and
chapter assembled in their own cathedral!  Before men who had grown
old in the exercise of their peculiar services, with a full
conviction of their excellence for all intended purposes!  This too
from such a man, a clerical parvenu, a man without a cure, a mere
chaplain, an intruder among them; a fellow raked up, so said Dr.
Grantly, from the gutters of Marylebone!  They had to sit through it! 
None of them, not even Dr. Grantly, could close his ears, nor leave
the house of God during the hours of service.  They were under an 
obligation of listening, and that too without any immediate power of
reply.

There is, perhaps, no greater hardship at present inflicted on
mankind in civilized and free countries than the necessity of
listening to sermons.  No one but a preaching clergyman has, in these
realms, the power of compelling an audience to sit silent and be
tormented.  No one but a preaching clergyman can revel in platitudes,
truisms, and untruisms and yet receive, as his undisputed privilege,
the same respectful demeanour as though words of impassioned
eloquence, or persuasive logic, fell from his lips.  Let a professor
of law or physics find his place in a lecture-room and there pour
forth jejune words and useless empty phrases, and he will pour them
forth to empty benches.  Let a barrister attempt to talk without
talking well, and he will talk but seldom.  A judge's charge need be
listened to perforce by none but the jury, prisoner, and gaoler.
A member of Parliament can be coughed down or counted out.  Town-
councillors can be tabooed.  But no one can rid himself of the
preaching clergyman.  He is the bore of the age, the old man whom we
Sindbads cannot shake off, the nightmare that disturbs our Sunday's
rest, the incubus that overloads our religion and makes God's service
distasteful.  We are not forced into church!  No: but we desire more
than that.  We desire not to be forced to stay away.  We desire, nay,
we are resolute, to enjoy the comfort of public worship, but we
desire also that we may do so without an amount of tedium which
ordinary human nature cannot endure with patience; that we may be
able to leave the house of God without that anxious longing for
escape which is the common consequence of common sermons.

With what complacency will a young parson deduce false conclusions
from misunderstood texts, and then threaten us with all the penalties
of Hades if we neglect to comply with the injunctions he has given
us!  Yes, my too self-confident juvenile friend, I do believe in
those mysteries which are so common in your mouth; I do believe in
the unadulterated word which you hold there in your hand; but you
must pardon me if, in some things, I doubt your interpretation.  The
Bible is good, the prayer-book is good, nay, you yourself would be
acceptable, if you would read to me some portion of those time-
honoured discourses which our.  great divines have elaborated in the
full maturity of their powers.  But you must excuse me, my
insufficient young lecturer, if I yawn over your imperfect sentences,
your repeated phrases, your false pathos, your drawlings and
denouncings, your humming and hawing, your ohing and ahing, your
black gloves and your white handkerchief.  To me, it all means
nothing; and hours are too precious to be so wasted--if one could
only avoid it.

And here I must make a protest against the pretence, so often put
forward by the working clergy, that they are overburdened by the
multitude of sermons to be preached.  We are all too fond of our own
voices, and a preacher is encouraged in the vanity of making his
heard by the privilege of a compelled audience.  His sermon is the
pleasant morsel of his life, his delicious moment of self-exaltation. 
"I have preached nine sermons this week," said a young friend to me
the other day, with hand languidly raised to his brow, the picture of
an overburdened martyr.  "Nine this week, seven last week, four the
week before.  I have preached twenty-three sermons this month.  It is
really too much."

"Too much, indeed," said I, shuddering; "too much for the strength of
any one."

"Yes," he answered meekly, "indeed it is; I am beginning to feel it
painfully."

"Would," said I, "you could feel it--would that you could be made to
feel it."  But he never guessed that my heart was wrung for the poor
listeners.

There was, at any rate, no tedium felt in listening to Mr. Slope on
the occasion in question.  His subject came too home to his audience
to be dull, and to tell the truth Mr. Slope had the gift of using
words forcibly.  He was heard through his thirty minutes of eloquence
with mute attention and open ears, but with angry eyes, which glared
round from one enraged parson to another, with wide-spread nostrils
from which already burst forth fumes of indignation, and with many
shufflings of the feet and uneasy motions of the body, which
betokened minds disturbed and hearts not at peace with all the world.

At last the bishop, who, of all the congregation, had been most
surprised, and whose hair almost stood on end with terror, gave the
blessing in a manner not at all equal to that in which he had long
been practising it in his own study, and the congregation was free to
go their way.



CHAPTER VII

The Dean and Chapter Take Counsel


All Barchester was in a tumult.  Dr. Grantly could hardly get himself
out of the cathedral porch before he exploded in his wrath.  The old
dean betook himself silently to his deanery, afraid to speak, and
there sat, half-stupefied, pondering many things in vain.  Mr.
Harding crept forth solitary and unhappy and, slowly passing beneath
the elms of the close, could scarcely bring himself to believe that
the words which he had heard had proceeded from the pulpit of
Barchester cathedral.  Was he again to be disturbed?  Was his whole
life to be shown up as a useless sham a second time?  Would he have
to abdicate his precentorship, as he had his wardenship, and to give
up chanting, as he had given up his twelve old bedesmen?  And what if
he did!  Some other Jupiter, some other Mr. Slope, would come and
turn him out of St. Cuthbert's.  Surely he could not have been wrong
all his life in chanting the litany as he had done!  He began,
however, to have his doubts.  Doubting himself was Mr. Harding's
weakness.  It is not, however, the usual fault of his order.

Yes!  All Barchester was in a tumult  It was not only the clergy who
were affected.  The laity also had listened to Mr. Slope's new
doctrine, all with surprise, some with indignation, and some with a
mixed feeling, in which dislike of the preacher was not so strongly
blended.  The old bishop and his chaplains, the dean and his canons
and minor canons, the old choir, and especially Mr. Harding who was
at the head of it, had all been popular in Barchester.  They had
spent their money and done good; the poor had not been ground down;
the clergy in society had neither been overbearing nor austere; and
the whole repute of the city was due to its ecclesiastical
importance.  Yet there were those who had heard Mr. Slope with
satisfaction.

It is so pleasant to receive a fillip of excitement when suffering
from the dull routine of everyday life!  The anthems and Te Deums
were in themselves delightful, but they had been heard so often!  Mr.
Slope was certainly not delightful, but he was new and, moreover,
clever.  They had long thought it slow, so said now many of the
Barchesterians, to go on as they had done in their old humdrum way,
giving ear to none of the religious changes which were moving the
world without.  People in advance of the age now had new ideas, and
it was quite time that Barchester should go in advance.  Mr. Slope
might be right.  Sunday had certainly not been strictly kept in
Barchester, except as regarded the cathedral services.  Indeed the
two hours between services had long been appropriated to morning
calls and hot luncheons.  Then, Sunday-schools!  Really more ought to
have been done as to Sunday-schools--Sabbath-day schools Mr. Slope
had called them.  The late bishop had really not thought of Sunday-
schools as he should have done.  (These people probably did not
reflect that catechisms and collects are quite as hard work to the
young mind as bookkeeping is to the elderly, and that quite as little
feeling of worship enters into the one task as the other.)  And then,
as regarded that great question of musical services, there might be
much to be said on Mr. Slope's side of the question.  It certainly
was the fact that people went to the cathedral to hear the music, &c.
&c

And so a party absolutely formed itself in Barchester on Mr. Slope's
side of the question!  This consisted, among the upper classes,
chiefly of ladies.  No man--that is, no gentleman--could possibly be
attracted by Mr. Slope, or consent to sit at the feet of so abhorrent
a Gamaliel.  Ladies are sometimes less nice in their appreciation of
physical disqualification; provided that a man speak to them well,
they will listen, though he speak from a mouth never so deformed and
hideous.  Wilkes was most fortunate as a lover, and the damp, sandy-
haired, saucer-eyed, red-fisted Mr. Slope was powerful only over the
female breast.

There were, however, one or two of the neighbouring clergy who
thought it not quite safe to neglect the baskets in which for the
nonce were stored the loaves and fishes of the diocese of Barchester. 
They, and they only, came to call on Mr. Slope after his performance
in the cathedral pulpit.  Among these Mr. Quiverful, the rector of
Puddingdale, whose wife still continued to present him from year to
year with fresh pledges of her love, and so to increase his cares
and, it is to be hoped, his happiness equally.  Who can wonder that a
gentleman with fourteen living children and a bare income of £400 a
year should look after the loaves and fishes, even when they are
under the thumb of a Mr. Slope?

Very soon after the Sunday on which the sermon was preached, the
leading clergy of the neighbourhood held high debate together as to
how Mr. Slope should be put down.  In the first place, he should
never again preach from the pulpit of Barchester cathedral.  This was
Dr. Grantly's earliest dictum, and they all agreed, providing only
that they had the power to exclude him.  Dr. Grantly declared that
the power rested with the dean and chapter, observing that no
clergyman out of the chapter had a claim to preach there, saving only
the bishop himself.  To this the dean assented, but alleged that
contests on such a subject would be unseemly; to which rejoined a
meagre little doctor, one of the cathedral prebendaries, that the
contest must be all on the side of Mr. Slope if every prebendary were
always there ready to take his own place in the pulpit.  Cunning
little meagre doctor, whom it suits well to live in his own cosy
house within Barchester close, and who is well content to have his
little fling at Dr. Vesey Stanhope and other absentees whose Italian
villas, or enticing London homes, are more tempting than cathedral
stalls and residences!

To this answered the burly chancellor, a man rather silent indeed,
but very sensible, that absent prebendaries had their vicars, and
that in such case the vicar's right to the pulpit was the same as
that of the higher order.  To which the dean assented, groaning
deeply at these truths.  Thereupon, however, the meagre doctor
remarked that they would be in the hands of their minor canons, one
of whom might at any hour betray his trust.  Whereon was heard from
the burly chancellor an ejaculation sounding somewhat like "Pooh,
pooh, pooh!" but it might be that the worthy man was but blowing out
the heavy breath from his windpipe.  Why silence him at all?
suggested Mr. Harding.  Let them not be ashamed to hear what any man
might have to preach to them, unless he preached false doctrine; in
which case, let the bishop silence him.  So spoke our friend; vainly;
for human ends must be attained by human means.  But the dean saw a
ray of hope out of those purblind old eyes of his.  Yes, let them
tell the bishop how distasteful to them was this Mr. Slope: a new
bishop just come to his seat could not wish to insult his clergy
while the gloss was yet fresh on his first apron.

Then up rose Dr. Grantly and, having thus collected the scattered
wisdom of his associates, spoke forth with words of deep authority. 
When I say up rose the archdeacon, I speak of the inner man, which
then sprang up to more immediate action, for the doctor had bodily
been standing all along with his back to the dean's empty fire-grate,
and the tails of his frock coat supported over his two arms.  His
hands were in his breeches pockets.

"It is quite clear that this man must not be allowed to preach again
in this cathedral.  We all see that, except our dear friend here, the
milk of whose nature runs so softly that he would not have the heart
to refuse the Pope the loan of his pulpit, if the Pope would come and
ask it.  We must not, however, allow the man to preach again here. 
It is not because his opinion on church matters may be different from
ours--with that one would not quarrel.  It is because he has
purposely insulted us.  When he went up into that pulpit last Sunday,
his studied object was to give offence to men who had grown old in
reverence of those things of which he dared to speak so slightingly. 
What!  To come here a stranger, a young, unknown, and unfriended
stranger and tell us, in the name of the bishop his master, that we
are ignorant of our duties, old-fashioned, and useless!  I don't know
whether most to admire his courage or his impudence!  And one thing I
will tell you: that sermon originated solely with the man himself. 
The bishop was no more a party to it than was the dean here.  You all
know how grieved I am to see a bishop in this diocese holding the
latitudinarian ideas by which Dr. Proudie has made himself
conspicuous.  You all know how greatly I should distrust the opinion
of such a man.  But in this matter I hold him to be blameless.  I
believe Dr. Proudie has lived too long among gentlemen to be guilty,
or to instigate another to be guilty, of so gross an outrage.  No! 
That man uttered what was untrue when he hinted that he was speaking
as the mouthpiece of the bishop.  It suited his ambitious views at
once to throw down the gauntlet to us--at once to defy us here in the
quiet of our own religious duties--here within the walls of our own
loved cathedral--here where we have for so many years exercised our
ministry without schism and with good repute.  Such an attack upon
us, coming from such a quarter, is abominable."

"Abominable," groaned the dean.  "Abominable," muttered the meagre
doctor.  "Abominable," re-echoed the chancellor, uttering the sound
from the bottom of his deep chest.  "I really think it was," said Mr.
Harding.

"Most abominable and most unjustifiable," continued the archdeacon. 
"But, Mr. Dean, thank God, that pulpit is still our own: your own, I
should say.  That pulpit belongs solely to the dean and chapter of
Barchester Cathedral, and as yet Mr. Slope is no part of that
chapter.  You, Mr. Dean, have suggested that we should appeal to the
bishop to abstain from forcing this man on us; but what if the bishop
allow himself to be ruled by his chaplain?  In my opinion the matter
is in our own hands.  Mr. Slope cannot preach there without
permission asked and obtained, and let that permission be invariably
refused.  Let all participation in the ministry of the cathedral
service be refused to him.  Then, if the bishop choose to interfere,
we shall know what answer to make to the bishop.  My friend here has
suggested that this man may again find his way into the pulpit by
undertaking the duty of some of your minor canons, but I am sure that
we may fully trust to these gentlemen to support us, when it is known
that the dean objects to any such transfer."

"Of course you may," said the chancellor.

There was much more discussion among the learned conclave, all of
which, of course, ended in obedience to the archdeacon's commands. 
They had too long been accustomed to his rule to shake it off so
soon, and in this particular case they had none of them a wish to
abet the man whom he was so anxious to put down.

Such a meeting as that we have just recorded is not held in such a
city as Barchester unknown and untold of.  Not only was the fact of
the meeting talked of in every respectable house, including the
palace, but the very speeches of the dean, the archdeacon, and
chancellor were repeated; not without many additions and imaginary
circumstances, according to the tastes and opinions of the relaters.

All, however, agreed in saying that Mr. Slope was to be debarred from
opening his mouth in the cathedral of Barchester; many believed that
the vergers were to be ordered to refuse him even the accommodation
of a seat; and some of the most far-going advocates for strong
measures declared that his sermon was looked upon as an indictable
offence, and that proceedings were to be taken against him for
brawling.

The party who were inclined to defend him--the enthusiastically
religious young ladies and the middle-aged spinsters desirous of a
move--of course took up his defence the more warmly on account of
this attack.  If they could not hear Mr. Slope in the cathedral, they
would hear him elsewhere; they would leave the dull dean, the dull
old prebendaries, and the scarcely less dull young minor canons to
preach to each other; they would work slippers and cushions and hem
bands for Mr. Slope, make him a happy martyr, and stick him up in
some new Sion or Bethesda, and put the cathedral quite out of
fashion.

Dr. and Mrs. Proudie at once returned to London.  They thought it
expedient not to have to encounter any personal application from the
dean and chapter respecting the sermon till the violence of the storm
had expended itself; but they left Mr. Slope behind them nothing
daunted, and he went about his work zealously, flattering such as
would listen to his flattery, whispering religious twaddle into the
ears of foolish women, ingratiating himself with the few clergy who
would receive him, visiting the houses of the poor, inquiring into
all people, prying into everything, and searching with his minutest
eye into all palatial dilapidations.  He did not, however, make any
immediate attempt to preach again in the cathedral.

And so all Barchester was by the ears.



CHAPTER VIII

The Ex-warden Rejoices in His Probable Return to the Hospital


Among the ladies in Barchester who have hitherto acknowledged Mr,
Slope as their spiritual director must not be reckoned either the
Widow Bold or her sister-in-law.  On the first outbreak of the wrath
of the denizens of the close, none had been more animated against the
intruder than these two ladies.  And this was natural.  Who could he
so proud of the musical distinction of their own cathedral as the
favourite daughter of the precentor?  Who would be so likely to
resent an insult offered to the old choir?  And in such matters Miss
Bold and her sister-in-law had but one opinion.

This wrath, however, has in some degree been mitigated, and I regret
to say that these ladies allowed Mr. Slope to he his own apologist. 
About a fortnight after the sermon had been preached, they were both
of them not a little surprised by hearing Mr. Slope announced, as the
page in buttons opened Mrs. Bold's drawing-room door.  Indeed, what
living man could, by a mere morning visit, have surprised them more? 
Here was the great enemy of all that was good in Barchester coming
into their own drawing-room, and they had no strong arm, no ready
tongue, near at hand for their protection.  The widow snatched her
baby out of its cradle into her lap, and Mary Bold stood up ready to
die manfully in that baby's behalf, should, under any circumstances,
such a sacrifice become necessary.

In this manner was Mr. Slope received.  But when he left, he was
allowed by each lady to take her hand and to make his adieux as
gentlemen do who have been graciously entertained!  Yes, he shook
hands with them, and was curtseyed out courteously, the buttoned page
opening the door as he would have done for the best canon of them
all.  He had touched the baby's little hand and blessed him with a
fervid blessing; he had spoken to the widow of her early sorrows, and
Eleanor's silent tears had not rebuked him; he had told Mary Bold
that her devotion would he rewarded, and Mary Bold had heard the
praise without disgust.  And how had he done all this?  How had he so
quickly turned aversion into, at any rate, acquaintance?  How had he
over-come the enmity with which these ladies had been ready to
receive him, and made his peace with them so easily?

My readers will guess from what I have written that I myself do not
like Mr. Slope, but I am constrained to admit that he is a man of
parts.  He knows how to say a soft word in the proper place; he knows
how to adapt his flattery to the ears of his hearers; he knows the
wiles of the serpent, and he uses them.  Could Mr. Slope have adapted
his manners to men as well as to women, could he ever have learnt the
ways of a gentleman, he might have risen to great things.

He commenced his acquaintance with Eleanor by praising her father. 
He had, he said, become aware that he had unfortunately offended the
feelings of a man of whom he could not speak too highly; he would not
now allude to a subject which was probably too serious for drawing-
room conversation, but he would say that it had been very far from
him to utter a word in disparagement of a man of whom all the world,
at least the clerical world, spoke so highly as it did of Mr.
Harding.  And so he went on, unsaying a great deal of his sermon,
expressing his highest admiration for the precentor's musical
talents, eulogizing the father and the daughter and the sister-in-
law, speaking in that low silky whisper which he always had specially
prepared for feminine ears, and, ultimately, gaining his object. 
When he left, he expressed a hope that he might again he allowed to
call; and though Eleanor gave no verbal assent to this, she did not
express dissent: and so Mr. Slope's right to visit at the widow's
house was established.

The day after this visit Eleanor told her father of it and expressed
an opinion that Mr. Slope was not quite so black as he had been
painted.  Mr. Harding opened his eyes rather wider than usual when he
heard what had occurred, but he said little; he could not agree in
any praise of Mr. Slope, and it was not his practice to say much evil
of anyone.  He did not, however, like the visit, and simple-minded as
he was, he felt sure that Mr. Slope had some deeper motive than the
mere pleasure of making soft speeches to two ladies.

Mr. Harding, however, had come to see his daughter with other purpose
than that of speaking either good or evil of Mr. Slope.  He had come
to tell her that the place of warden in Hiram's Hospital was again to
be filled up and that in all probability he would once more return to
his old home and his twelve bedesmen.

"But," said he, laughing, "I shall be greatly shorn of my ancient
glory."

"Why so, Papa?"

"This new act of Parliament that is to put us all on our feet again,"
continued he, "settles my income at four hundred and fifty pounds per
annum."

"Four hundred and fifty," said she, "instead of eight hundred!  Well,
that is rather shabby.  But still, Papa, you'll have the dear old
house and the garden?"

"My dear," said he, "it's worth twice the money;" and as he spoke he
showed a jaunty kind of satisfaction in his tone and manner and in
the quick, pleasant way in which he paced Eleanor's drawing-room. 
"It's worth twice the money.  I shall have the house and the garden
and a larger income than I can possibly want."

"At any rate, you'll have no extravagant daughter to provide for;"
and as she spoke, the young widow put her arm within his, and made
him sit on the sofa beside her; "at any rate, you'll not have that
expense."

"No, my dear, and I shall be rather lonely without her; but we won't
think of that now.  As regards income, I shall have plenty for all I
want.  I shall have my old house, and I don't mind owning now that I
have felt sometimes the inconvenience of living in a lodging. 
Lodgings are very nice for young men, but at my time of life there is
a want of--I hardly know what to call it, perhaps not respect-
ability--"

"Oh, Papa!  I'm sure there's been nothing like that.  Nobody has
thought it; nobody in all Barchester has been more respected than you
have been since you took those rooms in High Street.  Nobody!  Not
the dean in his deanery, or the archdeacon out at Plumstead."

"The archdeacon would not be much obliged to you if he heard you,"
said he, smiling somewhat at the exclusive manner in which his
daughter confined her illustration to the church dignitaries of the
chapter of Barchester; "but at any rate I shall be glad to get back
to the old house.  Since I heard that it was all settled, I have
begun to fancy that I can't be comfortable without my two sitting-
rooms."

"Come and stay with me, Papa, till it is settled--there's a dear
Papa."

"Thank ye, Nelly.  But no, I won't do that.  It would make two
movings.  I shall be very glad to get back to my old men again. 
Alas! alas!  There have six of them gone in these few last years. 
Six out of twelve!  And the others I fear have had but a sorry life
of it there.  Poor Bunce, poor old Bunce!"

Bunce was one of the surviving recipients of Hiram's charity, an old
man, now over ninety, who had long been a favourite of Mr. Harding's.

"How happy old Bunce will be," said Mrs. Bold, clapping her soft
hands softly.  "How happy they all will be to have you back again. 
You may be sure there will soon be friendship among them again when
you are there."

"But," said he, half-laughing, "I am to have new troubles, which will
be terrible to me.  There are to be twelve old women and a matron. 
How shall I manage twelve women and a matron!"

"The matron will manage the women, of course."

"And who'll manage the matron?" said he.

"She won't want to be managed.  She'll be a great lady herself, I
suppose.  But, Papa, where will the matron live?  She is not to live
in the warden's house with you, is she?"

"Well, I hope not, my dear."

"Oh, Papa, I tell you fairly, I won't have a matron for a new
stepmother."

"You shan't, my dear; that is, if I can help it.  But they are going
to build another house for the matron and the women, and I believe
they haven't even fixed yet on the site of the building."

"And have they appointed the matron?" said Eleanor.

"They haven't appointed the warden yet," replied he.

"But there's no doubt about that, I suppose," said his daughter.

Mr. Harding explained that he thought there was no doubt; that the
archdeacon had declared as much, saying that the bishop and his
chaplain between them had not the power to appoint anyone else, even
if they had the will to do so and sufficient impudence to carry out
such a will.  The archdeacon was of opinion that though Mr. Harding
had resigned his wardenship, and had done so unconditionally, he had
done so under circumstances which left the bishop no choice as to his
reappointment, now that the affair of the hospital had been settled
on a new basis by act of Parliament.  Such was the archdeacon's
opinion, and his father-in-law received it without a shadow of doubt.

Dr. Grantly had always been strongly opposed to Mr. Harding's
resignation of the place.  He had done all in his power to dissuade
him from it.  He had considered that Mr. Harding was bound to
withstand the popular clamour with which he was attacked for
receiving so large an income as eight hundred a year from such a
charity, and was not even yet satisfied that his father-in-law's
conduct had not been pusillanimous and undignified.  He looked also
on this reduction of the warden's income as a shabby, paltry scheme
on the part of government for escaping from a difficulty into which
it had been brought by the public press.  Dr. Grantly observed that
the government had no more right to dispose of a sum of four hundred
and fifty pounds a year out of the income of Hiram's legacy than of
nine hundred; whereas, as he said, the bishop, dean, and chapter
clearly had a right to settle what sum should be paid.  He also
declared that the government had no more right to saddle the charity
with twelve old women than with twelve hundred, and he was,
therefore, very indignant on the matter.  He probably forgot when so
talking that government had done nothing of the kind and had never
assumed any such might or any such right.  He made the common mistake
of attributing to the government, which in such matters is powerless,
the doings of Parliament, which in such matters is omnipotent.

But though he felt that the glory and honour of the situation of
warden of Barchester Hospital were indeed curtailed by the new
arrangement; that the whole establishment had to a certain degree
been made vile by the touch of Whig commissioners; that the place,
with its lessened income, its old women, and other innovations, was
very different from the hospital of former days; still the archdeacon
was too practical a man of the world to wish that his father-in-law,
who had at present little more than £200 per annum for all his wants,
should refuse the situation, defiled, undignified, and commission-
ridden as it was.

Mr. Harding had, accordingly, made up his mind that he would return
to his old home at the hospital, and, to tell the truth, had
experienced almost a childish pleasure in the idea of doing so.  The
diminished income was to him not even the source of momentary regret. 
The matron and the old women did rather go against the grain, but he
was able to console himself with the reflection that, after all, such
an arrangement might be of real service to the poor of the city.  The
thought that he must receive his reappointment as the gift of the new
bishop, and probably through the hands of Mr. Slope, annoyed him a
little, but his mind was set at rest by the assurance of the
archdeacon that there would be no favour in such a presentation.  The
reappointment of the old warden would be regarded by all the world as
a matter of course.  Mr. Harding, therefore, felt no hesitation in
telling his daughter that they might look upon his return to his old
quarters as a settled matter.

"And you won't have to ask for it, Papa?"

"Certainly not, my dear.  There is no ground on which I could ask for
any favour from the bishop, whom, indeed, I hardly know.  Nor would I
ask a favour, the granting of which might possibly be made a question
to be settled by Mr. Slope.  No," said he, moved for a moment by a
spirit very unlike his own, "I certainly shall be very glad to go
back to the hospital; but I should never go there if it were
necessary that my doing so should be the subject of a request to Mr.
Slope."

This little outbreak of her father's anger jarred on the present tone
of Eleanor's mind.  She had not learnt to like Mr. Slope, but she had
learnt to think that he had much respect for her father; and she
would, therefore, willingly use her efforts to induce something like
good feeling between them.

"Papa," said she, "I think you somewhat mistake Mr. Slope's
character."

"Do I?" said he placidly.

"I think you do, Papa.  I think he intended no personal disrespect to
you when he preached the sermon which made the archdeacon and the
dean so angry!"

"I never supposed he did, my dear.  I hope I never inquired within
myself whether he did or no.  Such a matter would be unworthy of any
inquiry and very unworthy of the consideration of the chapter.  But I
fear he intended disrespect to the ministration of God's services, as
conducted in conformity with the rules of the Church of England."

"But might it not he that he thought it his duty to express his
dissent from that which you, and the dean, and all of us here so much
approve?"

"It can hardly be the duty of a young man rudely to assail the
religious convictions of his elders in the church.  Courtesy should
have kept him silent, even if neither charity nor modesty could do
so."

"But Mr. Slope would say that on such a subject the commands of his
heavenly Master do not admit of his being silent."

"Nor of his being courteous, Eleanor?"

"He did not say that, Papa."

"Believe me, my child, that Christian ministers are never called on
by God's word to insult the convictions, or even the prejudices of
their brethren, and that religion is at any rate not less susceptible
of urbane and courteous conduct among men than any other study which
men may take up.  I am sorry to say that I cannot defend Mr. Slope's
sermon in the cathedral.  But come, my dear, put on your bonnet and
let us walk round the dear old gardens at the hospital.  I have never
yet had the heart to go beyond the courtyard since we left the place. 
Now I think I can venture to enter."

Eleanor rang the bell and gave a variety of imperative charges as to
the welfare of the precious baby, whom, all but unwillingly, she was
about to leave for an hour or so, and then sauntered forth with her
father to revisit the old hospital.  It had been forbidden ground to
her as well as to him since the day on which they had walked forth
together from its walls.



CHAPTER IX

The Stanhope Family


It is now three months since Dr. Proudie began his reign, and changes
have already been effected in the diocese which show at least the
energy of an active mind.  Among other things absentee clergymen have
been favoured with hints much too strong to be overlooked.  Poor dear
old Bishop Grantly had on this matter been too lenient, and the
archdeacon had never been inclined to he severe with those who were
absent on reputable pretences, and who provided for their duties in a
liberal way.

Among the greatest of the diocesan sinners in this respect was Dr.
Vesey Stanhope.  Years had now passed since he had done a day's duty,
and yet there was no reason against his doing duty except a want of
inclination on his own part.  He held a prebendal stall in the
diocese, one of the best residences in the close, and the two large
rectories of Crabtree Canonicorum and Stogpingum.  Indeed, he had the
cure of three parishes, for that of Eiderdown was joined to
Stogpingum.  He had resided in Italy for twelve years.  His first
going there had been attributed to a sore throat, and that sore
throat, though never repeated in any violent manner, had stood him in
such stead that it had enabled him to live in easy idleness ever
since.

He had now been summoned home--not, indeed, with rough violence, or
by any peremptory command, but by a mandate which he found himself
unable to disregard.  Mr. Slope had written to him by the bishop's
desire.  In the first place, the bishop much wanted the valuable co-
operation of Dr. Vesey Stanhope in the diocese; in the next, the
bishop thought it his imperative duty to become personally acquainted
with the most conspicuous of his diocesan clergy; then the bishop
thought it essentially necessary for Dr. Stanhope's own interests
that Dr. Stanhope should, at any rate for a time, return to
Barchester; and lastly, it was said that so strong a feeling was at
the present moment evinced by the hierarchs of the church with
reference to the absence of its clerical members that it behoved Dr.
Vesey Stanhope not to allow his name to stand among those which would
probably in a few months be submitted to the councils of the nation.

There was something so ambiguously frightful in this last threat that
Dr. Stanhope determined to spend two or three summer months at his
residence in Barchester.  His rectories were inhabited by his
curates, and he felt himself from disuse to be unfit for parochial
duty; but his prebendal home was kept empty for him, and he thought
it probable that he might be able now and again to preach a prebendal
sermon.  He arrived, therefore, with all his family at Barchester,
and he and they must be introduced to my readers.

The great family characteristic of the Stanhopes might probably be
said to be heartlessness, but this want of feeling was, in most of
them, accompanied by so great an amount of good nature as to make
itself but little noticeable to the world.  They were so prone to
oblige their neighbours that their neighbours failed to perceive how
indifferent to them was the happiness and well-being of those around
them.  The Stanhopes would visit you in your sickness (provided it
were not contagious), would bring you oranges, French novels, and the
last new bit of scandal, and then hear of your death or your recovery
with an equally indifferent composure.  Their conduct to each other
was the same as to the world; they bore and forbore; and there was
sometimes, as will be seen, much necessity for forbearing; but their
love among themselves rarely reached above this.  It is astonishing
how much each of the family was able to do, and how much each did, to
prevent the well-being of the other four.

For there were five in all; the doctor, namely, and Mrs. Stanhope,
two daughters, and one son.  The doctor, perhaps, was the least
singular and most estimable of them all, and yet such good qualities
as he possessed were all negative.  He was a good-looking rather
plethoric gentleman of about sixty years of age.  His hair was snow-
white, very plentiful, and somewhat like wool of the finest
description.  His whiskers were very large and very white and gave to
his face the appearance of a benevolent, sleepy old lion.  His dress
was always unexceptionable.  Although he had lived.  so many years in
Italy it was invariably of a decent clerical hue, but it never was
hyperclerical.  He was a man not given to much talking, but what
little he did say was generally well said.  His reading seldom went
beyond romances and poetry of the lightest and not always most moral
description.  He was thoroughly a bon vivant; an accomplished judge
of wine, though he never drank to excess; and a most inexorable
critic in all affairs touching the kitchen.  He had had much to
forgive in his own family, since a family had grown up around him,
and had forgiven everything--except inattention to his dinner.  His
weakness in that respect was now fully understood, and his temper but
seldom tried.  As Dr. Stanhope was a clergyman, it may be supposed
that his religious convictions made up a considerable part of his
character, but this was not so.  That he had religious convictions
must be believed, but he rarely obtruded them, even on his children. 
This abstinence on his part was not systematic but very
characteristic of the man.  It was not that he had predetermined
never to influence their thoughts, but he was so habitually idle that
his time for doing so had never come till the opportunity for doing
so was gone forever.  Whatever conviction the father may have had,
the children were at any rate but indifferent members of the church
from which he drew his income.

Such was Dr. Stanhope.  The features of Mrs. Stanhope's character
were even less plainly marked than those of her lord.  The far niente
of her Italian life had entered into her very soul and brought her to
regard a state of inactivity as the only earthly good.  In manner and
appearance she was exceedingly prepossessing.  She had been a beauty,
and even now, at fifty-five, she was a handsome woman.  Her dress was
always perfect: she never dressed but once in the day and never
appeared till between three and four, but when she did appear, she
appeared at her best.  Whether the toil rested partly with her, or
wholly with her handmaid, it is not for such a one as the author even
to imagine.  The structure of her attire was always elaborate and yet
never over-laboured.  She was rich in apparel but not bedizened with
finery; her ornaments were costly, rare, and such as could not fail
to attract notice but they did not look as though worn with that
purpose.  She well knew the great architectural secret of decorating
her constructions and never descended to construct a decoration.  But
when we have said that Mrs. Stanhope knew how to dress and used her
knowledge daily, we have said all.  Other purpose in life she had
none.  It was something, indeed, that she did not interfere with the
purposes of others.  In early life she had undergone great trials
with reference to the doctor's dinners, but for the last ten or
twelve years her elder daughter Charlotte had taken that labour off
her hands, and she had had little to trouble her--little, that is,
till the edict for this terrible English journey had gone forth:
since then, indeed, her life had been laborious enough.  For such a
one, the toil of being carried from the shores of Como to the city of
Barchester is more than labour enough, let the care of the carriers
be ever so vigilant.  Mrs. Stanhope had been obliged to have every
one of her dresses taken in from the effects of the journey.

Charlotte Stanhope was at this time about thirty-five years old, and
whatever may have been her faults, she had none of those which belong
particularly to old young ladies.  She neither dressed young, nor
talked young, nor indeed looked young.  She appeared to be perfectly
content with her time of life and in no way affected the graces of
youth.  She was a fine young woman, and had she been a man, would
have been a very fine young man.  All that was done in the house, and
that was not done by servants, was done by her.  She gave the orders,
paid the bills, hired and dismissed the domestics, made the tea,
carved the meat, and managed everything in the Stanhope household. 
She, and she alone, could ever induce her father to look into the
state of his worldly concerns.  She, and she alone, could in any
degree control the absurdities of her sister.  She, and she alone,
prevented the whole family from falling into utter disrepute and
beggary.  It was by her advice that they now found themselves very
unpleasantly situated in Barchester.

So far, the character of Charlotte Stanhope is not unprepossessing. 
But it remains to be said that the influence which she had in her
family, though it had been used to a certain extent for their worldly
well-being, had not been used to their real benefit, as it might have
been.  She had aided her father in his indifference to his
professional duties, counselling him that his livings were as much
his individual property as the estates of his elder brother were the
property of that worthy peer.  She had for years past stifled every
little rising wish for a return to England which the doctor had from
time to time expressed.  She had encouraged her mother in her
idleness, in order that she herself might be mistress and manager of
the Stanhope household.  She had encouraged and fostered the follies
of her sister, though she was always willing, and often able, to
protect her from their probable result.  She had done her best and
had thoroughly succeeded in spoiling her brother, and turning him
loose upon the world an idle man without a profession and without a
shilling that he could call his own.

Miss Stanhope was a clever woman, able to talk on most subjects, and
quite indifferent as to what the subject was.  She prided herself on
her freedom from English prejudice and, she might have added, from
feminine delicacy.  On religion she was a pure free-thinker, and with
much want of true affection, delighted to throw out her own views
before the troubled mind of her father.  To have shaken what remained
of his Church of England faith would have gratified her much, but the
idea of his abandoning his preferment in the church had never once
presented itself to her mind.  How could he indeed, when he had no
income from any other source?

But the two most prominent members of the family still remain to be
described.  The second child had been christened Madeline and had
been a great beauty.  We need not say had been, for she was never
more beautiful than at the time of which we write, though her person
for many years had been disfigured by an accident.  It is unnecessary
that we should give in detail the early history of Madeline Stanhope. 
She had gone to Italy when about seventeen years of age and had been
allowed to make the most of her surpassing beauty in the salons of
Milan and among the crowded villas along the shores of the Lake of
Como.  She had become famous for adventures in which her character
was just not lost and had destroyed the hearts of a dozen cavaliers
without once being touched in her own.  Blood had flowed in quarrels
about her charms, and she had heard of these encounters with
pleasurable excitement.  It had been told of her that on one occasion
she had stood by in the disguise of a page and had seen her lover
fall.

As is so often the case, she had married the very worst of those who
sought her hand.  Why she had chosen Paulo Neroni, a man of no birth
and no property, a mere captain in the Pope's guard, one who had come
up to Milan either simply as an adventurer or else as a spy, a man of
harsh temper and oily manners, mean in figure, swarthy in face, and
so false in words as to be hourly detected, need not now be told. 
When the moment for doing so came, she had probably no alternative. 
He, at any rate, had become her husband, and after a prolonged
honeymoon among the lakes, they had gone together to Rome, the papal
captain having vainly endeavoured to induce his wife to remain behind
him.

Six months afterwards she arrived at her father's house a cripple,
and a mother.  She had arrived without even notice, with hardly
clothes to cover her, and without one of those many ornaments which
had graced her bridal trousseau.  Her baby was in the arms of a poor
girl from Milan, whom she had taken in exchange for the Roman maid
who had accompanied her thus far, and who had then, as her mistress
said, become homesick and had returned.  It was clear that the lady
had determined that there should be no witness to tell stories of her
life in Rome.

She had fallen, she said, in ascending a ruin, and had fatally
injured the sinews of her knee; so fatally that when she stood, she
lost eight inches of her accustomed height; so fatally that when she
essayed to move, she could only drag herself painfully along, with
protruded hip and extended foot, in a manner less graceful than that
of a hunchback.  She had consequently made up her mind, once and
forever, that she would never stand and never attempt to move
herself.

Stories were not slow to follow her, averring that she had been
cruelly ill-used by Neroni and that to his violence had she owed her
accident.  Be that as it may, little had been said about her husband,
but that little had made it clearly intelligible to the family that
Signor Neroni was to be seen and heard of no more.  There was no
question as to readmitting the poor, ill-used beauty to her old
family rights, no question as to adopting her infant daughter beneath
the Stanhope roof-tree.  Though heartless, the Stanhopes were not
selfish.  The two were taken in, petted, made much of, for a time all
but adored, and then felt by the two parents to be great nuisances in
the house.  But in the house the lady was, and there she remained,
having her own way, though that way was not very conformable with the
customary usages of an English clergyman.

Madame Neroni, though forced to give up all motion in the world, had
no intention whatever of giving up the world itself.  The beauty of
her face was uninjured, and that beauty was of a peculiar kind.  Her
copious rich brown hair was worn in Grecian bandeaux round her head,
displaying as much as possible of her forehead and cheeks.  Her
forehead, though rather low, was very beautiful from its perfect
contour and pearly whiteness.  Her eyes were long and large and
marvellously bright; might I venture to say bright as Lucifer's, I
should perhaps best express the depth of their brilliancy.  They were
dreadful eyes to look at, such as would absolutely deter any man of
quiet mind and easy spirit from attempting a passage of arms with
such foes.  There was talent in them, and the fire of passion and the
play of wit, but there was no love.  Cruelty was there instead, and
courage, a desire of masterhood, cunning, and a wish for mischief. 
And yet, as eyes, they were very beautiful.  The eyelashes were long
and perfect, and the long, steady, unabashed gaze with which she
would look into the face of her admirer fascinated while it
frightened him.  She was a basilisk from whom an ardent lover of
beauty could make no escape.  Her nose and mouth and teeth and chin
and neck and bust were perfect, much more so at twenty-eight than
they had been at eighteen.  What wonder that with such charms still
glowing in her face, and with such deformity destroying her figure,
she should resolve to be seen, but only to be seen reclining on a
sofa.

Her resolve had not been carried out without difficulty.  She had
still frequented the opera at Milan; she had still been seen
occasionally in the salons of the noblesse; she had caused herself to
be carried in and out from her carriage, and that in such a manner as
in no wise to disturb her charms, disarrange her dress, or expose her
deformities.  Her sister always accompanied her and a maid, a
manservant also, and on state occasions, two.  It was impossible that
her purpose could have been achieved with less; and yet, poor as she
was, she had achieved her purpose.  And then again the more dissolute
Italian youths of Milan frequented the Stanhope villa and surrounded
her couch, not greatly to her father's satisfaction.  Sometimes his
spirit would rise, a dark spot would show itself on his cheek, and he
would rebel, but Charlotte would assuage him with some peculiar
triumph of her culinary art and all again would be smooth for awhile.

Madeline affected all manner of rich and quaint devices in the
garniture of her room, her person, and her feminine belongings.  In
nothing was this more apparent than in the visiting card which she
had prepared for her use.  For such an article one would say that
she, in her present state, could have but small need, seeing how
improbable it was that she should make a morning call: but not such
was her own opinion.  Her card was surrounded by a deep border of
gilding; on this she had imprinted, in three lines

La Signora Madeline
Vesey Neroni.
--Nata Stanhope.

And over the name she had a bright gilt coronet, which certainly
looked very magnificent.  How she had come to concoct such a name for
herself it would be difficult to explain.  Her father had been
christened Vesey as another man is christened Thomas, and she had no
more right to assume it than would have the daughter of a Mr. Josiah
Jones to call herself Mrs. Josiah Smith, on marrying a man of the
latter name.  The gold coronet was equally out of place and perhaps
inserted with even less excuse.  Paulo Neroni had had not the
faintest title to call himself a scion of even Italian nobility.  Had
the pair met in England 