Neroni would probably have been a count, but
they had met in Italy, and any such pretence on his part would have
been simply ridiculous.  A coronet, however, was a pretty ornament,
and if it could solace a poor cripple to have such on her card, who
would begrudge it to her?

Of her husband, or of his individual family, she never spoke, but
with her admirers she would often allude in a mysterious way to her
married life and isolated state and, pointing to her daughter, would
call her the last of the blood of the emperors, thus referring
Neroni's extraction to the old Roman family from which the worst of
the Caesars sprang.

The "signora" was not without talent and not without a certain sort
of industry; she was an indomitable letter-writer, and her letters
were worth the postage: they were full of wit, mischief, satire,
love, latitudinarian philosophy, free religion, and, sometimes, alas,
loose ribaldry.  The subject, however, depended entirely on the
recipient, and she was prepared to correspond with anyone but moral
young ladies or stiff old women.  She wrote also a kind of poetry,
generally in Italian, and short romances, generally in French.  She
read much of a desultory sort of literature and as a modern linguist
had really made great proficiency.  Such was the lady who had now
come to wound the hearts of the men of Barchester.

Ethelbert Stanhope was in some respects like his younger sister, but
he was less inestimable as a man than she as a woman.  His great
fault was an entire absence of that principle which should have
induced him, as the son of a man without fortune, to earn his own
bread.  Many attempts had been made to get him to do so, but these
had all been frustrated, not so much by idleness on his part as by a
disinclination to exert himself in any way not to his taste.  He had
been educated at Eton and had been intended for the Church, but he
had left Cambridge in disgust after a single term and notified to his
father his intention to study for the bar.  Preparatory to that, he
thought it well that he should attend a German university, and
consequently went to Leipzig.  There he remained two years and
brought away a knowledge of German and a taste for the fine arts.  He
still, however, intended himself for the bar, took chambers, engaged
himself to sit at the feet of a learned pundit, and spent a season in
London.  He there found that all his aptitudes inclined him to the
life of an artist, and he determined to live by painting.  With this
object he returned to Milan, and had himself rigged out for Rome.  As
a painter he might have earned his bread, for he wanted only
diligence to excel, but when at Rome his mind was carried away by
other things: he soon wrote home for money, saying that he had been
converted to the Mother Church, that he was already an acolyte of the
Jesuits, and that he was about to start with others to Palestine on a
mission for converting Jews.  He did go to Judea, but being unable to
convert the Jews, was converted by them.  He again wrote home, to say
that Moses was the only giver of perfect laws to the world, that the
coming of the true Messiah was at hand, that great things were doing
in Palestine, and that he had met one of the family of Sidonia, a
most remarkable man, who was now on his way to western Europe, and
whom he had induced to deviate from his route with the object of
calling at the Stanhope villa.  Ethelbert then expressed his hope
that his mother and sisters would listen to this wonderful prophet. 
His father he knew could not do so from pecuniary considerations. 
This Sidonia, however, did not take so strong a fancy to him as
another of that family once did to a young English nobleman.  At
least he provided him with no heaps of gold as large as lions, so
that the Judaized Ethelbert was again obliged to draw on the revenues
of the Christian Church.

It is needless to tell how the father swore that he would send no
more money and receive no Jew, nor how Charlotte declared that
Ethelbert could not be left penniless in Jerusalem, and how "La
Signora Neroni" resolved to have Sidonia at her feet.  The money was
sent, and the Jew did come.  The Jew did come, but he was not at all
to the taste of "La Signora." He was a dirty little old man, and
though he had provided no golden lions, he had, it seems, relieved
young Stanhope's necessities.  He positively refused to leave the
villa till he had got a bill from the doctor on his London bankers.

Ethelbert did not long remain a Jew.  He soon reappeared at the villa
without prejudices on the subject of his religion and with a firm
resolve to achieve fame and fortune as a sculptor.  He brought with
him some models which he had originated at Rome and which really gave
such fair promise that his father was induced to go to further
expense in furthering these views.  Ethelbert opened an
establishment, or rather took lodgings and a workshop, at Carrara,
and there spoilt much marble and made some few pretty images.  Since
that period, now four years ago, he had alternated between Carrara
and the villa, but his sojourns at the workshop became shorter and
shorter and those at the villa longer and longer.  'Twas no wonder,
for Carrara is not a spot in which an Englishman would like to dwell.

When the family started for England, he had resolved not to be left
behind and, with the assistance of his elder sister, had carried his
point against his father's wishes.  It was necessary, he said, that
he should come to England for orders.  How otherwise was he to bring
his profession to account?

In personal appearance Ethelbert Stanhope was the most singular of
beings.  He was certainly very handsome.  He had his sister
Madeline's eyes, without their stare and without their hard, cunning,
cruel firmness.  They were also very much lighter and of so light and
clear a blue as to make his face remarkable, if nothing else did so. 
On entering a room with him, Ethelbert's blue eyes would be the first
thing you would see, and on leaving it almost the last you would
forget.  His light hair was very long and silky, coming down over his
coat.  His beard had been prepared in holy land, and was patriarchal. 
He never shaved and rarely trimmed it.  It was glossy, soft, clean,
and altogether not unprepossessing.  It was such that ladies might
desire to reel it off and work it into their patterns in lieu of
floss silk.  His complexion was fair and almost pink; he was small in
height and slender in limb, but well-made; and his voice was of
peculiar sweetness.

In manner and dress he was equally remarkable.  He had none of the
mauvaise honte of an Englishman.  He required no introduction to make
himself agreeable to any person.  He habitually addressed strangers,
ladies as well as men, without any such formality, and in doing so
never seemed to meet with rebuke.  His costume cannot be described
because it was so various, but it was always totally opposed in every 
principle of colour and construction to the dress of those with whom
he for the time consorted.

He was habitually addicted to making love to ladies, and did so
without any scruples of conscience, or any idea that such a practice
was amiss.  He had no heart to touch himself, and was literally
unaware that humanity was subject to such an infliction.  He had not
thought much about it, but, had he been asked, would have said that
ill-treating a lady's heart meant injuring her promotion in the
world.  His principles therefore forbade him to pay attention to a
girl if he thought any man was present whom it might suit her to
marry.  In this manner his good nature frequently interfered with his
amusement, but he had no other motive in abstaining from the fullest
declarations of love to every girl that pleased his eye.

Bertie Stanhope, as he was generally called, was, however, popular
with both sexes--and with Italians as well as English.  His circle of
acquaintance was very large and embraced people of all sorts.  He had
no respect for rank and no aversion to those below him.  He had lived
on familiar terms with English peers, German shopkeepers, and Roman
priests.  All people were nearly alike to him.  He was above, or
rather below, all prejudices.  No virtue could charm him, no vice
shock him.  He had about him a natural good manner, which seemed to
qualify him for the highest circles, and yet he was never out of
place in the lowest.  He had no principle, no regard for others, no
self-respect, no desire to be other than a drone in the hive, if only
he could, as a drone, get what honey was sufficient for him.  Of
honey, in his latter days, it may probably be presaged, that he will
have but short allowance.

Such was the family of the Stanhopes, who, at this period, suddenly
joined themselves to the ecclesiastical circle of Barchester close. 
Any stranger union it would be impossible perhaps to conceive.  And
it was not as though they all fell down into the cathedral precincts
hitherto unknown and untalked of.  In such case, no amalgamation
would have been at all probable between the new-comers and either the
Proudie set or the Grantly set.  But such was far from being the
case.  The Stanhopes were all known by name in Barchester, and
Barchester was prepared to receive them with open arms.  The doctor
was one of her prebendaries, one of her rectors, one of her pillars
of strength; and was, moreover, counted on as a sure ally both by
Proudies and Grantlys.

He himself was the brother of one peer, and his wife was the sister
of another--and both these peers were lords of Whiggish tendency,
with whom the new bishop had some sort of alliance.  This was
sufficient to give to Mr. Slope high hope that he might enlist Dr.
Stanhope on his side, before his enemies could outmanoeuvre him.  On
the other hand, the old dean had many many years ago, in the days of
the doctor's clerical energies, been instrumental in assisting him in
his views as to preferment; and many many years ago also, the two
doctors, Stanhope and Grantly, had, as young parsons, been joyous
together in the common-rooms of Oxford.  Dr. Grantly, consequently,
did not doubt but that the newcomer would range himself under his
banners.

Little did any of them dream of what ingredients the Stanhope family
was now composed.



CHAPTER X

Mrs. Proudie's Reception--Commenced


The bishop and his wife had spent only three or four days in
Barchester on the occasion of their first visit.  His lordship had,
as we have seen, taken his seat on his throne, but his demeanour
there, into which it had been his intention to infuse much hierarchal
dignity, had been a good deal disarranged by the audacity of his
chaplain's sermon.  He had hardly dared to look his clergy in the
face and to declare by the severity of his countenance that in truth
he meant all that his factotum was saying on his behalf, nor yet did
he dare to throw Mr. Slope over, and show to those around him that he
was no party to the sermon, and would resent it.

He had accordingly blessed his people in a shambling manner, not at
all to his own satisfaction, and had walked back to his palace with
his mind very doubtful as to what he would say to his chaplain on the
subject.  He did not remain long in doubt.  He had hardly doffed his
lawn when the partner of all his toils entered his study and
exclaimed even before she had seated herself:

"Bishop, did you ever hear a more sublime, more spirit-moving, more
appropriate discourse than that?"

"Well, my love; ha--hum--he!"  The bishop did not know what to say.

"I hope, my lord, you don't mean to say you disapprove?"

There was a look about the lady's eye which did not admit of my
lord's disapproving at that moment.  He felt that if he intended to
disapprove, it must be now or never, but he also felt that it could
not be now.  It was not in him to say to the wife of his bosom that
Mr. Slope's sermon was ill-timed, impertinent, and vexatious.

"No, no," replied the bishop.  "No, I can't say I disapprove--a very
clever sermon and very well intended, and I dare say will do a great
deal of good."  This last praise was added, seeing that what he had
already said by no means satisfied Mrs. Proudie.

"I hope it will," said she.  "And I am sure it was well deserved. 
Did you ever in your life, bishop, hear anything so like play-acting
as the way in which Mr. Harding sings the litany?  I shall beg Mr.
Slope to continue a course of sermons on the subject till all that is
altered.  We will have at any rate in our cathedral a decent, godly,
modest morning service.  There must be no more play-acting here now;"
and so the lady rang for lunch.

The bishop knew more about cathedrals and deans and precentors and
church services than his wife did, and also more of a bishop's
powers.  But he thought it better at present to let the subject drop.

"My dear," said he, "I think we must go back to London on Tuesday.
I find my staying here will be very inconvenient to the Government."

The bishop knew that to this proposal his wife would not object, and
he also felt that by thus retreating from the ground of battle the
heat of the fight might be got over in his absence.

"Mr. Slope will remain here, of course?" said the lady.

"Oh, of course," said the bishop.

Thus, after less than a week's sojourn in his palace, did the bishop
fly from Barchester; nor did he return to it for two months, the
London season being then over.  During that time Mr. Slope was not
idle, but he did not again essay to preach in the cathedral.  In
answer to Mrs. Proudie's letters advising a course of sermons, he had
pleaded that he would at any rate wish to put off such an undertaking
till she was there to hear them.

He had employed his time in consolidating a Proudie and Slope party--
or rather a Slope and Proudie party, and he had not employed his time
in vain.  He did not meddle with the dean and chapter, except by 
giving them little teasing intimations of the bishop's wishes about
this and the bishop's feelings about that, in a manner which was to
them sufficiently annoying, but which they could not resent.  He
preached once or twice in a distant church in the suburbs of the city
but made no allusion to the cathedral service.  He commenced the
establishment of two "Bishop's Barchester Sabbath-day schools," gave
notice of a proposed "Bishop's Barchester Young Men's Sabbath Evening
Lecture Room," and wrote three or four letters to the manager of the
Barchester branch railway, informing him how anxious the bishop was
that the Sunday trains should be discontinued.

At the end of two months, however, the bishop and the lady
reappeared, and as a happy harbinger of their return, heralded their
advent by the promise of an evening party on the largest scale.  The
tickets of invitation were sent out from London--they were dated from
Bruton Street and were dispatched by the odious Sabbath-breaking
railway, in a huge brown paper parcel to Mr. Slope.  Everybody
calling himself a gentleman, or herself a lady, within the city of
Barchester, and a circle of two miles round it, was included. 
Tickets were sent to all the diocesan clergy, and also to many other
persons of priestly note, of whose absence the bishop, or at least
the bishop's wife, felt tolerably confident.  It was intended,
however, to be a thronged and noticeable affair, and preparations
were made for receiving some hundreds.

And now there arose considerable agitation among the Grantlyites
whether or no they would attend the episcopal bidding.  The first
feeling with them all was to send the briefest excuses both for
themselves and their wives and daughters.  But by degrees policy
prevailed over passion.  The archdeacon perceived that he would be
making a false step if he allowed the cathedral clergy to give the
bishop just ground of umbrage.  They all met in conclave and agreed
to go.  They would show that they were willing to respect the office,
much as they might dislike the man.  They agreed to go.  The old dean
would crawl in, if it were but for half an hour.  The chancellor,
treasurer, archdeacon, prebendaries, and minor canons would all go
and would all take their wives.  Mr. Harding was especially bidden to
do so, resolving in his heart to keep himself far removed from Mrs.
Proudie.  And Mrs. Bold was determined to go, though assured by her
father that there was no necessity for such a sacrifice on her part. 
When all Barchester was to be there, neither Eleanor nor Mary Bold
understood why they should stay away.  Had they not been invited
separately?  And had not a separate little note from the chaplain,
couched in the most respectful language, been enclosed with the huge
episcopal card?

And the Stanhopes would be there, one and all.  Even the lethargic
mother would so far bestir herself on such an occasion.  They had
only just arrived.  The card was at the residence waiting for them. 
No one in Barchester had seen them.  What better opportunity could
they have of showing themselves to the Barchester world?  Some few
old friends, such as the archdeacon and his wife, had called and had
found the doctor and his eldest daughter, but the élite of the family
were not yet known.

The doctor indeed wished in his heart to prevent the signora from
accepting the bishop's invitation, but she herself had fully
determined that she would accept it.  If her father was ashamed of 
having his daughter carried into a bishop's palace, she had no such
feeling.

"Indeed, I shall," she had said to her sister who had gently
endeavoured to dissuade her, by saying that the company would consist
wholly of parsons and parsons' wives.  "Parsons, I suppose, are much
the same as other men, if you strip them of their black coats; and as
to their wives, I dare say they won't trouble me.  You may tell Papa
I don't at all mean to be left at home."

Papa was told, and felt that he could do nothing but yield.  He also
felt that it was useless for him now to be ashamed of his children. 
Such as they were, they had become such under his auspices; as he had
made his bed, so he must lie upon it; as he had sown his seed, so
must he reap his corn.  He did not indeed utter such reflexions in
such language, but such was the gist of his thought.  It was not
because Madeline was a cripple that he shrank from seeing her made
one of the bishop's guests, but because he knew that she would
practise her accustomed lures and behave herself in a way that could
not fail of being distasteful to the propriety of Englishwomen. 
These things had annoyed but not shocked him in Italy.  There they
had shocked no one, but here in Barchester, here among his fellow
parsons, he was ashamed that they should be seen.  Such had been his
feelings, but he repressed them.  What if his brother clergymen were
shocked!  They could not take from him his preferment because the
manners of his married daughter were too free.

La Signora Neroni had, at any rate, no fear that she would shock
anybody.  Her ambition was to create a sensation, to have parsons at
her feet, seeing that the manhood of Barchester consisted mainly of
parsons, and to send, if possible, every parson's wife home with a
green fit of jealousy.  None could be too old for her, and hardly any
too young.  None too sanctified, and none too worldly.  She was quite
prepared to entrap the bishop himself and then to turn up her nose at
the bishop's wife.  She did not doubt of success, for she had always
succeeded; but one thing was absolutely necessary; she must secure
the entire use of a sofa.

The card sent to Dr. and Mrs. Stanhope and family had been so sent in
an envelope having on the cover Mr. Slope's name.  The signora soon
learnt that Mrs. Proudie was not yet at the palace and that the
chaplain was managing everything.  It was much more in her line to
apply to him than to the lady, and she accordingly wrote him the
prettiest little billet in the world.  In five lines she explained
everything, declared how impossible it was for her not to be desirous
to make the acquaintance of such persons as the Bishop of Barchester
and his wife, and she might add also of Mr. Slope, depicted her own
grievous state, and concluded by being assured that Mrs. Proudie
would forgive her extreme hardihood in petitioning to be allowed to
be carried to a sofa.  She then enclosed one of her beautiful cards. 
In return she received as polite an answer from Mr. Slope--a sofa
should be kept in the large drawing-room, immediately at the top of
the grand stairs, especially for her use.

And now the day of the party had arrived.  The bishop and his wife
came down from town only on the morning of the eventful day, as
behoved such great people to do, but Mr. Slope had toiled day and
night to see that everything should be in right order.  There had
been much to do.  No company had been seen in the palace since heaven
knows when.  New furniture had been required, new pots and pans, new
cups and saucers, new dishes and plates.  Mrs. Proudie had at first
declared that she would condescend to nothing so vulgar as eating and
drinking, but Mr. Slope had talked, or rather written her out of
economy.  Bishops should be given to hospitality, and hospitality
meant eating and drinking.  So the supper was conceded; the guests,
however, were to stand as they consumed it.

There were four rooms opening into each other on the first floor of
the house, which were denominated the drawing-rooms, the reception-
room, and Mrs. Proudie's boudoir.  In olden days one of these had
been Bishop Grantly's bedroom, and another his common sitting-room
and study.  The present bishop, however, had been moved down into a
back parlour and had been given to understand that he could very well
receive his clergy in the dining-room, should they arrive in too
large a flock to be admitted into his small sanctum.  He had been
unwilling to yield, but after a short debate had yielded.

Mrs. Proudie's heart beat high as she inspected her suite of rooms. 
They were really very magnificent, or at least would be so by
candlelight, and they had nevertheless been got up with commendable
economy.  Large rooms when full of people and full of light look
well, because they are large, and are full, and are light.  Small
rooms are those which require costly fittings and rich furniture. 
Mrs. Proudie knew this and made the most of it; she had therefore a
huge gas lamp with a dozen burners hanging from each of the ceilings.

People were to arrive at ten, supper was to last from twelve till
one, and at half-past one everybody was to be gone.  Carriages were
to come in at the gate in the town and depart at the gate outside. 
They were desired to take up at a quarter before one.  It was managed
excellently, and Mr. Slope was invaluable.

At half-past nine the bishop and his wife and their three daughters
entered the great reception-room, and very grand and very solemn they
were.  Mr. Slope was downstairs giving the last orders about the
wine.  He well understood that curates and country vicars with their
belongings did not require so generous an article as the dignitaries
of the close.  There is a useful gradation in such things, and
Marsala at 20s. a dozen did very well for the exterior supplementary
tables in the corner.

"Bishop," said the lady, as his lordship sat himself down, "don't sit
on that sofa, if you please; it is to be kept separate for a lady."

The bishop jumped up and seated himself on a cane-bottomed chair.
"A lady?" he inquired meekly; "do you mean one particular lady, my
dear?"

"Yes, Bishop, one particular lady," said his wife, disdaining to
explain.

"She has got no legs, Papa," said the youngest daughter, tittering.

"No legs!" said the bishop, opening his eyes.

"Nonsense, Netta, what stuff you talk," said Olivia.  "She has got
legs, but she can't use them.  She has always to be kept lying down,
and three or four men carry her about everywhere."

"Laws, how odd!" said Augusta.  "Always carried about by four men! 
I'm sure I shouldn't like it.  Am I right behind, Mamma?  I feel as
if I was open;" and she turned her back to her anxious parent.

"Open!  To be sure you are," said she, "and a yard of petticoat
strings hanging out.  I don't know why I pay such high wages to Mrs.
Richards if she can't take the trouble to see whether or no you are
fit to be looked at," and Mrs. Proudie poked the strings here, and
twitched the dress there, and gave her daughter a shove and a shake,
and then pronounced it all right.

"But," rejoined the bishop, who was dying with curiosity about the
mysterious lady and her legs, "who is it that is to have the sofa? 
What's her name, Netta?"

A thundering rap at the front door interrupted the conversation. 
Mrs. Proudie stood up and shook herself gently and touched her cap on
each side as she looked in the mirror.  Each of the girls stood on
tiptoe and rearranged the bows on their bosoms, and Mr. Slope rushed
upstairs three steps at a time.

"But who is it, Netta?" whispered the bishop to his youngest
daughter.

"La Signora Madeline Vesey Neroni," whispered back the daughter;
"and mind you don't let anyone sit upon the sofa."

"La Signora Madeline Vicinironi!" muttered to himself the bewildered
prelate.  Had he been told that the Begum of Oude was to be there, or
Queen Pomara of the Western Isles, he could not have been more
astonished.  La Signora Madeline Vicinironi, who, having no legs to
stand on, had bespoken a sofa in his drawing-room!  Who could she be? 
He however could now make no further inquiry, as Dr. and Mrs.
Stanhope were announced.  They had been sent on out of the way a
little before the time, in order that the signora might have plenty
of time to get herself conveniently packed into the carriage.

The bishop was all smiles for the prebendary's wife, and the bishop's
wife was all smiles for the prebendary.  Mr. Slope was presented and
was delighted to make the acquaintance of one of whom he had heard so
much.  The doctor bowed very low, and then looked as though he could
not return the compliment as regarded Mr. Slope, of whom, indeed, he
had heard nothing.  The doctor, in spite of his long absence, knew an
English gentleman when he saw him.

And then the guests came in shoals: Mr. and Mrs. Quiverful and their
three grown daughters.  Mr. and Mrs. Chadwick and their three
daughters.  The burly chancellor and his wife and clerical son from
Oxford.  The meagre little doctor without incumbrance.  Mr. Harding
with Eleanor and Miss Bold.  The dean leaning on a gaunt spinster,
his only child now living with him, a lady very learned in stones,
ferns, plants, and vermin, and who had written a book about petals. 
A wonderful woman in her way was Miss Trefoil.  Mr. Finnie, the
attorney, with his wife, was to be seen, much to the dismay of many
who had never met him in a drawing-room before.  The five Barchester
doctors were all there, and old Scalpen, the retired apothecary and
tooth-drawer, who was first taught to consider himself as belonging
to the higher orders by the receipt of the bishop's card.  Then came
the archdeacon and his wife with their elder daughter Griselda, a
slim, pale, retiring girl of seventeen who kept close to her mother
and looked out on the world with quiet watchful eyes, one who gave
promise of much beauty when time should have ripened it.

And so the rooms became full, and knots were formed, and every
newcomer paid his respects to my lord and passed on, not presuming to
occupy too much of the great man's attention.  The archdeacon shook
hands very heartily with Dr. Stanhope, and Mrs. Grantly seated
herself by the doctor's wife.  And Mrs. Proudie moved about with
well-regulated grace, measuring out the quantity of her favours to
the quality of her guests, just as Mr. Slope had been doing with the
wine.  But the sofa was still empty, and five-and-twenty ladies and
five gentlemen had been courteously warned off it by the mindful
chaplain.

"Why doesn't she come?" said the bishop to himself.  His mind was so
preoccupied with the signora that he hardly remembered how to behave
himself en bishop.

At last a carriage dashed up to the hall steps with a very different
manner of approach from that of any other vehicle that had been there
that evening.  A perfect commotion took place.  The doctor, who heard
it as he was standing in the drawing-room, knew that his daughter was
coming and retired into the furthest corner, where he might not see
her entrance.  Mrs. Proudie perked herself up, feeling that some
important piece of business was in hand.  The bishop was
instinctively aware that La Signora Vicinironi was come at last, and
Mr. Slope hurried into the hall to give his assistance.

He was, however, nearly knocked down and trampled on by the cortège
that he encountered on the hall steps.  He got himself picked up, as
well as he could, and followed the cortège upstairs.  The signora was
carried head foremost, her head being the care of her brother and an
Italian manservant who was accustomed to the work; her feet were in
the care of the lady's maid and the lady's Italian page; and
Charlotte Stanhope followed to see that all was done with due grace
and decorum.  In this manner they climbed easily into the drawing-
room, and a broad way through the crowd having been opened, the
signora rested safely on her couch.  She had sent a servant
beforehand to learn whether it was a right- or a left-hand sofa, for
it required that she should dress accordingly, particularly as
regarded her bracelets.

And very becoming her dress was.  It was white velvet, without any
other garniture than rich white lace worked with pearls across her
bosom, and the same round the armlets of her dress.  Across her brow
she wore a band of red velvet, on the centre of which shone a
magnificent Cupid in mosaic, the tints of whose wings were of the
most lovely azure, and the colour of his chubby cheeks the clearest
pink.  On the one arm which her position required her to expose she
wore three magnificent bracelets, each of different stones.  Beneath
her on the sofa, and over the cushion and head of it, was spread a
crimson silk mantle or shawl, which went under her whole body and
concealed her feet.  Dressed as she was and looking as she did, so
beautiful and yet so motionless, with the pure brilliancy of her
white dress brought out and strengthened by the colour beneath it,
with that lovely head, and those large, bold, bright, staring eyes,
it was impossible that either man or woman should do other than look
at her.

Neither man nor woman for some minutes did do other.

Her bearers too were worthy of note.  The three servants were
Italian, and though perhaps not peculiar in their own country, were
very much so in the palace at Barchester.  The man especially
attracted notice and created a doubt in the mind of some whether he
were a friend or a domestic.  The same doubt was felt as to
Ethelbert.  The man was attired in a loose-fitting, common, black-
cloth morning-coat.  He had a jaunty, fat, well-pleased, clean face 
on which no atom of beard appeared, and be wore round his neck a
loose, black silk neck-handkerchief.  The bishop essayed to make him
a bow, but the man, who was well trained, took no notice of him and
walked out of the room quite at his ease, followed by the woman and
the boy.

Ethelbert Stanhope was dressed in light blue from head to foot.  He
had on the loosest possible blue coat, cut square like a shooting
coat, and very short.  It was lined with silk of azure blue.  He had
on a blue satin waistcoat, a blue neck-handkerchief which was
fastened beneath his throat with a coral ring, and very loose blue
trousers which almost concealed his feet.  His soft, glossy beard was
softer and more glossy than ever.

The bishop, who had made one mistake, thought that he also was a
servant and therefore tried to make way for him to pass.  But
Ethelbert soon corrected the error.



CHAPTER XI

Mrs. Proudie's Reception--Concluded


"Bishop of Barchester, I presume?" said Bertie Stanhope, putting out
his hand frankly; "I am delighted to make your acquaintance.  We are
in rather close quarters here, a'nt we?"

In truth they were.  They had been crowded up behind the head of the
sofa--the bishop in waiting to receive his guest, and the other in
carrying her--and they now had hardly room to move themselves.

The bishop gave his hand quickly, made his little studied bow, and
was delighted to make--He couldn't go on, for he did not know whether
his friend was a signor, or a count or a prince.

"My sister really puts you all to great trouble," said Bertie.

"Not at all!" The bishop was delighted to have the opportunity of
welcoming La Signora Vicinironi--so at least he said--and attempted
to force his way round to the front of the sofa.  He had, at any
rate, learnt that his strange guests were brother and sister.  The
man, he presumed, must be Signor Vicinironi--or count, or prince, as
it might be.  It was wonderful what good English he spoke.  There was
just a twang of foreign accent, and no more.

"Do you like Barchester, on the whole?" asked Bertie.

The bishop, looking dignified, said that he did like Barchester.

"You've not been here very long, I believe," said Bertie.

"No--not long," said the bishop and tried again to make his way
between the back of the sofa and heavy rector, who was staring over
it at the grimaces of the signora.

"You weren't a bishop before, were you?"

Dr. Proudie explained that this was the first diocese he had held.

"Ah--I thought so," said Bertie, "but you are changed about
sometimes, a'nt you?"

'Translations are occasionally made," said Dr. Proudie, "but not so
frequently as in former days."

"They've cut them all down to pretty nearly the same figure, haven't
they?" said Bertie.

To this the bishop could not bring himself to make any answer, but
again attempted to move the rector.

"But the work, I suppose, is different?" continued Bertie.  "Is there
much to do here, at Barchester?"  This was said exactly in the tone
that a young Admiralty clerk might use in asking the same question of
a brother acolyte at the Treasury.

"The work of a bishop of the Church of England," said Dr. Proudie
with considerable dignity, "is not easy.  The responsibility which he
has to bear is very great indeed."

"Is it?" said Bertie, opening wide his wonderful blue eyes.  "Well, I
never was afraid of responsibility.  I once had thoughts of being a
bishop, myself."

"Had thoughts of being a bishop!" said Dr. Proudie, much amazed.

That is, a parson--a parson first, you know, and a bishop afterwards. 
If I had once begun, I'd have stuck to it.  But, on the whole, I like
the Church of Rome the best."

The bishop could not discuss the point, so he remained silent.

"Now, there's my father," continued Bertie; "he hasn't stuck to it. 
I fancy he didn't like saying the same thing over so often.  By the
by, Bishop, have you seen my father?"

The bishop was more amazed than ever.  Had he seen his father?  "No,"
he replied; he had not yet had the pleasure: he hoped he might; and,
as he said so, he resolved to bear heavy on that fat, immovable
rector, if ever he had the power of doing so.

"He's in the room somewhere," said Bertie, "and he'll turn up soon. 
By the by, do you know much about the Jews?"

At last the bishop saw a way out.  "I beg your pardon," said he, "but
I'm forced to go round the room."

"Well--I believe I'll follow in your wake," said Bertie.  "Terribly
hot--isn't it?"  This he addressed to the fat rector with whom he had
brought himself into the closest contact.  "They've got this sofa
into the worst possible part of the room; suppose we move it.  Take
care, Madeline."

The sofa had certainly been so placed that those who were behind it
found great difficulty in getting out; there was but a narrow
gangway, which one person could stop.  This was a bad arrangement,
and one which Bertie thought it might be well to improve.

"Take care, Madeline," said he, and turning to the fat rector, added,
"Just help me with a slight push."

The rector's weight was resting on the sofa and unwittingly lent all
its impetus to accelerate and increase the motion which Bertie
intentionally originated.  The sofa rushed from its moorings and ran
half-way into the middle of the room.  Mrs. Proudie was standing with
Mr. Slope in front of the signora, and had been trying to be
condescending and sociable; but she was not in the very best of
tempers, for she found that, whenever she spoke to the lady, the lady
replied by speaking to Mr. Slope.  Mr. Slope was a favourite, no
doubt, but Mrs. Proudie had no idea of being less thought of than the
chaplain.  She was beginning to be stately, stiff, and offended, when
unfortunately the castor of the sofa caught itself in her lace train
and carried away there is no saying how much of her garniture. 
Gathers were heard to go, stitches to crack, plaits to fly open,
flounces were seen to fall, and breadths to expose themselves; a long
ruin of rent lace disfigured the carpet and still clung to the vile
wheel on which the sofa moved.

So, when a granite battery is raised, excellent to the eyes of
warfaring men, is its strength and symmetry admired.  It is the work
of years.  Its neat embrasures, its finished parapets, its casemated
stories show all the skill of modern science.  But, anon, a small
spark is applied to the treacherous fusee--a cloud of dust arises to
the heavens--and then nothing is to be seen but dirt and dust and
ugly fragments.

We know what was the wrath of Juno when her beauty was despised.  We
know to what storms of passion even celestial minds can yield.  As
Juno may have looked at Paris on Mount Ida, so did Mrs. Proudie look
on Ethelbert Stanhope when he pushed the leg of the sofa into her
lace train.

"Oh, you idiot, Bertie!" said the signora, seeing what had been done
and what were to be the consequences.

"Idiot!" re-echoed Mrs. Proudie, as though the word were not half
strong enough to express the required meaning; "I'll let him know--"
and then looking round to learn, at a glance, the worst, she saw that
at present it behoved her to collect the scattered débris of her
dress.

Bertie, when he saw what he had done, rushed over the sofa and threw
himself on one knee before the offended lady.  His object, doubtless,
was to liberate the torn lace from the castor, but he looked as
though he were imploring pardon from a goddess.

"Unhand it, sir!" said Mrs. Proudie.  From what scrap of dramatic
poetry she had extracted the word cannot be said, but it must have
rested on her memory and now seemed opportunely dignified for the
occasion.

"I'll fly to the looms of the fairies to repair the damage, if you'll
only forgive me," said Ethelbert, still on his knees.

"Unhand it, sir!" said Mrs. Proudie with redoubled emphasis and all
but furious wrath.  This allusion to the fairies was a direct mockery
and intended to turn her into ridicule.  So at least it seemed to
her.  "Unhand it, sir!" she almost screamed.

"It's not me; it's the cursed sofa," said Bertie, looking imploringly
in her face and holding up both his hands to show that he was not
touching her belongings, but still remaining on his knees.

Hereupon the Signora laughed; not loud, indeed, but yet audibly.  And
as the tigress bereft of her young will turn with equal anger on any
within reach, so did Mrs. Proudie turn upon her female guest.

"Madam!" she said--and it is beyond the power of prose to tell of the
fire which flashed from her eyes.

The signora stared her full in the face for a moment, and then
turning to her brother said playfully, "Bertie, you idiot, get up."

By this time the bishop, and Mr. Slope, and her three daughters were
around her, and had collected together the wide ruins of her
magnificence.  The girls fell into circular rank behind their mother,
and thus following her and carrying out the fragments, they left the
reception-rooms in a manner not altogether devoid of dignity.  Mrs.
Proudie had to retire and re-array herself.

As soon as the constellation had swept by, Ethelbert rose from his
knees and, turning with mock anger to the fat rector, said: "After
all it was your doing, sir--not mine.  But perhaps you are waiting
for preferment, and so I bore it."

Whereupon there was a laugh against the fat rector, in which both the
bishop and the chaplain joined, and thus things got themselves again
into order.

"Oh! my lord, I am so sorry for this accident," said the signora
putting out her hand so as to force the bishop to take it.  "My
brother is so thoughtless.  Pray sit down and let me have the
pleasure of making your acquaintance.  Though I am so poor a creature
as to want a sofa, I am not so selfish as to require it all." 
Madeline could always dispose herself so as to make room for a
gentleman, though, as she declared, the crinoline of her lady friends
was much too bulky to be so accommodated.

"It was solely for the pleasure of meeting you that I have had myself
dragged here," she continued.  "Of course, with your occupation, one
cannot even hope that you should have time to come to us, that is, in
the way of calling.  And at your English dinner-parties all is so
dull and so stately.  Do you know, my lord, that in coming to England
my only consolation has been the thought that I should know you;" and
she looked at him with the look of a she-devil.

The bishop, however, thought that she looked very like an angel and,
accepting the proffered seat, sat down beside her.  He uttered some
platitude as to his deep obligation for the trouble she had taken and
wondered more and more who she was.

"Of course you know my sad story?" she continued.

The bishop didn't know a word of it.  He knew, however, or thought he
knew that she couldn't walk into a room like other people, and so
made the most of that.  He put on a look of ineffable distress and
said that he was aware how God had afflicted her.

The signora just touched the corner of her eyes with the most lovely
of pocket-handkerchiefs.  Yes, she said--she had been sorely tried--
tried, she thought, beyond the common endurance of humanity; but
while her child was left to her, everything was left.  "Oh! my lord,"
she exclaimed, you must see that infant--the last bud of a wondrous
tree: you must let a mother hope that you will lay your holy hands on
her innocent head and consecrate her for female virtues.  May I hope
it?" said she, looking into the bishop's eye and touching the
bishop's arm with her hand.

The bishop was but a man and said she might.  After all, what was it
but a request that he would confirm her daughter?--a request, indeed,
very unnecessary to make, as he should do so as a matter of course if
the young lady came forward in the usual way.

"The blood of Tiberius," said the signora in all but a whisper; "the
blood of Tiberius flows in her veins.  She is the last of the Neros!"

The bishop had heard of the last of the Visigoths, and had floating
in his brain some indistinct idea of the last of the Mohicans, but to
have the last of the Neros thus brought before him for a blessing was
very staggering.  Still he liked the lady: she had a proper way of
thinking and talked with more propriety than her brother.  But who
were they?  It was now quite clear that that blue madman with the
silky beard was not a Prince Vicinironi.  The lady was married and
was of course one of the Vicinironi's by right of the husband.  So
the bishop went on learning.

"When will you see her? said the signora with a start.

"See whom?" said the bishop.

"My child," said the mother.

"What is the young lady's age?" asked the bishop.

"She is just seven," said the signora.

"Oh," said the bishop, shaking his head; "she is much too young--very
much too young."

"But in sunny Italy, you know, we do not count by years," and the
signora gave the bishop one of her very sweetest smiles.

"But indeed, she is a great deal too young," persisted the bishop;
"we never confirm before--"

"But you might speak to her; you might let her hear from your
consecrated lips that she is not a castaway because she is a Roman;
that she may be a Nero and yet a Christian; that she may owe her
black locks and dark cheeks to the blood of the pagan Caesars and yet
herself be a child of grace; you will tell her this, won't you, my
friend?"

The friend said he would and asked if the child could say her
catechism.

"No," said the signora, "I would not allow her to learn lessons such
as those in a land ridden over by priests and polluted by the
idolatry of Rome.  It is here, here in Barchester, that she must
first be taught to lisp those holy words.  Oh, that you could be her
instructor!"

Now, Dr. Proudie certainly liked the lady, but, seeing that he was a
bishop, it was not probable that he was going to instruct a little
girl in the first rudiments of her catechism; so he said he'd send a
teacher.

"But you'll see her yourself, my lord?"

The bishop said he would, but where should he call.

"At Papa's house," said the Signora with an air of some little
surprise at the question.

The bishop actually wanted the courage to ask her who was her papa,
so he was forced to at last to leave her without fathoming the
mystery.  Mrs. Proudie, in her second best, had now returned to the
rooms, and her husband thought it as well that he should not remain
in too close conversation with the lady whom his wife appeared to
hold in such slight esteem.  Presently he came across his youngest
daughter.

"Netta," said he, "do you know who is the father of that Signora
Vicinironi?"

"It isn't Vicinironi, Papa," said Netta; "but Vesey Neroni and she's
Doctor Stanhope's daughter.  But I must go and do the civil to
Griselda Grantly; I declare nobody has spoken a word to the poor girl
this evening."

Dr. Stanhope!  Dr. Vesey Stanhope!  Dr. Vesey Stanhope's daughter, of
whose marriage with a dissolute Italian scamp he now remembered to
have heard something!  And that impertinent blue cub who had examined
him as to his episcopal bearings was old Stanhope's son, and the lady
who had entreated him to come and teach her child the catechism was
old Stanhope's daughter!  The daughter of one of his own
prebendaries!  As these things flashed across his mind, he was nearly
as angry as his wife had been.  Nevertheless, he could not but own
that the mother of the last of the Neros was an agreeable woman.

Dr. Proudie tripped out into the adjoining room, in which were
congregated a crowd of Grantlyite clergymen, among whom the
archdeacon was standing pre-eminent, while the old dean was sitting
nearly buried in a huge arm chair by the fire-place.  The bishop was
very anxious to be gracious and, if possible, to diminish the
bitterness which his chaplain had occasioned.  Let Mr. Slope do the
fortiter in re, he himself would pour in the suaviter in modo.

"Pray don't stir, Mr. Dean, pray don't stir," he said as the old man
essayed to get up; "I take it as a great kindness, your coming to
such an omnium gatherum as this.  But we have hardly got settled yet,
and Mrs. Proudie has not been able to see her friends as she would
wish to do.  Well, Mr. Archdeacon, after all, we have not been so
hard upon you at Oxford."

"No," said the archdeacon, "you've only drawn our teeth and cut out
our tongues; you've allowed us still to breathe and swallow."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the bishop; "it's not quite so easy to cut out
the tongue of an Oxford magnate--and as for teeth--ha, ha, ha!  Why,
in the way we've left the matter, it's very odd if the heads of
colleges don't have their own way quite as fully as when the
hebdomadal board was in all its glory; what do you say, Mr. Dean?"

"An old man, my lord, never likes changes," said the dean.

"You must have been sad bunglers if it is so," said the archdeacon;
"and indeed, to tell the truth, I think you have bungled it.  At any
rate, you must own this; you have not done the half what you boasted
you would do."

"Now, as regards your system of professors--" began the chancellor
slowly.  He was never destined to get beyond such beginning.

"Talking of professors," said a soft clear voice close behind the
chancellor's elbow; "how much you Englishmen might learn from
Germany; only you are all too proud."

The bishop, looking round, perceived that that abominable young
Stanhope had pursued him.  The dean stared at him as though he were
some unearthly apparition; so also did two or three prebendaries and
minor canons.  The archdeacon laughed.

"The German professors are men of learning," said Mr. Harding, "but--

"German professors!" groaned out the chancellor as though his nervous
system had received a shock which nothing but a week of Oxford air
could cure.

"Yes," continued Ethelbert, not at all understanding why a German
professor should be contemptible in the eyes of an Oxford don.  "Not
but what the name is best earned at Oxford.  In Germany the
professors do teach; at Oxford, I believe, they only profess to do
so, and sometimes not even that.  You'll have those universities of
yours about your ears soon, if you don't consent to take a lesson
from Germany."

There was no answering this.  Dignified clergymen of sixty years of
age could not condescend to discuss such a matter with a young man
with such clothes and such a beard.

"Have you got good water out at Plumstead, Mr. Archdeacon?" said the
bishop by way of changing the conversation.

"Pretty good," said Dr. Grantly.

"But by no means so good as his wine, my lord," said a witty minor
canon.

"Nor so generally used," said another; "that is, for inward
application."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the bishop, "a good cellar of wine is a very
comfortable thing in a house"

"Your German professors, Sir, prefer beer, I believe," said the
sarcastic little meagre prebendary.

"They don't think much of either," said Ethelbert, "and that perhaps
accounts for their superiority.  Now the Jewish professor--"

The insult was becoming too deep for the spirit of Oxford to endure,
so the archdeacon walked off one way and the chancellor another,
followed by their disciples, and the bishop and the young reformer
were left together on the hearth-rug.

"I was a Jew once myself," began Bertie.

The bishop was determined not to stand another examination, or be led
on any terms into Palestine, so he again remembered that he had to do
something very particular and left young Stanhope with the dean.  The
dean did not get the worst of it for Ethelbert gave him a true
account of his remarkable doings in the Holy Land.

"Oh, Mr. Harding," said the bishop, overtaking the ci-devant warden;
"I wanted to say one word about the hospital.  You know, of course,
that it is to be filled up."

Mr. Harding's heart beat a little, and he said that he had heard so.

"Of course," continued the bishop; "there can be only one man whom I
could wish to see in that situation.  I don't know what your own
views may be, Mr. Harding--"

"They are very simply told, my lord," said the other; "to take the
place if it be offered me, and to put up with the want of it should
another man get it."

The bishop professed himself delighted to hear it; Mr. Harding might
be quite sure that no other man would get it.  There were some few
circumstances which would in a slight degree change the nature of the
duties.  Mr. Harding was probably aware of this, and would, perhaps,
not object to discuss the matter with Mr. Slope.  It was a subject to
which Mr. Slope had given a good deal of attention.

Mr. Harding felt, he knew not why, oppressed and annoyed.  What could
Mr. Slope do to him?  He knew that there were to be changes.  The
nature of them must he communicated to the warden through somebody,
and through whom so naturally as the bishop's chaplain?  'Twas thus he
tried to argue himself back to an easy mind, but in vain.

Mr. Slope in the meantime had taken the seat which the bishop had
vacated on the signora's sofa and remained with that lady till it was
time to marshal the folk to supper.  Not with contented eyes had Mrs.
Proudie seen this.  Had not this woman laughed at her distress, and
had not Mr. Slope heard it?  Was she not an intriguing Italian woman,
half wife and half not, full of affectation, airs, and impudence? 
Was she not horribly bedizened with velvet and pearls, with velvet
and pearls, too, which had not been torn off her back?  Above all,
did she not pretend to be more beautiful than her neighbo