urs?  To say
that Mrs. Proudie was jealous would give a wrong idea of her
feelings.  She had not the slightest desire that Mr. Slope should be 
in love with herself.  But she desired the incense of Mr. Slope's
spiritual and temporal services and did not choose that they should
be turned out of their course to such an object as Signora Neroni. 
She considered also that Mr. Slope ought in duty to hate the signora,
and it appeared from his manner that he was very far from hating her.

"Come, Mr. Slope," she said, sweeping by and looking all that she
felt, "can't you make yourself useful?  Do pray take Mrs. Grantly
down to supper."

Mrs. Grantly heard and escaped.  The words were hardly out of Mrs.
Proudie's mouth before the intended victim had stuck her hand through
the arm of one of her husband's curates and saved herself.  What
would the archdeacon have said had he seen her walking downstairs
with Mr. Slope?

Mr. Slope heard also but was by no means so obedient as was expected. 
Indeed, the period of Mr. Slope's obedience to Mrs. Proudie was
drawing to a close.  He did not wish yet to break with her, nor to
break with her at all, if it could be avoided.  But he intended to be
master in that palace, and as she had made the same resolution it was
not improbable that they might come to blows.

Before leaving the signora he arranged a little table before her and
begged to know what he should bring her.  She was quite indifferent,
she said--nothing--anything.  It was now she felt the misery of her
position, now that she must be left alone.  Well, a little chicken,
some ham, and a glass of champagne.

Mr. Slope had to explain, not without blushing for his patron, that
there was no champagne.

Sherry would do just as well.  And then Mr. Slope descended with the
learned Miss Trefoil on his arm.  Could she tell him, he asked,
whether the ferns of Barsetshire were equal to those of Cumberland? 
His strongest worldly passion was for ferns--and before she could
answer him he left her wedged between the door and the sideboard.  It
was fifty minutes before she escaped, and even then unfed.

"You are not leaving us, Mr. Slope," said the watchful lady of the
house, seeing her slave escaping towards the door, with stores of
provisions held high above the heads of the guests.

Mr. Slope explained that the Signora Neroni was in want of her
supper.

"Pray, Mr. Slope, let her brother take it to her," said Mrs. Proudie,
quite out loud.  "It is out of the question that you should he so
employed.  Pray, Mr. Slope, oblige me; I am sure Mr. Stanhope will
wait upon his sister."

Ethelbert was most agreeably occupied in the furthest corner of the
room, making himself both useful and agreeable to Mrs. Proudie's
youngest daughter.

"I couldn't get out, madam, if Madeline were starving for her
supper," said he; "I'm physically fixed, unless I could fly."

The lady's anger was increased by seeing that her daughter also had
gone over to the enemy, and when she saw that in spite of her
remonstrances, in the teeth of her positive orders, Mr. Slope went
off to the drawing-room, the cup of her indignation ran over, and she
could not restrain herself.  "Such manners I never saw," she said,
muttering.  "I cannot and will not permit it;" and then, after
fussing and fuming for a few minutes, she pushed her way through the
crowd and followed Mr. Slope.

When she reached the room above, she found it absolutely deserted,
except by the guilty pair.  The signora was sitting very comfortably
up to her supper, and Mr. Slope was leaning over her and
administering to her wants.  They had been discussing the merits of
Sabbath-day schools, and the lady had suggested that as she could not
possibly go to the children, she might be indulged in the wish of her
heart by having the children brought to her.

"And when shall it be, Mr. Slope?" said she.

Mr. Slope was saved the necessity of committing himself to a promise
by the entry of Mrs. Proudie.  She swept close up to the sofa so as
to confront the guilty pair, stared full at them for a moment, and
then said, as she passed on to the next room, "Mr. Slope, his
lordship is especially desirous of your attendance below; you will
greatly oblige me if you will join him."  And so she stalked on.

Mr. Slope muttered something in reply and prepared to go downstairs. 
As for the bishop's wanting him, he knew his lady patroness well
enough to take that assertion at what it was worth; but he did not
wish to make himself the hero of a scene, or to become conspicuous
for more gallantry than the occasion required.

"Is she always like this?" said the signora.

"Yes--always--madam," said Mrs. Proudie, returning; "always the same
--always equally adverse to impropriety of conduct of every
description;" and she stalked back through the room again, following
Mr. Slope out of the door.

The signora couldn't follow her, or she certainly would have done so. 
But she laughed loud and sent the sound of it ringing through the
lobby and down the stairs after Mrs. Proudie's feet.  Had she been as
active as Grimaldi, she could probably have taken no better revenge.

"Mr. Slope," said Mrs. Proudie, catching the delinquent at the door,
"I am surprised you should leave my company to attend on such a
painted Jezebel as that."

"But she's lame, Mrs. Proudie, and cannot move.  Somebody must have
waited upon her."

"Lame," said Mrs. Proudie; "I'd lame her if she belonged to me.  What
business had she here at all?--such impertinence--such affectation."

In the hall and adjacent rooms all manner of cloaking and shawling
was going on, and the Barchester folk were getting themselves gone. 
Mrs. Proudie did her best to smirk at each and every one as they made
their adieux, but she was hardly successful.  Her temper had been
tried fearfully.  By slow degrees the guests went.

"Send back the carriage quick," said Ethelbert as Dr. and Mrs.
Stanhope took their departure.

The younger Stanhopes were left to the very last, and an
uncomfortable party they made with the bishop's family.  They all
went into the dining-room, and then the bishop observing that "the
lady" was alone in the drawing-room, they followed him up.  Mrs.
Proudie kept Mr. Slope and her daughters in close conversation,
resolving that he should not be indulged, nor they polluted.  The
bishop, in mortal dread of Bertie and the Jews, tried to converse
with Charlotte Stanhope about the climate of Italy.  Bertie and the
signora had no resource but in each other.

"Did you get your supper at last, Madeline?" said the impudent or
else mischievous young man.

"Oh, yes," said Madeline; "Mr. Slope was so very kind as to bring it
me.  I fear, however, he put himself to more inconvenience than I
wished."

Mrs. Proudie looked at her but said nothing.  The meaning of her look
might have been thus translated; "If ever you find yourself within
these walls again, I'll give you leave to be as impudent and affected
and as mischievous as you please."

At last the carriage returned with the three Italian servants, and La
Signora Madeline Vesey Neroni was carried out as she had been carried
in.

The lady of the palace retired to her chamber by no means contented
with the result of her first grand party at Barchester.



CHAPTER XII

Slope Versus Harding


Two or three days after the party, Mr. Harding received a note
begging him to call on Mr. Slope, at the palace, at an early hour on
the following morning.  There was nothing uncivil in the
communication, and yet the tone of it was thoroughly displeasing.  It
was as follows:

MY DEAR MR. HARDING,
Will you favour me by calling on me at the palace tomorrow morning at
9:30 A.M.  The bishop wishes me to speak to you touching the
hospital.  I hope you will excuse my naming so early an hour.  I do
so as my time is greatly occupied.  If, however, it is positively
inconvenient to you, I will change it to 10.  You will, perhaps, be
kind enough to let me have a note in reply.
Believe me to be,
My dear Mr. Harding,
Your assured friend,
OBH. SLOPE

The Palace, Monday morning, 20th August, 185-

Mr. Harding neither could nor would believe anything of the sort, and
he thought, moreover, that Mr. Slope was rather impertinent to call
himself by such a name.  His assured friend, indeed!  How many
assured friends generally fall to the lot of a man in this world? 
And by what process are they made?  And how much of such process had
taken place as yet between Mr. Harding and Mr. Slope?  Mr. Harding
could not help asking himself these questions as he read and reread
the note before him.  He answered it, however, as follows:

DEAR SIR,
I will call at the palace tomorrow at 9:30 A.M.  as you desire.
Truly yours,
S. HARDING

High Street, Barchester, Monday

And on the following morning, punctually at half-past nine, he
knocked at the palace door and asked for Mr. Slope.

The bishop had one small room allotted to him on the ground-floor,
and Mr. Slope had another.  Into this latter Mr. Harding was shown
and asked to sit down.  Mr. Slope was not yet there.  The ex-warden
stood up at the window looking into the garden and could not help
thinking how very short a time had passed since the whole of that
house had been open to him, as though he had been a child of the
family, born and bred in it.  He remembered how the old servants used
to smile as they opened the door to him; how the familiar butler
would say, when he had been absent a few hours longer than usual,
"A sight of you, Mr. Harding, is good for sore eyes;" how the fussy
housekeeper would swear that he couldn't have dined, or couldn't have
breakfasted, or couldn't have lunched.  And then, above all, he
remembered the pleasant gleam of inward satisfaction which always
spread itself over the old bishop's face whenever his friend entered
his room.

A tear came into each eye as he reflected that all this was gone. 
What use would the hospital be to him now?  He was alone in the
world, and getting old; he would soon, very soon have to go and leave
it all, as his dear old friend had gone; go, and leave the hospital,
and his accustomed place in the cathedral, and his haunts and
pleasures, to younger and perhaps wiser men.  That chanting of his! 
Perhaps, in truth, the time for it was gone by.  He felt as though
the world were sinking from his feet; as though this, this was the
time for him to turn with confidence to those hopes which he had
preached with confidence to others.  "What," said he to himself, "can
a man's religion be worth if it does not support him against the
natural melancholy of declining years?"  And as he looked out through
his dimmed eyes into the bright parterres of the bishop's garden, he
felt that he had the support which he wanted.

Nevertheless, he did not like to be thus kept waiting.  If Mr. Slope
did not really wish to see him at half-past nine o'clock, why force
him to come away from his lodgings with his breakfast in his throat? 
To tell the truth, it was policy on the part of Mr. Slope.  Mr. Slope
had made up his mind that Mr. Harding should either accept the
hospital with abject submission, or else refuse it altogether, and
had calculated that he would probably be more quick to do the latter
if he could be got to enter upon the subject in an ill-humour. 
Perhaps Mr. Slope was not altogether wrong in his calculation.

It was nearly ten when Mr. Slope hurried into the room and, muttering
something about the bishop and diocesan duties, shook Mr. Harding's
hand ruthlessly and begged him to be seated.

Now the air of superiority which this man assumed did go against the
grain with Mr. Harding, and yet he did not know how to resent it. 
The whole tendency of his mind and disposition was opposed to any
contra-assumption of grandeur on his own part, and he hadn't the
worldly spirit or quickness necessary to put down insolent
pretensions by downright and open rebuke, as the archdeacon would
have done.  There was nothing for Mr. Harding but to submit, and he
accordingly did so.

"About the hospital, Mr. Harding?" began Mr. Slope, speaking of it as
the head of a college at Cambridge might speak of some sizarship
which had to be disposed of.

Mr. Harding crossed one leg over another, and then one hand over the
other on the top of them, and looked Mr. Slope in the face; but he
said nothing.

"It's to be filled up again," said Mr. Slope.  Mr. Harding said that
he had understood so.

"Of course, you know, the income will be very much reduced,"
continued Mr. Slope.  "The bishop wished to be liberal, and he
therefore told the government that he thought it ought to be put at
not less than £450.  I think on the whole the bishop was right, for
though the services required will not be of a very onerous nature,
they will be more so than they were before.  And it is, perhaps, well
that the clergy immediately attached to the cathedral town should be
made as comfortable as the extent of the ecclesiastical means at our
disposal will allow.  Those are the bishop's ideas, and I must say
mine also."

Mr. Harding sat rubbing one hand on the other but said not a word.

"So much for the income, Mr. Harding.  The house will, of course,
remain to the warden, as before.  It should, however, I think, be
stipulated that he should paint inside every seven years, and outside
every three years, and be subject to dilapidations, in the event of
vacating, either by death or otherwise.  But this is a matter on
which the bishop must yet be consulted."

Mr. Harding still rubbed his hands and still sat silent, gazing up
into Mr. Slope's unprepossessing face.

"Then, as to the duties," continued he, "I believe, if I am rightly
informed, there can hardly be said to have been any duties hitherto,"
and he gave a sort of half-laugh, as though to pass off the
accusation in the guise of a pleasantry.

Mr. Harding thought of the happy, easy years he had passed in his old
home; of the worn-out, aged men whom he had succoured; of his good
intentions; and of his work, which had certainly been of the
lightest.  He thought of these things, doubting for a moment whether
he did or did not deserve the sarcasm.  He gave his enemy the benefit
of the doubt and did not rebuke him.  He merely observed, very
tranquilly and perhaps with too much humility, that the duties of the
situation, such as they were, had, he believed, been done to the
satisfaction of the late bishop.

Mr. Slope again smiled, and this time the smile was intended to
operate against the memory of the late bishop rather than against the
energy of the ex-warden; so it was understood by Mr. Harding.  The
colour rose to his cheeks, and he began to feel very angry.

"You must be aware, Mr. Harding, that things are a good deal changed
in Barchester," said Mr. Slope.

Mr. Harding said that he was aware of it.  "And not only in
Barchester, Mr. Harding, but in the world at large.  It is not only
in Barchester that a new man is carrying out new measures and casting
away the useless rubbish of past centuries.  The same thing is going
on throughout the country.  Work is now required from every man who
receives wages, and they who have to superintend the doing of work,
and the paying of wages, are bound to see that this rule is carried
out.  New men, Mr. Harding, are now needed and are now forthcoming in
the church, as well as in other professions."

All this was wormwood to our old friend.  He had never rated very
high his own abilities or activity, but all the feelings of his heart
were with the old clergy, and any antipathies of which his heart was
susceptible were directed against those new, busy, uncharitable,
self-lauding men, of whom Mr. Slope was so good an example.

"Perhaps," said he, "the bishop will prefer a new man at the
hospital?"

"By no means," said Mr. Slope.  "The bishop is very anxious that you
should accept the appointment, but he wishes you should understand
beforehand what will be the required duties.  In the first place, a
Sabbath-day school will be attached to the hospital."

"What!  For the old men?" asked Mr. Harding.

"No, Mr. Harding, not for the old men, but for the benefit of the
children of such of the poor of Barchester as it may suit.  The
bishop will expect that you shall attend this school and that the
teachers shall be under your inspection and care."

Mr. Harding slipped his topmost hand off the other and began to rub
the calf of the leg which was supported.

"As to the old men," continued Mr. Slope, "and the old women who are
to form a part of the hospital, the bishop is desirous that you shall
have morning and evening service on the premises every Sabbath, and
one weekday service; that you shall preach to them once at least on
Sundays; and that the whole hospital be always collected for morning
and evening prayer.  The bishop thinks that this will render it
unnecessary that any separate seats in the cathedral should be
reserved for the hospital inmates."

Mr. Slope paused, but Mr. Harding still said nothing.

"Indeed, it would be difficult to find seats for the women; on the
whole, Mr. Harding, I may as well say at once that for people of that
class the cathedral service does not appear to me the most useful--
even if it be so for any class of people."

"We will not discuss that, if you please," said Mr. Harding.

"I am not desirous of doing so; at least, not at the present moment. 
I hope, however, you fully understand the bishop's wishes about the
new establishment of the hospital; and if, as I do not doubt, I shall 
receive from you an assurance that you accord with his lordship's
views, it will give me very great pleasure to be the bearer from his
lordship to you of the presentation to the appointment."

"But if I disagree with his lordship's views?" asked Mr. Harding.

"But I hope you do not," said Mr. Slope.

"But if I do?" again asked the other.

"If such unfortunately should be the case, which I can hardly
conceive, I presume your own feelings will dictate to you the
propriety of declining the appointment."

"But if I accept the appointment and yet disagree with the bishop,
what then?"

This question rather bothered Mr. Slope.  It was true that he had
talked the matter over with the bishop and had received a sort of
authority for suggesting to Mr. Harding the propriety of a Sunday
school and certain hospital services, but he had no authority for
saying that these propositions were to be made peremptory conditions
attached to the appointment.  The bishop's idea had been that Mr.
Harding would of course consent and that the school would become,
like the rest of those new establishments in the city, under the
control of his wife and his chaplain.  Mr. Slope's idea had been more
correct.  He intended that Mr. Harding should refuse the situation
and that an ally of his own should get it, but he had not conceived
the possibility of Mr. Harding openly accepting the appointment and
as openly rejecting the conditions.

"It is not, I presume, probable," said he, "that you will accept from
the hands of the bishop a piece of preferment with a fixed
predetermination to disacknowledge the duties attached to it"

"If I become warden," said Mr. Harding, "and neglect my duty, the
bishop has means by which he can remedy the grievance."

"I hardly expected such an argument from you, or I may say the
suggestion of such a line of conduct," said Mr. Slope with a great
look of injured virtue.

"Nor did I expect such a proposition."

"I shall be glad at any rate to know what answer I am to make to his
lordship," said Mr. Slope.

"I will take an early opportunity of seeing his lordship myself,"
said Mr. Harding.

"Such an arrangement," said Mr. Slope, "will hardly give his lordship
satisfaction.  Indeed, it is impossible that the bishop should
himself see every clergyman in the diocese on every subject of
patronage that may arise.  The bishop, I believe, did see you on the
matter, and I really cannot see why he should be troubled to do so
again."

"Do you know, Mr. Slope, how long I have been officiating as a
clergyman in this city?"  Mr. Slope's wish was now nearly fulfilled. 
Mr. Harding had become angry, and it was probable that he might
commit himself.

"I really do not see what that has to do with the question.  You
cannot think the bishop would be justified in allowing you to regard
as a sinecure a situation that requires an active man merely because
you have been employed for many years in the cathedral."

"But it might induce the bishop to see me, if I asked him to do so. 
I shall consult my friends in this matter, Mr. Slope; but I mean to
be guilty of no subterfuge--you may tell the bishop that as I
altogether disagree with his views about the hospital, I shall
decline the situation if I find that any such conditions are attached
to it as those you have suggested;" and so saying, Mr. Harding took
his hat and went his way.

Mr. Slope was contented.  He considered himself at liberty to accept
Mr. Harding's last speech as an absolute refusal of the appointment. 
At least, he so represented it to the bishop and to Mrs. Proudie.

"That is very surprising," said the bishop.

"Not at all," said Mrs. Proudie; "you little know how determined the
whole set of them are to withstand your authority."

"But Mr. Harding was so anxious for it," said the bishop.

"Yes," said Mr. Slope, "if he can hold it without the slightest
acknowledgement of your lordship's jurisdiction."

"That is out of the question," said the bishop.

"I should imagine it to be quite so," said the chaplain.

"Indeed, I should think so," said the lady.

"I really am sorry for it," said the bishop.

"I don't know that there is much cause for sorrow," said the lady. 
"Mr. Quiverful is a much more deserving man, more in need of it, and
one who will make himself much more useful in the close neighbourhood
of the palace."

"I suppose I had better see Quiverful?" said the chaplain.

"I suppose you had," said the bishop.



CHAPTER XIII

The Rubbish Cart


Mr. Harding was not a happy man as he walked down the palace pathway
and stepped out into the close.  His preferment and pleasant house
were a second time gone from him, but that he could endure.  He had
been schooled and insulted by a man young enough to be his son, but
that he could put up with.  He could even draw from the very injuries
which had been inflicted on him some of that consolation which we may
believe martyrs always receive from the injustice of their own
sufferings, and which is generally proportioned in its strength to
the extent of cruelty with which martyrs are treated.  He had
admitted to his daughter that he wanted the comfort of his old home,
and yet he could have returned to his lodgings in the High Street, if
not with exaltation, at least with satisfaction, had that been all. 
But the venom of the chaplain's harangue had worked into his blood
and sapped the life of his sweet contentment.

"New men are carrying out new measures and are carting away the
useless rubbish of past centuries!"  What cruel words these had been;
and how often are they now used with all the heartless cruelty of a
Slope!  A man is sufficiently condemned if it can only be shown that
either in politics or religion he does not belong to some new school
established within the last score of years.  He may then regard
himself as rubbish and expect to be carted away.  A man is nothing
now unless he has within him a full appreciation of the new era, an
era in which it would seem that neither honesty nor truth is very
desirable, but in which success is the only touchstone of merit.  We
must laugh at everything that is established.  Let the joke be ever
so bad, ever so untrue to the real principles of joking; nevertheless
we must laugh--or else beware the cart.  We must talk, think, and
live up to the spirit of the times, and write up to it too, if that
cacoethes be upon us, or else we are nought.  New men and new
measures, long credit and few scruples, great success or wonderful
ruin, such are now the tastes of Englishmen who know how to live. 
Alas, alas!  Under such circumstances Mr. Harding could not but feel
that he was an Englishman who did not know how to live.  This new
doctrine of Mr. Slope and the rubbish cart, new at least at
Barchester, sadly disturbed his equanimity.

"The same thing is going on throughout the whole country! ....  Work
is now required from every man who receives wages!"  And had he been
living all his life receiving wages and doing no work?  Had he in
truth so lived as to be now in his old age justly reckoned as rubbish
fit only to be hidden away in some huge dust-hole?  The school of men
to whom he professes to belong, the Grantlys, the Gwynnes, and the 
old high set of Oxford divines, are afflicted with no such self-
accusations as these which troubled Mr. Harding.  They, as a rule,
are as satisfied with the wisdom and propriety of their own conduct
as can be any Mr. Slope, or any Dr. Proudie, with his own.  But
unfortunately for himself Mr. Harding had little of this self-
reliance.  When he heard himself designated as rubbish by the Slopes
of the world, he had no other resource than to make inquiry within
his own bosom as to the truth of the designation.  Alas, alas!  The
evidence seemed generally to go against him.

He had professed to himself in the bishop's parlour that in these
coming sources of the sorrow of age, in these fits of sad regret from
which the latter years of few reflecting men can be free, religion
would suffice to comfort him.  Yes, religion could console him for
the loss of any worldly good, but was his religion of that active
sort which would enable him so to repent of misspent years as to pass
those that were left to him in a spirit of hope for the future?  And
such repentance itself, is it not a work of agony and of tears?  It
is very easy to talk of repentance, but a man has to walk over hot
ploughshares before he can complete it; to be skinned alive as was
St. Bartholomew; to be stuck full of arrows as was St. Sebastian; to
lie broiling on a gridiron like St. Lorenzo!  How if his past life
required such repentance as this?  Had he the energy to go through
with it?

Mr. Harding, after leaving the palace, walked slowly for an hour or
so beneath the shady elms of the close and then betook himself to his
daughter's house.  He had at any rate made up his mind that he would
go out to Plumstead to consult Dr. Grantly, and that he would in the
first instance tell Eleanor what had occurred.

And now he was doomed to undergo another misery.  Mr. Slope had
forestalled him at the widow's house.  He had called there on the
preceding afternoon.  He could not, he had said, deny himself the
pleasure of telling Mrs. Bold that her father was about to return to
the pretty house at Hiram's Hospital.  He had been instructed by the
bishop to inform Mr. Harding that the appointment would now be made
at once.  The bishop was of course only too happy to be able to be
the means of restoring to Mr. Harding the preferment which he had so
long adorned.  And then by degrees Mr. Slope had introduced the
subject of the pretty school which he hoped before long to see
attached to the hospital.  He had quite fascinated Mrs. Bold by his
description of this picturesque, useful, and charitable appendage,
and she had gone so far as to say that she had no doubt her father
would approve and that she herself would gladly undertake a class.

Anyone who had heard the entirely different tone and seen the
entirely different manner in which Mr. Slope had spoken of this
projected institution to the daughter and to the father could not
have failed to own that Mr. Slope was a man of genius.  He said 
nothing to Mrs. Bold about the hospital sermons and services, nothing
about the exclusion of the old men from the cathedral, nothing about
dilapidation and painting, nothing about carting away the rubbish. 
Eleanor had said to herself that certainly she did not like Mr. Slope
personally, but that he was a very active, zealous clergyman and
would no doubt be useful in Barchester.  All this paved the way for
much additional misery to Mr. Harding.

Eleanor put on her happiest face as she heard her father on the
stairs, for she thought she had only to congratulate him; but
directly she saw his face she knew that there was but little matter
for congratulation.  She had seen him with the same weary look of
sorrow on one or two occasions before, and remembered it well.  She
had seen him when he first read that attack upon himself in The
Jupiter which had ultimately caused him to resign the hospital, and
she had seen him also when the archdeacon had persuaded him to remain
there against his own sense of propriety and honour.  She knew at a
glance that his spirit was in deep trouble.

"Oh, Papa, what is it?" said she, putting down her boy to crawl upon
the floor.

"I came to tell you, my dear," said he, "that I am going out to
Plumstead: you won't come with me, I suppose?"

"To Plumstead, Papa?  Shall you stay there?"

"I suppose I shall, to-night: I must consult the archdeacon about
this weary hospital.  Ah me!  I wish I had never thought of it
again."

"Why, Papa, what is the matter?"

"I've been with Mr. Slope, my dear, and he isn't the pleasantest
companion in the world, at least not to me."  Eleanor gave a sort of
half-blush, but she was wrong if she imagined that her father in any
way alluded to her acquaintance with Mr. Slope.

"Well, Papa."

"He wants to turn the hospital into a Sunday-school and a preaching-
house, and I suppose he will have his way.  I do not feel myself
adapted for such an establishment, and therefore, I suppose, I must
refuse the appointment."

"What would be the harm of the school, Papa?"

"The want of a proper schoolmaster, my dear."

"But that would of course be supplied."

"Mr. Slope wishes to supply it by making me his schoolmaster.  But as
I am hardly fit for such work, I intend to decline."

"Oh, Papa! Mr. Slope doesn't intend that.  He was here yesterday, and
what he intends -"

"He was here yesterday, was he?" asked Mr. Harding.

"Yes, Papa."

"And talking about the hospital?"

"He was saying how glad he would be, and the bishop too, to see you
back there again.  And then he spoke about the Sunday-school; and to
tell the truth I agreed with him; and I thought you would have done
so too.  Mr. Slope spoke of a school, not inside the hospital, but
just connected with it, of which you would be the patron and visitor;
and I thought you would have liked such a school as that; and I
promised to look after it and to take a class--and it all seemed so
very--.  But, oh, Papa!  I shall be so miserable if I find I have
done wrong."

"Nothing wrong at all, my dear," said he gently, very gently
rejecting his daughter's caress.  There can be nothing wrong in your
wishing to make yourself useful; indeed, you ought to do so by all
means.  Everyone must now exert himself who would not choose to go to
the wall."  Poor Mr. Harding thus attempted in his misery to preach
the new doctrine to his child.  "Himself or herself, it's all the
same," he continued; "you will be quite right, my dear, to do
something of this sort; but--"

"Well, Papa."

I am not quite sure that if I were you I would select Mr. Slope for
my guide."

"But I never have done so and never shall."

"It would he very wicked of me to speak evil of him, for to tell the
truth I know no evil of him, but I am not quite sure that he is
honest.  That he is not gentlemanlike in his manners, of that I am
quite sure."

"I never thought of taking him for my guide, Papa."

"As for myself, my dear," continued he, "we know the old proverb--
'It's bad teaching an old dog tricks.'  I must decline the Sunday-
school, and shall therefore probably decline the hospital also.  But
I will first see your brother-in-law."  So he took up his hat, kissed
the baby, and withdrew, leaving Eleanor in as low spirits as himself.

All this was a great aggravation to his misery.  He had so few with
whom to sympathize that he could not afford to be cut off from the
one whose sympathy was of the most value to him.  And yet it seemed 
probable that this would be the case.  He did not own to himself that
he wished his daughter to hate Mr. Slope, yet had she expressed such
a feeling there would have been very little bitterness in the rebuke
he would have given her for so uncharitable a state of mind.  The
fact, however, was that she was on friendly terms with Mr. Slope,
that she coincided with his views, adhered at once to his plans, and
listened with delight to his teaching.  Mr. Harding hardly wished his
daughter to hate the man, but he would have preferred that to her
loving him.

He walked away to the inn to order a fly, went home to put up his
carpet-bag, and then started for Plumstead.  There was, at any rate,
no danger that the archdeacon would fraternize with Mr. Slope; but
then he would recommend internecine war, public appeals, loud
reproaches, and all the paraphernalia of open battle.  Now that
alternative was hardly more to Mr. Harding's taste than the other.

When Mr. Harding reached the parsonage, he found that the archdeacon
was out and would not be home till dinnertime, so he began his
complaint to his elder daughter.  Mrs. Grantly entertained quite as
strong an antagonism to Mr. Slope as did her husband; she was also
quite as alive to the necessity of combating the Proudie faction, of
supporting the old church interest of the close, of keeping in her
own set such of the loaves and fishes as duly belonged to it; and was
quite as well prepared as her lord to carry on the battle without
giving or taking quarter.  Not that she was a woman prone to
quarrelling, or ill-inclined to live at peace with her clerical
neighbours, but she felt, as did the archdeacon, that the presence of
Mr. Slope in Barchester was an insult to everyone connected with the
late bishop and that his assumed dominion in the diocese was a
spiritual injury to her husband.  Hitherto people had little guessed
how bitter Mrs. Grantly could be.  She lived on the best of terms
with all the rectors' wives around her.  She had been popular with
all the ladies connected with the close.  Though much the wealthiest
of the ecclesiastical matrons of the county, she had so managed her
affairs that her carriage and horses had given umbrage to none.  She
had never thrown herself among the county grandees so as to excite
the envy of other clergymen's wives.  She never talked too loudly of
earls and countesses, or boasted that she gave her governess sixty
pounds a year, or her cook seventy.  Mrs. Grantly had lived the life
of a wise, discreet, peace-making woman, and the people of Barchester
were surprised at the amount of military vigour she displayed as
general of the feminine Grantlyite forces.

Mrs. Grantly soon learned that her sister Eleanor had promised to
assist Mr. Slope in the affairs of the hospital school, and it was on
this point that her attention first fixed itself.

"How can Eleanor endure him?" said she.

"He is a very crafty man," said her father, "and his craft has been
successful in making Eleanor think that he is a meek, charitable,
good clergyman.  God forgive me, if I wrong him, but such is not his
true character in my opinion."

"His true character, indeed!" said she with something approaching
scorn for her father's moderation.  "I only hope he won't have craft
enough to make Eleanor forget herself and her position."

"Do you mean marry him?" said he, startled out of his usual demeanour
by the abruptness and horror of so dreadful a proposition.

"What is there so improbable in it?  Of course that would be his own
object if he thought he had any chance of success.  Eleanor has a
thousand a year entirely at her own disposal, and what better fortune
could fall to Mr. Slope's lot than the transferring of the disposal
of such a fortune to himself?"

"But you can't think she likes him, Susan?"

"Why not?" said Susan.  "Why shouldn't she like him?  He's just the
sort of man to get on with a woman left, as she is, with no one to
look after her."

"Look after her!" said the unhappy father; "don't we look after her?"

"Ah, Papa, how innocent you are!  Of course it was to be expected
that Eleanor should marry again.  I should be the last to advise her
against it, if she would only wait the proper time and then marry at
least a gentleman."

"But you don't really mean to say that you suppose Eleanor has ever
thought of marrying Mr. Slope?  Why, Mr. Bold has only been dead a
year."

"Eighteen months," said his daughter.  "But I don't suppose Eleanor
has ever thought about it.  It is very probable, though, that he has;
and that he will try and make her do so; and that he will succeed
too, if we don't take care what we are about."

This was quite a new phase of the affair to poor Mr. Harding.  To
have thrust upon him as his son-in-law, as the husband of his
favourite child, the only man in the world whom he really positively
disliked would be a misfortune which he felt he would not know how to
endure patiently.  But then, could there be any ground for so
dreadful a surmise?  In all worldly matters he was apt to look upon
the opinion of his eldest daughter as one generally sound and
trustworthy.  In her appreciation of character, of motives, and the
probable conduct both of men and women she was usually not far wrong. 
She had early foreseen the marriage of Eleanor and John Bold; she had
at a glance deciphered the character of the new bishop and his
chaplain; could it possibly be that her present surmise should ever 
come forth as true?

"But you don't think that she likes him?" said Mr. Harding again.

"Well, Papa, I can't say that I think she dislikes him as she ought
to do.  Why is he visiting there as a confidential friend, when he
never ought to have been admitted inside the house?  Why is it that
she speaks to him about your welfare and your position as she clearly
has done?  At the bishop's party the other night I saw her talking to
him for half an hour at the stretch."

"I thought Mr. Slope seemed to talk to nobody there but that daughter
of Stanhope's," said Mr. Harding, wishing to defend his child.

"Oh, Mr. Slope is a cleverer man than you think of, Papa, and keeps
more than one iron in the fire."

To give Eleanor her due, any suspicion as to the slightest
inclination on her part towards Mr. Slope was a wrong to her.  She
had no more idea of marrying Mr. Slope than she had of marrying the
bishop, and the idea that Mr. Slope would present himself as a suitor
had never occurred to her.  Indeed, to give her her due again, she
had never thought about suitors since her husband's death.  But
nevertheless it was true that she had overcome all that repugnance to
the man which was so strongly felt for him by the rest of the Grantly
faction.  She had forgiven him his sermon.  She had forgiven him his
Low Church tendencies, his Sabbath-schools, and puritanical
observances.  She had forgiven his pharisaical arrogance and even his
greasy face and oily, vulgar manners.  Having agreed to overlook such
offences as these, why should she not in time be taught to regard Mr.
Slope as a suitor?

And as to him, it must also be affirmed that he was hitherto equally
innocent of the crime imputed to him.  How it had come to pass that a
man whose eyes were generally so widely open to everything around him
had not perceived that this young widow was rich as well as beautiful
cannot probably now be explained.  But such was the fact.  Mr. Slope
had ingratiated himself with Mrs. Bold, merely as he had done with
other ladies, in order to strengthen his party in the city.  He
subsequently amended his error, but it was not till after the
interview between him and Mr. Harding.



CHAPTER XIV

The New Champion


The archdeacon did not return to the parsonage till close upon the
hour of dinner, and there was therefore no time to discuss matters
before that important ceremony.  He seemed to be in an especial good
humour and welcomed his father-in-law with a sort of jovial
earnestness that was usual with him when things on which be was
intent were going on as he would have them.

"It's all settled, my dear," said he to his wife as he washed his
hands in his dressing-room, while she, according to her wont, sat
listening in the bedroom; "Arabin has agreed to accept the living. 
He'll be here next week."  And the archdeacon scrubbed his hands and
rubbed his face with a violent alacrity, which showed that Arabin's
coming was a great point gained.

"Will he come here to Plumstead?" said the wife.

"He has promised to stay a month with us," said the archdeacon, "so
that he may see what his parish is like.  You'll like Arabin very
much.  He's a gentleman in every respect and full of humour."

"He's very queer, isn't he?" asked the lady.

"Well--he is a little odd in some of his fancies, but there's nothing
about him you won't like.  He is as staunch a churchman as there is
at Oxford.  I really don't know what we should do without Arabin. 
It's a great thing for me to have him so near me, and if anything can
put Slope down, Arabin will do it."

The Reverend Francis Arabin was a fellow of Lazarus, the favoured
disciple of the great Dr. Gwynne, a High Churchman at all points--so
high, indeed, that at one period of his career he had all but toppled
over into the cesspool of Rome--a poet and also a polemical writer, a
great pet in the common-rooms at Oxford, an eloquent clergyman, a
droll, odd, humorous, energetic, conscientious man, and, as the
archdeacon had boasted of him, a thorough gentleman.  As he will
hereafter be brought more closely to our notice, it is now only
necessary to add that he had just been presented to the vicarage of
St. Ewold by Dr. Grantly, in whose gift as archdeacon the living lay. 
St. Ewold is a parish lying just without the city of Barchester.  The
suburbs of the new town, indeed, are partly within its precincts, and
the pretty church and parsonage are not much above a mile distant
from the city gate.

St Ewold is not a rich piece of preferment--it is worth some three or
four hundred a year at most, and has generally been held by a
clergyman attached to the cathedral choir.  The archdeacon, however,
felt, when the living on this occasion became vacant, that it
imperatively behoved him to aid the force of his party with some
tower of strength, if any such tower could be got to occupy St.
Ewold's.  He had discussed the matter with his brethren in
Barchester, not in any weak spirit as the holder of patronage to be
used for his own or his family's benefit, but as one to whom was
committed a trust on the due administration of which much of the
church's welfare might depend.  He had submitted to them the name of
Mr. Arabin as though the choice had rested with them all in conclave,
and they had unanimously admitted that, if Mr. Arabin would accept
St. Ewold's, no better choice could possibly be made.

If Mr. Arabin would accept St. Ewold's!  There lay the difficulty. 
Mr. Arabin was a man standing somewhat prominently before the world,
that is, before the Church of England world.  He was not a rich man,
it is true, for he held no preferment but his fellowship, but he was
a man not over-anxious for riches, not married of course, and one
whose time was greatly taken up in discussing, both in print and on
platforms, the privileges and practices of the church to which he
belonged.  As the archdeacon had done battle for its temporalities,
so did Mr. Arabin do battle for its spiritualities, and both had done
so conscientiously; that is, not so much each for his own benefit as
for that of others.

Holding such a position as Mr. Arabin did, there was much reason to
doubt whether he would consent to become the parson of St. Ewold's,
and Dr. Grantly had taken the trouble to go himself to Oxford on the
matter.  Dr. Gwynne and Dr. Grantly together had succeeded in
persuading this eminent divine that duty required him to go to
Barchester.  There were wheels within wheels in this affair.  For
some time past Mr. Arabin had been engaged in a tremendous
controversy with no less a person than Mr. Slope, respecting the
apostolic succession.  These two gentlemen had never seen each other,
but they had been extremely bitter in print.  Mr. Slope had
endeavoured to strengthen his cause by calling Mr. Arabin an owl, and
Mr. Arabin had retaliated by hinting that Mr. Slope was an infidel. 
This battle had been commenced in the columns of The Jupiter, a
powerful newspaper, the manager of which was very friendly to Mr.
Slope's view of the case.  The matter, however, had become too
tedious for the readers of The Jupiter, and a little note had
therefore been appended to one of Mr. Slope's most telling
rejoinders, in which it had been stated that no further letters from
the reverend gentlemen could be inserted except as advertisements.

Other methods of publication were, however, found, less expensive
than advertisements in The Jupiter, and the war went on merrily.  Mr.
Slope declared that the main part of the consecration of a clergyman
was the self-devotion of the inner man to the duties of the ministry. 
Mr. Arabin contended that a man was not consecrated at all, had,
indeed, no single attribute of a clergyman, unless he became so
through the imposition of some bishop's hands, who had become a
bishop through the imposition of other hands, and so on in a direct
line to one of the apostles.  Each had repeatedly hung the other on
the horns of a dilemma, but neither seemed to be a whit the worse for
the hanging; and so the war went on merrily.

Whether or no the near neighbourhood of the foe may have acted in any
way as an inducement to Mr. Arabin to accept the living of St. Ewold
we will not pretend to say, but it had at any rate been settled in
Dr. Gwynne's library, at Lazarus, that he would accept it and that he
would lend his assistance towards driving the enemy out of
Barchester, or, at any rate, silencing him while he remained there. 
Mr. Arabin intended to keep his rooms at Oxford and to have the
assistance of a curate at St. Ewold, but he promised to give as much
time as possible to the neighbourhood of Barchester, and from so
great a man Dr. Grantly was quite satisfied with such a promise.  It
was no small part of the satisfaction derivable from such an
arrangement that Bishop Proudie would be forced to institute into a
living immediately under his own nose the enemy of his favourite
chaplain.

All through dinner the archdeacon's good humour shone brightly in his
face.  He ate of the good things heartily, he drank wine with his
wife and daughter, he talked pleasantly of his doings at Oxford, told
his father-in-law that he ought to visit Dr. Gwynne at Lazarus, and
launched out again in praise of Mr. Arabin.

"Is Mr. Arabin married, Papa?" asked Griselda.

"No, my dear, the fellow of a college is never married."

"Is he a young man, Papa?"

"About forty, I believe," said the archdeacon.

"Oh!" said Griselda.  Had her father said eighty, Mr. Arabin would
not have appeared to her to be very much older.

When the two gentlemen were left alone over their wine, Mr. Harding
told his tale of woe.  But even this, sad as it was, did not much
diminish the archdeacon's good humour, though it greatly added to his
pugnacity.

"He can't do it," said Dr. Grantly over and over again as his father-
in-law explained to him the terms on which the new warden of the
hospital was to be appointed; "he can't do it.  What he says is not
worth the trouble of listening to.  He can't alter the duties of the
place."

"Who can't?" asked the ex-warden.

"Neither the bishop nor the chaplain, nor yet the bishop's wife, who,
I take it, has really more to say to such matters than either of the
other two.  The whole body corporate of the palace together have no
power to turn the warden of the hospital into a Sunday-schoolmaster."

"But the bishop has the power to appoint whom he pleases, and--"

"I don't know that; I rather think he'll find he has no such power. 
Let him try it, and see what the press will say.  For once we shall
have the popular cry on our side.  But Proudie, ass as he is, knows
the world too well to get such a hornet's nest about his ears."

Mr. Harding winced at the idea of the press.  He had had enough of
that sort of publicity, and was unwilling to be shown up a second
time either as a monster or as a martyr.  He gently remarked that he
hoped the newspapers would not get hold of his name again and then
suggested that perhaps it would be better that he should abandon his
object.  "I am getting old," said he, "and after all I doubt whether
I am fit to undertake new duties."

"New duties?" said the archdeacon; "don't I tell you there shall be
no new duties?"

"Or perhaps old duties either," said Mr. Harding; "I think I will
remain content as I am."  The picture of Mr. Slope carting away the
rubbish was still present to his mind.

The archdeacon drank off his glass of claret and prepared himself to
be energetic.  "I do hope," said he, "that you are not going to be so
weak as to allow such a man as Mr. Slope to deter you from doing what
you know it is your duty to do.  You know it is your duty to resume
your place at the hospital now that parliament has so settled the
stipend as to remove those difficulties which induced you to resign
it.  You cannot deny this, and should your timidity now prevent you
from doing so, your conscience will hereafter never forgive you," and
as he finished this clause of his speech, he pushed over the bottle
to his companion.

"Your conscience will never forgive you," he continued.  "You
resigned the place from conscientious scruples, scruples which I
greatly respected, though I did not share them.  All your friends
respected them, and you left your old house as rich in reputation as
you were ruined in fortune.  It is now expected that you will return. 
Dr. Gwynne was saying only the other day--"

"Dr. Gwynne does not reflect how much older a man I am now than when
he last saw me."

"Old--nonsense," said the archdeacon; "you never thought yourself old
till you listened to the impudent trash of that coxcomb at the
palace."

"I shall be sixty-five if I live till November," said Mr. Harding.

"And seventy-five, if you live till November ten years," said the
archdeacon.  "And you bid fair to be as efficient then as you were
ten years ago.  But for heaven's sake let us have no pretence in this
matter.  Your plea of old age is a pretence.  But you're not drinking
your wine.  It is only a pretence.  The fact is, you are half-afraid
of this Slope and would rather subject yourself to comparative
poverty and discomfort than come to blows with a man who will trample
on you, if you let him."

"I certainly don't like coming to blows, if I can help it."

"Nor I neither--but sometimes we can't help it.  This man's object is
to induce you to refuse the hospital, that he may put some creature
of his own into it; that he may show his power and insult us all by
insulting you, whose cause and character are so intimately bound up
with that of the chapter.  You owe it to us all to resist him in
this, even if you have no solicitude for yourself.  But surely, for
your own sake, you will not be so lily-livered as to fall into this
trap which he has baited for you and let him take the very bread out
of your mouth without a struggle."

Mr. Harding did not like being called lily-livered and was rather
inclined to resent it.  "I doubt there is any true courage," said he,
"in squabbling for money."

"If honest men did not squabble for money, in this wicked world of
ours, the dishonest men would get it all, and I do not see that the
cause of virtue would be much improved.  No--we must use the means
which we have.  If we were to carry your argument home, we might give
away every shilling of revenue which the church has, and I presume
you are not prepared to say that the church would be strengthened by
such a sacrifice."  The archdeacon filled his glass and then emptied
it, drinking with much reverence a silent toast to the well-being and
permanent security of those temporalities which were so dear to his
soul.

"I think all quarrels between a clergyman and his bishop should be
avoided," said Mr. Harding.

"I think so too, but it is quite as much the duty of the bishop to
look to that as of his inferior.  I tell you what, my friend; I'll
see the bis