hop in this matter--that is, if you will allow me--and you
may be sure I will not compromise you.  My opinion is that all this
trash about the Sunday-schools and the sermons has originated wholly
with Slope and Mrs. Proudie and that the bishop knows nothing about
it.  The bishop can't very well refuse to see me, and I'll come upon
him when he has neither his wife nor his chaplain by him.  I think
you'll find that it will end in his sending you the appointment
without any condition whatever.  And as to the seats in the
cathedral, we may safely leave that to Mr. Dean.  I believe the fool
positively thinks that the bishop could walk away with the cathedral
if he pleased."

And so the matter was arranged between them.  Mr. Harding had come
expressly for advice, and therefore felt himself bound to take the
advice given him.  He had known, moreover, beforehand that the
archdeacon would not hear of his giving the matter up, and
accordingly, though he had in perfect good faith put forward his own
views, he was prepared to yield.

They therefore went into the drawing-room in good humour with each
other, and the evening passed pleasantly in prophetic discussions on
the future wars of Arabin and Slope.  The frogs and the mice would be
nothing to them, nor the angers of Agamemnon and Achilles.  How the
archdeacon rubbed his hands and plumed himself on the success of his
last move.  He could not himself descend into the arena with Slope,
but Arabin would have no such scruples.  Arabin was exactly the man
for such work, and the only man whom he knew that was fit for it.

The archdeacon's good humour and high buoyancy continued till, when
reclining on his pillow, Mrs. Grantly commenced to give him her view
of the state of affairs at Barchester.  And then certainly he was
startled.  The last words he said that night were as follows:

"If she does, by heaven I'll never speak to her again.  She dragged
me into the mire once, but I'll not pollute myself with such filth as
that--"  And the archdeacon gave a shudder which shook the whole
room, so violently was he convulsed with the thought which then
agitated his mind.

Now in this matter the widow Bold was scandalously ill-treated by her
relatives.  She had spoken to the man three or four times, and had
expressed her willingness to teach in a Sunday-school.  Such was the
full extent of her sins in the matter of Mr. Slope.  Poor Eleanor! 
But time will show.

The next morning Mr. Harding returned to Barchester, no further word
having been spoken in his hearing respecting Mr. Slope's acquaintance
with his younger daughter.  But he observed that the archdeacon at
breakfast was less cordial than he had been on the preceding evening.



CHAPTER XV

The Widow's Suitors


Mr. Slope lost no time in availing himself of the bishop's permission
to see Mr. Quiverful, and it was in his interview with this worthy
pastor that he first learned that Mrs. Bold was worth the wooing.  He
rode out to Puddingdale to communicate to the embryo warden the
goodwill of the bishop in his favour, and during the discussion on
the matter it was not unnatural that the pecuniary resources of Mr.
Harding and his family should become the subject of remark.

Mr. Quiverful with his fourteen children and his four hundred a year
was a very poor man, and the prospect of this new preferment, which
was to be held together with his living, was very grateful to him. 
To what clergyman so circumstanced would not such a prospect be very 
grateful?  But Mr. Quiverful had long been acquainted with Mr.
Harding, and had received kindness at his hands, so that his heart
mis-gave him as he thought of supplanting a friend at the hospital. 
Nevertheless, he was extremely civil, cringingly civil, to Mr. Slope;
treated him quite as the great man; entreated this great man to do
him the honour to drink a glass of sherry, at which, as it was very
poor Marsala, the now pampered Slope turned up his nose; and ended by
declaring his extreme obligation to the bishop and Mr. Slope and his
great desire to accept the hospital, if--if it were certainly the
case that Mr. Harding had refused it.

What man as needy as Mr. Quiverful would have been more
disinterested?

"Mr. Harding did positively refuse it," said Mr. Slope with a certain
air of offended dignity, "when he heard of the conditions to which
the appointment is now subjected.  Of course you understand, Mr.
Quiverful, that the same conditions will be imposed on yourself."

Mr. Quiverful cared nothing for the conditions.  He would have
undertaken to preach any number of sermons Mr. Slope might have
chosen to dictate and to pass every remaining hour of his Sundays
within the walls of a Sunday-school.  What sacrifices, or at any
rate, what promises would have been too much to make for such an
addition to his income and for such a house!  But his mind still
recurred to Mr. Harding.

"To be sure," said he; "Mr. Harding's daughter is very rich, and why
should he trouble himself with the hospital?"

"You mean Mrs. Grantly," said Slope.

"I meant his widowed daughter," said the other.  "Mrs. Bold has
twelve hundred a year of her own, and I suppose Mr. Harding means to
live with her."

"Twelve hundred a year of her own!" said Slope, and very shortly
afterwards took his leave, avoiding, as far as it was possible for
him to do, any further allusion to the hospital.  Twelve hundred a
year! said he to himself as he rode slowly home.  If it were the fact
that Mrs. Bold had twelve hundred a year of her own, what a fool
would he be to oppose her father's return to his old place.  The
train of Mr. Slope's ideas will probably be plain to all my readers. 
Why should he not make the twelve hundred a year his own?  And if he
did so, would it not be well for him to have a father-in-law
comfortably provided with the good things of this world?  Would it
not, moreover, be much more easy for him to gain the daughter if he
did all in his power to forward the father's views?

These questions presented themselves to him in a very forcible way,
and yet there were many points of doubt.  If he resolved to restore
to Mr. Harding his former place, he must take the necessary steps for
doing so at once; he must immediately talk over the bishop, quarrel
on the matter with Mrs. Proudie whom he knew he could not talk over,
and let Mr. Quiverful know that he had been a little too precipitate
as to Mr. Harding's positive refusal.  That he could effect all this
he did not doubt, but he did not wish to effect it for nothing.  He
did not wish to give way to Mr. Harding and then be rejected by the
daughter.  He did not wish to lose one influential friend before he
had gained another.

And thus he rode home, meditating many things in his mind.  It
occurred to him that Mrs. Bold was sister-in-law to the archdeacon
and that not even for twelve hundred a year would he submit to that
imperious man.  A rich wife was a great desideratum to him, but
success in his profession was still greater; there were, moreover,
other rich women who might be willing to become wives; and after all,
this twelve hundred a year might, when inquired into, melt away into
some small sum utterly beneath his notice.  Then also he remembered
that Mrs. Bold had a son.

Another circumstance also much influenced him, though it was one
which may almost be said to have influenced him against his will. 
The vision of the Signora Neroni was perpetually before his eyes.  It
would be too much to say that Mr. Slope was lost in love, but yet he
thought, and kept continually thinking, that he had never seen so
beautiful a woman.  He was a man whose nature was open to such
impulses, and the wiles of the Italianized charmer had been
thoroughly successful in imposing upon his thoughts.  We will not
talk about his heart: not that he had no heart, but because his heart
had little to do with his present feelings.  His taste had been
pleased, his eyes charmed, and his vanity gratified.  He had been
dazzled by a sort of loveliness which he had never before seen and
had been caught by an easy, free, voluptuous manner which was
perfectly new to him.  He had never been so tempted before, and the
temptation was now irresistible.  He had not owned to himself that he
cared for this woman more than for others around him, but yet he
thought often of the time when he might see her next and made, almost
unconsciously, little cunning plans for seeing her frequently.

He had called at Dr. Stanhope's house the day after the bishop's
party, and then the warmth of his admiration had been fed with fresh
fuel.  If the signora had been kind in her manner and flattering in
her speech when lying upon the bishop's sofa, with the eyes of so
many on her, she had been much more so in her mother's drawing-room,
with no one present but her sister to repress either her nature or
her art.  Mr. Slope had thus left her quite bewildered, and could not
willingly admit into his brain any scheme a part of which would be
the necessity of his abandoning all further special friendship with
this lady.

And so he slowly rode along, very meditative.

And here the author must beg it to be remembered that Mr. Slope was
not in all things a bad man.  His motives, like those of most men,
were mixed, and though his conduct was generally very different from
that which we would wish to praise, it was actuated perhaps as often
as that of the majority of the world by a desire to do his duty.  He
believed in the religion which he taught, harsh, unpalatable,
uncharitable as that religion was.  He believed those whom he wished
to get under his hoof, the Grantlys and Gwynnes of the church, to be
the enemies of that religion.  He believed himself to be a pillar of
strength, destined to do great things, and with that subtle, selfish,
ambiguous sophistry to which the minds of all men are so subject, he
had taught himself to think that in doing much for the promotion of
his own interests, he was doing much also for the promotion of
religion.  But Mr. Slope had never been an immoral man.  Indeed, he
had resisted temptations to immorality with a strength of purpose
that was creditable to him.  He had early in life devoted himself to
works which were not compatible with the ordinary pleasures of youth,
and he had abandoned such pleasures not without a struggle.  It must
therefore be conceived that he did not admit to himself that he
warmly admired the beauty of a married woman without heart-felt
stings of conscience, and to pacify that conscience he had to teach
himself that the nature of his admiration was innocent.

And thus he rode along meditative and ill at ease.  His conscience
had not a word to say against his choosing the widow and her fortune. 
That he looked upon as a godly work rather than otherwise; as a deed
which, if carried through, would redound to his credit as a
Christian.  On that side lay no future remorse, no conduct which he
might probably have to forget, no inward stings.  If it should turn
out to be really the fact that Mrs. Bold had twelve hundred a year at
her own disposal, Mr. Slope would rather look upon it as a duty which
he owed his religion to make himself the master of the wife and the
money; as a duty too, in which some amount of self-sacrifice would be
necessary.  He would have to give up his friendship with the signora,
his resistance to Mr. Harding, his antipathy--no, he found on mature
self-examination that he could not bring himself to give up his
antipathy to Dr. Grantly.  He would marry the lady as the enemy of
her brother-in-law if such an arrangement suited her; if not, she
must look elsewhere for a husband.

It was with such resolve as this that he reached Barchester.  He
would at once ascertain what the truth might be as to the lady's
wealth, and having done this he would be ruled by circumstances in
his conduct respecting the hospital.  If he found that he could turn
round and secure the place for Mr. Harding without much self-
sacrifice, he would do so; but if not, he would woo the daughter in
opposition to the father.  But in no case would he succumb to the
archdeacon.

He saw his horse taken round to the stable and immediately went forth
to commence his inquiries.  To give Mr. Slope his due, he was not a
man who ever let much grass grow under his feet.

Poor Eleanor!  She was doomed to be the intended victim of more
schemes than one.

About the time that Mr. Slope was visiting the vicar of Puddingdale a
discussion took place respecting her charms and wealth at Dr.
Stanhope's house in the close.  There had been morning callers there,
and people had told some truth and also some falsehood respecting the
property which John Bold had left behind him.  By degrees the
visitors went, and as the doctor went with them, and as the doctor's
wife had not made her appearance, Charlotte Stanhope and her brother
were left together.  He was sitting idly at the table, scrawling
caricatures of Barchester notables, then yawning, then turning over a
book or two, and evidently at a loss how to kill his time without
much labour.

"You haven't done much, Bertie, about getting any orders," said his
sister.

"Orders!" said he; "who on earth is there at Barchester to give one
orders?  Who among the people here could possibly think it worth his
while to have his head done into marble?"

"Then you mean to give up your profession," said she.

"No, I don't," said he, going on with some absurd portrait of the
bishop.  "Look at that, Lotte; isn't it the little man all over,
apron and all?  I'd go on with my profession at once, as you call it,
if the governor would set me up with a studio in London; but as to
sculpture at Barchester--I suppose half the people here don't know
what a torso means."

"The governor will not give you a shilling to start you in London,"
said Lotte.  "Indeed, he can't give you what would be sufficient, for
he has not got it.  But you might start yourself very well, if you
pleased."

"How the deuce am I to do it?" said he.

"To tell you the truth, Bertie, you'll never make a penny by any
profession."

"That's what I often think myself," said he, not in the least
offended.  "Some men have a great gift of making money, but they
can't spend it.  Others can't put two shillings together, but they
have a great talent for all sorts of outlay.  I begin to think that
my genius is wholly in the latter line."

"How do you mean to live then?" asked the sister.

"I suppose I must regard myself as a young raven and look for
heavenly manna; besides, we have all got something when the governor
goes."

"Yes--you'll have enough to supply yourself with gloves and boots;
that is, if the Jews have not got the possession of it all.  I
believe they have the most of it already.  I wonder, Bertie, at your
indifference; that you with your talents and personal advantages
should never try to settle yourself in life.  I look forward with
dread to the time when the governor must go.  Mother, and Madeline,
and I--we shall be poor enough, but you will have absolutely
nothing."

"Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof," said Bertie.

"Will you take my advice?" said his sister.

"Cela depend," said the brother.

"Will you marry a wife with money?"

"At any rate," said he, "I won't marry one without; wives with money
a'nt so easy to get now-a-days; the parsons pick them all up."

"And a parson will pick up the wife I mean for you, if you do not
look quickly about it; the wife I mean is Mrs. Bold."

"Whew-w-w-w!" whistled Bertie, "a widow!"

"She is very beautiful," said Charlotte.

"With a son and heir all ready to my hand," said Bertie.  "A baby
that will very likely die," said Charlotte.

"I don't see that," said Bertie.  "But however he may live for me--I
don't wish to kill him; only, it must be owned that a ready-made
family is a drawback."

"There is only one after all," pleaded Charlotte.

"And that a very little one, as the maidservant said," rejoined
Bertie.

"Beggars mustn't be choosers, Bertie; you can't have everything."

"God knows I am not unreasonable," said he, "nor yet opinionated, and
if you'll arrange it all for me, Lotte, I'll marry the lady.  Only
mark this: the money must be sure and the income at my own disposal,
at any rate for the lady's life."

Charlotte was explaining to her brother that he must make love for
himself if he meant to carry on the matter, and was encouraging him
to do so by warm eulogiums on Eleanor's beauty, when the signora was
brought into the drawing-room.  When at home, and subject to the gaze
of none but her own family, she allowed herself to be dragged about
by two persons, and her two bearers now deposited her on her sofa. 
She was not quite so grand in her apparel as she had been at the
bishop's party, but yet she was dressed with much care, and though
there was a look of care and pain about her eyes, she was, even by
daylight, extremely beautiful.

"Well, Madeline, so I'm going to be married," Bertie began as soon as
the servants had withdrawn.

"There's no other foolish thing left that you haven't done," said
Madeline, "and therefore you are quite right to try that."

"Oh, you think it's a foolish thing, do you?" said he.  "There's
Lotte advising me to marry by all means.  But on such a subject your
opinion ought to be the best; you have experience to guide you."

"Yes, I have," said Madeline with a sort of harsh sadness in her
tone, which seemed to say--What is it to you if I am sad?  I have
never asked your sympathy.

Bertie was sorry when he saw that she was hurt by what he said, and
he came and squatted on the floor close before her face to make his
peace with her.

"Come, Mad, I was only joking; you know that.  But in sober earnest
Lotte is advising me to marry.  She wants me to marry this Mrs. Bold. 
She's a widow with lots of tin, a fine baby, a beautiful complexion,
and the George and Dragon hotel up in the High Street.  By Jove,
Lotte, if I marry her, I'll keep the public-house myself--it's just
the life to suit me."

"What," said Madeline, "that vapid, swarthy creature in the widow's
cap, who looked as though her clothes had been stuck on her back with
a pitchfork!"  The signora never allowed any woman to be beautiful.

"Instead of being vapid," said Lotte, "I call her a very lovely
woman.  She was by far the loveliest woman in the rooms the other
night; that is, excepting you, Madeline."

Even the compliment did not soften the asperity of the maimed beauty. 
"Every woman is charming according to Lotte," she said; "I never knew
an eye with so little true appreciation.  In the first place, what
woman on earth could look well in such a thing as that she had on her
head."

"Of course she wears a widow's cap, but she'll put that off when
Bertie marries her."

"I don't see any of course in it," said Madeline.  "The death of
twenty husbands should not make me undergo such a penance.  It is as
much a relic of paganism as the sacrifice of a Hindu woman at the
burning of her husband's body.  If not so bloody, it is quite as
barbarous and quite as useless."

"But you don't blame her for that," said Bertie.  "She does it
because it's the custom of the country.  People would think ill of
her if she didn't do it."

"Exactly," said Madeline.  "She is just one of those English
nonentities who would tie her head up in a bag for three months every
summer, if her mother and her grandmother had tied up their heads
before her.  It would never occur to her to think whether there was
any use in submitting to such a nuisance."

"It's very hard in a country like England, for a young woman to set
herself in opposition to prejudices of that sort," said the prudent
Charlotte.

"What you mean is that it's very hard for a fool not to be a fool,"
said Madeline.

Bertie Stanhope had been so much knocked about the world from his
earliest years that he had not retained much respect for the gravity
of English customs, but even to his mind an idea presented itself
that, perhaps in a wife, true British prejudice would not in the long
run be less agreeable than Anglo-Italian freedom from restraint.  He
did not exactly say so, but he expressed the idea in another way.

"I fancy," said he, "that if I were to die, and then walk, I should
think that my widow looked better in one of those caps than any other
kind of head-dress."

"Yes--and you'd fancy also that she could do nothing better than shut
herself up and cry for you, or else burn herself.  But she would
think differently.  She'd probably wear one of those horrid she-
helmets, because she'd want the courage not to do so; but she'd wear 
it with a heart longing for the time when she might be allowed to
throw it off.  I hate such shallow false pretences.  For my part I
would let the world say what it pleased and show no grief if I felt
none--and perhaps not, if I did."

"But wearing a widow's cap won't lessen her fortune," said Charlotte.

"Or increase it," said Madeline.  "Then why on earth does she do it?"

"But Lotte's object is to make her put it off," said Bertie.

"If it be true that she has got twelve hundred a year quite at her
own disposal, and she be not utterly vulgar in her manners, I would
advise you to marry her.  I dare say she's to be had for the asking:
and as you are not going to marry her for love, it doesn't much
matter whether she is good-looking or not.  As to your really
marrying a woman for love, I don't believe you are fool enough for
that."

"Oh, Madeline!" exclaimed her sister.

"And oh, Charlotte!" said the other.

"You don't mean to say that no man can love a woman unless he be a
fool?"

"I mean very much the same thing--that any man who is willing to
sacrifice his interest to get possession of a pretty face is a fool. 
Pretty faces are to be had cheaper than that.  I hate your mawkish
sentimentality, Lotte.  You know as well as I do in what way husbands
and wives generally live together; you know how far the warmth of
conjugal affection can withstand the trial of a bad dinner, of a
rainy day, or of the least privation which poverty brings with it;
you know what freedom a man claims for himself, what slavery he would
exact from his wife if he could!  And you know also how wives
generally obey.  Marriage means tyranny on one side and deceit on the
other.  I say that a man is a fool to sacrifice his interests for
such a bargain.  A woman, too generally, has no other way of living."

"But Bertie has no other way of living," said Charlotte.

"Then, in God's name, let him marry Mrs. Bold," said Madeline.  And
so it was settled between them.

But let the gentle-hearted reader be under no apprehension
whatsoever.  It is not destined that Eleanor shall marry Mr. Slope or
Bertie Stanhope.  And here perhaps it may be allowed to the novelist
to explain his views on a very important point in the art of telling
tales.  He ventures to reprobate that system which goes so far to
violate all proper confidence between the author and his readers by
maintaining nearly to the end of the third volume a mystery as to the
fate of their favourite personage.  Nay, more, and worse than this is
too frequently done.  Have not often the profoundest efforts of
genius been used to baffle the aspirations of the reader, to raise
false hopes and false fears, and to give rise to expectations which
are never to be realized?  Are not promises all but made of
delightful horrors, in lieu of which the writer produces nothing but
most commonplace realities in his final chapter?  And is there not a
species of deceit in this to which the honesty of the present age
should lend no countenance?

And what can be the worth of that solicitude which a peep into the
third volume can utterly dissipate?  What the value of those literary
charms which are absolutely destroyed by their enjoyment?  When we
have once learnt what was that picture before which was hung Mrs.
Ratcliffe's solemn curtain, we feel no further interest about either
the frame or the veil.  They are to us merely a receptacle for old
bones, an inappropriate coffin, which we would wish to have decently
buried out of our sight.

And then how grievous a thing it is to have the pleasure of your
novel destroyed by the ill-considered triumph of a previous reader. 
"Oh, you needn't be alarmed for Augusta, of course she accepts
Gustavus in the end."  "How very ill-natured you are, Susan," says
Kitty with tears in her eyes: "I don't care a bit about it now." 
Dear Kitty, if you will read my book, you may defy the ill-nature of
your sister.  There shall be no secret that she can tell you.  Nay,
take the third volume if you please--learn from the last pages all
the results of our troubled story, and the story shall have lost none
of its interest, if indeed there be any interest in it to lose.

Our doctrine is that the author and the reader should move along
together in full confidence with each other.  Let the personages of
the drama undergo ever so complete a comedy of errors among
themselves, but let the spectator never mistake the Syracusan for the
Ephesian; otherwise he is one of the dupes, and the part of a dupe is
never dignified.

I would not for the value of this chapter have it believed by a
single reader that my Eleanor could bring herself to marry Mr. Slope,
or that she should be sacrificed to a Bertie Stanhope.  But among the
good folk of Barchester many believed both the one and the other.



CHAPTER XVI

Baby Worship


"Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle, dum, dum, dum," said or sung Eleanor
Bold.

"Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle, dum, dum, dum," continued Mary Bold,
taking up the second part in this concerted piece.

The only audience at the concert was the baby, who however gave such
vociferous applause that the performers, presuming it to amount to an
encore, commenced again.

"Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle, dum, dum, dum: hasn't he got lovely
legs?" said the rapturous mother.

"H'm 'm 'm 'm 'm," simmered Mary, burying her lips in the little
fellow's fat neck, by way of kissing him.

"H'm 'm 'm 'm 'm," simmered the mamma, burying her lips also in his
fat, round, short legs.  "He's a dawty little bold darling, so he is;
and he has the nicest little pink legs in all the world, so he has;"
and the simmering and the kissing went on over again, as though the
ladies were very hungry and determined to eat him.

"Well, then, he's his own mother's own darling: well, he shall--oh,
oh--Mary, Mary--did you ever see?  What am I to do?  My naughty,
naughty, naughty, naughty little Johnny."  All these energetic
exclamations were elicited by the delight of the mother in finding
that her son was strong enough and mischievous enough to pull all her
hair out from under her cap.  "He's been and pulled down all Mamma's
hair, and he's the naughtiest, naughtiest, naughtiest little man that
ever, ever, ever, ever, ever--"

A regular service of baby worship was going on.  Mary Bold was
sitting on a low easy chair, with the boy in her lap, and Eleanor was
kneeling before the object of her idolatry.  As she tried to cover up
the little fellow's face with her long, glossy, dark brown locks, and
permitted him to pull them hither and thither as he would, she looked
very beautiful in spite of the widow's cap which she still wore. 
There was a quiet, enduring, grateful sweetness about her face which
grew so strongly upon those who knew her, as to make the great praise
of her beauty which came from her old friends appear marvellously
exaggerated to those who were only slightly acquainted with her.  Her
loveliness was like that of many landscapes, which require to be
often seen to be fully enjoyed.  There was a depth of dark clear
brightness in her eyes which was lost upon a quick observer, a
character about her mouth which only showed itself to those with whom
she familiarly conversed, a glorious form of head the perfect
symmetry of which required the eye of an artist for its appreciation. 
She had none of that dazzling brilliancy, of that voluptuous Rubens
beauty, of that pearly whiteness, and those vermilion tints which
immediately entranced with the power of a basilisk men who came
within reach of Madeline Neroni.  It was all but impossible to resist
the signora, but no one was called upon for any resistance towards
Eleanor.  You might begin to talk to her as though she were your
sister, and it would not be till your head was on your pillow that
the truth and intensity of her beauty would flash upon you, that the
sweetness of her voice would come upon your ear.  A sudden half-hour
with the Neroni was like falling into a pit, an evening spent with
Eleanor like an unexpected ramble in some quiet fields of asphodel.

"We'll cover him up till there shan't be a morsel of his little
'ittle 'ittle 'ittle nose to be seen," said the mother, stretching
her streaming locks over the infant's face.  The child screamed with
delight and kicked till Mary Bold was hardly able to hold him.

At this moment the door opened, and Mr. Slope was announced.  Up
jumped Eleanor and, with a sudden quick motion of her hands, pushed
back her hair over her shoulders.  It would have been perhaps better
for her that she had not, for she thus showed more of her confusion
than she would have done had she remained as she was.  Mr. Slope,
however, immediately recognized her loveliness and thought to himself
that, irrespective of her fortune, she would be an inmate that a man
might well desire for his house, a partner for his bosom's care very
well qualified to make care lie easy.  Eleanor hurried out of the
room to readjust her cap, muttering some unnecessary apology about
her baby.  And while she is gone, we will briefly go back and state
what had been hitherto the results of Mr. Slope's meditations on his
scheme of matrimony.

His inquiries as to the widow's income had at any rate been so far
successful as to induce him to determine to go on with the
speculation.  As regarded Mr. Harding, he had also resolved to do
what he could without injury to himself.  To Mrs. Proudie he
determined not to speak on the matter, at least not at present.  His
object was to instigate a little rebellion on the part of the bishop. 
He thought that such a state of things would be advisable, not only
in respect to Messrs. Harding and Quiverful, but also in the affairs
of the diocese generally.  Mr. Slope was by no means of opinion that
Dr. Proudie was fit to rule, but he conscientiously thought it wrong
that his brother clergy should be subjected to petticoat government. 
He therefore made up his mind to infuse a little of his spirit into
the bishop, sufficient to induce him to oppose his wife, though not
enough to make him altogether insubordinate.

He had therefore taken an opportunity of again speaking to his
lordship about the hospital and had endeavoured to make it appear
that after all it would be unwise to exclude Mr. Harding from the
appointment.  Mr. Slope, however, had a harder task than he had
imagined.  Mrs. Proudie, anxious to assume to herself as much as
possible of the merit of patronage, had written to Mrs. Quiverful,
requesting her to call at the palace, and had then explained to that
matron, with much mystery, condescension, and dignity, the good that
was in store for her and her progeny.  Indeed, Mrs. Proudie had been
so engaged at the very time that Mr. Slope had been doing the same
with the husband at Puddingdale Vicarage, and had thus in a measure
committed herself.  The thanks, the humility, the gratitude, the
surprise of Mrs. Quiverful had been very overpowering; she had all
but embraced the knees of her patroness and had promised that the
prayers of fourteen unprovided babes (so Mrs. Quiverful had described
her own family, the eldest of which was a stout young woman of three-
and-twenty) should be put up to heaven morning and evening for the
munificent friend whom God had sent to them.  Such incense as this
was not unpleasing to Mrs. Proudie, and she made the most of it.  She
offered her general assistance to the fourteen unprovided babes, if,
as she had no doubt, she should find them worthy; expressed a hope
that the eldest of them would be fit to undertake tuition in her
Sabbath-schools; and altogether made herself a very great lady in the
estimation of Mrs. Quiverful.

Having done this, she thought it prudent to drop a few words before
the bishop, letting him know that she had acquainted the Puddingdale
family with their good fortune; so that he might perceive that he
stood committed to the appointment.  The husband well understood the
ruse of his wife, but he did not resent it.  He knew that she was
taking the patronage out of his hands; he was resolved to put an end
to her interference and reassume his powers.  But then he thought
this was not the best time to do it.  He put off the evil hour, as
many a man in similar circumstances has done before him.

Such having been the case, Mr. Slope naturally encountered a
difficulty in talking over the bishop, a difficulty indeed which he
found could not be overcome except at the cost of a general outbreak
at the palace.  A general outbreak at the present moment might be
good policy, but it also might not.  It was at any rate not a step to
be lightly taken.  He began by whispering to the bishop that be
feared that public opinion would be against him if Mr. Harding did
not reappear at the hospital.  The bishop answered with some warmth
that Mr. Quiverful had been promised the appointment on Mr. Slope's
advice.  "Not promised?" said Mr. Slope.  "Yes, promised," replied
the bishop, "and Mrs. Proudie has seen Mrs. Quiverful on the
subject."  This was quite unexpected on the part of Mr. Slope, but
his presence of mind did not fail him, and he turned the statement to
his own account.

"Ah, my lord," said he, "we shall all be in scrapes if the ladies
interfere."

This was too much in unison with my lord's feelings to be altogether
unpalatable, and yet such an allusion to interference demanded a
rebuke.  My lord was somewhat astounded also, though not altogether
made miserable, by finding that there was a point of difference
between his wife and his chaplain.

"I don't know what you mean by interference," said the bishop mildly. 
"When Mrs. Proudie heard that Mr. Quiverful was to be appointed, it
was not unnatural that she should wish to see Mrs. Quiverful about
the schools.  I really cannot say that I see any interference."

"I only speak, my lord, for your own comfort," said Slope; "for your
own comfort and dignity in the diocese.  I can have no other motive. 
As far as personal feelings go, Mrs. Proudie is the best friend I
have.  I must always remember that.  But still, in my present
position, my first duty is to your lordship."

"I'm sure of that, Mr. Slope; I am quite sure of that;" said the
bishop, mollified: "and you really think that Mr. Harding should have
the hospital?"

"Upon my word, I'm inclined to think so.  I am quite prepared to take
upon myself the blame of first suggesting Mr. Quiverful's name.  But
since doing so, I have found that there is so strong a feeling in the
diocese in favour of Mr. Harding that I think your lordship should
give way.  I hear also that Mr. Harding has modified the objections
he first felt to your lordship's propositions.  And as to what has
passed between Mrs. Proudie and Mrs. Quiverful, the circumstance may
be a little inconvenient, but I really do not think that that should
weigh in a matter of so much moment."

And thus the poor bishop was left in a dreadfully undecided step as
to what he should do.  His mind, however, slightly inclined itself to
the appointment of Mr. Harding, seeing that by such a step he should
have the assistance of Mr. Slope in opposing Mrs. Proudie.

Such was the state of affairs at the palace, when Mr. Slope called at
Mrs. Bold's house and found her playing with her baby.  When she ran
out of the room, Mr. Slope began praising the weather to Mary Bold,
then he praised the baby and kissed him, and then he praised the
mother, and then he praised Miss Bold herself.  Mrs. Bold, however,
was not long before she came back.

"I have to apologize for calling at so very early an hour," began Mr.
Slope, "but I was really so anxious to speak to you that I hope you
and Miss Bold will excuse me."

Eleanor muttered something in which the words "certainly," and "of
course," and "not early at all," were just audible, and then
apologized for her own appearance, declaring, with a smile, that her
baby was becoming such a big boy that he was quite unmanageable.

"He's a great big naughty boy," said she to the child, "and we must
send him away to a great big rough romping school, where they have
great big rods and do terrible things to naughty boys who don't do
what their own mammas tell them;" and she then commenced another
course of kissing, being actuated thereto by the terrible idea of
sending her child away which her own imagination had depicted.

"And where the masters don't have such beautiful long hair to be
dishevelled," said Mr. Slope, taking up the joke and paying a
compliment at the same time.

Eleanor thought he might as well have left the compliment alone, but
she said nothing and looked nothing, being occupied as she was with
the baby.

"Let me take him," said Mary.  "His clothes are nearly off his back
with his romping," and so saying she left the room with the child. 
Miss Bold had heard Mr. Slope say he had something pressing to say to
Eleanor, and thinking that she might be de trop, took this
opportunity of getting herself out of the room.

"Don't be long, Mary," said Eleanor as Miss Bold shut the door.

"I am glad, Mrs. Bold, to have the opportunity of having ten minutes'
conversation with you alone," began Mr. Slope.  "Will you let me
openly ask you a plain question?"

"Certainly," said she.

"And I am sure you will give me a plain and open answer."

"Either that, or none at all," said she, laughing.

"My question is this, Mrs. Bold: is your father really anxious to go
back to the hospital?"

"Why do you ask me?" said she.  "Why don't you ask himself?"

"My dear Mrs. Bold, I'll tell you why.  There are wheels within
wheels, all of which I would explain to you, only I fear that there
is not time.  It is essentially necessary that I should have an
answer to this question, otherwise I cannot know how to advance your
father's wishes; and it is quite impossible that I should ask
himself.  No one can esteem your father more than I do, but I doubt
if this feeling is reciprocal."  It certainly was not.  "I must be
candid with you as the only means of avoiding ultimate consequences,
which may be most injurious to Mr. Harding.  I fear there is a
feeling--I will not even call it a prejudice--with regard to myself
in Barchester, which is not in my favour.  You remember that
sermon--"

"Oh, Mr. Slope, we need not go back to that," said Eleanor.

"For one moment, Mrs. Bold.  It is not that I may talk of myself but
because it is so essential that you should understand how matters
stand.  That sermon may have been ill-judged--it was certainly
misunderstood; but I will say nothing about that now; only this, that
it did give rise to a feeling against myself which your father shares
with others.  It may be that he has proper cause, but the result is
that he is not inclined to meet me on friendly terms.  I put it to
yourself whether you do not know this to be the case."

Eleanor made no answer, and Mr. Slope, in the eagerness of his
address, edged his chair a little nearer to the widow's seat,
unperceived by her.

"Such being so," continued Mr. Slope, "I cannot ask him this question
as I can ask it of you.  In spite of my delinquencies since I came to
Barchester you have allowed me to regard you as a friend."  Eleanor
made a little motion with her head which was hardly confirmatory, but
Mr. Slope if he noticed it did not appear to do so.  "To you I can
speak openly and explain the feelings of my heart.  This your father
would not allow.  Unfortunately, the bishop has thought it right that
this matter of the hospital should pass through my hands.  There have
been some details to get up with which he would not trouble himself,
and thus it has come to pass that I was forced to have an interview
with your father on the matter."

"I am aware of that," said Eleanor.

"Of course," said he.  "In that interview Mr. Harding left the
impression on my mind that he did not wish to return to the
hospital."

"How could that be?" said Eleanor, at last stirred up to forget the
cold propriety of demeanour which she had determined to maintain.

"My dear Mrs. Bold, I give you my word that such was the case," said
he, again getting a little nearer to her.  "And what is more than
that, before my interview with Mr. Harding, certain persons at the
palace--I do not mean the bishop--had told me that such was the fact. 
I own, I hardly believed it; I own, I thought that your father would
wish on every account, for conscience' sake, for the sake of those
old men, for old association and the memory of dear days long gone
by, on every account I thought that he would wish to resume his
duties.  But I was told that such was not his wish, and he certainly
left me with the impression that I had been told the truth."

"Well!" said Eleanor, now sufficiently roused on the matter.

"I hear Miss Bold's step," said Mr. Slope; "would it be asking too
great a favour to beg you to--I know you can manage anything with
Miss Bold."

Eleanor did not like the word manage, but still she went out and
asked Mary to leave them alone for another quarter of an hour.

"Thank you, Mrs. Bold--I am so very grateful for this confidence. 
Well, I left your father with this impression.  Indeed, I may say
that he made me understand that he declined the appointment."

"Not the appointment," said Eleanor.  "I am sure he did not decline
the appointment.  But he said that he would not agree--that is, that
he did not like the scheme about the schools and the services and all
that.  I am quite sure he never said that he wished to refuse the
place."

"Oh, Mrs. Bold!" said Mr. Slope in a manner almost impassioned.  "I
would not for the world say to so good a daughter a word against so
good a father.  But you must, for his sake, let me show you exactly
how the matter stands at present.  Mr. Harding was a little flurried
when I told him of the bishop's wishes about the school.  I did so
perhaps with the less caution because you yourself had so perfectly
agreed with me on the same subject.  He was a little put out and
spoke warmly.  'Tell the bishop,' said he, 'that I quite disagree
with him--and shall not return to the hospital as such conditions are
attached to it.'  What he said was to that effect; indeed, his words
were, if anything, stronger than those.  I had no alternative but to
repeat them to his lordship, who said that he could look on them in
no other light than a refusal.  He also had heard the report that
your father did not wish for the appointment, and putting all these
things together, he thought he had no choice but to look for someone
else.  He has consequently offered the place to Mr. Quiverful."

"Offered the place to Mr. Quiverful!" repeated Eleanor, her eyes
suffused with tears.  "Then, Mr. Slope, there is an end of it."

"No, my friend--not so," said he.  "It is to prevent such being the
end of it that I am now here.  I may at any rate presume that I have
got an answer to my question and that Mr. Harding is desirous of
returning."

"Desirous of returning--of course he is," said Eleanor; "of course he
wishes to have back his house and his income and his place in the
world; to have back what he gave up with such self-denying honesty,
if he can have them without restraints on his conduct to which at his
age it would be impossible that he should submit.  How can the bishop
ask a man of his age to turn schoolmaster to a pack of children?"

"Out of the question," said Mr. Slope, laughing slightly; "of course
no such demand shall be made on your father.  I can at any rate
promise you that I will not be the medium of any so absurd a
requisition.  We wished your father to preach in the hospital, as the
inmates may naturally be too old to leave it, but even that shall not
be insisted on.  We wished also to attach a Sabbath-day school to the
hospital, thinking that such an establishment could not but be useful
under the surveillance of so good a clergyman as Mr. Harding, and
also under your own.  But, dear Mrs. Bold, we won't talk of these
things now.  One thing is clear: we must do what we can to annul this
rash offer the bishop has made to Mr. Quiverful.  Your father
wouldn't see Quiverful, would he?  Quiverful is an honourable man,
and would not for a moment stand in your father's way."

"What?" said Eleanor.  "Ask a man with fourteen children to give up
his preferment!  I am quite sure he will do no such thing."

"I suppose not," said Slope, and he again drew near to Mrs. Bold, so
that now they were very close to each other.  Eleanor did not think
much about it but instinctively moved away a little.  How greatly
would she have increased the distance could she have guessed what had
been said about her at Plumstead!  "I suppose not.  But it is out of
the question that Quiverful should supersede your father--quite out
of the question.  The bishop has been too rash.  An idea occurs to me
which may perhaps, with God's blessing, put us right.  My dear Mrs.
Bold, would you object to seeing the bishop yourself?"

"Why should not my father see him?" said Eleanor.  She had once
before in her life interfered in her father's affairs, and then not
to much advantage.  She was older now and felt that she should take
no step in a matter so vital to him without his consent.

"Why, to tell the truth," said Mr. Slope with a look of sorrow, as
though he greatly bewailed the want of charity in his patron, "the
bishop fancies that he has cause of anger against your father.  I
fear an interview would lead to further ill-will."

"Why," said Eleanor, "my father is the mildest, the gentlest man
living."

"I only know," said Slope, "that he has the best of daughters.  So
you would not see the bishop?  As to getting an interview, I could
manage that for you without the slightest annoyance to yourself."

"I could do nothing, Mr. Slope, without consulting my father."

"Ah!" said he, "that would be useless; you would then only be your
father's messenger.  Does anything occur to yourself?  Something must
be done.  Your father shall not be ruined by so ridiculous a
misunderstanding."

Eleanor said that nothing occurred to her, but that it was very hard;
the tears came to her eyes and rolled down her cheeks.  Mr. Slope
would have given much to have had the privilege of drying them, but
he had tact enough to know that he had still a great deal to do
before he could even hope for any privilege with Mrs. Bold.

"It cuts me to the heart to see you so grieved," said he.  "But pray
let me assure you that your father's interests shall not be
sacrificed if it be possible for me to protect them.  I will tell the
bishop openly what are the facts.  I will explain to him that he has
hardly the right to appoint any other than your father and will show
him that if he does so he will be guilty of great injustice--and you,
Mrs. Bold, you will have the charity at any rate to believe this of
me, that I am truly anxious for your father's welfare--for his and
for your own."

The widow hardly knew what answer to make.  She was quite aware that
her father would not be at all thankful to Mr. Slope; she had a
strong wish to share her father's feelings; and yet she could not but
acknowledge that Mr. Slope was very kind.  Her father, who was
generally so charitable to all men, who seldom spoke ill of anyone,
had warned her against Mr. Slope, and yet she did not know how to
abstain from thanking him.  What interest could he have in the matter
but that which he professed?  Nevertheless there was that in his
manner which even she distrusted.  She felt, she did not know why,
that there was something about him which ought to put her on her
guard.

Mr. Slope read all this in her hesitating manner just as plainly as
though she had opened her heart to him.  It was the talent of the man
that he could so read the inward feelings of women with whom he
conversed.  He knew that Eleanor was doubting him and that, if she
thanked him, she would only do so because she could not help it, but
yet this did not make him angry or even annoy him.  Rome was not
built in a day.

"I did not come for thanks," continued he, seeing her hesitation,
"and do not want them--at any rate before they are merited.  But this
I do want, Mrs. Bold, that I may make to myself friends in this fold
to which it has pleased God to call me as one of the humblest of his
shepherds.  If I cannot do so, my task here must indeed be a sad one. 
I will at any rate endeavour to deserve them."

"I'm sure," said she, "you will soon make plenty of friends."  She
felt herself obliged to say something.

"That will be nothing unless they are such as will sympathize with my
feelings; unless they are such as I can reverence and admire--and
love.  If the best and purest turn away from me, I cannot bring
myself to be satisfied with the friendship of the less estimable.  In
such case I must live alone."

"Oh, I'm sure you will not do that, Mr. Slope."  Eleanor meant
nothing, but it suited him to appear to think some special allusion
had been intended.

"Indeed, Mrs. Bold, I shall live alone, quite alone as far as the
heart is concerned, if those with whom I yearn to ally myself turn
away from me.  But enough of this; I have called you my friend, and I
hope you will not contradict me.  I trust the time may come when I
may also call your father so.  May God bless you, Mrs. Bold, you and
your darling boy.  And tell your father from me that what can be done
for his interest shall be done."

And so he took his leave, pressing the widow's hand rather more
closely than usual.  Circumstances, however, seemed just then to make
this intelligible, and the lady did not feel called on to resent it.

"I cannot understand him," said Eleanor to Mary Bold a few minutes
afterwards.  "I do not know whether he is a good man or a bad man--
whether he is true or false."

"Then give him the benefit of the doubt," said Mary, "and believe the
best."

"On the, whole, I think I do," said Eleanor.  "I think I do believe
that he means well--and if so, it is a shame that we should revile
him and make him miserable while he is among us.  But, oh, Mary, I
fear Papa will be disappointed in the hospital."



CHAPTER XVII

Who Shall he Cock of the Walk?


All this time things were going somewhat uneasily at the palace.  The
hint or two which Mr. Slope had given was by no means thrown away
upon the bishop.  He had a feeling that if he ever meant to oppose
the now almost unendurable despotism of his wife, he must lose no
further time in doing so; that if he ever meant to be himself master
in his own diocese, let alone his own house, he should begin at once. 
It would have been easier to have done so from the day of his
consecration than now, but easier now than when Mrs. Proudie should
have succeeded in thoroughly mastering the diocesan details.  Then
the proffered assistance of Mr. Slope was a great thing for him, a
most unexpected and invaluable aid.  Hitherto he had looked on the
two as allied forces and had considered that, as allies, they were
impregnable.  He had begun to believe that his only chance of escape
would be by the advancement of Mr. Slope to some distant and rich
preferment.  But now it seemed that one of his enemies, certainly the
least potent of them, but nevertheless one very important, was
willing to desert his own camp.  Assisted by Mr. Slope what might he
not do?  He walked up and down his little study, almost thinking that
the time might come when he would be able to appropriate to his own
use the big room upstairs in which his predecessor had always sat.

As he revolved these things in his mind a note was brought to him
from Archdeacon Grantly in which that divine begged his lordship to
do him the honour of seeing him on the morrow--would his lordship
have the kindness to name an hour?  Dr. Grantly's proposed visit
would have reference to the reappointment of Mr. Harding to the
wardenship of Barchester Hospital.  The bishop having read his note
was informed that the archdea