con's servant was waiting for an answer.

Here at once a great opportunity offered itself to the bishop of
acting on his own responsibility.  He bethought himself however of
his new ally and rang the bell for Mr. Slope.  It turned out that Mr.
Slope was not in the house, and then, greatly daring, the bishop with
his own unassisted spirit wrote a note to the archdeacon saving that
he would see him and naming an hour for doing so.  Having watched
from his study-window that the messenger got safely off from the
premises with this dispatch, he began to turn over in his mind what
step he should next take.

Tomorrow he would have to declare to the archdeacon either that Mr.
Harding should have the appointment, or that he should not have it. 
The bishop felt that he could not honestly throw over the Quiverfuls
without informing Mrs. Proudie, and he resolved at last to brave the
lioness in her den and tell her that circumstances were such that it
behoved him to reappoint Mr. Harding.  He did not feel that he should
at all derogate from his new courage by promising Mrs. Proudie that
the very first piece of available preferment at his disposal should
be given to Quiverful to atone for the injury done to him.  If he
could mollify the lioness with such a sop, how happy would he think
his first efforts to have been!

Not without many misgivings did he find himself in Mrs. Proudie's
boudoir.  He had at first thought of sending for her.  But it was not
at all impossible that she might choose to take such a message amiss,
and then also it might be some protection to him to have his
daughters present at the interview.  He found her sitting with her
account-books before her nibbling the end of her pencil, evidently
immersed in pecuniary difficulties, and harassed in mind by the
multiplicity of palatial expenses and the heavy cost of episcopal
grandeur.  Her daughters were around her.  Olivia was reading a
novel, Augusta was crossing a note to her bosom friend in Baker
Street, and Netta was working diminutive coach wheels for the bottom
of a petticoat.  If the bishop could get the better of his wife in
her present mood, he would be a man indeed.  He might then consider
the victory his own forever.  After all, in such cases the matter
between husband and wife stands much the same as it does between two
boys at the same school, two cocks in the same yard, or two armies on
the same continent.  The conqueror once is generally the conqueror
forever after.  The prestige of victory is everything.

"Ahem--my dear," began the bishop, "if you are disengaged, I wished
to speak to you."  Mrs. Proudie put her pencil down carefully at the
point to which she had totted her figures, marked down in her memory
the sum she had arrived at, and then looked up, sourly enough, into
her helpmate's face.  "If you are busy, another time will do as
well," continued the bishop, whose courage, like Bob Acres', had
oozed out now that he found himself on the ground of battle.

"What is it about, Bishop?" asked the lady.

"Well--it was about those Quiverfuls--but I see you are engaged. 
Another time will do just as well for me."

"What about the Quiverfuls?  It is quite understood, I believe, that
they are to come to the hospital.  There is to be no doubt about
that, is there?" and as she spoke she kept her pencil sternly and
vigorously fixed on the column of figures before her.

"Why, my dear, there is a difficulty," said the bishop.

"A difficulty!" said Mrs. Proudie, "what difficulty?  The place has
been promised to Mr. Quiverful, and of course he must have it.  He
has made all his arrangements.  He has written for a curate for
Puddingdale, he has spoken to the auctioneer about selling his farm,
horses, and cows, and in all respects considers the place as his own. 
Of course he must have it."

Now, Bishop, look well to thyself and call up all the manhood that is
in thee.  Think how much is at stake.  If now thou art not true to
thy guns, no Slope can hereafter aid thee.  How can he who deserts
his own colours at the first smell of gunpowder expect faith in any
ally?  Thou thyself hast sought the battle-field: fight out the
battle manfully now thou art there.  Courage, Bishop, courage! 
Frowns cannot kill, nor can sharp words break any bones.  After all,
the apron is thine own.  She can appoint no wardens, give away no
benefices, nominate no chaplains, an' thou art but true to thyself. 
Up, man, and at her with a constant heart.

Some little monitor within the bishop's breast so addressed him.  But
then there was another monitor there which advised him differently,
and as follows.  Remember, Bishop, she is a woman, and such a woman
too as thou well knowest: a battle of words with such a woman is the
very mischief.  Were it not better for thee to carry on this war, if
it must be waged, from behind thine own table in thine own study? 
Does not every cock fight best on his own dunghill?  Thy daughters
also are here, the pledges of thy love, the fruits of thy loins: is
it well that they should see thee in the hour of thy victory over
their mother?  Nay, is it well that they should see thee in the
possible hour of thy defeat?  Besides, hast thou not chosen thy
opportunity with wonderful little skill, indeed with no touch of that
sagacity for which thou art famous?  Will it not turn out that thou
art wrong in this matter and thine enemy right; that thou hast
actually pledged thyself in this matter of the hospital and that now
thou wouldest turn upon thy wife because she requires from thee but
the fulfilment of thy promise?  Art thou not a Christian bishop, and
is not thy word to be held sacred whatever be the result?  Return,
Bishop, to thy sanctum on the lower floor and postpone thy combative
propensities for some occasion in which at least thou mayest fight
the battle against odds less tremendously against thee.

All this passed within the bishop's bosom while Mrs. Proudie still
sat with her fixed pencil, and the figures of her sum still enduring
on the tablets of her memory.  "£4 17s. 7d." she said to herself. 
"Of course Mr. Quiverful must have the hospital," she said out loud
to her lord.

"Well, my dear, I merely wanted to suggest to you that Mr. Slope
seems to think that if Mr. Harding be not appointed, public feeling
in the matter would be against us, and that the press might perhaps
take it up."

"Mr. Slope seems to think!" said Mrs. Proudie in a tone of voice
which plainly showed the bishop that he was right in looking for a
breach in that quarter.  "And what has Mr. Slope to do with it?  I
hope, my lord, you are not going to allow yourself to be governed by
a chaplain."  And now in her eagerness the lady lost her place in her
account.

"Certainly not, my dear.  Nothing I can assure you is less probable. 
But still, Mr. Slope may be useful in finding how the wind blows, and
I really thought that if we could give something else as good to the
Quiverfuls--"

"Nonsense," said Mrs. Proudie; "it would be years before you could
give them anything else that could suit them half as well, and as for
the press and the public and all that, remember there are two ways of
telling a story.  If Mr. Harding is fool enough to tell his tale, we
can also tell ours.  The place was offered to him, and he refused it. 
It has now been given to someone else, and there's an end of it.  At
least I should think so."

"Well, my dear, I rather believe you are right," said the bishop, and
sneaking out of the room, he went downstairs, troubled in his mind as
to how he should receive the archdeacon on the morrow.  He felt
himself not very well just at present and began to consider that he
might, not improbably, be detained in his room the next morning by an
attack of bile.  He was, unfortunately, very subject to bilious
annoyances.

"Mr. Slope, indeed!  I'll Slope him," said the indignant matron to
her listening progeny.  "I don't know what has come to Mr. Slope.
I believe he thinks he is to be Bishop of Barchester himself, because
I've taken him by the hand and got your father to make him his
domestic chaplain."

"He was always full of impudence," said Olivia; "I told you so once
before, Mamma."  Olivia, however, had not thought him too impudent
when once before he had proposed to make her Mrs. Slope.

"Well, Olivia, I always thought you liked him," said Augusta, who at
that moment had some grudge against her sister.  "I always disliked
the man, because I think him thoroughly vulgar."

"There you're wrong," said Mrs. Proudie; "he's not vulgar at all; and
what is more, he is a soul-stirring, eloquent preacher; but he must
be taught to know his place if he is to remain in this house."

"He has the horridest eyes I ever saw in a man's head," said Netta;
"and I tell you what, he's terribly greedy; did you see all the
currant pie he ate yesterday?"

When Mr. Slope got home he soon learnt from the bishop, as much from
his manner as his words, that Mrs. Proudie's behests in the matter of
the hospital were to be obeyed.  Dr. Proudie let fall something as to
"this occasion only" and "keeping all affairs about patronage
exclusively in his own hands."  But he was quite decided about Mr.
Harding; and as Mr. Slope did not wish to have both the prelate and
the prelatess against him, he did not at present see that he could do
anything but yield.

He merely remarked that he would of course carry out the bishop's
views and that he was quite sure that if the bishop trusted to his
own judgement things in the diocese would certainly be well ordered. 
Mr. Slope knew that if you hit a nail on the head often enough, it
will penetrate at last.

He was sitting alone in his room on the same evening when a light
knock was made on his door, and before he could answer it the door
was opened, and his patroness appeared.  He was all smiles in a
moment, but so was not she also.  She took, however, the chair that
was offered to her and thus began her expostulation:

"Mr. Slope, I did not at all approve your conduct the other night
with that Italian woman.  Anyone would have thought that you were her
lover."

"Good gracious, my dear madam," said Mr. Slope with a look of horror. 
"Why, she is a married woman."

"That's more than I know," said Mrs. Proudie; "however she chooses to
pass for such.  But married or not married, such attention as you
paid to her was improper.  I cannot believe that you would wish to
give offence in my drawing-room, Mr. Slope, but I owe it to myself
and my daughters to tell you that I disapprove of your conduct."

Mr. Slope opened wide his huge protruding eyes and stared out of them
with a look of well-feigned surprise.  "Why, Mrs. Proudie," said he,
"I did but fetch her something to eat when she said she was hungry."

"And you have called on her since, continued she, looking at the
culprit with the stern look of a detective policeman in the act of
declaring himself.

Mr. Slope turned over in his mind whether it would be well for him to
tell this termagant at once that he should call on whom he liked and
do what he liked, but he remembered that his footing in Barchester
was not yet sufficiently firm and that it would be better for him to
pacify her.

"I certainly called since at Dr. Stanhope's house and certainly saw
Madame Neroni."

"Yes, and you saw her alone," said the episcopal Argus.

"Undoubtedly, I did," said Mr. Slope, "but that was because nobody
else happened to be in the room.  Surely it was no fault of mine if
the rest of the family were out."

"Perhaps not, but I assure you, Mr. Slope, you will fall greatly in
nay estimation if I find that you allow yourself to be caught by the
lures of that woman.  I know women better than you do, Mr. Slope, and
you may believe me that that signora, as she calls herself, is not a
fitting companion for a strict evangelical unmarried young
clergyman."

How Mr. Slope would have liked to laugh at her, had he dared!  But he
did not dare.  So he merely said, "I can assure you, Mrs. Proudie,
the lady in question is nothing to me."

"Well, I hope not, Mr. Slope.  But I have considered it my duty to
give you this caution.  And now there is another thing I feel myself
called on to speak about: it is your conduct to the bishop, Mr.
Slope."

"My conduct to the bishop," said he, now truly surprised and ignorant
what the lady alluded to.

"Yes, Mr. Slope, your conduct to the bishop.  It is by no means what
I would wish to see it."

"Has the bishop said anything, Mrs. Proudie?"

"No, the bishop has said nothing.  He probably thinks that any
remarks on the matter will come better from me, who first introduced
you to his lordship's notice.  The fact is, Mr. Slope, you are a
little inclined to take too much upon yourself."

An angry spot showed itself on Mr. Slope's cheeks, and it was with
difficulty that he controlled himself.  But he did do so and sat
quite silent while the lady went on.

"It is the fault of many young men in your position, and therefore
the bishop is not inclined at present to resent it.  You will, no
doubt, soon learn what is required from you and what is not.  If you
will take my advice, however, you will be careful not to obtrude
advice upon the bishop in any matter touching patronage.  If his
lordship wants advice, he knows where to look for it."  And then
having added to her counsel a string of platitudes as to what was
desirable and what not desirable in the conduct of a strictly
evangelical unmarried young clergyman, Mrs. Proudie retreated,
leaving the chaplain to his thoughts.

The upshot of his thoughts was this, that there certainly was not
room in the diocese for the energies of both himself and Mrs.
Proudie, and that it behoved him quickly to ascertain whether his
energies or hers were to prevail.



CHAPTER XVIII

The Widow's Persecution


Early on the following morning Mr. Slope was summoned to the bishop's
dressing-room, and went there fully expecting that he should find his
lordship very indignant and spirited up by his wife to repeat the
rebuke which she had administered on the previous day.  Mr. Slope had
resolved that at any rate from him he would not stand it and entered
the dressing-room in rather a combative disposition, but he found the
bishop in the most placid and gentlest of humours.  His lordship
complained of' being rather unwell, had a slight headache, and was
not quite the thing in his stomach; but there was nothing the matter
with his temper.

"Oh, Slope," said he, taking the chaplain's proffered hand,
"Archdeacon Grantly is to call on me this morning, and I really am
not fit to see him.  I fear I must trouble you to see him for me;"
and then Dr. Proudie proceeded to explain what it was that must be
said to Dr. Grantly.  He was to be told in fact in the civilest words
in which the tidings could be conveyed that Mr. Harding having
refused the wardenship, the appointment had been offered to Mr.
Quiverful and accepted by him.

Mr. Slope again pointed out to his patron that he thought he was
perhaps not quite wise in his decision, and this he did sotto voce. 
But even with this precaution it was not safe to say much, and during
the little that he did say, the bishop made a very slight, but still
a very ominous gesture with his thumb towards the door which opened
from his dressing-room to some inner sanctuary.  Mr. Slope at once
took the hint and said no more, but he perceived that there was to be
confidence between him and his patron, that the league desired by him
was to be made, and that this appointment of Mr. Quiverful was to be
the last sacrifice offered on the altar of conjugal obedience.  All
this Mr. Slope read in the slight motion of the bishop's thumb, and
he read it correctly.  There was no need of parchments and seals, of
attestations, explanations, and professions.  The bargain was
understood between them, and Mr. Slope gave the bishop his hand upon
it  The bishop understood the little extra squeeze, and an
intelligible gleam of assent twinkled in his eye.

"Pray be civil to the archdeacon, Mr. Slope," said he out loud, 'but
make him quite understand that in this matter Mr. Harding has put it
out of my power to oblige him."

It would be a calumny on Mrs. Proudie to suggest that she was sitting
in her bedroom with her ear at the keyhole during this interview. 
She had within her a spirit of decorum which prevented her from
descending to such baseness.  To put her ear to a keyhole, or to
listen at a chink, was a trick for a housemaid.  Mrs. Proudie knew
this and therefore did not do it, but she stationed herself as near
to the door as she well could, that she might if possible, get the
advantage which the housemaid would have had without descending to
the housemaid's artifice.

It was little, however, that she heard, and that little was only
sufficient to deceive her.  She saw nothing of that friendly
pressure, perceived nothing of that concluded bargain; she did not
even dream of the treacherous resolves which those two false men had
made together to upset her in the pride of her station, to dash the
cup from her lip before she had drunk of it, to sweep away all her
power before she had tasted its sweets!  Traitors that they were, the
husband of her bosom and the outcast whom she had fostered and
brought to the warmth of the world's brightest fireside!  But neither
of them had the magnanimity of this woman.  Though two men have thus
leagued themselves together against her, even yet the battle is not
lost.

Mr. Slope felt pretty sure that Dr. Grantly would decline the honour
of seeing him, and such turned out to be the case.  The archdeacon,
when the palace door was opened to him, was greeted by a note.
Mr. Slope presented his compliments, &c. &c.  The bishop was ill in
his room and very greatly regretted, &c. &c.  Mr. Slope had been
charged with the bishop's views, and if agreeable to the archdeacon,
would do himself the honour, &c. &c.  The archdeacon, however, was
not agreeable, and having read his note in the hall, crumpled it up
in his hand, and muttering something about sorrow for his lordship's
illness took his leave, without sending as much as a verbal message
in answer to Mr. Slope's note.

"Ill!" said the archdeacon to himself as he flung himself into his
brougham.  "The man is absolutely a coward.  He is afraid to see me. 
Ill, indeed!"  The archdeacon was never ill himself and did not
therefore understand that anyone else could in truth be prevented by
illness from keeping an appointment.  He regarded all such excuses as
subterfuges, and in the present instance be was not far wrong.

Dr. Grantly desired to be driven to his father-in-law's lodgings in
the High Street, and hearing from the servant that Mr. Harding was at
his daughter's, followed him to Mrs. Bold's house, and there found
him.  The archdeacon was fuming with rage when he got into the
drawing-room, and had by this time nearly forgotten the pusillanimity
of the bishop in the villainy of the chaplain.

"Look at that," said he, throwing Mr. Slope's crumpled note to Mr.
Harding.  "I am to be told that if I choose I may have the honour of
seeing Mr. Slope, and that too after a positive engagement with the
bishop."

"But he says the bishop is ill," said Mr. Harding.

"Pshaw!  You don't mean to say that you are deceived by such an
excuse as that.  He was well enough yesterday.  Now I tell you what,
I will see the bishop, and I will tell him also very plainly what I
think of his conduct.  I will see him, or else Barchester will soon
be too hot to hold him."

Eleanor was sitting in the room, but Dr. Grantly had hardly noticed
her in his anger.  Eleanor now said to him with the greatest
innocence, "I wish you had seen Mr. Slope, Dr. Grantly, because I
think perhaps it might have done good."

The archdeacon turned on her with almost brutal wrath.  Had she at
once owned that she had accepted Mr. Slope for her second husband he
could hardly have felt more convinced of her belonging body and soul
to the Slope and Proudie party than he now did on hearing her express
such a wish as this.  Poor Eleanor!

"See him!" said the archdeacon glaring at her.  "And why am I to be
called on to lower myself in the world's esteem and my own by coming
in contact with such a man as that?  I have hitherto lived among
gentlemen, and do not mean to be dragged into other company by
anybody."

Poor Mr. Harding well knew what the archdeacon meant, but Eleanor was
as innocent as her own baby.  She could not understand how the
archdeacon could consider himself to be dragged into bad company by
condescending to speak to Mr. Slope for a few minutes when the
interests of her father might be served by his doing so.

"I was talking for a full hour yesterday to Mr. Slope," said she with
some little assumption of dignity, "and I did not find myself lowered
by it."

"Perhaps not," said he.  "But if you'll be good enough to allow me, I
shall judge for myself in such matters.  And I tell you what,
Eleanor; it will be much better for you if you will allow yourself to
be guided also by the advice of those who are your friends.  If you
do not, you will be apt to find that you have no friends left who can
advise you."

Eleanor blushed up to the roots of her hair.  But even now she had
not the slightest idea of what was passing in the archdeacon's mind. 
No thought of love-making or love-receiving had yet found its way to
her heart since the death of poor John Bold, and if it were possible
that such a thought should spring there, the man must be far
different from Mr. Slope that could give it birth.

Nevertheless Eleanor blushed deeply, for she felt she was charged
with improper conduct, and she did so with the more inward pain
because her father did not instantly rally to her side--that father
for whose sake and love she had submitted to be the receptacle of Mr.
Slope's confidence.  She had given a detailed account of all that had
passed to her father, and though he had not absolutely agreed with
her about Mr. Slope's views touching the hospital, yet he had said
nothing to make her think that she had been wrong in talking to him.

She was far too angry to humble herself before her brother-in-law. 
Indeed, she had never accustomed herself to be very abject before
him, and they had never been confidential allies.  "I do not the
least understand what you mean, Dr. Grantly," said she.  "I do not
know that I can accuse myself of doing anything that my friends
should disapprove.  Mr. Slope called here expressly to ask what
Papa's wishes were about the hospital, and as, I believe he called
with friendly intentions, I told him"'

"Friendly intentions!" sneered the archdeacon.

"I believe you greatly wrong Mr. Slope," continued Eleanor, "but I
have explained this to Papa already; and as you do not seem to
approve of what I say, Dr. Grantly, I will with your permission leave
you and Papa together;" so saying, she walked slowly out of the room.

All this made Mr. Harding very unhappy.  It was quite clear that the
archdeacon and his wife had made up their minds that Eleanor was
going to marry Mr. Slope.  Mr. Harding could not really bring himself
to think that she would do so, but yet he could not deny that
circumstances made it appear that the man's company was not
disagreeable to her.  She was now constantly seeing him, and yet she
received visits from no other unmarried gentleman.  She always took
his part when his conduct was canvassed, although she was aware how
personally objectionable he was to her friends.  Then, again, Mr.
Harding felt that if she should choose to become Mrs. Slope, he had
nothing that he could justly urge against her doing so.  She had full
right to please herself, and he, as a father, could not say that she
would disgrace herself by marrying a clergyman who stood so well
before the world as Mr. Slope did.  As for quarrelling with his
daughter on account of such a marriage, and separating himself from
her as the archdeacon had threatened to do, that, with Mr. Harding,
would be out of the question.  If she should determine to marry this
man, he must get over his aversion as best he could.  His Eleanor,
his own old companion in their old happy home, must still be the
friend of his bosom, the child of his heart.  Let who would cast her
off, he would not.  If it were fated that he should have to sit in
his old age at the same table with that man whom of all men he
disliked the most, he would meet his fate as best he might.  Anything
to him would be preferable to the loss of his daughter.

Such being his feelings, he hardly knew how to take part with Eleanor
against the archdeacon, or with the archdeacon against Eleanor.  It
will be said that he should never have suspected her.--Alas! he never
should have done so.  But Mr. Harding was by no means a perfect
character.  In his indecision, his weakness, his proneness to be led
by others, his want of self-confidence, he was very far from being
perfect.  And then it must be remembered that such a marriage as that
which the archdeacon contemplated with disgust, which we who know Mr.
Slope so well would regard with equal disgust, did not appear so
monstrous to Mr. Harding because in his charity he did not hate the
chaplain as the archdeacon did, and as we do.

He was, however, very unhappy when his daughter left the room, and he
had recourse to an old trick of his that was customary to him in his
times of sadness.  He began playing some slow tune upon an imaginary
violoncello, drawing one hand slowly backwards and forwards as though
he held a bow in it and modulating the unreal chords with the other.

"She'll marry that man as sure as two and two make four," said the
practical archdeacon.

"I hope not, I hope not," said the father.  "But if she does, what
can I say to her?  I have no right to object to him."

"No right!" exclaimed Dr. Grantly.

"No right as her father.  He is in my own profession and, for aught
we know, a good man."

To this the archdeacon would by no means assent  It was not well,
however, to argue the case against Eleanor in her own drawing-room,
and so they both walked forth and discussed the matter in all its
bearings under the elm-trees of the close.  Mr. Harding also
explained to his son-in-law what had been the purport, at any rate
the alleged purport, of Mr. Slope's last visit to the widow.  He,
however, stated that he could not bring himself to believe that Mr.
Slope had any real anxiety such as that he had pretended.  "I cannot
forget his demeanour to myself," said Mr. Harding, "and it is not
possible that his ideas should have changed so soon."

"I see it all," said the archdeacon.  "The sly tartuffe!  He thinks
to buy the daughter by providing for the father.  He means to show
how powerful he is, how good he is, and how much he is willing to do
for her beaux yeux; yes, I see it all now.  But we'll be too many for
him yet, Mr. Harding;" he said, turning to his companion with some
gravity and pressing his hand upon the other's arm.  "It would,
perhaps, be better for you to lose the hospital than get it on such
terms."

"Lose it!" said Mr. Harding; "why I've lost it already.  I don't want
it.  I've made up my mind to do without it.  I'll withdraw
altogether.  I'll just go and write a line to the bishop and tell him
that I withdraw my claim altogether."

Nothing would have pleased him better than to be allowed to escape
from the trouble and difficulty in such a manner.  But he was now
going too fast for the archdeacon.

"No--no--no!  We'll do no such thing," said Dr. Grantly.  "We'll
still have the hospital.  I hardly doubt but that we'll have it.  But
not by Mr. Slope's assistance.  If that be necessary, we'll lose it;
but we'll have it, spite of his teeth, if we can.  Arabin will be at
Plumstead tomorrow; you must come over and talk to him."

The two now turned into the cathedral library, which was used by the
clergymen of the close as a sort of ecclesiastical club-room, for
writing sermons and sometimes letters; also for reading theological
works and sometimes magazines and newspapers.  The theological works
were not disturbed, perhaps, quite as often as from the appearance of
the building the outside public might have been led to expect.  Here
the two allies settled on their course of action.  The archdeacon
wrote a letter to the bishop, strongly worded, but still respectful,
in which he put forward his father-in-law's claim to the appointment
and expressed his own regret that he had not been able to see his
lordship when he called.  Of Mr. Slope he made no mention whatsoever. 
It was then settled that Mr. Harding should go out to Plumstead on
the following day, and after considerable discussion on the matter
the archdeacon proposed to ask Eleanor there also, so as to withdraw
her, if possible, from Mr. Slope's attentions.  "A week or two," said
he, "may teach her what he is, and while she is there she will be out
of harm's way.  Mr. Slope won't come there after her."

Eleanor was not a little surprised when her brother-in-law came back
and very civilly pressed her to go out to Plumstead with her father. 
She instantly perceived that her father had been fighting her battles
for her behind her back.  She felt thankful to him, and for his sake
she would not show her resentment to the archdeacon by refusing his
invitation.  But she could not, she said, go on the morrow; she had
an invitation to drink tea at the Stanhopes, which she had promised
to accept.  She would, she added, go with her father on the next day,
if he would wait; or she would follow him.

"The Stanhopes!" said Dr. Grantly.  "I did not know you were so
intimate with them."

"I did not know it myself," said she, "till Miss Stanhope called
yesterday.  However, I like her very much, and I have promised to go
and play chess with some of them."

"Have they a party there?' said the archdeacon, still fearful of Mr.
Slope.

"Oh, no," said Eleanor; "Miss Stanhope said there was to be nobody at
all.  But she had heard that Mary had left me for a few weeks, and
she had learnt from someone that I play chess, and so she came over
on purpose to ask me to go in."

"Well, that's very friendly," said the ex-warden.  "They certainly do
look more like foreigners than English people, but I dare say they
are none the worse for that"

The archdeacon was inclined to look upon the Stanhopes with
favourable eyes, and had nothing to object on the matter.  It was
therefore arranged that Mr. Harding should postpone his visit to
Plumstead for one day and then take with him Eleanor, the baby, and
the nurse.

Mr. Slope is certainly becoming of some importance in Barchester.



CHAPTER XIX

Barchester by Moonlight


There was much cause for grief and occasional perturbation of spirits
in the Stanhope family, but yet they rarely seemed to he grieved or
to he disturbed.  It was the peculiar gift of each of them that each
was able to bear his or her own burden without complaint and perhaps
without sympathy.  They habitually looked on the sunny side of the
wall, if there was a gleam on either side for them to look at; if
there was none, they endured the shade with an indifference which, if
not stoical, answered the end at which the Stoics aimed.  Old
Stanhope could not but feel that he had ill-performed his duties as a
father and a clergyman and could hardly look forward to his own death
without grief at the position in which he would leave his family. 
His income for many years had been as high as £3,000 a year, and yet
they had among them no other provision than their mother's fortune of
£10,000.  He had not only spent his income, but was in debt.  Yet
with all this he seldom showed much outward sign of trouble.

It was the same with the mother.  If she added little to the
pleasures of her children, she detracted still less: she neither
grumbled at her lot, nor spoke much of her past or future sufferings;
as long as she had a maid to adjust her dress, and had those dresses
well made, nature with her was satisfied.  It was the same with the
children.  Charlotte never rebuked her father with the prospect of
their future poverty, nor did it seem to grieve her that she was
becoming an old maid so quickly; her temper was rarely ruffled, and,
if we might judge by her appearance, she was always happy.  The
signora was not so sweet-tempered, but she possessed much enduring
courage; she seldom complained--never, indeed, to her family.  Though
she had a cause for affliction which would have utterly broken down
the heart of most women as beautiful as she and as devoid of all
religious support, yet she bore her suffering in silence, or alluded
to it only to elicit the sympathy and stimulate the admiration of the
men with whom she flirted.  As to Bertie, one would have imagined
from the sound of his voice and the gleam of his eye that he had not
a sorrow nor a care in the world.  Nor had he.  He was incapable of
anticipating tomorrow's griefs.  The prospect of future want no more
disturbed his appetite than does that of the butcher's knife disturb
the appetite of the sheep.

Such was the usual tenor of their way, but there were rare
exceptions.  Occasionally the father would allow an angry glance to
fall from his eye, and the lion would send forth a low dangerous roar
as though he meditated some deed of blood.  Occasionally also Madame
Neroni would become bitter against mankind, more than usually
antagonistic to the world's decencies, and would seem as though she
was about to break from her moorings and allow herself to be carried
forth by the tide of her feelings to utter ruin and shipwreck.  She,
however, like the rest of them, had no real feelings, could feel no
true passion.  In that was her security.  Before she resolved on any
contemplated escapade she would make a small calculation, and
generally summed up that the Stanhope villa or even Barchester close
was better than the world at large.

They were most irregular in their hours.  The father was generally
the earliest in the breakfast-parlour, and Charlotte would soon
follow and give him his coffee, but the others breakfasted anywhere,
anyhow, and at any time.  On the morning after the archdeacon's
futile visit to the palace, Dr. Stanhope came downstairs with an
ominously dark look about his eyebrows; his white locks were rougher
than usual, and he breathed thickly and loudly as he took his seat in
his armchair.  He had open letters in his hand, and when Charlotte
came into the room, he was still reading them.  She went up and
kissed him as was her wont, but he hardly noticed her as she did so,
and she knew at once that something was the matter.

"What's the meaning of that?" said he, throwing over the table a
letter with a Milan postmark.  Charlotte was a little frightened as
she took it up, but her mind was relieved when she saw that it was
merely the bill of their Italian milliner.  The sum total was
certainly large, but not so large as to create an important row.

"It's for our clothes, Papa, for six months before we came here.  The
three of us can't dress for nothing, you know."

"Nothing, indeed!" said he, looking at the figures which, in Milanese
denominations, were certainly monstrous.

"The man should have sent it to me," said Charlotte.

"I wish he had with all my heart--if you would have paid it.  I see
enough in it to know that three quarters of it are for Madeline."

"She has little else to amuse her, sir," said Charlotte with true
good nature.

"And I suppose he has nothing else to amuse him," said the doctor,
throwing over another letter to his daughter.  It was from some
member of the family of Sidonia, and politely requested the father to
pay a small trifle of £700, being the amount of a bill discounted in
favour of Mr. Ethelbert Stanhope and now overdue for a period of nine
months.

Charlotte read the letter, slowly folded it up, and put it under the
edge of the tea-tray.

"I suppose he has nothing to amuse him but discounting bills with
Jews.  Does he think I'll pay that?"

"I am sure he thinks no such thing," said she.

"And who does he think will pay it?"

"As far as honesty goes I suppose it won't much matter if it is never
paid," said she.  "I dare say he got very little of it."

"I suppose it won't much matter either," said the father, "if he goes
to prison and rots there.  It seems to me that that's the other
alternative."

Dr. Stanhope spoke of the custom of his youth.  But his daughter,
though she had lived so long abroad, was much more completely versed
in the ways of the English world.  "If the man arrests him," said
she, "he must go through the court."

It is thus, thou great family of Sidonia--it is thus that we Gentiles
treat thee, when, in our extremest need, thou and thine have aided us
with mountains of gold as big as lions--and occasionally with wine-
warrants and orders for dozens of dressing-cases.

"What, and become an insolvent?" said the doctor.

"He's that already," said Charlotte, wishing always to get over a
difficulty.

"What a condition," said the doctor, "for the son of a clergyman of
the Church of England."

"I don't see why clergymen's sons should pay their debts more than
other young men," said Charlotte.

"He's had as much from me since he left school as is held sufficient
for the eldest son of many a nobleman," said the angry father.

"Well, sir," said Charlotte, "give him another chance."

"What!" said the doctor, "do you mean that I am to pay that Jew?"

"Oh, no!  I wouldn't pay him, he must take his chance; and if the
worst comes to the worst, Bertie must go abroad.  But I want you to
be civil to Bertie and let him remain here as long as we stop.
He has a plan in his head that may put him on his feet after all."

"Has he any plan for following up his profession?"

"Oh, he'll do that too, but that must follow.  He's thinking of
getting married."

Just at that moment the door opened, and Bertie came in whistling. 
The doctor immediately devoted himself to his egg and allowed Bertie
to whistle himself round to his sister's side without noticing him.

Charlotte gave a sign to him with her eye, first glancing at her
father, and then at the letter, the corner of which peeped out from
under the tea-tray.  Bertie saw and understood, and with the quiet
motion of a cat he abstracted the letter and made himself acquainted
with its contents.  The doctor, however, had seen him, deep as he
appeared to be mersed in his egg-shell, and said in his harshest
voice, "Well, sir, do you know that gentleman?"

"Yes, sir," said Bertie.  "I have a sort of acquaintance with him,
but none that can justify him in troubling you.  If you will allow
me, sir, I will answer this."

"At any rate I shan't," said the father, and then he added, after a
pause, "Is it true, sir, that you owe the man £700?"

"Well," said Bertie, "I think I should be inclined to dispute the
amount, if I were in a condition to pay him such of it as I really do
owe him."

"Has he your bill for £700?" said the father, speaking very loudly
and very angrily.

"Well, I believe he has," said Bertie, "but all the money I ever got
from him was £150."

"And what became of the £550?"

"Why, sir, the commission was £100 or so, and I took the remainder in
paving-stones and rocking-horses."

"Paving-stones and rocking-horses!" said the doctor.  "Where are
they?"

"Oh, sir, I suppose they are in London somewhere--but I'll inquire if
you wish for them."

"He's an idiot," said the doctor, "and it's sheer folly to waste more
money on him.  Nothing can save him from ruin," and so saying, the
unhappy father walked out of the room.

"Would the governor like to have the paving-stones?" said Bertie to
his sister.

"I'll tell you what," said she.  "If you don't take care, you will
find yourself loose upon the world without even a house over your
head; you don't know him as well as I do.  He's very angry."

Bertie stroked his big beard, sipped his tea, chatted over his
misfortunes in a half-comic, half-serious tone, and ended by
promising his sister that he would do his very best to make himself
agreeable to the Widow Bold.  Then Charlotte followed her father to
his own room, softened down his wrath, and persuaded him to say
nothing more about the Jew bill discounter, at any rate for a few
weeks.  He even went so far as to say he would pay the £700, or at
any rate settle the bill, if he saw a certainty of his son's securing
for himself anything like a decent provision in life.  Nothing was
said openly between them about poor Eleanor, but the father and the
daughter understood each other.

They all met together in the drawing-room at nine o'clock, in perfect
good humour with each other, and about that hour Mrs. Bold was
announced.  She had never been in the house before, though she had of
course called, and now she felt it strange to find herself there in
her usual evening dress, entering the drawing-room of these strangers
in this friendly, unceremonious way, as though she had known them all
her life.  But in three minutes they made her at home.  Charlotte
tripped downstairs and took her bonnet from her, and Bertie came to
relieve her from her shawl, and the signora smiled on her as she
could smile when she chose to be gracious, and the old doctor shook
hands with her in a kind benedictory manner that went to her heart at
once and made her feel that he must be a good man.

She had not been seated for above five minutes when the door again
opened and Mr. Slope was announced.  She felt rather surprised,
because she was told that nobody was to be there, and it was very
evident from the manner of some of them that Mr. Slope was not
unexpected.  But still there was not much in it.  In such invitations
a bachelor or two more or less are always spoken of as nobodies, and
there was no reason why Mr. Slope should not drink tea at Dr.
Stanhope's as well as Eleanor herself.  He, however, was very much
surprised and not very much gratified at finding that his own embryo
spouse made one of the party.  He had come there to gratify himself
by gazing on Madame Neroni's beauty and listening to and returning
her flattery: and though he had not owned as much to himself, he
still felt that if he spent the evening as he had intended to do, he
might probably not thereby advance his suit with Mrs. Bold.

The signora, who had no idea of a rival, received Mr. Slope with her
usual marks of distinction.  As he took her hand, she made some
confidential communication to him in a low voice, declaring that she
had a plan to communicate to him after tea, and was evidently
prepared to go on with her work of reducing the chaplain to a state
of captivity.  Poor Mr. Slope was rather beside himself.  He thought
that Eleanor could not but have learnt from his demeanour that he was
an admirer of her own, and he had also flattered himself that the
idea was not unacceptable to her.  What would she think of him if he
now devoted himself to a married woman!

But Eleanor was not inclined to be severe in her criticisms on him in
this respect, and felt no annoyance of any kind, when she found
herself seated between Bertie and Charlotte Stanhope.  She had no
suspicion of Mr. Slope's intentions; she had no suspicion even of the
suspicion of other people; but still she felt well-pleased not to
have Mr. Slope too near to her.

And she was not ill-pleased to have Bertie Stanhope near her.  It was
rarely indeed that he failed to make an agreeable impression on
strangers.  With a bishop indeed who thought much of his own dignity
it was possible that he might fail, but hardly with a young and
pretty woman.  He possessed the tact of becoming instantly intimate
with women without giving rise to any fear of impertinence.  He had
about him somewhat of the propensities of a tame cat.  It seemed
quite natural that he should be petted, caressed, and treated with
familiar good nature, and that in return he should purr, and be sleek
and graceful, and above all never show his claws.  Like other tame
cats, however, he had his claws and sometimes made them dangerous.

When tea was over, Charlotte went to the open window and declared
loudly that the full harvest moon was much too beautiful to be
disregarded, and called them all to look at it.  To tell the truth
there was but one there who cared much about the moon's beauty, and
that one was not Charlotte, but she knew how valuable an aid to her
purpose the chaste goddess might become, and could easily create a
little enthusiasm for the purpose of the moment.  Eleanor and Bertie
were soon with her.  The doctor was now quiet in his armchair, and
Mrs. Stanhope in hers, both prepared for slumber.

"Are you a Whewellite or a Brewsterite, or a t'othermanite, Mrs.
Bold?" said Charlotte, who knew a little about everything, and had
read about a third of each of the books to which she alluded.

"Oh!" said Eleanor; "I have not read any of the books, but I feel
sure that there is one man in the moon at least, if not more."

"You don't believe in the pulpy gelatinous matter?" said Bertie.

"I heard about that," said Eleanor, "and I really think it's almost
wicked to talk in such a manner.  How can we argue about God's power
in the other stars from the laws which he has given for our rule in
this one?"

"How indeed!" said Bertie.  "Why shouldn't there he a race of
salamanders in Venus?  And even if there be nothing but fish in
Jupiter, why shouldn't the fish there he as wide awake as the men and
women here?"

"That would be saying very little for them," said Charlotte.  "I am
for Dr. Whewell myself, for I do not think that men and women are
worth being repeated in such countless worlds.  There may be souls in
other stars, but I doubt their having any bodies attached to them. 
But come, Mrs. Bold, let us put our bonnets on and walk round the
close.  If we are to discuss sidereal questions, we shall do so much
better under the towers of the cathedral than stuck in this narrow
window."

Mrs. Bold made no objection, and a party was made to walk out. 
Charlotte Stanhope well knew the rule as to three being no company,
and she had therefore to induce her sister to allow Mr. Slope to
accompany them.

"Come, Mr. Slope," she said, "I'm sure you'll join us.  We shall be
in again in a quarter of an hour, Madeline."

Madeline read in her eye all that she had to say, knew her object,
and as she had to depend on her sister for so many of her amusements,
she felt that she must yield.  It was hard to be left alone while
others of her own age walked out to feel the soft influence of the
bright night, but it would be harder still to be without the sort of
sanction which Charlotte gave to all her flirtations and intrigues. 
Charlotte's eye told her that she must give up just at present for
the good of the family, and so Madeline obeyed.

But Charlotte's eyes said nothing of the sort to Mr. Slope.  He had
no objection at all to the tête-à-tête with the signora which the
departure of the other three would allow him, and gently whispered to
her, "I shall not leave you alone."

"Oh, yes," said she; "go--pray go, pray go, for my sake.  Do not
think that I am so selfish.  It is understood that nobody is kept
within for me.  You will understand this too when you know me better. 
Pray join them, Mr. Slope, but when you come in speak to me for five
minutes before you leave us."

Mr. Slope understood that he was to go, and he therefore joined the
party in the hall.  He would have had no objection at all to this
arrangement, if he could have secured Mrs. Bold's arm; but this of
course was out of the question.  Indeed, his fate was very soon
settled, for no sooner had he reached the hall-door than Miss
Stanhope put her hand within his arm, and Bertie walked off with
Eleanor just as naturally as though she were already his own
property.

And so they sauntered forth: first they walked round the close,
according to their avowed intent; then they went under the old arched
gateway below St. Cuthbert's little church, and then they turned
behind the grounds of the bishop's palace, and so on till they came
to the bridge just at the edge of the town, from which passers-by can
look down into the gardens of Hiram's Hospital; and here Charlotte
and Mr. Slope, who were in advance, stopped till the other two came
up to them.  Mr. Slope knew that the gable-ends and old brick
chimneys which stood up so prettily in the moonlight were those of
Mr. Harding's late abode, and would not have stopped on such a spot,
in such company, if he could have avoided it; but Miss Stanhope would
not take the hint which he tried to give.

"This is a very pretty place, Mrs. Bold," said Charlotte; "by far the
prettiest place near Barchester.  I wonder your father gave it up."

It was a very pretty place, and now by the deceitful light of the
moon looked twice larger, twice prettier, twice more antiquely
picturesque than it would have done in truth-telling daylight.  Who
does not know the air of complex multiplicity and the mysterious
interesting grace which the moon always lends to old gabled buildings
half-surrounded, as was the hospital, by fine trees!  As seen from
the bridge on the night of which we are speaking, Mr. Harding's late
abode did look very lovely, and though Eleanor did not grieve at her
father's having left it, she felt at the moment an intense wish that
he might be allowed to return.

"He is going to return to it almost immediately, is he not?" asked
Bertie.

Eleanor made no immediate reply.  Many such a question passes
unanswered without the notice of the questioner, but such was not now
the case.  They all remained silent as though expecting her to reply,
and after a moment or two, Charlotte said, "I believe it is settled
that Mr. Harding returns to the hospital, is it not?"

"I don't think anything about it is settled yet," said Eleanor.

"But it must be a matter of course," said Bertie; "that is, if your
father wishes it.  Who else on earth could hold it after what has
occurred?"

Eleanor quietly made her companion understand that the matter was one
which she could not discuss in the present company, and then they
passed on.  Charlotte said she would go a short way up the hill out
of the town so as to look back upon the towers of the cathedral, and
as Eleanor leant upon Bertie's arm for assistance in the walk, she
told him how the matter stood between her father and the bishop.

"And, he," said Bertie, pointing on to Mr. Slope, "what part does he
take in it?"

Eleanor explained how Mr. Slope had at first endeavoured to tyrannize
over her father, but how he had latterly come round and done all he
could to talk the bishop over in Mr. Harding's favour.  "But my
father," she said, "is hardly inclined to trust him; they all say he
is so arrogant to the old clergymen of the city."

"Take my word for it," said Bertie, "your father is right.  If I am
not very much mistaken, that man is both arrogant and false."

They strolled up to the top of the hill and then returned through the
fields by a foot-path which leads by a small wooden bridge, or rather
a plank with a rustic rail to it, over the river to the other side of
the cathedral from that at which they had started.  They had thus
walked round the bishop's grounds, through which the river runs, and
round the cathedral and adjacent fields, and it was past eleven
before they reached the doctor's door.

"It is very late," said Eleanor; "it will be a shame to disturb your
mother again at such an hour."

"Oh"' said Charlotte, laughing, "you won't disturb Mamma; I dare say
she is in bed by this time, and Madeline would be furious if you did
not come in and see her.  Come, Bertie, take Mrs. Bold's bonnet from
her."

They went upstairs and found the signora alone, reading.  She looked
somewhat sad and melancholy, but not more so perhaps than was
sufficient to excite additional interest in the bosom of Mr. Slope;
and she was soon deep in whispered intercourse with that happy
gentleman, who was allowed to find a resting-place on her sofa.  The
signora had a way of whispering that was peculiarly her own and was
exactly the reverse of that which prevails among great tragedians. 
The great tragedian hisses out a positive whisper, made with bated
breath, and produced by inarticulated tongue-formed sounds, but yet
he is audible through the whole house.  The signora, however, used no
hisses and produced all her words in a clear, silver tone, but they
could only be heard by the ear into which they