 were poured.

Charlotte hurried and scurried about the room hither and thither,
doing, or pretending to do many things; then, saying something about
seeing her mother, ran upstairs.  Eleanor was thus left alone with
Bertie, and she hardly felt an hour fly by her.  To give Bertie his
due credit, he could not have played his cards better.  He did not
make love to her, nor sigh, nor look languishing, but he was amusing
and familiar, yet respectful; and when he left Eleanor at her own
door at one o'clock, which he did by the by with the assistance of
the now jealous Slope, she thought that he was one of the most
agreeable men and the Stanhopes decidedly the most agreeable family
that she had ever met.



CHAPTER XX

Mr. Arabin


The Rev. Francis Arabin, fellow of Lazarus, late professor of poetry
at Oxford, and present vicar of St. Ewold, in the diocese of
Barchester, must now be introduced personally to the reader.  He is
worthy of a new volume, and as he will fill a conspicuous place in
it, it is desirable that he should be made to stand before the
reader's eye by the aid of such portraiture as the author is able to
produce.

It is to be regretted that no mental method of daguerreotype or
photography has yet been discovered by which the characters of men
can he reduced to writing and put into grammatical language with an
unerring precision of truthful description.  How often does the
novelist feel, ay, and the historian also and the biographer, that he
has conceived within his mind and accurately depicted on the tablet
of his brain the full character and personage of a man, and that
nevertheless, when he flies to pen and ink to perpetuate the
portrait, his words forsake, elude, disappoint, and play the deuce
with him, till at the end of a dozen pages the man described has no
more resemblance to the man conceived than the sign-board at the
corner of the street has to the Duke of Cambridge.

And yet such mechanical descriptive skill would hardly give more
satisfaction to the reader than the skill of the photographer does to
the anxious mother desirous to possess an absolute duplicate of her
beloved child.  The likeness is indeed true, but it is a dull, dead,
unfeeling, inauspicious likeness.  The face is indeed there, and
those looking at it will know at once whose image it is, but the
owner of the face will not be proud of the resemblance.

There is no royal road to learning, no short cut to the acquirement
of any valuable art.  Let photographers and daguerreotypers do what
they will, and improve as they may with further skill on that which
skill has already done, they will never achieve a portrait of the
human face divine.  Let biographers, novelists, and the rest of us
groan as we may under the burdens which we so often feel too heavy
for our shoulders; we must either bear them up like men, or own
ourselves too weak for the work we have undertaken.  There is no way
of writing well and also of writing easily.

Labor omnia vincit improbus.  Such should be the chosen motto of
every labourer, and it may be that labour, if adequately enduring,
may suffice at last to produce even some not untrue resemblance of
the Rev. Francis Arabin.

Of his doings in the world and of the sort of fame which he has
achieved enough has been already said.  It has also been said that he
is forty years of age and still unmarried.  He was the younger son of
a country gentleman of small fortune in the north of England.  At an
early age he went to Winchester, and was intended by his father for
New College; but though studious as a boy, he was not studious within
the prescribed limits, and at the age of eighteen he left school with
a character for talent, but without a scholarship.  All that he had
obtained, over and above the advantage of his character, was a gold
medal for English verse, and hence was derived a strong presumption
on the part of his friends that he was destined to add another name
to the imperishable list of English poets.

From Winchester he went to Oxford, and was entered as a commoner at
Balliol.  Here his special career very soon commenced.  He utterly
eschewed the society of fast men, gave no wine-parties, kept no
horses, rowed no boats, joined no rows, and was the pride of his
college tutor.  Such at least was his career till he had taken his
little go, and then he commenced a course of action which, though not
less creditable to himself as a man, was hardly so much to the taste
of the tutor.  He became a member of a vigorous debating society and
rendered himself remarkable there for humorous energy.  Though always
in earnest, yet his earnestness was always droll.  To be true in his
ideas, unanswerable in his syllogisms, and just in his aspirations
was not enough for him.  He had failed, failed in his own opinion as
well as that of others when others came to know him, if he could not
reduce the arguments of his opponents to an absurdity and conquer
both by wit and reason.  To say that his object was ever to raise a
laugh would be most untrue.  He hated such common and unnecessary
evidence of satisfaction on the part of his hearers.  A joke that
required to be laughed at was, with him, not worth uttering.  He
could appreciate by a keener sense than that of his ears the success
of his wit, and would see in the eyes of his auditors whether or no
he was understood and appreciated.

He had been a religious lad before he left school.  That is, he had
addicted himself to a party in religion, and having done so had
received that benefit which most men do who become partisans in such
a cause.  We are much too apt to look at schism in our church as an
unmitigated evil.  Moderate schism, if there may be such a thing, at
any rate calls attention to the subject, draws in supporters who
would otherwise have been inattentive to the matter, and teaches men
to think upon religion.  How great an amount of good of this
description has followed that movement in the Church of England which
commenced with the publication of Froude's Remains!

As a boy young Arabin took up the cudgels on the side of the
Tractarians, and at Oxford he sat for a while at the feet of the
great Newman.  To this cause he lent all his faculties.  For it he
concocted verses, for it he made speeches, for it he scintillated the
brightest sparks of his quiet wit.  For it he ate and drank and
dressed and had his being.  In due process of time he took his degree
and wrote himself B.A., but he did not do so with any remarkable
amount of academical éclat.  He had occupied himself too much with
High Church matters and the polemics, politics, and outward
demonstrations usually concurrent with High Churchmanship to devote
himself with sufficient vigour to the acquisition of a double first. 
He was not a double first, nor even a first class man, but he
revenged himself on the university by putting firsts and double
firsts out of fashion for the year and laughing down a species of
pedantry which, at the age of twenty-three, leaves no room in a man's
mind for graver subjects than conic sections or Greek accents.

Greek accents, however, and conic sections were esteemed necessaries
at Balliol, and there was no admittance there for Mr. Arabin within
the list of its fellows.  Lazarus, however, the richest and most
comfortable abode of Oxford dons, opened its bosom to the young
champion of a church militant.  Mr. Arabin was ordained, and became a
fellow soon after taking his degree, and shortly after that was
chosen professor of poetry.

And now came the moment of his great danger.  After many mental
struggles, and an agony of doubt which may be well surmised, the
great prophet of the Tractarians confessed himself a Roman Catholic. 
Mr. Newman left the Church of England and with him carried many a
waverer.  He did not carry off Mr. Arabin, but the escape which that
gentleman had was a very narrow one.  He left Oxford for awhile that
he might meditate in complete peace on the step which appeared to him
to be all but unavoidable, and shut himself up in a little village on
the sea-shore of one of our remotest counties, that he might learn by
communing with his own soul whether or no he could with a safe
conscience remain within the pale of his mother church.

Things would have gone badly with him there had he been left entirely
to himself.  Everything was against him: all his worldly interests
required him to remain a Protestant, and he looked on his worldly
interests as a legion of foes, to get the better of whom was a point
of extremest honour.  In his then state of ecstatic agony such a
conquest would have cost him little; he could easily have thrown away
all his livelihood; but it cost him much to get over the idea that by
choosing the Church of England he should be open in his own mind to
the charge that he had been led to such a choice by unworthy motives. 
Then his heart was against him: he loved with a strong and eager love
the man who had hitherto been his guide and yearned to follow his
footsteps.  His tastes were against him: the ceremonies and pomps of
the Church of Rome, their august feasts and solemn fasts, invited his
imagination and pleased his eye.  His flesh was against him: how
great an aid would it be to a poor, weak, wavering man to be
constrained to high moral duties, self-denial, obedience, and
chastity by laws which were certain in their enactments, and not to
be broken without loud, palpable, unmistakable sin!  Then his faith
was against him: he required to believe so much; panted so eagerly to
give signs of his belief; deemed it so insufficient to wash himself
simply in the waters of Jordan; that some great deed, such as that of
forsaking everything for a true Church, had for him allurements
almost past withstanding.

Mr. Arabin was at this time a very young man, and when he left Oxford
for his far retreat was much too confident in his powers of fence,
and too apt to look down on the ordinary sense of ordinary people, to
expect aid in the battle that he had to fight from any chance
inhabitants of the spot which he had selected.  But Providence was
good to him; there, in that all but desolate place, on the storm-beat
shore of that distant sea, he met one who gradually calmed his mind,
quieted his imagination, and taught him something of a Christian's
duty.  When Mr. Arabin left Oxford, he was inclined to look upon the
rural clergymen of most English parishes almost with contempt.  It
was his ambition, should he remain within the fold of their church,
to do somewhat towards redeeming and rectifying their inferiority and
to assist in infusing energy and faith into the hearts of Christian
ministers, who were, as he thought, too often satisfied to go through
life without much show of either.

And yet it was from such a one that Mr. Arabin in his extremest need
received that aid which he so much required.  It was from the poor
curate of a small Cornish parish that he first learnt to know that
the highest laws for the governance of a Christian's duty must act
from within and not from without; that no man can become a
serviceable servant solely by obedience to written edicts; and that
the safety which he was about to seek within the gates of Rome was no
other than the selfish freedom from personal danger which the bad
soldier attempts to gain who counterfeits illness on the eve of
battle.

Mr. Arabin returned to Oxford a humbler but a better and a happier
man, and from that time forth he put his shoulder to the wheel as a
clergyman of the Church for which he had been educated.  The
intercourse of those among whom he familiarly lived kept him staunch
to the principles of that system of the Church to which he had always
belonged.  Since his severance from Mr. Newman, no one had had so
strong an influence over him as the head of his college.  During the
time of his expected apostasy Dr. Gwynne had not felt much
predisposition in favour of the young fellow.  Though a High
Churchman himself within moderate limits, Dr. Gwynne felt no sympathy
with men who could not satisfy their faiths with the Thirty-nine
Articles.  He regarded the enthusiasm of such as Newman as a state of
mind more nearly allied to madness than to religion, and when he saw
it evinced by very young men, he was inclined to attribute a good
deal of it to vanity.  Dr. Gwynne himself, though a religious man,
was also a thoroughly practical man of the world, and he regarded
with no favourable eye the tenets of anyone who looked on the two
things as incompatible.  When he found that Mr. Arabin was a half
Roman, he began to regret all he had done towards bestowing a
fellowship on so unworthy a recipient; and when again he learnt that
Mr. Arabin would probably complete his journey to Rome, he regarded
with some satisfaction the fact that in such case the fellowship
would be again vacant.

When, however, Mr. Arabin returned and professed himself a confirmed
Protestant, the Master of Lazarus again opened his arms to him, and
gradually he became the pet of the college.  For some little time he
was saturnine, silent, and unwilling to take any prominent part in
university broils, but gradually his mind recovered, or rather made
its tone, and he became known as a man always ready at a moment's
notice to take up the cudgels in opposition to anything that savoured
of an evangelical bearing.  He was great in sermons, great on
platforms, great at after-dinner conversations, and always pleasant 
as well as great.  He took delight in elections, served on
committees, opposed tooth and nail all projects of university reform,
and talked jovially over his glass of port of the ruin to be
anticipated by the Church and of the sacrilege daily committed by the
Whigs.  The ordeal through which he had gone in resisting the
blandishments of the lady of Rome had certainly done much towards the
strengthening of his character.  Although in small and outward
matters he was self-confident enough, nevertheless in things
affecting the inner man he aimed at a humility of spirit which would
never have been attractive to him but for that visit to the coast of
Cornwall.  This visit he now repeated every year.

Such is an interior view of Mr. Arabin at the time when he accepted
the living of St Ewold.  Exteriorly, he was not a remarkable person. 
He was above the middle height, well-made, and very active.  His
hair, which had been jet black, was now tinged with gray, but his
face bore no sign of years.  It would perhaps be wrong to say that he
was handsome, but his face was nevertheless pleasant to look upon. 
The cheek-bones were rather too high for beauty, and the formation of
the forehead too massive and heavy: but the eyes, nose, and mouth
were perfect.  There was a continual play of lambent fire about his
eyes, which gave promise of either pathos or humour whenever he
essayed to speak, and that promise was rarely broken.  There was a
gentle play about his mouth which declared that his wit never
descended to sarcasm and that there was no ill-nature in his
repartee.

Mr. Arabin was a popular man among women, but more so as a general
than a special favourite.  Living as a fellow at Oxford, marriage
with him had been out of the question, and it may be doubted whether
he had ever allowed his heart to be touched.  Though belonging to a
church in which celibacy is not the required lot of its ministers, he
had come to regard himself as one of those clergymen to whom to be a
bachelor is almost a necessity.  He had never looked for parochial
duty, and his career at Oxford was utterly incompatible with such
domestic joys as a wife and nursery.  He looked on women, therefore,
in the same light that one sees them regarded by many Romish priests. 
He liked to have near him that which was pretty and amusing, but
women generally were little more to him than children.  He talked to
them without putting out all his powers and listened to them without
any idea that what he should hear from them could either actuate his
conduct or influence his opinion.

Such was Mr. Arabin, the new vicar of St. Ewold, who is going to stay
with the Grantlys at Plumstead Episcopi.

Mr. Arabin reached Plumstead the day before Mr. Harding and Eleanor,
and the Grantly family were thus enabled to make his acquaintance and
discuss his qualifications before the arrival of the other guests. 
Griselda was surprised to find that he looked so young, but she told
Florinda her younger sister, when they had retired for the night,
that he did not talk at all like a young man: and she decided with
the authority that seventeen has over sixteen that he was not at all
nice, although his eyes were lovely.  As usual, sixteen implicitly
acceded to the dictum of seventeen in such a matter and said that he
certainly was not nice.  They then branched off on the relative
merits of other clerical bachelors in the vicinity, and both
determined without any feeling of jealousy between them that a
certain Rev. Augustus Green was by many degrees the most estimable of
the lot.  The gentleman in question had certainly much in his favour,
as, having a comfortable allowance from his father, he could devote
the whole proceeds of his curacy to violet gloves and unexceptionable
neck ties.  Having thus fixedly resolved that the new-comer had
nothing about him to shake the pre-eminence of the exalted Green, the
two girls went to sleep in each other's arms, contented with
themselves and the world.

Mrs. Grantly at first sight came to much the same conclusion about
her husband's favourite as her daughters had done, though, in seeking
to measure his relative value, she did not compare him to Mr. Green;
indeed, she made no comparison by name between him and anyone else;
but she remarked to her husband that one person's swans were very
often another person's geese, thereby clearly showing that Mr. Arabin
had not yet proved his qualifications in swanhood to her
satisfaction.

'Well, Susan," said he, rather offended at hearing his friend spoken
of so disrespectfully, "if you take Mr. Arabin for a goose, I cannot
say that I think very highly of your discrimination."

"A goose!  No, of course, he's not a goose.  I've no doubt he's a
very clever man.  But you're so matter-of-fact, Archdeacon, when it
suits your purpose, that one can't trust oneself to any façon de
parler.  I've no doubt Mr. Arabin is a very valuable man--at Oxford--
and that he'll be a good vicar at St. Ewold.  All I mean is that,
having passed one evening with him, I don't find him to be absolutely
a paragon.  In the first place, if I am not mistaken, he is a little
inclined to be conceited."

"Of all the men that I know intimately," said the archdeacon, "Arabin
is, in my opinion, the most free from any taint of self-conceit.  His
fault is that he's too diffident."

"Perhaps so," said the lady; "only I must own I did not find it out
this evening."

Nothing further was said about him.  Dr. Grantly thought that his
wife was abusing Mr. Arabin merely because he had praised him, and
Mrs. Grantly knew that it was useless arguing for or against any
person in favour of or in opposition to whom the archdeacon had
already pronounced a strong opinion.

In truth, they were both right.  Mr. Arabin was a diffident man in
social intercourse with those whom he did not intimately know; when
placed in situations which it was his business to fill, and
discussing matters with which it was his duty to be conversant, Mr.
Arabin was from habit brazen-faced enough.  When standing on a
platform in Exeter Hall, no man would be less mazed than he by the
eyes of the crowd before him, for such was the work which his
profession had called on him to perform; but he shrank from a strong
expression of opinion in general society, and his doing so not
uncommonly made it appear that he considered the company not worth
the trouble of his energy.  He was averse to dictate when the place
did not seem to him to justify dictation, and as those subjects on
which people wished to hear him speak were such as he was accustomed
to treat with decision, he generally shunned the traps there were
laid to allure him into discussion, and, by doing so, not
infrequently subjected himself to such charges as those brought
against him by Mrs. Grantly.

Mr. Arabin, as he sat at his open window, enjoying the delicious
moonlight and gazing at the gray towers of the church, which stood
almost within the rectory grounds, little dreamed that he was the
subject of so many friendly or unfriendly criticisms.  Considering
how much we are all given to discuss the characters of others, and
discuss them often not in the strictest spirit of charity, it is
singular how little we are inclined to think that others can speak
ill-naturedly of us, and how angry and hurt we are when proof reaches
us that they have done so.  It is hardly too much to say that we all
of us occasionally speak of our dearest friends in a manner in which
those dearest friends would very little like to hear themselves
mentioned, and that we nevertheless expect that our dearest friends
shall invariably speak of us as though they were blind to all our
faults but keenly alive to every shade of our virtues.

It did not occur to Mr. Arabin that he was spoken of at all.  It
seemed to him, when he compared himself with his host, that he was a
person of so little consequence to any that he was worth no one's
words or thoughts.  He was utterly alone in the world as regarded
domestic ties and those inner familiar relations which are hardly
possible between others than husbands and wives, parents and
children, or brothers and sisters.  He had often discussed with
himself the necessity of such bonds for a man's happiness in this
world and had generally satisfied himself with the answer that
happiness in this world is not a necessity.  Herein he deceived
himself, or rather tried to do so.  He, like others, yearned for the
enjoyment of whatever he saw enjoyable, and though he attempted, with
the modern stoicism of so many Christians, to make himself believe
that joy and sorrow were matters which here should be held as
perfectly indifferent, these things were not indifferent to him.  He
was tired of his Oxford rooms and his college life.  He regarded the
wife and children of his friend with something like envy; he all but
coveted the pleasant drawing-room, with its pretty windows opening on
to lawns and flower-beds, the apparel of the comfortable house,
and--above all--the air of home which encompassed it all.

It will be said that no time can have been so fitted for such desires
on his part as this, when he had just possessed himself of a country
parish, of a living among fields and gardens, of a house which a wife
would grace.  It is true there was a difference between the opulence
of Plumstead and the modest economy of St. Ewold, but surely Mr.
Arabin was not a man to sigh after wealth!  Of all men, his friends
would have unanimously declared he was the last to do so.  But how
little our friends know us!  In his period of stoical rejection of
this world's happiness, he had cast from him as utter dross all
anxiety as to fortune.  He had, as it were, proclaimed himself to be
indifferent to promotion, and those who chiefly admired his talents,
and would mainly have exerted themselves to secure to them their
deserved reward, had taken him at his word.  And now, if the truth
must out, he felt himself disappointed--disappointed not by them but
by himself.  The daydream of his youth was over, and at the age of
forty he felt that he was not fit to work in the spirit of an
apostle.  He had mistaken himself and learned his mistake when it was
past remedy.  He had professed himself indifferent to mitres and
diaconal residences, to rich livings and pleasant glebes, and now he
had to own to himself that he was sighing for the good things of
other men on whom, in his pride, he had ventured to look down.

Not for wealth, in its vulgar sense, had he ever sighed; not for the
enjoyment of rich things, had he ever longed; but for the allotted
share of worldly bliss which a wife, and children, and happy home
could give him, for that usual amount of comfort which he had
ventured to reject as unnecessary for him, he did now feel that he
would have been wiser to have searched.

He knew that his talents, his position, and his friends would have
won for him promotion, had he put himself in the way of winning it. 
Instead of doing so, he had allowed himself' to be persuaded to
accept a living which would give him an income of some £300 a year
should he, by marrying, throw up his fellowship.  Such, at the age of
forty, was the worldly result of labour which the world had chosen to
regard as successful.  The world also thought that Mr. Arabin was, in
his own estimation, sufficiently paid.  Alas!  Alas!  The world was
mistaken, and Mr. Arabin was beginning to ascertain that such was the
case.

And here may I beg the reader not to be hard in his judgement upon
this man.  Is not the state at which he has arrived the natural
result of efforts to reach that which is not the condition of
humanity?  Is not modern stoicism, built though it be on
Christianity, as great an outrage on human nature as was the stoicism
of the ancients?  The philosophy of Zeno was built on true laws, but
on true laws misunderstood and therefore misapplied.  It is the same
with our Stoics here, who would teach us that wealth and worldly
comfort and happiness on earth are not worth the search.  Alas, for a
doctrine which can find no believing pupils and no true teachers!

The case of Mr. Arabin was the more singular, as he belonged to a
branch of the Church of England well inclined to regard its
temporalities with avowed favour, and had habitually lived with men
who were accustomed to much worldly comfort.  But such was his
idiosyncrasy that these very facts had produced within him, in early
life, a state of mind that was not natural to him.  He was content to
be a High Churchman, if he could be so on principles of his own and
could strike out a course showing a marked difference from those with
whom he consorted.  He was ready to be a partisan as long as he was
allowed to have a course of action and of thought unlike that of his
party.  His party had indulged him, and he began to feel that his
party was right and himself wrong, just when such a conviction was
too late to be of service to him.  He discovered, when such discovery
was no longer serviceable, that it would have been worth his while to
have worked for the usual pay assigned to work in this world and have
earned a wife and children, with a carriage for them to sit in; to
have earned a pleasant dining-room, in which his friends could drink
his wine, and the power of walking up the high street of his country
town, with the knowledge that all its tradesmen would have gladly
welcomed him within their doors.  Other men arrived at those
convictions in their start in life and so worked up to them.  To him
they had come when they were too late to be of use.

It has been said that Mr. Arabin was a man of pleasantry, and it may
be thought that such a state of mind as that described would be
antagonistic to humour.  But surely such is not the case.  Wit is the
outward mental casing of the man and has no more to do with the inner
mind of thoughts and feelings than have the rich brocaded garments of
the priest at the altar with the asceticism of the anchorite below
them, whose skin is tormented with sackcloth and whose body is half-
flayed with rods.  Nay, will not such a one often rejoice more than
any other in the rich show of his outer apparel?  Will it not be food
for his pride to feel that he groans inwardly while he shines
outwardly?  So it is with the mental efforts which men make.  Those
which they show forth daily to the world are often the opposites of
the inner workings of the spirit.

In the archdeacon's drawing-room, Mr. Arabin had sparkled with his
usual unaffected brilliancy, but when he retired to his bedroom, he
sat there sad, at his open window, repining within himself that he
also had no wife, no bairns, no soft sward of lawn duly mown for him
to lie on, no herd of attendant curates, no bowings from the banker's
clerks, no rich rectory.  That apostleship that he had thought of had
evaded his grasp, and he was now only vicar of St. Ewold's, with a
taste for a mitre.  Truly he had fallen between two stools.



CHAPTER XXI

St. Ewold's Parsonage


When Mr. Harding and Mrs. Bold reached the rectory on the following
morning, the archdeacon and his friend were at St. Ewold's.  They had
gone over that the new vicar might inspect his church and be
introduced to the squire, and were not expected back before dinner. 
Mr. Harding rambled out by himself and strolled, as was his wont at
Plumstead, about the lawn and round the church; and as he did so, the
two sisters naturally fell into conversation about Barchester.

There was not much sisterly confidence between them.  Mrs. Grantly
was ten years older than Eleanor, and had been married while Eleanor
was yet a child.  They had never, therefore, poured into each other's
ears their hopes and loves, and now that one was a wife and the other
a widow, it was not probable that they would begin to do so.  They
lived too much asunder to be able to fall into that kind of
intercourse which makes confidence between sisters almost a
necessity; moreover, that which is so easy at eighteen is often very
difficult at twenty-eight.  Mrs. Grantly knew this and did not,
therefore, expect confidence from her sister; yet she longed to ask
her whether in real truth Mr. Slope was agreeable to her.

It was by no means difficult to turn the conversation to Mr. Slope. 
That gentleman had become so famous at Barchester, had so much to do
with all clergymen connected with the city, and was so specially
concerned in the affairs of Mr. Harding, that it would have been odd
if Mr. Harding's daughters had not talked about him.  Mrs. Grantly
was soon abusing him, which she did with her whole heart, and Mrs.
Bold was nearly as eager to defend him.  She positively disliked the
man, would have been delighted to learn that he had taken himself off
so that she should never see him again, had indeed almost a fear of
him, and yet she constantly found herself taking his part.  The abuse
of other people and abuse of a nature that she felt to be unjust
imposed this necessity on her and at last made Mr. Slope's defence an
habitual course of argument with her.

From Mr. Slope the conversation turned to the Stanhopes, and Mrs.
Grantly was listening with some interest to Eleanor's account of the
family when it dropped out that Mr. Slope made one of the party.

"What!" said the lady of the rectory.  "Was Mr. Slope there too?"

Eleanor merely replied that such had been the case.

"Why, Eleanor, he must be very fond of you, I think; he seems to
follow you everywhere."

Even this did not open Eleanor's eyes.  She merely laughed, and said
that she imagined Mr. Slope found other attraction at Dr. Stanhope's. 
And so they parted.  Mrs. Grantly felt quite convinced that the
odious match would take place, and Mrs. Bold as convinced that that
unfortunate chaplain, disagreeable as he must be allowed to be, was
more sinned against than sinning.

The archdeacon of course heard before dinner that Eleanor had
remained the day before in Barchester with the view of meeting Mr.
Slope and that she had so met him.  He remembered how she had
positively stated that there were to be no guests at the Stanhopes,
and he did not hesitate to accuse her of deceit.  Moreover, the fact,
or rather presumed fact, of her being deceitful on such a matter
spoke but too plainly in evidence against her as to her imputed crime
of receiving Mr. Slope as a lover.

"I am afraid that anything we can do will be too late," said the
archdeacon.  "I own I am fairly surprised.  I never liked your
sister's taste with regard to men, but still I did not give her
credit for--ugh!"

"And so soon, too," said Mrs. Grantly, who thought more, perhaps, of 
her sister's indecorum in having a lover before she had put off her
weeds than her bad taste in having such a lover as Mr. Slope.

"Well, my dear, I shall he sorry to be harsh, or to do anything that
can hurt your father; but, positively, neither that man nor his wife
shall come within my doors."

Mrs. Grantly sighed, and then attempted to console herself and her
lord by remarking that, after all, the thing was not accomplished
yet.  Now that Eleanor was at Plumstead, much might be done to wean
her from her fatal passion.  Poor Eleanor!

The evening passed off without anything to make it remarkable.  Mr.
Arabin discussed the parish of St. Ewold with the archdeacon, and
Mrs. Grantly and Mr. Harding, who knew the personages of the parish,
joined in.  Eleanor also knew them, but she said little.  Mr. Arabin
did not apparently take much notice of her, and she was not in a
humour to receive at that time with any special grace any special
favourite of her brother-in-law.  Her first idea on reaching her
bedroom was that a much pleasanter family party might be met at Dr.
Stanhope's than at the rectory.  She began to think that she was
getting tired of clergymen and their respectable, humdrum, wearisome
mode of living, and that after all, people in the outer world, who
had lived in Italy, London, or elsewhere, need not necessarily be
regarded as atrocious and abominable.  The Stanhopes, she had
thought, were a giddy, thoughtless, extravagant set of people, but
she had seen nothing wrong about them and had, on the other hand,
found that they thoroughly knew how to make their house agreeable. 
It was a thousand pities, she thought, that the archdeacon should not
have a little of the same savoir vivre.  Mr. Arabin, as we have said,
did not apparently take much notice of her, but yet he did not go to
bed without feeling that he had been in company with a very pretty
woman; and as is the case with most bachelors, and some married men,
regarded the prospect of his month's visit at Plumstead in a
pleasanter light when he learnt that a very pretty woman was to share
it with him.

Before they all retired it was settled that the whole party should
drive over on the following day to inspect the parsonage at St.
Ewold.  The three clergymen were to discuss dilapidations, and the
two ladies were to lend their assistance in suggesting such changes
as might be necessary for a bachelor's abode.

Accordingly, soon after breakfast the carriage was at the door. 
There was only room for four inside, and the archdeacon got upon the
box.  Eleanor found herself opposite to Mr. Arabin, and was,
therefore, in a manner forced into conversation with him.  They were
soon on comfortable terms together, and had she thought about it, she
would have thought that, in spite of his black cloth, Mr. Arabin
would not have been a bad addition to the Stanhope family party.

Now that the archdeacon was away they could all trifle.  Mr. Harding
began by telling them in the most innocent manner imaginable an old
legend about Mr. Arabin's new parish.  There was, he said, in days of
yore an illustrious priestess of St. Ewold, famed through the whole
country for curing all manner of diseases.  She had a well, as all
priestesses have ever had, which well was extant to this day and
shared in the minds of many of the people the sanctity which belonged
to the consecrated ground of the parish church.  Mr. Arabin declared
that he should look on such tenets on the part of his parishioners as
anything but orthodox.  And Mrs. Grantly replied that she so entirely
disagreed with him as to think that no parish was in a proper state
that had not its priestess as well as its priest.  "The duties are
never well done," said she, "unless they are so divided."

"I suppose, Papa," said Eleanor, "that in the olden times the
priestess bore all the sway herself.  Mr. Arabin, perhaps, thinks
that such might be too much the case now if a sacred lady were
admitted within the parish."

"I think, at any rate," said he, "that it is safer to run no such
risk.  No priestly pride has ever exceeded that of sacerdotal
females.  A very lowly curate I might, perhaps, essay to rule, but a
curatess would be sure to get the better of me."

"There are certainly examples of such accidents happening," said Mrs.
Grantly.  "They do say that there is a priestess at Barchester who is
very imperious in all things touching the altar.  Perhaps the fear of
such a fate as that is before your eyes."

When they were joined by the archdeacon on the gravel before the
vicarage, they descended again to grave dullness.  Not that
Archdeacon Grantly was a dull man, but his frolic humours were of a
cumbrous kind, and his wit, when he was witty, did not generally
extend itself to his auditors.  On the present occasion he was soon
making speeches about wounded roofs and walls, which he declared to
be in want of some surgeon's art.  There was not a partition that he
did not tap, nor a block of chimneys that he did not narrowly
examine; all water-pipes, flues, cisterns, and sewers underwent an
investigation; he even descended, in the care of his friend, so far
as to bore sundry boards in the floors with a bradawl.

Mr. Arabin accompanied him through the rooms, trying to look wise in
such domestic matters, and the other three also followed.  Mrs.
Grantly showed that she had not herself been priestess of a parish
twenty years for nothing and examined the bells and window-panes in a
very knowing way.

"You will, at any rate, have a beautiful prospect out of your own
window, if this is to be your private sanctum," said Eleanor.  She
was standing at the lattice of a little room upstairs, from which the
view certainly was very lovely.  It was from the back of the
vicarage, and there was nothing to interrupt the eye between the
house and the glorious gray pile of the cathedral.  The intermediate
ground, however, was beautifully studded with timber.  In the
immediate foreground ran the little river which afterwards skirted
the city, and, just to the right of the cathedral, the pointed gables
and chimneys of Hiram's Hospital peeped out of the elms which
encompass it.

"Yes," said he, joining her.  "I shall have a beautifully complete
view of my adversaries.  I shall sit down before the hostile town and
fire away at them at a very pleasant distance.  I shall just be able
to lodge a shot in the hospital, should the enemy ever get possession
of it, and as for the palace, I have it within full range."

"I never saw anything like you clergymen," said Eleanor; "You are
always thinking of fighting each other."

"Either that," said he, "or else supporting each other.  The pity is
that we cannot do the one without the other.  But are we not here to
fight?  Is not ours a church militant?  What is all our work but
fighting, and hard fighting, if it be well done?"

"But not with each other."

"That's as it may be.  The same complaint which you make of me for
battling with another clergyman of our own church the Mohammedan
would make against me for battling with the error of a priest of
Rome.  Yet, surely, you would not be inclined to say that I should be
wrong to do battle with such as him.  A pagan, too, with his
multiplicity of gods, would think it equally odd that the Christian
and the Mohammedan should disagree."

"Ah!  But you wage your wars about trifles so bitterly."

"Wars about trifles," said he, "are always bitter, especially among
neighbours.  When the differences are great, and the
parties comparative strangers, men quarrel with courtesy.  What
combatants are ever so eager as two brothers?"

"But do not such contentions bring scandal on the church?"

"More scandal would fall on the church if there were no such
contentions.  We have but one way to avoid them--by that of
acknowledging a common head of our church, whose word on all points
of doctrine shall be authoritative.  Such a termination of our
difficulties is alluring enough.  It has charms which are
irresistible to many, and all but irresistible, I own, to me."

"You speak now of the Church of Rome?" said Eleanor.

"No," said he, "not necessarily of the Church of Rome; but of a
church with a head.  Had it pleased God to vouchsafe to us such a
church our path would have been easy.  But easy paths have not been
thought good for us."  He paused and stood silent for awhile,
thinking of the time when he had so nearly sacrificed all he had, his
powers of mind, his free agency, the fresh running waters of his
mind's fountain, his very inner self, for an easy path in which no
fighting would be needed; and then he continued: "What you say is
partly true: our contentions do bring on us some scandal.  The outer
world, though it constantly reviles us for our human infirmities and
throws in our teeth the fact that being clergymen we are still no
more than men, demands of us that we should do our work with godlike
perfection.  There is nothing god-like about us: we differ from each
other with the acerbity common to man; we triumph over each other
with human frailty; we allow differences on subjects of divine origin
to produce among us antipathies and enmities which are anything but
divine.  This is all true.  But what would you have in place of it? 
There is no infallible head for a church on earth.  This dream of
believing man has been tried, and we see in Italy and in Spain what
has come of it.  Grant that there are and have been no bickerings
within the pale of the Pope's Church.  Such an assumption would be
utterly untrue, but let us grant it, and then let us say which church
has incurred the heavier scandals."

There was a quiet earnestness about Mr. Arabin, as he half-
acknowledged and half-defended himself from the charge brought
against him, which surprised Eleanor.  She had been used all her life
to listen to clerical discussion, but the points at issue between the
disputants had so seldom been of more than temporal significance as
to have left on her mind no feeling of reverence for such subjects. 
There had always been a hard worldly leaven of the love either of
income or of power in the strains she had heard; there had been no
panting for the truth; no aspirations after religious purity.  It had
always been taken for granted by those around her that they were
indubitably right; that there was no ground for doubt; that the hard
uphill work of ascertaining what the duty of a clergyman should be
had been already accomplished in full; and that what remained for an
active militant parson to do was to hold his own against all comers. 
Her father, it is true, was an exception to this, but then he was so
essentially anti-militant in all things that she classed him in her
own mind apart from all others.  She had never argued the matter
within herself, or considered whether this common tone was or was not
faulty, but she was sick of it without knowing that she was so.  And
now she found to her surprise, and not without a certain pleasurable
excitement, that this new-comer among them spoke in a manner very
different from that to which she was accustomed.

"It is so easy to condemn," said he, continuing the thread of his
thoughts.  "I know no life that must be so delicious as that of a
writer for newspapers, or a leading member of the opposition--to
thunder forth accusations against men in power; to show up the worst
side of everything that is produced; to pick holes in every coat; to 
be indignant, sarcastic, jocose, moral, or supercilious; to damn with
faint praise, or crush with open calumny!  What can be so easy as
this when the critic has to be responsible for nothing?  You condemn
what I do, but put yourself in my position and do the reverse, and
then see if I cannot condemn you."

"Oh, Mr. Arabin, I do not condemn you."

"Pardon me, you do, Mrs. Bold--you as one of the world; you are now
the opposition member; you are now composing your leading article,
and well and bitterly you do it.  'Let dogs delight to bark and
bite'--you fitly begin with an elegant quotation--'but if we are to
have a church at all, in heaven's name let the pastors who preside
over it keep their hands from each other's throats.  Lawyers can live
without befouling each other's names; doctors do not fight duels. 
Why is it that clergymen alone should indulge themselves in such
unrestrained liberty of abuse against each other?' and so you go on
reviling us for our ungodly quarrels, our sectarian propensities, and
scandalous differences.  It will, however, give you no trouble to
write another article next week in which we, or some of us, shall be
twitted with an unseemly apathy in matters of our vocation.  It will
not fall on you to reconcile the discrepancy; your readers will never
ask you how the poor parson is to be urgent in season and out of
season and yet never come in contact with men who think widely
differently from him.  You, when you condemn this foreign treaty, or
that official arrangement, will have to incur no blame for the graver
faults of any different measure.  It is so easy to condemn--and so
pleasant too, for eulogy charms no listeners as detraction does."

Eleanor only half-followed him in his raillery, but she caught his
meaning.  "I know I ought to apologize for presuming to criticize
you," she said, "but I was thinking with sorrow of the ill-will that
has lately come among us at Barchester, and I spoke more freely than
I should have done."

"Peace on earth and goodwill among men, are, like heaven, promises
for the future;" said he, following rather his own thoughts than
hers.  "When that prophecy is accomplished, there will no longer be
any need for clergymen."

Here they were interrupted by the archdeacon, whose voice was heard
from the cellar shouting to the vicar.

"Arabin, Arabin,"--and then, turning to his wife, who was apparently
at his elbow--"where has he gone to?  This cellar is perfectly
abominable.  It would be murder to put a bottle of wine into it till
it has been roofed, walled, and floored.  How on earth old Goodenough
ever got on with it I cannot guess.  But then Goodenough never had a
glass of wine that any man could drink."

"What is it, Archdeacon?" said the vicar, running downstairs and
leaving Eleanor above to her meditations.

"This cellar must be roofed, walled, and floored," repeated the
archdeacon.  "Now mind what I say, and don't let the architect
persuade you that it will do; half of these fellows know nothing
about wine.  This place as it is now would be damp and cold in winter
and hot and muggy in summer.  I wouldn't give a straw for the best
wine that ever was vinted, after it had lain here a couple of years."

Mr. Arabin assented and promised that the cellar should be
reconstructed according to the archdeacon's receipt.

"And, Arabin, look here, was such an attempt at a kitchen grate ever
seen?"

"The grate is really very bad," said Mrs. Grantly.  "1 am sure the 
priestess won't approve of it, when she is brought home to the scene
of her future duties.  Really, Mr. Arabin, no priestess accustomed to
such an excellent well as that above could put up with such a grate
as this."

"If there must be a priestess at St. Ewold's at all, Mrs. Grantly, I
think we will leave her to her well and not call down her divine
wrath on any of the imperfections rising from our human poverty. 
However, I own I am amenable to the attractions of a well-cooked
dinner, and the grate shall certainly be changed."

By this time the archdeacon had again ascended, and was now in the
dining-room.  "Arabin," said he, speaking in his usual loud, clear
voice and with that tone of dictation which was so common to him,
"you must positively alter this dining-room--that is, remodel it
altogether.  Look here, it is just sixteen feet by fifteen; did any
man ever hear of a dining-room of such proportions!"  The archdeacon
stepped the room long-ways and cross-ways with ponderous steps, as
though a certain amount of ecclesiastical dignity could be imparted
even to such an occupation as that by the manner of doing it. 
"Barely sixteen; you may call it a square."

"It would do very well for a round table," suggested the ex-warden.

Now there was something peculiarly unorthodox, in the archdeacon's
estimation, in the idea of a round table.  He had always been
accustomed to a goodly board of decent length, comfortably elongating
itself according to the number of the guests, nearly black with
perpetual rubbing, and as bright as a mirror.  Now round dinner-
tables are generally of oak, or else of such new construction as not
to have acquired the peculiar hue which was so pleasing to him.  He
connected them with what he called the nasty newfangled method of
leaving a cloth on the table, as though to warn people that they were
not to sit long.  In his eyes there was something democratic and
parvenu in a round table.  He imagined that dissenters and calico-
printers chiefly used them, and perhaps a few literary lions more
conspicuous for their wit than their gentility.  He was a little
flurried at the idea of such an article being introduced into the
diocese by a protégé of his own and at the instigation of his
father-in-law.

"A round dinner-table," said he with some heat, "is the most
abominable article of furniture that ever was invented.  I hope that
Arabin has more taste than to allow such a thing in his house."

Poor Mr. Harding felt himself completely snubbed and of course said
nothing further, but Mr. Arabin, who had yielded submissively in the
small matters of the cellar and kitchen grate, found himself obliged
to oppose reforms which might be of a nature too expensive for his
pocket

"But it seems to me, Archdeacon, that I can't very well lengthen the
room without pulling down the wall, and if I pull down the wall, I
must build it up again; then if I throw out a bow on this side, I
must do the same on the other, and if I do it for the ground floor, I
must carry it up to the floor above.  That will be putting a new
front to the house and will cost, I suppose, a couple of hundred
pounds.  The ecclesiastical commissioners will hardly assist me when
they hear that my grievance consists in having a dining-room only
sixteen feet long."

The archdeacon proceeded to explain that nothing would be easier than
adding six feet to the front of the dining-room without touching any
other room in the house.  Such irregularities of construction in
small country-houses were, he said, rather graceful than otherwise,
and he offered to pay for the whole thing out of his own pocket if it
cost more than forty pounds.  Mr. Arabin, however, was firm, and,
although the archdeacon fussed and fumed about it, would not give
way.  Forty pounds, he said, was a matter of serious moment to him,
and his friends, if under such circumstances they would be good-
natured enough to come to him at all, must put up with the misery of
a square room.  He was willing to compromise matters by disclaiming
any intention of having a round table.

"But," said Mrs. Grantly, "what if the priestess insists on having
both the rooms enlarged?"

"The priestess in that case must do it for herself, Mrs. Grantly."

"I have no doubt she will be well able to do so," replied the lady;
"to do that and many more wonderful things.  I am quite sure that the
priestess of St. Ewold, when she does come, won't come empty-handed."

Mr. Arabin, however, did not appear well inclined to enter into
speculative expenses on such a chance as this, and therefore any
material alterations in the house the cost of which could not fairly
be made to lie at the door either of the ecclesiastical commissioners
or of the estate of the late incumbent were tabooed.  With this
essential exception, the archdeacon ordered, suggested, and carried
all points before him in a manner very much to his own satisfaction. 
A close observer, had there been one there, might have seen that his
wife had been quite as useful in the matter as himself.  No one knew
better than Mrs. Grantly the appurtenances necessary to a comfortable
house.  She did not, however, think it necessary to lay claim to any
of the glory which her lord and master was so ready to appropriate as
his own.

Having gone through their work effectually and systematically, the
party returned to Plumstead well satisfied with their expedition.



CHAPTER XXII

The Thornes of Ullathorne


On the following Sunday