 Mr. Arabin was to read himself in at his new
church.  It was agreed at the rectory that the archdeacon should go
over with him and assist at the reading desk and that Mr. Harding
should take the archdeacon's duty at Plumstead Church.  Mrs. Grantly
had her school and her buns to attend to and professed that she could
not be spared, but Mrs. Bold was to accompany them.  It was further
agreed also that they would lunch at the squire's house and return
home after the afternoon service.

Wilfred Thorne, Esq., of Ullathorne, was the squire of St. Ewold's--
or, rather, the squire of Ullathorne, for the domain of the modern
landlord was of wider notoriety than the fame of the ancient saint. 
He was a fair specimen of what that race has come to in our days
which, a century ago, was, as we are told, fairly represented by
Squire Western.  If that representation be a true one, few classes of
men can have made faster strides in improvement.  Mr. Thorne,
however, was a man possessed of quite a sufficient number of foibles
to lay him open to much ridicule.  He was still a bachelor, being
about fifty, and was not a little proud of his person.  When living
at home at Ullathorne, there was not much room for such pride, and 
there therefore he always looked like a gentleman and like that which
he certainly was, the first man in his parish.  But during the month
or six weeks which he annually spent in London he tried so hard to
look like a great man there also, which he certainly was not, that he
was put down as a fool by many at his club.  He was a man of
considerable literary attainment in a certain way and on certain
subjects.  His favourite authors were Montaigne and Burton, and he
knew more perhaps than any other man in his own county and the next
to it of the English essayists of the two last centuries.  He
possessed complete sets of the Idler, the Spectator, the Tatler, the
Guardian, and the Rambler, and would discourse by hours together on
the superiority of such publications to anything which has since been
produced in our Edinburghs and Quarterlies.  He was proficient in all
questions of genealogy and knew enough of almost every gentleman's
family in England to say of what blood and lineage were descended all
those who had any claim to be considered as possessors of any such
luxuries.  For blood and lineage he himself had a most profound
respect.  He counted back his own ancestors to some period long
antecedent to the Conquest and could tell you, if you would listen to
him, how it had come to pass that they, like Cedric the Saxon, had
been permitted to hold their own among the Norman barons.  It was
not, according to his showing, on account of any weak complaisance on
the part of his family towards their Norman neighbours.  Some
Ealfried of Ullathorne once fortified his own castle and held out,
not only that, but the then existing cathedral of Barchester also,
against one Geoffrey De Burgh, in the time of King John; and Mr.
Thorne possessed the whole history of the siege written on vellum and
illuminated in a most costly manner.  It little signified that no one
could read the writing, as, had that been possible, no one could have
understood the language.  Mr. Thorne could, however, give you all the
particulars in good English and had no objection to do so.

It would be unjust to say that he looked down on men whose families
were of recent date.  He did not do so.  He frequently consorted with
such, and had chosen many of his friends from among them.  But he
looked on them as great millionaires are apt to look on those who
have small incomes; as men who have Sophocles at their fingers' ends
regard those who know nothing of Greek.  They might doubtless be good
sort of people, entitled to much praise for virtue, very admirable
for talent, highly respectable in every way, but they were without
the one great good gift.  Such was Mr. Thorne's way of thinking on
this matter; nothing could atone for the loss of good blood; nothing
could neutralize its good effects.  Few indeed were now possessed of
it, but the possession was on that account the more precious.   It
was very pleasant to hear Mr. Thorne descant on this matter.  Were
you in your ignorance to surmise that such a one was of a good family
because the head of his family was a baronet of an old date, he would
open his eyes with a delightful look of affected surprise and
modestly remind you that baronetcies only dated from James I.  He 
would gently sigh if you spoke of the blood of the Fitzgeralds and De
Burghs; would hardly allow the claims of the Howards and Lowthers;
and has before now alluded to the Talbots as a family who had hardly
yet achieved the full honours of a pedigree.

In speaking once of a wide-spread race whose name had received the
honours of three coronets, scions from which sat for various
constituencies, some one of whose members had been in almost every
cabinet formed during the present century, a brilliant race such as
there are few in England, Mr. Thorne had called them all "dirt."  He
had not intended any disrespect to these men.  He admired them in
many senses and allowed them their privileges without envy.  He had
merely meant to express his feeling that the streams which ran
through their veins were not yet purified by time to that perfection,
had not become so genuine an ichor, as to be worthy of being called
blood in the genealogical sense.

When Mr. Arabin was first introduced to him, Mr. Thorne had
immediately suggested that he was one of the Arabins of Uphill
Stanton.  Mr. Arabin replied that he was a very distant relative of
the family alluded to.  To this Mr. Thorne surmised that the
relationship could not be very distant.  Mr. Arabin assured him that
it was so distant that the families knew nothing of each other.  Mr.
Thorne laughed his gentle laugh at this and told Mr. Arabin that
there was now existing no branch of his family separated from the
parent stock at an earlier date than the reign of Elizabeth, and that
therefore Mr. Arabin could not call himself distant.  Mr. Arabin
himself was quite clearly an Arabin of Uphill Stanton.

"But," said the vicar, "Uphill Stanton has been sold to the De Greys
and has been in their hands for the last fifty years."

"And when it has been there one hundred and fifty, if it unluckily
remain there so long," said Mr. Thorne, "your descendants will not be
a whit the less entitled to describe themselves as being of the
family of Uphill Stanton.  Thank God no De Grey can buy that--and
thank God no Arabin, and no Thorne, can sell it."

In politics Mr. Thorne was an unflinching conservative.  He looked on
those fifty-three Trojans who, as Mr. Dod tells us, censured free
trade in November, 1852, as the only patriots left among the public
men of England.  When that terrible crisis of free trade had arrived,
when the repeal of the Corn Laws was carried by those very men whom
Mr. Thorne had hitherto regarded as the only possible saviours of his
country, he was for a time paralysed.  His country was lost; but that
was comparatively a small thing.  Other countries had flourished and
fallen, and the human race still went on improving under God's
providence.  But now all trust in human faith must forever be at an
end.  Not only must ruin come, but it must come through the apostasy
of those who had been regarded as the truest of true believers. 
Politics in England, as a pursuit for gentlemen, must be at an end. 
Had Mr. Thorne been trodden under foot by a Whig, he could have borne
it as a Tory and a martyr, but to be so utterly thrown over and
deceived by those he had so earnestly supported, so thoroughly
trusted, was more than he could endure and live.  He therefore ceased
to live as a politician and refused to hold any converse with the
world at large on the state of the country.

Such were Mr. Thorne's impressions for the first two or three years
after Sir Robert Peel's apostasy, but by degrees his temper, as did
that of others, cooled down.  He began once more to move about, to
frequent the bench and the market, and to be seen at dinners shoulder
to shoulder with some of those who had so cruelly betrayed him.  It
was a necessity for him to live, and that plan of his for avoiding
the world did not answer.  He, however, and others around him who
still maintained the same staunch principles of protection--men like
himself who were too true to flinch at the cry of a mob--had their
own way of consoling themselves.  They were, and felt themselves to
be, the only true depositaries left of certain Eleusinian mysteries,
of certain deep and wondrous services of worship by which alone the
gods could be rightly approached.  To them and them only was it now
given to know these things and to perpetuate them, if that might
still be done, by the careful and secret education of their children.

We have read how private and peculiar forms of worship have been
carried on from age to age in families which, to the outer world,
have apparently adhered to the services of some ordinary church.  And
so by degrees it was with Mr. Thorne.  He learnt at length to listen
calmly while protection was talked of as a thing dead, although he
knew within himself that it was still quick with a mystic life.  Nor
was he without a certain pleasure that such knowledge, though given
to him, should be debarred from the multitude.  He became accustomed
to hear even among country gentlemen that free trade was after all
not so bad, and to hear this without dispute, although conscious
within himself that everything good in England had gone with his old
palladium.  He had within him something of the feeling of Cato, who
gloried that he could kill himself because Romans were no longer
worthy of their name.  Mr. Thorne had no thought of killing himself,
being a Christian and still possessing his £4000 a year, but the
feeling was not on that account the less comfortable.

Mr. Thorne was a sportsman, and had been active though not outrageous
in his sports.  Previous to the great downfall of politics in his
county, he had supported the hunt by every means in his power.  He
had preserved game till no goose or turkey could show a tail in the
parish of St. Ewold's.  He had planted gorse covers with more care
than oaks and larches.  He had been more anxious for the comfort of
his foxes than of his ewes and lambs.  No meet had been more popular
than Ullathorne; no man's stables had been more liberally open to the
horses of distant men than Mr. Thorne's; no man had said more,
written more, or done more to keep the club up.  The theory of
protection could expand itself so thoroughly in the practices of a
county hunt!  But when the great ruin came; when the noble master of
the Barsetshire hounds supported the recreant minister in the House
of Lords and basely surrendered his truth, his manhood, his friends,
and his honour for the hope of a garter, then Mr. Thorne gave up the
hunt.  He did not cut his covers, for that would not have been the
act of a gentleman.  He did not kill his foxes, for that according to
his light would have been murder.  He did not say that his covers
should not be drawn, or his earths stopped, for that would have been
illegal according to the by-laws prevailing among country gentlemen. 
But he absented himself from home on the occasion of every meet at
Ullathorne, left the covers to their fate, and could not be persuaded
to take his pink coat out of his press, or his hunters out of his
stable.  This lasted for two years, and then by degrees he came
round.  He first appeared at a neighbouring meet on a pony, dressed
in his shooting-coat, as though he had trotted in by accident; then
he walked up one morning on foot to see his favourite gorse drawn,
and when his groom brought his mare out by chance, he did not refuse
to mount her.  He was next persuaded, by one of the immortal fifty-
three, to bring his hunting materials over to the other side of the
county and take a fortnight with the hounds there; and so gradually
he returned to his old life.  But in hunting as in other things he
was only supported by an inward feeling of mystic superiority to
those with whom he shared the common breath of outer life.

Mr. Thorne did not live in solitude at Ullathorne.  He had a sister,
who was ten years older than himself and who participated in his
prejudices and feelings so strongly that she was a living caricature
of all his foibles.  She would not open a modern quarterly, did not
choose to see a magazine in her drawing-room, and would not have
polluted her fingers with a shred of the Times for any consideration. 
She spoke of Addison, Swift, and Steele as though they were still
living, regarded Defoe as the best known novelist of his country, and
thought of Fielding as a young but meritorious novice in the fields
of romance.  In poetry, she was familiar with names as late as
Dryden, and had once been seduced into reading "The Rape of the
Lock;" but she regarded Spenser as the purest type of her country's
literature in this line.  Genealogy was her favourite insanity. 
Those things which are the pride of most genealogists were to her
contemptible.  Arms and mottoes set her beside herself.  Ealfried of
Ullathorne had wanted no motto to assist him in cleaving to the
brisket Geoffrey De Burgh, and Ealfried's great grandfather, the
gigantic Ullafrid, had required no other arms than those which nature
gave him to hurl from the top of his own castle a cousin of the base
invading Norman.  To her all modern English names were equally
insignificant: Hengist, Horsa, and such like had for her ears the
only true savour of nobility.  She was not contented unless she could
go beyond the Saxons, and would certainly have christened her
children, had she had children, by the names of the ancient Britons. 
In some respects she was not unlike Scott's Ulrica, and had she been
given to cursing, she would certainly have done so in the names of
Mista, Skogula, and Zernebock.  Not having submitted to the embraces
of any polluting Norman, as poor Ulrica had done, and having assisted
no parricide, the milk of human kindness was not curdled in her
bosom.  She never cursed therefore, but blessed rather.   This,
however, she did in a strange uncouth Saxon manner that would have
been unintelligible to any peasants but her own.

As a politician, Miss Thorne had been so thoroughly disgusted with
public life by base deeds long antecedent to the Corn Law question
that that had but little moved her.  In her estimation her brother
had been a fast young man, hurried away by a too ardent temperament
into democratic tendencies.  Now happily he was brought to sounder
views by seeing the iniquity of the world.  She had not yet
reconciled herself to the Reform Bill, and still groaned in spirit
over the defalcations of the Duke as touching the Catholic
Emancipation.  If asked whom she thought the Queen should take as her
counsellor, she would probably have named Lord Eldon, and when
reminded that that venerable man was no longer present in the flesh
to assist us, she would probably have answered with a sigh that none
now could help us but the dead.

In religion Miss Thorne was a pure Druidess.  We would not have it
understood by that that she did actually in these latter days assist
at any human sacrifices, or that she was in fact hostile to the
Church of Christ.  She had adopted the Christian religion as a milder
form of the worship of her ancestors, and always appealed to her
doing so as evidence that she had no prejudices against reform, when
it could be shown that reform was salutary.  This reform was the most
modern of any to which she had as yet acceded, it being presumed that
British ladies had given up their paint and taken to some sort of
petticoats before the days of St. Augustine.  That further feminine
step in advance which combines paint and petticoats together had not
found a votary in Miss Thorne.

But she was a Druidess in this, that she regretted she knew not what
in the usages and practices of her Church.  She sometimes talked and
constantly thought of good things gone by, though she had but the 
faintest idea of what those good things had been.  She imagined that
a purity had existed which was now gone, that a piety had adorned our
pastors and a simple docility our people, for which it may be feared
history gave her but little true warrant.  She was accustomed to
speak of Cranmer as though he had been the firmest and most simple-
minded of martyrs, and of Elizabeth as though the pure Protestant
faith of her people had been the one anxiety of her life.  It would
have been cruel to undeceive her, had it been possible; but it would
have been impossible to make her believe that the one was a time-
serving priest, willing to go any length to keep his place, and that
the other was in heart a papist, with this sole proviso, that she
should be her own pope.

And so Miss Thorne went on sighing and regretting, looking back to
the divine right of kings as the ruling axiom of a golden age, and
cherishing, low down in the bottom of her heart of hearts, a dear
unmentioned wish for the restoration of some exiled Stuart.  Who
would deny her the luxury of her sighs, or the sweetness of her soft
regrets!

In her person and her dress she was perfect, and well she knew her
own perfection.  She was a small, elegantly made old woman, with a
face from which the glow of her youth had not departed without
leaving some streaks of a roseate hue.  She was proud of her colour,
proud of her grey hair which she wore in short crisp curls peering
out all around her face from her dainty white lace cap.  To think of
all the money that she spent in lace used to break the heart of poor
Mrs. Quiverful with her seven daughters.  She was proud of her teeth,
which were still white and numerous, proud of her bright cheery eye,
proud of her short jaunty step; and very proud of the neat, precise,
small feet with which those steps were taken.  She was proud also,
ay, very proud, of the rich brocaded silk in which it was her custom
to ruffle through her drawing-room.

We know what was the custom of the lady of Branksome--

Nine-and-twenty knights of fame
Hung their shields in Branksome Hall.

The lady of Ullathorne was not so martial in her habits, but hardly
less costly.  She might have boasted that nine-and-twenty silken
skirts might have been produced in her chamber, each fit to stand
alone.  The nine-and-twenty shields of the Scottish heroes were less
independent and hardly more potent to withstand any attack that might
be made on them.  Miss Thorne when fully dressed might be said to
have been armed cap-a-pie, and she was always fully dressed, as far
as was ever known to mortal man.

For all this rich attire Miss Thorne was not indebted to the
generosity of her brother.  She had a very comfortable independence
of her own, which she divided among juvenile relatives, the
milliners, and the poor, giving much the largest share to the latter. 
It may be imagined, therefore, that with all her little follies she
was not unpopular.  All her follies have, we believe, been told.  Her
virtues were too numerous to describe and not sufficiently
interesting to deserve description.

While we are on the subject of the Thornes, one word must be said of
the house they lived in.  It was not a large house, nor a fine house,
nor perhaps to modern ideas a very commodious house, but by those who
love the peculiar colour and peculiar ornaments of genuine Tudor
architecture it was considered a perfect gem.  We beg to own
ourselves among the number and therefore take this opportunity to
express our surprise that so little is known by English men and women
of the beauties of English architecture.  The ruins of the Colosseum,
the Campanile at Florence, St. Mark's, Cologne, the Bourse and Notre
Dame are with our tourists as familiar as household words, but they
know nothing of the glories of Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, and
Somersetshire.  Nay, we much question whether many noted travellers,
men who have pitched their tents perhaps under Mount Sinai, are not
still ignorant that there are glories in Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, and
Somersetshire.  We beg that they will go and see.

Mr. Thorne's house was called Ullathorne Court--and was properly so
called, for the house itself formed two sides of a quadrangle, which
was completed on the other two sides by a wall about twenty feet
high.  This wall was built of cut stone, rudely cut indeed, and now
much worn, but of a beautiful, rich, tawny yellow colour, the effect
of that stonecrop of minute growth which it had taken three centuries
to produce.  The top of this wall was ornamented by huge, round stone
balls of the same colour as the wall itself.  Entrance into the court
was had through a pair of iron gates so massive that no one could
comfortably open or close them--consequently, they were rarely
disturbed.  From the gateway two paths led obliquely across the
court: that to the left reaching the hall-door, which was in the
corner made by the angle of the house, and that to the right leading
to the back entrance, which was at the further end of the longer
portion of the building.

With those who are now adepts in contriving house accommodation, it
will militate much against Ullathorne Court that no carriage could be
brought to the hall-door.  If you enter Ullathorne at all, you must
do so, fair reader, on foot, or at least in a bath-chair.  No vehicle
drawn by horses ever comes within that iron gate.  But this is
nothing to the next horror that will encounter you.  On entering the
front door, which you do by no very grand portal, you find yourself
immediately in the dining-room.  What, no hall? exclaims my luxurious
friend, accustomed to all the comfortable appurtenances of modern
life.  Yes, kind sir, a noble hall, if you will but observe it; a
true old English hall of excellent dimensions for a country
gentleman's family; but, if you please, no dining-parlour.

Both Mr. and Miss Thorne were proud of this peculiarity of their
dwelling, though the brother was once all but tempted by his friends
to alter it.  They delighted in the knowledge that they, like Cedric,
positively dined in their true hall, even though they so dined
tête-à-tête.  But though they had never owned, they had felt and
endeavoured to remedy the discomfort of such an arrangement.  A huge
screen partitioned off the front door and a portion of the hall, and
from the angle so screened off a second door led into a passage which
ran along the larger side of the house next to the courtyard.  Either
my reader or I must be a bad hand at topography, if it be not clear
that the great hall forms the ground-floor of the smaller portion of
the mansion, that which was to your left as you entered the iron
gate, and that it occupies the whole of this wing of the building. 
It must be equally clear that it looks out on a trim mown lawn,
through three quadrangular windows with stone mullions, each window
divided into a larger portion at the bottom, and a smaller portion at
the top, and each portion again divided into five by perpendicular
stone supporters.  There may be windows which give a better light
than such as these, and it may be, as my utilitarian friend observes,
that the giving of light is the desired object of a window.  I will
not argue the point with him.  Indeed I cannot.  But I shall not the
less die in the assured conviction that no sort or description of
window is capable of imparting half so much happiness to mankind as
that which had been adopted at Ullathorne Court.  What, not an oriel?
says Miss Diana de Midellage.  No, Miss Diana, not even an oriel,
beautiful as is an oriel window.  It has not about it so perfect a
feeling of quiet English homely comfort.  Let oriel windows grace a
college, or the half-public mansion of a potent peer, but for the
sitting room of quiet country ladies, of ordinary homely folk,
nothing can equal the square, mullioned windows of the Tudor
architects.

The hall was hung round with family female insipidities by Lely and
unprepossessing male Thornes in red coats by Kneller, each Thorne
having been let into a panel in the wainscoting, in the proper
manner.  At the further end of the room was a huge fire-place, which
afforded much ground of difference between the brother and sister. 
An antiquated grate that would hold about a hundredweight of coal,
had been stuck on to the hearth by Mr. Thorne's father.  This hearth
had of course been intended for the consumption of wood faggots, and
the iron dogs for the purpose were still standing, though half-buried
in the masonry of the grate.  Miss Thorne was very anxious to revert
to the dogs.  The dear good old creature was always glad to revert to
anything, and had she been systematically indulged, would doubtless
in time have reflected that fingers were made before forks and have
reverted accordingly.  But in the affairs of the fire-place Mr.
Thorne would not revert.  Country gentlemen around him all had
comfortable grates in their dining-rooms.  He was not exactly the man
to have suggested a modern usage, but he was not so far prejudiced as
to banish those which his father had prepared for his use.  Mr.
Thorne had indeed once suggested that with very little contrivance
the front door might have been so altered as to open at least into
the passage, but on hearing this, his sister Monica--such was Miss
Thorne's name--had been taken ill and had remained so for a week. 
Before she came downstairs she received a pledge from her brother
that the entrance should never be changed in her lifetime.

At the end of the hall opposite to the fire-place a door led into the
drawing-room, which was of equal size and lighted with precisely
similar windows.  But yet the aspect of the room was very different. 
It was papered, and the ceiling, which in the hall showed the old
rafters, was whitened and finished with a modern cornice.  Miss
Thorne's drawing-room, or, as she always called it, withdrawing-room,
was a beautiful apartment.  The windows opened on to the full extent
of the lovely trim garden; immediately before the windows were plots
of flowers in stiff, stately, stubborn little beds, each bed
surrounded by a stone coping of its own; beyond, there was a low
parapet wall on which stood urns and images, fawns, nymphs, satyrs,
and a whole tribe of Pan's followers; and then again, beyond that, a
beautiful lawn sloped away to a sunk fence which divided the garden
from the park.  Mr. Thorne's study was at the end of the drawing-
room, and beyond that were the kitchen and the offices.  Doors opened
into both Miss Thorne's withdrawing-room and Mr. Thorne's sanctum
from the passage above alluded to, which, as it came to the latter
room, widened itself so as to make space for the huge black oak
stairs which led to the upper regions.

Such was the interior of Ullathorne Court.  But having thus described
it, perhaps somewhat too tediously, we beg to say that it is not the
interior to which we wish to call the English tourist's attention,
though we advise him to lose no legitimate opportunity of becoming
acquainted with it in a friendly manner.  It is the outside of
Ullathorne that is so lovely.  Let the tourist get admission at least
into the garden and fling himself on that soft sward just opposite to
the exterior angle of the house.  He will there get the double
frontage and enjoy that which is so lovely--the expanse of
architectural beauty without the formal dullness of one long line.

It is the colour of Ullathorne that is so remarkable.  It is of that
delicious tawny hue which no stone can give, unless it has on it the
vegetable richness of centuries.  Strike the wall with your hand and
you will think that the stone has on it no covering, but rub it
carefully and you will find that the colour comes off upon your
finger.  No colourist that ever yet worked from a palette has been
able to come up to this  rich colouring of years crowding themselves
on years.

Ullathorne is a high building for a country-house, for it possesses
three stories, and in each story the windows are of the same sort as
that described, though varying in size and varying also in their
lines athwart the house.  Those of the ground floor are all uniform
in size and position.  But those above are irregular both in size and
place, and this irregularity gives a bizarre and not unpicturesque
appearance to the building.  Along the top, on every side, runs a low
parapet, which nearly hides the roof, and at the corners are more
figures of fawns and satyrs.

Such is Ullathorne House.  But we must say one word of the approach
to it, which shall include all the description which we mean to give
of the church also.  The picturesque old church of St. Ewold's stands
immediately opposite to the iron gates which open into the court and
is all but surrounded by the branches of the lime-trees which form
the avenue leading up to the house from both sides.  This avenue is
magnificent, but it would lose much of its value in the eyes of many
proprietors by the fact that the road through it is not private
property.  It is a public lane between hedgerows, with a broad grass
margin on each side of the road, from which the lime-trees spring. 
Ullathorne Court, therefore, does not stand absolutely surrounded by
its own grounds, though Mr. Thorne is owner of all the adjacent land. 
This, however, is the source of very little annoyance to him.  Men,
when they are acquiring property, think much of such things, but they
who live where their ancestors have lived for years do not feel the
misfortune.  It never occurred either to Mr. or Miss Thorne that they
were not sufficiently private because the world at large might, if it
so wished, walk or drive by their iron gates.  That part of the world
which availed itself of the privilege was however very small.

Such a year or two since were the Thornes of Ullathorne.  Such, we
believe, are the inhabitants of many an English country-home.  May it
be long before their number diminishes.



CHAPTER XXIII

Mr. Arabin Reads Himself in at St. Ewold's


On the Sunday morning the archdeacon with his sister-in-law and Mr.
Arabin drove over to Ullathorne, as had been arranged.  On their way
thither the new vicar declared himself to be considerably disturbed
in his mind at the idea of thus facing his parishioners for the first
time.  He had, he said, been always subject to mauvaise honte and an
annoying degree of bashfulness, which often unfitted him for any work
of a novel description, and now he felt this so strongly that he
feared he should acquit himself badly in St. Ewold's reading-desk. 
He knew, he said, that those sharp little eyes of Miss Thorne would
be on him and that they would not approve.  All this the archdeacon
greatly ridiculed.  He himself knew not, and had never known, what it
was to be shy.  He could not conceive that Miss Thorne, surrounded as
she would be by the peasants of Ullathorne and a few of the poorer
inhabitants of the suburbs of Barchester, could in any way affect the
composure of a man well accustomed to address the learned
congregation of St. Mary's at Oxford, and he laughed accordingly at
the idea of Mr. Arabin's modesty.

Thereupon Mr. Arabin commenced to subtilize.  The change, he said,
from St. Mary's to St. Ewold's was quite as powerful on the spirits
as would be that from St. Ewold's to St. Mary's.  Would not a peer
who, by chance of fortune, might suddenly be driven to herd among
navvies be as afraid of the jeers of his companions as would any
navvy suddenly exalted to a seat among the peers?  Whereupon the
archdeacon declared with a loud laugh that he would tell Miss Thorne
that her new minister had likened her to a navvy.  Eleanor, however,
pronounced such a conclusion to be unfair; a comparison might be very
just in its proportions which did not at all assimilate the things
compared.  But Mr. Arabin went on subtilizing, regarding neither the
archdeacon's raillery nor Eleanor's defence.  A young lady, he said,
would execute with most perfect self-possession a difficult piece of
music in a room crowded with strangers, who would not be able to
express herself in intelligible language, even on any ordinary
subject and among her most intimate friends, if she were required to
do so standing on a box somewhat elevated among them.  It was all an
affair of education, and he at forty found it difficult to educate
himself anew.

Eleanor dissented on the matter of the box and averred she could
speak very well about dresses, or babies, or legs of mutton from any
box, provided it were big enough for her to stand upon without fear,
even though all her friends were listening to her.  The archdeacon
was sure she would not be able to say a word, but this proved nothing
in favour of Mr. Arabin.  Mr. Arabin said that he would try the
question out with Mrs. Bold and get her on a box some day when the
rectory might be full of visitors.  To this Eleanor assented, making 
condition that the visitors should be of their own set, and the
archdeacon cogitated in his mind whether by such a condition it was
intended that Mr. Slope should be included, resolving also that, if
so, the trial would certainly never take place in the rectory
drawing-room at Plumstead.

And so arguing, they drove up to the iron gates of Ullathorne Court.

Mr. and Miss Thorne were standing ready dressed for church in the
hall and greeted their clerical visitors with cordiality.  The
archdeacon was an old favourite.  He was a clergyman of the old
school, and this recommended him to the lady.  He had always been an
opponent of free trade as long as free trade was an open question,
and now that it was no longer so, he, being a clergyman, had not been
obliged, like most of his lay Tory companions, to read his
recantation.  He could therefore be regarded as a supporter of the
immaculate fifty-three, and was on this account a favourite with Mr.
Thorne.  The little bell was tinkling, and the rural population of
the parish were standing about the lane, leaning on the church-stile
and against the walls of the old court, anxious to get a look at
their new minister as he passed from the house to the rectory.  The
archdeacon's servant had already preceded them thither with the
vestments.

They all went forth together, and when the ladies passed into the
church, the three gentlemen tarried a moment in the lane, that Mr.
Thorne might name to the vicar with some kind of one-sided
introduction the most leading among his parishioners.

"Here are our churchwardens, Mr. Arabin--Farmer Greenacre and Mr.
Stiles.  Mr. Stiles has the mill as you go into Barchester; and very
good churchwardens they are."

"Not very severe, I hope," said Mr. Arabin.  The two ecclesiastical
officers touched their hats and each made a leg in the approved rural
fashion, assuring the vicar that they were very glad to have the
honour of seeing him and adding that the weather was very good for
the harvest.  Mr. Stiles, being a man somewhat versed in town life,
had an impression of his own dignity and did not quite like leaving
his pastor under the erroneous idea that he being a churchwarden kept
the children in order during church time.  'Twas thus he understood
Mr. Arabin's allusion to his severity and hastened to put matters
right by observing that "Sexton Clodheve looked to the younguns, and
perhaps sometimes there may be a thought too much stick going on
during sermon."  Mr. Arabin's bright eye twinkled as he caught that
of the archdeacon, and he smiled to himself as he observed how
ignorant his officers were of the nature of their authority and of
the surveillance which it was their duty to keep even over himself.

Mr. Arabin read the lessons and preached.  It was enough to put a man
a little out, let him have been ever so used to pulpit reading, to
see the knowing way in which the farmers cocked their ears and set
about a mental criticism as to whether their new minister did or did
not fall short of the excellence of him who had lately departed from
them.  A mental and silent criticism it was for the existing moment,
but soon to be made public among the elders of St. Ewold's over the
green graves of their children and forefathers.  The excellence,
however, of poor old Mr. Goodenough had not been wonderful, and there
were few there who did not deem that Mr. Arabin did his work
sufficiently well, in spite of the slightly nervous affliction which
at first impeded him and which nearly drove the archdeacon beside
himself.

But the sermon was the thing to try the man.  It often surprises us
that very young men can muster courage to preach for the first time
to a strange congregation.  Men who are as yet but little more than
boys, who have but just left what indeed we may not call a school,
but a seminary intended for their tuition as scholars, whose thoughts
have been mostly of boating, cricketing, and wine-parties, ascend a
rostrum high above the heads of the submissive crowd, not that they
may read God's word to those below, but that they may preach their
own word for the edification of their hearers.  It seems strange to
us that they are not stricken dumb by the new and awful solemnity of
their position.  How am I, just turned twenty-three, who have never
yet passed ten thoughtful days since the power of thought first came
to me, how am I to instruct these greybeards who, with the weary
thinking of so many years, have approached so near the grave?  Can I
teach them their duty?  Can I explain to them that which I so
imperfectly understand, that which years of study may have made so
plain to them?  Has my newly acquired privilege as one of God's
ministers imparted to me as yet any fitness for the wonderful work of
a preacher?

It must be supposed that such ideas do occur to young clergymen, and
yet they overcome, apparently with ease, this difficulty which to us
appears to be all but insurmountable.  We have never been subjected
in the way of ordination to the power of a bishop's hands.  It may be
that there is in them something that sustains the spirit and banishes
the natural modesty of youth.  But for ourselves we must own that the
deep affection which Dominie Sampson felt for his young pupils has
not more endeared him to us than the bashful spirit which sent him
mute and inglorious from the pulpit when he rose there with the
futile attempt to preach God's gospel.

There is a rule in our church which forbids the younger order of our
clergymen to perform a certain portion of the service.  The
absolution must be read by a minister in priest's orders.  If there
be no such minister present, the congregation can have the benefit of
no absolution but that which each may succeed in administering to
himself.  The rule may be a good one, though the necessity for it
hardly comes home to the general understanding.  But this forbearance
on the part of youth would be much more appreciated if it were
extended likewise to sermons.  The only danger would be that
congregations would be too anxious to prevent their young clergymen
from advancing themselves in the ranks of the ministry.  Clergymen
who could not preach would be such blessings that they would be
bribed to adhere to their incompetence.

Mr. Arabin, however, had not the modesty of youth to impede him, and
he succeeded with his sermon even better than with the lessons.  He
took for his text two verses out of the second epistle of St. John,
"Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ,
hath not God.  He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath
both the Father and the Son.  If there come any unto you, and bring
not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him
God-speed."  He told them that the house of theirs to which he
alluded was this their church, in which he now addressed them for the
first time; that their most welcome and proper manner of bidding him
God-speed would be their patient obedience to his teaching of the
gospel; but that he could put forward no claim to such conduct on
their part unless he taught them the great Christian doctrine of
works and faith combined.  On this he enlarged, but not very amply,
and after twenty minutes succeeded in sending his new friends home to
their baked mutton and pudding well pleased with their new minister.

Then came the lunch at Ullathorne.  As soon as they were in the hall
Miss Thorne took Mr. Arabin's hand and assured him that she received
him into her house, into the temple, she said, in which she
worshipped, and bade him God-speed with all her heart.  Mr. Arabin
was touched and squeezed the spinster's hand without uttering a word
in reply.  Then Mr. Thorne expressed a hope that Mr. Arabin found the
church well adapted for articulation, and Mr. Arabin having replied
that he had no doubt he should as soon as he had learnt to pitch his
voice to the building, they all sat down to the good things before
them.

Miss Thorne took special care of Mrs. Bold.  Eleanor still wore her
widow's weeds and therefore had about her that air of grave and sad
maternity which is the lot of recent widows.  This opened the soft
heart of Miss Thorne and made her look on her young guest as though
too much could not be done for her.  She heaped chicken and ham upon
her plate and poured out for her a full bumper of port wine.  When
Eleanor, who was not sorry to get it, had drunk a little of it, Miss
Thorne at once essayed to fill it again.  To this Eleanor objected,
but in vain.  Miss Thorne winked and nodded and whispered, saying
that it was the proper thing and must be done, and that she knew all
about it; and so she desired Mrs. Bold to drink it up and not mind
anybody.

"It is your duty, you know, to support yourself," she said into the
ear of the young mother; "there's more than yourself depending on
it;" and thus she coshered up Eleanor with cold fowl and port wine. 
How it is that poor men's wives, who have no cold fowl and port wine
on which to be coshered up, nurse their children without difficulty,
whereas the wives of rich men, who eat and drink everything that is
good, cannot do so, we will for the present leave to the doctors and
the mothers to settle between them.

And then Miss Thorne was great about teeth.  Little Johnny Bold had
been troubled for the last few days with his first incipient
masticator, and with that freemasonry which exists among ladies, Miss
Thorne became aware of the fact before Eleanor had half-finished her
wing.  The old lady prescribed at once a receipt which had been much
in vogue in the young days of her grandmother and warned Eleanor with
solemn voice against the fallacies of modern medicine.

"Take his coral, my dear," said she, "and rub it well with carrot-
juice; rub it till the juice dries on it, and then give it him to
play with-"

"But he hasn't got a coral," said Eleanor.

"Not got a coral!" said Miss Thorne with almost angry vehemence. 
"Not got a coral--how can you expect that he should cut his teeth? 
Have you got Daffy's Elixir?"

Eleanor explained that she had not.  It had not been ordered by Mr.
Rerechild, the Barchester doctor whom she employed; and then the
young mother mentioned some shockingly modern succedaneum which Mr.
Rerechild's new lights had taught him to recommend.

Miss Thorne looked awfully severe.  "Take care, my dear," said she,
"that the man knows what he's about; take care he doesn't destroy
your little boy.  But"--and she softened into sorrow, as she said it,
and spoke more in pity than in anger--"but I don't know who there is
in Barchester now that you can trust.  Poor dear old Doctor Bumpwell,
indeed -"

"Why, Miss Thorne, he died when I was a little girl."

"Yes, my dear, he did, and an unfortunate day it was for Barchester. 
As to those young men that have come up since"--Mr. Rerechild, by the
by, was quite as old as Miss Thorne herself--"one doesn't know where
they came from or who they are, or whether they know anything about
their business or not."

"I think there are very clever men in Barchester," said Eleanor.

"Perhaps there may be; only I don't know them: and it's admitted on
all sides that medical men aren't now what they used to be.  They
used to be talented, observing, educated men.  But now any whipper-
snapper out of an apothecary's shop can call himself a doctor.  I
believe no kind of education is now thought necessary."

Eleanor was herself the widow of a medical man and felt a little
inclined to resent all these hard sayings.  But Miss Thorne was so
essentially good-natured that it was impossible to resent anything
she said.  She therefore sipped her wine and finished her chicken.

"At any rate, my dear, don't forget the carrot-juice, and by all
means get him a coral at once.  My grandmother Thorne had the best
teeth in the county and carried them to the grave with her at eighty. 
I have heard her say it was all the carrot-juice.  She couldn't bear
the Barchester doctors.  Even poor old Dr. Bumpwell didn't please
her."  It clearly never occurred to Miss Thorne that some fifty years
ago Dr. Bumpwell was only a rising man and therefore as much in need
of character in the eyes of the then ladies of Ullathorne as the
present doctors were in her own.

The archdeacon made a very good lunch and talked to his host about
turnip-drillers and new machines for reaping, while the host,
thinking it only polite to attend to a stranger, and fearing that
perhaps he might not care about turnip crops on a Sunday, mooted all
manner of ecclesiastical subjects.

"I never saw a heavier lot of wheat, Thorne, than you've got there in
that field beyond the copse.  I suppose that's guano," said the
archdeacon.

"Yes, guano.  I get it from Bristol myself.  You'll find you often
have a tolerable congregation of Barchester people out here, Mr.
Arabin.  They are very fond of St. Ewold's, particularly of an
afternoon when the weather is not too hot for the walk."

"I am under an obligation to them for staying away today, at any
rate," said the vicar.  "The congregation can never be too small for
a maiden sermon."

"I got a ton and a half at Bradley's in High Street," said the
archdeacon, "and it was a complete take in.  I don't believe there
was five hundredweight of guano in it."

"That Bradley never has anything good," said Miss Thorne, who had
just caught the name during her whisperings with Eleanor.  "And such
a nice shop as there used to be in that very house before he came. 
Wilfred, don't you remember what good things old Ambleoff used to
have?"

"There have been three men since Ambleoff's time," said the
archdeacon, "and each as bad as the other.  But who gets it for you
at Bristol, Thorne?"

"I ran up myself this year and bought it out of the ship.  I am
afraid as the evenings get shorter, Mr. Arabin, you'll find the
reading-desk too dark.  I must send a fellow with an axe and make him
lop off some of those branches."

Mr. Arabin declared that the morning light at any rate was perfect
and deprecated any interference with the lime-trees.  And then they
took a stroll out among the trim parterres, and Mr. Arabin explained
to Mrs. Bold the difference between a naiad and a dryad and dilated
on vases and the shapes of urns.  Miss Thorne busied herself among
her pansies, and her brother, finding it quite impracticable to give
anything of a peculiarly Sunday tone to the conversation, abandoned
the attempt and had it out with the archdeacon about the Bristol
guano.

At three o'clock they again went into church, and now Mr. Arabin read
the service and the archdeacon preached.  Nearly the same
congregation was present, with some adventurous pedestrians from the
city, who had not thought the heat of the midday August sun too great
to deter them.  The archdeacon took his text from the epistle to
Philemon.  "I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten
in my bonds."  From such a text it may be imagined the kind of sermon
which Dr. Grantly preached, and on the whole it was neither dull, nor
bad, nor out of place.

He told them that it had become his duty to look about for a pastor
for them, to supply the place of one who had been long among them,
and that in this manner he regarded as a son him whom he had
selected, as St. Paul had regarded the young disciple whom he sent
forth.  Then he took a little merit to himself for having studiously
provided the best man he could without reference to patronage or
favour; but he did not say that the best man according to his views
was he who was best able to subdue Mr. Slope and make that
gentleman's situation in Barchester too hot to be comfortable.  As to
the bonds, they had consisted in the exceeding struggle which he had
made to get a good clergyman for them.  He deprecated any comparison
between himself and St. Paul but said that he was entitled to beseech
them for their goodwill towards Mr. Arabin, in the same manner that
the apostle had besought Philemon and his household with regard to
Onesimus.

The archdeacon's sermon--text, blessing, and all--was concluded
within the half-hour.  Then they shook hands with their Ullathorne
friends and returned to Plumstead.  'Twas thus that Mr. Arabin read
himself in at St. Ewold's.



CHAPTER XXIV

Mr. Slope Manages Matters very Cleverly at Puddingdale


The next two weeks passed pleasantly enough at Plumstead.  The whole
party there assembled seemed to get on well together.  Eleanor made
the house agreeable, and the archdeacon and Mr. Grantly seemed to
have forgotten her iniquity as regarded Mr. Slope.  Mr. Harding had
his violoncello and played to them while his daughters accompanied
him.  Johnny Bold, by the help either of Mr. Rerechild or else by
that of his coral and carrot-juice, got through his teething
troubles.  There had been gaieties, too, of all sorts.  They had
dined at Ullathorne, and the Thornes had dined at the rectory. 
Eleanor had been duly put to stand on her box and in that position
had found herself quite unable to express her opinion on the merits
of flounces, such having been the subject given to try her elocution. 
Mr. Arabin had of course been much in his own parish, looking to the
doings at his vicarage, calling on his parishioners, and taking on
himself the duties of his new calling.  But still he had been every
evening at Plumstead, and Mrs. Grantly was partly willing to agree
with her husband that he was a pleasant inmate in a house.

They had also been at a dinner-party at Dr. Stanhope's, of which Mr.
Arabin had made one.  He also, mothlike, burnt his wings in the
flames of the signora's candle.  Mrs. Bold, too, had been there and
had felt somewhat displeased with the taste--want of taste she called
it--shown by Mr. Arabin in paying so much attention to Madame Neroni. 
It was as infallible that Madeline should displease and irritate the
women as that she should charm and captivate the men.  The one result
followed naturally on the other.  It was quite true that Mr. Arabin
had been charmed.  He thought her a very clever and a very handsome
woman; he thought also that her peculiar affliction entitled her to
the sympathy of all.  He had never, he said, met so much suffering
joined to such perfect beauty and so clear a mind.  'Twas thus he
spoke of the signora, coming home in the archdeacon's carriage, and
Eleanor by no means liked to hear the praise.  It was, however,
exceedingly unjust of her to be angry with Mr. Arabin, as she had
herself spent a very pleasant evening with Bertie Stanhope, who had
taken her down to dinner and had not left her side for one moment
after the gentlemen came out of the dining-room.  It was unfair that
she should amuse herself with Bertie and yet begrudge her new friend
his license of amusing himself with Bertie's sister.  And yet she did
so.  She was half-angry with him in the carriage and said something,
about meretricious manners.  Mr. Arabin did not understand the ways
of women very well, or else he might have flattered himself that
Eleanor was in love with him.

But Eleanor was not in love with him.  How many shades there are
between love and indifference, and how little the graduated scale is,
understood!  She had now been nearly three weeks in the same house
with Mr. Arabin and had received much of his attention and listened
daily to his conversation.  He had usually devoted at least some
portion of his evening to her exclusively.  At Dr. St