anhope's he had
devoted himself exclusively to another.  It does not require that a
woman should be in love to be irritated at this; it does not require
that she should even acknowledge to herself that it is unpleasant to
her.  Eleanor had no such self-knowledge.  She thought in her own
heart that it was only on Mr. Arabin's account that she regretted
that he could condescend to be amused by the signora.  "I thought he
had more mind," she said to herself as she sat watching her baby's
cradle on her return from the party.  "After all, I believe Mr.
Stanhope is the pleasanter man of the two."  Alas for the memory of
poor John Bold!  Eleanor was not in love with Bertie Stanhope, nor
was she in love with Mr. Arabin.  But her devotion to her late
husband was fast fading when she could revolve in her mind over the
cradle of his infant the faults and failings of other aspirants to
her favour.

Will anyone blame my heroine for this?  Let him or her rather thank
God for all His goodness--for His mercy endureth forever.

Eleanor, in truth, was not in love; neither was Mr. Arabin.  Neither
indeed was Bertie Stanhope, though he had already found occasion to
say nearly as much as that he was.  The widow's cap had prevented him
from making a positive declaration, when otherwise he would have
considered himself entitled to do so on a third or fourth interview. 
It was, after all, but a small cap now and had but little of the
weeping willow left in its construction.  It is singular how these
emblems of grief fade away by unseen gradations.  Each pretends to be
the counterpart of the forerunner, and yet the last little bit of
crimped white crape that sits so jauntily on the back of the head is
as dissimilar to the first huge mountain of woe which disfigured the
face of the weeper as the state of the Hindu is to the jointure of
the English dowager.

But let it be clearly understood that Eleanor was in love with no one
and that no one was in love with Eleanor.  Under these circumstances
her anger against Mr. Arabin did not last long, and before two days
were over they were both as good friends as ever.  She could not but
like him, for every hour spent in his company was spent pleasantly. 
And yet she could not quite like him, for there was always apparent
in his conversation a certain feeling on his part that he hardly
thought it worth his while to be in earnest.  It was almost as though
he were playing with a child.  She knew well enough that he was in
truth a sober, thoughtful man who, in some matters and on some
occasions, could endure an agony of earnestness.  And yet to her he
was always gently playful.  Could she have seen his brow once
clouded, she might have learnt to love him.

So things went on at Plumstead, and on the whole not unpleasantly,
till a huge storm darkened the horizon and came down upon the
inhabitants of the rectory with all the fury of a water-spout.  It
was astonishing how in a few minutes the whole face of the heavens
was changed.  The party broke up from breakfast in perfect harmony,
but fierce passions had arisen before the evening which did not admit
of their sitting at the same board for dinner.  To explain this it
will be necessary to go back a little.

It will be remembered that the bishop expressed to Mr. Slope in his
dressing-room his determination that Mr. Quiverful should be
confirmed in his appointment to the hospital, and that his lordship
requested Mr. Slope to communicate this decision to the archdeacon. 
It will also be remembered that the archdeacon had indignantly
declined seeing Mr. Slope and had instead written a strong letter to
the bishop in which he all but demanded the situation of warden for
Mr. Harding.  To this letter the archdeacon received an immediate
formal reply from Mr. Slope, in which it was stated that the bishop
had received and would give his best consideration to the
archdeacon's letter.

The archdeacon felt himself somewhat checkmated by this reply.  What
could he do with a man who would neither see him, nor argue with him
by letter, and who had undoubtedly the power of appointing any
clergyman he pleased?  He had consulted with Mr. Arabin, who had
suggested the propriety of calling in the aid of the Master of
Lazarus.  "If," said he, "you and Dr. Gwynne formally declare your
intention of waiting upon the bishop, the bishop will not dare to
refuse to see you; and if two such men as you are see him together,
you will probably not leave him without carrying your point."

The archdeacon did not quite like admitting the necessity of his
being backed by the Master of Lazarus before he could obtain
admission into the episcopal palace of Barchester, but still he felt
that the advice was good, and he resolved to take it.  He wrote again
to the bishop, expressing a hope that nothing further would be done
in the matter of the hospital till the consideration promised by his
lordship had been given, and then sent off a warm appeal to his
friend the master, imploring him to come to Plumstead and assist in
driving the bishop into compliance.  The.  master had rejoined,
raising some difficulty but not declining, and the archdeacon had
again pressed his point, insisting on the necessity for immediate
action.  Dr. Gwynne unfortunately had the gout, and could therefore
name no immediate day, but still agreed to come, if it should be
finally found necessary.  So the matter stood, as regarded the party
at Plumstead.

But Mr. Harding had another friend fighting his battle for him, quite
as powerful as the Master of Lazarus, and this was Mr. Slope.  Though
the bishop had so pertinaciously insisted on giving way to his wife
in the matter of the hospital, Mr. Slope did not think it necessary
to abandon his object.  He had, he thought, daily more and more
reason to imagine that the widow would receive his overtures
favourably, and he could not but feel that Mr. Harding at the
hospital, and placed there by his means, would be more likely to
receive him as a son-in-law than Mr. Harding growling in opposition
and disappointment under the archdeacon's wing at Plumstead. 
Moreover, to give Mr. Slope due credit, he was actuated by greater
motives even than these.  He wanted a wife, and he wanted money, but
he wanted power more than either.  He had fully realized the fact
that he must come to blows with Mrs. Proudie.  He had no desire to
remain in Barchester as her chaplain.  Sooner than do so, he would
risk the loss of his whole connexion with the diocese.  What!  Was he
to feel within him the possession of no ordinary talents--was he to
know himself to be courageous, firm, and, in matters where his
conscience did not interfere, unscrupulous--and yet he contented to
be the working factotum of a woman prelate?  Mr. Slope had higher
ideas of his own destiny.  Either he or Mrs. Proudie must go to the
wall, and now had come the time when he would try which it should be.

The bishop had declared that Mr. Quiverful should be the new warden. 
As Mr. Slope went downstairs, prepared to see the archdeacon, if
necessary, but fully satisfied that no such necessity would arise, he
declared to himself that Mr. Harding should be warden.  With the
object of carrying this point, he rode over to Puddingdale and had a
further interview with the worthy expectant of clerical good things. 
Mr. Quiverful was on the whole a worthy man.  The impossible task of
bringing up as ladies and gentlemen fourteen children on an income
which was insufficient to give them with decency the common
necessaries of life had had an effect upon him not beneficial either
to his spirit or his keen sense of honour.  Who can boast that he
would have supported such a burden with a different result?  Mr.
Quiverful was an honest, painstaking, drudging man, anxious indeed
for bread and meat, anxious for means to quiet his butcher and cover
with returning smiles the now sour countenance of the baker's wife,
but anxious also to be right with his own conscience.  He was not
careful, as another might be who sat on an easier worldly seat, to
stand well with those around him, to shun a breath which might sully
his name or a rumour which might affect his honour.  He could not
afford such niceties of conduct, such moral luxuries.  It must
suffice for him to be ordinarily honest according to the ordinary
honesty of the world's ways, and to let men's tongues wag as they
would.

He had felt that his brother clergymen, men whom he had known for the
last twenty years, looked coldly on him from the first moment that he
had shown himself willing to sit at the feet of Mr. Slope; he had
seen that their looks grew colder still when it became bruited about
that he was to he the bishop's new warden at Hiram's Hospital.  This
was painful enough, but it was the cross which he was doomed to bear. 
He thought of his wife, whose last new silk dress was six years in
wear.  He thought of all his young flock, whom he could hardly take
to church with him on Sundays, for there were not decent shoes and
stockings for them all to wear.  He thought of the well-worn sleeves
of his own black coat and of the stern face of the draper, from whom
he would fain ask for cloth to make another, did he not know that the
credit would be refused him.  Then he thought of the comfortable
house in Barchester, of the comfortable income, of his boys sent to
school, of his girls with books in their hands instead of darning
needles, of his wife's face again covered with smiles, and of his
daily board again covered with plenty.  He thought of these things;
and do thou also, reader, think of them, and then wonder, if thou
canst, that Mr. Slope had appeared to him to possess all those good
gifts which could grace a bishop's chaplain.  "How beautiful upon the
mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings."

Why, moreover, should the Barchester clergy have looked coldly on Mr.
Quiverful?  Had they not all shown that they regarded with
complacency the loaves and fishes of their mother church?  Had they
not all, by some hook or crook, done better for themselves than he
had done?  They were not burdened as he was burdened.  Dr. Grantly
had five children and nearly as many thousands a year on which to
feed them.  It was very well for him to turn up his nose at a new
bishop who could do nothing for him and a chaplain who was beneath
his notice, but it was cruel in a man so circumstanced to set the
world against the father of fourteen children because he was anxious
to obtain for them an honourable support!  He, Mr. Quiverful, had not
asked for the wardenship; he had not even accepted it till he had
been assured that Mr. Harding had refused it.  How hard then that he
should he blamed for doing that which not to have done would have
argued a most insane imprudence!

Thus in this matter of the hospital poor Mr. Quiverful had his
trials, and he had also his consolations.  On the whole the
consolations were the more vivid of the two.  The stern draper heard
of the coming promotion, and the wealth of his warehouse was at Mr.
Quiverful's disposal.  Coming events cast their shadows before, and
the coming event of Mr. Quiverful's transference to Barchester
produced a delicious shadow in the shape of a new outfit for Mrs.
Quiverful and her three elder daughters.  Such consolations come home
to the heart of a man and quite home to the heart of a woman. 
Whatever the husband might feel, the wife cared nothing for frowns of
dean, archdeacon, or prebendary.  To her the outsides and insides of
her husband and fourteen children were everything.  In her bosom
every other ambition had been swallowed up in that maternal ambition
of seeing them and him and herself duly clad and properly fed.  It
had come to that with her that life had now no other purpose.  She
recked nothing of the imaginary rights of others.  She had no
patience with her husband when he declared to her that he could not
accept the hospital unless he knew that Mr. Harding had refused it. 
Her husband had no right to be quixotic at the expense of fourteen
children.  The narrow escape of throwing away his good fortune which
her lord had had almost paralysed her.  Now, indeed, they had
received a full promise, not only from Mr. Slope, but also from Mrs.
Proudie.  Now, indeed, they might reckon with safety on their good
fortune.  But what if all had been lost?  What if her fourteen bairns
had been resteeped to the hips in poverty by the morbid
sentimentality of their father?  Mrs. Quiverful was just at present a
happy woman, but yet it nearly took her breath away when she thought
of the risk they had run.

"I don't know what your father means when he talks so much of what is
due to Mr. Harding," she said to her eldest daughter.  "Does he think
that Mr. Harding would give him £450 a year out of fine feeling?  And
what signifies it whom he offends, as long as he gets the place?  He
does not expect anything better.  It passes me to think how your
father can he so soft, while everybody around him is so griping."

Thus, while the outer world was accusing Mr. Quiverful of rapacity
for promotion and of disregard to his honour, the inner world of his
own household was falling foul of him, with equal vehemence, for his
willingness to sacrifice their interests to a false feeling of
sentimental pride.  It is astonishing how much difference the point
of view makes in the aspect of all that we look at!

Such were the feelings of the different members of the family at
Puddingdale on the occasion of Mr. Slope's second visit.  Mrs.
Quiverful, as soon as she saw his horse coming up the avenue from the
vicarage gate, hastily packed up her huge basket of needlework and
hurried herself and her daughter out of the room in which she was
sitting with her husband.  "It's Mr. Slope," she said.  "He's come to
settle with you about the hospital.  I do hope we shall now be able
to move at once."  And she hastened to bid the maid of all work go to
the door, so that the welcome great man might not be kept waiting.

Mr. Slope thus found Mr. Quiverful alone.  Mrs. Quiverful went off to
her kitchen and back settlements with anxious beating heart, almost
dreading that there might be some slip between the cup of her
happiness and the lip of her fruition, but yet comforting herself
with the reflexion that after what had taken place, any such slip
could hardly be possible.

Mr. Slope was all smiles as he shook his brother clergyman's hand and
said that he had ridden over because he thought it right at once to
put Mr. Quiverful in possession of the facts of the matter regarding
the wardenship of the hospital.  As he spoke; the poor expectant
husband and father saw at a glance that his brilliant hopes were to
be dashed to the ground and that his visitor was now there for the
purpose of unsaying what on his former visit he had said.  There was
something in the tone of the voice, something in the glance of the
eye, which told the tale.  Mr. Quiverful knew it all at once.  He
maintained his self-possession, however, smiled with a slight
unmeaning smile, and merely said that he was obliged to Mr. Slope for
the trouble he was taking.

"It has been a troublesome matter from first to last," said Mr.
Slope, "and the bishop has hardly known how to act.  Between
ourselves--but mind this of course must go no further, Mr.
Quiverful."

Mr. Quiverful said that of course it should not.  "The truth is that
poor Mr. Harding has hardly known his own mind.  You remember our
last conversation, no doubt."

Mr. Quiverful assured him that he remembered it very well indeed.

"You will remember that I told you that Mr. Harding had refused to
return to the hospital."

Mr. Quiverful declared that nothing could be more distinct on his
memory.

"And acting on this refusal, I suggested that you should take the
hospital," continued Mr. Slope.

"I understood you to say that the bishop had authorised you to offer
it to me.

"Did I?  Did I go so far as that?  Well, perhaps it may he that in my
anxiety in your behalf I did commit myself further than I should have
done.  So far as my own memory serves me, I don't think I did go
quite so far as that.  But I own I was very anxious that you should
get it, and I may have said more than was quite prudent."

"But," said Mr. Quiverful in his deep anxiety to prove his case, "my
wife received as distinct a promise from Mrs. Proudie as one human
being could give to another."

Mr. Slope smiled and gently shook his head.  He meant the smile for a
pleasant smile, but it was diabolical in the eyes of the man he was
speaking to.  "Mrs. Proudie!" he said.  "If we are to go to what
passes between the ladies in these matters, we shall really be in a
nest of troubles from which we shall never extricate ourselves.  Mrs.
Proudie is a most excellent lady, kind-hearted, charitable, pious,
and in every way estimable.  But, my dear Mr. Quiverful, the
patronage of the diocese is not in her hands."

Mr. Quiverful for a moment sat panic-stricken and silent.  "Am I to
understand, then, that I have received no promise?" he said as soon
as he had sufficiently collected his thoughts.

"If you will allow me, I will tell you exactly how the matter rests. 
You certainly did receive a promise conditional on Mr. Harding's
refusal.  I am sure you will do me the justice to remember that you
yourself declared that you could accept the appointment on no other
condition than the knowledge that Mr. Harding had declined it"

"Yes," said Mr. Quiverful; "I did say that, certainly."

"Well, it now appears that he did not refuse it."

"But surely you told me, and repeated it more than once, that he had
done so in your own hearing."

"So I understood him.  But it seems I was in error.  But don't for a
moment, Mr. Quiverful, suppose that I mean to throw you over.  No. 
Having held out my hand to a man in your position, with your long
family and pressing claims, I am not now going to draw it back again. 
I only want you to act with me fairly and honestly."

"Whatever I do I shall endeavour at any rate to act fairly," said the
poor man, feeling that he had to fall back for support on the spirit
of martyrdom within him.

"I am sure you will," said the other.  "I am sure you have no wish to
obtain possession of an income which belongs by all right to another. 
No man knows better than you do Mr. Harding's history, or can better
appreciate his character.  Mr. Harding is very desirous of returning
to his old position, and the bishop feels that he is at the present
moment somewhat hampered, though of course he is not bound, by the
conversation which took place on the matter between you and me."

"Well," said Mr. Quiverful, dreadfully doubtful as to what his
conduct under such circumstances should be, and fruitlessly striving
to harden his nerves with some of that instinct of self-preservation
which made his wife so bold.

"The wardenship of this little hospital is not the only thing in the
bishop's gift, Mr. Quiverful, nor is it by many degrees the best. 
And his lordship is not the man to forget anyone whom he has once
marked with approval.  If you would allow me to advise you as a
friend -"

"Indeed, I shall be most grateful to you," said the poor vicar of
Puddingdale.

"I should advise you to withdraw from any opposition to Mr. Harding's
claims.  If you persist in your demand, I do not think you will
ultimately succeed.  Mr. Harding has all but a positive right to the
place.  But if you will allow me to inform the bishop that you
decline to stand in Mr. Harding's way, I think I may promise you--
though, by the by, it must not he taken as a formal promise--that the
bishop will not allow you to be a poorer man than you would have been
had you become warden."

Mr. Quiverful sat in his armchair, silent, gazing at vacancy.  What
was he to say?  All this that came from Mr. Slope was so true.  Mr.
Harding had a right to the hospital.  The bishop had a great many
good things to give away.  Both the bishop and Mr. Slope would be
excellent friends and terrible enemies to a man in his position.  And
then he had no proof of any promise; he could not force the bishop to
appoint him.

"Well, Mr. Quiverful, what do you say about it?"

"Oh, of course, whatever you think fit, Mr. Slope.  It's a great
disappointment, a very great disappointment.  I won't deny that I am
a very poor man, Mr. Slope."

"In the end, Mr. Quiverful, you will find that it will have been
better for you."

The interview ended in Mr. Slope receiving a full renunciation from
Mr. Quiverful of any claim he might have to the appointment in
question.  It was only given verbally and without witnesses, but then
the original promise was made in the same way.

Mr. Slope again assured him that he should not be forgotten and then
rode back to Barchester, satisfied that he would now be able to mould
the bishop to his wishes.



CHAPTER XXV

Fourteen Arguments in Favour of Mr. Quiverful's Claims


We have most of us heard of the terrible anger of a lioness when,
surrounded by her cubs, she guards her prey.  Few of us wish to
disturb the mother of a litter of puppies when mouthing a bone in the
midst of her young family.  Medea and her children are familiar to
us, and so is the grief of Constance.  Mrs. Quiverful, when she first
heard from her husband the news which he had to impart, felt within
her bosom all the rage of the lioness, the rapacity of the hound, the
fury of the tragic queen, and the deep despair of the bereaved
mother.

Doubting, but yet hardly fearing, what might have been the tenor of
Mr. Slope's discourse, she rushed back to her husband as soon as the
front door was closed behind the visitor.  It was well for Mr. Slope
that he so escaped--the anger of such a woman, at such a moment,
would have cowed even him.  As a general rule, it is highly desirable
that ladies should keep their temper: a woman when she storms always
makes herself ugly, and usually ridiculous also.  There is nothing so
odious to man as a virago.  Though Theseus loved an Amazon, he showed
his love but roughly, and from the time of Theseus downward, no man
ever wished to have his wife remarkable rather for forward prowess
than retiring gentleness.  A low voice "is an excellent thing in
woman."

Such may be laid down as a very general rule; and few women should
allow themselves to deviate from it, and then only on rare occasions. 
But if there be a time when a woman may let her hair to the winds,
when she may loose her arms, and scream out trumpet-tongued to the
ears of men, it is when nature calls out within her not for her own
wants, but for the wants of those whom her womb has borne, whom her
breasts have suckled, for those who look to her for their daily bread
as naturally as man looks to his Creator.

There was nothing poetic in the nature of Mrs. Quiverful.  She was
neither a Medea nor a Constance.  When angry, she spoke out her anger
in plain words and in a tone which might have been modulated with
advantage; but she did so, at any rate, without affectation.  Now, 
without knowing it, she rose to a tragic vein.

"Well, my dear, we are not to have it."  Such were the words with
which her ears were greeted when she entered the parlour, still hot
from the kitchen fire.  And the face of her husband spoke even more
plainly than his words:

E'en such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night.

"What!" said she--and Mrs. Siddons could not have put more passion
into a single syllable--"What!  Not have it?  Who says so?"  And she
sat opposite to her husband, with her elbows on the table, her hands
clasped together, and her coarse, solid, but once handsome face
stretched over it towards him.

She sat as silent as death while he told his story, and very dreadful
to him her silence was.  He told it very lamely and badly but still
in such a manner that she soon understood the whole of it.

"And so you have resigned it?" said she.

I have had no opportunity of accepting it," he replied.  "I had no
witnesses to Mr. Slope's offer, even if that offer would bind the
bishop.  It was better for me, on the whole, to keep on good terms
with such men than to fight for what I should never get!"

"Witnesses!" she screamed, rising quickly to her feet and walking up
and down the room.  "Do clergymen require witnesses to their words? 
He made the promise in the bishop's name, and if it is to be broken,
I'll know the reason why.  Did he not positively say that the bishop
had sent him to offer you the place?"

"He did, my dear.  But that is now nothing to the purpose."

"It is everything to the purpose, Mr. Quiverful.  Witnesses indeed! 
And then to talk of your honour being questioned because you wish to
provide for fourteen children.  It is everything to the purpose; and
so they shall know, if I scream it into their ears from the town
cross of Barchester."

"You forget, Letitia, that the bishop has so many things in his gift. 
We must wait a little longer.  That is all."

"Wait!  Shall we feed the children by waiting?  Will waiting put
George, and Tom, and Sam out into the world?  Will it enable my poor
girls to give up some of their drudgery?  Will waiting make Bessy and
Jane fit even to be governesses?  Will waiting pay for the things we
got in Barchester last week?"

"It is all we can do, my dear.  The disappointment is as much to me
as to you; and yet, God knows, I feel it more for your sake than my
own."

Mrs. Quiverful was looking full into her husband's face, and saw a
small hot tear appear on each of those furrowed cheeks.  This was too
much for her woman's heart.  He also had risen, and was standing with
his back to the empty grate.  She rushed towards him and, seizing him
in her arms, sobbed aloud upon his bosom.

"You are too good, too soft, too yielding," she said at last.  "These
men, when they want you, they use you like a cat's paw; and when they
want you no longer, they throw you aside like an old shoe.  This is
twice they have treated you so."

"In one way this will be all for the better," argued he.  "It will
make the bishop feel that he is bound to do something for me."

"At any rate he shall hear of it," said the lady, again reverting to
her more angry mood.  "At any rate he shall hear of it, and that
loudly, and so shall she.  She little knows Letitia Quiverful, if she
thinks I will sit down quietly with the loss after all that passed
between us at the palace.  If there's any feeling within her, I'll
make her ashamed of herself"--and she paced the room again, stamping
the floor as she went with her fat, heavy foot.  "Good heavens!  What
a heart she must have within her to treat in such a way as this the
father of fourteen unprovided children!"

Mr. Quiverful proceeded to explain that he didn't think that Mrs.
Proudie had had anything to do with it.

"Don't tell me," said Mrs. Quiverful; "I know more about it than
that.  Doesn't all the world know that Mrs. Proudie is bishop of
Barchester and that Mr. Slope is merely her creature?  Wasn't it she
that made me the promise, just as though the thing was in her own
particular gift?  I tell you, it was that woman who sent him over
here to-day, because, for some reason of her own, she wants to go
back from her word."

"My dear, you're wrong--"

"Now, Q., don't be so soft," she continued.  "Take my word for it,
the bishop knows no more about it than Jemima does."  Jemima was the
two-year-old.  "And if you'll take my advice, you'll lose no time in
going over and seeing him yourself."

Soft, however, as Mr. Quiverful might be, he would not allow himself
to be talked out of his opinion on this occasion, and proceeded with
much minuteness to explain to his wife the tone in which Mr. Slope
had spoken of Mrs. Proudie's interference in diocesan matters.  As he
did so, a new idea gradually instilled itself into the matron's head,
and a new course of conduct presented itself to her judgement.  What
if, after all, Mrs. Proudie knew nothing of this visit of Mr.
Slope's?  In that case, might it not be possible that that lady would
still be staunch to her in this matter, still stand her friend, and,
perhaps, possibly carry her through in opposition to Mr. Slope?
Mrs. Quiverful said nothing as this vague hope occurred to her but
listened with more than ordinary patience to what her husband had to
say.  While he was still explaining that in all probability the world
was wrong in its estimation of Mrs. Proudie's power and authority,
she had fully made up her mind as to her course of action.  She did
not, however, proclaim her intention.  She shook her head ominously
as he continued his narration, and when he had completed, she rose to
go, merely observing that it was cruel, cruel treatment.  She then
asked him if he would mind waiting for a late dinner instead of
dining at their usual hour of three, and, having received from him a
concession on this point, she proceeded to carry her purpose into
execution.

She determined that she would at once go to the palace, that she
would do so, if possible, before Mrs. Proudie could have had an
interview with Mr. Slope, and that she would be either submissive,
piteous, and pathetic, or else indignant, violent, and exacting
according to the manner in which she was received.

She was quite confident in her own power.  Strengthened as she was by
the pressing wants of fourteen children, she felt that she could make
her way through legions of episcopal servants and force herself, if
need be, into the presence of the lady who had so wronged her.  She
had no shame about it, no mauvaise honte, no dread of archdeacons. 
She would, as she declared to her husband, make her wail heard in the
market-place if she did not get redress and justice.  It might be
very well for an unmarried young curate to be shamefaced in such
matters; it might be all right that a snug rector, really in want of
nothing, but still looking for better preferment, should carry on his 
affairs decently under the rose.  But Mrs. Quiverful, with fourteen
children, had given over being shamefaced and, in some things, had
given over being decent.  If it were intended that she should be ill-
used in the manner proposed by Mr. Slope, it should not be done under
the rose.  All the world should know of it.

In her present mood, Mrs. Quiverful was not over-careful about her
attire.  She tied her bonnet under her chin, threw her shawl over her
shoulders, armed herself with the old family cotton umbrella, and
started for Barchester.  A journey to the palace was not quite so
easy a thing for Mrs. Quiverful as for our friend at Plumstead. 
Plumstead is nine miles from Barchester, and Puddingdale is but four. 
But the archdeacon could order round his brougham, and his high-
trotting fast bay gelding would take him into the city within the
hour.  There was no brougham in the coach-house of Puddingdale
Vicarage, no bay horse in the stables.  There was no method of
locomotion for its inhabitants but that which nature has assigned to
man.

Mrs. Quiverful was a broad, heavy woman, not young, nor given to
walking.  In her kitchen, and in the family dormitories, she was
active enough, but her pace and gait were not adapted for the road. 
A walk into Barchester and back in the middle of an August day would
be to her a terrible task, if not altogether impracticable.  There
was living in the parish, about half a mile from the vicarage on the
road to the city, a decent, kindly farmer, well to do as regards this
world and so far mindful of the next that he attended his parish
church with decent regularity.  To him Mrs. Quiverful had before now
appealed in some of her more pressing family troubles and had not
appealed in vain.  At his door she now presented herself, and, having
explained to his wife that most urgent business required her to go at
once to Barchester, begged that Farmer Subsoil would take her thither
in his tax-cart.  The farmer did not reject her plan, and, as soon as
Prince could be got into his collar, they started on their journey.

Mrs. Quiverful did not mention the purpose of her business, nor did
the farmer alloy his kindness by any unseemly questions.  She merely
begged to be put down at the bridge going into the city and to be
taken up again at the same place in the course of two hours.  The
farmer promised to be punctual to his appointment, and the lady,
supported by her umbrella, took the short cut to the close and, in a
few minutes, was at the bishop's door.

Hitherto she had felt no dread with regard to the coming interview. 
She had felt nothing but an indignant longing to pour forth her
claims, and declare her wrongs, if those claims were not fully
admitted.  But now the difficulty of her situation touched her a
little.  She had been at the palace once before, but then she went to
give grateful thanks.  Those who have thanks to return for favours
received find easy admittance to the halls of the great.  Such is not
always the case with men, or even with women, who have favours to
beg.  Still less easy is access for those who demand the fulfilment
of promises already made.

Mrs. Quiverful had not been slow to learn the ways of the world.  She
knew all this, and she knew also that her cotton umbrella and all but
ragged shawl would not command respect in the eyes of the palatial
servants.  If she were too humble, she knew well that she would never
succeed.  To overcome by imperious overbearing with such a shawl as
hers upon her shoulders and such a bonnet on her head would have
required a personal bearing very superior to that with which nature
had endowed her.  Of this also Mrs. Quiverful was aware.  She must
make it known that she was the wife of a gentleman and a clergyman
and must yet condescend to conciliate.

The poor lady knew but one way to overcome these difficulties at the
very threshold of her enterprise, and to this she resorted.  Low as
were the domestic funds at Puddingdale, she still retained possession
of half a crown, and this she sacrificed to the avarice of Mrs.
Proudie's metropolitan sesquipedalian serving-man.  She was, she
said, Mrs. Quiverful of Puddingdale, the wife of the Rev. Mr.
Quiverful.  She wished to see Mrs. Proudie.  It was indeed quite
indispensable that she should see Mrs. Proudie.  James Fitzplush
looked worse than dubious, did not know whether his lady were out, or
engaged, or in her bedroom; thought it most probable she was subject
to one of these or to some other cause that would make her invisible;
but Mrs. Quiverful could sit down in the waiting-room while inquiry
was being made of Mrs. Proudie's maid.

"Look here, my man," said Mrs. Quiverful; "I must see her;" and she
put her card and half-crown--think of it, my reader, think of it; her
last half-crown--into the man's hand and sat herself down on a chair
in the waiting-room.

Whether the bribe carried the day, or whether the bishop's wife
really chose to see the vicar's wife, it boots not now to inquire. 
The man returned and, begging Mrs. Quiverful to follow him, ushered
her into the presence of the mistress of the diocese.

Mrs. Quiverful at once saw that her patroness was in a smiling
humour.  Triumph sat throned upon her brow, and all the joys of
dominion hovered about her curls.  Her lord had that morning
contested with her a great point.  He had received an invitation to
spend a couple of days with the archbishop.  His soul longed for the
gratification.  Not a word, however, in his grace's note alluded to
the fact of his being a married man; if he went at all, he must go
alone.  This necessity would have presented no insurmountable bar to
the visit, or have militated much against the pleasure, had he been
able to go without any reference to Mrs. Proudie.  But this he could
not do.  He could not order his portmanteau to be packed and start
with his own man, merely telling the lady of his heart that he would
probably be back on Saturday.  There are men--may we not rather say
monsters?--who do such things, and there are wives--may we not rather
say slaves?--who put up with such usage.  But Dr. and Mrs. Proudie
were not among the number.

The bishop, with some beating about the bush, made the lady
understand that he very much wished to go.  The lady, without any
beating about the bush, made the bishop understand that she wouldn't
hear of it.  It would be useless here to repeat the arguments that
were used on each side, and needless to record the result.  Those who
are married will understand very well how the battle was lost and
won, and those who are single will never understand it till they
learn the lesson which experience alone can give.  When Mrs.
Quiverful was shown into Mrs. Proudie's room, that lady had only
returned a few minutes from her lord.  But before she left him she
had seen the answer to the archbishop's note written and sealed.  No
wonder that her face was wreathed with smiles as she received Mrs.
Quiverful.

She instantly spoke of the subject which was so near the heart of her
visitor.  "Well, Mrs. Quiverful," said she, "is it decided yet when
you are to move into Barchester?"

"That woman," as she had an hour or two since been called, became
instantly re-endowed with all the graces that can adorn a bishop's
wife.  Mrs. Quiverful immediately saw that her business was to be
piteous and that nothing was to be gained by indignation--nothing,
indeed, unless she could be indignant in company with her patroness.

"Oh, Mrs. Proudie," she began, "I fear we are not to move to
Barchester at all."

"Why not?" said that lady sharply, dropping at a moment's notice her
smiles and condescension and turning with her sharp quick way to
business which she saw at a glance was important.

And then Mrs. Quiverful told her tale.  As she progressed in the
history of her wrongs she perceived that the heavier she leant upon
Mr. Slope the blacker became Mrs. Proudie's brow, but that such
blackness was not injurious to her own case.  When Mr. Slope was at
Puddingdale Vicarage that morning she had regarded him as the
creature of the lady-bishop; now she perceived that they were
enemies.  She admitted her mistake to herself without any pain or
humiliation.  She had but one feeling, and that was confined to her
family.  She cared little how she twisted and turned among these new-
comers at the bishop's palace so long as she could twist her husband
into the warden's house.  She cared not which was her friend or which
was her enemy, if only she could get this preferment which she so
sorely wanted.

She told her tale, and Mrs. Proudie listened to it almost in silence. 
She told how Mr. Slope had cozened her husband into resigning his
claim and had declared that it was the bishop's will that none but
Mr. Harding should be warden.  Mrs. Proudie's brow became blacker and
blacker.  At last she started from her chair and, begging Mrs.
Quiverful to sit and wait for her return, marched out of the room.

"Oh, Mrs. Proudie, it's for fourteen children--for fourteen
children."  Such was the burden that fell on her ear as she closed
the door behind her.



CHAPTER XXVI

Mrs. Proudie Wrestles and Gets a Fall


It was hardly an hour since Mrs. Proudie had left her husband's
apartment victorious, and yet so indomitable was her courage that she
now returned thither panting for another combat.  She was greatly
angry with what she thought was his duplicity.  He had so clearly
given her a promise on this matter of the hospital.  He had been
already so absolutely vanquished on that point.  Mrs. Proudie began
to feel that if every affair was to be thus discussed and battled
about twice and even thrice, the work of the diocese would be too
much even for her.

Without knocking at the door, she walked quickly into her husband's
room and found him seated at his office table, with Mr. Slope
opposite to him.  Between his fingers was the very note which he had
written to the archbishop in her presence--and it was open!  Yes, he
had absolutely violated the seal which had been made sacred by her
approval.  They were sitting in deep conclave, and it was too clear
that the purport of the archbishop's invitation had been absolutely
canvassed again, after it had been already debated and decided on in
obedience to her behests!  Mr. Slope rose from his chair and bowed
slightly.  The two opposing spirits looked each other fully in the
face, and they knew that they were looking each at an enemy.

"What is this, Bishop, about Mr. Quiverful?" said she, coming to the
end of the table and standing there.

Mr. Slope did not allow the bishop to answer but replied himself.
"I have been out to Puddingdale this morning, ma'am, and have seen
Mr. Quiverful.  Mr. Quiverful has abandoned his claim to the hospital
because he is now aware that Mr. Harding is desirous to fill his old
place.  Under these circumstances I have strongly advised his
lordship to nominate Mr. Harding."

"Mr. Quiverful has not abandoned anything," said the lady, with a
very imperious voice.  "His lordship's word has been pledged to him,
and it must be respected."

The bishop still remained silent.  He was anxiously desirous of
making his old enemy bite the dust beneath his feet.  His new ally
had told him that nothing was more easy for him than to do so.  The
ally was there now at his elbow to help him, and yet his courage
failed him.  It is so hard to conquer when the prestige of former
victories is all against one.  It is so hard for the cock who has
once been beaten out of his yard to resume his courage and again take
a proud place upon a dunghill.

"Perhaps I ought not to interfere," said Mr. Slope, "but yet--"

"Certainly you ought not," said the infuriated dame

"But yet," continued Mr. Slope, not regarding the interruption,
"I have thought it my imperative duty to recommend the bishop not to
slight Mr. Harding's claims."

"Mr. Harding should have known his own mind," said the lady.

"If Mr. Harding be not replaced at the hospital, his lordship will
have to encounter much ill-will, not only in the diocese, but in the
world at large.  Besides, taking a higher ground, his lordship, as I
understand, feels it to be his duty to gratify, in this matter, so
very worthy a man and so good a clergyman as Mr. Harding."

"And what is to become of the Sabbath-day school and of the Sunday
services in the hospital?" said Mrs. Proudie, with something very 
nearly approaching to a sneer on her face.

"I understand that Mr. Harding makes no objection to the Sabbath-day
school," said Mr. Slope.  "And as to the hospital services, that
matter will be best discussed after his appointment.  If he has any
permanent objection, then, I fear, the matter must rest."

"You have a very easy conscience in such matters, Mr. Slope," said
she.

"I should not have an easy conscience," he rejoined, "but a
conscience very far from being easy, if anything said or done by me
should lead the bishop to act unadvisedly in this matter.  It is
clear that in the interview I had with Mr. Harding I misunderstood
him--"

"And it is equally clear that you have misunderstood Mr. Quiverful,"
said she, now at the top of her wrath.  "What business have you at
all with these interviews?  Who desired you to go to Mr. Quiverful
this morning?  Who commissioned you to manage this affair?  Will you
answer me, sir?  Who sent you to Mr. Quiverful this morning?"

There was a dead pause in the room.  Mr. Slope had risen from his
chair, and was standing with his hand on the back of it, looking at
first very solemn and now very black.  Mrs. Proudie was standing as
she had at first placed herself, at the end of the table, and as she
interrogated her foe she struck her hand upon it with almost more
than feminine vigour.  The bishop was sitting in his easy chair
twiddling his thumbs, turning his eyes now to his wife, and now to
his chaplain, as each took up the cudgels.  How comfortable it would
be if they could fight it out between them without the necessity of
any interference on his part; fight it out so that one should kill
the other utterly, as far as diocesan life was concerned, so that he,
the bishop, might know clearly by whom it behoved him to be led. 
There would be the comfort of quiet in either case; but if the bishop
had a wish as to which might prove the victor, that wish was
certainly not antagonistic to Mr. Slope.

"Better the d---- you know than the d---- you don't know," is an old
saying, and perhaps a true one, but the bishop had not yet realized
the truth of it.

"Will you answer me, sir?" she repeated.  "Who instructed you to call
on Mr. Quiverful this morning?"  There was another pause.  "Do you
intend to answer me, sir?"

"I think, Mrs. Proudie, that under all the circumstances it will be
better for me not to answer such a question," said Mr. Slope.  Mr.
Slope had many tones in his voice, all duly under his command; among
them was a sanctified low tone and a sanctified loud tone--he now
used the former.

"Did anyone send you, sir?"

"Mrs. Proudie," said Mr. Slope, "I am quite aware how much I owe to
your kindness.  I am aware also what is due by courtesy from a
gentleman to a lady.  But there are higher considerations than either
of those, and I hope I shall be forgiven if I now allow myself to be
actuated solely by them.  My duty in this matter is to his lordship,
and I can admit of no questioning but from him.  He has approved of
what I have done, and you must excuse me if I say that, having that
approval and my own, I want none other."

What horrid words were these which greeted the ear of Mrs. Proudie? 
The matter was indeed too clear.  There was premeditated mutiny in
the camp.  Not only had ill-conditioned minds become insubordinate by
the fruition of a little power, but sedition had been overtly taught
and preached.  The bishop had not yet been twelve months in his chair
and rebellion had already reared her hideous head within the palace. 
Anarchy and misrule would quickly follow unless she took immediate
and strong measures to put down the conspiracy which she had
detected.

"Mr. Slope," she said with slow and dignified voice, differing much
from that which she had hitherto used, "Mr. Slope, I will trouble
you, if you please, to leave the apartment.  I wish to speak to my
lord alone."

Mr. Slope also felt that everything depended on the present
interview.  Should the bishop now be re-petticoated, his thraldom
would be complete and forever.  The present moment was peculiarly
propitious for rebellion.  The bishop had clearly committed himself
by breaking the seal of the answer to the archbishop; he had
therefore fear to influence him.  Mr. Slope had told him that no
consideration ought to induce him to refuse the archbishop's
invitation; he had therefore hope to influence him.  He had accepted
Mr. Quiverful's resignation and therefore dreaded having to renew
that matter with his wife.  He had been screwed up to the pitch of
asserting a will of his own, and might possibly be carried on till by
an absolute success he should have been taught how possible it was to
succeed.  Now was the moment for victory or rout.  It was now that
Mr. Slope must make himself master of the diocese, or else resign his
place and begin his search for fortune again.  He saw all this
plainly.  After what had taken place any compromise between him and
the lady was impossible.  Let him once leave the room at her bidding
and leave the bishop in her hands, and he might at once pack up his
portmanteau and bid adieu to episcopal honours, Mrs. Bold, and the
Signora Neroni.

And yet it was not so easy to keep his ground when he was bidden by a
lady to go, or to continue to make a third in a party between a
husband and wife when the wife expressed a wish for a tête-à-tête
with her husband.

"Mr. Slope," she repeated, "I wish to be alone with my lord."

"His lordship has summoned me on most important diocesan business,"
said Mr. Slope, glancing with uneasy eye at Dr. Proudie.  He felt
that he must trust something to the bishop, and yet that that trust
was so woefully ill-placed.  "My leaving him at the present moment
is, I fear, impossible."

"Do you bandy words with me, you ungrateful man?" said she.  "My
lord, will you do me the favour to beg Mr. Slope to leave the room?"

My lord scratched his head but for the moment said nothing.  This was
as much as Mr. Slope expected from him and was on the whole, for him,
an active exercise of marital rights.

"My lord," said the lady, "is Mr. Slope to leave this room, or am I?"

Here Mrs. Proudie made a false step.  She should not have alluded to
the possibility of retreat on her part.  She should not have
expressed the idea that her order for Mr. Slope's expulsion could be
treated otherwise than by immediate obedience.  In answer to such a
question the bishop naturally said in his own mind that, as it was
necessary that one should leave the room, perhaps it might be as well
that Mrs. Proudie did so.  He did say so in his own mind, but
externally he again scratched his head and again twiddled his thumbs.

Mrs. Proudie was boiling over with wrath.  Alas, alas!  Could she but
have kept her temper as her enemy did, she would have conquered as
she had ever conquered.  But divine anger got the better of her, as
it has done of other heroines, and she fell.

"My lord," said she, "am I to be vouchsafed an answer or am I not?"

At last he broke his deep silence and proclaimed himself a Slopeite. 
"Why, my dear," said he, "Mr. Slope and I are very busy.

That was all.  There was nothing more necessary.  He had gone to the
battlefield, stood the dust and heat of the day, encountered the fury
of the foe, and won the victory.  How easy is success to those who
will only be true to themselves!

Mr. Slope saw at once the full amount of his gain and turned on the
vanquished lady a look of triumph which she never forgot and never
forgave.  Here he was wrong.  He should have looked humbly at her
and, with meek entreating eye, have deprecated her anger.  He should
have said by his glance that he asked pardon for his success and that
he hoped forgiveness for the stand which he had been forced to make
in the cause of duty.  So might he perchance have somewhat mollified
that imperious bosom and prepared the way for future terms.  But Mr.
Slope meant to rule without terms.  Ah, forgetful, inexperienced man! 
Can you cause that little trembling victim to be divorced from the
woman that possesses him?  Can you provide that they shall be
separated at bed and board?  Is he not flesh of her flesh and bone of
her bone, and must he not so continue?  It is very well now for you
to stand your ground and triumph as she is driven ignominiously from
the room, but can you be present when those curtains are drawn, when
that awful helmet of proof has been tied beneath the chin, when the
small remnants of the bishop's prowess shall be cowed by the tassel
above his head?  Can you then intrude yourself when the wife wishes
"to speak to my lord alone?"

But for the moment Mr. Slope's triumph was complete, for Mrs. Proudie
without further parley left the room and did not forget to shut the
door after her.  Then followed a close conference between the new
allies, in which was said much which it astonished Mr. Slope to say
and the bishop to hear.  And yet the one said it and the other heard
it without ill-will.  There was no mincing of matters now.  The
chaplain plainly told the bishop that the world gave him credit for
being under the governance of his wife; that his credit and character
in the diocese were suffering; that he would surely get himself in
hot water if he allowed Mrs. Proudie to interfere in matters which
were not suitable for a woman's powers; and in fact that he would
become contemptible if he did not throw off the yoke under which he
groaned.  The bishop at first hummed and hawed and affected to deny
the truth of what was said.  But his denial was not stout and quickly
broke down.  He soon admitted by silence his state of vassalage and
pledged himself, with Mr. Slope's assistance, to change his courses. 
Mr. Slope also did not make out a bad case for himself.  He explained
how it grieved him to run counter to a lady who had always been his
patroness, who had befriended him in so many ways, who had, in fact,
recommended him to the bishop's notice; but, as he stated, his duty
was now imperative; he held a situation of peculiar confidence and
was immediately