 and especially attached to the bishop's person.  In
such a situation his conscience required that he should regard solely
the bishop's interests, and therefore he had ventured to speak out.

The bishop took this for what it was worth, and Mr. Slope only
intended that he should do so.  It gilded the pill which Mr. Slope
had to administer, and which the bishop thought would be less bitter
than that other pill which he had so long been taking.

"My lord," had his immediate reward, like a good child.  He was
instructed to write and at once did write another note to the
archbishop accepting his grace's invitation.  This note Mr. Slope,
more prudent than the lady, himself took away and posted with his own
hands.  Thus he made sure that this act of self-jurisdiction should
be as nearly as possible a fait accompli.  He begged, and coaxed, and
threatened the bishop with a view of making him also write at once to
Mr. Harding, but the bishop, though temporally emancipated from his
wife, was not yet enthralled to Mr. Slope.  He said, and probably
said truly, that such an offer must be made in some official form;
that he was not yet prepared to sign the form; and that he should
prefer seeing Mr. Harding before he did so.  Mr. Slope might,
however, beg Mr. Harding to call upon him.  Not disappointed with his
achievement Mr. Slope went his way.  He first posted the precious
note which he had in his pocket and then pursued other enterprises in
which we must follow him in other chapters.

Mrs. Proudie, having received such satisfaction as was to be derived
from slamming her husband's door, did not at once betake herself to
Mrs. Quiverful.  Indeed, for the first few moments after her repulse
she felt that she could not again see that lady.  She would have to
own that she had been beaten, to confess that the diadem had passed
from her brow and the sceptre from her hand!  No, she would send a
message to her with a promise of a letter on the next day or the day
after.  Thus resolving, she betook herself to her bedroom, but here
she again changed her mind.  The air of that sacred enclosure
somewhat restored her courage and gave her more heart.  As Achilles
warmed at the sight of his armour, as Don Quixote's heart grew strong
when he grasped his lance, so did Mrs. Proudie look forward to fresh
laurels, as her eye fell on her husband's pillow.  She would not
despair.  Having so resolved, she descended with dignified mien and
refreshed countenance to Mrs. Quiverful.

This scene in the bishop's study took longer in the acting than in
the telling.  We have not, perhaps, had the whole of the
conversation.  At any rate Mrs. Quiverful was beginning to be very
impatient and was thinking that Farmer Subsoil would be tired of
waiting for her when Mrs. Proudie returned.  Oh, who can tell the
palpitations of that maternal heart, as the suppliant looked into the
face of the great lady to see written there either a promise of
house, income, comfort and future competence, or else the doom of
continued and ever-increasing poverty!  Poor mother!  Poor wife! 
There was little there to comfort you!

"Mrs. Quiverful," thus spoke the lady with considerable austerity and
without sitting down herself, "I find that your husband has behaved
in this matter in a very weak and foolish manner."

Mrs. Quiverful immediately rose upon her feet, thinking it
disrespectful to remain sitting while the wife of the bishop stood. 
But she was desired to sit down again, and made to do so, so that
Mrs. Proudie might stand and preach over her.  It is generally
considered an offensive thing for a gentleman to keep his seat while
another is kept standing before him, and we presume the same law
holds with regard to ladies.  It often is so felt, but we are
inclined to say that it never produces half the discomfort or half
the feeling of implied inferiority that is shown by a great man who
desires his visitor to be seated while be himself speaks from his
legs.  Such a solecism in good breeding, when construed into English,
means this: "The accepted rules of courtesy in the world require that
I should offer you a seat; if I did not do so, you would bring a
charge against me in the world of being arrogant and ill-mannered; I
will obey the world, but, nevertheless, I will not put myself on an
equality with you.  You may sit down, but I won't sit with you.  Sit,
therefore, at my bidding, and I'll stand and talk at you!"

This was just what Mrs. Proudie meant to say, and Mrs. Quiverful,
though she was too anxious and too flurried thus to translate the
full meaning of the manoeuvre, did not fail to feel its effect.  She
was cowed and uncomfortable and a second time essayed to rise from
her chair.

"Pray be seated, Mrs. Quiverful, pray keep your seat.  Your husband,
I say, has been most weak and most foolish.  It is impossible, Mrs.
Quiverful, to help people who will not help themselves.  I much fear
that I can now do nothing for you in this matter."

"Oh, Mrs. Proudie, don't say so," said the poor woman, again jumping
up.

"Pray be seated, Mrs. Quiverful.  I must fear that I can do nothing
further for you in this matter.  Your husband has, in a most
unaccountable manner, taken upon himself to resign that which I was
empowered to offer him.  As a matter of course, the bishop expects
that his clergy shall know their own minds.  What he may ultimately
do--what we may finally decide on doing--I cannot now say.  Knowing
the extent of your family--"

"Fourteen children, Mrs. Proudie, fourteen of them!  And barely
bread--barely bread?  It's hard for the children of a clergyman, it's
hard for one who has always done his duty respectably!"  Not a word
fell from her about herself, but the tears came streaming down her
big, coarse cheeks, on which the dust of the August road had left its
traces.

Mrs. Proudie has not been portrayed in these pages as an agreeable or
an amiable lady.  There has been no intention to impress the reader
much in her favour.  It is ordained that all novels should have a
male and a female angel and a male and a female devil.  If it be
considered that this rule is obeyed in these pages, the latter
character must be supposed to have fallen to the lot of Mrs. Proudie. 
But she was not all devil.  There was a heart inside that stiff-
ribbed bodice, though not, perhaps, of large dimensions and certainly
not easily accessible.  Mrs. Quiverful, however, did gain access, and
Mrs. Proudie proved herself a woman.  'Whether it was the fourteen
children with their probable bare bread and their possible bare
backs, or the respectability of the father's work, or the mingled
dust and tears on the mother's face, we will not pretend to say.  But
Mrs. Proudie was touched.

She did not show it as other women might have done.  She did not give
Mrs. Quiverful eau-de-Cologne, or order her a glass of wine.  She did
not take her to her toilet table and offer her the use of brushes and
combs, towels and water.  She did not say soft little speeches and
coax her kindly back to equanimity.  Mrs. Quiverful, despite her
rough appearance, would have been as amenable to such little tender
cares as any lady in the land.  But none such were forthcoming. 
Instead of this, Mrs. Proudie slapped one hand upon the other and
declared--not with an oath, for, as a lady and a Sabbatarian and a
she-bishop, she could not swear, but with an adjuration--that she
"wouldn't have it done."

The meaning of this was that she wouldn't have Mr. Quiverful's
promised appointment cozened away by the treachery of Mr. Slope and
the weakness of her husband.  This meaning she very soon explained to
Mrs. Quiverful.

"Why was your husband such a fool," said she, now dismounted from her
high horse and sitting confidentially down close to her visitor, "as
to take the bait which that man threw to him?  If he had not been so
utterly foolish, nothing could have prevented your going to the
hospital."

Poor Mrs. Quiverful was ready enough with her own tongue in accusing
her husband to his face of being soft, and perhaps did not always
speak of him to her children quite so respectfully as she might have
done.  But she did not at all like to hear him abused by others and
began to vindicate him and to explain that of course he had taken Mr.
Slope to be an emissary from Mrs. Proudie herself; that Mr. Slope was
thought to be peculiarly her friend; and that, therefore, Mr.
Quiverful would have been failing in respect to her had he assumed to
doubt what Mr. Slope had said.

Thus mollified, Mrs. Proudie again declared that she "would not have
it done," and at last sent Mrs. Quiverful home with an assurance
that, to the furthest stretch of her power and influence in the
palace, the appointment of Mr. Quiverful should be insisted on.  As
she repeated the word "insisted," she thought of the bishop in his
night-cap and, with compressed lips, slightly shook her head.  Oh, my
aspiring pastors, divines to whose ears nolo episcopari are the
sweetest of words, which of you would be a bishop on such terms as
these?

Mrs. Quiverful got home in the farmer's cart, not indeed with a light
heart, but satisfied that she had done right in making her visit.



CHAPTER XXVII

A Love Scene


Mr. Slope, as we have said, left the palace with a feeling of
considerable triumph.  Not that he thought that his difficulties were
all over--he did not so deceive himself--but he felt that he had
played his first move well, as well as the pieces on the board would
allow, and that he had nothing with which to reproach himself.  He 
first of all posted the letter to the archbishop and, having made
that sure, proceeded to push the advantage which he had gained.  Had
Mrs. Bold been at home, he would have called on her, but he knew that
she was at Plumstead, so he wrote the following note.  It was the
beginning of what, he trusted, might be a long and tender series of
epistles.

MY DEAR MRS. BOLD,

You will understand perfectly that I cannot at present correspond
with your father.  I heartily wish that I could and hope the day may
be not long distant when mists shall have been cleared away and we
may know each other.  But I cannot preclude myself from the pleasure
of sending you these few lines to say that Mr. Q. has to-day, in my
presence, resigned any title that he ever had to the wardenship of
the hospital, and that the bishop has assured me that it is his
intention to offer it to your esteemed father.

Will you, with my respectful compliments, ask him, who I believe is
now a fellow-visitor with you, to call on the bishop either on
Wednesday or Thursday, between ten and one.  This is by the bishop's
desire.  If you will so far oblige me as to let me have a line naming
either day, and the hour which will suit Mr. Harding, I will take
care that the servants shall have orders to show him in without
delay.  Perhaps I should say no more--but still I wish you could make
your father understand that no subject will be mooted between his
lordship and him which will refer at all to the method in which he
may choose to perform his duty.  I for one am persuaded that no
clergyman could perform it more satisfactorily than he did, or than
he will do again.

On a former occasion I was indiscreet and much too impatient,
considering your father's age and my own.  I hope he will not now
refuse my apology.  I still hope also that with your aid and sweet
pious labours we may live to attach such a Sabbath-school to the old
endowment as may, by God's grace and furtherance, be a blessing to
the poor of this city.

You will see at once that this letter is confidential.  The subject,
of course, makes it so.  But, equally, of course, it is for your
parent's eye as well as for your own, should you think proper to show
it to him.

I hope my darling little friend Johnny is as strong as ever--dear
little fellow.  Does he still continue his rude assaults on those
beautiful long silken tresses?

I can assure you your friends miss you from Barchester sorely, but it
would be cruel to begrudge you your sojourn among flowers and fields
during this truly sultry weather.

Pray believe me, my dear Mrs. Bold,
Yours most sincerely,
OBADIAH SLOPE
Barchester, Friday.

Now this letter, taken as a whole, and with the consideration that
Mr. Slope wished to assume a great degree of intimacy with Eleanor,
would not have been bad but for the allusion to the tresses. 
Gentlemen do not write to ladies about their tresses unless they are
on very intimate terms indeed.  But Mr. Slope could not be expected
to be aware of this.  He longed to put a little affection into his
epistle, and yet he thought it injudicious, as the letter would, he
knew, be shown to Mr. Harding.  He would have insisted that the
letter should be strictly private and seen by no eyes but Eleanor's
own, had he not felt that such an injunction would have been
disobeyed.  He therefore restrained his passion, did not sign himself
"yours affectionately," and contented himself instead with the
compliment to the tresses.

Having finished his letter, he took it to Mrs. Bold's house and,
learning there, from the servant, that things were to be sent out to
Plumstead that afternoon, left it, with many injunctions, in her
hands.

We will now follow Mr. Slope so as to complete the day with him and
then return to his letter and its momentous fate in the next chapter.

There is an old song which gives us some very good advice about
courting:

It's gude to be off with the auld luve
Before ye be on wi' the new.

Of the wisdom of this maxim Mr. Slope was ignorant, and accordingly,
having written his letter to Mrs. Bold, he proceeded to call upon the
Signora Neroni.  Indeed, it was hard to say which was the old love
and which the new, Mr. Slope having been smitten with both so nearly
at the same time.  Perhaps he thought it not amiss to have two
strings to his bow.  But two strings to Cupid's bow are always
dangerous to him on whose behalf they are to be used.  A man should
remember that between two stools he may fall to the ground.

But in sooth Mr. Slope was pursuing Mrs. Bold in obedience to his
better instincts, and the signora in obedience to his worser.  Had he
won the widow and worn her, no one, could have blamed him.  You,
O reader, and I and Eleanor's other friends would have received the
story of such a winning with much disgust and disappointment, but we
should have been angry with Eleanor, not with Mr. Slope.  Bishop,
male and female, dean and chapter and diocesan clergy in full
congress could have found nothing to disapprove of in such an
alliance.  Convocation itself, that mysterious and mighty synod,
could in no wise have fallen foul of it.  The possession of £1000 a
year and a beautiful wife would not at all have hurt the voice of the
pulpit charmer, or lessened the grace and piety of the exemplary
clergyman.

But not of such a nature were likely to be his dealings with the
Signora Neroni.  In the first place he knew that her husband was
living, and therefore he could not woo her honestly.  Then again she
had nothing to recommend her to his honest wooing had such been
possible.  She was not only portionless, but also from misfortune
unfitted to be chosen as the wife of any man who wanted a useful
mate.  Mr. Slope was aware that she was a helpless, hopeless cripple.

But Mr. Slope could not help himself.  He knew that he was wrong in
devoting his time to the back drawing-room in Dr. Stanhope's house. 
He knew that what took place there would, if divulged, utterly ruin
him with Mrs. Bold.  He knew that scandal would soon come upon his
heels and spread abroad among the black coats of Barchester some
tidings, exaggerated tidings, of the sighs which he poured into the
lady's ears.  He knew that he was acting against the recognized
principles of his life, against those laws of conduct by which he
hoped to achieve much higher success.  But, as we have said, he could
not help himself.  Passion, for the first time in his life, passion
was too strong for him.

As for the signora, no such plea can be put forward for her, for in
truth she cared no more for Mr. Slope than she did for twenty others
who had been at her feet before him.  She willingly, nay greedily,
accepted his homage.  He was the finest fly that Barchester had
hitherto afforded to her web, and the signora was a powerful spider
that made wondrous webs and could in no way live without catching
flies.  Her taste in this respect was abominable, for she had no use
for the victims when caught.  She could not eat them matrimonially,
as young lady flies do whose webs are most frequently of their
mothers' weaving.  Nor could she devour them by any escapade of a
less legitimate description.  Her unfortunate affliction precluded
her from all hope of levanting with a lover.  It would be impossible
to run away with a lady who required three servants to move her from
a sofa.

The signora was subdued by no passion.  Her time for love was gone. 
She had lived out her heart, such heart as she had ever had, in her
early years, at an age when Mr. Slope was thinking of the second book
of Euclid and his unpaid bill at the buttery hatch.  In age the lady
was younger than the gentleman, but in feelings, in knowledge of the 
affairs of love, in intrigue, he was immeasurably her junior.  It was
necessary to her to have some man at her feet.  It was the one
customary excitement of her life.  She delighted in the exercise of
power which this gave her; it was now nearly the only food for her
ambition; she would boast to her sister that she could make a fool of
any man, and the sister, as little imbued with feminine delicacy as
herself, good-naturedly thought it but fair that such amusement
should be afforded to a poor invalid who was debarred from the
ordinary pleasures of life.

Mr. Slope was madly in love but hardly knew it.  The Signora spitted
him, as a boy does a cockchafer on a cork, that she might enjoy the
energetic agony of his gyrations.  And she knew very well what she
was doing.

Mr. Slope having added to his person all such adornments as are
possible to a clergyman making a morning visit--such as a clean
necktie, clean handkerchief, new gloves, and a soupçon of not
unnecessary scent--called about three o'clock at the doctor's door. 
At about this hour the signora was almost always alone in the back
drawing-room.  The mother had not come down.  The doctor was out or
in his own room.  Bertie was out, and Charlotte at any rate left the
room if anyone called whose object was specially with her sister. 
Such was her idea of being charitable and sisterly.

Mr: Slope, as was his custom, asked for Mr. Stanhope, and was told,
as was the servant's custom, that the signora was in the drawing-
room.  Upstairs he accordingly went.  He found her, as he always did,
lying on her sofa with a French volume before her and a beautiful
little inlaid writing-case open on her table.  At the moment of his
entrance she was in the act of writing.

"Ah, my friend," said she, putting out her left hand to him across
her desk, "I did not expect you today and was this very instant
writing to you--"

Mr. Slope, taking the soft, fair, delicate hand in his--and very soft
and fair and delicate it was--bowed over it his huge red head and
kissed it.  It was a sight to see, a deed to record if the author
could fitly do it, a picture to put on canvas.  Mr. Slope was big,
awkward, cumbrous, and, having his heart in his pursuit, was ill at
ease.  The lady was fair, as we have said, and delicate; everything
about her was fine and refined; her hand in his looked like a rose
lying among carrots, and when he kissed it, he looked as a cow might
do on finding such a flower among her food.  She was graceful as a
couchant goddess and, moreover, as self-possessed as Venus must have
been when courting Adonis.

Oh, that such grace and such beauty should have condescended to waste
itself on such a pursuit!

"I was in the act of writing to you," said she, "but now my scrawl
may go into the basket;" and she raised the sheet of gilded note-
paper from off her desk as though to tear it.

"Indeed it shall not," said he, laying the embargo of half a stone
weight of human flesh and blood upon the devoted paper.  "Nothing
that you write for my eyes, signora, shall be so desecrated," and he
took up the letter, put that also among the carrots and fed on it,
and then proceeded to read it.

"Gracious me!  Mr. Slope," said she, "I hope you don't mean to say
you keep all the trash I write to you.  Half my time I don't know
what I write, and when I do, I know it is only fit for the back of
the fire.  I hope you have not that ugly trick of keeping letters."

"At any rate, I don't throw them into a waste-paper basket.  If
destruction is their doomed lot, they perish worthily, and are burnt
on a pyre, as Dido was of old."

"With a steel pen stuck through them, of course," said she, 'to make
the simile more complete.  Of all the ladies of my acquaintance I
think Lady Dido was the most absurd.  Why did she not do as Cleopatra
did?  Why did she not take out her ships and insist on going with
him?  She could not bear to lose the land she had got by a swindle,
and then she could not bear the loss of her lover.  So she fell
between two stools.  Mr. Slope, whatever you do, never mingle love
and business."

Mr. Slope blushed up to his eyes and over his mottled forehead to the
very roots of his hair.  He felt sure that the signora knew all about
his intentions with reference to Mrs Bold.  His conscience told him
that he was detected.  His doom was to be spoken; he was to be
punished for his duplicity and rejected by the beautiful creature
before him.  Poor man.  He little dreamt that had all his intentions
with reference to Mrs. Bold been known to the signora, it would only
have added zest to that lady's amusement.  It was all very well to
have Mr. Slope at her feet, to show her power by making an utter fool
of a clergyman, to gratify her own infidelity by thus proving the
little strength which religion had in controlling the passions even
of a religious man, but it would be an increased gratification if she
could be made to understand that she was at the same time alluring
her victim away from another, whose love if secured would be in every
way beneficent and salutary.

The Signora had indeed discovered, with the keen instinct of such a
woman, that Mr. Slope was bent on matrimony with Mrs. Bold, but in
alluding to Dido she had not thought of it.  She instantly perceived,
however, from her lover's blushes, what was on his mind and was not
slow in taking advantage of it.

She looked him full in the face, not angrily, nor yet with a smile,
but with an intense and overpowering gaze; then, holding up her
forefinger and slightly shaking her head, she said:

"Whatever you do, my friend, do not mingle love and business.  Either
stick to your treasure and your city of wealth, or else follow your 
love like a true man.  But never attempt both.  If you do, you'll
have to die with a broken heart as did poor Dido.  Which is it to be
with you, Mr. Slope, love or money?"

Mr. Slope was not so ready with a pathetic answer as he usually was
with touching episodes in his extempore sermons.  He felt that he
ought to say something pretty, something also that should remove the
impression on the mind of his lady-love.  But he was rather put about
how to do it.

"Love," said he, "true overpowering love, must be the strongest
passion a man can feel; it must control every other wish and put
aside every other pursuit.  But with me love will never act in that
way unless it be returned;" and he threw upon the signora a look of
tenderness which was intended to make up for all the deficiencies of
his speech.

"Take my advice," said she.  "Never mind love.  After all, what is
it?  The dream of a few weeks.  That is all its joy.  The
disappointment of a life is its Nemesis.  Who was ever successful in
true love?  Success in love argues that the love is false.  True love
is always despondent or tragical.  Juliet loved, Haidee loved, Dido
loved, and what came of it?  Troilus loved and ceased to be a man."

"Troilus loved and was fooled," said the more manly chaplain.  "A man
may love and yet not be a Troilus.  All women are not Cressidas."

"No, all women are not Cressidas.  The falsehood is not always on the
woman's side.  Imogen was true, but how was she rewarded?  Her lord
believed her to be the paramour of the first he who came near her in
his absence.  Desdemona was true and was smothered.  Ophelia was true
and went mad.  There is no happiness in love, except at the end of an
English novel.  But in wealth, money, houses, lands, goods, and
chattels, in the good things of this world, yes, in them there is
something tangible, something that can be retained and enjoyed."

"Oh, no," said Mr. Slope, feeling himself bound to enter some protest
against so very unorthodox a doctrine, "this world's wealth will make
no one happy."

"And what will make you happy--you--you?" said she, raising herself
up and speaking to him with energy across the table.  "From what
source do you look for happiness?  Do not say that you look for none. 
I shall not believe you.  It is a search in which every human being
spends an existence."

"And the search is always in vain," said Mr. Slope.  "We look for
happiness on earth, while we ought to be content to hope for it in
heaven."

"Pshaw!  You preach a doctrine which you know you don't believe.
It is the way with you all.  If you know that there is no earthly
happiness, why do you long to be a bishop or a dean?  Why do you
want lands and income?"

"I have the natural ambition of a man," said he.

"Of course you have, and the natural passions, and therefore I say
that you don't believe the doctrine you preach.  St Paul was an
enthusiast.  He believed so that his ambition and passions did not
war against his creed.  So does the Eastern fanatic who passes half
his life erect upon a pillar.  As for me, I will believe in no belief
that does not make itself manifest by outward signs.  I will think no
preaching sincere that is not recommended by the practice of the
preacher."

Mr. Slope was startled and horrified, but he felt that he could not
answer.  How could he stand up and preach the lessons of his Master,
being there, as he was, on the devil's business?  He was a true
believer, otherwise this would have been nothing to him.  He had
audacity for most things, but he had not audacity to make a plaything
of the Lord's word.  All this the signora understood, and felt much
interest as she saw her cockchafer whirl round upon her pin.

"Your wit delights in such arguments," said he, "but your heart and
your reason do not go along with them."

"My heart!" said she; "you quite mistake the principles of my
composition if you imagine that there is such a thing about me." 
After all, there was very little that was false in anything that the
signora said.  If Mr. Slope allowed himself to be deceived, it was
his own fault.  Nothing could have been more open than her
declarations about herself.

The little writing-table with her desk was still standing before her,
a barrier, as it were, against the enemy.  She was sitting as nearly
upright as she ever did, and he had brought a chair close to the
sofa, so that there was only the corner of the table between him and
her.  It so happened that as she spoke her hand lay upon the table,
and as Mr. Slope answered her he put his hand upon hers.

"No heart!" said he.  "That is a heavy charge which you bring against
yourself, and one of which I cannot find you guilty--

She withdrew her hand, not quickly and angrily, as though insulted by
his touch, but gently and slowly.

"You are in no condition to give a verdict on the matter," said she,
"as you have not tried me.  No, don't say that you intend doing so,
for you know you have no intention of the kind; nor indeed have I,
either.  As for you, you will take your vows where they will result
in something more substantial than the pursuit of such a ghostlike,
ghastly love as mine--"

"Your love should be sufficient to satisfy the dream of a monarch,"
said Mr. Slope, not quite clear as to the meaning of his words.

"Say an archbishop, Mr. Slope," said she.  Poor fellow!  She was very
cruel to him.  He went round again upon his cork on this allusion to
his profession.  He tried, however, to smile and gently accused her
of joking on a matter, which was, he said, to him of such vital
moment.

"Why--what gulls do you men make of us," she replied.  "How you fool
us to the top of our bent; and of all men you clergymen are the most
fluent of your honeyed, caressing words.  Now look me in the face,
Mr. Slope, boldly and openly."

Mr; Slope did look at her with a languishing loving eye, and as he
did so he again put forth his hand to get hold of hers.

"I told you to look at me boldly, Mr. Slope, but confine your
boldness to your eyes."

"Oh, Madeline!" he sighed.

"Well, my name is Madeline," said she, "but none except my own family
usually call me so.  Now look me in the face, Mr. Slope.  Am I to
understand that you say you love me?"

Mr. Slope never had said so.  If he had come there with any formed
plan at all, his intention was to make love to the lady without
uttering any such declaration.  It was, however, quite impossible
that he should now deny his love.  He had, therefore, nothing for it
but to go down on his knees distractedly against the sofa and swear
that he did love her with a love passing the love of man.

The signora received the assurance with very little palpitation or
appearance of surprise.  "And now answer me another question," said
she.  "When are you to be married to my dear friend Eleanor Bold?"

Poor Mr. Slope went round and round in mortal agony.  In such a
condition as his it was really very hard for him to know what answer
to give.  And yet no answer would be his surest condemnation.  He
might as well at once plead guilty to the charge brought against him.

"And why do you accuse me of such dissimulation?" said he.

"Dissimulation!  I said nothing of dissimulation.  I made no charge
against you, and make none.  Pray don't defend yourself to me.  You
swear that you are devoted to my beauty and yet you are on the eve of
matrimony with another.  I feel this to be rather a compliment.  It
is to Mrs. Bold that you must defend yourself.  That you may find
difficult; unless, indeed, you can keep her in the dark.  You
clergymen are cleverer than other men."

"Signora, I have told you that I loved you, and now you rail at me."

"Rail at you.  God bless the man, what would he have?  Come, answer
me this at your leisure--not without thinking now, but leisurely and
with consideration--are you not going to be married to Mrs. Bold?"

"I am not," said he.  And as he said it he almost hated, with an
exquisite hatred, the woman whom he could not help loving with an
exquisite love.

"But surely you are a worshipper of hers?"

"I am not," said Mr. Slope, to whom the word worshipper was
peculiarly distasteful.  The signora had conceived that it would be
so.

"I wonder at that," said she.  "Do you not admire her?  To my eye she
is the perfection of English beauty.  And then she is rich, too.  I
should have thought she was just the person to attract you.  Come,
Mr. Slope, let me give you advice on this matter.  Marry the charming
widow; she will be a good mother to your children and an excellent
mistress of a clergyman's household."

"Oh, signora, how can you be so cruel?"

"Cruel," said she, changing the voice of banter which she had been
using for one which was expressively earnest in its tone; "is that
cruelty?"

"How can I love another while my heart is entirely your own?"

"If that were cruelty, Mr. Slope, what might you say of me if I were
to declare that I returned your passion?  What would you think if I
bound you even by a lover's oath to do daily penance at this couch of
mine?  What can I give in return for a man's love?  Ah, dear friend,
you have not realized the conditions of my fate."

Mr. Slope was not on his knees all this time.  After his declaration
of love, he had risen from them as quickly as he thought consistent
with the new position which he now filled, and as he stood was
leaning on the back of his chair.  This outburst of tenderness on the 
signora's part quite overcame him and made him feel for the moment
that he could sacrifice everything to be assured of the love of the
beautiful creature before him, maimed, lame, and already married as
she was.

"And can I not sympathize with your lot?" said he, now seating
himself on her sofa and pushing away the table with his foot.

"Sympathy is so near to pity!" said she.  "If you pity me, cripple as
I am, I shall spurn you from me."

"Oh, Madeline, I will only love you," and again he caught her hand
and devoured it with kisses.  Now she did not draw it from him, but
sat there as he kissed it, looking at him with her great eyes, just
as a great spider would look at a great fly that was quite securely
caught.

"Suppose Signor Neroni were to come to Barchester," said she.  "Would
you make his acquaintance?"

"Signor Neroni!" said he.

"Would you introduce him to the bishop, and Mrs. Proudie, and the
young ladies?" said she, again having recourse to that horrid
quizzing voice which Mr. Slope so particularly hated.

'Why do you ask such a question?" said he.

"Because it is necessary that you should know that there is a Signor
Neroni.  I think you had forgotten it."

"If I thought that you retained for that wretch one particle of the
love of which he was never worthy, I would die before I would
distract you by telling you what I feel.  No!  Were your husband the
master of your heart, I might perhaps love you, but you should never
know it."

"My heart again!  How you talk.  And you consider then that if a
husband be not master of his wife's heart, he has no right to her
fealty; if a wife ceases to love, she may cease to be true.  Is that
your doctrine on this matter, as a minister of the Church of
England?"

Mr. Slope tried hard within himself to cast off the pollution with
which he felt that he was defiling his soul.  He strove to tear
himself away from the noxious siren that had bewitched him.  But he
could not do it.  He could not be again heart free.  He had looked
for rapturous joy in loving this lovely creature, and he already
found that he met with little but disappointment and self-rebuke.  He
had come across the fruit of the Dead Sea, so sweet and delicious to
the eye, so bitter and nauseous to the taste.  He had put the apple
to his mouth, and it had turned to ashes between his teeth.  Yet he
could not tear himself away.  He knew, he could not but know, that
she jeered at him, ridiculed his love, and insulted the weakness of
his religion.  But she half-permitted his adoration, and that half-
permission added such fuel to his fire that all the fountain of his
piety could not quench it.  He began to feel savage, irritated, and
revengeful.  He meditated some severity of speech, some taunt that
should cut her, as her taunts cut him.  He reflected as he stood
there for a moment, silent before her, that if he desired to quell
her proud spirit, he should do so by being prouder even than herself;
that if he wished to have her at his feet suppliant for his love, it
behoved him to conquer her by indifference.  All this passed through
his mind.  As far as dead knowledge went, he knew, or thought he
knew, how a woman should be tamed.  But when he essayed to bring his
tactics to bear, he failed like a child.  What chance has dead
knowledge with experience in any of the transactions between man and
man?  What possible chance between man and woman?  Mr. Slope loved
furiously, insanely and truly, but he had never played the game of
love.  The signora did not love at all, but she was up to every move
of the board.  It was Philidor pitted against a schoolboy.

And so she continued to insult him, and he continued to bear it.

Sacrifice the world for love!" she said in answer to some renewed
vapid declaration of his passion.  "How often has the same thing been
said, and how invariably with the same falsehood!"

"Falsehood," said he.  "Do you say that I am false to you?  Do you
say that my love is not real?"

"False?  Of course it is false, false as the father of falsehood--if
indeed falsehoods need a sire and are not self-begotten since the
world began.  You are ready to sacrifice the world for love?  Come
let us see what you will sacrifice.  I care nothing for nuptial vows. 
The wretch, I think you were kind enough to call him so, whom I swore
to love and obey is so base that he can only be thought of with
repulsive disgust.  In the council chamber of my heart I have
divorced him.  To me that is as good as though aged lords had gloated
for months over the details of his licentious life.  I care nothing
for what the world can say.  Will you be as frank?  Will you take me
to your home as your wife?  Will you call me Mrs. Slope before 
bishop, dean, and prebendaries?"  The poor tortured wretch stood
silent, not knowing what to say.  "What!  You won't do that.  Tell
me, then, what part of the world is it that you will sacrifice for my
charms?"

"Were you free to marry, I would take you to my house tomorrow and
wish no higher privilege."

"I am free," said she, almost starting up in her energy.  For though
there was no truth in her pretended regard for her clerical admirer,
there was a mixture of real feeling in the scorn and satire with
which she spoke of love and marriage generally.  "I am free--free as
the winds.  Come, will you take me as I am?  Have your wish;
sacrifice the world, and prove yourself a true man."

Mr. Slope should have taken her at her word.  She would have drawn
back, and he would have had the full advantage of the offer.  But he
did not.  Instead of doing so, he stood wrapt in astonishment,
passing his fingers through his lank red hair and thinking, as he
stared upon her animated countenance, that her wondrous beauty grew
more wonderful as he gazed on it.  "Ha! ha! ha!" she laughed out
loud.  "Come, Mr. Slope, don't talk of sacrificing the world again. 
People beyond one-and-twenty should never dream of such a thing.  You
and I, if we have the dregs of any love left in us, if we have the
remnants of a passion remaining in our hearts, should husband our
resources better.  We are not in our première jeunesse.  The world is
a very nice place.  Your world, at any rate, is so.  You have all
manner of fat rectories to get and possible bishoprics to enjoy. 
Come, confess; on second thoughts you would not sacrifice such things
for the smiles of a lame lady?"

It was impossible for him to answer this.  In order to be in any way
dignified, he felt that he must be silent.

"Come," said she, "don't boody with me: don't be angry because I
speak out some home truths.  Alas, the world, as I have found it, has
taught me bitter truths.  Come, tell me that I am forgiven.  Are we
not to be friends?" and she again put out her hand to him.

He sat himself down in the chair beside her, took her proffered hand,
and leant over her.

"There," said she with her sweetest, softest smile--a smile to
withstand which a man should be cased in triple steel, "there; seal
your forgiveness on it," and she raised it towards his face.  He
kissed it again and again and stretched over her as though desirous
of extending the charity of his pardon beyond the hand that was
offered to him.  She managed, however, to check his ardour.  For one
so easily allured as this poor chaplain, her hand was surely enough.

"Oh, Madeline!" said he, "tell me that you love me--do you--do you
love me?"

"Hush," said she.  "There is my mother's step.  Our tête-à-tête has
been of monstrous length.  Now you had better go.  But we shall see
you soon again, shall we not?"

Mr. Slope promised that he would call again on the following day.

"And, Mr. Slope," she continued, "pray answer my note.  You have it
in your hand, though I declare during these two hours you have not
been gracious enough to read it.  It is about the Sabbath-school and
the children.  You know how anxious I am to have them here.  I have
been learning the catechism myself, on purpose.  You must manage it
for me next week.  I will teach them, at any rate, to submit
themselves to their spiritual pastors and masters."

Mr. Slope said but little on the subject of Sabbath-schools, but he
made his adieu and betook himself home with a sad heart, troubled
mind, and uneasy conscience.



CHAPTER XXVIII

Mrs. Bold is Entertained by Dr. and Mrs. Grantly at Plumstead


It will be remembered that Mr. Slope, when leaving his billet-doux at
the house of Mrs. Bold, had been informed that it would be sent out
to her at Plumstead that afternoon.  The archdeacon and Mr. Harding
had in fact come into town together in the brougham, and it had been
arranged that they should call for Eleanor's parcels as they left on
their way home.  Accordingly they did so call, and the maid, as she
handed to the coachman a small basket and large bundle carefully and
neatly packed, gave in at the carriage window Mr. Slope's epistle. 
The archdeacon, who was sitting next to the window, took it and
immediately recognized the hand-writing of his enemy.

"Who left this?" said he.

"Mr. Slope called with it himself, your Reverence," said the girl,
"and was very anxious that Missus should have it today."

So the brougham drove off, and the letter was left in the
archdeacon's hand.  He looked at it as though he held a basket of
adders.  He could not have thought worse of the document had he read
it and discovered it to be licentious and atheistical.  He did,
moreover, what so many wise people are accustomed to do in similar
circumstances; he immediately condemned the person to whom the letter
was written, as though she were necessarily a particeps criminis.

Poor Mr. Harding, though by no means inclined to forward Mr. Slope's
intimacy with his daughter, would have given anything to have kept
the letter from his son-in-law.  But that was now impossible.  There
it was in his hand, and he looked as thoroughly disgusted as though
he were quite sure that it contained all the rhapsodies of a favoured
lover.

"It's very hard on me," said he after awhile, "that this should go on
under my roof."

Now here the archdeacon was certainly most unreasonable.  Having
invited his sister-in-law to his house, it was a natural consequence
that she should receive her letters there.  And if Mr. Slope chose to
write to her, his letter would, as a matter of course, be sent after
her.  Moreover, the very fact of an invitation to one's house implies
confidence on the part of the inviter.  He had shown that he thought
Mrs. Bold to be a fit person to stay with him by his asking her to do
so, and it was most cruel to her that he should complain of her
violating the sanctity of his roof-tree, when the laches committed
were none of her committing.

Mr. Harding felt this and felt also that when the archdeacon talked
thus about his roof, what he said was most offensive to himself as
Eleanor's father.  If Eleanor did receive a letter from Mr. Slope,
what was there in that to pollute the purity of Dr. Grantly's
household?  He was indignant that his daughter should be so judged
and so spoken of, and he made up his mind that even as Mrs. Slope she
must be dearer to him than any other creature on God's earth.  He
almost broke out and said as much, but for the moment he restrained
himself.

"Here," said the archdeacon, handing the offensive missile to his
father-in-law, "I am not going to be the bearer of his love-letters. 
You are her father and may do as you think fit with it."

By doing as he thought fit with it, the archdeacon certainly meant
that Mr. Harding would be justified in opening and reading the letter
and taking any steps which might in consequence be necessary.  To
tell the truth, Dr. Grantly did feel rather a stronger curiosity than
was justified by his outraged virtue to see the contents of the
letter.  Of course he could not open it himself, but he wished to
make Mr. Harding understand that he, as Eleanor's father, would be 
fully justified in doing so.  The idea of such a proceeding never
occurred to Mr. Harding.  His authority over Eleanor ceased when she
became the wife of John Bold.  He had not the slightest wish to pry
into her correspondence.  He consequently put the letter into his
pocket and only wished that he had been able to do so without the
archdeacon's knowledge.  They both sat silent during half the journey
home, and then Dr. Grantly said, "Perhaps Susan had better give it to
her.  She can explain to her sister better than either you or I can
do how deep is the disgrace of such an acquaintance."

"I think you are very hard upon Eleanor," replied Mr. Harding.  "I
will not allow that she has disgraced herself, nor do I think it
likely that she will do so.  She has a right to correspond with whom
she pleases, and I shall not take upon myself to blame her because
she gets a letter from Mr. Slope."

"I suppose," said Dr. Grantly, "you don't wish her to marry the man. 
I suppose you'll admit that she would disgrace herself if she did do
so."

"I do not wish her to marry him," said the perplexed father.  "I do
not like him and do not think he would make a good husband.  But if
Eleanor chooses to do so, I shall certainly not think that she
disgraces herself."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Dr. Grantly and threw himself back into the
corner of his brougham.  Mr. Harding said nothing more but commenced
playing a dirge with an imaginary fiddle bow upon an imaginary
violoncello, for which there did not appear to be quite room enough
in the carriage; he continued the tune, with sundry variations, till
he arrived at the rectory door.

The archdeacon had been meditating sad things in his mind.  Hitherto
he had always looked on his father-in-law as a true partisan, though
he knew him to be a man devoid of all the combative qualifications
for that character.  He had felt no fear that Mr. Harding would go
over to the enemy, though he had never counted much on the
ex-warden's prowess in breaking the hostile ranks.  Now, however, it
seemed that Eleanor, with her wiles, had completely trepanned and
bewildered her father, cheated him out of his judgement, robbed him
of the predilections and tastes of his life, and caused him to be
tolerant of a man whose arrogance and vulgarity would, a few years
since, have been unendurable to him.  That the whole thing was as
good as arranged between Eleanor and Mr. Slope there was no longer
any room to doubt.  That Mr. Harding knew that such was the case,
even this could hardly be doubted.  It was too manifest that he at
any rate suspected it and was prepared to sanction it.

And to tell the truth, such was the case.  Mr. Harding disliked Mr.
Slope as much as it was in his nature to dislike any man.  Had his
daughter wished to do her worst to displease him by a second
marriage, she could hardly have succeeded better than by marrying Mr.
Slope.  But, as he said to himself now very often, what right had he
to condemn her if she did nothing that was really wrong?  If she
liked Mr. Slope, it was her affair.  It was indeed miraculous to him
that a woman with such a mind, so educated, so refined, so nice in
her tastes, should like such a man.  Then he asked himself whether it
was possible that she did so.

Ah, thou weak man; most charitable, most Christian, but weakest of
men!  Why couldn't thou not have asked herself?  Was she not the
daughter of thy loins, the child of thy heart, the best beloved to
thee of all humanity?  Had she not proved to thee, by years of
closest affection, her truth and goodness and filial obedience?  And
yet, knowing and feeling all this, thou couldst endure to go groping
in darkness, hearing her named in strains which wounded thy loving
heart and being unable to defend her as thou shouldst have done!

Mr. Harding had not believed, did not believe, that his daughter
meant to marry this man, but he feared to commit himself to such an
opinion.  If she did do it there would be then no means of retreat. 
The wishes of his heart were: first, that there should be no truth in
the archdeacon's surmises; and in this wish he would have fain
trusted entirely, had he dared so to do; secondly, that the match
might be prevented, if unfortunately, it had been contemplated by
Eleanor; thirdly, that should she be so infatuated as to marry this
man, he might justify his conduct and declare that no cause existed
for his separating himself from her.

He wanted to believe her incapable of such a marriage; he wanted to
show that he so believed of her; but he wanted also to be able to say
hereafter that she had done nothing amiss, if she should
unfortunately prove herself to be different from what he thought her
to be.

Nothing but affection could justify such fickleness, but affection
did justify it.  There was but little of the Roman about Mr. Harding. 
He could not sacrifice his Lucretia even though she should be
polluted by the accepted addresses of the clerical Tarquin at the
palace.  If Tarquin could be prevented, well and good, but if not,
the father would still open his heart to his daughter and accept her
as she presented herself, Tarquin and all.

Dr. Grantly's mind was of a stronger calibre, and he was by no means
deficient in heart.  He loved with an honest genuine love his wife
and children and friends.  He loved his father-in-law, and was quite
prepared to love Eleanor too, if she would be one of his party, if
she would be on his side, if she would regard the Slopes and the
Proudies as the enemies of mankind and acknowledge and feel the
comfortable merits of the Gwynnes and Arabins.  He wished to be what
he called "safe" with all those whom he had admitted to the
penetralia of his house and heart.  He could luxuriate in no society
that was deficient in a certain feeling of faithful, staunch High
Churchism, which to him was tantamount to freemasonry.  He was not
strict in his lines of definition.  He endured without impatience
many different shades of Anglo-church conservatism, but with the
Slopes and Proudies he could not go on all fours.

He was wanting in, moreover, or perhaps it would be more correct to
say, he was not troubled by that womanly tenderness which was so
peculiar to Mr. Harding.  His feelings towards his friends were that
while they stuck to him, he would stick to them; that he would work
with them shoulder and shoulder; that he would be faithful to the
faithful.  He knew nothing of that beautiful love which can be true
to a false friend.

And thus these two men, each miserable enough in his own way,
returned to Plumstead.

It was getting late when they arrived there, and the ladies had
already gone up to dress.  Nothing more was said as the two parted in
the hall.  As Mr. Harding passed to his own room he knocked at
Eleanor's door and handed in the letter.  The archdeacon hurried to
his own territory, there to unburden his heart to his faithful
partner.

What colloquy took place between the marital chamber and the
adjoining dressing-room shall not be detailed.  The reader, now
intimate with the persons concerned, can well imagine it.  The whole
tenor of it also might be read in Mrs. Grantly's brow as she came
down to dinner.

Eleanor, when she received the letter from her father's hand, had no
idea from whom it came.  She had never seen Mr. Slope's handwriting,
or if so had forgotten it, and did not think of him as she twisted
the letter as people do twist letters when they do not immediately
recognize their correspondents either by the writing or the seal. 
She was sitting at her glass, brushing her hair and rising every
other minute to play with her boy, who was sprawling on the bed and
who engaged pretty nearly the whole attention of the maid as well as
of his mother.

At last, sitting before her toilet-table, she broke the seal and,
turning over the leaf, saw Mr. Slope's name.  She first felt
surprised, and then annoyed, and then anxious.  As she read it she
became interested.  She was so delighted to find that all obstacles
to her father's return to the hospital were apparently removed that
she did not observe the fulsome language in which the tidings were
conveyed.  She mere