ly perceived that she was commissioned to tell her
father that such was the case, and she did not realize the fact that
such a communication should not have been made, in the first
instance, to her by an unmarried young clergyman.  She felt, on the
whole, grateful to Mr. Slope and anxious to get on her dress that she
might run with the news to her father.  Then she came to the allusion
to her own pious labours, and she said in her heart that Mr. Slope
was an affected ass.  Then she went on again and was offended by her
boy being called Mr. Slope's darling--he was nobody's darling but her
own, or at any rate not the darling of a disagreeable stranger like
Mr. Slope.  Lastly she arrived at the tresses and felt a qualm of
disgust.  She looked up in the glass, and there they were before her,
long and silken, certainly, and very beautiful.  I will not say but
that she knew them to be so, but she felt angry with them and brushed
them roughly and carelessly.  She crumpled the letter up with angry
violence and resolved, almost without thinking of it, that she would
not show it to her father.  She would merely tell him the contents of
it.  She then comforted herself again with her boy, had her dress
fastened, and went down to dinner.

As she tripped down the stairs she began to ascertain that there was
some difficulty in her situation.  She could not keep from her father
the news about the hospital, nor could she comfortably confess the
letter from Mr. Slope before the Grantlys.  Her father had already
gone down.  She had heard his step upon the lobby.  She resolved
therefore to take him aside and tell him her little bit of news. 
Poor girl!  She had no idea how severely the unfortunate letter had
already been discussed.

When she entered the drawing-room, the whole party were there,
including Mr. Arabin, and the whole party looked glum and sour.
The two girls sat silent and apart as though they were aware that
something was wrong.  Even Mr. Arabin was solemn and silent.  Eleanor
had not seen him since breakfast.  He had been the whole day at St.
Ewold's, and such having been the case, it was natural that he should
tell how matters were going on there.  He did nothing of the kind,
however, but remained solemn and silent.  They were all solemn and
silent.  Eleanor knew in her heart that they had been talking about
her, and her heart misgave her as she thought of Mr. Slope and his
letter.  At any rate she felt it to be quite impossible to speak to
her father alone while matters were in this state.

Dinner was soon announced, and Dr. Grantly, as was his wont, gave
Eleanor his arm.  But he did so as though the doing it were an
outrage on his feelings rendered necessary by sternest necessity. 
With quick sympathy Eleanor felt this , and hardly put her fingers on
his coat-sleeve.  It may be guessed in what way the dinner-hour was
passed.  Dr. Grantly said a few words to Mr. Arabin, Mr. Arabin said
a few words to Mrs. Grantly, she said a few words to her father, and
he tried to say a few words to Eleanor.  She felt that she had been
tried and found guilty of something, though she knew not what.  She
longed to say out to them all, "Well, what is it that I have done;
out with it, and let me know my crime; for heaven's sake let me hear
the worst of it;" but she could not.  She could say nothing, but sat
there silent, half-feeling that she was guilty and trying in vain to
pretend even to eat her dinner.

At last the cloth was drawn, and the ladies were not long following
it.  When they were gone, the gentlemen were somewhat more sociable
but not much so.  They could not of course talk over Eleanor's sins. 
The archdeacon had indeed so far betrayed his sister-in-law as to
whisper into Mr. Arabin's ear in the study, as they met there before
dinner, a hint of what he feared.  He did so with the gravest and
saddest of fears, and Mr. Arabin became grave and apparently sad
enough as he heard it.  He opened his eyes, and his mouth and said in
a sort of whisper "Mr. Slope!" in the same way as he might have said
"The Cholera!" had his friend told him that that horrid disease was
in his nursery.  "I fear so, I fear so," said the archdeacon, and
then together they left the room.

We will not accurately analyse Mr. Arabin's feelings on receipt of
such astounding tidings.  It will suffice to say that he was
surprised, vexed, sorrowful, and ill at ease.  He had not perhaps
thought very much about Eleanor, but he had appreciated her influence
and had felt that close intimacy with her in a country-house was
pleasant to him and also beneficial.  He had spoken highly of her
intelligence to the archdeacon and had walked about the shrubberies
with her carrying her boy on his back.  When Mr. Arabin had called
Johnny his darling, Eleanor was not angry.

Thus the three men sat over their wine, all thinking of the same
subject but unable to speak of it to each other.  So we will leave
them and follow the ladies into the drawing-room.

Mrs. Grantly had received a commission from her husband and had
undertaken it with some unwillingness.  He had desired her to speak
gravely to Eleanor and to tell her that, if she persisted in her
adherence to Mr. Slope, she could no longer look for the countenance
of her present friends.  Mrs. Grantly probably knew her sister better
than the doctor did and assured him that it would be in vain to talk
to her.  The only course likely to be of any service in her opinion
was to keep Eleanor away from Barchester.  Perhaps she might have
added, for she had a very keen eye in such things, that there might
also be ground for hope in keeping Eleanor near Mr. Arabin.  Of this,
however, she said nothing.  But the archdeacon would not be talked
over; he spoke much of his conscience and declared that, if Mrs.
Grantly would not do it, he would.  So instigated, the lady undertook
the task, stating, however, her full conviction that her interference
would be worse than useless.  And so it proved.

As soon as they were in the drawing-room Mrs. Grantly found some
excuse for sending her girls away, and then began her task.  She knew
well that she could exercise but very slight authority over her
sister.  Their various modes of life, and the distance between their
residences, had prevented any very close confidence.  They had hardly
lived together since Eleanor was a child.  Eleanor had, moreover,
especially in latter years, resented in a quiet sort of way the
dictatorial authority which the archdeacon seemed to exercise over
her father, and on this account had been unwilling to allow the
archdeacon's wife to exercise authority over herself.

"You got a note just before dinner, I believe," began the eldest
sister.

Eleanor acknowledged that she had done so and felt that she turned
red as she acknowledged it.  She would have given anything to have
kept her colour, but the more she tried to do so the more signally
she failed.

"Was it not from Mr. Slope?"

Eleanor said that the letter was from Mr. Slope.

"Is he a regular correspondent of yours, Eleanor?"

"Not exactly," said she, already beginning to feel angry at the
cross-examination.  She determined, and why it would be difficult to
say, that nothing should induce her to tell her sister Susan what was
the subject of the letter.  Mrs. Grantly, she knew, was instigated by
the archdeacon, and she would not plead to any arraignment made
against her by him.

"But, Eleanor dear, why do you get letters from Mr. Slope at all,
knowing, as you do, he is a person so distasteful to Papa, and to the
archdeacon, and indeed to all your friends?"

"In the first place, Susan, I don't get letters from him; and in the
next place, as Mr. Slope wrote the one letter which I have got, and
as I only received it, which I could not very well help doing, as
Papa handed it to me, I think you had better ask Mr. Slope instead of
me."

"What was his letter about, Eleanor?"

"I cannot tell you," said she, "because it was confidential.  It was
on business respecting a third person."

"It was in no way personal to yourself then?"

"I won't exactly say that, Susan," said she, getting more and more
angry at her sister's questions.

"Well, I must say it's rather singular," said Mrs. Grantly, affecting
to laugh, "that a young lady in your position should receive a letter
from an unmarried gentleman of which she will not tell the contents
and which she is ashamed to show to her sister."

"I am not ashamed," said Eleanor, blazing up.  "I am not ashamed of
anything in the matter; only I do not choose to be cross-examined as
to my letters by anyone."

"Well, dear," said the other, "I cannot but tell you that I do not
think Mr. Slope a proper correspondent for you."

"If he be ever so improper, how can I help his having written to me? 
But you are all prejudiced against him to such an extent that that
which would be kind and generous in another man is odious and
impudent in him.  I hate a religion that teaches one to be so one-
sided in one's charity."

"I am sorry, Eleanor, that you hate the religion you find here, but
surely you should remember that in such matters the archdeacon must
know more of the world than you do.  I don't ask you to respect or
comply with me, although I am, unfortunately, so many years your
senior, but surely, in such a matter as this, you might consent to be
guided by the archdeacon.  He is most anxious to be your friend, if
you will let him."

"In such a matter as what?' said Eleanor very testily.  "Upon my word
I don't know what this is all about."

"We all want you to drop Mr. Slope."

"You all want me to be as illiberal as yourselves.  That I shall
never be.  I see no harm in Mr. Slope's acquaintance, and I shall not
insult the man by telling him that I do.  He has thought it necessary
to write to me, and I do not want the archdeacon's advice about the
letter.  If I did, I would ask it."

"Then, Eleanor, it is my duty to tell you," and now she spoke with a
tremendous gravity, "that the archdeacon thinks that such a
correspondence is disgraceful and that he cannot allow it to go on in
his house."

Eleanor's eyes flashed fire as she answered her sister, jumping up
from her seat as she did so.  "You may tell the archdeacon that
wherever I am I shall receive what letters I please and from whom I
please.  And as for the word 'disgraceful,' if Dr. Grantly has used
it of me, he has been unmanly and inhospitable," and she walked off 
to the door.  "When Papa comes from the dining-room I will thank you
to ask him to step up to my bedroom.  I will show him Mr. Slope's
letter, but I will show it to no one else." And so saying, she
retreated to her baby.

She had no conception of the crime with which she was charged.  The
idea that she could be thought by her friends to regard Mr. Slope as
a lover had never flashed upon her.  She conceived that they were all
prejudiced and illiberal in their persecution of him, and therefore
she would not join in the persecution, even though she greatly
disliked the man.

Eleanor was very angry as she seated herself in a low chair by her
open window at the foot of her child's bed.  "To dare to say I have
disgraced myself," she repeated to herself more than once.  "How Papa
can put up with that man's arrogance!  I will certainly not sit down
to dinner in his house again unless he begs my pardon for that word."
And then a thought struck her that Mr. Arabin might perchance hear of
her "disgraceful" correspondence with Mr. Slope, and she turned
crimson with pure vexation.  Oh, if she had known the truth!  If she
could have conceived that Mr. Arabin had been informed as a fact that
she was going to marry Mr. Slope!

She had not been long in her room before her father joined her.  As
he left the drawing-room Mrs. Grantly took her husband into the
recess of the window and told him how signally she had failed.

"I will speak to her myself before I go to bed," said the archdeacon.

"Pray do no such thing," said she; "you can do no good and will only
make an unseemly quarrel in the house.  You have no idea how
headstrong she can be."

The archdeacon declared that as to that he was quite indifferent.  He
knew his duty and would do it.  Mr. Harding was weak in the extreme
in such matters.  He would not have it hereafter on his conscience
that he had not done all that in him lay to prevent so disgraceful an
alliance.  It was in vain that Mrs. Grantly assured him that speaking
to Eleanor angrily would only hasten such a crisis and render it
certain, if at present there were any doubt.  He was angry, self-
willed, and sore.  The fact that a lady of his household had received
a letter from Mr. Slope had wounded his pride in the sorest place,
and nothing could control him.

Mr. Harding looked worn and woe-begone as he entered his daughter's
room.  These sorrows worried him sadly.  He felt that if they were
continued, he must go to the wall in the manner so kindly prophesied
to him by the chaplain.  He knocked gently at his daughter's door,
waited till he was distinctly bade to enter, and then appeared as
though he and not she were the suspected criminal.

Eleanor's arm was soon within his, and she had soon kissed his
forehead and caressed him, not with joyous but with eager love.  "Oh,
Papa," she said, "I do so want to speak to you.  They have been
talking about me downstairs tonight--don't you know they have, Papa?"

Mr. Harding confessed with a sort of murmur that the archdeacon had
been speaking of her.

"I shall hate Dr. Grantly soon--"

"Oh, my dear!"

"Well, I shall.  I cannot help it.  He is so uncharitable, so unkind,
so suspicious of everyone that does not worship himself: and then he
is so monstrously arrogant to other people who have a right to their
opinions as well as he has to his own."

"He is an earnest, eager man, my dear, but he never means to be
unkind."

"He is unkind, Papa, most unkind.  There, I got that letter from Mr.
Slope before dinner.  It was you yourself who gave it to me.  There,
pray read it.  It is all for you.  It should have been addressed to
you.  You know how they have been talking about it downstairs.  You
know how they behaved to me at dinner.  And since dinner Susan has
been preaching to me, till I could not remain in the room with her. 
Read it, Papa, and then say whether that is a letter that need make
Dr. Grantly so outrageous."

Mr. Harding took his arm from his daughter's waist and slowly read
the letter.  She expected to see his countenance lit with joy as he
learnt that his path back to the hospital was made so smooth, but she
was doomed to disappointment, as had once been the case before on a
somewhat similar occasion.  His first feeling was one of unmitigated
disgust that Mr. Slope should have chosen to interfere in his behalf. 
He had been anxious to get back to the hospital, but he would have
infinitely sooner resigned all pretensions to the place than have
owed it in any manner to Mr. Slope's influence in his favour.  Then
he thoroughly disliked the tone of Mr. Slope's letter; it was
unctuous, false, and unwholesome, like the man.  He saw, which
Eleanor had failed to see, that much more had been intended than was
expressed.  The appeal to Eleanor's pious labours as separate from
his own grated sadly against his feelings as a father.  And then,
when he came to the "darling boy" and the "silken tresses," he slowly
closed and folded the letter in despair.  It was impossible that Mr.
Slope should so write unless he had been encouraged.  It was
impossible Eleanor should have received such a letter, and have
received it without annoyance, unless she were willing to encourage
him.  So at least Mr. Harding argued to himself.

How hard it is to judge accurately of the feelings of others.  Mr.
Harding, as he came to the close of the letter, in his heart
condemned his daughter for indelicacy, and it made him miserable to
do so.  She was not responsible for what Mr. Slope might write. 
True.  But then she expressed no disgust at it.  She had rather
expressed approval of the letter as a whole.  She had given it to him
to read, as a vindication for herself and also for him.  The father's
spirits sank within him as he felt that he could not acquit her.

And yet it was the true feminine delicacy of Eleanor's mind which
brought on her this condemnation.  Listen to me, ladies, and I
beseech you to acquit her.  She thought of this man, this lover of
whom she was so unconscious, exactly as her father did, exactly as
the Grantlys did.  At least she esteemed him personally as they did. 
But she believed him to be in the main an honest man and one truly
inclined to assist her father.  She felt herself bound, after what
had passed, to show this letter to Mr. Harding.  She thought it
necessary that he should know what Mr. Slope had to say.  But she did
not think it necessary to apologize for, or condemn, or even allude
to the vulgarity of the man's tone, which arose, as does all
vulgarity, from ignorance.  It was nauseous to her to have a man like
Mr. Slope commenting on her personal attractions, and she did not
think it necessary to dilate with her father upon what was nauseous. 
She never supposed they could disagree on such a subject.  It would
have been painful for her to point it out, painful for her to speak
strongly against a man of whom, on the whole, she was anxious to
think and speak well.  In encountering such a man she had encountered
what was disagreeable, as she might do in walking the streets.  But
in such encounters she never thought it necessary to dwell on what
disgusted her.

And he, foolish, weak, loving man, would not say one word, though one
word would have cleared up everything.  There would have been a
deluge of tears, and in ten minutes everyone in the house would have
understood how matters really were.  The father would have been
delighted.  The sister would have kissed her sister and begged a
thousand pardons.  The archdeacon would have apologized and wondered,
and raised his eyebrows, and gone to bed a happy man.  And Mr.
Arabin--Mr. Arabin would have dreamt of Eleanor, have awoke in the
morning with ideas of love, and retired to rest the next evening with
schemes of marriage.  But, alas, all this was not to be.

Mr. Harding slowly folded the letter, handed it back to her, kissed
her forehead, and bade God bless her.  He then crept slowly away to
his own room.

As soon as he had left the passage, another knock was given at
Eleanor's door, and Mrs. Grantly's very demure own maid, entering on
tiptoe, wanted to know would Mrs. Bold be so kind as to speak to the
archdeacon for two minutes in the archdeacon's study, if not
disagreeable.  The archdeacon's compliments, and he wouldn't detain
her two minutes.

Eleanor thought it was very disagreeable; she was tired and fagged
and sick at heart; her present feelings towards Dr. Grantly were
anything but those of affection.  She was, however, no coward, and
therefore promised to be in the study in five minutes.  So she
arranged her hair, tied on her cap, and went down with a palpitating
heart.



CHAPTER XXIX

A Serious Interview


There are people who delight in serious interviews, especially when
to them appertains the part of offering advice or administering
rebuke, and perhaps the archdeacon was one of these.  Yet on this
occasion he did not prepare himself for the coming conversation with
much anticipation of pleasure.  Whatever might be his faults he was
not an inhospitable man, and he almost felt that he was sinning
against hospitality in upbraiding Eleanor in his own house.  Then,
also, he was not quite sure that he would get the best of it.  His
wife had told him that he decidedly would not, and he usually gave
credit to what his wife said.  He was, however, so convinced of what
he considered to be the impropriety of Eleanor's conduct and so
assured also of his own duty in trying to check it that his
conscience would not allow him to take his wife's advice and go to
bed quietly.

Eleanor's face as she entered the room was not such as to reassure
him.  As a rule she was always mild in manner and gentle in conduct,
but there was that in her eye which made it not an easy task to scold
her.  In truth she had been little used to scolding.  No one since
her childhood had tried it but the archdeacon, and he had generally
failed when he did try it.  He had never done so since her marriage,
and now, when he saw her quiet, easy step as she entered his room, he
almost wished that he had taken his wife's advice.

He began by apologizing for the trouble he was giving her.  She
begged him not to mention it, assured him that walking downstairs was
no trouble to her at all, and then took a seat and' waited patiently
for him to begin his attack.

"My dear Eleanor," he said, "I hope you believe me when I assure you
that you have no sincerer friend than I am."  To this Eleanor
answered nothing, and therefore he proceeded.  "If you had a brother
of your own, I should not probably trouble you with what I am going
to say.  But as it is I cannot but think that it must be a comfort to
you to know that you have near you one who is as anxious for your
welfare as any brother of your own could be."

"I never had a brother," said she.

"I know you never had, and it is therefore that I speak to you."

"I never had a brother," she repeated, "but I have hardly felt the
want.  Papa has been to me both father and brother."

"Your father is the fondest and most affectionate of men.  But--"

"He is--the fondest and most affectionate of men and the best of
counsellors.  While he lives I can never want advice."

This rather put the archdeacon out.  He could not exactly contradict
what his sister-in-law said about her father, and yet he did not at
all agree with her.  He wanted her to understand that he tendered his
assistance because her father was a soft, good-natured gentleman not
sufficiently knowing in the ways of the world, but he could not say
this to her.  So he had to rush into the subject-matter of his
proffered counsel without any acknowledgement on her part that she
could need it, or would be grateful for it.

"Susan tells me that you received a letter this evening from Mr.
Slope."

"Yes; Papa brought it in the brougham.  Did he not tell you?"

"And Susan says that you objected to let her know what it was about."

"I don't think she asked me.  But had she done so, I should not have
told her.  I don't think it nice to be asked about one's letters.  If
one wishes to show them, one does so without being asked."

"True.  Quite so.  What you say is quite true.  But is not the fact
of your receiving letters from Mr. Slope, which you do not wish to
show to your friends, a circumstance which must excite some--some
surprise--some suspicion--"

"Suspicion!" said she, not speaking above her usual voice, speaking
still in a soft, womanly tone but yet with indignation.  "Suspicion! 
And who suspects me, and of what?"  And then there was a pause, for
the archdeacon was not quite ready to explain the ground of his
suspicion.  "No, Dr. Grantly, I did not choose to show Mr. Slope's
letter to Susan.  I could not show it to anyone till Papa had seen
it.  If you have any wish to read it now, you can do so," and she
handed the letter to him over the table.

This was an amount of compliance which he had not at all expected and
which rather upset him in his tactics.  However, he took the letter,
perused it carefully, and then refolding it, kept it on the table
under his hand.  To him it appeared to be in almost every respect the
letter of a declared lover; it seemed to corroborate his worst
suspicions; and the fact of Eleanor's showing it to him was all but
tantamount to a declaration on her part that it was her pleasure to
receive love-letters from Mr. Slope.  He almost entirely overlooked
the real subject-matter of the epistle, so intent was he on the
forthcoming courtship and marriage.

"I'll thank you to give it me back, if you please, Dr. Grantly."

He took it in his hand and held it up, but made no immediate overture
to return it.  "And Mr. Harding has seen this?" said he.

"Of course he has," said she; "it was written that he might see it. 
It refers solely to his business--of course I showed it to him."

"And, Eleanor, do you think that that is a proper letter for you--for 
a person in your condition--to receive from Mr. Slope?"

"Quite a proper letter," said she, speaking, perhaps, a little out of
obstinacy, probably forgetting at the moment the objectionable
mention of her silken curls.

"Then, Eleanor, it is my duty to tell you that I wholly differ from
you."

"So I suppose," said she, instigated now by sheer opposition and
determination not to succumb.  'You think Mr. Slope is a messenger
direct from Satan.  I think he is an industrious, well-meaning
clergyman.  It's a pity that we differ as we do.  But, as we do
differ, we had probably better not talk about it."

Here Eleanor undoubtedly put herself in the wrong.  She might
probably have refused to talk to Dr. Grantly on the matter in dispute
without any impropriety, but, having consented to listen to him, she
had no business to tell him that he regarded Mr. Slope as an emissary
from the evil one; nor was she justified in praising Mr. Slope,
seeing that in her heart of hearts she did not think well of him. 
She was, however, wounded in spirit, and angry, and bitter.  She had
been subjected to contumely and cross-questioning and ill-usage
through the whole evening.  No one, not even Mr. Arabin, not even her
father, had been kind to her.  All this she attributed to the
prejudice and conceit of the archdeacon, and therefore she resolved
to set no bounds to her antagonism to him.  She would neither give
nor take quarter.  He had greatly presumed in daring to question her
about her correspondence, and she was determined to show that she
thought so.

"Eleanor, you are forgetting yourself," said he, looking very sternly
at her.  "Otherwise you would never tell me that I conceive any man
to be a messenger from Satan."

"But you do," said she.  "Nothing is too bad for him.  Give me that
letter, if you please;" and she stretched out her hand and took it
from him.  "He has been doing his best to serve Papa, doing more than
any of Papa's friends could do; and yet, because he is the chaplain
of a bishop whom you don't like, you speak of him as though he had no
right to the usage of a gentleman."

"He has done nothing for your father."

"I believe that he has done a great deal; and, as far as I am
concerned, I am grateful to him.  Nothing that you can say can
prevent my being so.  I judge people by their acts, and his, as far
as I can see them, are good." She then paused for a moment.  "If you
have nothing further to say, I shall be obliged by being permitted to 
say good night--I am very tired."

Dr. Grantly had, as he thought, done his best to be gracious to his
sister-in-law.  He had endeavoured not to be harsh to her and had
striven to pluck the sting from his rebuke.  But he did not intend
that she should leave him without hearing him.

"I have something to say, Eleanor, and I fear I must trouble you to
hear it.  You profess that it is quite proper that you should receive
from Mr. Slope such letters as that you have in your hand.  Susan and
I think very differently.  You are, of course, your own mistress, and
much as we both must grieve should anything separate you from us, we
have no power to prevent you from taking steps which may lead to such
a separation.  If you are so wilful as to reject the counsel of your
friends, you must be allowed to cater for yourself.  But, Eleanor, I
may at any rate ask you this.  Is it worth your while to break away
from all those you have loved--from all who love you--for the sake of
Mr. Slope?"

"I don't know what you mean, Dr. Grantly; I don't know what you're
talking about.  I don't want to break away from anybody."

"But you will do so if you connect yourself with Mr. Slope.  Eleanor,
I must speak out to you.  You must choose between your sister and
myself and our friends, and Mr. Slope and his friends.  I say nothing
of your father, as you may probably understand his feelings better
than I do."

"What do you mean, Dr. Grantly?  What am I to understand?  I never
heard such wicked prejudice in my life."

"It is no prejudice, Eleanor.  I have known the world longer than you
have done.  Mr. Slope is altogether beneath you.  You ought to know
and feel that he is so.  Pray--pray think of this before it is too
late."

"Too late!"

"Or if you will not believe me, ask Susan; you cannot think she is
prejudiced against you.  Or even consult your father--he is not
prejudiced against you.  Ask Mr. Arabin--"

"You haven't spoken to Mr. Arabin about this!" said she, jumping up 
and standing before him.

"Eleanor, all the world in and about Barchester will be speaking of
it soon."

"But have you spoken to Mr. Arabin about me and Mr. Slope?"

"Certainly I have, and he quite agrees with me."

"Agrees with what?" said she.  "I think you are trying to drive me
mad."

"He agrees with me and Susan that it is quite impossible you should
be received at Plumstead as Mrs. Slope."

Not being favourites with the tragic muse, we do not dare to attempt
any description of Eleanor's face when she first heard the name of
Mrs. Slope pronounced as that which would or should or might at some
time appertain to herself.  The look, such as it was, Dr. Grantly did
not soon forget.  For a moment or two she could find no words to 
express her deep anger and deep disgust; indeed, at this conjuncture,
words did not come to her very freely.

"How dare you be so impertinent?" at last she said, and then she
hurried out of the room without giving the archdeacon the opportunity
of uttering another word.  It was with difficulty she contained
herself till she reached her own room, and then, locking the door,
she threw herself on her bed and sobbed as though her heart would
break.

But even yet she had no conception of the truth.  She had no idea
that her father and her sister had for days past conceived in sober
earnest the idea that she was going to marry this man.  She did not
even then believe that the archdeacon thought that she would do so. 
By some manoeuvre of her brain she attributed the origin of the
accusation to Mr. Arabin, and as she did so her anger against him was
excessive, and the vexation of her spirit almost unendurable.  She
could not bring herself to think that the charge was made seriously.  
It appeared to her most probable that the archdeacon and Mr. Arabin
had talked over her objectionable acquaintance with Mr. Slope; that
Mr. Arabin in his jeering, sarcastic way had suggested the odious
match as being the severest way of treating with contumely her
acquaintance with his enemy; and that the archdeacon, taking the idea
from him, thought proper to punish her by the allusion.  The whole
night she lay awake thinking of what had been said, and this appeared
to be the most probable solution.

But the reflexion that Mr. Arabin should have in any way mentioned
her name in connexion with that of Mr. Slope was overpowering, and
the spiteful ill-nature of the archdeacon in repeating the charge to
her made her wish to leave his house almost before the day had
broken.  One thing was certain: nothing should make her stay there
beyond the following morning, and nothing should make her sit down to
breakfast in company with Dr. Grantly.  When she thought of the man
whose name had been linked with her own, she cried from sheer
disgust.  It was only because she would be thus disgusted, thus
pained and shocked and cut to the quick, that the archdeacon had
spoken the horrid word.  He wanted to make her quarrel with Mr.
Slope, and therefore he had outraged her by his abominable vulgarity. 
She determined that at any rate he should know that she appreciated
it.

Nor was the archdeacon a bit better satisfied with the result of his
serious interview than was Eleanor.  He gathered from it, as indeed
he could hardly fail to do, that she was very angry with him, but he
thought that she was thus angry, not because she was suspected of an
intention to marry Mr. Slope, but because such an intention was
imputed to her as a crime.  Dr. Grantly regarded this supposed union
with disgust, but it never occurred to him that Eleanor was outraged
because she looked at it exactly in the same light.

He returned to his wife, vexed and somewhat disconsolate, but
nevertheless confirmed in his wrath against his sister-in-law.
"Her whole behaviour," said he, "has been most objectionable.
She handed me his love-letter to read as though she were proud of it. 
And she is proud of it.  She is proud of having this slavering,
greedy man at her feet.  She will throw herself and John Bold's money
into his lap; she will ruin her boy, disgrace her father and you, and
be a wretched miserable woman."

His spouse, who was sitting at her toilet-table, continued her
avocations, making no answer to all this.  She had known that the
archdeacon would gain nothing by interfering, but she was too
charitable to provoke him by saying so while he was in such deep
sorrow.

"This comes of a man making such a will as that of Bold's," he 
continued.  "Eleanor is no more fitted to be trusted with such an
amount of money in her own hands than is a charity-school girl."
Still Mrs. Grantly made no reply.  "But I have done my duty; I can do
nothing further.  I have told her plainly that she cannot be allowed
to form a link of connexion between me and that man.  From
henceforward it will not be in my power to make her welcome at
Plumstead.  I cannot have Mr. Slope's love-letters coming here. 
Susan, I think you had better let her understand that, as her mind on
this subject seems to be irrevocably fixed, it will be better for all
parties that she should return to Barchester."

Now Mrs. Grantly was angry with Eleanor--nearly as angry as her
husband--but she had no idea of turning her sister out of the house. 
She therefore at length spoke out and explained to the archdeacon in
her own mild, seducing way that he was fuming and fussing and
fretting himself very unnecessarily.  She declared that things, if
left alone, would arrange themselves much better than he could
arrange them, and at last succeeded in inducing him to go to bed in a
somewhat less inhospitable state of mind.

On the following morning Eleanor's maid was commissioned to send
word into the dining-room that her mistress was not well enough to
attend prayers and that she would breakfast in her own room.  Here
she was visited by her father, and declared to him her intention of
returning immediately to Barchester.  He was hardly surprised by the
announcement.  All the household seemed to be aware that something
had gone wrong.  Everyone walked about with subdued feet, and
people's shoes seemed to creak more than usual.  There was a look of
conscious intelligence on the faces of the women, and the men
attempted, but in vain, to converse as though nothing were the
matter.  All this had weighed heavily on the heart of Mr. Harding,
and when Eleanor told him that her immediate return to Barchester was
a necessity, he merely sighed piteously and said that he would be
ready to accompany her.

But here she objected strenuously.  She had a great wish, she said,
to go alone; a great desire that it might be seen that her father was
not implicated in her quarrel with Dr. Grantly.  To this at last he
gave way; but not a word passed between them about Mr. Slope--not a
word was said, not a question asked as to the serious interview on
the preceding evening.  There was, indeed, very little confidence
between them, though neither of them knew why it should be so. 
Eleanor once asked him whether he would not call upon the bishop, but
he answered rather tartly that he did not know--he did not think he
should, but he could not say just at present.  And so they parted. 
Each was miserably anxious for some show of affection, for some
return of confidence, for some sign of the feeling that usually bound
them together.  But none was given.  The father could not bring
himself to question his daughter about her supposed lover, and the
daughter would not sully her mouth by repeating the odious word with
which Dr. Grantly had roused her wrath.  And so they parted.

There was some trouble in arranging the method of Eleanor's return. 
She begged her father to send for a post-chaise, but when Mrs.
Grantly heard of this, she objected strongly.  If Eleanor would go
away in dudgeon with the archdeacon, why should she let all the
servants and all the neighbourhood know that she had done so?  So at
last Eleanor consented to make use of the Plumstead carriage, and as
the archdeacon had gone out immediately after breakfast and was not
to return till dinner-time, she also consented to postpone her
journey till after lunch, and to join the family at that time.  As to
the subject of the quarrel; not a word was said by anyone.  The
affair of the carriage was arranged by Mr. Harding, who acted as
Mercury between the two ladies; they, when they met, kissed each
other very lovingly and then sat down each to her crochet work as 
though nothing was amiss in all the world.



CHAPTER XXX

Another Love Scene


But there was another visitor at the rectory whose feelings in this
unfortunate matter must be somewhat strictly analysed.  Mr. Arabin
had heard from his friend of the probability of Eleanor's marriage
with Mr. Slope with amazement but not with incredulity.  It has been
said that he was not in love with Eleanor, and up to this period this
certainly had been true.  But as soon as he heard that she loved
someone else, he began to be very fond of her himself.  He did not
make up his mind that he wished to have her for his wife; he had
never thought of her, and did not now think of her, in connexion with
himself; but he experienced an inward, indefinable feeling of deep
regret, a gnawing sorrow, an unconquerable depression of spirits, and
also a species of self-abasement that he--he, Mr. Arabin--had not
done something to prevent that other he, that vile he whom he so
thoroughly despised, from carrying off this sweet prize.

Whatever man may have reached the age of forty unmarried without
knowing something of such feelings must have been very successful or
else very cold-hearted.

Mr. Arabin had never thought of trimming the sails of his bark so
that he might sail as convoy to this rich argosy.  He had seen that
Mrs. Bold was beautiful, but he had not dreamt of making her beauty
his own.  He knew that Mrs. Bold was rich, but he had had no more
idea of appropriating her wealth than that of Dr. Grantly.  He had
discovered that Mrs. Bold was intelligent, warm-hearted, agreeable,
sensible, all in fact that a man could wish his wife to be; but the
higher were her attractions, the greater her claims to consideration,
the less had he imagined that he might possibly become the possessor
of them.  Such had been his instinct rather than his thoughts, so
humble and so diffident.  Now his diffidence was to be rewarded by
his seeing this woman, whose beauty was to his eyes perfect, whose
wealth was such as to have deterred him from thinking of her, whose
widowhood would have silenced him had he not been so deterred, by his
seeing her become the prey of--Obadiah Slope!

On the morning of Mrs. Bold's departure he got on his horse to ride
over to St. Ewold's.  As he rode he kept muttering to himself a line
from Van Artevelde,

How little flattering is woman's love.

And then he strove to recall his mind and to think of other affairs--
his parish, his college, his creed--but his thoughts would revert to
Mr. Slope and the Flemish chieftain.

When we think upon it,
How little flattering is woman's love,
Given commonly to whosoe'er is nearest
And propped with most advantage.

It was not that Mrs. Bold should marry anyone but him--he had not put
himself forward as a suitor--but that she should marry Mr. Slope, and
so he repeated over again -

Outward grace
Nor inward light is needful--day by day
Men wanting both are mated with the best
And loftiest of God's feminine creation,
Whose love takes no distinction but of gender,
And ridicules the very name of choice.

And so he went on, troubled much in his mind.

He had but an uneasy ride of it that morning, and little good did he
do at St. Ewold's.

The necessary alterations in his house were being fast completed, and
he walked through the rooms, and went up and down the stairs, and
rambled through the garden, but he could not wake himself to much
interest about them.  He stood still at every window to look out and
think upon Mr. Slope.  At almost every window he had before stood and
chatted with Eleanor.  She and Mrs. Grantly had been there
continually, and while Mrs. Grantly had been giving orders, and
seeing that orders had been complied with, he and Eleanor had
conversed on all things appertaining to a clergyman's profession.  He
thought how often he had laid down the law to her and how sweetly she
had borne with his somewhat dictatorial decrees.  He remembered her
listening intelligence, her gentle but quick replies, her interest in
all that concerned the church, in all that concerned him; and then he
struck his riding-whip against the window-sill and declared to
himself that it was impossible that Eleanor Bold should marry Mr.
Slope.

And yet he did not really believe, as he should have done, that it
was impossible.  He should have known her well enough to feel that it
was truly impossible.  He should have been aware that Eleanor had
that within her which would surely protect her from such degradation. 
But he, like so many others, was deficient in confidence in woman. 
He said to himself over and over again that it was impossible that
Eleanor Bold should become Mrs. Slope, and yet he believed that she
would do so.  And so he rambled about, and could do and think of
nothing.  He was thoroughly uncomfortable, thoroughly ill at ease,
cross with himself and everybody else, and feeding in his heart on
animosity towards Mr. Slope.  This was not as it should be, as he
knew and felt, but he could not help himself.  In truth Mr. Arabin
was now in love with Mrs. Bold, though ignorant of the fact himself. 
He was in love and, though forty years old, was in love without being
aware of it.  He fumed and fretted and did not know what was the
matter, as a youth might do at one-and-twenty.  And so having done no
good at St. Ewold's, he rode back much earlier than was usual with
him, instigated by some inward, unacknowledged hope that he might see
Mrs. Bold before she left.

Eleanor had not passed a pleasant morning.  She was irritated with
everyone, and not least with herself.  She felt that she had been
hardly used, but she felt also that she had not played her own cards
well.  She should have held herself so far above suspicion as to have
received her sister's innuendoes and the archdeacon's lecture with
indifference.  She had not done this but had shown herself angry and
sore, and was now ashamed of her own petulance, yet unable to
discontinue it.

The greater part of the morning she had spent alone, but after awhile
her father joined her.  He had fully made up his mind that, come what
come might, nothing should separate him from his younger daughter. 
It was a hard task for him to reconcile himself to the idea of seeing
her at the head of Mr. Slope's table, but he got through it.
Mr. Slope, as he argued to himself, was a respectable man and a
clergyman, and he, as Eleanor's father, had no right even to
endeavour to prevent her from marrying such a one.  He longed to tell
her how he had determined to prefer her to all the world, how he was
prepared to admit that she was not wrong, how thoroughly he differed
from Dr. Grantly, but he could not bring himself to mention Mr.
Slope's name.  There was yet a chance that they were all wrong in
their surmise, and being thus in doubt, he could not bring himself to
speak openly to her on the subject.

He was sitting with her in the drawing-room, with his arm round her
waist, saying every now and then some little soft words of affection
and working hard with his imaginary fiddle-bow, when Mr. Arabin
entered the room.  He immediately got up, and the two made some trite
remarks to each other, neither thinking of what he was saying, while
Eleanor kept her seat on the sofa, mute and moody.  Mr. Arabin was
included in the list of those against whom her anger was excited. 
He, too, had dared to talk about her acquaintance with Mr. Slope; he,
too, had dared to blame her for not making an enemy of his enemy. 
She had not intended to see him before her departure, and was now but
little inclined to be gracious.

There was a feeling through the whole house that something was wrong. 
Mr. Arabin, when he saw Eleanor, could not succeed in looking or in
speaking as though he knew nothing of all this.  He could not be
cheerful and positive and contradictory with her, as was his wont. 
He had not been two minutes in the room before he felt that he had
done wrong to return; and the moment he heard her voice, he
thoroughly wished himself back at St. Ewold's.  Why, indeed, should
he have wished to have aught further to say to the future wife of
Mr. Slope?

"I am sorry to hear that you are to leave us so soon," said he,
striving in vain to use his ordinary voice.  In answer to this she
muttered something about the necessity of her being in Barchester and
betook herself most industriously to her crochet work.

Then there was a little more trite conversation between Mr. Arabin
and Mr. Harding--trite, and hard, and vapid, and senseless.  Neither
of them had anything to say to the other, and yet neither at such a
moment liked to remain silent.  At last Mr. Harding, taking advantage
of a pause, escaped out of the room, and Eleanor and Mr. Arabin were
left together.

"Your going will be a great break-up to our party," said he.

She again muttered something which was all but inaudible, but kept
her eyes fixed upon her work.

"We have had a very pleasant month here," said he; "at least I have;
and I am sorry it should be so soon over."

"I have already been from home longer than I intended," said she,
"and it is time that I should return."

"Well, pleasant hours and pleasant days must come to an end.  It is a
pity that so few of them are pleasant; or perhaps, rather--"

"It is a pity, certainly, that men and women do so much to destroy
the pleasantness of their days," said she, interrupting him.  "It is
a pity that there should be so little charity abroad."

"Charity should begin at home," said he, and he was proceeding to
explain that he as a clergyman could not be what she would call
charitable at the expense of those principles which he considered it
his duty to teach when he remembered that it would be worse than vain
to argue on such a matter with the future wife of Mr. Slope.  "But
you are just leaving us," he continued, "and I will not weary your
last hour with another lecture.  As it is, I fear I have given you
too many."

"You should practise as well as preach, Mr. Arabin."

"Undoubtedly I should.  So should we all.  All of us who presume to
teach are bound to do our utmost towards fulfilling our own lessons. 
I thoroughly allow my deficiency in doing so, but I do not quite know
now to what you allude.  Have you any special reason for telling me
now that I should practise as well as preach?"

Eleanor made no answer.  She longed to let him know the cause of her
anger, to upbraid him for speaking of her disrespectfully, and then
at last to forgive him, and so part friends.  She felt that she would
be unhappy to leave him in her present frame of mind, but yet she
could hardly bring herself to speak to him of Mr. Slope.  And how
could she allude to the innuendo thrown out by the archdeacon, and
thrown out, as she believed, at the instigation of Mr. Arabin?  She
wanted to make him know that he was wrong, to make him aware that he
had ill-treated her, in order that the sweetness of her forgiveness
might be enhanced.  She felt that she liked him too well to be
contented to part with him in displeasure, yet she could not get over
her deep displeasure without some explanation, some acknowledgement
on his part, some assurance that he would never again so sin against
her.

"Why do you tell me that I should practise what I preach?" continued
he.

"All men should do so."

"Certainly.  That is as it were understood and acknowledged.  But you
do not say so to all men, or to all clergymen.  The advice, good as
it is, is not given except in allusion to some special deficiency. 
If you will tell me my special deficiency, I will endeavour to profit
by the advice."

She paused for awhile and then, looking full in his face, she said,
"You are not bold enough, Mr. Arabin, to speak out to me openly and
plainly, and yet you expect me, a woman, to speak openly to you.  Why
did you speak calumny of me to Dr. Grantly behind my back?"

"Calumny!" said he, and his whole face became suffused with blood. 
"What calumny?  If I have spoken calumny of you, I will beg your
pardon, and his to whom I spoke it, and God's pardon also.  But what
calumny have I spoken of you to Dr. Grantly?"

She also blushed deeply.  She could not bring herself to ask him
whether he had not spoken of her as another man's wife.  "You know
that best yourself," said she.  "But I ask you as a man of honour, if
you have not spoken of me as you would not have spoken of your own
sister--or rather I will not ask you," she continued, finding that he
did not immediately answer her.  "I will not put you to the necessity
of answering such a question.  Dr. Grantly has told me what you
said."

"Dr. Grantly certainly asked me for my advice, and I gave it.  He
asked me--"

"I know he did, Mr. Arabin.  He asked you whether he would be doing
right to receive me at Plumstead if I continued my acquaintance with
a gentleman who happens to be personally disagreeable to yourself and
to him."

"You are mistaken, Mrs. Bold.  I have no personal knowledge of Mr.
Slope; I never met him in my life."

"You are not the less individually hostile to him.  It is not for me
to question the propriety of your enmity, but I had a right to expect
that my name should not have been mixed up in your hostilities.  This
has been done and been done by you in a manner the most injurious and
the most distressing to me as a woman.  I must confess, Mr. Arabin,
that from you I expected a different sort of usage."

As she spoke she with difficulty restrained her tears--but she did
restrain them.  Had she given way and sobbed aloud, as in such cases
a woman should do, he would have melted at once, implored her pardon,
perhaps knelt at her feet ' and declared his love.  Everything would
have been explained, and Eleanor would have gone back to Barchester
with a contented mind.  How easily would she have forgiven and
forgotten the archdeacon's suspicions had she but heard the whole
truth from Mr. Arabin.  But then where would have been my novel?
She did not cry, and Mr. Arabin did not melt.

"'You do me an injustice," said he.  "My advice was asked by Dr.
Grantly, and I was obliged to give it."

"Dr. Grantly has been most officious, most impertinent.  I have as
complete a right to form my acquaintance as he has to form his.  What
would you have said had I consulted you as to the propriety of my
banishing Dr. Grantly from my house because he knows Lord Tattenham
Corner?  I am sure Lord Tattenham is quite as objectionable an
acquaintance for a clergyman as Mr. Slope is for a clergyman's
daughter."

"I do not know Lord Tattenham Corner."

"No, but Dr. Grantly does.  It is nothing to me if he knows all the
young lords on every race-course in England.  I shall not interfere
with him, nor shall he with me."

"I am sorry to differ with you, Mrs. Bold, but as you have spoken to
me on this matter, and especially as you blame me for what little I
said on the subject, I must tell you that I do differ from you.  Dr.
Grantly's position as a man in the world gives him a right to choose
his own acquaintances, subject to certain influences.  If he chooses
them badly, those influences will be used.  If he consorts with
persons unsuitable to him, his bishop will interfere.  What the
bishop is to Dr. Grantly, Dr. Grantly is to you