."

"I deny it.  I utterly deny it," said Eleanor, jumping from her seat
and literally flashing before Mr. Arabin, as she stood on the
drawing-room floor.  He had never seen her so excited, he had never
seen her look half so beautiful.

"I utterly deny it," said she.  "Dr. Grantly has no sort of
jurisdiction over me whatsoever.  Do you and he forget that I am not
altogether alone in the world?  Do you forget that I have a father? 
Dr. Grantly, I believe, always has forgotten it.

"From you, Mr. Arabin," she continued, "I would have listened to
advice because I should have expected it to have been given as one
friend may advise another--not as a schoolmaster gives an order to a
pupil.  I might have differed from you--on this matter I should have
done so--but had you spoken to me in your usual manner and with your
usual freedom, I should not have been angry.  But now--was it manly
of you, Mr. Arabin, to speak of me in this way--so disrespectful--
so--?  I cannot bring myself to repeat what you said.  You must
understand what I feel.  Was it just of you to speak of me in such a
way and to advise my sister's husband to turn me out of my sister's
house because I chose to know a man of whose doctrine you
disapprove?"

"I have no alternative left to me, Mrs. Bold," said he, standing with
his back to the fire-place, looking down intently at the carpet
pattern, and speaking with a slow, measured voice, "but to tell you
plainly what did take place between me and Dr. Grantly."

"Well," said she, finding that he paused for a moment.

"I am afraid that what I may say may pain you."

"It cannot well do so more than what you have already done," said
she.

"Dr. Grantly asked me whether I thought it would be prudent for him
to receive you in his house as the wife of Mr. Slope, and I told him
that I thought it would be imprudent.  Believing it to be utterly
impossible that Mr. Slope and--"

"Thank you, Mr. Arabin, that is sufficient.  I do not want to know
your reasons," said she, speaking with a terribly calm voice.  "I
have shown to this gentleman the commonplace civility of a neighbour;
and because I have done so, because I have not indulged against him
in all the rancour and hatred which you and Dr. Grantly consider due
to all clergymen who do not agree with yourselves, you conclude that
I am to marry him; or rather you do not conclude so--no rational man
could really come to such an outrageous conclusion without better
ground; you have not thought so, but, as I am in a position in which
such an accusation must be peculiarly painful, it is made in order
that I may be terrified into hostility against this enemy of yours."

As she finished speaking, she walked to the drawing-room window and
stepped out into the garden.  Mr. Arabin was left in the room, still
occupied in counting the pattern on the carpet.  He had, however,
distinctly heard and accurately marked every word that she had
spoken.  Was it not clear from what she had said that the archdeacon
had been wrong in imputing to her any attachment to Mr. Slope?  Was
it not clear that Eleanor was still free to make another choice?  It
may seem strange that he should for a moment have had a doubt, and
yet he did doubt.  She had not absolutely denied the charge; she had
not expressly said that it was untrue.  Mr. Arabin understood little
of the nature of a woman's feelings, or he would have known how
improbable it was that she should make any clearer declaration than
she had done.  Few men do understand the nature of a woman's heart,
till years have robbed such understanding of its value.  And it is
well that it should be so, or men would triumph too easily.

Mr. Arabin stood counting the carpet, unhappy, wretchedly unhappy, at
the hard words that had been spoken to him, and yet happy,
exquisitely happy, as he thought that after all the woman whom he so
regarded was not to become the wife of the man whom he so much
disliked.  As he stood there he began to be aware that he was himself
in love.  Forty years had passed over his head, and as yet woman's
beauty had never given him an uneasy hour.  His present hour was very
uneasy.

Not that he remained there for half or a quarter of that time.  In
spite of what Eleanor had said Mr. Arabin was, in truth, a manly man. 
Having ascertained that he loved this woman, and having now reason to
believe that she was free to receive his love, at least if she
pleased to do so, he followed her into the garden to make such wooing
as he could.

He was not long in finding her.  She was walking to and fro beneath
the avenue of elms that stood in the archdeacon's grounds, skirting
the churchyard.  What had passed between her and Mr. Arabin had not,
alas, tended to lessen the acerbity of her spirit.  She was very
angry--more angry with him than with anyone.  How could he have so
misunderstood her?  She had been so intimate with him, had allowed
him such latitude in what he had chosen to say to her, had complied
with his ideas, cherished his views, fostered his precepts, cared for
his comforts, made much of him in every way in which a pretty woman
can make much of an unmarried man without committing herself or her
feelings!  She had been doing this, and while she had been doing it
he had regarded her as the affianced wife of another man.

As she passed along the avenue, every now and then an unbidden tear
would force itself on her cheek, and as she raised her hand to brush
it away, she stamped with her little foot upon the sward with very
spite to think that she had been so treated.

Mr. Arabin was very near to her when she first saw him, and she
turned short round and retraced her steps down the avenue, trying to
rid her cheeks of all trace of the tell-tale tears.  It was a
needless endeavour, for Mr. Arabin was in a state of mind that hardly
allowed him to observe such trifles.  He followed her down the walk
and overtook her just as she reached the end of it.

He had not considered how he would address her; he had not thought
what he would say.  He had only felt that it was wretchedness to him
to quarrel with her and that it would be happiness to be allowed to
love her.  And yet he could not lower himself by asking her pardon. 
He had done her no wrong.  He had not calumniated her, not injured
her, as she had accused him of doing.  He could not confess sins of
which he had not been guilty.  He could only let the past be past and
ask her as to her and his hopes for the future.

"I hope we are not to part as enemies?" said he.

"There shall be no enmity on my part," said Eleanor; "I endeavour to
avoid all enmities.  It would be a hollow pretence were I to say that
there can be true friendship between us, after what has just passed. 
People cannot make their friends of those whom they despise."

"And am I despised?"

"I must have been so before you could have spoken of me as you did. 
And I was deceived, cruelly deceived.  I believed that you thought
well of me; I believed that you esteemed me."

"Thought well of you and esteemed you!" said he.  "In justifying
myself before you, I must use stronger words than those."  He paused
for a moment, and Eleanor's heart beat with painful violence within
her bosom as she waited for him to go on.  "I have esteemed, do
esteem you, as I never yet esteemed any woman.  Think well of you!
I never thought to think so well, so much of any human creature. 
Speak calumny of you!  Insult you!  Wilfully injure you!  I wish it
were my privilege to shield you from calumny, insult, and injury. 
Calumny!  Ah me!  'Twere almost better that it were so.  Better than
to worship with a sinful worship; sinful and vain also."  And then he
walked along beside her, with his hands clasped behind his back,
looking down on the grass beneath his feet and utterly at a loss how
to express his meaning.  And Eleanor walked beside him determined at
least to give him no assistance.

"Ah me!" he uttered at last, speaking rather to himself than to her. 
"Ah me!  These Plumstead walks were pleasant enough, if one could
have but heart's ease, but without that the dull, dead stones of
Oxford were far preferable--and St. Ewold's, too.  Mrs. Bold, I am
beginning to think that I mistook myself when I came hither.  A
Romish priest now would have escaped all this.  Oh, Father of heaven,
how good for us would it be if thou couldest vouchsafe to us a
certain rule."

"And have we not a certain rule, Mr. Arabin?"

"Yes--yes, surely; 'Lead us not into temptation but deliver us from
evil.'  But what is temptation?  What is evil?  Is this evil--is this
temptation?"

Poor Mr. Arabin!  It would not come out of him, that deep, true love
of his.  He could not bring himself to utter it in plain language
that would require and demand an answer.  He knew not how to say to
the woman by his side, "Since the fact is that you do not love that
other man, that you are not to be his wife, can you love me, will you
be my wife?"  These were the words which were in his heart, but with
all his sighs he could not draw them to his lips.  He would have
given anything, everything for power to ask this simple question, but
glib as was his tongue in pulpits and on platforms, now he could not
find a word wherewith to express the plain wish of his heart.

And yet Eleanor understood him as thoroughly as though he had
declared his passion with all the elegant fluency of a practised
Lothario.  With a woman's instinct, she followed every bend of his
mind as he spoke of the pleasantness of Plumstead and the stones of
Oxford, as he alluded to the safety of the Romish priest and the
hidden perils of temptation.  She knew that it all meant love.  She
knew that this man at her side, this accomplished scholar, this
practised orator, this great polemical combatant, was striving and
striving in vain to tell her that his heart was no longer his own.

She knew this and felt a sort of joy in knowing it, yet she would not
come to his aid.  He had offended her deeply, had treated her
unworthily, the more unworthily seeing that he had learnt to love
her, and Eleanor could not bring herself to abandon her revenge.  She
did not ask herself whether or no she would ultimately accept his
love.  She did not even acknowledge to herself that she now perceived
it with pleasure.  At the present moment it did not touch her heart;
it merely appeased her pride and flattered her vanity.  Mr. Arabin
had dared to associate her name with that of Mr. Slope, and now her
spirit was soothed by finding that he would fain associate it with
his own.  And so she walked on beside him, inhaling incense but
giving out no sweetness in return.

"Answer me this," said Mr. Arabin, stopping suddenly in his walk and
stepping forward so that he faced his companion.  "Answer me this one
question.  You do not love Mr. Slope?  You do not intend to be his
wife?"

Mr. Arabin certainly did not go the right way to win such a woman as
Eleanor Bold.  Just as her wrath was evaporating, as it was
disappearing before the true warmth of his untold love, he rekindled
it by a most useless repetition of his original sin.  Had he known
what he was about, he should never have mentioned Mr. Slope's name
before Eleanor Bold, till he had made her all his own.  Then, and not
till then, he might have talked of Mr. Slope with as much triumph as
he chose.

"I shall answer no such question," said she; "and what is more,
I must tell you that nothing can justify your asking it.  Good
morning!"

And so saying, she stepped proudly across the lawn and, passing
through the drawing-room window, joined her father and sister at
lunch in the dining-room.  Half an hour afterwards she was in the
carriage, and so she left Plumstead without again seeing Mr. Arabin.

His walk was long and sad among the sombre trees that overshadowed
the churchyard.  He left the archdeacon's grounds that he might
escape attention and sauntered among the green hillocks under which
lay at rest so many of the once loving swains and forgotten beauties
of Plumstead.  To his ears Eleanor's last words sounded like a knell
never to be reversed.  He could not comprehend that she might be
angry with him, indignant with him, remorseless with him, and yet
love him.  He could not make up his mind whether or no Mr. Slope was
in truth a favoured rival.  If not, why should she not have answered
his question?

Poor Mr. Arabin--untaught, illiterate, boorish, ignorant man!  That
at forty years of age you should know so little of the workings of a
woman's heart!



CHAPTER XXXI

The Bishop's Library


And thus the pleasant party at Plumstead was broken up.  It had been
a very pleasant party as long as they had all remained in good humour
with one another.  Mrs. Grantly had felt her house to be gayer and
brighter than it had been for many a long day, and the archdeacon had
been aware that the month had passed pleasantly without attributing
the pleasure to any other special merits than those of his own
hospitality.  Within three or four days of Eleanor's departure, Mr.
Harding had also returned, and Mr. Arabin had gone to Oxford to spend
one week there previous to his settling at the vicarage of St.
Ewold's.  He had gone laden with many messages to Dr. Gwynne touching
the iniquity of the doings in Barchester palace and the peril in
which it was believed the hospital still stood in spite of the
assurances contained in Mr. Slope's inauspicious letter.

During Eleanor's drive into Barchester she had not much opportunity
of reflecting on Mr. Arabin.  She had been constrained to divert her
mind both from his sins and his love by the necessity of conversing
with her sister and maintaining the appearance of parting with her on
good terms.  When the carriage reached her own door, and while she
was in the act of giving her last kiss to her sister and nieces, Mary
Bold ran out and exclaimed:

"Oh, Eleanor, have you heard?  Oh, Mrs. Grantly, have you heard what
has happened?  The poor dean!"

"Good heavens!" said Mrs. Grantly.  "What--what has happened?"

"This morning at nine he had a fit of apoplexy, and he has not spoken
since.  I very much fear that by this time he is no more."

Mrs. Grantly had been very intimate with the dean, and was therefore
much shocked.  Eleanor had not known him so well; nevertheless, she
was sufficiently acquainted with his person and manners to feel
startled and grieved also at the tidings she now received.  "I will
go at once to the deanery," said Mrs. Grantly; "the archdeacon, I am
sure, will be there.  If there is any news to send you, I will let
Thomas call before he leaves town."  And so the carriage drove off,
leaving Eleanor and her baby with Mary Bold.

Mrs. Grantly had been quite right.  The archdeacon was at the
deanery.  He had come into Barchester that morning by himself, not
caring to intrude himself upon Eleanor, and he also immediately on
his arrival had heard of the dean's fit.  There was, as we have
before said, a library or reading-room connecting the cathedral with
the dean's house.  This was generally called the bishop's library,
because a certain bishop of Barchester was supposed to have added it
to the cathedral.  It was built immediately over a portion of the
cloisters, and a flight of stairs descended from it into the room in
which the cathedral clergymen put their surplices on and off.  As it
also opened directly into the dean's house, it was the passage
through which that dignitary usually went to his public devotions. 
Who had or had not the right of entry into it, it might be difficult
to say, but the people of Barchester believed that it belonged to the
dean and the clergymen of Barchester believed that it belonged to the
chapter.

On the morning in question most of the resident clergymen who
constituted the chapter, and some few others, were here assembled,
and among them as usual the archdeacon towered with high authority. 
He had heard of the dean's fit before he was over the bridge which
led into the town and had at once come to the well-known clerical
trysting place.  He had been there by eleven o'clock and had remained
ever since.  From time to time the medical men who had been called in
came through from the deanery into the library, uttered little
bulletins, and then returned.  There was, it appears, very little
hope of the old man's rallying, indeed no hope of anything like a
final recovery.  The only question was whether he must die at once
speechless, unconscious, stricken to death by his first heavy fit, or
whether by due aid of medical skill he might not be so far brought
back to this world as to become conscious of his state and enabled to
address one prayer to his Maker before he was called to meet Him face
to face at the judgement seat.

Sir Omicron Pie had been sent for from London.  That great man had
shown himself a wonderful adept at keeping life still moving within
an old man's heart in the case of good old Bishop Grantly, and it
might be reasonably expected that he would be equally successful with
a dean.  In the meantime Dr. Fillgrave and Mr. Rerechild were doing
their best, and poor Miss Trefoil sat at the head of her father's
bed, longing, as in such cases daughters do long, to be allowed to do
something to show her love--if it were only to chafe his feet with
her hands, or wait in menial offices on those autocratic doctors--
anything so that now in the time of need she might be of use.

The archdeacon alone of the attendant clergy had been admitted for a
moment into the sick man's chamber.  He had crept in with creaking
shoes, had said with smothered voice a word of consolation to the
sorrowing daughter, had looked on the distorted face of his old
friend with solemn but yet eager scrutinising eye, as though he said
in his heart "and so some day it will probably be with me," and then,
having whispered an unmeaning word or two to the doctors, had creaked
his way back again into the library.

"He'll never speak again, I fear," said the archdeacon as he
noiselessly closed the door, as though the unconscious dying man,
from whom all sense had fled, would have heard in his distant chamber
the spring of the lock which was now so carefully handled.

"Indeed!  Indeed!  Is he so bad?" said the meagre little prebendary,
turning over in his own mind all the probable candidates for the
deanery and wondering whether the archdeacon would think it worth his
while to accept it.  "The fit must have been very violent."

'When a man over seventy has a stroke of apoplexy, it seldom comes
very lightly," said the burly chancellor.

"He was an excellent, sweet-tempered man," said one of the vicars
choral.  "Heaven knows how we shall repair his loss."

"He was indeed," said a minor canon, "and a great blessing to all
those privileged to take a share in the services of our cathedral.
I suppose the government will appoint, Mr. Archdeacon.  I trust we
may have no stranger."

"We will not talk about his successor," said the archdeacon, "while
there is yet hope."

"Oh, no, of course not," said the minor canon.  "It would be
exceedingly indecorous; but--"

"I know of no man," said the meagre little prebendary, "who has
better interest with the present government than Mr. Slope."

"Mr. Slope," said two or three at once almost sotto voce.  "Mr. Slope
Dean of Barchester!"

"Pooh!" exclaimed the burly chancellor.

"The bishop would do anything for him," said the little prebendary.

"And so would Mrs. Proudie," said the vicar choral.

"Pooh!" said the chancellor.

The archdeacon had almost turned pale at the idea.  What if Mr. Slope
should become Dean of Barchester?  To be sure there was no adequate
ground, indeed no ground at all, for presuming that such a
desecration could even be contemplated.  But nevertheless it was on
the cards.  Dr. Proudie had interest with the government, and the man
carried as it were Dr. Proudie in his pocket.  How should they all
conduct themselves if Mr. Slope were to become Dean of Barchester? 
The bare idea for a moment struck even Dr. Grantly dumb.

"It would certainly not be very pleasant for us to have Mr. Slope at
the deanery," said the little prebendary, chuckling inwardly at the
evident consternation which his surmise had created.

"About as pleasant and as probable as having you in the palace," said
the chancellor.

"I should think such an appointment highly improbable," said the
minor canon, "and, moreover, extremely injudicious.  Should not you,
Mr. Archdeacon?"

"I should presume such a thing to be quite out of the question," said
the archdeacon, "but at the present moment I am thinking rather of
our poor friend who is lying so near us than of Mr. Slope."

"Of course, of course," said the vicar choral with a very solemn air;
"of course you are.  So are we all.  Poor Dr. Trefoil; the best of
men, but--"

"It's the most comfortable dean's residence in England," said a
second prebendary.  "Fifteen acres in the grounds.  It is better than
many of the bishops' palaces."

"And full two thousand a year," said the meagre doctor.

"It is cut down to £1,200," said the chancellor.

"No," said the second prebendary.  "It is to be fifteen.  A special
case was made."

"No such thing," said the chancellor.

"You'll find I'm right," said the prebendary.

"I'm sure I read it in the report," said the minor canon.

"Nonsense," said the chancellor.  "They couldn't do it.  There were
to be no exceptions but London and Durham."

"And Canterbury and York," said the vicar choral modestly.

"What do you say, Grantly?" said the meagre little doctor.

"Say about what?" said the archdeacon, who had been looking as though
he were thinking about his friend the dean but who had in reality
been thinking about Mr. Slope.

"What is the next dean to have, twelve or fifteen?"

"Twelve," said the archdeacon authoritatively, thereby putting an end
at once to all doubt and dispute among his subordinates as far as
that subject was concerned.

"Well, I certainly thought it was fifteen," said the minor canon.

"Pooh!" said the burly chancellor.  At this moment the door opened
and in came Dr. Fillgrave.

"How is he?"  "Is he conscious?"  "Can he speak?"  "I hope not dead?" 
"No worse news, Doctor, I trust?"  "I hope, I trust, something
better, Doctor?" said half a dozen voices all at once, each in a tone
of extremest anxiety.  It was pleasant to see how popular the good
old dean was among his clergy.

"No change, gentlemen; not the slightest change.  But a telegraphic
message has arrived--Sir Omicron Pie will be here by the 9.15 P.M.
train.  If any man can do anything, Sir Omicron Pie will do it.  But
all that skill can do has been done."

"We are sure of that, Dr. Fillgrave," said the archdeacon; "we are
quite sure of that.  But yet you know--"

"Oh, quite right," said the doctor, "quite right--I should have done
just the same--I advised it at once.  I said to Rerechild at once
that with such a life and such a man, Sir Omicron should be
summoned--of course I knew expense was nothing--so distinguished, you
know, and so popular.  Nevertheless, all that human skill can do has
been done."

Just at this period Mrs. Grantly's carriage drove into the close, and
the archdeacon went down to confirm the news which she had heard
before.

By the 9.15 P.M. train Sir Omicron Pie did arrive.  And in the course
of the night a sort of consciousness returned to the poor old dean. 
Whether this was due to Sir Omicron Pie is a question on which it may
be well not to offer an opinion.  Dr. Fillgrave was very clear in his
own mind, but Sir Omicron himself is thought to have differed from
that learned doctor.  At any rate Sir Omicron expressed an opinion
that the dean had yet some days to live.

For the eight or ten next days, accordingly, the poor dean remained
in the same state, half-conscious and half-comatose, and the
attendant clergy began to think that no new appointment would be
necessary for some few months to come.



CHAPTER XXXII

A New Candidate for Ecclesiastical Honours


The dean's illness occasioned much mental turmoil in other places
besides the deanery and adjoining library, and the idea which
occurred to the meagre little prebendary about Mr. Slope did not
occur to him alone.

The bishop was sitting listlessly in his study when the news reached
him of the dean's illness.  It was brought to him by Mr. Slope, who
of course was not the last person in Barchester to hear it.  It was
also not slow in finding its way to Mrs. Proudie's ears.  It may be
presumed that there was not just then much friendly intercourse
between these two rival claimants for his lordship's obedience. 
Indeed, though living in the same house, they had not met since the
stormy interview between them in the bishop's study on the preceding
day.

On that occasion Mrs. Proudie had been defeated.  That the prestige
of continual victory should have been torn from her standards was a
subject of great sorrow to that militant lady, but, though defeated,
she was not overcome.  She felt that she might yet recover her lost
ground, that she might yet hurl Mr. Slope down to the dust from which
she had picked him and force her sinning lord to sue for pardon in
sackcloth and ashes.

On that memorable day, memorable for his mutiny and rebellion against
her high behests, he had carried his way with a high hand and had
really begun to think it possible that the days of his slavery were
counted.  He had begun to hope that he was now about to enter into a
free land, a land delicious with milk which he himself might quaff
and honey which would not tantalize him by being only honey to the
eye.  When Mrs. Proudie banged the door as she left his room, he felt
himself every inch a bishop.  To be sure, his spirit had been a
little cowed by his chaplain's subsequent lecture, but on the whole
he was highly pleased with himself, and he flattered himself that the
worst was over.  Ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute, he reflected,
and now that the first step had been so magnanimously taken, all the
rest would follow easily.

He met his wife as a matter of course at dinner, where little or
nothing was said that could ruffle the bishop's happiness.  His
daughters and the servants were present and protected him.

He made one or two trifling remarks on the subject of his projected
visit to the archbishop, in order to show to all concerned that he
intended to have his own way; the very servants, perceiving the
change, transferred a little of their reverence from their mistress
to their master.  All which the master perceived, and so also did the
mistress.  But Mrs. Proudie bided her time.

After dinner he returned to his study, where Mr. Slope soon found
him, and there they had tea together and planned many things.  For
some few minutes the bishop was really happy; but as the clock on the
chimney-piece warned him that the stilly hours of night were drawing
on, as he looked at his chamber candlestick and knew that he must use
it, his heart sank within him again.  He was as a ghost, all whose
power of wandering free through these upper regions ceases at cock-
crow; or, rather, he was the opposite of the ghost, for till cock-
crow he must again be a serf.  And would that be all?  Could he trust
himself to come down to breakfast a free man in the morning?

He was nearly an hour later than usual when he betook himself to his
rest.  Rest!  What rest?  However, he took a couple of glasses of
sherry and mounted the stairs.  Far be it from us to follow him
thither.  There are some things which no novelist, no historian,
should attempt; some few scenes in life's drama which even no poet
should dare to paint.  Let that which passed between Dr. Proudie and
his wife on this night be understood to be among them.

He came down the following morning a sad and thoughtful man.  He was
attenuated in appearance--one might almost say emaciated.  I doubt
whether his now grizzled locks had not palpably become more grey than
on the preceding evening.  At any rate he had aged materially.  Years
do not make a man old gradually and at an even pace.  Look through
the world and see if this is not so always, except in those rare
cases in which the human being lives and dies without joys and
without sorrows, like a vegetable.  A man shall be possessed of
florid, youthful blooming health till, it matters not what
age--thirty; forty; fifty--then comes some nipping frost, some period
of agony, that robs the fibres of the body of their succulence, and
the hale and hearty man is counted among the old.

He came down and breakfasted alone; Mrs. Proudie, being indisposed,
took her coffee in her bedroom, and her daughters waited upon her
there.  He ate his breakfast alone, and then, hardly knowing what he
did, he betook himself to his usual seat in his study.  He tried to
solace himself with his coming visit to the archbishop.  That effort
of his own free will at any rate remained to him as an enduring
triumph.  But somehow, now that he had achieved it, he did not seem
to care so much about it.  It was his ambition that had prompted him
to take his place at the archiepiscopal table, and his ambition was
now quite dead within him.

He was thus seated when Mr. Slope made his appearance, with
breathless impatience.

"My lord, the dean is dead."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed the bishop, startled out of his apathy by
an announcement so sad and so sudden.

"He is either dead or now dying.  He has had an apoplectic fit, and I
am told that there is not the slightest hope; indeed, I do not doubt
that by this time he is no more."

Bells were rung, and servants were immediately sent to inquire.  In
the course of the morning the bishop, leaning on his chaplains arm,
himself called at the deanery door.  Mrs. Proudie sent to Miss
Trefoil all manner of offers of assistance.  The Misses Proudie sent
also, and there was immense sympathy between the palace and the
deanery.  The answer to all inquiries was unvaried.  The dean was
just the same, and Sir Omicron Pie was expected down by the 9.15 P.M.
train.

And then Mr. Slope began to meditate, as others also had done, as to
who might possibly be the new dean, and it occurred to him, as it had
also occurred to others, that it might be possible that he should be
the new dean himself.  And then the question as to the twelve
hundred, or fifteen hundred, or two thousand ran in his mind, as it
had run through those of the other clergymen in the cathedral
library.

Whether it might be two thousand, or fifteen, or twelve hundred, it
would in any case undoubtedly be a great thing for him, if he could
get it.  The gratification to his ambition would be greater even than
that of his covetousness.  How glorious to out-top the archdeacon in
his own cathedral city; to sit above prebendaries and canons and have
the cathedral pulpit and all the cathedral services altogether at his
own disposal!

But it might be easier to wish for this than to obtain it.  Mr.
Slope, however, was not without some means of forwarding his views,
and he at any rate did not let the grass grow under his feet.  In the
first place, he thought--and not vainly--that he could count upon
what assistance the bishop could give him.  He immediately changed
his views with regard to his patron; he made up his mind that if he
became dean, he would hand his lordship back again to his wife's
vassalage; and he thought it possible that his lordship might not be
sorry to rid himself of one of his mentors.  Mr. Slope had also taken
some steps towards making his name known to other men in power. 
There was a certain chief-commissioner of national schools who at the
present moment was presumed to stand especially high in the good
graces of the government bigwigs, and with him Mr. Slope had
contrived to establish a sort of epistolary intimacy.  He thought
that he might safely apply to Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin, and he felt
sure that if Sir Nicholas chose to exert himself, the promise of such
a piece of preferment would be had for the asking.

Then he also had the press at his bidding, or flattered himself that
he had so.  The Daily Jupiter had taken his part in a very thorough
manner in those polemical contests of his with Mr. Arabin; he had on
more than one occasion absolutely had an interview with a gentleman
on the staff of that paper who, if not the editor, was as good as the
editor; and he had long been in the habit of writing telling letters
on all manner of ecclesiastical abuses, which he signed with his
initials, and sent to his editorial friend with private notes signed
in his own name.  Indeed, he and Mr. Towers--such was the name of the
powerful gentleman of the press with whom he was connected--were
generally very amiable with each other.  Mr. Slope's little
productions were always printed and occasionally commented upon, and
thus, in a small sort of way, he had become a literary celebrity. 
This public life had great charms for him, though it certainly also
had its drawbacks.  On one occasion, when speaking in the presence of
reporters, he had failed to uphold and praise and swear by that
special line of conduct which had been upheld and praised and sworn
by in The Jupiter, and then he had been much surprised and at the
moment not a little irritated to find himself lacerated most
unmercifully by his old ally.  He was quizzed and bespattered and
made a fool of, just as though, or rather worse than if, he had been
a constant enemy instead of a constant friend.  He had hitherto not
learnt that a man who aspires to be on the staff of The Jupiter must
surrender all individuality.  But ultimately this little castigation
had broken no bones between him and his friend Mr. Towers.  Mr. Slope
was one of those who understood the world too well to show himself
angry with such a potentate as The Jupiter.  He had kissed the rod
that scourged him and now thought that he might fairly look for his
reward.  He determined that he would at once let Mr. Towers know that
he was a candidate for the place which was about to become vacant. 
More than one piece of preferment had lately been given away much in
accordance with advice tendered to the government in the columns of
The Jupiter.

But it was incumbent on Mr. Slope first to secure the bishop.  He
specially felt that it behoved him to do this before the visit to the
archbishop was made.  It was really quite providential that the dean
should have fallen ill just at the very nick of time.  If Dr. Proudie
could be instigated to take the matter up warmly, he might manage a
good deal while staying at the archbishop's palace.  Feeling this
very strongly, Mr. Slope determined to sound the bishop that very
afternoon.  He was to start on the following morning to London, and
therefore not a moment could be lost with safety.

He went into the bishop's study about five o'clock and found him
still sitting alone.  It might have been supposed that he had hardly
moved since the little excitement occasioned by his walk to the
dean's door.  He still wore on his face that dull, dead look of half-
unconscious suffering.  He was doing nothing, reading nothing,
thinking of nothing, but simply gazing on vacancy when Mr. Slope for
the second time that day entered his room.

"Well, Slope," said he somewhat impatiently, for, to tell the truth,
he was not anxious just at present to have much conversation with Mr.
Slope.

"Your lordship will be sorry to hear that as yet the poor dean has
shown no sign of amendment."

"Oh--ah--hasn't he?  Poor man!  I'm sure I'm very sorry.  I suppose
Sir Omicron has not arrived yet?"

"No, not till the 9.15 P.M. train."

"I wonder they didn't have a special.  They say Dr. Trefoil is very
rich."

"Very rich, I believe," said Mr. Slope.  "But the truth is, all the
doctors in London can do no good--no other good than to show that
every possible care has been taken.  Poor Dr. Trefoil is not long for
this world, my lord."

"I suppose not--I suppose not."

"Oh, no; indeed, his best friends could not wish that he should
outlive such a shock, for his intellects cannot possibly survive it."

"Poor man!  Poor man!" said the bishop.

"It will naturally be a matter of much moment to your lordship who is
to succeed him," said Mr. Slope.  "It would be a great thing if you
could secure the appointment for some person of your own way of
thinking on important points.  The party hostile to us are very
strong here in Barchester--much too strong."

"Yes, yes.  If poor Dr. Trefoil is to go, it will be a great thing to
get a good man in his place."

"It will be everything to your lordship to get a man on whose co-
operation you can reckon.  Only think what trouble we might have if
Dr. Grantly, or Dr. Hyandry, or any of that way of thinking were to
get it."

"It is not very probable that Lord ---- will give it to any of that
school; why should he?"

"No.  Not probable; certainly not; but it's possible.  Great interest
will probably be made.  If I might venture to advise your lordship, I
would suggest that you should discuss the matter with his grace next
week.  I have no doubt that your wishes, if made known and backed by
his grace, would be paramount with Lord ----."

"Well, I don't know that; Lord ---- has always been very kind to me,
very kind.  But I am unwilling to interfere in such matters unless
asked.  And indeed if asked, I don't know whom, at this moment, I
should recommend."

Mr. Slope, even Mr. Slope, felt at the present rather abashed.  He
hardly knew how to frame his little request in language sufficiently
modest.  He had recognized and acknowledged to himself the necessity
of shocking the bishop in the first instance by the temerity of his
application, and his difficulty was how best to remedy that by his
adroitness and eloquence.  "I doubted myself," said he, "whether your
lordship would have anyone immediately in your eye, and it is on this
account that I venture to submit to you an idea that I have been
turning over in my own mind.  If poor Dr. Trefoil must go, I really
do not see why, with your lordship's assistance, I should not hold
the preferment myself."

"You!" exclaimed the bishop in a manner that Mr. Slope could hardly
have considered complimentary.

The ice was now broken, and Mr. Slope became fluent enough.  "I have
been thinking of looking for it.  If your lordship will press the
matter on the archbishop, I do not doubt but I shall succeed.  You
see I shall be the first to move, which is a great matter.  Then I
can count upon assistance from the public press: my name is known, I
may say, somewhat favourably known, to that portion of the press
which is now most influential with the government; and I have friends
also in the government.  But nevertheless it is to you, my lord, that
I look for assistance.  It is from your hands that I would most
willingly receive the benefit.  And, which should ever be the chief
consideration in such matters, you must know better than any other
person whatsoever what qualifications I possess."

The bishop sat for awhile dumbfounded.  Mr. Slope Dean of Barchester! 
The idea of such a transformation of character would never have
occurred to his own unaided intellect.  At first he went on thinking
why, for what reasons, on what account, Mr. Slope should be Dean of
Barchester.  But by degrees the direction of his thoughts changed,
and he began to think why, for what reasons, on what account, Mr.
Slope should not be Dean of Barchester.  As far as he himself, the
bishop, was concerned, he could well spare the services of his
chaplain.  That little idea of using Mr. Slope as a counterpoise to
his wife had well nigh evaporated.  He had all but acknowledged the
futility of the scheme.  If indeed he could have slept in his
chaplain's bedroom instead of his wife's, there might have been
something in it.  But--.  And thus as Mr. Slope was speaking, the
bishop began to recognize the idea that that gentleman might become
Dean of Barchester without impropriety--not moved, indeed, by Mr.
Slope's eloquence, for he did not follow the tenor of his speech, but
led thereto by his own cogitations.

"I need not say," continued Mr. Slope, "that it would be my chief
desire to act in all matters connected with the cathedral as far as
possible in accordance with your views.  I know your lordship so well
(and I hope you know me well enough to have the same feelings) that I
am satisfied that my being in that position would add materially to
your own comfort and enable you to extend the sphere of your useful
influence.  As I said before, it is most desirable that there should
be but one opinion among the dignitaries of the same diocese.  I
doubt much whether I would accept such an appointment in any diocese
in which I should be constrained to differ much from the bishop.  In
this case there would be a delightful uniformity of opinion."

Mr. Slope perfectly well perceived that the bishop did not follow a
word that he said, but nevertheless he went on talking.  He knew it
was necessary that Dr. Proudie should recover from his surprise, and
he knew also that he must give him the opportunity of appearing to
have been persuaded by argument.  So he went on and produced a
multitude of fitting reasons all tending to show that no one on earth
could make so good a Dean of Barchester as himself, that the
government and the public would assuredly coincide in desiring that
he, Mr. Slope, should be Dean of Barchester, but that for high
considerations of ecclesiastical polity it would be especially
desirable that this piece of preferment should be so bestowed through
the instrumentality of the bishop of the diocese.

"But I really don't know what I could do in the matter," said the
bishop.

"If you would mention it to the archbishop; if you could tell his
grace that you consider such an appointment very desirable, that you
have it much at heart with a view to putting an end to schism in the
diocese; if you did this with your usual energy, you would probably
find no difficulty in inducing his grace to promise that he would
mention it to Lord ----.  Of course you would let the archbishop know
that I am not looking for the preferment solely through his
intervention; that you do not exactly require him to ask it as a
favour; that you expect that I shall get it through other sources, as
is indeed the case; but that you are very anxious that his grace
should express his approval of such an arrangement to Lord ----."

It ended in the bishop promising to do as he was bid.  Not that he so
promised without a stipulation.  "About that hospital," he said in
the middle of the conference.  "I was never so troubled in my life"--
which was about the truth.  "You haven't spoken to Mr. Harding since
I saw you?"

Mr. Slope assured his patron that he had not.

"Ah well, then--I think upon the whole it will be better to let
Quiverful have it.  It has been half-promised to him, and he has a
large family and is very poor.  I think on the whole it will be
better to make out the nomination for Mr. Quiverful."

"But, my lord," said Mr. Slope, still thinking that he was bound to
make a fight for his own view on this matter and remembering that it
still behoved him to maintain his lately acquired supremacy over Mrs.
Proudie, lest he should fail in his views regarding the deanery,
"but, my lord, I am really much afraid--"

"Remember, Mr. Slope," said the bishop, "I can hold out no sort of
hope to you in this matter of succeeding poor Dr. Trefoil.  I will
certainly speak to the archbishop, as you wish it, but I cannot
think--"

"Well, my lord," said Mr. Slope, fully understanding the bishop and
in his turn interrupting him, "perhaps your lordship is right about
Mr. Quiverful.  I have no doubt I can easily arrange matters with Mr.
Harding, and I will make out the nomination for your signature as you
direct."

"Yes, Slope, I think that will be best; and you may be sure that any
little that I can do to forward your views shall be done."

And so they parted.

Mr. Slope had now much business on his hands.  He had to make his
daily visit to the signora.  This common prudence should have now
induced him to omit, but he was infatuated, and could not bring
himself to be commonly prudent.  He determined therefore that he
would drink tea at the Stanhopes', and he determined also, or thought
that he determined, that having done so he would go thither no more. 
He had also to arrange his matters with Mrs. Bold.  He was of opinion
that Eleanor would grace the deanery as perfectly as she would the
chaplain's cottage, and he thought, moreover, that Eleanor's fortune
would excellently repair any dilapidations and curtailments in the
dean's stipend which might have been made by that ruthless
ecclesiastical commission.

Touching Mrs. Bold his hopes now soared high.  Mr. Slope was one of
that numerous multitude of swains who think that all is fair in love,
and he had accordingly not refrained from using the services of Mrs.
Bold's own maid.  From her he had learnt much of what had taken place
at Plumstead--not exactly with truth, for "the own maid" had not been
able to divine the exact truth, but with some sort of similitude to
it.  He had been told that the archdeacon and Mrs. Grantly and Mr.
Harding and Mr. Arabin had all quarrelled with "missus" for having
received a letter from Mr. Slope; that "missus" had positively
refused to give the letter up; that she had received from the
archdeacon the option of giving up either Mr. Slope and his letter,
or else the society of Plumstead Rectory; and that "missus" had
declared, with much indignation, that "she didn't care a straw for
the society of Plumstead Rectory" and that she wouldn't give up Mr.
Slope for any of them.

Considering the source from whence this came, it was not quite so
untrue as might have been expected.  It showed pretty plainly what
had been the nature of the conversation in the servants' hall, and,
coupled as it was with the certainty of Eleanor's sudden return, it
appeared to Mr. Slope to be so far worthy of credit as to justify him
in thinking that the fair widow would in all human probability accept
his offer.

All this work was therefore to be done.  It was desirable, he
thought, that he should make his offer before it was known that
Mr. Quiverful was finally appointed to the hospital.  In his letter
to Eleanor he had plainly declared that Mr. Harding was to have the
appointment.  It would be very difficult to explain this away, and
were he to write another letter to Eleanor, telling the truth and
throwing the blame on the bishop, it would naturally injure him in
her estimation.  He determined therefore to let that matter disclose
itself as it would and to lose no time in throwing himself at her
feet.

Then he had to solicit the assistance of Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin and
Mr. Towers, and he went directly from the bishop's presence to
compose his letters to those gentlemen.  As Mr. Slope was esteemed an
adept at letter writing, they shall be given in full.

Private           Palace, Barchester, Sept. 185-

MY DEAR SIR NICHOLAS,

I hope that the intercourse which has been between us will preclude
you from regarding my present application as an intrusion.  You
cannot, I imagine, have yet heard that poor old Dr. Trefoil has been
seized with apoplexy.  It is a subject of profound grief to everyone
in Barchester, for he has always been an excellent man--excellent as
a man and as a clergyman.  He is, however, full of years, and his
life could not under any circumstances have been much longer spared. 
You may probably have known him.

There is, it appears, no probable chance of his recovery.  Sir
Omicron Pie is, I believe, at present with him.  At any rate the
medical men here have declared that one or two days more must limit
the tether of his mortal coil.  I sincerely trust that his soul may
wing its flight to that haven where it may forever be at rest and
forever be happy.

The bishop has been speaking to me about the preferment, and he is
anxious that it should be conferred on me.  I confess that I can
hardly venture, at my age, to look for such advancement, but I am so
far encouraged by his lordship that I believe I shall be induced to
do so.  His lordship goes to ---- to-morrow and is intent on
mentioning the subject to the archbishop.

I know well how deservedly great is your weight with the present
government.  In any matter touching church preferment you would of
course be listened to.  Now that the matter has been put into my
head, I am of course anxious to be successful.  If you can assist me
by your good word, you will confer on me one additional favour.

I had better add, that Lord ---- cannot as yet know of this piece of
preferment having fallen in, or rather of its certainty of falling
(for poor dear Dr. Trefoil is past hope).  Should Lord ---- first
hear it from you, that might probably be thought to give you a fair
claim to express your opinion.

Of course our grand object is that we should all be of one opinion in
church matters.  This is most desirable at Barchester; it is this
that makes our good bishop so anxious about it.  You may probably
think it expedient to point this out to Lord ---- if it shall be in
your power to oblige me by mentioning the subject to his lordship.

Believe me,
My dear Sir Nicholas,
Your most faithful servant,
OBADIAH SLOPE

His letter to Mr. Towers was written in quite a different strain. 
Mr. Slope conceived that he completely understood the difference in
character and position of the two men whom he addressed.  He knew
that for such a man as Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin a little flummery was
necessary, and that it might be of the easy, everyday description. 
Accordingly his letter to Sir Nicholas was written, currente calamo,
with very little trouble.  But to such a man as Mr. Towers it was not
so easy to write a letter that should be effective and yet not
offensive, that should carry its point without undue interference. 
It was not difficult to flatter Dr. Proudie or Sir Nicholas
Fitzwhiggin, but very difficult to flatter Mr. Towers without letting
the flattery declare itself.  This, however, had to be done. 
Moreover, this letter must, in appearance at least, be written
without effort and be fluent, unconstrained, and demonstrative of no
doubt or fear on the part of the writer.  Therefore the epistle to
Mr, Towers was studied, and re-copied, and elaborated at the cost of
so many minutes that Mr. Slope had hardly time to dress himself and
reach Dr. Stanhope's that evening.

When dispatched, it ran as follows:

(Private.)             Barchester.  Sept. 185-

(He purposely omitted any allusion to the "palace," thinking that Mr.
Towers might not like it.  A great man, he remembered, had been once
much condemned for dating a letter from Windsor Castle.)

MY DEAR SIR,

We were all a good deal shocked here this morning by hearing that
poor old Dean Trefoil had been stricken with apoplexy.  The fit took
him about 9 A.M.  I am writing now to save the post, and he is still
alive but past all hope or possibility, I believe, of living.  Sir
Omicron Pie is here, or will be very shortly, but all that even Sir
Omicron can do is to ratify the sentence of his less distinguished
brethren that nothing can be done.  Poor Dr. Trefoil's race on this
side the grave is run.  I do not know whether you knew him.  He was a
good, quiet, charitable man, of the old school, of course, as any
clergyman over seventy years of age must necessarily be.

But I do not write merely with the object of sending you such news as
this: doubtless someone of your Mercuries will have seen and heard
and reported so much; I write, as you usually do yourself, rather
with a view to the future than to the past.

Rumour is already rife here as to Dr. Trefoil's successor, and among
those named as possible future deans your humble servant is, I
believe, not the least frequently spoken of; in short, I am looking
for the preferment.  You may probably know that since Bishop Proudie
came to the diocese I have exerted myself here a good deal and, I may
certainly say, not without some success.  He and I are nearly always
of the same opinion on points of doctrine as well as church
discipline, and therefore I have had, as his confidential chaplain,
very much in my own hands; but I confess to you that I have a higher
ambition than to remain the chaplain of any bishop.

There are no positions in which more energy is now needed than those
of our deans.  The whole of our enormous ca