thedral establishments
have been allowed to go to sleep--nay, they are all but dead and
ready for the sepulchre!  And yet of what prodigious moment they
might be made if, as was intended, they were so managed as to lead
the way and show an example for all our parochial clergy!

The bishop here is most anxious for my success; indeed, he goes
to-morrow to press the matter on the archbishop.  I believe also I
may count on the support of at least one most effective member of the
government.  But I confess that the support of The Jupiter, if I be
thought worthy of it, would be more gratifying to me than any other;
more gratifying if by it I should be successful, and more gratifying
also if, although so supported, I should be unsuccessful.

The time has, in fact, come in which no government can venture to
fill up the high places of the Church in defiance of the public
press.  The age of honourable bishops and noble deans has gone by,
and any clergyman however humbly born can now hope for success if his
industry, talent, and character be sufficient to call forth the
manifest opinion of the public in his favour.

At the present moment we all feel that any counsel given in such
matters by The Jupiter has the greatest weight--is, indeed, generally
followed; and we feel also--I am speaking of clergymen of my own age
and standing--that it should be so.  There can be no patron less
interested than The Jupiter, and none that more thoroughly
understands the wants of the people.

I am sure you will not suspect me of asking from you any support
which the paper with which you are connected cannot conscientiously
give me.  My object in writing is to let you know that I am a
candidate for the appointment.  It is for you to judge whether or no
you can assist my views.  I should not, of course, have written to
you on such a matter had I not believed (and I have had good reason
so to believe) that The Jupiter approves of my views on
ecclesiastical polity.

The bishop expresses a fear that I may be considered too young for
such a station, my age being thirty-six.  I cannot think that at the
present day any hesitation need be felt on such a point.  The public
has lost its love for antiquated servants.  If a man will ever be fit
to do good work, he will be fit at thirty-six years of age.

Believe me very faithfully yours,
OBADIAH SLOPE

T.  TOWERS, ESQ.,
---- Court,
Middle Temple

Having thus exerted himself, Mr. Slope posted his letters and passed
the remainder of the evening at the feet of his mistress.

Mr. Slope will be accused of deceit in his mode of canvassing.  It
will be said that he lied in the application he made to each of his
three patrons.  I believe it must be owned that he did so.  He could
not hesitate on account of his youth and yet be quite assured that he
was not too young.  He could not count chiefly on the bishop's
support and chiefly also on that of the newspaper.  He did not think
that the bishop was going to ---- to press the matter on the
archbishop.  It must be owned that in his canvassing Mr. Slope was as
false as he well could be.

Let it, however, be asked of those who are conversant with such
matters, whether he was more false than men usually are on such
occasions.  We English gentlemen hate the name of a lie, but how
often do we find public men who believe each other's words?



CHAPTER XXXIII

Mrs. Proudie Victrix


The next week passed over at Barchester with much apparent
tranquillity.  The hearts, however, of some of the inhabitants were
not so tranquil as the streets of the city.  The poor old dean still
continued to live, just as Sir Omicron Pie had prophesied that he
would do, much to the amazement, and some thought disgust, of Dr.
Fillgrave.  The bishop still remained away.  He had stayed a day or
two in town and had also remained longer at the archbishop's than he
had intended.  Mr. Slope had as yet received no line in answer to
either of his letters, but he had learnt the cause of this.  Sir
Nicholas was stalking a deer, or attending the Queen, in the
Highlands, and even the indefatigable Mr. Towers had stolen an autumn
holiday and had made one of the yearly tribe who now ascend Mont
Blanc.  Mr. Slope learnt that he was not expected back till the last
day of September.

Mrs. Bold was thrown much with the Stanhopes, of whom she became
fonder and fonder.  If asked, she would have said that Charlotte
Stanhope was her especial friend, and so she would have thought. 
But, to tell the truth, she liked Bertie nearly as well; she had no
more idea of regarding him as a lover than she would have had of
looking at a big tame dog in such a light.  Bertie had become very
intimate with her, and made little speeches to her, and said little
things of a sort very different from the speeches and sayings of
other men.  But then this was almost always done before his sisters,
and he, with his long silken beard, his light blue eyes, and strange
dress, was so unlike other men.  She admitted him to a kind of
familiarity which she had never known with anyone else and of which
she by no means understood the danger.  She blushed once at finding
that she had called him Bertie and, on the same day, only barely
remembered her position in time to check herself from playing upon
him some personal practical joke to which she was instigated by
Charlotte.

In all this Eleanor was perfectly innocent, and Bertie Stanhope could
hardly be called guilty.  But every familiarity into which Eleanor
was entrapped was deliberately planned by his sister.  She knew well
how to play her game and played it without mercy; she knew, none so
well, what was her brother's character, and she would have handed
over to him the young widow, and the young widow's money, and the
money of the widow's child, without remorse.  With her pretended
friendship and warm cordiality, she strove to connect Eleanor so
closely with her brother as to make it impossible that she should go
back even if she wished it.  But Charlotte Stanhope knew really
nothing of Eleanor's character, did not even understand that there
were such characters.  She did not comprehend that a young and pretty
woman could be playful and familiar with a man such as Bertie
Stanhope and yet have no idea in her head, no feeling in her heart,
that she would have been ashamed to own to all the world.  Charlotte
Stanhope did not in the least conceive that her new friend was a
woman whom nothing could entrap into an inconsiderate marriage, whose
mind would have revolted from the slightest impropriety had she been
aware that any impropriety existed.

Miss Stanhope, however, had tact enough to make herself and her
father's house very agreeable to Mrs. Bold.  There was with them all
an absence of stiffness and formality which was peculiarly agreeable
to Eleanor after the great dose of clerical arrogance which she had
lately been constrained to take.  She played chess with them, walked
with them, and drank tea with them; studied or pretended to study
astronomy; assisted them in writing stories in rhyme, in turning
prose tragedy into comic verse, or comic stories into would-be tragic
poetry.  She had no idea before that she had any such talents.  She
had not conceived the possibility of her doing such things as she now
did.  She found with the Stanhopes new amusements and employments,
new pursuits, which in themselves could not be wrong and which were
exceedingly alluring.

Is it not a pity that people who are bright and clever should so
often be exceedingly improper, and that those who are never improper
should so often be dull and heavy?  Now Charlotte Stanhope was always
bright and never heavy, but then her propriety was doubtful.

But during all this time Eleanor by no means forgot Mr. Arabin, nor
did she forget Mr. Slope.  She had parted from Mr. Arabin in her
anger.  She was still angry at what she regarded as his impertinent
interference, but nevertheless she looked forward to meeting him
again and also looked forward to forgiving him.  The words that Mr.
Arabin had uttered still sounded in her ears.  She knew that if not
intended for a declaration of love, they did signify that he loved
her, and she felt also that if he ever did make such a declaration,
it might be that she should not receive it unkindly.  She was still
angry with him, very angry with him; so angry that she would bite her
lip and stamp her foot as she thought of what he had said and done. 
Nevertheless, she yearned to let him know that he was forgiven; all
that she required was that he should own that he had sinned.

She was to meet him at Ullathorne on the last day of the present
month.  Miss Thorne had invited all the country round to a breakfast
on the lawn.  There were to be tents, and archery, and dancing for
the ladies on the lawn and for the swains and girls in the paddock. 
There were to be fiddlers and fifers, races for the boys, poles to be
climbed, ditches full of water to be jumped over, horse-collars to be
grinned through (this latter amusement was an addition of the
stewards, and not arranged by Miss Thorne in the original programme),
and every game to be played which, in a long course of reading, Miss
Thorne could ascertain to have been played in the good days of Queen
Elizabeth.  Everything of more modern growth was to be tabooed, if
possible.  On one subject Miss Thorne was very unhappy.  She had been
turning in her mind the matter of a bull-ring, but could not succeed
in making anything of it.  She would not for the world have done, or
allowed to be done, anything that was cruel; as to the promoting the
torture of a bull for the amusement of her young neighbours, it need
hardly be said that Miss Thorne would be the last to think of it. 
And yet there was something so charming in the name.  A bull-ring,
however, without a bull would only be a memento of the decadence of
the times, and she felt herself constrained to abandon the idea. 
Quintains, however, she was determined to have, and had poles and
swivels and bags of flour prepared accordingly.  She would no doubt
have been anxious for something small in the way of a tournament,
but, as she said to her brother, that had been tried, and the age had
proved itself too decidedly inferior to its forerunners to admit of
such a pastime.  Mr. Thorne did not seem to participate much in her
regret, feeling perhaps that a full suit of chain-armour would have
added but little to his own personal comfort.

This party at Ullathorne had been planned in the first place as a
sort of welcoming to Mr. Arabin on his entrance into St. Ewold's
parsonage; an intended harvest-home gala for the labourers and their
wives and children had subsequently been amalgamated with it, and
thus it had grown to its present dimensions.  All the Plumstead party
had of course been asked, and at the time of the invitation Eleanor
had intended to have gone with her sister.  Now her plans were
altered, and she was going with the Stanhopes.  The Proudies were 
also to be there, and, as Mr. Slope had not been included in the
invitation to the palace, the signora, whose impudence never deserted
her, asked permission of Miss Thorne to bring him.

This permission Miss Thorne gave, having no other alternative, but
she did so with a trembling heart, fearing Mr. Arabin would be
offended.  Immediately on his return she apologized, almost with
tears, so dire an enmity was presumed to rage between the two
gentlemen.  But Mr. Arabin comforted her by an assurance that he
should meet Mr. Slope with the greatest pleasure imaginable and made
her promise that she would introduce them to each other.

But this triumph of Mr. Slope's was not so agreeable to Eleanor, who
since her return to Barchester had done her best to avoid him.  She
would not give way to the Plumstead folk when they so ungenerously
accused her of being in love with this odious man, but, nevertheless,
knowing that she was so accused, she was fully alive to the
expediency of keeping out of his way and dropping him by degrees. 
She had seen very little of him since her return.  Her servant had
been instructed to say to all visitors that she was out.  She could
not bring herself to specify Mr. Slope particularly, and in order to
avoid him she had thus debarred herself from all her friends.  She
had excepted Charlotte Stanhope and, by degrees, a few others also. 
Once she had met him at the Stanhopes', but as a rule, Mr. Slope's
visits there were made in the morning and hers in the evening.  On
that one occasion Charlotte had managed to preserve her from any
annoyance.  This was very good-natured on the part of Charlotte, as
Eleanor thought, and also very sharp-witted, as Eleanor had told her
friend nothing of her reasons for wishing to avoid that gentleman. 
The fact, however, was that Charlotte had learnt from her sister that
Mr. Slope would probably put himself forward as a suitor for the
widow's hand, and she was consequently sufficiently alive to the
expediency of guarding Bertie's future wife from any danger in that
quarter.

Nevertheless the Stanhopes were pledged to take Mr. Slope with them
to Ullathorne.  An arrangement was therefore necessarily made, which
was very disagreeable to Eleanor.  Dr. Stanhope, with herself,
Charlotte, and Mr. Slope, were to go together, and Bertie was to
follow with his sister Madeline.  It was clearly visible by Eleanor's
face that this assortment was very disagreeable to her, and
Charlotte, who was much encouraged thereby in her own little plan,
made a thousand apologies.

"I see you don't like it, my dear," said she, "but we could not
manage otherwise.  Bertie would give his eyes to go with you, but
Madeline cannot possibly go without him.  Nor could we possibly put
Mr. Slope and Madeline in the same carriage without anyone else. 
They'd both be ruined forever, you know, and not admitted inside
Ullathorne gates, I should imagine, after such an impropriety."

"Of course that wouldn't do," said Eleanor, "but couldn't I go in the
carriage with the signora and your brother?"

"Impossible!" said Charlotte.  "When she is there, there is only room
for two." The Signora, in truth, did not care to do her travelling in
the presence of strangers.

"Well, then," said Eleanor, "you are all so kind, Charlotte, and so
good to me that I am sure you won't be offended, but I think I'll not
go at all."

"Not go at all!--what nonsense!--indeed you shall."  It had been
absolutely determined in family counsel that Bertie should propose on
that very occasion.

"Or I can take a fly," said Eleanor.  "You know I am not embarrassed
by so many difficulties as you young ladies; I can go alone."

"Nonsense, my dear! Don't think of such a thing; after all, it is
only for an hour or so; and, to tell the truth, I don't know what it
is you dislike so.  I thought you and Mr. Slope were great friends. 
What is it you dislike?"

"Oh, nothing particular," said Eleanor; "only I thought it would be a
family party."

"Of course it would be much nicer, much more snug, if Bertie could go
with us.  It is he that is badly treated.  I can assure you he is
much more afraid of Mr. Slope than you are.  But you see Madeline
cannot go out without him--and she, poor creature, goes out so
seldom!  I am sure you don't begrudge her this, though her vagary
does knock about our own party a little."

Of course Eleanor made a thousand protestations and uttered a
thousand hopes that Madeline would enjoy herself.  And of course she
had to give way and undertake to go in the carriage with Mr. Slope. 
In fact, she was driven either to do this or to explain why she would
not do so.  Now she could not bring herself to explain to Charlotte
Stanhope all that had passed at Plumstead.

But it was to her a sore necessity.  She thought of a thousand little
schemes for avoiding it; she would plead illness and not go at all;
she would persuade Mary Bold to go, although not asked, and then make
a necessity of having a carriage of her own to take her sister-in-
law; anything, in fact, she could do, rather than be seen by Mr.
Arabin getting out of the same carriage with Mr. Slope.  However,
when the momentous morning came, she had no scheme matured, and then
Mr. Slope handed her into Dr. Stanhope's carriage and, following her
steps, sat opposite to her.

The bishop returned on the eve of the Ullathorne party, and was
received at home with radiant smiles by the partner of all his cares. 
On his arrival he crept up to his dressing-room with somewhat of a
palpitating heart; he had overstayed his alloted time by three days,
and was not without much fear of penalties.  Nothing, however, could
be more affectionately cordial than the greeting he received; the
girls came out and kissed him in a manner that was quite soothing to
his spirit; and Mrs. Proudie, "albeit, unused to the melting mood,"
squeezed him in her arms and almost in words called him her dear,
darling, good, pet, little bishop.  All this was a very pleasant
surprise.

Mrs. Proudie had somewhat changed her tactics; not that she had seen
any cause to disapprove of her former line of conduct, but she had
now brought matters to such a point that she calculated that she
might safely do so.  She had got the better of Mr. Slope, and she now
thought well to show her husband that when allowed to get the better
of everybody, when obeyed by him and permitted to rule over others,
she would take care that he should have his reward.  Mr. Slope had
not a chance against her; not only could she stun the poor bishop by
her midnight anger, but she could assuage and soothe him, if she so
willed, by daily indulgences.  She could furnish his room for him,
turn him out as smart a bishop as any on the bench, give him good
dinners, warm fires, and an easy life--all this she would do if he
would but be quietly obedient.  But, if not,--!  To speak sooth,
however, his sufferings on that dreadful night had been so poignant
as to leave him little spirit for further rebellion.

As soon as he had dressed himself, she returned to his room.  "I hope
you enjoyed yourself at ----," said she, seating herself on one side
of the fire while he remained in his armchair on the other, stroking
the calves of his legs.  It was the first time he had had a fire in
his room since the summer, and it pleased him, for the good bishop
loved to be warm and cosy.  Yes, he said, he had enjoyed himself very
much.  Nothing could be more polite than the archbishop, and Mrs.
Archbishop had been equally charming.

Mrs. Proudie was delighted to hear it; nothing, she declared, pleased
her so much as to think

Her bairn respectit like the lave.

She did not put it precisely in these words, but what she said came
to the same thing; and then, having petted and fondled her little man
sufficiently, she proceeded to business.

"The poor dean is still alive," said she.

"So I hear, so I hear," said the bishop.  "I'll go to the deanery
directly after breakfast to-morrow."

"We are going to this party at Ullathorne tomorrow morning, my dear;
we must be there early, you know--by twelve o'clock I suppose."

"Oh--ah!" said the bishop; "then I'll certainly call the next day."

"Was much said about it at ----?" asked Mrs. Proudie.

"About what?" said the bishop.

"Filling up the dean's place," said Mrs. Proudie.  As she spoke, a
spark of the wonted fire returned to her eye, and the bishop felt
himself to be a little less comfortable than before.

"Filling up the dean's place; that is, if the dean dies?  Very
little, my dear.  It was mentioned, just mentioned."

"And what did you say about it, Bishop?"

"Why, I said that I thought that if, that is, should--should the dean
die, that is, I said I thought--"  As he went on stammering and
floundering, he saw that his wife's eye was fixed sternly on him. 
Why should he encounter such evil for a man whom he loved so slightly
as Mr. Slope?  Why should he give up his enjoyments and his ease and
such dignity as might be allowed to him to fight a losing battle for
a chaplain?  The chaplain, after all, if successful, would be as
great a tyrant as his wife.  Why fight at all?  Why contend?  Why be
uneasy?  From that moment he determined to fling Mr. Slope to the
winds and take the goods the gods provided.

"I am told," said Mrs. Proudie, speaking very slowly, "that Mr. Slope
is looking to be the new dean."

"Yes--certainly, I believe he is," said the bishop.

"And what does the archbishop say about that?" asked Mrs. Proudie.

"Well, my dear, to tell the truth, I promised Mr. Slope to speak to
the archbishop.  Mr. Slope spoke to me about it.  It is very arrogant
of him, I must say--but that is nothing to me."

"Arrogant!" said Mrs. Proudie; "it is the most impudent piece of
pretension I ever heard of in my life.  Mr. Slope Dean of Barchester,
indeed!  And what did you do in the matter, Bishop?"

"Why, my dear, I did speak to the archbishop."

"You don't mean to tell me," said Mrs. Proudie, "that you are going
to make yourself ridiculous by lending your name to such a
preposterous attempt as this?  Mr. Slope Dean of Barchester, indeed!" 
And she tossed her head and put her arms akimbo with an air of
confident defiance that made her husband quite sure that Mr. Slope
never would be Dean of Barchester.  In truth, Mrs. Proudie was all
but invincible; had she married Petruchio, it may be doubted whether
that arch wife-tamer would have been able to keep her legs out of
those garments which are presumed by men to be peculiarly unfitted
for feminine use.

"It is preposterous, my dear."

"Then why have you endeavoured to assist him?"

"Why--my dear, I haven't assisted him--much."

"But why have you done it at all?  Why have you mixed your name up in
anything so ridiculous?  What was it you did say to the archbishop?"

"Why, I just did mention it; I just did say that--that in the event
of the poor dean's death, Mr. Slope would--would--"

"Would what?"

"I forget how I put it--would take it if he could get it, something
of that sort.  I didn't say much more than that."

"You shouldn't have said anything at all.  And what did the
archbishop say?"

"He didn't say anything; he just bowed and rubbed his hands. 
Somebody else came up at the moment, and as we were discussing the
new parochial universal school committee, the matter of the new dean
dropped; after that I didn't think it wise to renew it."

"Renew it!  I am very sorry you ever mentioned it.  What will the
archbishop think of you?"

"You may be sure, my dear, the archbishop thought very little about
it."

"But why did you think about it, Bishop?  How could you think of
making such a creature as that Dean of Barchester?  Dean of
Barchester!  I suppose he'll be looking for a bishopric some of these
days--a man that hardly knows who his own father was; a man that I
found without bread to his mouth or a coat to his back.  Dean of
Barchester, indeed!  I'll dean him."

Mrs. Proudie considered herself to be in politics a pure Whig; all
her family belonged to the Whig party.  Now, among all ranks of
Englishmen and Englishwomen (Mrs. Proudie should, I think, be ranked
among the former on the score of her great strength of mind), no one
is so hostile to lowly born pretenders to high station as the pure
Whig.

The bishop thought it necessary to exculpate himself.  "Why, my
dear," said he, "it appeared to me that you and Mr. Slope did not get
on quite so well as you used to do!"

"Get on!" said Mrs. Proudie, moving her foot uneasily on the hearth-
rug and compressing her lips in a manner that betokened much danger
to the subject of their discourse.

"I began to find that he was objectionable to you"--Mrs. Proudie's
foot worked on the hearth-rug with great rapidity--"and that you
would be more comfortable if he was out of the palace"--Mrs. Proudie
smiled, as a hyena may probably smile before he begins his laugh--
"and therefore I thought that if he got this place, and so ceased to
be my chaplain, you might be pleased at such an arrangement."

And then the hyena laughed out.  Pleased at such an arrangement! 
Pleased at having her enemy converted into a dean with twelve hundred 
a year!  Medea, when she describes the customs of her native country
(I am quoting from Robson's edition), assures her astonished auditor
that in her land captives, when taken, are eaten.

"You pardon them?" says Medea.

"We do indeed," says the mild Grecian.

"We eat them!" says she of Colchis, with terrific energy.

Mrs. Proudie was the Medea of Barchester; she had no idea of not
eating Mr. Slope.  Pardon him!  Merely get rid of him!  Make a dean
of him!  It was not so they did with their captives in her country,
among people of her sort!  Mr. Slope had no such mercy to expect; she
would pick him to the very last bone.

"Oh, yes, my dear, of course he'll cease to be your chaplain," said
she.  "After what has passed, that must be a matter of course.  I
couldn't for a moment think of living in the same house with such a
man.  Besides, he has shown himself quite unfit for such a situation;
making broils and quarrels among the clergy; getting you, my dear,
into scrapes; and taking upon himself as though he were as good as
bishop himself.  Of course he'll go.  But because he leaves the
palace, that is no reason why he should get into the deanery."

"Oh, of course not!" said the bishop; "but to save appearances, you
know, my dear--"

"I don't want to save appearances; I want Mr. Slope to appear just
what he is--a false, designing, mean, intriguing man.  I have my eye
on him; he little knows what I see.  He is misconducting himself in
the most disgraceful way with that lame Italian woman.  That family
is a disgrace to Barchester, and Mr. Slope is a disgrace to
Barchester.  If he doesn't look well to it, he'll have his gown
stripped off his back instead of having a dean's hat on his head. 
Dean, indeed!  The man has gone mad with arrogance."

The bishop said nothing further to excuse either himself or his
chaplain, and having shown himself passive and docile, was again
taken into favour.  They soon went to dinner, and he spent the
pleasantest evening he had had in his own house for a long time.  His
daughter played and sang to him as he sipped his coffee and read his
newspaper, and Mrs. Proudie asked good-natured little questions about
the archbishop; and then he went happily to bed and slept as quietly
as though Mrs. Proudie had been Griselda herself.  While shaving
himself in the morning and preparing for the festivities of
Ullathorne, he fully resolved to run no more tilts against a warrior
so fully armed at all points as was Mrs. Proudie.



CHAPTER XXXIV

Oxford--The Master and Tutor of Lazarus


Mr. Arabin, as we have said, had but a sad walk of it under the trees
of Plumstead churchyard.  He did not appear to any of the family till
dinner-time, and then he seemed, as far as their judgement went, to
be quite himself.  He had, as was his wont, asked himself a great
many questions and given himself a great many answers, and the upshot
of this was that he had sent himself down for an ass.  He had
determined that he was much too old and much too rusty to commence
the manoeuvres of love-making; that he had let the time slip through
his hands which should have been used for such purposes; and that now
he must lie on his bed as he had made it.  Then he asked himself
whether in truth he did love this woman, and he answered himself, not
without a long struggle, but at last honestly, that he certainly did
love her.  He then asked himself whether he did not also love her
money, and he again answered himself that he did so.  But here he did
not answer honestly.  It was and ever had been his weakness to look
for impure motives for his own conduct.  No doubt, circumstanced as
he was, with a small living and a fellowship, accustomed as he had
been to collegiate luxuries and expensive comforts, he might have
hesitated to marry a penniless woman had he felt ever so strong a
predilection for the woman herself; no doubt Eleanor's fortune put
all such difficulties out of the question; but it was equally without
doubt that his love for her had crept upon him without the slightest
idea on his part that he could ever benefit his own condition by
sharing her wealth.

When he had stood on the hearth-rug, counting the pattern and
counting also the future chances of his own life, the remembrances of
Mrs. Bold's comfortable income had certainly not damped his first
assured feeling of love for her.  And why should it have done so? 
Need it have done so with the purest of men?  Be that as it may, Mr.
Arabin decided against himself, he decided that it had done so in his
case and that he was not the purest of men.

He also decided, which was more to his purpose, that Eleanor did not
care a straw for him and that very probably she did care a straw for
his rival.  Then he made up his mind not to think of her any more,
and went on thinking of her till he was almost in a state to drown
himself in the little brook which ran at the bottom of the
archdeacon's grounds.

And ever and again his mind would revert to the Signora Neroni, and
he would make comparisons between her and Eleanor Bold, not always in
favour of the latter.  The signora had listened to him, and flattered
him, and believed in him; at least she had told him so.  Mrs. Bold
had also listened to him, but had never flattered him; had not always
believed in him; and now had broken from him in violent rage.  The
signora, too, was the more lovely woman of the two, and had also the
additional attraction of her affliction--for to him it was an
attraction.

But he never could have loved the Signora Neroni as he felt that he
now loved Eleanor, and so he flung stones into the brook, instead of
flinging in himself, and sat down on its margin as sad a gentleman as
you shall meet in a summer's day.

He heard the dinner-bell ring from the churchyard, and he knew that
it was time to recover his self-possession.  He felt that he was
disgracing himself in his own eyes, that he had been idling his time
and neglecting the high duties which he had taken upon himself to
perform.  He should have spent this afternoon among the poor at St.
Ewold's, instead of wandering about at Plumstead, an ancient, love-
lorn swain, dejected and sighing, full of imaginary sorrows and
Wertherian grief.  He was thoroughly ashamed of himself, and
determined to lose no time in retrieving his character, so damaged in
his own eyes.

Thus when he appeared at dinner he was as animated as ever and was
the author of most of the conversation which graced the archdeacon's
board on that evening.  Mr. Harding was ill at ease and sick at heart
and did not care to appear more comfortable than he really was; what
little he did say was said to his daughter.  He thought that the
archdeacon and Mr. Arabin had leagued together against Eleanor's
comfort, and his wish now was to break away from the pair and undergo
in his Barchester lodgings whatever Fate had in store for him.  He
hated the name of the hospital; his attempt to regain his lost
inheritance there had brought upon him so much suffering.  As far as
he was concerned, Mr. Quiverful was now welcome to the place.

And the archdeacon was not very lively.  The poor dean's illness was
of course discussed in the first place.  Dr. Grantly did not mention
Mr. Slope's name in connexion with the expected event of Dr.
Trefoil's death; he did not wish to say anything about Mr. Slope just
at present, nor did he wish to make known his sad surmises; but the
idea that his enemy might possibly become Dean of Barchester made him
very gloomy.  Should such an event take place, such a dire
catastrophe come about, there would be an end to his life as far as
his life was connected with the city of Barchester.  He must give up
all his old haunts, all his old habits, and live quietly as a retired
rector at Plumstead.  It had been a severe trial for him to have Dr.
Proudie in the palace, but with Mr. Slope also in the deanery he felt
that he should be unable to draw his breath in Barchester close.

Thus it came to pass that in spite of the sorrow at his heart, Mr.
Arabin was apparently the gayest of the party.  Both Mr. Harding and
Mrs. Grantly were in a slight degree angry with him on account of his
want of gloom.  To the one it appeared as though he were triumphing
at Eleanor's banishment, and to the other that he was not affected as
he should have been by all the sad circumstances of the day--
Eleanor's obstinacy, Mr. Slope's success, and the poor dean's
apoplexy.  And so they were all at cross-purposes.

Mr. Harding left the room almost together with the ladies, and then
the archdeacon opened his heart to Mr. Arabin.  He still harped upon
the hospital.  "What did that fellow mean," said he, "by saying in
his letter to Mrs. Bold that if Mr. Harding would call on the bishop,
it would be all right?  Of course I would not be guided by anything
he might say, but still it may be well that Mr. Harding should see
the bishop.  It would be foolish to let the thing slip through our
fingers because Mrs. Bold is determined to make a fool of herself."

Mr. Arabin hinted that he was not quite so sure that Mrs. Bold would
make a fool of herself.  He said that he was not convinced that she
did regard Mr. Slope so warmly as she was supposed to do.  The
archdeacon questioned and cross-questioned him about this, but
elicited nothing, and at last remained firm in his own conviction
that he was destined, malgré lui, to be the brother-in-law of Mr.
Slope.  Mr. Arabin strongly advised that Mr. Harding should take no
step regarding the hospital in connexion with, or in consequence of,
Mr. Slope's letter.  "If the bishop really means to confer the
appointment on Mr. Harding," argued Mr. Arabin, "he will take care to
let him have some other intimation than a message conveyed through a
letter to a lady.  Were Mr. Harding to present himself at the palace,
he might merely be playing Mr. Slope's game;" and thus it was settled
that nothing should be done till the great Dr. Gwynne's arrival, or
at any rate without that potentate's sanction.

It was droll to observe how these men talked of Mr. Harding as though
he were a puppet and planned their intrigues and small ecclesiastical
manoeuvres in reference to Mr. Harding's future position without
dreaming of taking him into their confidence.  There was a
comfortable house and income in question, and it was very desirable,
and certainly very just, that Mr. Harding should have them; but that
at present was not the main point; it was expedient to beat the
bishop and, if possible, to smash Mr. Slope.  Mr. Slope had set up,
or was supposed to have set up, a rival candidate.  Of all things the
most desirable would have been to have had Mr. Quiverful's
appointment published to the public and then annulled by the clamour
of an indignant world, loud in the defence of Mr. Harding's rights. 
But of such an event the chance was small; a slight fraction only of
the world would be indignant, and that fraction would be one not
accustomed to loud speaking.  And then the preferment had, in a sort
of way, been offered to Mr. Harding and had, in a sort of way, been
refused by him.

Mr. Slope's wicked, cunning hand had been peculiarly conspicuous in
the way in which this had been brought to pass, and it was the
success of Mr. Slope's cunning which was so painfully grating to the
feelings of the archdeacon.  That which of all things he most dreaded
was that he should be outgeneralled by Mr. Slope, and just at present
it appeared probable that Mr. Slope would turn his flank, steal a
march on him, cut off his provisions, carry his strong town by a coup
de main, and at last beat him thoroughly in a regular pitched battle. 
The archdeacon felt that his flank had been turned when desired to
wait on Mr. Slope instead of the bishop, that a march had been stolen
when Mr. Harding was induced to refuse the bishop's offer, that his
provisions would be cut off when Mr. Quiverful got the hospital, that
Eleanor was the strong town doomed to be taken, and that Mr. Slope,
as Dean of Barchester, would be regarded by all the world as
conqueror in the final conflict.

Dr. Gwynne was the Deus ex machina who was to come down upon the
Barchester stage and bring about deliverance from these terrible
evils.  But how can melodramatic dénouements be properly brought
about, how can vice and Mr. Slope be punished, and virtue and the
archdeacon be rewarded, while the avenging god is laid up with the
gout?  In the mean time evil may be triumphant, and poor innocence,
transfixed to the earth by an arrow from Dr. Proudie's quiver, may
lie dead upon the ground, not to be resuscitated even by Dr. Gwynne.

Two or three days after Eleanor's departure, Mr. Arabin went to
Oxford and soon found himself closeted with the august head of his
college.  It was quite clear that Dr. Gwynne was not very sanguine as
to the effects of his journey to Barchester and not over-anxious to
interfere with the bishop.  He had had the gout, but was very nearly
convalescent, and Mr. Arabin at once saw that had the mission been
one of which the master thoroughly approved, he would before this
have been at Plumstead.

As it was, Dr. Gwynne was resolved on visiting his friend and
willingly promised to return to Barchester with Mr. Arabin.  He could
not bring himself to believe that there was any probability that Mr.
Slope would be made Dean of Barchester.  Rumour, he said, had reached
even his ears, not at all favourable to that gentleman's character,
and he expressed himself strongly of opinion that any such
appointment was quite out of the question.  At this stage of the
proceedings, the master's right-hand man, Tom Staple, was called in
to assist at the conference.  Tom Staple was the Tutor of Lazarus
and, moreover, a great man at Oxford.  Though universally known by a
species of nomenclature so very undignified, Tom Staple was one who
maintained a high dignity in the university.  He was, as it were, the
leader of the Oxford tutors, a body of men who consider themselves
collectively as being by very little, if at all, second in importance
to the heads themselves.  It is not always the case that the master,
or warden, or provost, or principal can hit it off exactly with his
tutor.  A tutor is by no means indisposed to have a will of his own. 
But at Lazarus they were great friends and firm allies at the time of
which we are writing.

Tom Staple was a hale, strong man of about forty-five, short in
stature, swarthy in face, with strong, sturdy black hair and crisp
black beard of which very little was allowed to show itself in shape
of whiskers.  He always wore a white neckcloth, clean indeed, but not
tied with that scrupulous care which now distinguishes some of our
younger clergy.  He was, of course, always clothed in a seemly suit
of solemn black.  Mr. Staple was a decent cleanly liver, not over-
addicted to any sensuality, but nevertheless a somewhat warmish hue
was beginning to adorn his nose, the peculiar effect, as his friends
averred, of a certain pipe of port introduced into the cellars of
Lazarus the very same year in which the tutor entered it as a
freshman.  There was also, perhaps, a little redolence of port wine,
as it were the slightest possible twang, in Mr. Staple's voice.

In these latter days Tom Staple was not a happy man; university
reform had long been his bugbear, and now was his bane.  It was not
with him, as with most others, an affair of politics, respecting
which, when the need existed, he could, for parties' sake or on
behalf of principle, maintain a certain amount of necessary zeal; it
was not with him a subject for dilettante warfare and courteous,
commonplace opposition.  To him it was life and death.  The status
quo of the university was his only idea of life, and any reformation
was as bad to him as death.  He would willingly have been a martyr in
the cause, had the cause admitted of martyrdom.

At the present day, unfortunately, public affairs will allow of no
martyrs, and therefore it is that there is such a deficiency of zeal. 
Could gentlemen of £10,000 a year have died on their own door-steps
in defence of protection, no doubt some half-dozen glorious old
baronets would have so fallen, and the school of protection would at
this day have been crowded with scholars.  Who can fight strenuously
in any combat in which there is no danger?  Tom Staple would have
willingly been impaled before a Committee of the House, could he by
such self-sacrifice have infused his own spirit into the component
members of the hebdomadal board.

Tom Staple was one of those who in his heart approved of the credit
system which had of old been in vogue between the students and
tradesmen of the university.  He knew and acknowledged to himself
that it was useless in these degenerate days publicly to contend with
The Jupiter on such a subject.  The Jupiter had undertaken to rule
the university, and Tom Staple was well aware that The Jupiter was
too powerful for him.  But in secret, and among his safe companions,
he would argue that the system of credit was an ordeal good for young
men to undergo.

The bad men, said he, the weak and worthless, blunder into danger and
burn their feet, but the good men, they who have any character, they
who have that within them which can reflect credit on their alma
mater, they come through scatheless.  What merit will there be to a
young man to get through safely, if he be guarded and protected and
restrained like a schoolboy?  By so doing, the period of the ordeal
is only postponed, and the manhood of the man will be deferred from
the age of twenty to that of twenty-four.  If you bind him with
leading-strings at college, he will break loose while eating for the
bar in London; bind him there, and he will break loose afterwards,
when he is a married man.  The wild oats must be sown somewhere. 
'Twas thus that Tom Staple would argue of young men, not, indeed,
with much consistency, but still with some practical knowledge of the
subject gathered from long experience.

And now Tom Staple proffered such wisdom as he had for the assistance
of Dr. Gwynne and Mr. Arabin.

"Quite out of the question," said he, arguing that Mr. Slope could
not possibly be made the new Dean of Barchester.

"So I think," said the master.  "He has no standing and, if all I
hear be true, very little character."

"As to character," said Tom Staple, "I don't think much of that. 
They rather like loose parsons for deans; a little fast living, or a
dash of infidelity, is no bad recommendation to a cathedral close. 
But they couldn't make Mr. Slope; the last two deans have been
Cambridge men; you'll not show me an instance of their making three
men running from the same university.  We don't get our share and
never shall, I suppose, but we must at least have one out of three."

"Those sort of rules are all gone by now," said Mr. Arabin.

"Everything has gone by, I believe," said Tom Staple.  "The cigar has
been smoked out, and we are the ashes."

"Speak for yourself, Staple," said the master.

"I speak for all," said the tutor stoutly.  "It is coming to that,
that there will be no life left anywhere in the country.  No one is
any longer fit to rule himself, or those belonging to him.  The
Government is to find us all in everything, and the press is to find
the Government.  Nevertheless, Mr. Slope won't be Dean of
Barchester."

"And who will be warden of the hospital?" said Mr. Arabin.

"I hear that Mr. Quiverful is already appointed," said Tom Staple.

"I think not," said the master.  "And I think, moreover, that Dr.
Proudie will not be so short-sighted as to run against such a rock:
Mr. Slope should himself have sense enough to prevent it."

"But perhaps Mr. Slope may have no objection to see his patron on a
rock," said the suspicious tutor.

"What could he get by that?" asked Mr. Arabin.

"It is impossible to see the doubles of such a man,' said Mr. Staple. 
"It seems quite clear that Bishop Proudie is altogether in his hands,
and it is equally clear that he has been moving heaven and earth to
get this Mr. Quiverful into the hospital, although he must know that
such an appointment would be most damaging to the bishop.  It is
impossible to understand such a man and dreadful to think," added Tom
Staple, sighing deeply, "that the welfare and fortunes of good men
may depend on his intrigues."

Dr. Gwynne or Mr. Staple were not in the least aware, nor even was
Mr. Arabin, that this Mr. Slope, of whom they were talking, had been
using his utmost efforts to put their own candidate into the
hospital, and that in lieu of being permanent in the palace, his own
expulsion therefrom had been already decided on by the high powers of
the diocese.

"I'll tell you what," said the tutor, "if this Quiverful is thrust
into the hospital and Dr. Trefoil does die, I should not wonder if
the Government were to make Mr. Harding Dean of Barchester.  They
would feel bound to do something for him after all that was said when
he resigned."

Dr. Gwynne at the moment made no reply to this suggestion, but it did
not the less impress itself on his mind.  If Mr. Harding could not be
warden of the hospital, why should he not be Dean of Barchester?

And so the conference ended without any very fixed resolution, and
Dr. Gwynne and Mr. Arabin prepared for their journey to Plumstead on
the morrow.



CHAPTER XXXV

Miss Thorne's Fête Champêtre

The day of the Ullathorne party arrived, and all the world were
there--or at least so much of the world as had been included in Miss
Thorne's invitation.  As we have said, the bishop returned home on
the previous evening, and on the same evening and by the same train
came Dr. Gwynne and Mr. Arabin from Oxford.  The archdeacon with his
brougham was in waiting for the Master of Lazarus, so that there was
a goodly show of church dignitaries on the platform of the railway.

The Stanhope party was finally arranged in the odious manner already
described, and Eleanor got into the doctor's carriage full of
apprehension and presentiment of further misfortune, whereas Mr.
Slope entered the vehicle elate with triumph.

He had received that morning a very civil note from Sir Nicholas
Fitzwhiggin, not promising much, indeed, but then Mr. Slope knew, or
fancied that he knew, that it was not etiquette for government
officers to make promises.  Though Sir Nicholas promised nothing he
implied a good deal, declared his conviction that Mr. Slope would
make an excellent dean, and wished him every kind of success.  To be
sure he added that, not being in the cabinet, he was never consulted
on such matters, and that even if he spoke on the subject, his voice
would go for nothing.  But all this Mr. Slope took for the prudent
reserve of official life.  To complete his anticipated triumphs,
another letter was brought to him just as he was about to start to
Ullathorne.

Mr. Slope also enjoyed the idea of handing Mrs. Bold out of Dr.
Stanhope's carriage before the multitude at Ullathorne gate as much
as Eleanor dreaded the same ceremony.  He had fully made up his mind
to throw himself and his fortune at the widow's feet and had almost
determined to select the present propitious morning for doing so. 
The signora had of late been less than civil to him.  She had indeed
admitted his visits and listened, at any rate without anger, to his
love, but she had tortured him and reviled him, jeered at him and
ridiculed him, while she allowed him to call her the most beautiful
of living women, to kiss her hand, and to proclaim himself with
reiterated oaths her adorer, her slave and worshipper.

Miss Thorne was in great perturbation, yet in great glory, on the
morning of the gala day.  Mr. Thorne also, though the party was none
of his giving, had much heavy work on his hands.  But perhaps the
most overtasked, the most anxious, and the most effective of all the
Ullathorne household was Mr. Plomacy, the steward.  This last
personage had, in the time of Mr. Thorne's father, when the Directory
held dominion in France, gone over to Paris with letters in his boot-
heel for some of the royal party, and such had been his good luck
that he had returned safe.  He had then been very young and was now
very old, but the exploit gave him a character for political
enterprise and secret discretion which still availed him as
thoroughly as it had done in its freshest gloss.  Mr. Plomacy had
been steward of Ullathorne for more than fifty years, and a very easy
life he had had of it.  Who could require much absolute work from a
man who had carried safely at his heel that which, if discovered,
would have cost him his head?  Consequently Mr. Plomacy had never
worked hard, and of latter years had never worked at all.  He had a
taste for timber, and therefore he marked the trees that were to be
cut down; he had a taste for gardening, and would therefore allow no
shrub to be planted or bed to be made without his express sanction. 
In these matters he was sometimes driven to run counter to his
mistress, but he rarely allowed his mistress to carry the point
against him.

But on occasions such as the present Mr. Plomacy came out strong.  He
had the honour of the family at heart; he thoroughly appreciated the
duties of hospitality; and therefore, when gala doings were going on,
he always took the management into his own hands and reigned supreme
over master and mistress.

To give Mr. Plomacy his due, old as he was, he thoroughly understood
such work as he had in hand and did it well.

The order of the day was to be as follows.  The quality, as the upper
classes in rural districts are designated by the lower with so much
true discrimination, were to eat a breakfast, and the non-quality
were to eat a dinner.  Two marquees had been erected for these two
banquets: that for the quality on the esoteric or garden side of a
certain deep ha-ha; and that for the non-quality on the exoteric or
paddock side of the same.  Both were of huge dimensions--that on the
outer side was, one may say, on an egregious scale--but Mr. Plomacy
declared that neither would be sufficient.  To remedy this, an
auxiliary banquet was prepared in the dining-room, and a subsidiary
board was to be spread sub dio for the accommodation of the lower
class of yokels on the Ullathorne property.

No one who has not had a hand in the preparation of such an affair
can understand the manifold difficulties which Miss Thorne
encountered in her project.  Had she not been made throughout of the
very finest whalebone, riveted with the best Yorkshire steel, she
must have sunk under them.  Had not Mr. Plomacy felt how much was
justly expected from a man who at one time carried the destinies of
Europe in his boot, he would have given way, and his mistress, so
deserted, must have perished among her poles and canvas.

In the first place there was a dreadful line to be drawn.  Who were
to dispose themselves within the ha-ha, and who without?  To this the
unthinking will give an off-hand answer, as they will to every
ponderous question.  Oh, the bishop and such-like within the ha-ha,
and Farmer Greenacre and such-like without.  True, my unthinking
friend, but who shall define these such-likes?  It is in such
definitions that the whole difficulty of society consists.  To seat
the bishop on an arm-chair on the lawn and place Farmer Greenacre at
the end of a long table in the paddock is easy enough, but where will
you put Mrs. Lookaloft, whose husband, though a tenant on the estate,
hunts in a red coat, whose daughters go to a fashionable seminary in
Barchester, who calls her farm-house Rosebank, and who has a
pianoforte in her drawing-room?  The Misses Lookaloft, as they call
themselves, won't sit contented among the bumpkins.  Mrs. Lookaloft
won't squeeze her fine clothes on a bench and talk familiarly about
cream and ducklings to good Mrs. Greenacre.  And yet Mrs. Lookaloft
is no fit companion and never has been the associate of the Thornes
and the Grantlys.  And if Mrs. Lookaloft be admitted within the
sanctum of fashionable life, if she be allowed with her three
daughters to leap the ha-ha, why not the wives and daughters of other
families also?  Mrs. Greenacre is at present well contented with the
paddock, but she might cease to be so if she saw Mrs. Lookaloft on
the lawn.  And thus poor Miss Thorne had a hard time of it.

And how was she to