 divide her guests between the marquee and the
parlour?  She had a countess coming, an Honourable John and an
Honourable George, and a whole bevy of Ladies Amelia, Rosina,
Margaretta, &c; she had a leash of baronets with their baronettes;
and, as we all know, she had a bishop.  If she put them on the lawn,
no one would go into the parlour; if she put them into the parlour,
no one would go into the tent.  She thought of keeping the old people
in the house and leaving the lawn to the lovers.  She might as well
have seated herself at once in a hornet's nest.  Mr. Plomacy knew
better than this.  "Bless your soul, ma'am," said he, "there won't be
no old ladies--not one, barring yourself and old Mrs. Clantantram."

Personally Miss Thorne accepted this distinction in her favour as a
compliment to her good sense, but nevertheless she had no desire to
be closeted on the coming occasion with Mrs. Clantantram.  She gave
up all idea of any arbitrary division of her guests and determined if
possible to put the bishop on the lawn and the countess in the house,
to sprinkle the baronets, and thus divide the attractions.  What to
do with the Lookalofts even Mr. Plomacy could not decide.  They must
take their chance.  They had been specially told in the invitation
that all the tenants had been invited, and they might probably have
the good sense to stay away if they objected to mix with the rest of
the tenantry.

Then Mr. Plomacy declared his apprehension that the Honourable Johns
and Honourable Georges would come in a sort of amphibious costume,
half-morning, half-evening, satin neck-handkerchiefs, frock-coats,
primrose gloves, and polished boots; and that, being so dressed, they
would decline riding at the quintain, or taking part in any of the
athletic games which Miss Thorne had prepared with so much fond care. 
If the Lord Johns and Lord Georges didn't ride at the quintain, Miss
Thorne might be sure that nobody else would.

"But," said she in dolorous voice, all but overcome by her cares, "it
was specially signified that there were to be sports."

"And so there will be, of course," said Mr. Plomacy.  "They'll all be
sporting with the young ladies in the laurel walks.  Them's the
sports they care most about now-a-days.  If you gets the young men at
the quintain, you'll have all the young women in the pouts."

"Can't they look on as their greatgrandmothers did before them?" said
Miss Thorne.

"It seems to me that the ladies ain't contented with looking now-a-
days.  Whatever the men do they'll do.  If you'll have side-saddles
on the nags; and let them go at the quintain too, it'll answer
capital, no doubt."

Miss Thorne made no reply.  She felt that she had no good ground on
which to defend her sex of the present generation from the sarcasm of
Mr. Plomacy.  She had once declared, in one of her warmer moments,
"that now-a-days the gentlemen were all women, and the ladies all
men."  She could not alter the debased character of the age.  But,
such being the case, why should she take on herself to cater for the
amusement of people of such degraded tastes?  This question she asked
herself more than once, and she could only answer herself with a
sigh.  There was her own brother Wilfred, on whose shoulders rested
all the ancient honours of Ullathorne house; it was very doubtful
whether even he would consent to "go at the quintain," as Mr. Plomacy
not injudiciously expressed it.

And now the morning arrived.  The Ullathorne household was early on
the move.  Cooks were cooking in the kitchen long before daylight,
and men were dragging out tables and hammering red baize on to
benches at the earliest dawn.  With what dread eagerness did Miss
Thorne look out at the weather as soon as the parting veil of night
permitted her to look at all!  In this respect, at any rate, there
was nothing to grieve her.  The glass had been rising for the last
three days, and the morning broke with that dull, chill, steady, grey
haze which in autumn generally presages a clear and dry day.  By
seven she was dressed and down.  Miss Thorne knew nothing of the
modern luxury of déshabilles.  She would as soon have thought of
appearing before her brother without her stockings as without her
stays--and Miss Thorne's stays were no trifle.

And yet there was nothing for her to do when down.  She fidgeted out
to the lawn and then back into the kitchen.  She put on her high-
heeled clogs and fidgeted out into the paddock.  Then she went into
the small home park where the quintain was erected.  The pole and
cross-bar and the swivel and the target and the bag of flour were all
complete.  She got up on a carpenter's bench and touched the target
with her hand; it went round with beautiful ease; the swivel had been
oiled to perfection.  She almost wished to take old Plomacy at his
word, to get on a side-saddle and have a tilt at it herself.  What
must a young man be, thought she, who could prefer maundering among
laurel trees with a wishy-washy school-girl to such fun as this? 
"Well," said she aloud to herself, "one man can take a horse to
water, but a thousand can't make him drink.  There it is.  If they
haven't the spirit to enjoy it, the fault shan't be mine;" and so she
returned to the house.

At a little after eight her brother came down, and they had a sort of
scrap breakfast in his study.  The tea was made without the customary
urn, and they dispensed with the usual rolls and toast.  Eggs also
were missing, for every egg in the parish had been whipped into
custards, baked into pies, or boiled into lobster salad.  The
allowance of fresh butter was short, and Mr. Thorne was obliged to
eat the leg of a fowl without having it devilled in the manner he
loved.

"I have been looking at the quintain, Wilfred," said she, "and it
appears to be quite right."

"Oh--ah, yes," said he.  "It seemed to be so yesterday when I saw
it."  Mr. Thorne was beginning to be rather bored by his sister's
love of sports, and had especially no affection for this quintain
post.

"I wish you'd just try it after breakfast," said she.  "You could
have the saddle put on Mark Antony, and the pole is there all handy. 
You can take the flour bag off, you know, if you think Mark Antony
won't be quick enough," added Miss Thorne, seeing that her brother's
countenance was not indicative of complete accordance with her little
proposition.

Now Mark Antony was a valuable old hunter, excellently suited to Mr.
Thorne's usual requirements, steady indeed at his fences, but
extremely sure, very good in deep ground, and safe on the roads.  But
he had never yet been ridden at a quintain, and Mr. Thorne was not
inclined to put him to the trial, either with or without the bag of
flour.  He hummed and hawed and finally declared that he was afraid
Mark Antony would shy.

"Then try the cob," said the indefatigable Miss Thorne.

"He's in physic," said Wilfred.

"There's the Beelzebub colt," said his sister.  "I know he's in the
stable because I saw Peter exercising him just now."

"My dear Monica, he's so wild that it's as much as I can do to manage
him at all.  He'd destroy himself and me, too, if I attempted to ride
him at such a rattletrap as that."

A rattletrap!  The quintain that she had put up with so much anxious
care; the game that she had prepared for the amusement of the
stalwart yeomen of the country; the sport that had been honoured by
the affection of so many of their ancestors!  It cut her to the heart
to hear it so denominated by her own brother.  There were but the two
of them left together in the world, and it had ever been one of the
rules by which Miss Thorne had regulated her conduct through life to
say nothing that could provoke her brother.  She had often had to
suffer from his indifference to time-honoured British customs, but
she had always suffered in silence.  It was part of her creed that
the head of the family should never be upbraided in his own house,
and Miss Thorne had lived up to her creed.  Now, however, she was
greatly tried.  The colour mounted to her ancient cheek, and the fire
blazed in her still bright eyes, but yet she said nothing.  She
resolved that, at any rate, to him nothing more should be said about
the quintain that day.

She sipped her tea in silent sorrow and thought with painful regret
of the glorious days when her great ancestor Ealfried had
successfully held Ullathorne against a Norman invader.  There was no
such spirit now left in her family except that small useless spark
which burnt in her own bosom.  And she herself, was not she at this
moment intent on entertaining a descendant of those very Normans, a
vain proud countess with a Frenchified name who would only think that
she graced Ullathorne too highly by entering its portals?  Was it
likely that an Honourable John, the son of an Earl De Courcy, should
ride at a quintain in company with Saxon yeomen?  And why should she
expect her brother to do that which her brother's guests would
decline to do?

Some dim faint idea of the impracticability of her own views flitted
across her brain.  Perhaps it was necessary that races doomed to live
on the same soil should give way to each other and adopt each other's
pursuits.  Perhaps it was impossible that after more than five
centuries of close intercourse, Normans should remain Normans, and
Saxons, Saxons.  Perhaps, after all, her neighbours were wiser than
herself.  Such ideas did occasionally present themselves to Miss
Thorne's mind and make her sad enough.  But it never occurred to her
that her favourite quintain was but a modern copy of a Norman
knight's amusement, an adaptation of the noble tourney to the tastes
and habits of the Saxon yeomen.  Of this she was ignorant, and it
would have been cruelty to instruct her.

When Mr. Thorne saw the tear in her eye, he repented himself of his
contemptuous expression.  By him also it was recognized as a binding
law that every whim of his sister was to be respected.  He was not
perhaps so firm in his observances to her as she was in hers to him. 
But his intentions were equally good, and whenever he found that he
had forgotten them, it was matter of grief to him.

"My dear Monica," said he, "I beg your pardon.  I don't in the least
mean to speak ill of the game.  When I called it a rattletrap, I
merely meant that it was so for a man of my age.  You know you always
forget that I an't a young man."

"I am quite sure you are not an old man, Wilfred," said she,
accepting the apology in her heart and smiling at him with the tear
still on her cheek.

"If I was five-and-twenty, or thirty," continued he, "I should like
nothing better than riding at the quintain all day."

"But you are not too old to hunt or to shoot," said she.  "If you can
jump over a ditch and hedge, I am sure you could turn the quintain
round."

"But when I ride over the hedges, my dear--and it isn't very often I
do that--but when I do ride over the hedges, there isn't any bag of
flour coming after me.  Think how I'd look taking the countess out to
breakfast with the back of my head all covered with meal."

Miss, Thorne said nothing further.  She didn't like the allusion to
the countess.  She couldn't be satisfied with the reflection that the
sports at Ullathorne should be interfered with by the personal
attentions necessary for a Lady De Courcy.  But she saw that it was
useless for her to push the matter further.  It was conceded that Mr.
Thorne was to be spared the quintain, and Miss Thorne determined to
trust wholly to a youthful knight of hers, an immense favourite, who,
as she often declared, was a pattern to the young men of the age and
an excellent sample of an English yeoman.

This was Farmer Greenacre's eldest son, who, to tell the truth, had
from his earliest years taken the exact measure of Miss Thorne's
foot.  In his boyhood he had never failed to obtain from her apples,
pocket-money, and forgiveness for his numerous trespasses, and now in
his early manhood he got privileges and immunities which were equally
valuable.  He was allowed a day or two's shooting in September; he
schooled the squire's horses; got slips of trees out of the orchard
and roots of flowers out of the garden; and had the fishing of the
little river altogether in his own hands.  He had undertaken to come
mounted on a nag of his father's and show the way at the quintain
post.  Whatever young Greenacre did the others would do after him. 
The juvenile Lookalofts might stand aloof, but the rest of the youth
of Ullathorne would be sure to venture if Harry Greenacre showed the
way.  And so Miss Thorne made up her mind to dispense with the noble
Johns and Georges and trust, as her ancestors had done before her, to
the thews and sinews of native Ullathorne growth.

At about nine the lower orders began to congregate in the paddock and
park, under the surveillance of Mr. Plomacy and the head gardener and
head groom, who were sworn in as his deputies and were to assist him
in keeping the peace and promoting the sports.  Many of the younger
inhabitants of the neighbourhood, thinking that they could not have
too much of a good thing, had come at a very early hour, and the road
between the house and the church had been thronged for some time
before the gates were thrown open.

And then another difficulty of huge dimensions arose, a difficulty
which Mr. Plomacy had indeed foreseen and for which he was in some
sort provided.  Some of those who wished to share Miss Thorne's
hospitality were not so particular as they should have been as to the
preliminary ceremony of an invitation.  They doubtless conceived that
they had been overlooked by accident, and instead of taking this in
dudgeon, as their betters would have done, they good-naturedly put up
with the slight and showed that they did so by presenting themselves
at the gate in their Sunday best.

Mr. Plomacy, however, well-knew who were welcome and who were not. 
To some, even though uninvited, he allowed ingress.  "Don't be too
particular, Plomacy," his mistress had said, "especially with the
children.  If they live anywhere near, let them in."

Acting on this hint, Mr. Plomacy did let in many an eager urchin and
a few tidily dressed girls with their swains who in no way belonged
to the property.  But to the denizens of the city he was inexorable. 
Many a Barchester apprentice made his appearance there that day and
urged with piteous supplication that he had been working all the week
in making saddles and boots for the use of Ullathorne, in compounding
doses for the horses, or cutting up carcasses for the kitchen.  No
such claim was allowed.  Mr. Plomacy knew nothing about the city
apprentices; he was to admit the tenants and labourers on the estate;
Miss Thorne wasn't going to take in the whole city of Barchester; and
so on.

Nevertheless, before the day was half over, all this was found to be
useless.  Almost anybody who chose to come made his way into the
park, and the care of the guardians was transferred to the tables on
which the banquet was spread.  Even here there was many an
unauthorised claimant for a place, of whom it was impossible to get
quit without more commotion than the place and food were worth.



CHAPTER XXXVI

Ullathorne Sports--Act I


The trouble in civilized life of entertaining company, as it is
called too generally without much regard to strict veracity, is so
great that it cannot but be matter of wonder that people are so fond
of attempting it.  It is difficult to ascertain what is the quid pro
quo.  If they who give such laborious parties and who endure such
toil and turmoil in the vain hope of giving them successfully really
enjoyed the parties given by others, the matter could be understood. 
A sense of justice would induce men and women to undergo, in behalf
of others, those miseries which others had undergone in their behalf. 
But they all profess that going out is as great a bore as receiving,
and to look at them when they are out, one cannot but believe them.

Entertain!  Who shall have sufficient self-assurance, who shall feel
sufficient confidence in his own powers to dare to boast that he can
entertain his company?  A clown can sometimes do so, and sometimes a
dancer in short petticoats and stuffed pink legs; occasionally,
perhaps, a singer.  But beyond these, success in this art of
entertaining is not often achieved.  Young men and girls linking
themselves kind with kind, pairing like birds in spring because
nature wills it, they, after a simple fashion, do entertain each
other.  Few others even try.

Ladies, when they open their houses, modestly confessing, it may be
presumed, their own incapacity, mainly trust to wax candles and
upholstery.  Gentlemen seem to rely on their white waistcoats.  To
these are added, for the delight of the more sensual, champagne and
such good things of the table as fashion allows to be still
considered as comestible.  Even in this respect the world is
deteriorating.  All the good soups are now tabooed, and at the houses
of one's accustomed friends--small barristers, doctors, government
clerks, and such-like (for we cannot all of us always live as
grandees, surrounded by an elysium of livery servants)--one gets a
cold potato handed to one as a sort of finale to one's slice of
mutton.  Alas for those happy days when one could say to one's
neighbour, "Jones, shall I give you some mashed turnip?  May I
trouble you for a little cabbage?"  And then the pleasure of drinking
wine with Mrs. Jones and Miss Smith--with all the Joneses and all the
Smiths!  These latter-day habits are certainly more economical.

Miss Thorne, however, boldly attempted to leave the modern, beaten
track and made a positive effort to entertain her guests.  Alas!  She
did so with but moderate success.  They had all their own way of
going, and would not go her way.  She piped to them, but they would
not dance.  She offered to them good, honest household cake made of
currants and flour and eggs and sweetmeat, but they would feed
themselves on trashy wafers from the shop of the Barchester pastry-
cook, on chalk and gum and adulterated sugar.  Poor Miss Thorne! 
Yours is not the first honest soul that has vainly striven to recall
the glories of happy days gone by!  If fashion suggests to a Lady De
Courcy that, when invited to a déjeuner at twelve, she ought to come
at three, no eloquence of thine will teach her the advantage of a
nearer approach to punctuality.

She had fondly thought that when she called on her friends to come at
twelve, and specially begged them to believe that she meant it, she
would be able to see them comfortably seated in their tents at two. 
Vain woman--or rather ignorant woman--ignorant of the advances of
that civilization which the world had witnessed while she was growing
old.  At twelve she found herself alone, dressed in all the glory of
the newest of her many suits of raiment--with strong shoes however,
and a serviceable bonnet on her head, and a warm, rich shawl on her
shoulders.  Thus clad, she peered out into the tent, went to the ha-
ha, and satisfied herself that at any rate the youngsters were
amusing themselves, spoke a word to Mrs. Greenacre over the ditch,
and took one look at the quintain.  Three or four young farmers were
turning the machine round and round and poking at the bag of flour in
a manner not at all intended by the inventor of the game, but no
mounted sportsmen were there.  Miss Thorne looked at her watch.  It
was only fifteen minutes past twelve, and it was understood that
Harry Greenacre was not to begin till the half-hour.

Miss Thorne returned to her drawing-room rather quicker than was her
wont, fearing that the countess might come and find none to welcome
her.  She need not have hurried, for no one was there.  At half-past
twelve she peeped into the kitchen; at a quarter to one she was
joined by her brother; and just then the first fashionable arrival
took place.  Mrs. Clantantram was announced.

No announcement was necessary, indeed, for the good lady's voice was
heard as she walked across the courtyard to the house, scolding the
unfortunate postilion who had driven her from Barchester.  At the
moment Miss Thorne could not but be thankful that the other guests
were more fashionable and were thus spared the fury of Mrs.
Clantantram's indignation.

"Oh, Miss Thorne, look here!" said she as soon as she found herself
in the drawing-room; "do look at my roque-laure.  It's clean spoilt,
and forever.  I wouldn't but wear it because I knew you wished us all
to be grand to-day, and yet I had my misgivings.  Oh dear, oh dear! 
It was five-and-twenty shillings a yard."

The Barchester post-horses had misbehaved in some unfortunate manner
just as Mrs. Clantantram was getting out of the chaise and had nearly
thrown her under the wheel.

Mrs. Clantantram belonged to other days, and therefore, though she
had but little else to recommend her, Miss Thorne was to a certain
extent fond of her.  She sent the roque-laure away to be cleaned and
lent her one of her best shawls out of her own wardrobe.

The next comer was Mr. Arabin, who was immediately informed of Mrs.
Clantantram's misfortune and of her determination to pay neither
master nor post-boy, although, as she remarked, she intended to get
her lift home before she made known her mind upon that matter.  Then
a good deal of rustling was heard in the sort of lobby that was used
for the ladies' outside cloaks, and the door having been thrown wide
open, the servant announced, not in the most confident of voices,
Mrs. Lookaloft, and the Miss Lookalofts, and Mr. Augustus Lookaloft.

Poor man!--we mean the footman.  He knew, none better, that Mrs.
Lookaloft had no business there, that she was not wanted there, and
would not be welcome.  But he had not the courage to tell a stout
lady with a low dress, short sleeves, and satin at eight shillings a
yard that she had come to the wrong tent; he had not dared to hint to
young ladies with white dancing shoes and long gloves that there was
a place ready for them in the paddock.  And thus Mrs. Lookaloft
carried her point, broke through the guards, and made her way into
the citadel.  That she would have to pass an uncomfortable time there
she had surmised before.  But nothing now could rob her of the power
of boasting that she had consorted on the lawn with the squire and
Miss Thorne, with a countess, a bishop, and the county grandees,
while Mrs. Greenacre and such-like were walking about with the
ploughboys in the park.  It was a great point gained by Mrs.
Lookaloft, and it might be fairly expected that from this time
forward the tradesmen of Barchester would, with undoubting pens,
address her husband as T. Lookaloft, Esquire.

Mrs. Lookaloft's pluck carried her through everything, and she walked
triumphant into the Ullathorne drawing-room, but her children did
feel a little abashed at the sort of reception they met with.  It was
not in Miss Thorne's heart to insult her own guests, but neither was
it in her disposition to overlook such effrontery.

"Oh, Mrs. Lookaloft, is this you?" said she.  "And your daughters and
son?  Well, we're very glad to see you, but I'm sorry you've come in
such low dresses, as we are all going out of doors.  Could we lend
you anything?"

"Oh dear, no thank ye, Miss Thorne," said the mother; "the girls and
myself are quite used to low dresses, when we're out."

"Are you, indeed?" said Miss Thorne shuddering--but the shudder was
lost on Mrs. Lookaloft.

"And where's Lookaloft?" said the master of the house, coming up to
welcome his tenant's wife.  Let the faults of the family be what they
would, he could not but remember that their rent was well paid; he
was therefore not willing to give them a cold shoulder.

"Such a headache, Mr. Thorne!" said Mrs. Lookaloft.  "In fact he
couldn't stir, or you may be certain on such a day he would not have
absented hisself."

"Dear me," said Miss Thorne.  "If he is so ill, I'm sure you'd wish
to be with him."

"Not at all!" said Mrs. Lookaloft.  "Not at all, Miss Thorne.  It is
only bilious you know, and when he's that way, he can bear nobody
nigh him."

The fact, however, was that Mr. Lookaloft, having either more sense
or less courage than his wife, had not chosen to intrude on Miss
Thorne's drawing-room, and as he could not very well have gone among
the plebeians while his wife was with the patricians, he thought it
most expedient to remain at Rosebank.

Mrs. Lookaloft soon found herself on a sofa, and the Miss Lookalofts
on two chairs, while Mr. Augustus stood near the door; and here they
remained till in due time they were seated, all four together, at the
bottom of the dining-room table.

Then the Grantlys came--the archdeacon and Mrs. Grantly and the two
girls, and Dr. Gwynne and Mr. Harding.  As ill-luck would have it,
they were closely followed by Dr. Stanhope's carriage.  As Eleanor
looked out of the carriage window, she saw her brother-in-law helping
the ladies out and threw herself back into her seat, dreading to be
discovered.  She had had an odious journey.  Mr. Slope's civility had
been more than ordinarily greasy, and now, though he had not in fact
said anything which she could notice, she had for the first time
entertained a suspicion that he was intending to make love to her. 
Was it after all true that she had been conducting herself in a way
that justified the world in thinking that she liked the man?  After
all, could it be possible that the archdeacon and Mr. Arabin were
right, and that she was wrong?  Charlotte Stanhope had also been
watching Mr. Slope and had come to the conclusion that it behoved her
brother to lose no further time, if he meant to gain the widow.  She
almost regretted that it had not been contrived that Bertie should be
at Ullathorne before them.

Dr. Grantly did not see his sister-in-law in company with Mr. Slope,
but Mr. Arabin did.  Mr. Arabin came out with Mr. Thorne to the front
door to welcome Mrs. Grantly, and he remained in the courtyard till
all their party had passed on.  Eleanor hung back in the carriage as
long as she well could, but she was nearest to the door, and when Mr.
Slope, having alighted, offered her his hand, she had no alternative
but to take it.  Mr. Arabin, standing at the open door while Mrs.
Grantly was shaking hands with someone within, saw a clergyman alight
from the carriage whom he at once knew to be Mr. Slope, and then he
saw this clergyman hand out Mrs. Bold.  Having seen so much, Mr.
Arabin, rather sick at heart, followed Mrs. Grantly into the house.

Eleanor was, however, spared any further immediate degradation, for
Dr. Stanhope gave her his arm across the courtyard, and Mr. Slope was
fain to throw away his attention upon Charlotte.

They had hardly passed into the house and from the house to the lawn
when, with a loud rattle and such noise as great men and great women
are entitled to make in their passage through the world, the Proudies
drove up.  It was soon apparent that no everyday comer was at the
door.  One servant whispered to another that it was the bishop, and
the word soon ran through all the hangers-on and strange grooms and
coachmen about the place.  There was quite a little cortège to see
the bishop and his "lady" walk across the courtyard, and the good man
was pleased to see that the church was held in such respect in the
parish of St. Ewold's.

And now the guests came fast and thick, and the lawn began to be
crowded, and the room to be full.  Voices buzzed, silk rustled
against silk, and muslin crumpled against muslin.  Miss Thorne became
more happy than she had been and again bethought her of her sports. 
There were targets and bows and arrows prepared at the further end of
the lawn.  Here the gardens of the place encroached with a somewhat
wide sweep upon the paddock and gave ample room for the doings of the
toxophilites.  Miss Thorne got together such daughters of Diana as
could bend a bow and marshalled them to the targets.  There were the
Grantly girls and the Proudie girls and the Chadwick girls, and the
two daughters of the burly chancellor, and Miss Knowle; and with them
went Frederick and Augustus Chadwick, and young Knowle of Knowle
Park, and Frank Foster of the Elms, and Mr. Vellem Deeds, the dashing
attorney of the High Street, and the Rev. Mr. Green, and the Rev. Mr.
Brown, and the Rev. Mr. White, all of whom, as in duty bound,
attended the steps of the three Miss Proudies.

"Did you ever ride at the quintain, Mr. Foster?" said Miss Thorne as
she walked with her party across the lawn.

"The quintain?" said young Foster, who considered himself a dab at
horsemanship.  "Is it a sort of gate, Miss Thorne?"

Miss Thorne had to explain the noble game she spoke of, and Frank
Foster had to own that he never had ridden at the quintain.

"Would you like to come and see?" said Miss Thorne.  "There'll be
plenty here you know without you, if you like it."

"Well, I don't mind," said Frank.  "I suppose the ladies can come
too."

"Oh, yes," said Miss Thorne; "those who like it.  I have no doubt
they'll go to see your prowess, if you'll ride, Mr. Foster."

Mr. Foster looked down at a most unexceptionable pair of pantaloons,
which had arrived from London only the day before.  They were the
very things, at least he thought so, for a picnic or fête champêtre,
but he was not prepared to ride in them.  Nor was he more encouraged
than had been Mr. Thorne by the idea of being attacked from behind by
the bag of flour, which Miss Thorne had graphically described to him.

"Well, I don't know about riding, Miss Thorne," said he; "I fear I'm
not quite prepared."

Miss Thorne sighed but said nothing further.  She left the
toxophilites to their bows and arrows and returned towards the house. 
But as she passed by the entrance to the small park, she thought that
she might at any rate encourage the yeomen by her presence, as she
could not induce her more fashionable guests to mix with them in
their manly amusements.  Accordingly she once more betook herself to
the quintain post.

Here to her great delight she found Harry Greenacre ready mounted,
with his pole in his hand, and a lot of comrades standing round him,
encouraging him to the assault.  She stood at a little distance and
nodded to him in token of her good pleasure.

"Shall I begin, ma'am?" said Harry, fingering his long staff in a
rather awkward way, while his horse moved uneasily beneath him, not
accustomed to a rider armed with such a weapon.

"Yes, yes," said Miss Thorne, standing triumphant as the queen of
beauty on an inverted tub which some chance had brought thither from
the farmyard.

"Here goes then," said Harry as he wheeled his horse round to get the
necessary momentum of a sharp gallop.  The quintain post stood right
before him, and the square board at which he was to tilt was fairly
in his way.  If he hit that duly in the middle, and maintained his
pace as he did so, it was calculated that he would he carried out of
reach of the flour bag, which, suspended at the other end of the
cross-bar on the post, would swing round when the board was struck. 
It was also calculated that if the rider did not maintain his pace,
he would get a blow from the flour bag just at the back of his head,
and bear about him the signs of his awkwardness to the great
amusement of the lookers-on.

Harry Greenacre did not object to being powdered with flour in the
service of his mistress and therefore gallantly touched his steed
with his spur, having laid his lance in rest to the best of his
ability.  But his ability in this respect was not great, and his
appurtenances probably not very good; consequently, he struck his
horse with his pole unintentionally on the side of the head as he
started.  The animal swerved and shied and galloped off wide of the
quintain.  Harry, well-accustomed to manage a horse, but not to do so
with a twelve-foot rod on his arm, lowered his right hand to the
bridle, and thus the end of the lance came to the ground and got
between the legs of the steed.  Down came rider and steed and staff. 
Young Greenacre was thrown some six feet over the horse's head, and
poor Miss Thorne almost fell off her tub in a swoon.

"Oh, gracious, he's killed," shrieked a woman who was near him when
he fell.

"The Lord be good to him!  His poor mother, his poor mother!" said
another.

"Well, drat them dangerous plays all the world over," said an old
crone.

"He has broke his neck sure enough, if ever man did," said a fourth.

Poor Miss Thorne.  She heard all this and yet did not quite swoon. 
She made her way through the crowd as best she could, sick herself
almost to death.  Oh, his mother--his poor mother!  How could she
ever forgive herself.  The agony of that moment was terrific.  She
could hardly get to the place where the poor lad was lying, as three
or four men in front were about the horse, which had risen with some
difficulty, but at last she found herself close to the young farmer.

"Has he marked himself?  For heaven's sake tell me that: has he
marked his knees?" said Harry, slowly rising and rubbing his left
shoulder with his right hand and thinking only of his horse's legs. 
Miss Thorne soon found that he had not broken his neck, nor any of
his bones, nor been injured in any essential way.  But from that time
forth she never instigated anyone to ride at a quintain.

Eleanor left Dr. Stanhope as soon as she could do so civilly and went
in quest of her father, whom she found on the lawn in company with
Mr. Arabin.  She was not sorry to find them together.  She was
anxious to disabuse at any rate her father's mind as to this report
which had got abroad respecting her, and would have been well pleased
to have been able to do the same with regard to Mr. Arabin.  She put
her own through her father's arm, coming up behind his back, and then
tendered her hand also to the vicar of St. Ewold's.

"And how did you come?" said Mr. Harding, when the first greeting was
over.

"The Stanhopes brought me," said she; "their carriage was obliged to
come twice, and has now gone back for the signora."  As she spoke she
caught Mr. Arabin's eye and saw that he was looking pointedly at her
with a severe expression.  She understood at once the accusation
contained in his glance.  It said as plainly as an eye could speak,
"Yes, you came with the Stanhopes, but you did so in order that you
might be in company with Mr. Slope."

"Our party," said she, still addressing her father, "consisted of the
doctor and Charlotte Stanhope, myself, and Mr. Slope."  As she
mentioned the last name she felt her father's arm quiver slightly
beneath her touch.  At the same moment Mr. Arabin turned away from
them and, joining his hands behind his back, strolled slowly away by
one of the paths.

"Papa," said she, "it was impossible to help coming in the same
carriage with Mr. Slope; it was quite impossible.  I had promised to
come with them before I dreamt of his coming, and afterwards I could
not get out of it without explaining and giving rise to talk.  You
weren't at home, you know.  I couldn't possibly help it."  She said
all this so quickly that by the time her apology was spoken she was
quite out of breath.

"I don't know why you should have wished to help it, my dear," said
her father.

"Yes, Papa, you do.  You must know, you do know all the things they
said at Plumstead.  I am sure you do.  You know all the archdeacon
said.  How unjust he was; and Mr. Arabin too.  He's a horrid man, a
horrid odious man, but--"

Who is an odious man, my dear?  Mr. Arabin?"

"No; but Mr. Slope.  You know I mean Mr. Slope.  He's the most odious
man I ever met in my life, and it was most unfortunate my having to
come here in the same carriage with him.  But how could I help it?"

A great weight began to move itself off Mr. Harding's mind.  So,
after all, the archdeacon with all his wisdom, and Mrs. Grantly with
all her tact, and Mr. Arabin with all his talent, were in the wrong. 
His own child, his Eleanor, the daughter of whom he was so proud, was
not to become the wife of a Mr. Slope.  He had been about to give his
sanction to the marriage, so certified had he been of the fact, and
now he learnt that this imputed lover of Eleanor's was at any rate as
much disliked by her as by any one of the family.  Mr. Harding,
however, was by no means sufficiently a man of the world to conceal
the blunder he had made.  He could not pretend that he had
entertained no suspicion; he could not make believe that he had never
joined the archdeacon in his surmises.  He was greatly surprised and
gratified beyond measure, and he could not help showing that such was
the case.

"My darling girl," said he, "I am so delighted, so overjoyed.  My own
child; you have taken such a weight off my mind."

"But surely, Papa, you didn't think--"

"I didn't know what to think, my dear.  The archdeacon told me
that--"

"The archdeacon!" said Eleanor, her face lighting up with passion. 
"A man like the archdeacon might, one would think, he better employed
than in traducing his sister-in-law and creating bitterness between a
father and his daughter!"

"He didn't mean to do that, Eleanor."

"What did he mean then?  Why did he interfere with me and fill your
mind with such falsehood?"

"Never mind it now, my child; never mind it now.  We shall all know
you better now."

"Oh, Papa, that you should have thought it!  That you should have
suspected me!"

"I don't know what you mean by suspicion, Eleanor.  There would be
nothing disgraceful, you know, nothing wrong in such a marriage. 
Nothing that could have justified my interfering as your father." 
And Mr. Harding would have proceeded in his own defence to make out
that Mr. Slope after all was a very good sort of man and a very
fitting second husband for a young widow, had he not been interrupted
by Eleanor's greater energy.

"It would be disgraceful," said she; "it would be wrong; it would be
abominable.  Could I do such a horrid thing, I should expect no one
to speak to me.  Ugh--" and she shuddered as she thought of the
matrimonial torch which her friends had been so ready to light on her
behalf.  "I don't wonder at Dr. Grantly; I don't wonder at Susan;
but, oh, Papa, I do wonder at you.  How could you, how could you
believe it?"  Poor Eleanor, as she thought of her father's
defalcation, could resist her tears no longer, and was forced to
cover her face with her handkerchief.

The place was not very opportune for her grief.  They were walking
through the shrubberies, and there were many people near them.  Poor
Mr. Harding stammered out his excuse as best he could, and Eleanor
with an effort controlled her tears and returned her handkerchief to
her pocket.  She did not find it difficult to forgive her father, nor
could she altogether refuse to join him in the returning gaiety of
spirit to which her present avowal gave rise.  It was such a load off
his heart to think that he should not be called on to welcome Mr.
Slope as his son-in-law.  It was such a relief to him to find that
his daughter's feelings and his own were now, as they ever had been,
in unison.  He had been so unhappy for the last six weeks about this
wretched Mr. Slope!  He was so indifferent as to the loss of the
hospital, so thankful for the recovery of his daughter, that, strong
as was the ground for Eleanor's anger, she could not find it in her
heart to be long angry with him.

"Dear Papa," she said, hanging closely to his arm, "never suspect me
again: promise me that you never will.  Whatever I do you may be sure
I shall tell you first; you may be sure I shall consult you."

And Mr. Harding did promise, and owned his sin, and promised again. 
And so, while he promised amendment and she uttered forgiveness, they
returned together to the drawing-room windows.

And what had Eleanor meant when she declared that whatever she did
she would tell her father first?  What was she thinking of doing?

So ended the first act of the melodrama which Eleanor was called on
to perform this day at Ullathorne.



CHAPTER XXXVII

The Signora Neroni, the Countess De Courcy, and Mrs. Proudie Meet
Each Other at Ullathorne


And now there were new arrivals.  Just as Eleanor reached the
drawing-room the signora was being wheeled into it.  She had been
brought out of the carriage into the dining-room and there placed on
a sofa, and was now in the act of entering the other room, by the
joint aid of her brother and sister, Mr. Arabin, and two servants in
livery.  She was all in her glory and looked so pathetically happy,
so full of affliction and grace, was so beautiful, so pitiable, and
so charming that it was almost impossible not to be glad she was
there.

Miss Thorne was unaffectedly glad to welcome her.  In fact, the
signora was a sort of lion, and though there was no drop of the
Leohunter blood in Miss Thorne's veins, she nevertheless did like to
see attractive people at her house.  The signora was attractive, and
on her first settlement in the dining-room she had whispered two or
three soft feminine words into Miss Thorne's ear which, at the
moment, had quite touched that lady's heart.

"Oh, Miss Thorne; where is Miss Thorne?" she said as soon as her
attendants had placed her in her position just before one of the
windows, from whence she could see all that was going on upon the
lawn.  "How am I to thank you for permitting a creature like me to be
here?  But if you knew the pleasure you give me, I am sure you would
excuse the trouble I bring with me."  And as she spoke she squeezed
the spinster's little hand between her own.

"We are delighted to see you here," said Miss Thorne; "you give us no
trouble at all, and we think it a great favour conferred by you to
come and see us--don't we, Wilfred?"

"A very great favour indeed," said Mr. Thorne with a gallant bow but
of a somewhat less cordial welcome than that conceded by his sister. 
Mr. Thorne had heard perhaps more of the antecedents of his guest
than his sister had done and had not as yet undergone the power of
the signora's charms.

But while the mother of the last of the Neros was thus in her full
splendour, with crowds of people gazing at her and the élite of the
company standing round her couch, her glory was paled by the arrival
of the Countess De Courcy.  Miss Thorne had now been waiting three
hours for the countess, and could not therefore but show very evident
gratification when the arrival at last took place.  She and her
brother of course went off to welcome the titled grandees, and with
them, alas, went many of the signora's admirers.

"Oh, Mr. Thorne," said the countess, while in the act of being
disrobed of her fur cloaks and rerobed in her gauze shawls, "what
dreadful roads you have; perfectly frightful."

It happened that Mr. Thorne was waywarden for the district and, not
liking the attack, began to excuse his roads.

"Oh, yes, indeed they are," said the countess not minding him in the
least; "perfectly dreadful--are they not, Margaretta?  Why, my dear
Miss Thorne, we left Courcy Castle just at eleven; it was only just
past eleven, was it not, George? And--"

"Just past one I think you mean," said the Honourable George, turning
from the group and eyeing the signora through his glass.  The signora
gave him back his own, as the saying is, and more with it, so that
the young nobleman was forced to avert his glance and drop his glass.

"I say, Thorne," whispered he, "who the deuce is that on the sofa?"

"Dr. Stanhope's daughter," whispered back Mr. Thorne.  "Signora
Neroni, she calls herself."

"Whew--ew--ew!" whistled the Honourable George.  "The devil she is. 
I have heard no end of stories about that filly.  You must positively
introduce me, Thorne; you positively must."

Mr. Thorne, who was respectability itself, did not quite like having
a guest about whom the Honourable George De Courcy had heard no end
of stories, but he couldn't help himself.  He merely resolved that
before he went to bed he would let his sister know somewhat of the
history of the lady she was so willing to welcome.  The innocence of
Miss Thorne at her time of life was perfectly charming, but even
innocence may be dangerous.

"George may say what he likes," continued the countess, urging her
excuses to Miss Thorne; "I am sure we were past the castle gate
before twelve--weren't we, Margaretta?"

"Upon my word I don't know," said the Lady Margaretta, "for I was
half-asleep.  But I do know that I was called some time in the middle
of the night and was dressing myself before daylight."

Wise people, when they are in the wrong, always put themselves right
by finding fault with the people against whom they have sinned.  Lady
De Courcy was a wise woman, and therefore, having treated Miss Thorne
very badly by staying away till three o'clock, she assumed the
offensive and attacked Mr. Thorne's roads.  Her daughter, not less
wise, attacked Miss Thorne's early hours.  The art of doing this is
among the most precious of those usually cultivated by persons who
know how to live.  There is no withstanding it.  Who can go
systematically to work and, having done battle with the primary
accusation and settled that, then bring forward a countercharge and
support that also?  Life is not long enough for such labours.  A man
in the right relies easily on his rectitude and therefore goes about
unarmed.  His very strength is his weakness.  A man in the wrong
knows that he must look to his weapons; his very weakness is his
strength.  The one is never prepared for combat, the other is always
ready.  Therefore it is that in this world the man that is in the
wrong almost invariably conquers the man that is in the right, and
invariably despises him.

A man must be an idiot or else an angel who, after the age of forty,
shall attempt to be just to his neighbours.  Many like the Lady
Margaretta have learnt their lesson at a much earlier age.  But this
of course depends on the school in which they have been taught.

Poor Miss Thorne was altogether overcome.  She knew very well that
she had been ill-treated, and yet she found herself making apologies
to Lady De Courcy.  To do her ladyship justice, she received them
very graciously and allowed herself, with her train of daughters, to
be led towards the lawn.

There were two windows in the drawing-room wide open for the countess
to pass through, but she saw that there was a woman on a sofa, at the
third window, and that that woman had, as it were, a following
attached to her.  Her ladyship therefore determined to investigate
the woman.  The De Courcy's were hereditarily shortsighted, and had
been so for thirty centuries at least.  So Lady De Courcy, who when
she entered the family had adopted the family habits, did as her son
had done before her and, taking her glass to investigate the Signora
Neroni, pressed in among the gentlemen who surrounded the couch and
bowed slightly to those whom she chose to honour by her acquaintance.

In order to get to the window she had to pass close to the front of
the couch, and as she did so she stared hard at the occupant.  The
occupant, in return, stared hard at the countess.  The countess, who,
since her countess-ship commenced, had been accustomed to see all
eyes not royal, ducal, or marquesal fall before her own, paused as
she went on, raised her eyebrows, and stared even harder than before. 
But she had now to do with one who cared little for countesses.  It
was, one may say, impossible for mortal man or woman to abash
Madeline Neroni.  She opened her large, bright, lustrous eyes wider
and wider, till she seemed to be all eyes.  She gazed up into the
lady's face, not as though she did it with an effort, but as if she
delighted in doing it.  She used no glass to assist her effrontery
and needed none.  The faintest possible smile of derision played
round her mouth, and her nostrils were slightly dilated, as if in
sure anticipation of her triumph.  And it was sure.  The Countess De
Courcy, in spite of her thirty centuries and De Courcy Castle and the
fact that Lord De Courcy was grand master of the ponies to the Prince
of Wales, had not a chance with her.  At first the little circlet of
gold wavered in the countess's hand, then the hand shook, then the
circlet fell, the countess's head tossed itself into the air, and the
countess's feet shambled out to the lawn.  She did not, however, go
so fast but what she heard the signora's voice, asking:

"Who on earth is that woman, Mr. Slope?"

"That is Lady De Courcy."

"Oh, ah.  I might have supposed so.  Ha, ha, ha.  Well, that's as
good as a play."

It was as good as a play to any there who had eyes to observe it and
wit to comment on what they observed.

But the Lady De Courcy soon found a congenial spirit on the lawn. 
There she encountered Mrs. Proudie, and as Mrs. Proudie was not only
the wife of a bishop but was also the cousin of an earl, Lady De
Courcy considered her to be the fittest companion she was likely to
meet in that assemblage.  They were accordingly delighted to see each
other.  Mrs. Proudie by no means despised a countess, and as this
countess lived in the county and within a sort of extensive visiting
distance of Barchester, she was glad to have this opportunity of
ingratiating herself.

"My dear Lady De Courcy, I am so delighted," said she, looking as
little grim as it was in her nature to do.  "I hardly expected to see
you here.  It is such a distance, and then, you know, such a crowd."

"And such roads, Mrs. Proudie! I really wonder how the people ever
get about.  But I don't suppose they ever do."

"Well, I really don't know, but I suppose not.  The Thornes don't, I
know," said Mrs. Proudie.  "Very nice person, Miss Thorne, isn't
she?"

"Oh, delightful, and so queer; I've known her these twenty years.  A
great pet of mine is dear Miss Thorne.  She is so very strange, you
know.  She always makes me think of the Eskimos and the Indians. 
Isn't her dress quite delightful?"

"Delightful," said Mrs. Proudie.  "I wonder now whether she paints. 
Did you ever see such colour?"

"Oh, of course," said Lady De Courcy; "that is, I have no doubt she
does.  But, Mrs. Proudie, who is that woman on the sofa by the
window?  Just step this way and you'll see her, there--" and the
countess led her to a spot where she could plainly see the signora's
well-remembered face and figure.

She did not however do so without being equally well seen by the
signora.  "Look, look," said that lady to Mr. Slope, who was still
standing near to her; "see the high spiritualities and temporalities
of the land in league together, and all against poor me.  I'll wager
my bracelet, Mr. Slope, against your next sermon that they've taken
up their position there on purpose to pull me to pieces.  Well, I
can't rush to the combat, but I know how to protect myself if the
enemy come near me."

But the enemy knew better.  They could gain nothing by contact with
the Signora Neroni, and they could abuse her as they pleased at a
distance from her on the lawn.

"She's that horrid Italian woman, Lady De Courcy; you must have heard
of her."

"What Italian woman?" said her ladyship, quite alive to the coming
story.  "I don't think I've heard of any Italian woman coming into
the country.  She doesn't look Italian, either."

"Oh, you must have heard of her," said Mrs. Proudie.  "No, she's not
absolutely Italian.  She is Dr. Stanhope's daughter--Dr. Stanhope the
prebendary--and she calls herself the Signora Neroni."

"Oh-h-h-h!" exclaimed the countess.

"I was sure you had heard of her," continued Mrs. Proudie.  I don't
know anything about her husband.  They do say that some man named
Neroni is still alive.  I believe she did marry such a man abroad,
but I do not at all know who or what he was.

"Oh-h-h-h!" exclaimed the countess, shaking her head with much
intelligence, as every additional "h" fell from her lips.  "I know
all about it now.  I have heard George mention her.  George knows all
about her.  George heard about her in Rome."

"She's an abominable woman, at any rate," said Mrs. Proudie.

"Insufferable," said the countess.

"She made her way into the palace once, before I knew anything about
her, and I cannot tell you how dreadfully indecent her conduct was."

"Was it?" said the delighted countess.

"Insufferable," said the prelatess.

"But why does she lie on a sofa?" asked Lady De Courcy.

"She has only one leg," replied Mrs. Proudie.

"Only one leg!" said Lady De Courcy, who felt to a