 certain degree
dissatisfied that the signora was thus incapacitated.  "Was she born
so?"

"Oh, no," said Mrs. Proudie--and her ladyship felt some what
recomforted by the assurance--"she had two.  But that Signor Neroni
beat her, I believe, till she was obliged to have one amputated.  At
any rate, she entirely lost the use of it."

"Unfortunate creature!" said the countess, who herself knew something
of matrimonial trials.

"Yes," said Mrs. Proudie, "one would pity her in spite of her past
bad conduct, if she now knew how to behave herself.  But she does
not.  She is the most insolent creature I ever put my eyes on."

"Indeed she is," said Lady De Courcy.

"And her conduct with men is so abominable that she is not fit to be
admitted into any lady's drawing-room."

"Dear me!" said the countess, becoming again excited, happy and
merciless.

"You saw that man standing near her--the clergyman with the red
hair?"

"Yes, yes."

"She has absolutely ruined that man.  The bishop--or I should rather
take the blame on myself, for it was I--I brought him down from
London to Barchester.  He is a tolerable preacher, an active young
man, and I therefore introduced him to the bishop.  That woman, Lady
De Courcy, has got hold of him and has so disgraced him that I am
forced to require that he shall leave the palace; and I doubt very
much whether he won't lose his gown!"

"Why, what an idiot the man must be!" said the countess.

"You don't know the intriguing villainy of that woman," said Mrs.
Proudie, remembering her torn flounces.

"But you say she has only got one leg!"

"She is as full of mischief as tho' she had ten.  Look at her eyes,
Lady De Courcy.  Did you ever see such eyes in a decent woman's
head?"

"Indeed, I never did, Mrs. Proudie."

"And her effrontery, and her voice!  I quite pity her poor father,
who is really a good sort of man."

"Dr. Stanhope, isn't he?"

"Yes, Dr. Stanhope.  He is one of our prebendaries--a good, quiet
sort of man himself.  But I am surprised that he should let his
daughter conduct herself as she does."

"I suppose he can't help it," said the countess.

"But a clergyman, you know, Lady De Courcy!  He should at any rate
prevent her from exhibiting in public, if he cannot induce her to
behave at home.  But he is to be pitied.  I believe he has a
desperate life of it with the lot of them.  That apish-looking man
there, with the long beard and the loose trousers--he is the woman's
brother.  He is nearly as bad as she is.  They are both of them
infidels."

"Infidels!" said Lady De Courcy, "and their father a prebendary!"

"Yes, and likely to be the new dean, too," said Mrs. Proudie.

"Oh, yes, poor dear Dr. Trefoil!" said the countess, who had once in
her life spoken to that gentleman.  "I was so distressed to hear it,
Mrs. Proudie.  And so Dr. Stanhope is to be the new dean!  He comes
of an excellent family, and I wish him success in spite of his
daughter.  Perhaps, Mrs. Proudie, when he is dean, they'll be better
able to see the error of their ways."

To this Mrs. Proudie said nothing.  Her dislike of the Signora Neroni
was too deep to admit of her even hoping that that lady should see
the error of her ways.  Mrs. Proudie looked on the signora as one of
the lost--one of those beyond the reach of Christian charity--and was
therefore able to enjoy the luxury of hating her without the drawback
of wishing her eventually well out of her sins.

Any further conversation between these congenial souls was prevented
by the advent of Mr. Thorne, who came to lead the countess to the
tent.  Indeed, he had been desired to do so some ten minutes since,
but he had been delayed in the drawing-room by the signora.  She had
contrived to detain him, to get him near to her sofa, and at last to
make him seat himself on a chair close to her beautiful arm.  The
fish took the bait, was hooked, and caught, and landed.  Within that
ten minutes he had heard the whole of the signora's history in such
strains as she chose to use in telling it.  He learnt from the lady's
own lips the whole of that mysterious tale to which the Honourable
George had merely alluded.  He discovered that the beautiful creature
lying before him had been more sinned against than sinning.  She had
owned to him that she had been weak, confiding, and indifferent to
the world's opinion, and that she had therefore been ill-used,
deceived, and evil spoken of.  She had spoken to him of her mutilated
limb, her youth destroyed in fullest bloom, her beauty robbed of its
every charm, her life blighted, her hopes withered, and as she did so
a tear dropped from her eye to her cheek.  She had told him of these
things and asked for his sympathy.

What could a good-natured, genial, Anglo-Saxon Squire Thorne do but
promise to sympathize with her?  Mr. Thorne did promise to
sympathize; promised also to come and see the last of the Neros, to
hear more of those fearful Roman days, of those light and innocent
but dangerous hours which flitted by so fast on the shores of Como,
and to make himself the confidant of the signora's sorrows.

We need hardly say that he dropped all idea of warning his sister
against the dangerous lady.  He had been mistaken--never so much
mistaken in his life.  He had always regarded that Honourable George
as a coarse, brutal-minded young man; now he was more convinced than
ever that he was so.  It was by such men as the Honourable George
that the reputations of such women as Madeline Neroni were imperilled
and damaged.  He would go and see the lady in her own house; he was
fully sure in his own mind of the soundness of his own judgement; if
he found her, as he believed he should do, an injured, well-disposed,
warm-hearted woman, he would get his sister Monica to invite her out
to Ullathorne.

"No," said she, as at her instance he got up to leave her and
declared that he himself would attend upon her wants; "no, no, my
friend; I positively put a veto upon your doing so.  What, in your
own house, with an assemblage round you such as there is here!  Do
you wish to make every woman hate me and every man stare at me?  I
lay a positive order on you not to come near me again to-day.  Come
and see me at home.  It is only at home that I can talk, it is only
at home that I really can live and enjoy myself.  My days of going
out, days such as these, are rare indeed.  Come and see me at home,
Mr. Thorne, and then I will not bid you to leave me."

It is, we believe, common with young men of five-and-twenty to look
on their seniors--on men of, say, double their own age--as so many
stocks and stones--stocks and stones, that is, in regard to feminine
beauty.  There never was a greater mistake.  Women, indeed, generally
know better, but on this subject men of one age are thoroughly
ignorant of what is the very nature of mankind of other ages.  No
experience of what goes on in the world, no reading of history, no
observation of life, has any effect in teaching the truth.  Men of
fifty don't dance mazurkas, being generally too fat and wheezy; nor
do they sit for the hour together on river-banks at their mistresses'
feet, being somewhat afraid of rheumatism.  But for real true love--
love at first sight, love to devotion, love that robs a man of his
sleep, love that "will gaze an eagle blind," love that "will hear the
lowest sound when the suspicious tread of theft is stopped," love
that is "like a Hercules, still climbing trees in the Hesperides"--we
believe the best age is from forty-five to seventy; up to that, men
are generally given to mere flirting.

At the present moment Mr. Thorne, aetat. fifty, was over head and
ears in love at first sight with the Signora Madeline Vesey Neroni,
nata Stanhope.

Nevertheless, he was sufficiently master of himself to offer his arm
with all propriety to Lady De Courcy, and the countess graciously
permitted herself to be lead to the tent.  Such had been Miss
Thorne's orders, as she had succeeded in inducing the bishop to lead
old Lady Knowle to the top of the dining-room.  One of the baronets
was sent off in quest of Mrs. Proudie and found that lady on the lawn
not in the best of humours.  Mr. Thorne and the countess had left her
too abruptly; she had in vain looked about for an attendant chaplain,
or even a stray curate; they were all drawing long bows with the 
young ladies at the bottom of the lawn, or finding places for their
graceful co-toxophilites in some snug corner of the tent.  In such
position Mrs. Proudie had been wont in earlier days to fall back upon
Mr. Slope, but now she could never fall back upon him again.  She
gave her head one shake as she thought of her lone position, and that
shake was as good as a week deducted from Mr. Slope's longer sojourn
in Barchester.  Sir Harkaway Gorse, however, relieved her present
misery, though his doing so by no means mitigated the sinning
chaplain's doom.

And now the eating and drinking began in earnest.  Dr. Grantly, to
his great horror, found himself leagued to Mrs. Clantantram.  Mrs.
Clantantram had a great regard for the archdeacon, which was not
cordially returned, and when she, coming up to him, whispered in his
ear, "Come, Archdeacon, I'm sure you won't begrudge an old friend the
favour of your arm," and then proceeded to tell him the whole history
of her roquelaure, he resolved that he would shake her off before he
was fifteen minutes older.  But latterly the archdeacon had not been
successful in his resolutions, and on the present occasion Mrs.
Clantantram stuck to him till the banquet was over.

Dr. Gwynne got a baronet's wife, and Mrs. Grantly fell to the lot of
a baronet.  Charlotte Stanhope attached herself to Mr. Harding in
order to make room for Bertie, who succeeded in sitting down in the
dining-room next to Mrs. Bold.  To speak sooth, now that he had love
in earnest to make, his heart almost failed him.

Eleanor had been right glad to avail herself of his arm, seeing that
Mr. Slope was hovering nigh her.  In striving to avoid that terrible
Charybdis of a Slope she was in great danger of falling into an
unseen Scylla on the other hand, that Scylla being Bertie Stanhope. 
Nothing could be more gracious than she was to Bertie.  She almost
jumped at his proffered arm.  Charlotte perceived this from a
distance and triumphed in her heart; Bertie felt it and was
encouraged; Mr. Slope saw it and glowered with jealousy.  Eleanor and
Bertie sat down to table in the dining-room, and as she took her seat
at his right hand she found that Mr. Slope was already in possession
of the chair at her own.

As these things were going on in the dining-room, Mr. Arabin was
hanging enraptured and alone over the signora's sofa, and Eleanor
from her seat could look through the open door and see that he was
doing so.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

The Bishop Breakfasts, and the Dean Dies


The Bishop of Barchester said grace over the well-spread board in the
Ullathorne dining-room; while he did so, the last breath was flying
from the Dean of Barchester as he lay in his sick room in the
deanery.  When the Bishop of Barchester raised his first glass of
champagne to his lips, the deanship of Barchester was a good thing in
the gift of the prime minister.  Before the Bishop of Barchester had
left the table, the minister of the day was made aware of the fact at
his country-seat in Hampshire, and had already turned over in his
mind the names of five very respectable aspirants for the preferment. 
It is at present only necessary to say that Mr. Slope's name was not
among the five.

"'Twas merry in the hall when the beards wagged all," and the
clerical beards wagged merrily in the hall of Ullathorne that day. 
It was not till after the last cork had been drawn, the last speech
made, the last nut cracked, that tidings reached and were whispered
about that the poor dean was no more.  It was well for the happiness
of the clerical beards that this little delay took place, as
otherwise decency would have forbidden them to wag at all.

But there was one sad man among them that day.  Mr. Arabin's beard
did not wag as it should have done.  He had come there hoping the
best, striving to think the best, about Eleanor; turning over in his
mind all the words he remembered to have fallen from her about Mr.
Slope, and trying to gather from them a conviction unfavourable to
his rival.  He had not exactly resolved to come that day to some
decisive proof as to the widow's intention, but he had meant, if
possible, to recultivate his friendship with Eleanor, and in his
present frame of mind any such recultivation must have ended in a
declaration of love.

He had passed the previous night alone at his new parsonage, and it
was the first night that he had so passed.  It had been dull and
sombre enough.  Mrs. Grantly had been right in saying that a
priestess would be wanting at St. Ewold's.  He had sat there alone
with his glass before him, and then with his tea-pot, thinking about
Eleanor Bold.  As is usual in such meditations, he did little but
blame her; blame her for liking Mr. Slope, and blame her for not
liking him; blame her for her cordiality to himself, and blame her
for her want of cordiality; blame her for being stubborn, headstrong,
and passionate; and yet the more he thought of her the higher she
rose in his affection.  If only it should turn out, if only it could
be made to turn out, that she had defended Mr. Slope, not from love,
but on principle, all would be right.  Such principle in itself would
be admirable, lovable, womanly; he felt that he could be pleased to
allow Mr. Slope just so much favour as that.  But if--  And then Mr.
Arabin poked his fire most unnecessarily, spoke crossly to his new
parlour-maid who came in for the tea-things, and threw himself back
in his chair determined to go to sleep.  Why had she been so stiff-
necked when asked a plain question?  She could not but have known in
what light he regarded her.  Why had she not answered a plain
question and so put an end to his misery?  Then, instead of going to
sleep in his armchair, Mr. Arabin walked about the room as though he
had been possessed.

On the following morning, when he attended Miss Thorne's behests, he
was still in a somewhat confused state.  His first duty had been to
converse with Mrs. Clantantram, and that lady had found it impossible
to elicit the slightest sympathy from him on the subject of her
roquelaure.  Miss Thorne had asked him whether Mrs. Bold was coming
with the Grantlys, and the two names of Bold and Grantly together had
nearly made him jump from his seat.

He was in this state of confused uncertainty, hope, and doubt when he
saw Mr. Slope, with his most polished smile, handing Eleanor out of
her carriage.  He thought of nothing more.  He never considered
whether the carriage belonged to her or to Mr. Slope, or to anyone
else to whom they might both be mutually obliged without any concert
between themselves.  This sight in his present state of mind was
quite enough to upset him and his resolves.  It was clear as noon-
day.  Had he seen her handed into a carriage by Mr. Slope at a church
door with a white veil over her head, the truth could not be more
manifest.  He went into the house and, as we have seen, soon found
himself walking with Mr. Harding.  Shortly afterwards Eleanor came
up, and then he had to leave his companion and either go about alone
or find another.  While in this state he was encountered by the
archdeacon.

"I wonder," said Dr. Grantly, "if it be true that Mr. Slope and Mrs.
Bold came here together.  Susan says she is almost sure she saw their
faces in the same carriage as she got out of her own."

Mr. Arabin had nothing for it but to bear his testimony to the
correctness of Mrs. Grantly's eyesight.

"It is perfectly shameful," said the archdeacon; "or, I should rather
say, shameless.  She was asked here as my guest, and if she be
determined to disgrace herself, she should have feeling enough not to
do so before my immediate friends.  I wonder how that man got himself
invited.  I wonder whether she had the face to bring him."

To this Mr. Arabin could answer nothing, nor did he wish to answer
anything.  Though he abused Eleanor to himself, he did not choose to
abuse her to anyone else, nor was he well-pleased to hear anyone else
speak ill of her.  Dr. Grantly, however, was very angry and did not
spare his sister-in-law.  Mr. Arabin therefore left him as soon as he
could and wandered back into the house.

He had not been there long when the signora was brought in.  For some
time he kept himself out of temptation and merely hovered round her
at a distance, but as soon as Mr. Thorne had left her he yielded
himself up to the basilisk and allowed himself to be made prey of.

It is impossible to say how the knowledge had been acquired, but the
signora had a sort of instinctive knowledge that Mr. Arabin was an
admirer of Mrs. Bold.  Men hunt foxes by the aid of dogs and are
aware that they do so by the strong organ of smell with which the dog
is endowed.  They do not, however, in the least comprehend how such a
sense can work with such acuteness.  The organ by which women
instinctively, as it were, know and feel how other women are regarded
by men and how also men are regarded by other women is equally strong
and equally incomprehensible.  A glance, a word, a motion, suffices:
by some such acute exercise of her feminine senses the signora was
aware that Mr. Arabin loved Eleanor Bold; therefore, by a further
exercise of her peculiar feminine propensities, it was quite natural
for her to entrap Mr. Arabin into her net.

The work was half-done before she came to Ullathorne, and when could
she have a better opportunity of completing it?  She had had almost
enough of Mr. Slope, though she could not quite resist the fun of
driving a very sanctimonious clergyman to madness by a desperate and
ruinous passion.  Mr. Thorne had fallen too easily to give much
pleasure in the chase.  His position as a man of wealth might make
his alliance of value, but as a lover he was very second-rate.  We
may say that she regarded him somewhat as a sportsman does a
pheasant.  The bird is so easily shot that he would not be worth the
shooting were it not for the very respectable appearance that he
makes in a larder.  The signora would not waste much time in shooting
Mr. Thorne, but still he was worth bagging for family uses.

But Mr. Arabin was game of another sort.  The signora was herself
possessed of quite sufficient intelligence to know that Mr. Arabin
was a man more than usually intellectual.  She knew also that, as a
clergyman, he was of a much higher stamp than Mr. Slope and that, as
a gentleman, he was better educated than Mr. Thorne.  She would never
have attempted to drive Mr. Arabin into ridiculous misery as she did
Mr. Slope, nor would she think it possible to dispose of him in ten
minutes as she had done with Mr. Thorne.

Such were her reflexions about Mr. Arabin.  As to Mr. Arabin, it
cannot be said that he reflected at all about the signora.  He knew
that she was beautiful, and he felt that she was able to charm him. 
He required charming in his present misery, and therefore he went and
stood at the head of her couch.  She knew all about it.  Such were
her peculiar gifts.  It was her nature to see that he required
charming, and it was her province to charm him.  As the Eastern idler
swallows his dose of opium, as the London reprobate swallows his dose
of gin, so with similar desires and for similar reasons did Mr.
Arabin prepare to swallow the charms of the Signora Neroni.

"Why an't you shooting with bows and arrows, Mr. Arabin?" said she,
when they were nearly alone together in the drawing-room, "or talking
with young ladies in shady bowers, or turning your talents to account
in some way?  What was a bachelor like you asked here for?  Don't you
mean to earn your cold chicken and champagne?  Were I you, I should
be ashamed to be so idle."

Mr. Arabin murmured some sort of answer.  Though he wished to be
charmed, he was hardly yet in a mood to be playful in return.

"Why what ails you, Mr. Arabin?" said she.  "Here you are in your own
parish--Miss Thorne tells me that her party is given expressly in
your honour--and yet you are the only dull man at it.  Your friend
Mr. Slope was with me a few minutes since full of life and spirits;
why don't you rival him?"

It was not difficult for so acute an observer as Madeline Neroni to
see that she had hit the nail on the head and driven the bolt home. 
Mr. Arabin winced visibly before her attack, and she knew at once
that he was jealous of Mr. Slope.

"But I look on you and Mr. Slope as the very antipodes of men," said
she.  "There is nothing in which you are not each the reverse of the
other, except in belonging to the same profession--and even in that
you are so unlike as perfectly to maintain the rule.  He is
gregarious; you are given to solitude.  He is active; you are
passive.  He works; you think.  He likes women; you despise them.
He is fond of position and power; and so are you, but for directly
different reasons.  He loves to be praised; you very foolishly abhor
it.  He will gain his rewards, which will be an insipid, useful wife,
a comfortable income, and a reputation for sanctimony; you will also
gain yours."

"Well, and what will they be?" said Mr. Arabin, who knew that he was
being flattered and yet suffered himself to put up with it.  "What
will be my rewards?"

"The heart of some woman whom you will be too austere to own that you
love, and the respect of some few friends which you will be too proud
to own that you value."

"Rich rewards," said he; "but of little worth, if they are to be so
treated."

"Oh, you are not to look for such success as awaits Mr. Slope.  He is
born to be a successful man.  He suggests to himself an object and
then starts for it with eager intention.  Nothing will deter him from
his pursuit.  He will have no scruples, no fears, no hesitation.  His
desire is to be a bishop with a rising family--the wife will come
first, and in due time the apron.  You will see all this, and then--"

"Well, and what then?"

"Then you will begin to wish that you had done the same."

Mr. Arabin looked placidly out at the lawn and, resting his shoulder
on the head of the sofa, rubbed his chin with his hand.  It was a
trick he had when he was thinking deeply, and what the signora said
made him think.  Was it not all true?  Would he not hereafter look
back, if not at Mr. Slope, at some others, perhaps not equally gifted
with himself, who had risen in the world while he had lagged behind,
and then wish that he had done the same?

"Is not such the doom of all speculative men of talent?" said she. 
"Do they not all sit wrapt as you now are, cutting imaginary silken
cords with their fine edges, while those not so highly tempered sever
the everyday Gordian knots of the world's struggle and win wealth and
renown?  Steel too highly polished, edges too sharp, do not do for
this world's work, Mr. Arabin."

Who was this woman that thus read the secrets of his heart and
re-uttered to him the unwelcome bodings of his own soul?  He looked
full into her face when she had done speaking and said, "Am I one of 
those foolish blades, too sharp and too fine to do a useful day's
work?"

"Why do you let the Slopes of the world outdistance you?" said she. 
"Is not the blood in your veins as warm as his?  Does not your pulse
beat as fast?  Has not God made you a man and intended you to do a
man's work here, ay, and to take a man's wages also?"

Mr. Arabin sat ruminating, rubbing his face, and wondering why these
things were said to him, but he replied nothing.  The signora went
on:

"The greatest mistake any man ever made is to suppose that the good
things of the world are not worth the winning.  And it is a mistake
so opposed to the religion which you preach!  Why does God permit his
bishops one after another to have their five thousands and ten
thousands a year if such wealth be bad and not worth having?  Why are
beautiful things given to us, and luxuries and pleasant enjoyments,
if they be not intended to be used?  They must be meant for someone,
and what is good for a layman surely cannot be bad for a clerk.  You
try to despise these good things, but you only try--you don't
succeed."

"Don't I?" said Mr. Arabin, still musing, not knowing what he said.

"I ask you the question: do you succeed?"

Mr. Arabin looked at her piteously.  It seemed to him , as though he
were being interrogated by some inner spirit of his own, to whom he
could not refuse an answer and to whom he did not dare to give a
false reply.

"Come, Mr. Arabin, confess; do you succeed?  Is money so
contemptible?  Is worldly power so worthless?  Is feminine beauty a
trifle to be so slightly regarded by a wise man?"

"Feminine beauty!" said he, gazing into her face, as though all the
feminine beauty in the world were concentrated there.  "Why do you 
say I do not regard it?"

"If you look at me like that, Mr. Arabin, I shall alter my opinion--
or should do so, were I not of course aware that I have no beauty of
my own worth regarding."

The gentleman blushed crimson, but the lady did not blush at all.  A
slightly increased colour animated her face, just so much so as to
give her an air of special interest.  She expected a compliment from
her admirer, but she was rather gratified than otherwise by finding
that he did not pay it to her.  Messrs. Slope and Thorne, Messrs.
Brown, Jones, and Robinson, they all paid her compliments.  She was
rather in hopes that she would ultimately succeed in inducing Mr.
Arabin to abuse her.

"But your gaze," said she, "is one of wonder, not of admiration.  You
wonder at my audacity in asking you such questions about yourself."

"Well, I do rather," said he.

"Nevertheless, I expect an answer, Mr. Arabin.  Why were women made
beautiful if men are not to regard them?"

"But men do regard them," he replied.

"And why not you?"

"You are begging the question, Madame Neroni."

"I am sure I shall beg nothing, Mr. Arabin, which you will not grant,
and I do beg for an answer.  Do you not as a rule think women below
your notice as companions?  Let us see.  There is the Widow Bold
looking round at you from her chair this minute.  What would you say
to her as a companion for life?"

Mr. Arabin, rising from his position, leaned over the sofa and looked
through the drawing-room door to the place where Eleanor was seated
between Bertie Stanhope and Mr. Slope.  She at once caught his glance
and averted her own.  She was not pleasantly placed in her present
position.  Mr. Slope was doing his best to attract her attention, and
she was striving to prevent his doing so by talking to Mr. Stanhope,
while her mind was intently fixed on Mr. Arabin and Madame Neroni. 
Bertie Stanhope endeavoured to take advantage of her favours, but he
was thinking more of the manner in which he would by and by throw
himself at her feet than of amusing her at the present moment.

"There," said the signora.  "She was stretching her beautiful neck to
look at you, and now you have disturbed her.  Well, I declare I
believe I am wrong about you; I believe that you do think Mrs. Bold a
charming woman.  Your looks seem to say so, and by her looks I should
say that she is jealous of me.  Come, Mr. Arabin, confide in me, and
if it is so, I'll do all in my power to make up the match."

It is needless to say that the signora was not very sincere in her
offer..  She was never sincere on such subjects.  She never expected
others to be so, nor did she expect others to think her so.  Such
matters were her playthings, her billiard table, her hounds and
hunters, her waltzes and polkas, her picnics and summer-day
excursions.  She had little else to amuse her and therefore played at
love-making in all its forms.  She was now playing at it with Mr.
Arabin, and did not at all expect the earnestness and truth of his
answer.

"All in your power would be nothing," said he, "for Mrs. Bold is, I
imagine, already engaged to another."

"Then you own the impeachment yourself."

"You cross-question me rather unfairly," he replied, "and I do not
know why I answer you at all.  Mrs. Bold is a very beautiful woman,
and as intelligent as beautiful.  It is impossible to know her
without admiring her."

"So you think the widow a very beautiful woman?"

"Indeed I do."

"And one that would grace the parsonage of St. Ewold's."

"One that would well grace any man's house."

"And you really have the effrontery to tell me this," said she; "to
tell me, who, as you very well know, set up to be a beauty myself,
and who am at this very moment taking such an interest in your
affairs, you really have the effrontery to tell me that Mrs. Bold is
the most beautiful woman you know."

"I did not say so," said Mr. Arabin; "you are more beautiful--"

"Ah, come now, that is something like.  I thought you could not be so
unfeeling."

"You are more beautiful, perhaps more clever."

"Thank you, thank you, Mr. Arabin.  I knew that you and I should be
friends."

"But--"

"Not a word further.  I will not hear a word further.  If you talk
till midnight you cannot improve what you have said."

"But Madame Neroni, Mrs. Bold--"

"I will not hear a word about Mrs. Bold.  Dread thoughts of
strychnine did pass across my brain, but she is welcome to the second
place."

"Her place--"

"I won't hear anything about her or her place.  I am satisfied, and
that is enough.  But Mr. Arabin, I am dying with hunger; beautiful
and clever as I am, you know I cannot go to my food, and yet you do
not bring it to me."

This at any rate was so true as to make it necessary that Mr. Arabin
should act upon it, and he accordingly went into the dining-room and
supplied the signora's wants.

"And yourself?" said she.

"Oh," said he, "I am not hungry.  I never eat at this hour."

"Come, come, Mr. Arabin, don't let love interfere with your appetite. 
It never does with mine.  Give me half a glass more champagne and
then go to the table.  Mrs. Bold will do me an injury if you stay
talking to me any longer."

Mr. Arabin did as he was bid.  He took her plate and glass from her
and, going into the dining-room, helped himself to a sandwich from
the crowded table and began munching it in a corner.

As he was doing so Miss Thorne, who had hardly sat down for a moment,
came into the room and, seeing him standing, was greatly distressed.

"Oh, my dear Mr. Arabin," said she, "have you never sat down yet?
I am so distressed.  You of all men, too."

Mr. Arabin assured her that he had only just come into the room.

"That is the very reason why you should lose no more time.  Come,
I'll make room for you.  Thank'ee, my dear," she said, seeing that
Mrs. Bold was making an attempt to move from her chair, "but I would
not for worlds see you stir, for all the ladies would think it
necessary to follow.  But, perhaps, if Mr. Stanhope has done--just
for a minute, Mr. Stanhope, till I can get another chair."

And so Bertie had to rise to make way for his rival.  This he did, as
he did everything, with an air of good-humoured pleasantry which made
it impossible for Mr. Arabin to refuse the proffered seat.

"His bishopric let another take," said Bertie, the quotation being
certainly not very appropriate either for the occasion or the person
spoken to.  "I have eaten and am satisfied; Mr. Arabin, pray take my
chair.  I wish for your sake that it really was a bishop's seat."

Mr. Arabin did sit down, and as he did so Mrs. Bold got up as though
to follow her neighbour.

"Pray, pray don't move," said Miss Thorne, almost forcing Eleanor
back into her chair.  "Mr. Stanhope is not going to leave us.  He
will stand behind you like a true knight as he is.  And now I think
of it, Mr. Arabin, let me introduce you to Mr. Slope.  Mr. Slope, Mr.
Arabin."  And the two gentlemen bowed stiffly to each other across
the lady whom they both intended to marry, while the other gentleman
who also intended to marry her stood behind, watching them.

The two had never met each other before, and the present was
certainly not a good opportunity for much cordial conversation, even
if cordial conversation between them had been possible.  As it was,
the whole four who formed the party seemed as though their tongues
were tied.  Mr. Slope, who was wide awake to what he hoped was his
coming opportunity, was not much concerned in the interest of the
moment.  His wish was to see Eleanor move, that he might pursue her. 
Bertie was not exactly in the same frame of mind; the evil day was
near enough; there was no reason why he should precipitate it.  He
had made up his mind to marry Eleanor Bold if he could, and was
resolved to-day to take the first preliminary step towards doing so. 
But there was time enough before him.  He was not going to make an
offer of marriage over the table-cloth.  Having thus good-naturedly
made way for Mr. Arabin, he was willing also to let him talk to the
future Mrs. Stanhope as long as they remained in their present
position.

Mr. Arabin, having bowed to Mr. Slope, began eating his food without
saying a word further.  He was full of thought, and though he ate he
did so unconsciously.

But poor Eleanor was the most to be pitied.  The only friend on whom
she thought she could rely was Bertie Stanhope, and he, it seemed,
was determined to desert her.  Mr. Arabin did not attempt to address
her.  She said a few words in reply to some remarks from Mr. Slope
and then, feeling the situation too much for her, started from her
chair in spite of Miss Thorne and hurried from the room.  Mr. Slope
followed her, and young Stanhope lost the occasion.

Madeline Neroni when she was left alone, could not help pondering
much on the singular interview she had had with this singular man. 
Not a word that she had spoken to him had been intended by her to be
received as true, and yet he had answered her in the very spirit of
truth.  He had done so, and she had been aware that he had so done. 
She had wormed from him his secret, and he, debarred as it would seem
from man's usual privilege of lying, had innocently laid bare his
whole soul to her.  He loved Eleanor Bold, but Eleanor was not in his
eye so beautiful as herself.  He would fain have Eleanor for his
wife, but yet he had acknowledged that she was the less gifted of the
two.  The man had literally been unable to falsify his thoughts when
questioned and had been compelled to be true malgré lui, even when
truth must have been so disagreeable to him.

This teacher of men, this Oxford pundit, this double-distilled
quintessence of university perfection, this writer of religious
treatises, this speaker of ecclesiastical speeches, had been like a
little child in her hands; she had turned him inside out and read his
very heart as she might have done that of a young girl.  She could
not but despise him for his facile openness, and yet she liked him
for it, too.  It was a novelty to her, a new trait in a man's
character.  She felt also that she could never so completely make a
fool of him as she did of the Slopes and Thornes.  She felt that she
never could induce Mr. Arabin to make protestations to her that were
not true, or to listen to nonsense that was mere nonsense.

It was quite clear that Mr. Arabin was heartily in love with Mrs.
Bold, and the signora, with very unwonted good nature, began to turn
it over in her mind whether she could not do him a good turn.  Of
course Bertie was to have the first chance.  It was an understood
family arrangement that her brother was, if possible, to marry the
Widow Bold.  Madeline knew too well his necessities and what was due
to her sister to interfere with so excellent a plan, as long as it
might be feasible.  But she had strong suspicion that it was not
feasible.  She did not think it likely that Mrs. Bold would accept a
man in her brother's position, and she had frequently said so to
Charlotte.  She was inclined to believe that Mr. Slope had more
chance of success, and with her it would be a labour of love to rob
Mr. Slope of his wife.

And so the signora resolved, should Bertie fail, to do a good-natured
act for once in her life and give up Mr. Arabin to the woman whom he
loved.



CHAPTER XXXIX

The Lookalofts and the Greenacres


On the whole, Miss Thorne's provision for the amusement and feeding
of the outer classes in the exoteric paddock was not unsuccessful.

Two little drawbacks to the general happiness did take place, but
they were of a temporary nature, and apparent rather than real.  The
first was the downfall of young Harry Greenacre, and the other the
uprise of Mrs. Lookaloft and her family.

As to the quintain, it became more popular among the boys on foot
than it would ever have been among the men on horseback, even had
young Greenacre been more successful.  It was twirled round and round
till it was nearly twirled out of the ground, and the bag of flour
was used with great gusto in powdering the backs and heads of all who
could be coaxed within its vicinity.

Of course it was reported all through the assemblage that Harry was
dead, and there was a pathetic scene between him and his mother when
it was found that he had escaped scatheless from the fall.  A good
deal of beer was drunk on the occasion, and the quintain was
"dratted" and "bothered," and very generally anathematized by all the
mothers who had young sons likely to be placed in similar jeopardy. 
But the affair of Mrs. Lookaloft was of a more serious nature.

"I do tell 'ee plainly--face to face--she be there in madam's
drawing-room; herself and Gussy, and them two walloping gals, dressed
up to their very eyeses."  This was said by a very positive, very
indignant, and very fat farmer's wife, who was sitting on the end of
a bench leaning on the handle of a huge, cotton umbrella.

"But: you didn't zee her, Dame Guffern?" said Mrs. Greenacre, whom
this information, joined to the recent peril undergone by her son,
almost overpowered.  Mr. Greenacre held just as much land as Mr.
Lookaloft, paid his rent quite as punctually, and his opinion in the
vestry room was reckoned to be every whit as good.  Mrs. Lookaloft's
rise in the world had been wormwood to Mrs. Greenacre.  She had no
taste herself for the sort of finery which had converted Barleystubb
farm into Rosebank and which had occasionally graced Mr. Lookaloft's
letters with the dignity of esquirehood.  She had no wish to convert
her own homestead into Violet Villa, or to see her goodman go about
with a new-fangled handle to his name.  But it was a mortal injury to
her that Mrs. Lookaloft should be successful in her hunt after such
honours.  She had abused and ridiculed Mrs. Lookaloft to the extent
of her little power.  She had pushed against her going out of church
and had excused herself with all the easiness of equality.  "Ah,
dame, I axes pardon, but you be grown so mortal stout these times." 
She had inquired with apparent cordiality of Mr. Lookaloft after "the
woman that owned him," and had, as she thought, been on the whole
able to hold her own pretty well against her aspiring neighbour. 
Now, however, she found herself distinctly put into a separate and
inferior class.  Mrs. Lookaloft was asked into the Ullathorne
drawing-room merely because she called her house Rosebank and had
talked over her husband into buying pianos and silk dresses instead
of putting his money by to stock farms for his sons.

Mrs. Greenacre, much as she reverenced Miss Thorne, and highly as she
respected her husband's landlord, could not but look on this as an
act of injustice done to her and hers.  Hitherto the Lookalofts had
never been recognized as being of a different class from the
Greenacres.  Their pretensions were all self-pretensions, their
finery was all paid for by themselves and not granted to them by
others.  The local sovereigns of the vicinity, the district fountains
of honour, had hitherto conferred on them the stamp of no rank. 
Hitherto their crinoline petticoats, late hours, and mincing gait had
been a fair subject of Mrs. Greenacre's raillery, and this raillery
had been a safety-valve for her envy.  Now, however, and from
henceforward, the case would be very different.  Now the Lookalofts
would boast that their aspirations had been sanctioned by the gentry
of the country; now they would declare with some show of truth that
their claims to peculiar consideration had been recognized.  They had
sat as equal guests in the presence of bishops and baronets; they had
been curtseyed to by Miss Thorne on her own drawing-room carpet; they
were about to sit down to table in company with a live countess!  Bab
Lookaloft, as she had always been called by the young Greenacres in
the days of their juvenile equality, might possibly sit next to the
Honourable George, and that wretched Gussy might be permitted to hand
a custard to the Lady Margaretta De Courcy.

The fruition of those honours, or such of them as fell to the lot of
the envied family, was not such as should have caused much envy.  The
attention paid to the Lookalofts by the De Courcys was very limited,
and the amount of entertainment which they received from the bishop's
society was hardly in itself a recompense for the dull monotony of
their day.  But of what they endured Mrs. Greenacre took no account;
she thought only of what she considered they must enjoy and of the
dreadfully exalted tone of living which would be manifested by the
Rosebank family, as the consequence of their present distinction.

"But did 'ee zee 'em there, dame, did 'ee zee 'em there with your own
eyes?" asked poor Mrs. Greenacre, still hoping that there might be
some ground for doubt.

"And how could I do that, unless so be I was there myself?" asked
Mrs. Guffern.  "I didn't zet eyes on none of them this blessed
morning, but I zee'd them as did.  You know our John; well, he will
be for keeping company with Betsey Rusk, madam's own maid, you know. 
And Betsey isn't none of your common kitchen wenches.  So Betsey, she
come out to our John, you know, and she's always vastly polite to me,
is Betsey Rusk, I must say.  So before she took so much as one turn
with John she told me every ha'porth that was going on up in the
house."

"Did she now?" said Mrs. Greenacre.

"Indeed she did," said Mrs. Guffern.

"And she told you them people was up there in the drawing-room?"

"She told me she zee'd 'em come in--that they was dressed finer by
half nor any of the family, with all their neckses and buzoms stark
naked as a born babby."

"The minxes!" exclaimed Mrs. Greenacre, who felt herself more put
about by this than any other mark of aristocratic distinction which
her enemies had assumed.

"Yes, indeed," continued Mrs. Guffern, "as naked as you please, while
all the quality was dressed just as you and I be, Mrs. Greenacre."

"Drat their impudence," said Mrs. Greenacre, from whose well-covered
bosom all milk of human kindness was receding, as far as the family
of the Lookalofts were concerned.

"So says I," said Mrs. Guffern; "and so says my goodman, Thomas
Guffern, when he hear'd it.  'Molly,' says he to me, 'if ever you
takes to going about o' mornings with yourself all naked in them
ways, I begs you won't come back no more to the old house.'  So says
I, 'Thomas, no more I wull.'  'But,' says he, 'drat it, how the deuce
does she manage with her rheumatiz, and she not a rag on her;' " and
Mrs. Guffern laughed loudly as she thought of Mrs. Lookaloft's
probable sufferings from rheumatic attacks.

"But to liken herself that way to folk that ha' blood in their
veins," said Mrs. Greenacre.

"Well, but that warn't all neither that Betsey told.  There they all
swelled into madam's drawing-room, like so many turkey cocks, as much
as to say, 'and who dare say no to us?' and Gregory was thinking of
telling of 'em to come down here, only his heart failed him 'cause of
the grand way they was dressed.  So in they went, but madam looked at
them as glum as death."

"Well, now," said Mrs. Greenacre, greatly relieved, "so they wasn't
axed different from us at all then?"

"Betsey says that Gregory says that madam wasn't a bit too well
pleased to see them where they was, and that to his believing they
was expected to come here just like the rest of us."

There was great consolation in this.  Not that Mrs. Greenacre was
altogether satisfied.  She felt that justice to herself demanded that
Mrs. Lookaloft should not only not be encouraged, but that she should
also be absolutely punished.  What had been done at that scriptural
banquet, of which Mrs. Greenacre so often read the account to her
family?  Why had not Miss Thorne boldly gone to the intruder and
said, "Friend, thou hast come up hither to high places not fitted to
thee.  Go down lower, and thou wilt find thy mates."  Let the
Lookalofts be treated at the present moment with ever so cold a
shoulder, they would still be enabled to boast hereafter of their
position, their aspirations, and their honour.

"Well, with all her grandeur, I do wonder that she be so mean,"
continued Mrs. Greenacre, unable to dismiss the subject.  "Did you
hear, goodman?" she went on, about to repeat the whole story to her
husband who then came up.  "There's Dame Lookaloft and Bab and Gussy
and the lot of 'em all sitting as grand as fivepence in madam's
drawing-room, and they not axed no more nor you nor me.  Did you ever
hear tell the like o' that?"

"Well, and what for shouldn't they?" said Farmer Greenacre.

"Likening theyselves to the quality, as though they was estated folk,
or the like o' that!" said Mrs. Guffern.

"Well, if they likes it, and madam likes it, they's welcome for me,"
said the farmer.  "Now I likes this place better, 'cause I be more at
home-like, and don't have to pay for them fine clothes for the
missus.  Everyone to his taste, Mrs. Guffern, and if neighbour
Lookaloft thinks that he has the best of it, he's welcome."

Mrs. Greenacre sat down by her husband's side to begin the heavy work
of the banquet, and she did so in some measure with restored
tranquillity, but nevertheless she shook her head at her gossip to
show that in this instance she did not quite approve of her husband's
doctrine.

"And I'll tell 'ee what, dames," continued he; "if so be that we
cannot enjoy the dinner that madam gives us because Mother Lookaloft
is sitting up there on a grand sofa, I think we ought all to go home. 
If we greet at that, what'll we do when true sorrow comes across us? 
How would you be now, Dame, if the boy there had broke his neck when
he got the tumble?

Mrs. Greenacre was humbled and said nothing further on the matter. 
But let prudent men such as Mr. Greenacre preach as they will, the
family of the Lookalofts certainly does occasion a good deal of
heart-burning in the world at large.

It was pleasant to see Mr. Plomacy as, leaning on his stout stick, he
went about among the rural guests, acting as a sort of head constable
as well as master of the revels.  "Now, young'un, if you can't manage
to get along without that screeching, you'd better go to the other
side of the twelve-acre field and take your dinner with you.  Come,
girls, what do you stand there for, twirling of your thumbs?  Come
out, and let the lads see you; you've no need to be so ashamed of
your faces.  Hollo there, who are you?  How did you make your way in
here?"

This last disagreeable question was put to a young man of about
twenty-four who did not, in Mr. Plomacy's eye, bear sufficient
vestiges of a rural education and residence.

"If you please, your Worship, Master Barrell the coachman let me in
at the church wicket, 'cause I do be working mostly al'ays for the
family."

"Then Master Barrell the coachman may let you out again," said Mr.
Plomacy, not even conciliated by the magisterial dignity which had
been conceded to him.  "What's your name?  And what trade are you? 
And who do you work for?"

"I'm Stubbs, your worship, Bob Stubbs; and--and--and--"

"And what's your trade, Stubbs?"

"Plasterer, please your worship."

"I'll plaster you, and Barrell too; you'll just walk out of this 'ere
field as quick as you walked in.  We don't want no plasterers; when
we do, we'll send for 'em.  Come my buck, walk."

Stubbs the plasterer was much downcast at this dreadful edict.  He
was a sprightly fellow, and had contrived since his ingress into the
Ullathorne elysium to attract to himself a forest nymph, to whom he
was whispering a plasterer's usual soft nothings, when he was
encountered by the great Mr. Plomacy.  It was dreadful to be thus
dissevered from his dryad and sent howling back to a Barchester
pandemonium just as the nectar and ambrosia were about to descend on
the fields of asphodel.  He began to try what prayers would do, but
city prayers were vain against the great rural potentate.  Not only
did Mr. Plomacy order his exit but, raising his stick to show the way
which led to the gate that had been left in the custody of that false
Cerberus Barrell, proceeded himself to see the edict of banishment
carried out.

The goddess Mercy, however, the sweetest goddess that ever sat upon a
cloud, and the dearest to poor, frail, erring man, appeared on the
field in the person of Mr. Greenacre.  Never was interceding goddess
more welcome.

"Come, man," said Mr. Greenacre, "never stick at trifles such a day
as this.  I know the lad well.  Let him bide at my axing.  Madam
won't miss what he can eat and drink, I know."

Now Mr. Plomacy and Mr. Greenacre were sworn friends.  Mr. Plomacy
had at his own disposal as comfortable a room as there was in
Ullathorne House, but he was a bachelor, and alone there, and,
moreover, smoking in the house was not allowed even to Mr. Plomacy. 
His moments of truest happiness were spent in a huge armchair in the
warmest corner of Mrs. Greenacre's beautifully clean front kitchen. 
'Twas there that the inner man dissolved itself and poured itself out
in streams of pleasant chat; 'twas there that he was respected and
yet at his ease; 'twas there, and perhaps there only, that he could
unburden himself from the ceremonies of life without offending the
dignity of those above him, or incurring the familiarity of those
below.  'Twas there that his long pipe was always to be found on the
accustomed chimney-board, not only permitted but encouraged.

Such being the state of the case it was not to be supposed that Mr.
Plomacy could refuse such a favour to Mr. Greenacre, but nevertheless
he did not grant it without some further show of austere authority.

"Eat and drink, Mr. Greenacre!  No.  It's not what he eats and
drinks, but the example such a chap shows, coming in where he's not
invited--a chap of his age, too.  He too that never did a day's work
about Ullathorne since he was born.  Plasterer!  I'll plaster him!"

"He worked long enough for me, then, Mr. Plomacy.  And a good hand he
is at setting tiles as any in Barchester," said the other not
sticking quite to veracity, as indeed mercy never should.  "Come,
come, let him alone to-day and quarrel with him to-morrow.  You
wouldn't shame him before his lass there?"

"It goes against the grain with me, then," said Mr. Plomacy.  "And
take care, you Stubbs, and behave yourself.  If I hear a row, I shall
know where it comes from.  I'm up to you Barchester journeymen; I
know what stuff you're made of."

And so Stubbs went off happy, pulling at the forelock of his shock
head of hair in honour of the steward's clemency and giving another
double pull at it in honour of the farmer's kindness.  And as he went
he swore within his grateful heart that if ever Farmer Greenacre
wanted a day's work done for nothing, he was the lad to do it for
him.  Which promise it was not probable that he would ever be called
on to perform.

But Mr. Plomacy was not quite happy in his mind, for he thought of
the unjust steward and began to reflect whether he had not made for
himself friends of the mammon of unrighteousness.  This, however, did
not interfere with the manner in which he performed his duties at the
bottom of the long board; nor did Mr. Greenacre perform his the worse
at the top on account of the good wishes of Stubbs the plasterer. 
Moreover the guests did not think it anything amiss when Mr. Plomacy,
rising to say grace, prayed that God would make them all truly
thankful for the good things which Madame Thorne in her great
liberality had set before them!

All this time the quality in the tent on the lawn were getti