ng on
swimmingly--that is, if champagne without restriction can enable
quality folk to swim.  Sir Harkaway Gorse proposed the health of Miss
Thorne and likened her to a blood race-horse, always in condition and
not to be tired down by any amount of work.  Mr. Thorne returned
thanks, saying he hoped his sister would always be found able to run
when called upon, and then gave the health and prosperity of the De
Courcy family.  His sister was very much honoured by seeing so many
of them at her poor board.  They were all aware that important
avocations made the absence of the earl necessary.  As his duty to
his prince had called him from his family hearth, he, Mr. Thorne,
could not venture to regret that he did not see him at Ullathorne;
but nevertheless he would venture to say--that was, to express a
wish--an opinion, he meant to say--  And so Mr. Thorne became
somewhat gravelled, as country gentlemen in similar circumstances
usually do, but he ultimately sat down, declaring that he had much
satisfaction in drinking the noble earl's health, together with that
of the countess, and all the family of De Courcy Castle.

And then the Honourable George returned thanks.  We will not follow
him through the different periods of his somewhat irregular
eloquence.  Those immediately in his neighbourhood found it at first
rather difficult to get him on his legs, but much greater difficulty
was soon experienced in inducing him to resume his seat.  One of two
arrangements should certainly be made in these days: either let all
speech-making on festive occasions be utterly tabooed and made as it
were impossible; or else let those who are to exercise the privilege
be first subjected to a competing examination before the civil-
service examining commissioners.  As it is now, the Honourable
Georges do but little honour to our exertions in favour of British
education.

In the dining-room the bishop went through the honours of the day
with much more neatness and propriety.  He also drank Miss Thorne's
health and did it in a manner becoming the bench which he adorned. 
The party there was perhaps a little more dull, a shade less lively
than that in the tent.  But what was lost in mirth was fully made up
in decorum.

And so the banquets passed off at the various tables with great éclat
and universal delight.



CHAPTER XL

Ullathorne Sports--Act II


"That which has made them drunk has made me bold."  'Twas thus that
Mr. Slope encouraged himself, as he left the dining-room in pursuit
of Eleanor.  He had not indeed seen in that room any person really
intoxicated, but there had been a good deal of wine drunk, and Mr.
Slope had not hesitated to take his share, in order to screw himself
up to the undertaking which he had in hand.  He is not the first man
who has thought it expedient to call in the assistance of Bacchus on
such an occasion.

Eleanor was out through the window and on the grass before she
perceived that she was followed.  Just at that moment the guests were
nearly all occupied at the tables.  Here and there were to be seen a
constant couple or two, who preferred their own sweet discourse to
the jingle of glasses or the charms of rhetoric which fell from the
mouths of the Honourable George and the Bishop of Barchester; but the
grounds were as nearly vacant as Mr. Slope could wish them to be.

Eleanor saw that she was pursued, and as a deer when escape is no
longer possible will turn to bay and attack the hounds, so did she
turn upon Mr. Slope.

"Pray don't let me take you from the room," said she, speaking with
all the stiffness which she knew how to use.  "I have come out to
look for a friend.  I must beg of you, Mr. Slope, to go back."

But Mr. Slope would not be thus entreated.  He had observed all day
that Mrs. Bold was not cordial to him, and this had to a certain
extent oppressed him.  But he did not deduce from this any assurance
that his aspirations were in vain.  He saw that she was angry with
him.  Might she not be so because he had so long tampered with her
feelings--might it not arise from his having, as he knew was the
case, caused her name to be bruited about in conjunction with his own
without having given her the opportunity of confessing to the world
that henceforth their names were to be one and the same?  Poor lady. 
He had within him a certain Christian conscience-stricken feeling of
remorse on this head.  It might be that he had wronged her by his
tardiness.  He had, however, at the present moment imbibed too much
of Mr. Thorne's champagne to have any inward misgivings.  He was
right in repeating the boast of Lady Macbeth: he was not drunk, but
he was bold enough for anything.  It was a pity that in such a state
he could not have encountered Mrs. Proudie.

"You must permit me to attend you," said he; "I could not think of
allowing you to go alone."

"Indeed you must, Mr. Slope," said Eleanor still very stiffly, "for
it is my special wish to be alone."

The time for letting the great secret escape him had already come. 
Mr. Slope saw that it must be now or never, and he was determined
that it should be now.  This was not his first attempt at winning a
fair lady.  He had been on his knees, looked unutterable things with
his eyes, and whispered honeyed words before this.  Indeed, he was
somewhat an adept at these things, and had only to adapt to the
perhaps different taste of Mrs. Bold the well-remembered rhapsodies
which had once so much gratified Olivia Proudie.

"Do not ask me to leave you, Mrs. Bold," said he with an impassioned
look, impassioned and sanctified as well, with that sort of look
which is not uncommon with gentlemen of Mr. Slope's school and which
may perhaps be called the tender-pious.  "Do not ask me to leave you
till I have spoken a few words with which my heart is full--which I
have come hither purposely to say."

Eleanor saw how it was now.  She knew directly what it was she was
about to go through, and very miserable the knowledge made her.  Of
course she could refuse Mr. Slope, and there would be an end of that,
one might say.  But there would not be an end of it, as far as
Eleanor was concerned.  The very fact of Mr. Slope's making an offer
to her would be a triumph to the archdeacon and, in a great measure,
a vindication of Mr. Arabin's conduct.  The widow could not bring
herself to endure with patience the idea that she had been in the
wrong.  She had defended Mr. Slope, she had declared herself quite
justified in admitting him among her acquaintance, had ridiculed the
idea of his considering himself as more than an acquaintance, and had
resented the archdeacon's caution in her behalf: now it was about to
be proved to her in a manner sufficiently disagreeable that the
archdeacon had been right and she herself had been entirely wrong.

"I don't know what you can have to say to me, Mr. Slope, that you
could not have said when we were sitting at table just now;" and she
closed her lips, and steadied her eyeballs, and looked at him in a
manner that ought to have frozen him.

But gentlemen are not easily frozen when they are full of champagne,
and it would not at any time have been easy to freeze Mr. Slope.

"There are things, Mrs. Bold, which a man cannot well say before a
crowd; which perhaps he cannot well say at any time; which indeed he
may most fervently desire to get spoken and which he may yet find it
almost impossible to utter.  It is such things as these that I now
wish to say to you;" and then the tender-pious look was repeated,
with a little more emphasis even than before.

Eleanor had not found it practicable to stand stock still before the
dining-room window, there receive his offer in full view of Miss
Thorne's guests.  She had therefore in self-defence walked on, and
thus Mr. Slope had gained his object of walking with her.  He now
offered her his arm.

"Thank you, Mr. Slope, I am much obliged to you, but for the very
short time that I shall remain with you I shall prefer walking
alone."

"And must it be so short?" said he.  "Must it be--"

"Yes," said Eleanor, interrupting him, "as short as possible, if you
please, sir."

"I had hoped, Mrs. Bold--I had hoped--"

"Pray hope nothing, Mr. Slope, as far as I am concerned; pray do not;
I do not know and need not know what hope you mean.  Our acquaintance
is very slight, and will probably remain so.  Pray, pray let that be
enough; there is at any rate no necessity for us to quarrel."

Mrs. Bold was certainly treating Mr. Slope rather cavalierly, and he
felt it so.  She was rejecting him before he had offered himself, and
informing him at the same time that he was taking a great deal too
much on himself to be so familiar.  She did not even make an attempt

From such a sharp and waspish word as "no"
To pluck the sting.

He was still determined to be very tender and very pious, seeing
that, in spite of all Mrs. Bold had said to him, he had not yet
abandoned hope; but he was inclined also to be somewhat angry.  The
widow was bearing herself, as he thought, with too high a hand, was
speaking of herself in much too imperious a tone.  She had clearly no
idea that an honour was being conferred on her.  Mr. Slope would be
tender as long as he could, but he began to think if that failed it
would not be amiss if he also mounted himself for awhile on his high
horse.  Mr. Slope could undoubtedly be very tender, but he could be
very savage also, and he knew his own abilities.

"That is cruel," said he, "and unchristian, too.  The worst of us are
still bidden to hope.  What have I done that you should pass on me so
severe a sentence?"  And then he paused a moment, during which the
widow walked steadily on with measured steps, saying nothing further.

"Beautiful woman," at last he burst forth, "beautiful woman, you
cannot pretend to be ignorant that I adore you.  Yes, Eleanor, yes, I
love you.  I love you with the truest affection which man can bear to
woman.  Next to my hopes of heaven are my hopes of possessing you." 
(Mr. Slope's memory here played him false, or he would not have
omitted the deanery.)  "How sweet to walk to heaven with you by my
side, with you for my guide, mutual guides.  Say, Eleanor, dearest
Eleanor, shall we walk that sweet path together?"

Eleanor had no intention of ever walking together with Mr. Slope on
any other path than that special one of Miss Thorne's which they now
occupied, but as she had been unable to prevent the expression of Mr.
Slope's wishes and aspirations she resolved to hear him out to the
end before she answered him.

"Ah, Eleanor," he continued, and it seemed to be his idea that as he
had once found courage to pronounce her Christian name, he could not
utter it often enough.  "Ah, Eleanor, will it not be sweet, with the
Lord's assistance, to travel hand in hand through this mortal valley
which His mercies will make pleasant to us, till hereafter we shall
dwell together at the foot of His throne?"  And then a more tenderly
pious glance than ever beamed from the lover's eyes.  "Ah, Eleanor--"

"My name, Mr. Slope, is Mrs. Bold," said Eleanor, who, though
determined to hear out the tale of his love, was too much disgusted
by his blasphemy to be able to bear much more of it.

"Sweetest angel, be not so cold," said he, and as he said it the
champagne broke forth, and he contrived to pass his arm round her
waist.  He did this with considerable cleverness, for up to this
point Eleanor had contrived with tolerable success to keep her
distance from him.  They had got into a walk nearly enveloped by
shrubs, and Mr. Slope therefore no doubt considered that as they were
now alone it was fitting that he should give her some outward
demonstration of that affection of which he talked so much.  It may
perhaps be presumed that the same stamp of measures had been found to
succeed with Olivia Proudie.  Be this as it may, it was not
successful with Eleanor Bold.

She sprang from him as she would have jumped from an adder, but she
did not spring far--not, indeed, beyond arm's length--and then, quick
as thought, she raised her little hand and dealt him a box on the ear
with such right goodwill that it sounded among the trees like a
miniature thunderclap.

And now it is to be feared that every well-bred reader of these pages
will lay down the book with disgust, feeling that, after all, the
heroine is unworthy of sympathy.  She is a hoyden, one will say.  At
any rate she is not a lady, another will exclaim.  I have suspected
her all through, a third will declare; she has no idea of the dignity
of a matron, or of the peculiar propriety which her position demands. 
At one moment she is romping with young Stanhope; then she is making
eyes at Mr. Arabin; anon she comes to fisticuffs with a third lover--
and all before she is yet a widow of two years' standing.

She cannot altogether be defended, and yet it may be averred that she
is not a hoyden, not given to romping nor prone to boxing.  It were
to be wished devoutly that she had not struck Mr. Slope in the face. 
In doing so she derogated from her dignity and committed herself. 
Had she been educated in Belgravia, had she been brought up by any
sterner mentor than that fond father, had she lived longer under the
rule of a husband, she might, perhaps, have saved herself from this
great fault.  As it was, the provocation was too much for her, the
temptation to instant resentment of the insult too strong.  She was
too keen in the feeling of independence, a feeling dangerous for a
young woman, but one in which her position peculiarly tempted her to
indulge.  And then Mr. Slope's face, tinted with a deeper dye than
usual by the wine he had drunk, simpering and puckering itself with
pseudo-pity and tender grimaces, seemed specially to call for such
punishment.  She had, too, a true instinct as to the man; he was
capable of rebuke in this way and in no other.  To him the blow from
her little hand was as much an insult as a blow from a man would have
been to another.  It went directly to his pride.  He conceived
himself lowered in his dignity and personally outraged.  He could
almost have struck at her again in his rage.  Even the pain was a
great annoyance to him, and the feeling that his clerical character
had been wholly disregarded sorely vexed him.

There are such men: men who can endure no taint on their personal
self-respect, even from a woman; men whose bodies are to themselves
such sacred temples that a joke against them is desecration, and a
rough touch downright sacrilege.  Mr. Slope was such a man, and
therefore the slap on the face that he got from Eleanor was, as far
as he was concerned, the fittest rebuke which could have been
administered to him.

But nevertheless, she should not have raised her hand against the
man.  Ladies' hands, so soft, so sweet, so delicious to the touch, so
graceful to the eye, so gracious in their gentle doings, were not
made to belabour men's faces.  The moment the deed was done Eleanor
felt that she had sinned against all propriety, and would have given
little worlds to recall the blow.  In her first agony of sorrow she
all but begged the man's pardon.  Her next impulse, however, and the
one which she obeyed, was to run away.

"I never, never will speak another word to you," she said, gasping
with emotion and the loss of breath which her exertion and violent
feelings occasioned her, and so saying she put foot to the ground and
ran quickly back along the path to the house.

But how shall I sing the divine wrath of Mr. Slope, or how invoke the
tragic muse to describe the rage which swelled the celestial bosom of
the bishop's chaplain?  Such an undertaking by no means befits the
low-heeled buskin of modern fiction.  The painter put a veil over
Agamemnon's face when called on to depict the father's grief at the
early doom of his devoted daughter.  The god, when he resolved to
punish the rebellious winds, abstained from mouthing empty threats. 
We will not attempt to tell with what mighty surgings of the inner
heart Mr. Slope swore to revenge himself on the woman who had
disgraced him, nor will we vainly strive to depict his deep agony of
soul.

There he is, however, alone in the garden walk, and we must contrive
to bring him out of it.  He was not willing to come forth quite at
once.  His cheek was stinging with the weight of Eleanor's fingers,
and he fancied that everyone who looked at him would be able to see
on his face the traces of what he had endured.  He stood awhile,
becoming redder and redder with rage.  He stood motionless,
undecided, glaring with his eyes, thinking of the pains and penalties
of Hades, and meditating how he might best devote his enemy to the
infernal gods with all the passion of his accustomed eloquence.  He
longed in his heart to be preaching at her.  'Twas thus that he was
ordinarily avenged of sinning mortal men and women.  Could he at once
have ascended his Sunday rostrum and fulminated at her such
denunciations as his spirit delighted in, his bosom would have been
greatly eased.

But how preach to Mr. Thorne's laurels, or how preach indeed at all
in such a vanity fair as this now going on at Ullathorne?  And then
he began to feel a righteous disgust at the wickedness of the doings
around him.  He had been justly chastised for lending, by his
presence, a sanction to such worldly lures.  The gaiety of society,
the mirth of banquets, the laughter of the young, and the eating and
drinking of the elders were, for awhile, without excuse in his sight. 
What had he now brought down upon himself by sojourning thus in the
tents of the heathen?  He had consorted with idolaters round the
altars of Baal, and therefore a sore punishment had come upon him. 
He then thought of the Signora Neroni, and his soul within him was
full of sorrow.  He had an inkling--a true inkling--that he was a
wicked, sinful man, but it led him in no right direction; he could
admit no charity in his heart.  He felt debasement coming on him, and
he longed to shake it off, to rise up in his stirrup, to mount to
high places and great power, that he might get up into a mighty
pulpit and preach to the world a loud sermon against Mrs. Bold.

There he stood fixed to the gravel for about ten minutes.  Fortune
favoured him so far that no prying eyes came to look upon him in his
misery.  Then a shudder passed over his whole frame; he collected
himself and slowly wound his way round to the lawn, advancing along
the path and not returning in the direction which Eleanor had taken. 
When he reached the tent, he found the bishop standing there in
conversation with the Master of Lazarus.  His lordship had come out
to air himself after the exertion of his speech.

"This is very pleasant--very pleasant, my lord, is it not?" said Mr.
Slope with his most gracious smile, pointing to the tent; "very
pleasant.  It is delightful to see so many persons enjoying
themselves so thoroughly."

Mr. Slope thought he might force the bishop to introduce him to Dr.
Gwynne.  A very great example had declared and practised the wisdom
of being everything to everybody, and Mr. Slope was desirous of
following it.  His maxim was never to lose a chance.  The bishop,
however, at the present moment was not very anxious to increase Mr.
Slope's circle of acquaintance among his clerical brethren.  He had
his own reasons for dropping any marked allusion to his domestic
chaplain, and he therefore made his shoulder rather cold for the
occasion.

"Very, very," said he without turning round, or even deigning to look
at Mr. Slope.  "And therefore, Dr. Gwynne, I really think that you
will find that the hebdomadal board will exercise as wide and as
general an authority as at the present moment.  I, for one, Dr.
Gwynne--"

"Dr. Gwynne," said Mr. Slope, raising his hat and resolving not to be
outwitted by such an insignificant little goose as the Bishop of
Barchester.

The Master of Lazarus also raised his hat and bowed very politely to
Mr. Slope.  There is not a more courteous gentleman in the queen's
dominions than the Master of Lazarus.

"My lord," said Mr. Slope, "pray do me the honour of introducing me
to Dr. Gwynne.  The opportunity is too much in my favour to be lost."

The bishop had no help for it.  "My chaplain, Dr. Gwynne," said he,
"my present chaplain, Mr. Slope."  He certainly made the introduction
as unsatisfactory to the chaplain as possible, and by the use of the
word present seemed to indicate that Mr. Slope might probably not
long enjoy the honour which he now held.  But Mr. Slope cared nothing
for this.  He understood the innuendo and disregarded it.  It might
probably come to pass that he would be in a situation to resign his
chaplaincy before the bishop was in a situation to dismiss him from
it.  What need the future Dean of Barchester care for the bishop, or
for the bishop's wife?  Had not Mr. Slope, just as he was entering
Dr. Stanhope's carriage, received an all-important note from Tom
Towers of The Jupiter?  Had he not that note this moment in his
pocket?

So disregarding the bishop, he began to open out a conversation with
the Master of Lazarus.

But suddenly an interruption came, not altogether unwelcome to Mr.
Slope.  One of the bishop's servants came up to his master's shoulder
with a long, grave face and whispered into the bishop's ear.

What is it, John?" said the bishop.

"The dean, my lord; he is dead."

Mr. Slope had no further desire to converse with the Master of
Lazarus, and was very soon on his road back to Barchester.

Eleanor, as we have said, having declared her intention of never
holding further communication with Mr. Slope, ran hurriedly back
towards the house.  The thought, however, of what she had done
grieved her greatly, and she could not abstain from bursting into
tears.  'Twas thus she played the second act in that day's melodrama.



CHAPTER XLI

Mrs. Bold Confides Her Sorrow to Her Friend Miss Stanhope


When Mrs. Bold came to the end of the walk and faced the lawn, she
began to bethink herself what she should do.  Was she to wait there
till Mr. Slope caught her, or was she to go in among the crowd with
tears in her eyes and passion in her face?  She might in truth have
stood there long enough without any reasonable fear of further
immediate persecution from Mr. Slope, but we are all inclined to
magnify the bugbears which frighten us.  In her present state of
dread she did not know of what atrocity he might venture to be
guilty.  Had anyone told her a week ago that he would have put his
arm round her waist at this party of Miss Thorne's she would have
been utterly incredulous.  Had she been informed that he would be
seen on the following Sunday walking down the High Street in a
scarlet coat and top boots, she would not have thought such a
phenomenon more improbable.

But this improbable iniquity he had committed, and now there was
nothing she could not believe of him.  In the first place it was
quite manifest that he was tipsy; in the next place it was to be
taken as proved that all his religion was sheer hypocrisy; and
finally the man was utterly shameless.  She therefore stood watching
for the sound of his footfall, not without some fear that he might
creep out at her suddenly from among the bushes.

As she thus stood she saw Charlotte Stanhope at a little distance
from her, walking quickly across the grass.  Eleanor's handkerchief
was in her hand, and putting it to her face so as to conceal her
tears, she ran across the lawn and joined her friend.

"Oh, Charlotte," she said, almost too much out of breath to speak
very plainly; "I am so glad I have found you."

"Glad you have found me!" said Charlotte, laughing; "that's a good
joke.  Why Bertie and I have been looking for you everywhere.  He
swears that you have gone off with Mr. Slope and is now on the point
of hanging himself."

"Oh, Charlotte, don't," said Mrs. Bold.

"Why, my child, what on earth is the matter with you?" said Miss
Stanhope, perceiving that Eleanor's hand trembled on her own arm and
finding also that her companion was still half-choked by tears. 
"Goodness heaven!  Something has distressed you.  What is it?  What
can I do for you?"

Eleanor answered her only by a sort of spasmodic gurgle in her
throat.  She was a good deal upset, as people say, and could not at
the moment collect herself.

"Come here, this way, Mrs. Bold; come this way, and we shall not be
seen.  What has happened to vex you so?  What can I do for you?  Can
Bertie do anything?"

"Oh, no, no, no, no," said Eleanor.  "There is nothing to be done. 
Only that horrid man--"

"What horrid man?" asked Charlotte.

There are some moments in life in which both men and women feel
themselves imperatively called on to make a confidence, in which not
to do so requires a disagreeable resolution and also a disagreeable
suspicion.  There are people of both sexes who never make
confidences, who are never tempted by momentary circumstances to
disclose their secrets, but such are generally dull, close,
unimpassioned spirits, "gloomy gnomes, who live in cold dark mines." 
There was nothing of the gnome about Eleanor, and she therefore
resolved to tell Charlotte Stanhope the whole story about Mr. Slope.

"That horrid man; that Mr. Slope," said she.  "Did you not see that
he followed me out of the dining-room?"

"Of course I did, and was sorry enough, but I could not help it.
I knew you would be annoyed.  But you and Bertie managed it badly
between you."

"It was not his fault nor mine either.  You know how I disliked the
idea of coming in the carriage with that man."

"I am sure I am very sorry if that has led to it."

"I don't know what has led to it," said Eleanor, almost crying again. 
"But it has not been my fault."

"But what has he done, my dear?"

"He's an abominable, horrid, hypocritical man, and it would serve him
right to tell the bishop all about it."

"Believe me, if you want to do him an injury, you had far better tell
Mrs. Proudie.  But what did he do, Mrs. Bold?"

"Ugh!" exclaimed Eleanor.

"Well, I must confess he's not very nice," said Charlotte Stanhope.

"Nice!" said Eleanor.  "He is the most fulsome, fawning, abominable
man I ever saw.  What business had he to come to me?--I that never
gave him the slightest tittle of encouragement--I that always hated
him, though I did take his part when others ran him down."

"That's just where it is, my dear.  He has heard that and therefore
fancied that of course you were in love with him."

This was wormwood to Eleanor.  It was in fact the very thing which
all her friends had been saying for the last month past--and which
experience now proved to be true.  Eleanor resolved within herself
that she would never again take any man's part.  The world, with all
its villainy and all its ill-nature, might wag as it liked: she would
not again attempt to set crooked things straight.

"But what did he do, my dear?" said Charlotte, who was really rather
interested in the subject.

"He--he--he--"

"Well--come, it can't have been anything so very horrid, for the man
was not tipsy."

"Oh, I am sure he was" said Eleanor.  "I am sure he must have been
tipsy."

"Well, I declare I didn't observe it.  But what was it, my love?"

"Why, I believe I can hardly tell you.  He talked such horrid stuff
that you never heard the like: about religion, and heaven, and love. 
Oh, dear--he is such a nasty man."

"I can easily imagine the sort of stuff he would talk.  Well--and
then--?"

"And then--he took hold of me."

"Took hold of you?"

"Yes--he somehow got close to me and took hold of me--"

"By the waist?"

"Yes," said Eleanor shuddering.

"And then--"

"Then I jumped away from him, and gave him a slap on the face, and
ran away along the path till I saw you"

"Ha, ha, ha!"  Charlotte Stanhope laughed heartily at the finale to
the tragedy.  It was delightful to her to think that Mr. Slope had
had his ears boxed.  She did not quite appreciate the feeling which
made her friend so unhappy at the result of the interview.  To her
thinking the matter had ended happily enough as regarded the widow,
who indeed was entitled to some sort of triumph among her friends. 
Whereas to Mr. Slope would be due all those gibes and jeers which
would naturally follow such an affair.  His friends would ask him
whether his ears tingled whenever he saw a widow, and he would be
cautioned that beautiful things were made to be looked at and not to
be touched.

Such were Charlotte Stanhope's views on such matters, but she did not
at the present moment clearly explain them to Mrs. Bold.  Her object
was to endear herself to her friend, and therefore, having had her
laugh, she was ready enough to offer sympathy.  Could Bertie do
anything?  Should Bertie speak to the man and warn him that in future
he must behave with more decorum?  Bertie indeed, she declared, would
be more angry than anyone else when he heard to what insult Mrs. Bold
had been subjected.

"But you won't tell him?" said Mrs. Bold with a look of horror.

"Not if you don't like it," said Charlotte; "but considering
everything, I would strongly advise it.  If, you had a brother, you
know, it would be unnecessary.  But it is very right that Mr. Slope
should know that you have somebody by you that will and can protect
you."

"But my father is here."

"Yes, but it is so disagreeable for clergymen to have to quarrel with
each other; and circumstanced as your father is just at this moment,
it would be very inexpedient that there should be anything unpleasant
between him and Mr. Slope.  Surely you and Bertie are intimate enough
for you to permit him to take your part."

Charlotte Stanhope was very anxious that her brother should at once
on that very day settle matters with his future wife.  Things had now
come to that point between him and his father, and between him and
his creditors, that he must either do so, or leave Barchester; either
do that, or go back to his unwashed associates, dirty lodgings, and
poor living at Carrara.  Unless he could provide himself with an
income, he must go to Carrara, or to ----.  His father the prebendary
had not said this in so many words, but had he done so, he could not
have signified it more plainly.

Such being the state of the case it was very necessary that no more
time should be lost.  Charlotte had seen her brother's apathy, when
he neglected to follow Mrs. Bold out of the room, with anger which
she could hardly suppress.  It was grievous to think that Mr. Slope
should have so distanced him.  Charlotte felt that she had played her
part with sufficient skill.  She had brought them together and
induced such a degree of intimacy that her brother was really
relieved from all trouble and labour in the matter.  And moreover it
was quite plain that Mrs. Bold was very fond of Bertie.  And now it
was plain enough also that he had nothing to fear from his rival, Mr.
Slope.

There was certainly an awkwardness in subjecting Mrs. Bold to a
second offer on the same day.  It would have been well perhaps to
have put the matter off for a week, could a week have been spared. 
But circumstances are frequently too peremptory to be arranged as we
would wish to arrange them, and such was the case now.  This being
so, could not this affair of Mr. Slope's be turned to advantage? 
Could it not be made the excuse for bringing Bertie and Mrs. Bold
into still closer connexion--into such close connexion that they
could not fail to throw themselves into each other's arms?  Such was
the game which Miss Stanhope now at a moment's notice resolved to
play.

And very well she played it.  In the first place it was arranged that
Mr. Slope should not return in the Stanhopes' carriage to Barchester. 
It so happened that Mr. Slope was already gone, but of that of course
they knew nothing.  The signora should be induced to go first, with
only the servants and her sister, and Bertie should take Mr. Slope's
place in the second journey.  Bertie was to be told in confidence of
the whole affair, and when the carriage was gone off with its first
load, Eleanor was to be left under Bertie's special protection, so as
to insure her from any further aggression from Mr. Slope.  While the
carriage was getting ready, Bertie was to seek out that gentleman and
make him understand that he must provide himself with another
conveyance back to Barchester.  Their immediate object should be to
walk about together in search of Bertie.  Bertie in short was to be
the Pegasus on whose wings they were to ride out of their present
dilemma.

There was a warmth of friendship and cordial kindliness in all this
that was very soothing to the widow, but yet, though she gave way to
it, she was hardly reconciled to doing so.  It never occurred to her
that, now that she had killed one dragon, another was about to spring
up in her path; she had no remote idea that she would have to
encounter another suitor in her proposed protector, but she hardly
liked the thought of putting herself so much into the hands of young
Stanhope.  She felt that if she wanted protection, she should go to
her father.  She felt that she should ask him to provide a carriage
for her back to Barchester.  Mrs. Clantantram she knew would give her
a seat.  She knew that she should not throw herself entirely upon
friends whose friendship dated, as it were, but from yesterday.  But
yet she could not say no to one who was so sisterly in her kindness,
so eager in her good nature, so comfortably sympathetic as Charlotte
Stanhope.  And thus she gave way to all the propositions made to her.

They first went into the dining-room, looking for their champion, and
from thence to the drawing-room.  Here they found Mr. Arabin, still
hanging over the signora's sofa; or rather they found him sitting
near her head, as a physician might have sat had the lady been his
patient.  There was no other person in the room.  The guests were
some in the tent, some few still in the dining room, some at the bows
and arrows, but most of them walking with Miss Thorne through the
park and looking at the games that were going on.

All that had passed, and was passing between Mr. Arabin and the lady,
it is unnecessary to give in detail.  She was doing with him as she
did with all others.  It was her mission to make fools of men, and
she was pursuing her mission with Mr. Arabin.  She had almost got him
to own his love for Mrs. Bold and had subsequently almost induced him
to acknowledge a passion for herself.  He, poor man, was hardly aware
what he was doing or saying, hardly conscious whether was in heaven
or in hell.  So little had he known of female attractions of that
peculiar class which the signora owned that he became affected with a
kind of temporary delirium when first subjected to its power.  He
lost his head rather than this heart and toppled about mentally,
reeling in his ideas as a drunken man does on his legs.  She had
whispered to him words that really meant nothing but which, coming
from such beautiful lips and accompanied by such lustrous glances,
seemed to have a mysterious significance, which he felt though he
could not understand.

In being thus besirened Mr. Arabin behaved himself very differently
from Mr. Slope.  The signora had said truly that the two men were the
contrasts of each other--that the one was all for action, the other
all for thought.  Mr. Slope, when this lady laid upon his senses the
overpowering breath of her charms, immediately attempted to obtain
some fruition, to achieve some mighty triumph.  He began by catching 
at her hand and progressed by kissing it.  He made vows of love and
asked for vows in return.  He promised everlasting devotion, knelt
before her, and swore that had she been on Mount Ida, Juno would have
had no cause to hate the offspring of Venus.  But Mr. Arabin uttered
no oaths, kept his hand mostly in his trousers pocket, and had no
more thought of kissing Madame Neroni than of kissing the Countess De
Courcy.

As soon as Mr. Arabin saw Mrs. Bold enter the room he blushed and
rose from his chair; then he sat down again, and then again got up. 
The signora saw the blush at once and smiled at the poor victim, but
Eleanor was too much confused to see anything.

"Oh, Madeline," said Charlotte, "I want to speak to you particularly;
we must arrange about the carriage, you know," and she stooped down
to whisper to her sister.  Mr. Arabin immediately withdrew to a
little distance, and as Charlotte had in fact much to explain before
she could make the new carriage arrangement intelligible, he had
nothing to do but to talk to Mrs. Bold.

"We have had a very pleasant party," said he, using the tone he would
have used had he declared that the sun was shining very brightly, or
the rain falling very fast.

"Very," said Eleanor, who never in her life had passed a more
unpleasant day.

"I hope Mr. Harding has enjoyed himself."

"Oh, yes, very much," said Eleanor, who had not seen her father since
she parted from him soon after her arrival.

"He returns to Barchester to-night, I suppose."

"Yes, I believe so--that is, I think he is staying at Plumstead."

"Oh, staying at Plumstead," said Mr. Arabin.

"He came from there this morning.  I believe he is going back, he
didn't exactly say, however."

"I hope Mrs. Grantly is quite well."

"She seemed to be quite well.  She is here; that is, unless she has
gone away."

"Oh, yes, to be sure.  I was talking to her.  Looking very well
indeed."  Then there was a considerable pause; for Charlotte could
not at once make Madeline understand why she was to be sent home in a
hurry without her brother.

"Are you returning to Plumstead, Mrs. Bold?"  Mr. Arabin merely asked
this by way of making conversation, but he immediately perceived that
he was approaching dangerous ground.

"No," said Mrs. Bold very quietly; "I am going home to Barchester."

"Oh, ah, yes.  I had forgotten that you had returned."  And then Mr.
Arabin, finding it impossible to say anything further, stood silent
till Charlotte had completed her plans, and Mrs. Bold stood equally
silent, intently occupied as it appeared in the arrangement of her
rings.

And yet these two people were thoroughly in love with each other, and
though one was a middle-aged clergyman, and the other a lady at any
rate past the wishy-washy bread-and-butter period of life, they were
as unable to tell their own minds to each other as any Damon and
Phillis, whose united ages would not make up that to which Mr. Arabin
had already attained.

Madeline Neroni consented to her sister's proposal, and then the two
ladies again went off in quest of Bertie Stanhope.



CHAPTER XLII

Ullathorne Sports--Act III


And now Miss Thorne's guests were beginning to take their departure,
and the amusement of those who remained was becoming slack.  It was
getting dark, and ladies in morning costumes were thinking that, if
they were to appear by candlelight, they ought to readjust
themselves.  Some young gentlemen had been heard to talk so loud that
prudent mammas determined to retire judiciously, and the more
discreet of the male sex, whose libations had been moderate, felt
that there was not much more left for them to do.

Morning parties, as a rule, are failures.  People never know how to
get away from them gracefully.  A picnic on an island or a mountain
or in a wood may perhaps be permitted.  There is no master of the
mountain bound by courtesy to bid you stay while in his heart he is
longing for your departure.  But in a private house or in private
grounds a morning party is a bore.  One is called on to eat and drink
at unnatural hours.  One is obliged to give up the day, which is
useful, and is then left without resource for the evening, which is
useless.  One gets home fagged and désœuvré and yet at an hour too
early for bed.  There is no comfortable resource left.  Cards in
these genteel days are among the things tabooed, and a rubber of
whist is impracticable.

All this began now to be felt.  Some young people had come with some
amount of hope that they might get up a dance in the evening, and
were unwilling to leave till all such hope was at an end.  Others,
fearful of staying longer than was expected, had ordered their
carriages early, and were doing their best to go, solicitous for
their servants and horses.  The countess and her noble brood were
among the first to leave, and as regarded the Hon. George, it was
certainly time that he did so.  Her ladyship was in a great fret and
fume.  Those horrid roads would, she was sure, be the death of her if
unhappily she were caught in them by the dark night.  The lamps she
was assured were good, but no lamp could withstand the jolting of the
roads of East Barsetshire.  The De Courcy property lay in the western
division of the county.

Mrs. Proudie could not stay when the countess was gone.  So the
bishop was searched for by the Revs. Messrs. Grey and Green and found
in one corner of the tent enjoying himself thoroughly in a
disquisition on the hebdomadal board.  He obeyed, however, the
behests of his lady without finishing the sentence in which he was
promising to Dr. Gwynne that his authority at Oxford should remain
unimpaired, and the episcopal horses turned their noses towards the
palatial stables.  Then the Grantlys went.  Before they did so Mr.
Harding managed to whisper a word into his daughter's ear.  Of
course, he said, he would undeceive the Grantlys as to that foolish
rumour about Mr. Slope.

"No, no, no," said Eleanor; "pray do not--pray wait till I see you. 
You will be home in a day or two, and then I will I explain to you
everything."

"I shall be home to-morrow," said he.

"I am so glad," said Eleanor.  "You will come and dine with me, and
then we shall be so comfortable."

Mr. Harding promised.  He did not exactly know what there was to be
explained, or why Dr. Grantly's mind should not be disabused of the
mistake into which he had fallen, but nevertheless he promised.  He
owed some reparation to his daughter, and he thought that he might
best make it by obedience.

And thus the people were thinning off by degrees as Charlotte and
Eleanor walked about in quest of Bertie.  Their search might have
been long had they not happened to hear his voice.  He was
comfortably ensconced in the ha-ha, with his back to the sloping
side, smoking a cigar, and eagerly engaged in conversation with some
youngster from the further side of the county, whom he had never met
before, who was also smoking under Bertie's pupilage and listening
with open ears to an account given by his companion of some of the
pastimes of Eastern clime.

"Bertie, I am seeking you everywhere," said Charlotte.  "Come up here
at once."

Bertie looked up out of the ha-ha and saw the two ladies before him. 
As there was nothing for him but to obey, he got up and threw away
his cigar.  From the first moment of his acquaintance with her he had
liked Eleanor Bold.  Had he been left to his own devices, had she
been penniless, and had it then been quite out of the question that
he should marry her, he would most probably have fallen violently in
love with her.  But now he could not help regarding her somewhat as
he did the marble workshops at Carrara, as he had done his easel and
palette, as he had done the lawyer's chambers in London--in fact, as
he had invariably regarded everything by which it had been proposed
to him to obtain the means of living.  Eleanor Bold appeared before I
him, no longer as a beautiful woman, but as a new profession called
matrimony.  It was a profession indeed requiring but little labour
and one in which an income was insured to him.  But nevertheless he
had been as it were goaded on to it; his sister had talked to him of
Eleanor, just as she had talked of busts and portraits.  Bertie did
not dislike money, but he hated the very thought of earning it.  He
was now called away from his pleasant cigar to earn it, by offering
himself as a husband to Mrs. Bold.  The work indeed was made easy
enough, for in lieu of his having to seek the widow, the widow had
apparently come to seek him.

He made some sudden absurd excuse to his auditor and then, throwing
away his cigar, climbed up the wall of the ha-ha and joined the
ladies on the lawn.

"Come and give Mrs. Bold an arm," said Charlotte, "while I set you on
a piece of duty which, as a preux chevalier, you must immediately
perform.  Your personal danger will, I fear, be insignificant, as
your antagonist is a clergyman."

Bertie immediately gave his arm to Eleanor, walking between her and
his sister.  He had lived too long abroad to fall into the
Englishman's habit of offering each an arm to two ladies at the same
time--a habit, by the by, which foreigners regard as an approach to
bigamy, or a sort of incipient Mormonism.

The little history of Mr. Slope's misconduct was then told to Bertie
by his sister, Eleanor's ears tingling the while.  And well they
might tingle.  If it were necessary to speak of the outrage at all,
why should it be spoken of to such a person as Mr. Stanhope, and why
in her own hearing?  She knew she was wrong, and was unhappy and
dispirited, yet she could think of no way to extricate herself, no
way to set herself right.  Charlotte spared her as much as she
possibly could, spoke of the whole thing as though Mr. Slope had
taken a glass of wine too much, said that of course there would be
nothing more about it but that steps must be taken to exclude Mr.
Slope from the carriage.

"Mrs. Bold need be under no alarm about that," said Bertie, "for Mr.
Slope has gone this hour past.  He told me that business made it
necessary that he should start at once for Barchester."

"He is not so tipsy, at any rate, but what he knows his fault," said
Charlotte.  "Well, my dear, that is one difficulty over.  Now I'll
leave you with your true knight and get Madeline off as quickly as I
can.  The carriage is here, I suppose, Bertie?"

"It has been here for the last hour."

"That's well.  Good-bye, my dear.  Of course you'll come in to tea. 
I shall trust to you to bring her, Bertie, even by force if
necessary."  And so saying, Charlotte ran off across the lawn,
leaving her brother alone with the widow.

As Miss Stanhope went off, Eleanor bethought herself that, as Mr.
Slope had taken his departure, there no longer existed any necessity
for separating Mr. Stanhope from his sister Madeline, who so much
needed his aid.  It had been arranged that he should remain so as to
preoccupy Mr. Slope's place in the carriage and act as a social
policeman, to effect the exclusion of that disagreeable gentleman. 
But Mr. Slope had effected his own exclusion, and there was no
possible reason now why Bertie should not go with his sister--at
least Eleanor saw none, and she said as much.

"Oh, let Charlotte have her own way," said he.  "She has arranged it,
and there will be no end of confusion if we make another change. 
Charlotte always arranges everything in our house and rules us like a
despot."

"But the signora?" said Eleanor.

"Oh, the signora can do very well without me.  Indeed, she will have
to do without me," he added, thinking rather of his studies in
Carrara than of his Barchester hymeneals.

"Why, you are not going to leave us?" asked Eleanor.

It has been said that Bertie Stanhope was a man without principle. 
He certainly was so.  He had no power of using active mental exertion
to keep himself from doing evil.  Evil had no ugliness in his eyes;
virtue no beauty.  He was void of any of these feelings which actuate
men to do good.  But he was perhaps equally void of those which
actuate men to do evil.  He got into debt with utter recklessness,
thinking nothing as to whether the tradesmen would ever be paid or
not.  But he did not invent active schemes of deceit for the sake of
extracting the goods of others.  If a man gave him credit, that was
the man's look-out; Bertie Stanhope troubled himself nothing further. 
In borrowing money he did the same; he gave people references to "his
governor;" told them that the "old chap" had a good income; and
agreed to pay sixty per cent for the accommodation.  All this he did
without a scruple of conscience, but then he never contrived active
villainy.

In this affair of his marriage it had been represented to him as a
matter of duty that he ought to put himself in possession of Mrs.
Bold's hand and fortune, and at first he had so regarded it.  About
her he had thought but little.  It was the customary thing for men
situated as he was to marry for money, and there was no reason why he
should not do what others around him did.  And so he consented.  But
now he began to see the matter in another light.  He was setting
himself down to catch this woman, as a cat sits to catch a mouse.  He
was to catch her, and swallow her up, her and her child, and her
houses and land, in order that he might live on her instead of on his
father.  There was a cold, calculating, cautious cunning about this
quite at variance with Bertie's character.  The prudence of the
measure was quite as antagonistic to his feelings as the iniquity.

And then, should he be successful, what would be the reward? Having
satisfied his creditors with half of the widow's fortune, he would be
allowed to sit down quietly at Barchester, keeping economical house
with the remainder.  His duty would be to rock the cradle of the late
Mr. Bold's child, and his highest excitement a demure party at
Plumstead Rectory, should it ultimately turn out that the archdeacon
would be sufficiently reconciled to receive him.

There was very little in the programme to allure such a man as Bertie
Stanhope.  Would not the Carrara workshop, or whatever worldly career
fortune might have in store for him, would not almost anything be
better than this?  The lady herself was undoubtedly all that was
desirable, but the most desirable lady becomes nauseous when she has
to be taken as a pill.  He was pledged to his sister, however, and
let him quarrel with whom he would, it behoved him not to quarrel
with her.  If she were lost to him, all would be lost that he could
ever hope to derive henceforward from the paternal roof-tree.  His
mother was apparently indifferent to his weal or woe, to his wants or
his warfare.  His father's brow got blacker and blacker from day to
day, as the old man looked at his hopeless son.  And as for
Madeline--poor Madeline, whom of all of them he liked the best--she
had enough to do to shift for herself.  No; come what might, he must
cling to his sister and obey her behests, let them be ever so
stern--or at the very least seem to obey them.  Could not some happy
deceit bring him through in this matter, so that he might save
appearances with his sister and yet not betray the widow to her ruin? 
What if he made a confederate of Eleanor?  'Twas in this spirit that
Bertie Stanhope set about his wooing.

"But you are not going to leave Barchester?" asked Eleanor.

"I do not know," he replied; "I hardly know yet what I am going to
do.  But it is at any rate certain that I must do something."

"You mean about your profession?" said she.

"Yes, about my profession, if you can call it one."

"And is it not one?" said Eleanor.  "Were I a man, I know none I
should prefer to it, except painting.  And I believe the one is as
much in your power as the other."

"Yes, just about equally so," said Bertie with a little touch of
inward satire directed at himself.  He knew in his heart that he
would never make a penny by either.

"I have often wondered, Mr. Stanhope, why you do not exert yourself
more," said Eleanor, who felt a friendly fondness for the man with
whom she was walking.  "But I know it is very impertinent in me to
say so."

"Impertinent!" said he.  "Not so, but much too kind.  It is much too
kind in you to take any interest in so idle a scamp."

"But you are not a scamp, though you are perhaps idle.  And I do take
an interest in you, a very great interest," she added in a voice
which almost made him resolve to change his mind.  "And when I call
you idle, I know you are only so for the present moment.  Why can't
you settle steadily to work here in Barchester?"

"And make busts of the bishop, dean, and chapter?  Or perhaps, if I
achieve a great success, obtain a commission to put up an elaborate
tombstone over a prebendary's widow, a dead lady with a Grecian nose,
a bandeau, and an intricate lace veil; lying of course on a marble
sofa from among the legs of which death will be creeping out and
poking at his victim with a small