 toasting-fork."

Eleanor laughed, but yet she thought that if the surviving prebendary
paid the bill, the object of the artist as a professional man would
in a great measure be obtained.

"I don't know about the dean and chapter and the prebendary's widow,"
said Eleanor.  "Of course you must take them as they come.  But the
fact of your having a great cathedral in which such ornaments are
required could not but be in your favour."

"No real artist could descend to the ornamentation of a cathedral,"
said Bertie, who had his ideas of the high ecstatic ambition of art,
as indeed all artists have who are not in receipt of a good income. 
"Buildings should be fitted to grace the sculpture, not the sculpture
to grace the building."

"Yes, when the work of art is good enough to merit it.  Do you, Mr.
Stanhope, do something sufficiently excellent and we ladies of
Barchester will erect for it a fitting receptacle.  Come, what shall
the subject be?"

"I'll put you in your pony chair, Mrs. Bold, as Dannecker put Ariadne
on her lion.  Only you must promise to sit for me."

"My ponies are too tame, I fear, and my broad-brimmed straw hat will
not look so well in marble as the lace veil of the prebendary's
wife."

'If you will not consent to that, Mrs. Bold, I will consent to try no
other subject in Barchester."

"You are determined then to push your fortune in other lands?"

"I am determined," said Bertie slowly and significantly, as he tried
to bring up his mind to a great resolve; "I am determined in this
matter to be guided wholly by you."

"Wholly by me?" said Eleanor, astonished at, and not quite liking,
his altered manner.

"Wholly by you," said Bertie, dropping his companion's arm and
standing before her on the path.  In their walk they had come exactly
to the spot in which Eleanor had been provoked into slapping Mr.
Slope's face.  Could it be possible that this place was peculiarly
unpropitious to her comfort?  Could it be possible that she should
here have to encounter yet another amorous swain?

"If you will be guided by me, Mr. Stanhope, you will set yourself
down to steady and persevering work, and you will be ruled by your
father as to the place in which it will be most advisable for you to
do so."

"Nothing could be more prudent, if only it were practicable.  But
now, if you will let me, I will tell you how it is that I will be
guided by you, and why.  Will you let me tell you?"

"I really do not know what you can have to tell."

"No, you cannot know.  It is impossible that you should.  But we have
been very good friends, Mrs. Bold, have we not?"

"Yes, I think we have," said she, observing in his demeanour an
earnestness very unusual with him.

"You were kind enough to say just now that you took an interest in
me, and I was perhaps vain enough to believe you."

'There is no vanity in that; I do so as your sister's brother--and as
my own friend also."

"Well, I don't deserve that you should feel so kindly towards me,"
said Bertie, "but upon my word I am very grateful for it," and he
paused awhile, hardly knowing how to introduce the subject that he
had in hand.

And it was no wonder that he found it difficult.  He had to make
known to his companion the scheme that had been prepared to rob her
of her wealth, he had to tell her that he had intended to marry her
without loving her, or else that he loved her without intending to
marry her; and he had also to bespeak from her not only his own
pardon, but also that of his sister, and induce Mrs. Bold to protest
in her future communion with Charlotte that an offer had been duly
made to her and duly rejected.

Bertie Stanhope was not prone to be very diffident of his own
conversational powers, but it did seem to him that he was about to
tax them almost too far.  He hardly knew where to begin, and he
hardly knew where he should end.

By this time Eleanor was again walking on slowly by his side, not
taking his arm as she had heretofore done but listening very intently
for whatever Bertie might have to say to her.

"I wish to be guided by you," said he; "indeed, in this matter there
is no one else who can set me right."

"Oh, that must be nonsense," said she.

"Well, listen to me now, Mrs. Bold, and if you can help it, pray
don't be angry with me."

"Angry!" said she.

"Oh, indeed you will have cause to be so.  You know how very much
attached to you my sister Charlotte is."

Eleanor acknowledged that she did.

"Indeed she is; I never knew her to love anyone so warmly on so short
an acquaintance.  You know also how well she loves me?"

Eleanor now made no answer, but she felt the blood tingle in her
cheek as she gathered from what he said the probable result of this
double-barrelled love on the part of Miss Stanhope.

"I am her only brother, Mrs. Bold, and it is not to be wondered at
that she should love me.  But you do not yet know Charlotte--you do
not know how entirely the well-being of our family hangs on her. 
Without her to manage for us I do not know how we should get on from
day to day.  You cannot yet have observed all this."

Eleanor had indeed observed a good deal of this; she did not,
however, now say so but allowed him to proceed with his story.

"You cannot therefore be surprised that Charlotte should be most
anxious to do the best for us all."

Eleanor said that she was not at all surprised.

"And she has had a very difficult game to play, Mrs. Bold--a very
difficult game.  Poor Madeline's unfortunate marriage and terrible
accident, my mother's ill-health, my father's absence from England,
and last, and worse perhaps, my own roving, idle spirit have almost
been too much for her.  You cannot wonder if among all her cares one
of the foremost is to see me settled in the world."

Eleanor on this occasion expressed no acquiescence.  She certainly
supposed that a formal offer was to be made and could not but think
that so singular an exordium was never before made by a gentleman in
a similar position.  Mr. Slope had annoyed her by the excess of his
ardour.  It was quite clear that no such danger was to be feared from
Mr. Stanhope.  Prudential motives alone actuated him.  Not only was
he about to make love because his sister told him, but he also took
the precaution of explaining all this before he began.  'Twas thus,
we may presume, that the matter presented itself to Mrs. Bold.

When he had got so far, Bertie began poking the gravel with a little
cane which he carried.  He still kept moving on, but very slowly, and
his companion moved slowly by his side, not inclined to assist him in
the task the performance of which appeared to be difficult to him.

"Knowing how fond she is of yourself, Mrs. Bold, cannot you imagine
what scheme should have occurred to her?"

"I can imagine no better scheme, Mr. Stanhope, than the one I
proposed to you just now."

"No," said he somewhat lackadaisically; "I suppose that would be the
best, but Charlotte thinks another plan might be joined with it.  She
wants me to marry you."

A thousand remembrances flashed across Eleanor's mind all in a
moment--how Charlotte had talked about and praised her brother, how
she had continually contrived to throw the two of them together, how
she had encouraged all manner of little intimacies, how she had with
singular cordiality persisted in treating Eleanor as one of the
family.  All this had been done to secure her comfortable income for
the benefit of one of the family!

Such a feeling as this is very bitter when it first impresses itself
on a young mind.  To the old, such plots and plans, such matured
schemes for obtaining the goods of this world without the trouble of
earning them, such long-headed attempts to convert "tuum" into "meum"
are the ways of life to which they are accustomed.  'Tis thus that
many live, and it therefore behoves all those who are well-to-do in
the world to be on their guard against those who are not.  With them
it is the success that disgusts, not the attempt.  But Eleanor had
not yet learnt to look on her money as a source of danger; she had
not begun to regard herself as fair game to be hunted down by hungry
gentlemen.  She had enjoyed the society of the Stanhopes, she had
greatly liked the cordiality of Charlotte, and had been happy in her
new friends.  Now she saw the cause of all this kindness, and her
mind was opened to a new phase of human life.

"Miss Stanhope," said she haughtily, "has been contriving for me a
great deal of honour, but she might have saved herself the trouble. 
I am not sufficiently ambitious."

"Pray don't be angry with her, Mrs. Bold," said he, "or with me
either."

"Certainly not with you, Mr. Stanhope," said she with considerable
sarcasm in her tone.  "Certainly not with you."

"No--nor with her," said he imploringly.

"And why, may I ask you, Mr. Stanhope, have you told me this singular
story?  For I may presume I may judge by your manner of telling it
that--that--that you and your sister are not exactly of one mind on
the subject."

"No, we are not."

"And if so," said Mrs. Bold, who was now really angry with the
unnecessary insult which she thought had been offered to her.
"And if so, why has it been worth your while to tell me all this?"

"I did once think, Mrs. Bold--that you--that you--"

The widow now again became entirely impassive, and would not lend the
slightest assistance to her companion.

"I did once think that you perhaps might--might have been taught to
regard me as more than a friend."

"Never!" said Mrs. Bold, "never.  If I have ever allowed myself to do
anything to encourage such an idea, I have been very much to blame--
very much to blame indeed."

"You never have," said Bertie, who really had a good-natured anxiety
to make what he said as little unpleasant as possible.  "You never
have, and I have seen for some time that I had no chance--but my
sister's hopes ran higher.  I have not mistaken you, Mrs. Bold,
though perhaps she has."

"Then why have you said all this to me?"

"Because I must not anger her."

"And will not this anger her?  Upon my word, Mr. Stanhope, I do not
understand the policy of your family.  Oh, how I wish I was at home!" 
And as she expressed the wish she could restrain herself no longer
and burst out into a flood of tears.

Poor Bertie was greatly moved.  "You shall have the carriage to
yourself going home," said he; "at least you and my father.  As for
me, I can walk, or for the matter of that it does not much signify
what I do."  He perfectly understood that part of Eleanor's grief
arose from the apparent necessity of her going back to Barchester in
the carriage with her second suitor.

This somewhat mollified her.  "Oh, Mr. Stanhope," said she, "why
should you have made me so miserable?  What will you have gained by
telling me all this?"

He had not even yet explained to her the most difficult part of his
proposition; he had not told her that she was to be a party to the
little deception which he intended to play off upon his sister.  This
suggestion had still to be made, and as it was absolutely necessary,
he proceeded to make it.

We need not follow him through the whole of his statement.  At last,
and not without considerable difficulty, he made Eleanor understand
why he had let her into his confidence, seeing that he no longer
intended her the honour of a formal offer.  At last he made her
comprehend the part which she was destined to play in this little
family comedy.

But when she did understand it, she was only more angry with him than
ever; more angry, not only with him, but with Charlotte also.  Her
fair name was to be bandied about between them in different senses,
and each sense false.  She was to be played off by the sister against
the father, and then by the brother against the sister.  Her dear
friend Charlotte, with all her agreeable sympathy and affection, was
striving to sacrifice her for the Stanhope family welfare, and
Bertie, who, as he now proclaimed himself, was over head and ears in
debt, completed the compliment of owning that he did not care to have
his debts paid at so great a sacrifice of himself.  Then she was
asked to conspire together with this unwilling suitor for the sake of
making the family believe that he had in obedience to their commands
done his best to throw himself thus away!

She lifted up her face when he had finished, and looking at him with
much dignity, even through her tears, she said:

"I regret to say it, Mr. Stanhope, but after what has passed I
believe that all intercourse between your family and myself had
better cease."

"Well, perhaps it had," said Bertie naively; "perhaps that will be
better at any rate for a time; and then Charlotte will think you are
offended at what I have done."

"And now I will go back to the house, if you please," said Eleanor. 
"I can find my way by myself, Mr. Stanhope: after what has passed,"
she added, "I would rather go alone."

"But I must find the carriage for you, Mrs. Bold; and I must tell my
father that you will return with him alone; and I must make some
excuse to him for not going with you; and I must bid the servant put
you down at your own house, for I suppose you will not now choose to
see them again in the close."

There was a truth about this, and a perspicuity in making
arrangements for lessening her immediate embarrassment, which had
some effect in softening Eleanor's anger.  So she suffered herself to
walk by his side over the now deserted lawn, till they came to the
drawing-room window.  There was something about Bertie Stanhope which
gave him, in the estimation of everyone, a different standing from
that which any other man would occupy under similar circumstances. 
Angry as Eleanor was, and great as was her cause for anger, she was
not half as angry with him as she would have been with anyone else. 
He was apparently so simple, so good-natured, so unaffected and easy
to talk to, that she had already half-forgiven him before he was at
the drawing-room window.

When they arrived there, Dr. Stanhope was sitting nearly alone with
Mr. and Miss Thorne; one or two other unfortunates were there, who
from one cause or another were still delayed in getting away, but
they were every moment getting fewer in number.

As soon as he had handed Eleanor over to his father, Bertie started
off to the front gate in search of the carriage, and there he waited
leaning patiently against the front wall, comfortably smoking a
cigar, till it came up.  When he returned to the room, Dr. Stanhope
and Eleanor were alone with their hosts.

"At last, Miss Thorne," said he cheerily, "I have come to relieve
you.  Mrs. Bold and my father are the last roses of the very
delightful summer you have given us, and desirable as Mrs. Bold's
society always is, now at least you must be glad to see the last
flowers plucked from the tree."

Miss Thorne declared that she was delighted to have Mrs. Bold and Dr.
Stanhope still with her, and Mr. Thorne would have said the same, had
he not been checked by a yawn, which he could not suppress.

"Father, will you give your arm to Mrs. Bold?" said Bertie: and so
the last adieux were made, and the prebendary led out Mrs. Bold,
followed by his son.

"I shall be home soon after you," said he as the two got into the
carriage.

"Are you not coming in the carriage?" said the father.

"No, no; I have someone to see on the road, and shall walk.  John,
mind you drive to Mrs. Bold's house first."

Eleanor, looking out of the window, saw him with his hat in his hand,
bowing to her with his usual gay smile, as though nothing had
happened to mar the tranquillity of the day.  It was many a long year
before she saw him again.  Dr. Stanhope hardly spoke to her on her
way home, and she was safely deposited by John at her own hall-door
before the carriage drove into the close.

And thus our heroine played the last act of that day's melodrama.



CHAPTER XLIII

Mr. and Mrs. Quiverful Are Made Happy
Mr. Slope is Encouraged by the Press


Before she started for Ullathorne, Mrs. Proudie, careful soul, caused
two letters to be written, one by herself and one by her lord, to the
inhabitants of Puddingdale vicarage, which made happy the hearth of
those within it.

As soon as the departure of the horses left the bishop's stable-groom
free for other services, that humble denizen of the diocese started
on the bishop's own pony with the two dispatches.  We have had so
many letters lately that we will spare ourselves these.  That from
the bishop was simply a request that Mr. Quiverful would wait upon
his lordship the next morning at 11 A.M.; that from the lady was as
simply a request that Mrs. Quiverful would do the same by her, though
it was couched in somewhat longer and more grandiloquent phraseology.

It had become a point of conscience with Mrs. Proudie to urge the
settlement of this great hospital question.  She was resolved that
Mr. Quiverful should have it.  She was resolved that there should be
no more doubt or delay, no more refusals and resignations, no more
secret negotiations carried on by Mr. Slope on his own account in
opposition to her behests.

"Bishop," she said immediately after breakfast on the morning of that
eventful day, "have you signed the appointment yet?"

"No, my dear, not yet; it is not exactly signed as yet."

"Then do it," said the lady.

The bishop did it, and a very pleasant day indeed he spent at
Ullathorne.  And when he got home, he had a glass of hot negus in his
wife's sitting-room and read the last number of the Little Dorrit of
the day with great inward satisfaction.  Oh, husbands, oh, my marital
friends, what great comfort is there to be derived from a wife well
obeyed!

Much perturbation and flutter, high expectation and renewed hopes,
were occasioned at Puddingdale, by the receipt of these episcopal
dispatches.  Mrs. Quiverful, whose careful ear caught the sound of
the pony's feet as he trotted up to the vicarage kitchen door,
brought them in hurriedly to her husband.  She was at the moment
concocting the Irish stew destined to satisfy the noonday wants of
fourteen young birds, let alone the parent couple.  She had taken the
letters from the man's hands between the folds of her capacious apron
so as to save them from the contamination of the stew, and in this
guise she brought them to her husband's desk.

They at once divided the spoil, each taking that addressed to the
other.  "Quiverful," said she with impressive voice, "you are to be
at the palace at eleven to-morrow."

"And so are you, my dear," said he, almost gasping with the
importance of the tidings--and then they exchanged letters.

"She'd never have sent for me again," said the lady, "if it wasn't
all right."

"Oh, my dear, don't be too certain," said the gentleman, "Only think
if it should be wrong."

"She'd never have sent for me, Q., if it wasn't all right," again
argued the lady.  "She's stiff and hard and proud as piecrust, but I
think she's right at bottom." Such was Mrs. Quiverful's verdict about
Mrs. Proudie, to which in after times she always adhered.  People
when they get their income doubled usually think that those through
whose instrumentality this little ceremony is performed are right at
bottom.

"Oh, Letty!" said Mr. Quiverful, rising from his well-worn seat.

"Oh, Q.!" said Mrs. Quiverful, and then the two, unmindful of the
kitchen apron, the greasy fingers, and the adherent Irish stew, threw
themselves warmly into each other's arms.

"For heaven's sake, don't let anyone cajole you out of it again,"
said the wife.

"Let me alone for that," said the husband with a look of almost
fierce determination, pressing his fist as he spoke rigidly on his
desk, as though he had Mr. Slope's head below his knuckles and meant
to keep it there.

"I wonder how soon it will be?" said she.

"I wonder whether it will be at all?" said he, still doubtful.

"Well, I won't say too much," said the lady.  "The cup has slipped
twice before, and it may fall altogether this time, but I'll not
believe it.  He'll give you the appointment to-morrow.  You'll find
he will."

"Heaven send he may," said Mr. Quiverful solemnly.  And who that
considers the weight of the burden on this man's back will say that
the prayer was an improper one?  There were fourteen of them--
fourteen of them living--as Mrs. Quiverful had so powerfully urged in
the presence of the bishop's wife.  As long as promotion cometh from
any human source, whether north or south, east or west, will not such
a claim as this hold good, in spite of all our examination tests,
detur digniori's, and optimist tendencies?  It is fervently to be
hoped that it may.  Till we can become divine, we must be content to
be human, lest in our hurry for a change we sink to something lower.

And then the pair, sitting down lovingly together, talked over all
their difficulties, as they so often did, and all their hopes as they
so seldom were enabled to do.

"You had better call on that man, Q., as you come away from the
palace," said Mrs. Quiverful, pointing to an angry call for money
from the Barchester draper, which the postman had left at the
vicarage that morning.  Cormorant that he was, unjust, hungry
cormorant!  When rumour first got abroad that the Quiverfuls were to
go to the hospital, this fellow with fawning eagerness had pressed
his goods upon the wants of the poor clergyman.  He had done so,
feeling that he should be paid from the hospital funds, and
flattering himself that a man with fourteen children, and money
wherewithal to clothe them, could not but be an excellent customer. 
As soon as the second rumour reached him, he applied for his money
angrily.

And "the fourteen"--or such of them as were old enough to hope and
discuss their hopes--talked over their golden future.  The tall grown
girls whispered to each other of possible Barchester parties, of
possible allowances for dress, of a possible piano--the one they had
in the vicarage was so weather-beaten with the storms of years and 
children as to be no longer worthy of the name--of the pretty garden,
and the pretty house.  'Twas of such things it most behoved them to
whisper.

And the younger fry, they did not content themselves with whispers,
but shouted to each other of their new playground beneath our dear
ex-warden's well-loved elms, of their future own gardens, of marbles
to be procured in the wished-for city, and of the rumour which had
reached them of a Barchester school.

'Twas in vain that their cautious mother tried to instil into their
breasts the very feeling she had striven to banish from that of their
father; 'twas in vain that she repeated to the girls that "there's
many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip;" 'twas in vain she attempted
to make the children believe that they were to live at Puddingdale
all their lives.  Hopes mounted high, and would not have themselves
quelled.  The neighbouring farmers heard the news and came in to
congratulate them.  'Twas Mrs. Quiverful herself who had kindled the
fire, and in the first outbreak of her renewed expectations she did
it so thoroughly that it was quite past her power to put it out
again.

Poor matron!  Good, honest matron, doing thy duty in the state to
which thou hast been called, heartily if not contentedly; let the
fire burn on; on this occasion the flames will not scorch; they shall
warm thee and thine.  'Tis ordained that that husband of thine, that
Q. of thy bosom, shall reign supreme for years to come over the
bedesmen of Hiram's Hospital.

And the last in all Barchester to mar their hopes, had he heard and
seen all that passed at Puddingdale that day, would have been Mr.
Harding.  What wants had he to set in opposition to those of such a
regiment of young ravens?  There are fourteen of them living!  With
him, at any rate, let us say that that argument would have been
sufficient for the appointment of Mr. Quiverful.

In the morning Q. and his wife kept their appointments with that
punctuality which bespeaks an expectant mind.  The friendly farmer's
gig was borrowed, and in that they went, discussing many things by
the way.  They had instructed the household to expect them back by
one, and injunctions were given to the eldest pledge to have ready by
that accustomed hour the remainder of the huge stew which the
provident mother had prepared on the previous day.  The hands of the
kitchen clock came round to two, three, four, before the farmer's gig
wheels were again heard at the vicarage gate.  With what palpitating
hearts were the returning wanderers greeted!

"I suppose, children, you all thought we were never coming back any
more?" said the mother as she slowly let down her solid foot till it
rested on the step of the gig.  "Well, such a day as we've had!" and
then leaning heavily on a big boy's shoulder, she stepped once more
on terra firma.

There was no need for more than the tone of her voice to tell them
that all was right.  The Irish stew might burn itself to cinders now.

Then there was such kissing and hugging, such crying and laughing. 
Mr. Quiverful could not sit still at all but kept walking from room
to room, then out into the garden, then down the avenue into the
road, and then back again to his wife.  She, however, lost no time so
idly.

"We must go to work at once, girls, and that in earnest.  Mrs.
Proudie expects us to be in the hospital house on the 15th of
October."

Had Mrs. Proudie expressed a wish that they should all be there on
the next morning, the girls would have had nothing to say against it.

"And when will the pay begin?" asked the eldest boy.

"To-day, my dear," said the gratified mother.

"Oh, that is jolly," said the boy.

"Mrs. Proudie insisted on our going down to the house," continued the
mother, "and when there, I thought I might save a journey by
measuring some of the rooms and windows; so I got a knot of tape from
Bobbins.  Bobbins is as civil as you please, now."

"I wouldn't thank him," said Letty the younger.

"Oh, it's the way of the world, my dear.  They all do just the same. 
You might just as well be angry with the turkey cock for gobbling at
you.  It's the bird's nature."  And as she enunciated to her bairns
the upshot of her practical experience, she pulled from her pocket
the portions of tape which showed the length and breadth of the
various rooms at the hospital house.

And so we will leave her happy in her toils.

The Quiverfuls had hardly left the palace, and Mrs. Proudie was still
holding forth on the matter to her husband, when another visitor was
announced in the person of Dr. Gwynne.  The Master of Lazarus had
asked for the bishop and not for Mrs. Proudie, and therefore when he
was shown into the study, he was surprised rather than rejoiced to
find the lady there.

But we must go back a little, and it shall be but a little, for a
difficulty begins to make itself manifest in the necessity of
disposing of all our friends in the small remainder of this one
volume.  Oh, that Mr. Longman would allow me a fourth!  It should
transcend the other three as the seventh heaven transcends all the
lower stages of celestial bliss.

Going home in the carriage that evening from Ullathorne, Dr. Gwynne
had not without difficulty brought round his friend the archdeacon to
a line of tactics much less bellicose than that which his own taste
would have preferred.  "It will be unseemly in us to show ourselves
in a bad humour; moreover, we have no power in this matter, and it
will therefore be bad policy to act as though we had."  'Twas thus
the Master of Lazarus argued.  "If," he continued, "the bishop be
determined to appoint another to the hospital, threats will not
prevent him, and threats should not be lightly used by an archdeacon
to his bishop.  If he will place a stranger in the hospital, we can
only leave him to the indignation of others.  It is probable that
such a step may not eventually injure your father-in-law.  I will see
the bishop, if you will allow me--alone."  At this the archdeacon
winced visibly.  "Yes, alone; for so I shall be calmer; and then I
shall at any rate learn what he does mean to do in the matter."

The archdeacon puffed and blew, put up the carriage window and then
put it down again, argued the matter up to his own gate, and at last
gave way.  Everybody was against him, his own wife, Mr. Harding, and
Dr. Gwynne.

"Pray keep him out of hot water, Dr. Gwynne," Mrs. Grantly had said
to her guest.

"My dearest madam, I'll do my best," the courteous master had
replied.  'Twas thus he did it and earned for himself the gratitude
of Mrs. Grantly.

And now we may return to the bishop's study.

Dr. Gwynne had certainly not foreseen the difficulty which here
presented itself.  He--together with all the clerical world of
England--had heard it rumoured about that Mrs. Proudie did not
confine herself to her wardrobes, still-rooms, and laundries, but yet
it had never occurred to him that if he called on a bishop at one
o'clock in the day, he could by any possibility find him closeted
with his wife; or that if he did so, the wife would remain longer
than necessary to make her curtsey.  It appeared, however, as though
in the present case Mrs. Proudie had no idea of retreating.

The bishop had been very much pleased with Dr. Gwynne on the
preceding day, and of course thought that Dr. Gwynne had been as much
pleased with him.  He attributed the visit solely to compliment and
thought it an extremely gracious and proper thing for the Master of
Lazarus to drive over from Plumstead specially to call at the palace
so soon after his arrival in the country.  The fact that they were
not on the same side either in politics or doctrines made the
compliment the greater.  The bishop, therefore, was all smiles.  And
Mrs. Proudie, who liked people with good handles to their names, was
also very well disposed to welcome the Master of Lazarus.

"We had a charming party at Ullathorne, Master, had we not?" said
she.  "I hope Mrs. Grantly got home without fatigue."

Dr. Gwynne said that they had all been a little tired, but were none
the worse this morning.

"An excellent person, Miss Thorne," suggested the bishop.

"And an exemplary Christian, I am told," said Mrs. Proudie.

Dr. Gwynne declared that he was very glad to hear it.

"I have not seen her Sabbath-day schools yet," continued the lady,
"but I shall make a point of doing so before long."

Dr. Gwynne merely bowed at this intimation.  He had heard something
of Mrs. Proudie and her Sunday-schools, both from Dr. Grantly and
Mr. Harding.

"By the by, Master," continued the lady, "I wonder whether Mrs.
Grantly would like me to drive over and inspect her Sabbath-day
school.  I hear that it is most excellently kept."

Dr. Gwynne really could not say.  He had no doubt Mrs. Grantly would
be most happy to see Mrs. Proudie any day Mrs. Proudie would do her
the honour of calling: that was, of course, if Mrs. Grantly should
happen to be at home.

A slight cloud darkened the lady's brow.  She saw that her offer was
not taken in good part.  This generation of unregenerated vipers was
still perverse, stiff-necked, and hardened in their iniquity.  'The
archdeacon, I know," said she, "sets his face against these
institutions."

At this Dr. Gwynne laughed slightly.  It was but a smile.  Had he
given his cap for it he could not have helped it.

Mrs. Proudie frowned again.  " 'Suffer little children, and forbid
them not,' " she said.  "Are we not to remember that, Dr. Gwynne? 
'Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones.'  Are we not
to remember that, Dr. Gwynne?"  And at each of these questions she
raised at him her menacing forefinger.

"Certainly, madam, certainly," said the master, "and so does the
archdeacon, I am sure, on weekdays as well as on Sundays."

"On weekdays you can't take heed not to despise them," said Mrs.
Proudie, "because then they are out in the fields.  On weekdays they
belong to their parents, but on Sundays they ought to belong to the
clergyman." And the finger was again raised.

The master began to understand and to share the intense disgust which
the archdeacon always expressed when Mrs. Proudie's name was
mentioned.  What was he to do with such a woman as this?  To take his
hat and go would have been his natural resource, but then he did not
wish to be foiled in his object.

"My lord," said he, "I wanted to ask you a question on business, if
you could spare me one moment's leisure.  I know I must apologize for
so disturbing you, but in truth I will not detain you five minutes."

"Certainly, Master, certainly," said the bishop; "my time is quite
yours--pray make no apology, pray make no apology."

"You have a great deal to do just at the present moment, Bishop.  Do
not forget how extremely busy you are at present," said Mrs. Proudie,
whose spirit was now up, for she was angry with her visitor.

"I will not delay his lordship much above a minute," said the Master
of Lazarus, rising from his chair and expecting that Mrs. Proudie
would now go, or else that the bishop would lead the way into another
room.

But neither event seemed likely to occur, and Dr. Gwynne stood for a
moment silent in the middle of the room.

"Perhaps it's about Hiram's Hospital?" suggested Mrs. Proudie.

Dr. Gwynne, lost in astonishment, and not knowing what else on earth
to do, confessed that his business with the bishop was connected with
Hiram's Hospital.

"His lordship has finally conferred the appointment on Mr. Quiverful
this morning," said the lady.

Dr. Gwynne made a simple reference to the bishop, and finding that
the lady's statement was formally confirmed, he took his leave. 
"That comes of the reform bill," he said to himself as he walked down
the bishop's avenue.  "Well, at any rate the Greek play bishops were
not so bad as that."

It has been said that Mr. Slope, as he started for Ullathorne,
received a dispatch from his friend Mr. Towers, which had the effect
of putting him in that high good humour which subsequent events
somewhat untowardly damped.  It ran as follows.  Its shortness will
be its sufficient apology.

MY DEAR SIR,
I wish you every success.  I don't know that I can help you, but if I
can, I will.
Yours ever,
T. T.
30/9/185-

There was more in this than in all Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin's
flummery; more than in all the bishop's promises, even had they been
ever so sincere; more than in any archbishop's good word, even had it
been possible to obtain it.  Tom Towers would do for him what he
could.

Mr. Slope had from his youth upwards been a firm believer in the
public press.  He had dabbled in it himself ever since he had taken
his degree, and he regarded it as the great arranger and distributor
of all future British terrestrial affairs whatever.  He had not yet
arrived at the age, an age which sooner or later comes to most of us,
which dissipates the golden dreams of youth.  He delighted in the
idea of wresting power from the hands of his country's magnates and
placing it in a custody which was at any rate nearer to his own
reach.  Sixty thousand broadsheets dispersing themselves daily among
his reading fellow citizens formed in his eyes a better depot for
supremacy than a throne at Windsor, a cabinet in Downing Street, or
even an assembly at Westminster.  And on this subject we must not
quarrel with Mr. Slope, for the feeling is too general to be met with
disrespect.

Tom Towers was as good, if not better, than his promise.  On the
following morning The Jupiter, spouting forth public opinion with
sixty thousand loud clarions, did proclaim to the world that Mr.
Slope was the fitting man for the vacant post.  It was pleasant for
Mr. Slope to read the following lines in the Barchester news-room,
which he did within thirty minutes after the morning train from
London had reached the city.

It is just now five years since we called the attention of our
readers to the quiet city of Barchester.  From that day to this, we
have in no way meddled with the affairs of that happy ecclesiastical
community.  Since then, an old bishop has died there and a young
bishop has been installed, but we believe we did not do more than
give some customary record of the interesting event.  Nor are we now
about to meddle very deeply in the affairs of the diocese.  If any of
the chapter feel a qualm of conscience on reading thus far, let it be
quieted.  Above all, let the mind of the new bishop be at rest.  We
are now not armed for war, but approach the reverend towers of the
old cathedral with an olive branch in our hands.

It will be remembered that at the time alluded to, now five years
past, we had occasion to remark on the state of a charity in
Barchester called Hiram's Hospital.  We thought that it was
maladministered and that the very estimable and reverend gentleman
who held the office of warden was somewhat too highly paid for duties
which were somewhat too easily performed.  This gentleman--and we say
it in all sincerity and with no touch of sarcasm--had never looked on
the matter in this light before.  We do not wish to take praise to
ourselves whether praise be due to us or not.  But the consequence of
our remark was that the warden did look into the matter, and finding
on so doing that he himself could come to no other opinion than that
expressed by us, he very creditably threw up the appointment.  The
then bishop as creditably declined to fill the vacancy till the
affair was put on a better footing.  Parliament then took it up, and
we have now the satisfaction of informing our readers that Hiram's
Hospital will be immediately reopened under new auspices. 
Heretofore, provision was made for the maintenance of twelve old men. 
This will now be extended to the fair sex, and twelve elderly women,
if any such can be found in Barchester, will be added to the
establishment.  There will be a matron; there will, it is hoped, be
schools attached for the poorest of the children of the poor, and
there will be a steward.  The warden, for there will still be a
warden, will receive an income more in keeping with the extent of the
charity than that heretofore paid.  The stipend we believe will be
£450.  We may add that the excellent house which the former warden
inhabited will still be attached to the situation.

Barchester Hospital cannot perhaps boast a world-wide reputation, but
as we adverted to its state of decadence, we think it right also to
advert to its renaissance.  May it go on and prosper.  Whether the
salutary reform which has been introduced within its walls has been
carried as far as could have been desired may be doubtful.  The
important question of the school appears to be somewhat left to the
discretion of the new warden.  This might have been made the most
important part of the establishment, and the new warden, whom we
trust we shall not offend by the freedom of our remarks, might have
been selected with some view to his fitness as schoolmaster.  But we
will not now look a gift-horse in the mouth.  May the hospital go on
and prosper!  The situation of warden has of course been offered to
the gentleman who so honourably vacated it five years since, but we
are given to understand that he has declined it.  Whether the ladies
who have been introduced be in his estimation too much for his powers
of control, whether it be that the diminished income does not offer
to him sufficient temptation to resume his old place, or that he has
in the meantime assumed other clerical duties, we do not know.  We
are, however, informed that he has refused the offer and that the
situation has been accepted by Mr. Quiverful, the vicar of
Puddingdale.

So much we think is due to Hiram redivivus.  But while we are on the
subject of Barchester, we will venture with all respectful humility
to express our opinion on another matter connected with the
ecclesiastical polity of that ancient city.  Dr. Trefoil, the dean,
died yesterday.  A short record of his death, giving his age and the
various pieces of preferment which he has at different times held,
will be found in another column of this paper.  The only fault we
knew in him was his age, and as that is a crime of which we all hope
to be guilty, we will not bear heavily on it.  May he rest in peace! 
But though the great age of an expiring dean cannot be made matter of
reproach, we are not inclined to look on such a fault as at all
pardonable in a dean just brought to the birth.  We do hope that the
days of sexagenarian appointments are past.  If we want deans, we
must want them for some purpose.  That purpose will necessarily be
better fulfilled by a man of forty than by a man of sixty.  If we are
to pay deans at all, we are to pay them for some sort of work.  That
work, be it what it may, will be best performed by a workman in the
prime of life.  Dr. Trefoil, we see, was eighty when he died.  As we
have as yet completed no plan for pensioning superannuated clergymen,
we do not wish to get rid of any existing deans of that age.  But we
prefer having as few such as possible.  If a man of seventy be now
appointed, we beg to point out to Lord ---- that he will be past all
use in a year or two, if indeed he be not so at the present moment. 
His lordship will allow us to remind him that all men are not
evergreens like himself.

We hear that Mr. Slope's name has been mentioned for this preferment. 
Mr. Slope is at present chaplain to the bishop.  A better man could
hardly be selected.  He is a man of talent, young, active, and
conversant with the affairs of the cathedral; he is moreover, we
conscientiously believe, a truly pious clergyman.  We know that his
services in the city of Barchester have been highly appreciated.  He
is an eloquent preacher and a ripe scholar.  Such a selection as this
would go far to raise the confidence of the public in the present
administration of church patronage and would teach men to believe
that from henceforth the establishment of our church will not afford
easy couches to worn-out clerical voluptuaries.

Standing at a reading-desk in the Barchester news-room, Mr. Slope
digested this article with considerable satisfaction.  What was
therein said as to the hospital was now comparatively a matter of
indifference to him.  He was certainly glad that he had not succeeded
in restoring to the place the father of that virago who had so
audaciously outraged all decency in his person, and was so far
satisfied.  But Mrs. Proudie's nominee was appointed, and he was so
far dissatisfied.  His mind, however, was now soaring above Mrs. Bold
or Mrs. Proudie.  He was sufficiently conversant with the tactics of
The Jupiter to know that the pith of the article would lie in the
last paragraph.  The place of honour was given to him, and it was
indeed as honourable as even he could have wished.  He was very
grateful to his friend Mr. Towers and with full heart looked forward
to the day when he might entertain him in princely style at his own
full-spread board in the deanery dining-room.

It had been well for Mr. Slope that Dr. Trefoil had died in the
autumn.  Those caterers for our morning repast, the staff of The
Jupiter, had been sorely put to it for the last month to find a
sufficiency of proper pabulum.  Just then there was no talk of a new
American president.  No wonderful tragedies had occurred on railway
trains in Georgia, or elsewhere.  There was a dearth of broken banks,
and a dead dean with the necessity for a live one was a godsend.  Had
Dr. Trefoil died in June, Mr. Towers would probably not have known so
much about the piety of Mr. Slope.

And here we will leave Mr. Slope for awhile in his triumph,
explaining, however, that his feelings were not altogether of a
triumphant nature.  His rejection by the widow, or rather the method
of his rejection, galled him terribly.  For days to come he
positively felt the sting upon his cheek whenever he thought of what
had been done to him.  He could not refrain from calling her by harsh
names, speaking to himself as he walked through the streets of
Barchester.  When he said his prayers, he could not bring himself to
forgive her.  When he strove to do so, his mind recoiled from the
attempt and in lieu of forgiving ran off in a double spirit of
vindictiveness, dwelling on the extent of the injury he had received. 
And so his prayers dropped senseless from his lips.

And then the signora--what would he not have given to be able to hate
her also?  As it was, he worshipped the very sofa on which she was
ever lying.

And thus it was not all rose colour with Mr. Slope, although his
hopes ran high.



CHAPTER XLIV

Mrs. Bold at Home


Poor Mrs. Bold, when she got home from Ullathorne on the evening of
Miss Thorne's party, was very unhappy and, moreover, very tired. 
Nothing fatigues the body so much as weariness of spirit, and
Eleanor's spirit was indeed weary.

Dr. Stanhope had civilly but not very cordially asked her in to tea,
and her manner of refusal convinced the worthy doctor that he need
not repeat the invitation.  He had not exactly made himself a party
to the intrigue which was to convert the late Mr. Bold's patrimony
into an income for his hopeful son, but he had been well aware what
was going on.  And he was well aware also, when he perceived that
Bertie declined accompanying them home in the carriage, that the
affair had gone off.

Eleanor was very much afraid that Charlotte would have darted out
upon her, as the prebendary got out at his own door, but Bertie had
thoughtfully saved her from this by causing the carriage to go round
by her own house.  This also Dr. Stanhope understood and allowed to
pass by without remark.

When she got home, she found Mary Bold in the drawing-room with the
child in her lap.  She rushed forward and, throwing herself on her
knees, kissed the little fellow till she almost frightened him.

"Oh, Mary, I am so glad you did not go.  It was an odious party."

Now the question of Mary's going had been one greatly mooted between
them.  Mrs. Bold, when invited, had been the guest of the Grantlys,
and Miss Thorne, who had chiefly known Eleanor at the hospital or at
Plumstead Rectory, had forgotten all about Mary Bold.  Her sister-in-
law had implored her to go under her wing and had offered to write to
Miss Thorne, or to call on her.  But Miss Bold had declined.  In
fact, Mr. Bold had not been very popular with such people as the
Thornes, and his sister would not go among them unless she were
specially asked to do so.

"Well, then," said Mary cheerfully, "I have the less to regret."

"You have nothing to regret; but oh! Mary, I have--so much--so much;"
and then she began kissing her boy, whom her caresses had roused from
his slumbers.  When she raised her head, Mary saw that the tears were
running down her cheeks.

"Good heavens, Eleanor, what is the matter?  What has happened to
you--Eleanor--dearest Eleanor--what is the matter?" and Mary got up
with the boy still in her arms.

"Give him to me--give him to me," said the young mother.  "Give him
to me, Mary," and she almost tore the child out of her sister's arms. 
The poor little fellow murmured somewhat at the disturbance but
nevertheless nestled himself close into his mother's bosom.

"Here, Mary, take the cloak from me.  My own own darling, darling,
darling jewel.  You are not false to me.  Everybody else is false;
everybody else is cruel.  Mamma will care for nobody, nobody, nobody,
but her own, own, own little man;" and she again kissed and pressed
the baby and cried till the tears ran down over the child's face.

"Who has been cruel to you, Eleanor?" said Mary.  "I hope I have
not."

Now in this matter Eleanor had great cause for mental uneasiness. 
She could not certainly accuse her loving sister-in-law of cruelty,
but she had to do that which was more galling: she had to accuse
herself of imprudence against, which her sister-in-law had warned
her.  Miss Bold had never encouraged Eleanor's acquaintance with Mr.
Slope, and she had positively discouraged the friendship of the
Stanhopes, as far as her usual gentle mode of speaking had permitted. 
Eleanor had only laughed at her, however, when she said that she
disapproved of married women who lived apart from their husbands and
suggested that Charlotte Stanhope never went to church.  Now,
however, Eleanor must either hold her tongue, which was quite
impossible, or confess herself to have been utterly wrong, which was
nearly equally so.  So she staved off the evil day by more tears and
consoled herself by inducing little Johnny to rouse himself
sufficiently to return her caresses.

"He is a darling--as true as gold.  What would mamma do without him? 
Mamma would lie down and die if she had not her own Johnny Bold to
give her comfort."  This and much more she said of the same kind and
for a time made no other answer to Mary's inquiries.

This kind of consolation from the world's deceit is very common. 
Mothers obtain it from their children, and men from their dogs.  Some
men even do so from their walking-sticks, which is just as rational. 
How is it that we can take joy to ourselves in that we are not
deceived by those who have not attained the art to deceive us?  In a
true man, if such can be found, or a true woman, much consolation may
indeed be taken.

In the caresses of her child, however, Eleanor did receive
consolation, and may ill befall the man who would begrudge it to her. 
The evil day, however, was only postponed.  She had to tell her
disagreeable tale to Mary, and she had also to tell it to her father. 
Must it not, indeed, be told to the whole circle of her acquaintance
before she could be made to stand all right with them?  At the
present moment there was no one to whom she could turn for comfort. 
She hated Mr. Slope; that was a matter of course; in that feeling she
revelled.  She hated and despised the Stanhopes; but that feeling
distressed her greatly.  She had, as it were, separated herself from
her old friends to throw herself into the arms of this family; and
then how had they intended to use her?  She could hardly reconcile
herself to her own father, who had believed ill of her.  Mary Bold
had turned Mentor.  That she could have forgiven had the Mentor
turned out to be in the wrong, but Mentors in the right are not to be
pardoned.  She could not but hate the archdeacon, and now she hated
him worse than ever, for she must in some sort humble herself before
him.  She hated her sister, for she was part and parcel of the
archdeacon.  And she would have hated Mr. Arabin if she could.  He
had pretended to regard her, and yet before her face he had hung over
that Italian woman as though there had been no beauty in the world
but hers--no other woman worth a moment's attention.  And Mr. Arabin
would have to learn all this about Mr. Slope!  She told herself that 
she hated him, and she knew that she was lying to herself as she did
so.  She had no consolation but her baby, and of that she made the
most.  Mary, though she could not surmise what it was that had so
violently affected her sister-in-law, saw at once that her grief was
too great to be kept under control and waited patiently till the
child should be in his cradle.

"You'll have some tea, Eleanor," she said.

"Oh, I don't care," said she, though in fact she must have been very
hungry, for she had eaten nothing at Ullathorne.

Mary quietly made the tea, and buttered the bread, laid aside the
cloak, and made things look comfortable.

"He's fast asleep," said she; "you're very tired; let me take him up
to bed."

But Eleanor would not let her sister touch him.  She looked wistfully
at her baby's eyes, saw that they were lost in the deepest slumber,
and then made a sort of couch for him on the sofa.  She was
determined that nothing should prevail upon her to let him out of her
sight that night.

"Come, Nelly," said Mary, "don't be cross with me.  I at least have
done nothing to offend you."

"I an't cross," said Eleanor.

"Are you angry then?  Surely you can't be angry with me."

"No, I an't angry--at least not with you."

"If you are not, drink the tea I have made for you.  I am sure you
must want it."

Eleanor did drink it, and allowed herself to be persuaded.  She ate
and drank, and as the inner woman was recruited she felt a little
more charitable towards the world at large.  At last she found words
to begin her story, and before she went to bed she had made a clean
breast of it and told everything--everything, that is, as to the
lovers she had rejected; of Mr. Arabin she said not a word.

"I know I w