as wrong," said she, speaking of the blow she had given to
Mr. Slope; "but I didn't know what he might do, and I had to protect
myself."

"He richly deserved it," said Mary.

"Deserved it!" said Eleanor, whose mind as regarded Mr. Slope was
almost bloodthirsty.  "Had I stabbed him with a dagger, he would have
deserved it.  But what will they say about it at Plumstead?"

"I don't think I should tell them," said Mary.  Eleanor began to
think that she would not.

There could have been no kinder comforter than Mary Bold.  There was
not the slightest dash of triumph about her when she heard of the
Stanhope scheme, nor did she allude to her former opinion when
Eleanor called her late friend Charlotte a base, designing woman. 
She re-echoed all the abuse that was heaped on Mr. Slope's head and
never hinted that she had said as much before.  "I told you so, I
told you so!" is the croak of a true Job's comforter.  But Mary, when
she found her friend lying in her sorrow and scraping herself with
potsherds, forbore to argue and to exult.  Eleanor acknowledged the
merit of the forbearance, and at length allowed herself to be
tranquillised.

On the next day she did not go out of the house.  Barchester she
thought would be crowded with Stanhopes and Slopes; perhaps also with
Arabins and Grantlys.  Indeed, there was hardly anyone among her
friends whom she could have met without some cause of uneasiness.

In the course of the afternoon she heard that the dean was dead, and
she also heard that Mr. Quiverful had been finally appointed to the
hospital.

In the evening her father came to her, and then the story, or as much
of it as she could bring herself to tell him, had to be repeated.  He
was not in truth much surprised at Mr. Slope's effrontery, but he was
obliged to act as though he had been to save his daughter's feelings. 
He was, however, anything but skilful in his deceit, and she saw
through it.

"I see," said she, "that you think it only in the common course of
things that Mr. Slope should have treated me in this way." She had
said nothing to him about the embrace, nor yet of the way in which it
had been met.

"I do not think it at all strange," said he, "that anyone should
admire my Eleanor."

"It is strange to me," said she, "that any man should have so much
audacity, without ever having received the slightest encouragement."

To this Mr. Harding answered nothing.  With the archdeacon it would
have been the text for a rejoinder which would not have disgraced
Bildad the Shuhite.

"But you'll tell the archdeacon?' asked Mr. Harding.

"Tell him what?' said she sharply.

"Or Susan?" continued Mr. Harding.  "You'll tell Susan; you'll let
them know that they wronged you in supposing that this man's
addresses would be agreeable to you."

"They may find that out their own way," said she; "I shall not ever
willingly mention Mr. Slope's name to either of them."

"But I may."

"I have no right to hinder you from doing anything that may be
necessary to your own comfort, but pray do not do it for my sake. 
Dr. Grantly never thought well of me, and never will.  I don't know
now that I am even anxious that he should do so."

And then they went to the affair of the hospital.  "But is it true,
Papa?"

"What, my dear?" said he.  "About the dean?  Yes, I fear quite true. 
Indeed I know there is no doubt about it."

"Poor Miss Trefoil, I am so sorry for her.  But I did not mean that,"
said Eleanor.  "But about the hospital, Papa?"

"Yes, my dear.  I believe it is true that Mr. Quiverful is to have
it."

"Oh, what a shame."

"No, my dear, not at all, not at all a shame: I am sure I hope it
will suit him."

"But, Papa, you know it is a shame.  After all your hopes, all your
expectations to get back to your old house, to see it given away in
this way to a perfect stranger!"

"My dear, the bishop had a right to give it to whom he pleased."

"I deny that, Papa.  He had no such right.  It is not as though you
were a candidate for a new piece of preferment.  If the bishop has a
grain of justice--"

"The bishop offered it to me on his terms, and as I did not like the
terms, I refused it.  After that, I cannot complain."

"Terms!  He had no right to make terms."

"I don't know about that; but it seems he had the power.  But to tell
you the truth, Nelly, I am as well satisfied as it is.  When the
affair became the subject of angry discussion, I thoroughly wished to
be rid of it altogether."

"But you did want to go back to the old house, Papa.  You told me so
yourself."

"Yes, my dear, I did.  For a short time I did wish it.  And I was
foolish in doing so.  I am getting old now, and my chief worldly wish
is for peace and rest.  Had I gone back to the hospital, I should
have had endless contentions with the bishop, contentions with his
chaplain, and contentions with the archdeacon.  I am not up to this
now; I am not able to meet such troubles; and therefore I am not ill-
pleased to find myself left to the little church of St. Cuthbert's. 
I shall never starve," added he, laughing, "as long as you are here."

"But will you come and live with me, Papa?" she said earnestly,
taking him by both his hands.  "If you will do that, if you will
promise that, I will own that you are right."

"I will dine with you to-day at any rate."

"No, but live here altogether.  Give up that close, odious little
room in High Street."

"My dear, it's a very nice little room, and you are really quite
uncivil."

"Oh, Papa, don't joke.  It's not a nice place for you.  You say you
are growing old, though I am sure you are not."

"Am not I, my dear?"

"No, Papa, not old--not to say old.  But you are quite old enough to
feel the want of a decent room to sit in.  You know how lonely Mary
and I are here.  You know nobody ever sleeps in the big front
bedroom.  It is really unkind of you to remain up there alone, when
you are so much wanted here."

"Thank you, Nelly--thank you.  But, my dear--"

"If you had been living here, Papa, with us, as I really think you
ought to have done, considering how lonely we are, there would have
been none of all this dreadful affair about Mr. Slope."

Mr. Harding, however, did not allow himself to be talked over into
giving up his own and only little pied à terre in the High Street. 
He promised to come and dine with his daughter, and stay with her,
and visit her, and do everything but absolutely live with her.  It
did not suit the peculiar feelings of the man to tell his daughter
that though she had rejected Mr. Slope, and been ready to reject Mr.
Stanhope, some other more favoured suitor would probably soon appear,
and that on the appearance of such a suitor the big front bedroom
might perhaps be more frequently in requisition than at present.  But
doubtless such an idea crossed his mind and added its weight to the
other reasons which made him decide on still keeping the close,
odious little room in High Street.

The evening passed over quietly and in comfort.  Eleanor was always
happier with her father than with anyone else.  He had not, perhaps,
any natural taste for baby-worship, but he was always ready to
sacrifice himself, and therefore made an excellent third in a trio
with his daughter and Mary Bold in singing the praises of the
wonderful child.

They were standing together over their music in the evening, the baby
having again been put to bed upon the sofa, when the servant brought
in a very small note in a beautiful pink envelope.  It quite filled
the room with perfume as it lay upon the small salver.  Mary Bold and
Mrs. Bold were both at the piano, and Mr. Harding was sitting close
to them, with the violoncello between his legs, so that the elegancy 
of the epistle was visible to them all.

"Please ma'am, Dr. Stanhope's coachman says he is to wait for an
answer," said the servant.

Eleanor got very red in the face as she took the note in her hand. 
She had never seen the writing before.  Charlotte's epistles, to
which she was well accustomed, were of a very different style and
kind.  She generally wrote on large note-paper; she twisted up her
letters into the shape and sometimes into the size of cocked hats;
she addressed them in a sprawling, manly hand and not unusually added
a blot or a smudge, as though such were her own peculiar sign-manual. 
The address of this note was written in a beautiful female hand, and
the gummed wafer bore on it an impress of a gilt coronet.  Though
Eleanor had never seen such a one before, she guessed that it came
from the signora.  Such epistles were very numerously sent out from
any house in which the signora might happen to be dwelling, but they
were rarely addressed to ladies.  When the coachman was told by the
lady's maid to take the letter to Mrs. Bold, he openly expressed his
opinion that there was some mistake about it.  Whereupon the lady's
maid boxed the coachman's ears.  Had Mr. Slope seen in how meek a
spirit the coachman took the rebuke, he might have learnt a useful
lesson, both in philosophy and religion.

The note was as follows.  It may be taken as a faithful promise that
no further letter whatever shall be transcribed at length in these
pages.

MY DEAR MRS. BOLD,
May I ask you, as a great favour, to call on me to-morrow.  You can
say what hour will best suit you, but quite early, if you can.  I
need hardly say that if I could call upon you, I should not take this
liberty with you.

I partly know what occurred the other day, and I promise you that you
shall meet with no annoyance if you will come to me.  My brother
leaves us for London to-day, from thence he goes to Italy.

It will probably occur to you that I should not thus intrude on you,
unless I had that to say to you which may be of considerable moment. 
Pray therefore excuse me, even if you do not grant my request.

And believe me,
Very sincerely yours,
M. VESEY NERONI
Thursday Evening

The three of them sat in consultation on this epistle for some ten or
fifteen minutes and then decided that Eleanor should write a line
saying that she would see the signora the next morning at twelve
o'clock.



CHAPTER XLV

The Stanhopes at Home


We must now return to the Stanhopes and see how they behaved
themselves on their return from Ullathorne.

Charlotte, who came back in the first homeward journey with her
sister, waited in palpitating expectation till the carriage drove up
to the door a second time.  She did not run down, or stand at the
window, or show in any outward manner that she looked for anything
wonderful to occur, but when she heard the carriage wheels, she stood
up with erect ears, listening for Eleanor's footfall on the pavement,
or the cheery sound of Bertie's voice welcoming her in.  Had she
heard either, she would have felt that all was right, but neither
sound was there for her to hear.  She heard only her father's slow
step as he ponderously let himself down from the carriage and slowly
walked along the hall, till he got into his own private room on the
ground floor.  "Send Miss Stanhope to me," he said to the servant.

"There's something wrong now," said Madeline, who was lying on her
sofa in the back drawing-room.

"It's all up with Bertie," replied Charlotte.  "I know, I know," she
said to the servant as he brought up the message.  "Tell my father I
will be with him immediately."

"Bertie's wooing has gone astray," said Madeline.  "I knew it would."

"It has been his own fault then.  She was ready enough, I am quite
sure," said Charlotte with that sort of ill-nature which is not
uncommon when one woman speaks of another.

"What will you say to him now?"  By "him," the signora meant their
father.

"That will be as I find him.  He was ready to pay two hundred pounds
for Bertie to stave off the worst of his creditors, if this marriage
had gone on.  Bertie must now have the money instead and go and take
his chance."

"Where is he now?"

"Heaven knows!  Smoking in the bottom of Mr. Thorne's ha-ha, or
philandering with some of those Miss Chadwicks.  Nothing will ever
make an impression on him.  But he'll be furious if I don't go down."

"No, nothing ever will.  But don't be long, Charlotte, for I want my 
tea."

And so Charlotte went down to her father.  There was a very black
cloud on the old man's brow--blacker than his daughter could ever yet
remember to have seen there.  He was sitting in his own armchair, not
comfortably over the fire, but in the middle of the room, waiting
till she should come and listen to him.

"What has become of your brother?" he said as soon as the door was
shut.

"I should rather ask you," said Charlotte.  "I left you both at
Ullathorne when I came away.  What have you done with Mrs. Bold?"

"Mrs. Bold!  Nonsense.  The woman has gone home as she ought to do. 
And heartily glad I am that she should not be sacrificed to so
heartless a reprobate."

"Oh, Papa!"

"A heartless reprobate!  Tell me now where he is and what he is going
to do.  I have allowed myself to be fooled between you.  Marriage,
indeed!  Who on earth that has money, or credit, or respect in the
world to lose would marry him?"

"It is no use your scolding me, Papa.  I have done the best I could
for him and you."

"And Madeline is nearly as bad," said the prebendary, who was in
truth very, very angry.

"Oh, I suppose we are all bad," replied Charlotte.

The old man emitted a huge, leonine sigh.  If they were all bad, who
had made them so?  If they were unprincipled, selfish, and
disreputable, who was to be blamed for the education which had had so
injurious an effect?

"I know you'll ruin me among you," said he.

"Why, Papa, what nonsense that is.  You are living within your income
this minute, and if there are any new debts, I don't know of them.
I am sure there ought to be none, for we are dull enough here."

"Are those bills of Madeline's paid?"

"No, they are not.  Who was to pay them?"

"Her husband may pay them."

"Her husband!  Would you wish me to tell her you say so?  Do you wish
to turn her out of your house?"

"I wish she would know how to behave herself."

"Why, what on earth has she done now?  Poor Madeline!  To-day is only
the second time she has gone out since we came to this vile town."

He then sat silent for a time, thinking in what shape he would
declare his resolve.  "Well, Papa," said Charlotte, "shall I stay
here, or may I go upstairs and give Mamma her tea?"

"You are in your brother's confidence.  Tell me what he is going to
do."

"Nothing, that I am aware of."

"Nothing--nothing!  Nothing but eat and drink and spend every
shilling of my money he can lay his hands upon.  I have made up my
mind, Charlotte.  He shall eat and drink no more in this house."

"Very well.  Then I suppose he must go back to Italy."

"He may go where he pleases."

"That's easily said, Papa, but what does it mean?  You can't let
him--"

"It means this?" said the doctor, speaking more loudly than was his
wont and with wrath flashing from his eyes; "that as sure as God
rules in heaven I will not maintain him any longer in idleness."

"Oh, ruling in heaven!" said Charlotte.  "It is no use talking about
that.  You must rule him here on earth; and the question is, how can
you do it.  You can't turn him out of the house penniless, to beg
about the street."

"He may beg where he likes."

"He must go back to Carrara.  That is the cheapest place he can live
at, and nobody there will give him credit for above two or three
hundred pauls.  But you must let him have the means of going."

"As sure as--"

"Oh, Papa, don't swear.  You know you must do it.  You were ready to
pay two hundred pounds for him if this marriage came off.  Half that
will start him to Carrara."

"What?  Give him a hundred pounds?"

"You know we are all in the dark, Papa," said she, thinking it
expedient to change the conversation.  "For anything we know he may
be at this moment engaged to Mrs. Bold."

"Fiddlestick," said the father, who had seen the way in which Mrs.
Bold had got into the carriage while his son stood apart without even
offering her his hand.

"Well, then, he must go to Carrara," said Charlotte.

Just at this moment the lock of the front door was heard, and
Charlotte's quick ears detected her brother's catlike step in the
hall.  She said nothing, feeling that for the present Bertie had
better keep out of her father's way.  But Dr. Stanhope also heard the
sound of the lock.

"Who's that?" he demanded.  Charlotte made no reply, and he asked
again, "Who is that that has just come in?  Open the door.  Who is
it?"

"I suppose it is Bertie."

"Bid him come here," said the father.  But Bertie, who was close to
the door and heard the call, required no further bidding, but walked
in with a perfectly unconcerned and cheerful air.  It was this
peculiar insouciance which angered Dr. Stanhope, even more than his
son's extravagance.

"Well, sir?" said the doctor.

"And how did you get home, sir, with your fair companion?" said
Bertie.  "I suppose she is not upstairs, Charlotte?"

"Bertie," said Charlotte, "Papa is in no humour for joking.  He is
very angry with you."

"Angry!" said Bertie, raising his eyebrows as though he had never yet
given his parent cause for a single moment's uneasiness.

"Sit down, if you please, sir," said Dr. Stanhope very sternly but
not now very loudly.  "And I'll trouble you to sit down, too,
Charlotte.  Your mother can wait for her tea a few minutes."

Charlotte sat down on the chair nearest to the door in somewhat of a
perverse sort of manner, as much as though she would say--Well, here
I am; you shan't say I don't do what I am bid; but I'll be whipped if
I give way to you.  And she was determined not to give way.  She too
was angry with Bertie, but she was not the less ready on that account
to defend him from his father.  Bertie also sat down.  He drew his
chair close to the library-table, upon which he put his elbow, and
then resting his face comfortably on one hand, he began drawing
little pictures on a sheet of paper with the other.  Before the scene
was over he had completed admirable figures of Miss Thorne, Mrs.
Proudie, and Lady De Courcy, and begun a family piece to comprise the
whole set of the Lookalofts.

"Would it suit you, sir," said the father, "to give me some idea as
to what your present intentions are?  What way of living you propose
to yourself?"

"I'll do anything you can suggest, sir," replied Bertie.

"No, I shall suggest nothing further.  My time for suggesting has
gone by.  I have only one order to give, and that is that you leave
my house."

"To-night?" said Bertie, and the simple tone of the question left the
doctor without any adequately dignified method of reply.

"Papa does not quite mean to-night," said Charlotte; "at least I
suppose not."

"To-morrow, perhaps," suggested Bertie.

"Yes, sir, to-morrow," said the doctor.  "You shall leave this
to-morrow."

"Very well, sir.  Will the 4.30 P.M. train be soon enough?" and
Bertie, as he asked, put the finishing touch to Miss Thorne's
high-heeled boots.

"You may go how and when and where you please, so that you leave my
house to-morrow.  You have disgraced me, sir; you have disgraced
yourself, and me, and your sisters."

"I am glad at least, sir, that I have not disgraced my mother," said
Bertie.

Charlotte could hardly keep her countenance, but the doctor's brow
grew still blacker than ever.  Bertie was executing his chef d'oeuvre
in the delineation of Mrs. Proudie's nose and mouth.

"You are a heartless reprobate, sir; a heartless, thankless, good-
for-nothing reprobate.  I have done with you.  You are my son--that
I cannot help--but you shall have no more part or parcel in me as my
child, nor I in you as your father."

"Oh, Papa, Papa!  You must not, shall not say so," said Charlotte.

"I will say so, and do say so," said the father, rising from his
chair.  "And now leave the room, sir."

"Stop, stop," said Charlotte.  "Why don't you speak, Bertie?  Why
don't you look up and speak?  It is your manner that makes Papa so
angry."

"He is perfectly indifferent to all decency, to all propriety," said
the doctor; then he shouted out, "Leave the room, sir!  Do you hear
what I say?"

"Papa, Papa, I will not let you part so.  I know you will be sorry
for it."  And then she added, getting up and whispering into his ear,
"Is he only to blame?  Think of that.  We have made our own bed, and,
such as it is, we must lie on it.  It is no use for us to quarrel
among ourselves," and as she finished her whisper, Bertie finished
off the countess's bustle, which was so well done that it absolutely
seemed to be swaying to and fro on the paper with its usual lateral
motion.

"My father is angry at the present time," said Bertie, looking up for
a moment from his sketches, "because I am not going to marry Mrs.
Bold.  What can I say on the matter?  It is true that I am not going
to marry her.  In the first place--"

"That is not true, sir," said Dr. Stanhope, "but I will not argue
with you."

"You were angry just this moment because I would not speak," said
Bertie, going on with a young Lookaloft.

"Give over drawing," said Charlotte, going up to him and taking the
paper from under his hand.  The caricatures, however, she preserved
and showed them afterwards to the friends of the Thornes, the
Proudies, and De Courcys.  Bertie, deprived of his occupation, threw
himself back in his chair and waited further orders.

"I think it will certainly be for the best that Bertie should leave
this at once; perhaps to-morrow," said Charlotte; "but pray, Papa,
let us arrange some scheme together."

"If he will leave this to-morrow, I will give him £10, and he shall
be paid £5 a month by the banker at Carrara as long as he stays
permanently in that place."

"Well, sir, it won't be long," said Bertie, "for I shall be starved
to death in about three months."

"He must have marble to work with," said Charlotte.

"I have plenty there in the studio to last me three months," said
Bertie.  "It will be no use attempting anything large in so limited a
time--unless I do my own tombstone."

Terms, however, were ultimately come to somewhat more liberal than
those proposed, and the doctor was induced to shake hands with his
son and bid him good night.  Dr. Stanhope would not go up to tea, but
had it brought to him in his study by his daughter.

But Bertie went upstairs and spent a pleasant evening.  He finished
the Lookalofts, greatly to the delight of his sisters, though the
manner of portraying their décolleté dresses was not the most
refined.  Finding how matters were going, he by degrees allowed it to
escape from him that he had not pressed his suit upon the widow in a
very urgent way.

"I suppose, in point of fact, you never proposed at all?" said
Charlotte.

"Oh, she understood that she might have me if she wished," said he.

"And she didn't wish," said the Signora.

"You have thrown me over in the most shameful manner," said
Charlotte.  "I suppose you told her all about my little plan?"

"Well, it came out somehow--at least the most of it."

"There's an end of that alliance," said Charlotte, "but it doesn't
matter much.  I suppose we shall all be back at Como soon."

"I am sure I hope so," said the signora.  "I'm sick of the sight of
black coats.  If that Mr. Slope comes here any more, he'll be the
death of me."

"You've been the ruin of him, I think," said Charlotte.

"And as for a second black-coated lover of mine, I am going to make a
present of him to another lady with most singular disinterestedness."

The next day, true to his promise, Bertie packed up and went off by
the 4.30 P.M. train, with £20 in his pocket, bound for the marble
quarries of Carrara.  And so he disappears from our scene.

At twelve o'clock on the day following that on which Bertie went,
Mrs. Bold, true also to her word, knocked at Dr. Stanhope's door with
a timid hand and palpitating heart.  She was at once shown up to the
back drawing-room, the folding doors of which were closed, so that in
visiting the signora Eleanor was not necessarily thrown into any
communion with those in the front room.  As she went up the stairs,
she saw none of the family and was so far saved much of the annoyance
which she had dreaded.

"This is very kind of you, Mrs. Bold; very kind, after what has
happened," said the lady on the sofa with her sweetest smile.

"You wrote in such a strain that I could not but come to you."

"I did, I did; I wanted to force you to see me."

"Well, signora, I am here."

"How cold you are to me.  But I suppose I must put up with that.
I know you think you have reason to be displeased with us all.
Poor Bertie; if you knew all, you would not be angry with him."

"I am not angry with your brother--not in the least.  But I hope you
did not send for me here to talk about him."

"If you are angry with Charlotte, that is worse, for you have no
warmer friend in all Barchester.  But I did not send for you to talk
about this--pray bring your chair nearer, Mrs. Bold, so that I may
look at you.  It is so unnatural to see you keeping so far off from
me."

Eleanor did as she was bid and brought her chair close to the sofa.

"And now, Mrs. Bold, I am going to tell you something which you may
perhaps think indelicate, but yet I know that I am right in doing
so."

Hereupon Mrs. Bold said nothing but felt inclined to shake in her
chair.  The signora, she knew, was not very particular, and that
which to her appeared to be indelicate might to Mrs. Bold appear to
be extremely indecent.

"I believe you know Mr. Arabin?"

Mrs. Bold would have given the world not to blush, but her blood was
not at her own command.  She did blush up to her forehead, and the
signora, who had made her sit in a special light in order that she
might watch her, saw that she did so.

"Yes, I am acquainted with him.  That is, slightly.  He is an
intimate friend of Dr. Grantly, and Dr. Grantly is my
brother-in-law."

"Well, if you know Mr. Arabin, I am sure you must like him.  I know
and like him much.  Everybody that knows him must like him."

Mrs. Bold felt it quite impossible to say anything in reply to this. 
Her blood was rushing about her body she knew not how or why.  She
felt as though she were swinging in her chair, and she knew that she
was not only red in the face but also almost suffocated with heat. 
However, she sat still and said nothing.

"How stiff you are with me, Mrs. Bold," said the signora; "and I the
while am doing for you all that one woman can do to serve another."

A kind of thought came over the widow's mind that perhaps the
signora's friendship was real and that at any rate it could not hurt
her; and another kind of thought, a glimmering of a thought, came to
her also--that Mr. Arabin was too precious to be lost.  She despised
the signora, but might she not stoop to conquer?  It should be but
the smallest fraction of a stoop!

"I don't want to be stiff," she said, "but your questions are so very
singular."

"Well, then, I will ask you one more singular still," said Madeline
Neroni, raising herself on her elbow and turning her own face full
upon her companion's.  "Do you love him, love him with all your heart
and soul, with all the love your bosom can feel?  For I can tell you
that he loves you, adores you, worships you, thinks of you and
nothing else, is now thinking of you as he attempts to write his
sermon for next Sunday's preaching.  What would I not give to be
loved in such a way by such a man, that is, if I were an object fit
for any man to love!"

Mrs. Bold got up from her seat and stood speechless before the woman
who was now addressing her in this impassioned way.  When the signora
thus alluded to herself, the widow's heart was softened, and she put
her own hand, as though caressingly, on that of her companion, which
was resting on the table.  The signora grasped it and went on
speaking.

"What I tell you is God's own truth; and it is for you to use it as
may be best for your own happiness.  But you must not betray me.  He
knows nothing of this.  He knows nothing of my knowing his inmost
heart.  He is simple as a child in these matters.  He told me his
secret in a thousand ways because he could not dissemble, but he does
not dream that he has told it.  You know it now, and I advise you to 
use it."

Eleanor returned the pressure of the other's hand with an
infinitesimal soupçon of a squeeze.

"And remember," continued the signora, "he is not like other men. 
You must not expect him to come to you with vows and oaths and pretty
presents, to kneel at your feet, and kiss your shoe-strings.  If you
want that, there are plenty to do it, but he won't be one of them." 
Eleanor's bosom nearly burst with a sigh, but Madeline, not heeding
her, went on.  "With him, yea will stand for yea, and nay for nay. 
Though his heart should break for it, the woman who shall reject him
once will have rejected him once and for all.  Remember that.  And
now, Mrs. Bold, I will not keep you, for you are fluttered.  I partly
guess what use you will make of what I have said to you.  If ever you
are a happy wife in that man's house, we shall be far away, but I
shall expect you to write me one line to say that you have forgiven
the sins of the family."

Eleanor half-whispered that she would, and then, without uttering
another word, crept out of the room and down the stairs, opened the
front door for herself without hearing or seeing anyone, and found
herself in the close.

It would be difficult to analyse Eleanor's feelings as she walked
home.  She was nearly stupefied by the things that had been said to
her.  She felt sore that her heart should have been so searched and
riddled by a comparative stranger, by a woman whom she had never
liked and never could like.  She was mortified that the man whom she
owned to herself that she loved should have concealed his love from
her and shown it to another.  There was much to vex her proud spirit. 
But there was, nevertheless, an under stratum of joy in all this
which buoyed her up wondrously.  She tried if she could disbelieve
what Madame Neroni had said to her, but she found that she could not. 
It was true; it must be true.  She could not, would not, did not
doubt it.

On one point she fully resolved to follow the advice given her.  If
it should ever please Mr. Arabin to put such a question to her as
that suggested, her "yea" should be "yea."  Would not all her
miseries be at an end if she could talk of them to him openly, with
her head resting on his shoulder?



CHAPTER XLVI

Mr. Slope's Parting Interview with the Signora


On the following day the signora was in her pride.  She was dressed
in her brightest of morning dresses, and had quite a levée round her
couch.  It was a beautifully bright October afternoon; all the
gentlemen of the neighbourhood were in Barchester, and those who had
the entry of Dr. Stanhope's house were in the signora's back drawing-
room.  Charlotte and Mrs. Stanhope were in the front room, and such
of the lady's squires as could not for the moment get near the centre
of attraction had to waste their fragrance on the mother and sister.

The first who came and the last to leave was Mr. Arabin.  This was
the second visit he had paid to Madame Neroni since he had met her at
Ullathorne.  He came, he knew not why, to talk about, he knew not
what.  But, in truth, the feelings which now troubled him were new to
him, and he could not analyse them.  It may seem strange that he
should thus come dangling about Madame Neroni because he was in love
with Mrs. Bold; but it was nevertheless the fact; and though he could
not understand why he did so, Madame Neroni understood it well
enough.

She had been gentle and kind to him and had encouraged his staying. 
Therefore he stayed on.  She pressed his hand when he first greeted
her; she made him remain near her and whispered to him little
nothings.  And then her eye, brilliant and bright, now mirthful, now
melancholy, and invincible in either way!  What man with warm
feelings, blood unchilled, and a heart not guarded by a triple steel
of experience could have withstood those eyes!  The lady, it is true,
intended to do him no mortal injury; she merely chose to inhale a
slight breath of incense before she handed the casket over to
another.  Whether Mrs. Bold would willingly have spared even so much
is another question.

And then came Mr. Slope.  All the world now knew that Mr. Slope was a
candidate for the deanery and that he was generally considered to be
the favourite.  Mr. Slope, therefore, walked rather largely upon the
earth.  He gave to himself a portly air, such as might become a dean,
spoke but little to other clergymen, and shunned the bishop as much
as possible.  How the meagre little prebendary, and the burly
chancellor, and all the minor canons and vicars choral, ay, and all
the choristers, too, cowered and shook and walked about with long
faces when they read or heard of that article in The Jupiter.  Now
were coming the days when nothing would avail to keep the impure
spirit from the cathedral pulpit.  That pulpit would indeed be his
own.  Precentors, vicars, and choristers might hang up their harps on
the willows.  Ichabod!  Ichabod!  The glory of their house was
departing from them.

Mr. Slope, great as he was with embryo grandeur, still came to see
the signora.  Indeed, he could not keep himself away.  He dreamed of
that soft hand which he had kissed so often and of that imperial brow
which his lips had once pressed, and he then dreamed also of further
favours.

And Mr. Thorne was there also.  It was the first visit he had ever
paid to the signora, and he made it not without due preparation.  Mr.
Thorne was a gentleman usually precise in his dress and prone to make
the most of himself in an unpretending way.  The grey hairs in his
whiskers were eliminated perhaps once a month; those on his head were
softened by a mixture which we will not call a dye--it was only a
wash.  His tailor lived in St. James's Street, and his bootmaker at
the corner of that street and Piccadilly.  He was particular in the
article of gloves, and the getting up of his shirts was a matter not
lightly thought of in the Ullathorne laundry.  On the occasion of the
present visit he had rather overdone his usual efforts and caused
some little uneasiness to his sister, who had not hitherto received
very cordially the proposition for a lengthened visit from the
signora at Ullathorne.

There were others also there--young men about the city who had not
much to do and who were induced by the lady's charms to neglect that
little--but all gave way to Mr. Thorne, who was somewhat of a grand
signor, as a country gentleman always is in a provincial city.

"Oh, Mr. Thorne, this is so kind of you!" said the signora.  '"You
promised to come, but I really did not expect it.  I thought you
country gentlemen never kept your pledges."

"Oh, yes, sometimes," said Mr. Thorne, looking rather sheepish and
making his salutations a little too much in the style of the last
century.

"You deceive none but your consti--stit--stit--what do you call the
people that carry you about in chairs and pelt you with eggs and
apples when they make you a member of Parliament?"

"One another also, sometimes, signora," said Mr. Slope, with a very
deanish sort of smirk on his face.  "Country gentlemen do deceive one
another sometimes, don't they, Mr. Thorne?"

Mr. Thorne gave him a look which undeaned him completely for the
moment, but he soon remembered his high hopes and, recovering himself
quickly, sustained his probable coming dignity by a laugh at Mr.
Thorne's expense.

"I never deceive a lady, at any rate," said Mr. Thorne, "especially
when the gratification of my own wishes is so strong an inducement to
keep me true, as it now is."

Mr. Thorne went on thus awhile with antediluvian grimaces and
compliments which he had picked up from Sir Charles Grandison, and
the signora at every grimace and at every bow smiled a little smile
and bowed a little bow.  Mr. Thorne, however, was kept standing at
the foot of the couch, for the new dean sat in the seat of honour
near the table.  Mr. Arabin the while was standing with his back to
the fire, his coat-tails under his arms, gazing at her with all his
eyes--not quite in vain, for every now and again a glance came up at
him, bright as a meteor out of heaven.

"Oh, Mr. Thorne, you promised to let me introduce my little girl to
you.  Can you spare a moment--will you see her now?"

Mr. Thorne assured her that he could and would see the young lady
with the greatest pleasure in life.  "Mr. Slope, might I trouble you
to ring the bell?" said she, and when Mr. Slope got up, she looked at
Mr. Thorne and pointed to the chair.  Mr. Thorne, however, was much
too slow to understand her, and Mr. Slope would have recovered his
seat had not the signora, who never chose to be unsuccessful,
somewhat summarily ordered him out of it.

"Oh, Mr. Slope, I must ask you to let Mr. Thorne sit here just for a
moment or two.  I am sure you will pardon me.  We can take a liberty
with you this week.  Next week, you know, when you move into the
dean's house, we shall all be afraid of you."

Mr. Slope, with an air of much indifference, rose from his seat and,
walking into the next room, became greatly interested in Mrs.
Stanhope's worsted work.

And then the child was brought in.  She was a little girl, about
eight years of age, like her mother, only that her enormous eyes were
black, and her hair quite jet.  Her complexion, too, was very dark
and bespoke her foreign blood.  She was dressed in the most
outlandish and extravagant way in which clothes could be put on a
child's back.  She had great bracelets on her naked little arms, a
crimson fillet braided with gold round her head, and scarlet shoes
with high heels.  Her dress was all flounces and stuck out from her
as though the object were to make it lie off horizontally from her
little hips.  It did not nearly cover her knees, but this was atoned
for by a loose pair of drawers, which seemed made throughout of lace;
then she had on pink silk stockings.  It was thus that the last of
the Neros was habitually dressed at the hour when visitors were wont
to call.

"Julia, my love," said the mother--Julia was ever a favourite name
with the ladies of that family.  "Julia, my love, come here.  I was
telling you about the beautiful party poor Mamma went to.  This is
Mr. Thorne; will you give him a kiss, dearest?"

Julia put up her face to be kissed, as she did to all her mother's
visitors, and then Mr. Thorne found that he had got her and, what was
much more terrific to him, all her finery, into his arms.  The lace
and starch crumpled against his waistcoat and trousers, the greasy
black curls hung upon his cheek, and one of the bracelet clasps
scratched his ear.  He did not at all know how to hold so magnificent
a lady, nor holding her what to do with her.  However, he had on
other occasions been compelled to fondle little nieces and nephews,
and now set about the task in the mode he always had used.

"Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle," said he, putting the child on one
knee and working away with it as though he were turning a knife-
grinder's wheel with his foot.

"Mamma, Mamma," said Julia crossly, "I don't want to be diddle
diddled.  Let me go, you naughty old man, you."

Poor Mr. Thorne put the child down quietly on the ground and drew
back his chair; Mr. Slope, who had returned to the pole star that
attracted him, laughed aloud; Mr. Arabin winced and shut his eyes;
and the signora pretended not to hear her daughter.

"Go to Aunt Charlotte, lovey," said the mamma, "and ask her if it is
not time for you to go out."

But little Miss Julia, though she had not exactly liked the nature of
Mr. Thorne's attention, was accustomed to be played with by
gentlemen, and did not relish the idea of being sent so soon to her
aunt.

"Julia, go when I tell you, my dear."  But Julia still went pouting
about the room.  "Charlotte, do come and take her," said the signora. 
"She must go out, and the days get so short now."  And thus ended the
much-talked-of interview between Mr. Thorne and the last of the
Neros.

Mr. Thorne recovered from the child's crossness sooner than from Mr.
Slope's laughter.  He could put up with being called an old man by an
infant, but he did not like to be laughed at by the bishop's
chaplain, even though that chaplain was about to become a dean.  He
said nothing, but he showed plainly enough that he was angry.

The signora was ready enough to avenge him.  "Mr. Slope," said she,
"I hear that you are triumphing on all sides."

"How so?" said he, smiling.  He did not dislike being talked to about
the deanery, though, of course, he strongly denied the imputation.

"You carry the day both in love and war."  Mr. Slope hereupon did not
look quite so satisfied as he had done.

"Mr. Arabin," continued the signora, "don't you think Mr. Slope is a
very lucky man?"

"Not more so than he deserves, I am sure," said Mr. Arabin.

"Only think, Mr. Thorne, he is to be our new dean; of course we all
know that."

"Indeed, signora," said Mr. Slope, "we all know nothing about it.
I can assure you I myself--"

"He is to be the new dean--there is no manner of doubt of it, Mr.
Thorne."

"Hum!" said Mr. Thorne.

"Passing over the heads of old men like my father and Archdeacon
Grantly--"

"Oh--oh!" said Mr. Slope.

"The archdeacon would not accept it," said Mr. Arabin, whereupon Mr.
Slope smiled abominably and said, as plainly as a look could speak,
that the grapes were sour.

"Going over all our heads," continued the signora, "for of course I
consider myself one of the chapter."

"If I am ever dean," said Mr. Slope, "that is, were I ever to become
so, I should glory in such a canoness."

"Oh, Mr. Slope, stop; I haven't half done.  There is another canoness
for you to glory in.  Mr. Slope is not only to have the deanery but a
wife to put in it."

Mr. Slope again looked disconcerted.

"A wife with a large fortune, too.  It never rains but it pours, does
it, Mr. Thorne?"

"No, never," said Mr. Thorne, who did not quite relish talking about
Mr. Slope and his affairs.

"When will it be, Mr. Slope?"

"When will what be?" said he.

"Oh, we know when the affair of the dean will be: a week will settle
that.  The new hat, I have no doubt, has been already ordered.  But
when will the marriage come off?"

"Do you mean mine or Mr. Arabin's?" said he, striving to be
facetious.

"Well, just then I meant yours, though, perhaps, after all, Mr.
Arabin's may be first.  But we know nothing of him.  He is too close
for any of us.  Now all is open and above board with you--which, by
the by, Mr. Arabin, I beg to tell you I like much the best.  He who
runs can read that Mr. Slope is a favoured lover.  Come, Mr. Slope,
when is the widow to be made Mrs. Dean?"

To Mr. Arabin this badinage was peculiarly painful, and yet he could
not tear himself away and leave it.  He believed, still believed with
that sort of belief which the fear of a thing engenders, that Mrs.
Bold would probably become the wife of Mr. Slope.  Of Mr. Slope's
little adventure in the garden he knew nothing.  For aught he knew,
Mr. Slope might have had an adventure of quite a different character. 
He might have thrown himself at the widow's feet, been accepted, and
then returned to town a jolly, thriving wooer.  The signora's jokes
were bitter enough to Mr. Slope, but they were quite as bitter to Mr.
Arabin.  He still stood leaning against the fire-place, fumbling with
his hands in his trousers pockets.

"Come, come, Mr. Slope, don't be so bashful," continued the signora. 
"We all know that you proposed to the lady the other day at
Ullathorne.  Tell us with what words she accepted you.  Was it with a
simple 'yes,' or with the two 'no no's' which make an affirmative? 
Or did silence give consent?  Or did she speak out with that spirit
which so well becomes a widow and say openly, 'By my troth, sir, you
shall make me Mrs. Slope as soon as it is your pleasure to do so.' "

Mr. Slope had seldom in his life felt himself less at his ease. 
There sat Mr. Thorne, laughing silently.  There stood his old
antagonist, Mr. Arabin, gazing at him with all his eyes.  There round
the door between the two rooms were clustered a little group of
people, including Miss Stanhope and the Revs. Messrs. Grey and Green,
all listening to his discomfiture.  He knew that it depended solely
on his own wit whether or no he could throw the joke back upon the
lady.  He knew that it stood him to do so if he possibly could, but
he had not a word.  " 'Tis conscience that makes cowards of us all." 
He felt on his cheek the sharp points of Eleanor's fingers and did
not know who might have seen the blow, who might have told the tale
to this pestilent woman who took such delight in jeering him.  He
stood there, therefore, red as a carbuncle and mute as a fish;
grinning sufficiently to show his teeth; an object of pity.

But the signora had no pity; she knew nothing of mercy.  Her present
object was to put Mr. Slope down, and she was determined to do it
thoroughly, now that she had him in her power.

"What, Mr. Slope, no answer?  Why it can't possibly be that the woman
has been fool enough to refuse you?  She can't surely be looking out
after a bishop.  But I see how it is, Mr. Slope.  Widows are
proverbially cautious.  You should have let her alone till the new
hat was on your head, till you could show her the key of the
deanery."

"Signora," said he at last, trying to speak in a tone of dignified
reproach, "you really permit yourself to talk on solemn subjects in a
very improper way."

"Solemn subjects--what solemn subject?  Surely a dean's hat is not
such a solemn subject."

"I have no aspirations such as those you impute to me.  Perhaps you
will drop the subject."

"Oh, certainly, Mr. Slope; but one word first.  Go to her again with
the prime minister's letter in your pocket.  I'll wager my shawl to
your shovel she does not refuse you then."

"I must say, signora, that I think you are speaking of the lady in a
very unjustifiable manner."

"And one other piece of advice, Mr. Slope; I'll only offer you one
other;" and then she commenced singing

It's gude to be merry and wise, Mr. Slope;
It's gude to be honest and true;
It's gude to be off with the old love--Mr. Slope,
Before you are on with the new.

"Ha, ha, ha!"  And the signora, throwing herself back on her sofa,
laughed merrily.  She little recked how those who heard her would, in
their own imaginations, fill up the little history of Mr. Slope's
first love.  She little cared that some among them might attribute to
her the honour of his earlier admiration.  She was tired of Mr. Slope
and wanted to get rid of him; she had ground for anger with him, and
she chose to be revenged.

How Mr. Slope got out of that room he never himself knew.  He did
succeed ultimately, and probably with some assistance, in getting his
hat and escaping into the air.  At last his love for the signora was
cured.  Whenever he again thought of her in his dreams, it was not as
of an angel with azure wings.  He connected her rather with fire and
brimstone, and though he could still believe her to be a spirit, he
banished her entirely out of heaven and found a place for her among
the infernal gods.  When he weighed in the balance, as he not seldom
did, the two women to whom he had attached himself in Barchester, the
pre-eminent place in his soul's hatred was usually allotted to the
signora.



CHAPTER XLVII

The Dean Elect


During the entire next week Barchester was ignorant who was to be its
new dean.  On Sunday morning Mr. Slope was decidedly the favourite,
but he did not show himself in the cathedral, and then he sank a
point or two in the betting.  On Monday he got a scolding from the
bishop in the hearing of the servants, and down he went till nobody
would have him at any price; but on Tuesday he received a letter, in
an official cover, marked private, by which he fully recovered his
place in the public favour.  On Wednesday he was said to be ill, and
that did not look well; but on Thursday morning he went down to the
railway station with a very jaunty air; and when it was ascertained
that he had taken a first-class ticket for London, there was no
longer any room for doubt on the matter.

While matters were in this state of ferment at Barchester, there was
not much mental comfort at Plumstead.  Our friend the archdeacon had
many grounds for inward grief.  He was much displeased at the result
of Dr. Gwynne's diplomatic mission to the palace, and did not even
scruple to say to his wife that had he gone himself, he would have
managed the affair much better.  His wife did not agree with him, but
that did not mend the matter.

Mr. Quiverful's appointment to the hospital was, however, a fait
accompli, and Mr. Harding's acquiescence in that appointment was not
less so.  Nothing would induce Mr. Harding to make a public appeal
against the bishop, and the Master of Lazarus quite approved of his
not doing so.

"I don't know what has come to the master," said the archdeacon over
and over again.  "He used to be ready enough to stand up for his
order."

"My dear Archdeacon," Mrs. Grantly would say in reply, "what is the
use of always fighting?  I really think the master is right."  The
master, however, had taken steps of his own of which neither the
archdeacon nor his wife knew anything.

Then Mr. Slope's successes were henbane to Dr. Grantly, and Mrs.
Bold's improprieties were as bad.  What would be all the world to
Archdeacon Grantly if Mr. Slope should become Dean of Barchester and
marry his wife's sister!  He talked of it and talked of it till he
was nearly ill.  Mrs. Grantly almost wished that the marriage were
done and over, so that she might hear no more about it.

And there was yet another ground of misery which cut him to the quick
nearly as closely as either of the others.  That paragon of a
clergyman whom he had bestowed upon St. Ewold's, that college friend
of whom he had boasted so loudly, that ecclesiastical knight before
whose lance Mr. Slope was to fall and bite the dust, that worthy
bulwark of the church as it should be, that honoured representative
of Oxford's best spirit, was--so at least his wife had told him half
a dozen times--misconducting himself!

Nothing had been seen of Mr. Arabin at Plumstead for the last week,
but a good deal had, unfortunately, been heard of him.  As soon as
Mrs. Grantly had found herself alone with the archdeacon, on the
evening of the Ullathorne party, she had expressed herself very
forcibly as to Mr. Arabin's conduct on that occasion.  He had, she
declared, looked and acted and talked very unlike a decent parish
clergyman.  At first the archdeacon had laughed at this and assured
her that she need not trouble herself--that Mr. Arabin would be found
to be quite safe.  But by degrees he began to find that his wife's
eyes had been sharper than his own.  Other people coupled the
signora's name with that of Mr. Arabin.  The meagre little prebendary
who lived in the close told him to a nicety how often Mr. Arabin had
visited at Dr. Stanhope's and how long he had remained on the
occasion of each visit.  He had asked after Mr. Arabin at the
cathedral library, and an officious little vicar choral had offered
to go and see whether he could be found at Dr. Stanhope's.  Rumour,
when she has contrived to sound the first note on her trumpet, soon
makes a loud peal audible enough.  It was too clear that Mr. Arabin
had succumbed to the Italian woman and that the archdeacon's credit
would suffer fearfully if something were not done to rescue the brand
from the burning.  Besides, to give the archdeacon his due, he was
really attached to Mr. Arabin and grieved greatly at his backsliding.

They were sitting, talking over their sorrows, in the drawing-room
before dinner on the day after Mr. Slope's departure for London, and
on this occasion Mrs. Grantly spoke out her mind freely.  She had
opinions of her own about parish clergymen and now thought it right
to give vent to them.

"If you would have been led by me, Archdeacon, you would never have
put a bachelor into St. Ewold's."

"But my dear, you don't meant to say that all bachelor clergymen
misbehave themselves."

"I don't know that clergymen are so much better than other men," said
Mrs. Grantly.  "It's all very well with a curate, whom you have under
your own eye and whom you can get rid of if he pe