rsists in
improprieties."

"But Mr. Arabin was a fellow, and couldn't have had a wife."

"Then I would have found someone who could."

"But, my dear, are fellows never to get livings?"

"Yes, to be sure they are, when they get engaged.  I never would put
a young man into a living unless he were married, or engaged to be
married.  Now, here is Mr. Arabin.  The whole responsibility lies
upon you."

"There is not at this moment a clergymen in all Oxford more respected
for morals and conduct than Arabin."

"Oh, Oxford!" said the lady, with a sneer.  "What men choose to do at
Oxford nobody ever hears of.  A man may do very well at Oxford who
would bring disgrace on a parish; and to tell you the truth, it seems
to me that Mr. Arabin is just such a man."

The archdeacon groaned deeply, but he had no further answer to make.

"You really must speak to him, Archdeacon.  Only think what the
Thornes will say if they hear that their parish clergyman spends his
whole time philandering with this woman."

The archdeacon groaned again.  He was a courageous man and knew well
enough how to rebuke the younger clergymen of the diocese, when
necessary.  But there was that about Mr. Arabin which made the doctor
feel that it would be very difficult to rebuke him with good effect.

"You can advise him to find a wife for himself, and he will
understand well enough what that means," said Mrs. Grantly.

The archdeacon had nothing for it but groaning.  There was Mr. Slope:
he was going to be made dean; he was going to take a wife; he was
about to achieve respectability and wealth, an excellent family
mansion, and a family carriage; he would soon be among the
comfortable élite of the ecclesiastical world of Barchester; whereas
his own protégé, the true scion of the true church, by whom he had
sworn, would be still but a poor vicar, and that with a very
indifferent character for moral conduct!  It might be all very well
recommending Mr. Arabin to marry, but how would Mr. Arabin, when
married, support a wife?

Things were ordering themselves thus in Plumstead drawing-room when
Dr. and Mrs. Grantly were disturbed in their sweet discourse by the
quick rattle of a carriage and pair of horses on the gravel sweep. 
The sound was not that of visitors, whose private carriages are
generally brought up to country-house doors with demure propriety,
but betokened rather the advent of some person or persons who were in
a hurry to reach the house and had no intention of immediately
leaving it.  Guests invited to stay a week, and who were conscious of
arriving after the first dinner-bell, would probably approach in such
a manner.  So might arrive an attorney with the news of a
granduncle's death, or a son from college with all the fresh honours
of a double first.  No one would have had himself driven up to the
door of a country-house in such a manner who had the slightest doubt
of his own right to force an entry.

"Who is it?" said Mrs. Grantly, looking at her husband.

"Who on earth can it be?" said the archdeacon to his wife.  He then
quietly got up and stood with the drawing-room door open in his hand. 
"Why, it's your father!"

It was indeed Mr. Harding, and Mr. Harding alone.  He had come by
himself in a post-chaise with a couple of horses from Barchester,
arriving almost after dark, and evidently full of news.  His visits
had usually been made in the quietest manner; he had rarely presumed
to come without notice and had always been driven up in a modest old
green fly, with one horse, that hardly made itself heard as it
crawled up to the hall-door.

"Good gracious, Warden, is it you?" said the archdeacon, forgetting
in his surprise the events of the last few years.  "But come in;
nothing the matter, I hope."

"We are very glad you are come, Papa," said his daughter.  "I'll go
and get your room ready at once."

"I an't warden, Archdeacon," said Mr. Harding; "Mr. Quiverful is
warden."

"Oh, I know, I know," said the archdeacon petulantly.  "I forgot all
about it at the moment.  Is anything the matter?"

"Don't go this moment, Susan," said Mr. Harding.  "I have something
to tell you."

"The dinner-bell will ring in five minutes," said she.

"Will it?" said Mr. Harding.  "Then perhaps I had better wait."  He
was big with news which he had come to tell but which he knew could
not be told without much discussion.  He had hurried away to
Plumstead as fast as two horses could bring him, and now, finding
himself there, he was willing to accept the reprieve which dinner 
would give him.

"If you have anything of moment to tell us," said the archdeacon,
"pray let us hear it at once.  Has Eleanor gone off?"

"No, she has not," said Mr. Harding with a look of great displeasure.

"Has Slope been made dean?"

"No, he has not, but--"

"But what?" said the archdeacon, who was becoming very impatient.

"They have--"

"They have what?" said the archdeacon.

"They have offered it to me," said Mr. Harding with a modesty which
almost prevented his speaking.

"Good heavens!" said the archdeacon and sunk back exhausted in an
easy chair.

"My dear, dear father," said Mrs. Grantly and threw her arms round
her father's neck.

"So I thought I had better come out and consult with you at once,"
said Mr. Harding.

"Consult!" shouted the archdeacon.  "But, my dear Harding, I
congratulate you with my whole heart--with my whole heart; I do
indeed.  I never heard anything in my life that gave me so much
pleasure;" and he got hold of both his father-in-law's hands, and
shook them as though he were going to shake them off, and walked
round and round the room, twirling a copy of The Jupiter over his
head to show his extreme exultation.

"But--" began Mr. Harding.

"But me no buts," said the archdeacon.  "I never was so happy in my
life.  It was just the proper thing to do.  Upon my honour I'll never
say another word against Lord ---- the longest day I have to live."

"That's Dr. Gwynne's doing, you may be sure," said Mrs. Grantly, who
greatly liked the Master of Lazarus, he being an orderly married man
with a large family.

"I suppose it is," said the archdeacon.

"Oh, Papa, I am so truly delighted!" said Mrs. Grantly, getting up
and kissing her father.

"But, my dear," said Mr. Harding.  It was all in vain that he strove
to speak; nobody would listen to him.

"Well, Mr. Dean," said the archdeacon, triumphing, "the deanery
gardens will be some consolation for the hospital elms.  Well, poor
Quiverful!  I won't begrudge him his good fortune any longer."

"No, indeed," said Mrs. Grantly.  "Poor woman, she has fourteen
children.  I am sure I am very glad they have got it."

"So am I," said Mr. Harding.

"I would give twenty pounds," said the archdeacon, "to see how
Mr. Slope will look when he hears it."  The idea of Mr. Slope's
discomfiture formed no small part of the archdeacon's pleasure.

At last Mr. Harding was allowed to go upstairs and wash his hands,
having, in fact, said very little of all that he had come out to 
Plumstead on purpose to say.  Nor could anything more be said till
the servants were gone after dinner.  The joy of Dr. Grantly was so
uncontrollable that he could not refrain from calling his father-in-
law Mr. Dean before the men, and therefore it was soon matter of
discussion in the lower regions how Mr. Harding, instead of his
daughter's future husband, was to be the new dean, and various were
the opinions on the matter.  The cook and butler, who were advanced
in years, thought that it was just as it should be; but the footman
and lady's maid, who were younger, thought it was a great shame that
Mr. Slope should lose his chance.

"He's a mean chap all the same," said the footman, "and it an't along
of him that I says so.  But I always did admire the missus's sister;
and she'd well become the situation."

While these were the ideas downstairs, a very great difference of
opinion existed above.  As soon as the cloth was drawn and the wine
on the table, Mr. Harding made for himself an opportunity of
speaking.  It was, however, with much inward troubling that he said:

"It's very kind of Lord ----, very kind, and I feel it deeply, most
deeply.  I am, I must confess, gratified by the offer--"

"I should think so," said the archdeacon.

"But all the same I am afraid that I can't accept it."

The decanter almost fell from the archdeacon's hand upon the table,
and the start he made was so great as to make his wife jump up from
her chair.  Not accept the deanship!  If it really ended in this,
there would be no longer any doubt that his father-in-law was
demented.  The question now was whether a clergyman with low rank and
preferment amounting to less than £200 a year should accept high
rank, £1,200 a year, and one of the most desirable positions which
his profession had to afford!

"What!" said the archdeacon, gasping for breath and staring at his
guest as though the violence of his emotion had almost thrown him
into a fit.  "What!"

"I do not find myself fit for new duties," urged Mr. Harding.

"New duties!  What duties?" said the archdeacon with unintended
sarcasm.

"Oh, Papa," said Mrs. Grantly, "nothing can be easier than what a
dean has to do.  Surely you are more active than Dr. Trefoil."

"He won't have half as much to do as he has at present," said Dr.
Grantly.

"Did you see what The Jupiter said the other day about young men?"

"Yes, and I saw that The Jupiter said all that it could to induce the
appointment of Mr. Slope.  Perhaps you would wish to see Mr. Slope
made dean."

Mr. Harding made no reply to this rebuke, though he felt it strongly. 
He had not come over to Plumstead to have further contention with his
son-in-law about Mr. Slope, so he allowed it to pass by.

"I know I cannot make you understand my feeling," he said, "for we
have been cast in different moulds.  I may wish that I had your
spirit and energy and power of combatting, but I have not.  Every day
that is added to my life increases my wish for peace and rest."

"And where on earth can a man have peace and rest if not in a
deanery!" said the archdeacon.

"People will say that I am too old for it."

"Good heavens!  People!  What people?  What need you care for any
people?"

"But I think myself I am too old for any new place."

"Dear Papa," said Mrs. Grantly, "men ten years older than you are
appointed to new situations day after day."

"My dear," said he, "it is impossible that I should make you
understand my feelings, nor do I pretend to any great virtue in the
matter.  The truth is, I want the force of character which might
enable me to stand against the spirit of the times.  The call on all
sides now is for young men, and I have not the nerve to put myself in
opposition to the demand.  Were The Jupiter, when it hears of my
appointment, to write article after article setting forth my
incompetency, I am sure it would cost me my reason.  I ought to be
able to bear with such things, you will say.  Well, my dear, I own
that I ought.  But I feel my weakness, and I know that I can't.  And
to tell you the truth I know no more than a child what the dean has
to do."

"Pshaw!" exclaimed the archdeacon.

"Don't be angry with me, Archdeacon: don't let us quarrel about it,
Susan.  If you knew how keenly I feel the necessity of having to
disoblige you in this matter, you would not be angry with me."

This was a dreadful blow to Dr. Grantly.  Nothing could possibly have
suited him better than having Mr. Harding in the deanery.  Though he
had never looked down on Mr. Harding on account of his recent
poverty, he did fully recognize the satisfaction of having those
belonging to him in comfortable positions.  It would be much more
suitable that Mr. Harding should be Dean of Barchester than vicar of
St. Cuthbert's and precentor to boot.  And then the great
discomfiture of that arch-enemy of all that was respectable in
Barchester, of that new Low Church clerical parvenu that had fallen
amongst them, that alone would be worth more, almost, than the
situation itself.  It was frightful to think that such unhoped-for
good fortune should be marred by the absurd crotchets and unwholesome
hallucinations by which Mr. Harding allowed himself to be led astray. 
To have the cup so near his lips and then to lose the drinking of it
was more than Dr. Grantly could endure.

And yet it appeared as though he would have to endure it.  In vain he
threatened and in vain he coaxed.  Mr. Harding did not indeed speak
with perfect decision of refusing the proffered glory, but he would
not speak with anything like decision of accepting it.  When pressed
again and again, he would again and again allege that he was wholly
unfitted to new duties.  It was in vain that the archdeacon tried to
insinuate, though he could not plainly declare, that there were no
new duties to perform.  It was in vain he hinted that in all cases of
difficulty he, he the archdeacon, was willing and able to guide a
weak-minded dean.  Mr. Harding seemed to have a foolish idea, not
only that there were new duties to do, but that no one should accept
the place who was not himself prepared to do them.

The conference ended in an understanding that Mr. Harding should at
once acknowledge the letter he had received from the minister's
private secretary and should beg that he might be allowed two days to
make up his mind; and that during those two days the matter should be
considered.

On the following morning the archdeacon was to drive Mr. Harding back
to Barchester.



CHAPTER XLVIII

Miss Thorne Shows Her Talent at Match-Making


On Mr. Harding's return to Barchester from Plumstead, which was
effected by him in due course in company with the archdeacon, more
tidings of a surprising nature met him.  He was, during the journey,
subjected to such a weight of unanswerable argument, all of which
went to prove that it was his bounden duty not to interfere with the
paternal Government that was so anxious to make him a dean, that when
he arrived at the chemist's door in High Street, he hardly knew which
way to turn himself in the matter.  But, perplexed as he was, he was
doomed to further perplexity.  He found a note there from his
daughter begging him most urgently to come to her immediately.  But
we must again go back a little in our story.

Miss Thorne had not been slow to hear the rumours respecting Mr.
Arabin which had so much disturbed the happiness of Mrs. Grantly. 
And she, also, was unhappy to think that her parish clergyman should
be accused of worshipping a strange goddess.  She, also, was of
opinion that rectors and vicars should all be married, and with that
good-natured energy which was characteristic of her she put her wits
to work to find a fitting match for Mr. Arabin.  Mrs. Grantly, in
this difficulty, could think of no better remedy than a lecture from
the archdeacon.  Miss Thorne thought that a young lady, marriageable
and with a dowry, might be of more efficacy.  In looking through the
catalogue of her unmarried friends who might possibly be in want of a
husband and might also be fit for such promotion as a country
parsonage affords, she could think of no one more eligible than Mrs.
Bold; consequently, losing no time, she went into Barchester on the
day of Mr. Slope's discomfiture, the same day that her brother had
had his interesting interview with the last of the Neros, and invited
Mrs. Bold to bring her nurse and baby to Ullathorne and make them a
protracted visit.

Miss Thorne suggested a month or two, intending to use her influence
afterwards in prolonging it so as to last out the winter, in order
that Mr. Arabin might have an opportunity of becoming fairly intimate
with his intended bride.  "We'll have Mr. Arabin, too," said Miss
Thorne to herself; "and before the spring they'll know each other;
and in twelve or eighteen months' time, if all goes well, Mrs. Bold
will be domiciled at St. Ewold's;" and then the kind-hearted lady
gave herself some not undeserved praise for her match-making genius.

Eleanor was taken a little by surprise, but the matter ended in her
promising to go to Ullathorne for at any rate a week or two; on the
day previous to that on which her father drove out to Plumstead, she
had had herself driven out to Ullathorne.

Miss Thorne would not perplex her with her embryo lord on that same
evening, thinking that she would allow her a few hours to make
herself at home, but on the following morning Mr. Arabin arrived. 
"And now," said Miss Thorne to herself, "I must contrive to throw
them in each other's way." That same day, after dinner, Eleanor, with
an assumed air of dignity which she could not maintain, with tears
which she could not suppress, with a flutter which she could not
conquer, and a joy which she could not hide, told Miss Thorne that
she was engaged to marry Mr. Arabin and that it behoved her to get
back home to Barchester as quick as she could.

To say simply that Miss Thorne was rejoiced at the success of the
scheme would give a very faint idea of her feelings on the occasion. 
My readers may probably have dreamt before now that they have had
before them some terribly long walk to accomplish, some journey of
twenty or thirty miles, an amount of labour frightful to anticipate,
and that immediately on starting they have ingeniously found some
accommodating short cut which has brought them without fatigue to
their work's end in five minutes.  Miss Thorne's waking feelings were
somewhat of the same nature.  My readers may perhaps have had to do
with children and may on some occasion have promised to their young
charges some great gratification intended to come off, perhaps at the
end of the winter, or at the beginning of summer.  The impatient
juveniles, however, will not wait, and clamorously demand their treat
before they go to bed.  Miss Thorne had a sort of feeling that her
children were equally unreasonable.  She was like an inexperienced
gunner, who has ill-calculated the length of the train that he has
laid.  The gun-powder exploded much too soon, and poor Miss Thorne
felt that she was blown up by the strength of her own petard.

Miss Thorne had had lovers of her own, but they had been gentlemen of 
old-fashioned and deliberate habits.  Miss Thorne's heart also had
not always been hard, though she was still a virgin spinster, but it
had never yielded in this way at the first assault.  She had intended
to bring together a middle-aged, studious clergyman and a discreet
matron who might possibly be induced to marry again, and in doing so
she had thrown fire among tinder.  Well, it was all as it should be,
but she did feel perhaps a little put out by the precipitancy of her
own success and perhaps a little vexed at the readiness of Mrs. Bold
to be wooed.

She said, however, nothing about it to anyone and ascribed it all to
the altered manners of the new age.  Their mothers and grandmothers
were perhaps a little more deliberate, but it was admitted on all
sides that things were conducted very differently now than in former
times.  For aught Miss Thorne knew of the matter, a couple of hours
might be quite sufficient under the new régime to complete that for
which she in her ignorance had allotted twelve months.

But we must not pass over the wooing so cavalierly.  It has been
told, with perhaps tedious accuracy, how Eleanor disposed of two of
her lovers at Ullathorne, and it must also be told with equal
accuracy, and if possible with less tedium, how she encountered Mr.
Arabin.

It cannot be denied that when Eleanor accepted Miss Thorne's
invitation she remembered that Ullathorne was in the parish of St.
Ewold's.  Since her interview with the signora she had done little
else than think about Mr. Arabin and the appeal that had been made to
her.  She could not bring herself to believe, or try to bring herself
to believe, that what she had been told was untrue.  Think of it how
she would, she could not but accept it as a fact that Mr. Arabin was
fond of her; and then when she went further and asked herself the
question, she could not but accept it as a fact also that she was
fond of him.  If it were destined for her to be the partner of his
hopes and sorrows, to whom could she look for friendship so properly
as to Miss Thorne?  This invitation was like an ordained step towards
the fulfilment of her destiny, and when she also heard that Mr.
Arabin was expected to be at Ullathorne on the following day, it
seemed as though all the world were conspiring in her favour.  Well,
did she not deserve it?  In that affair of Mr. Slope had not all the
world conspired against her?

She could not, however, make herself easy and at home.  When, in the
evening after dinner, Miss Thorne expatiated on the excellence of Mr.
Arabin's qualities and hinted that any little rumour which might be
ill-naturedly spread abroad concerning him really meant nothing, Mrs.
Bold found herself unable to answer.  When Miss Thorne went a little
further and declared that she did not know a prettier vicarage-house
in the county than St. Ewold's, Mrs. Bold, remembering the projected
bow-window and the projected priestess, still held her tongue, though
her ears tingled with the conviction that all the world knew that she
was in love with Mr. Arabin.  Well, what would that matter if they
could only meet and tell each other what each now longed to tell?

And they did meet.  Mr. Arabin came early in the day and found the
two ladies together at work in the drawing-room.  Miss Thorne, who
had she known all the truth would have vanished into air at once, had
no conception that her immediate absence would be a blessing and
remained chatting with them till luncheon-time.  Mr. Arabin could
talk about nothing but the Signora Neroni's beauty, would discuss no
people but the Stanhopes.  This was very distressing to Eleanor and
not very satisfactory to Miss Thorne.  But yet there was evidence of
innocence in his open avowal of admiration.

And then they had lunch, and then Mr. Arabin went out on parish duty,
and Eleanor and Miss Thorne were left to take a walk together.

"Do you think the Signora Neroni is so lovely as people say?" Eleanor
asked as they were coming home.

"She is very beautiful, certainly, very beautiful," Miss Thorne
answered; "but I do not know that anyone considers her lovely.  She
is a woman all men would like to look at, but few, I imagine, would
be glad to take her to their hearths, even were she unmarried and not
afflicted as she is."

There was some little comfort in this.  Eleanor made the most of it
till she got back to the house.  She was then left alone in the
drawing-room, and just as it was getting dark Mr. Arabin came in.

It was a beautiful afternoon in the beginning of October, and Eleanor
was sitting in the window to get the advantage of the last daylight
for her novel.  There was a fire in the comfortable room, but the
weather was not cold enough to make it attractive, and as she could
see the sun set from where she sat, she was not very attentive to her
book.

Mr. Arabin, when he entered, stood awhile with his back to the fire
in his usual way, merely uttering a few commonplace remarks about the
beauty of the weather, while he plucked up courage for more
interesting converse.  It cannot probably be said that he had
resolved then and there to make an offer to Eleanor.  Men, we
believe, seldom make such resolves.  Mr. Slope and Mr. Stanhope had
done so, it is true, but gentlemen generally propose without any
absolutely defined determination as to their doing so.  Such was now
the case with Mr. Arabin.

"It is a lovely sunset," said Eleanor, answering him on the
dreadfully trite subject which he had chosen.

Mr. Arabin could not see the sunset from the hearth-rug, so he had to
go close to her.

"Very lovely," said he, standing modestly so far away from her as to
avoid touching the flounces of her dress.  Then it appeared that he
had nothing further to say, so, after gazing for a moment in silence
at the brightness of the setting sun, he returned to the fire.

Eleanor found that it was quite impossible for herself to commence a
conversation.  In the first place she could find nothing to say;
words, which were generally plenty enough with her, would not come to
her relief.  And moreover, do what she would, she could hardly
prevent herself from crying.

"Do you like Ullathorne?" said Mr. Arabin, speaking from the safely
distant position which he had assumed on the hearth-rug.

"Yes, indeed, very much!"

"I don't mean Mr. and Miss Thorne--I know you like them--but the
style of the house.  There is something about old-fashioned mansions,
built as this is, and old-fashioned gardens, that to me is especially
delightful."

"I like everything old-fashioned," said Eleanor; "old-fashioned
things are so much the honestest."

"I don't know about that," said Mr. Arabin, gently laughing.  "That
is an opinion on which very much may be said on either side.  It is
strange how widely the world is divided on a subject which so nearly
concerns us all and which is so close beneath our eyes.  Some think
that we are quickly progressing towards perfection, while others
imagine that virtue is disappearing from the earth."

"And you, Mr. Arabin, what do you think?" said Eleanor.  She felt
somewhat surprised at the tone which his conversation was taking, and
yet she was relieved at his saying something which enabled herself to
speak without showing her own emotion.

"What do I think, Mrs. Bold?" and then he rumbled his money with his
hands in his trousers pockets and looked and spoke very little like a
thriving lover.  "It is the bane of my life that on important
subjects I acquire no fixed opinion.  I think, and think, and go on
thinking, and yet my thoughts are running ever in different
directions.  I hardly know whether or no we do lean more confidently
than our fathers did on those high hopes to which we profess to
aspire."

"I think the world grows more worldly every day," said Eleanor.

"That is because you see more of it than when you were younger.  But
we should hardly judge by what we see--we see so very, very little." 
There was then a pause for awhile, during which Mr. Arabin continued
to turn over his shillings and half-crowns.  "If we believe in
Scripture, we can hardly think that mankind in general will now be
allowed to retrograde."

Eleanor, whose mind was certainly engaged otherwise than on the
general state of mankind, made no answer to this.  She felt
thoroughly dissatisfied with herself.  She could not force her
thoughts away from the topic on which the signora had spoken to her
in so strange a way, and yet she knew that she could not converse
with Mr. Arabin in an unrestrained, natural tone till she did so. 
She was most anxious not to show to him any special emotion, and yet
she felt, that if he looked at her, he would at once see that she was
not at ease.

But he did not look at her.  Instead of doing so, he left the fire-
place and began walking up and down the room.  Eleanor took up her
book resolutely, but she could not read, for there was a tear in her
eye, and do what she would, it fell on her cheek.  When Mr. Arabin's
back was turned to her, she wiped it away, but another was soon
coursing down her face in its place.  They would come--not a deluge
of tears that would have betrayed her at once, but one by one, single
monitors.  Mr. Arabin did not observe her closely, and they passed
unseen.

Mr. Arabin, thus pacing up and down the room, took four or five turns
before he spoke another word, and Eleanor sat equally silent with her
face bent over her book.  She was afraid that her tears would get the
better of her, and was preparing for an escape from the room, when
Mr. Arabin in his walk stood opposite to her.  He did not come close
up but stood exactly on the spot to which his course brought him, and
then, with his hands under his coat-tails, thus made his confession.

"Mrs. Bold," said he, "I owe you retribution for a great offence of
which I have been guilty towards you."  Eleanor's heart beat so that
she could not trust herself to say that he had never been guilty of
any offence.  So Mr. Arabin thus went on.

"I have thought much of it since, and I am now aware that I was
wholly unwarranted in putting to you a question which I once asked
you.  It was indelicate on my part, and perhaps unmanly.  No intimacy
which may exist between myself and your connexion, Dr. Grantly, could
justify it.  Nor could the acquaintance which existed between
ourselves."  This word acquaintance struck cold on Eleanor's heart. 
Was this to be her doom after all?  "I therefore think it right to
beg your pardon in a humble spirit, and I now do so."

What was Eleanor to say to him?  She could not say much because she
was crying, and yet she must say something.  She was most anxious to
say that something graciously, kindly, and yet not in such a manner
as to betray herself.  She had never felt herself so much at a loss
for words.

"Indeed, I took no offence, Mr. Arabin."

"Oh, but you did!  And had you not done so, you would not have been
yourself.  You were as right to be offended as I was wrong so to
offend you.  I have not forgiven myself, but I hope to hear that you
forgive me."

She was now past speaking calmly, though she still continued to hide
her tears, and Mr. Arabin, after pausing a moment in vain for her
reply, was walking off towards the door.  She felt that she could not
allow him to go unanswered without grievously sinning against all
charity; so, rising from her seat, she gently touched his arm and
said, "Oh, Mr. Arabin, do not go till I speak to you!  I do forgive
you.  You know that I forgive you."

He took the hand that had so gently touched his arm and then gazed
into her face as if he would peruse there, as though written in a
book, the whole future destiny of his life; as he did so, there was a
sober, sad seriousness in his own countenance which Eleanor found
herself unable to sustain.  She could only look down upon the carpet,
let her tears trickle as they would, and leave her hand within his.

It was but for a minute that they stood so, but the duration of that
minute was sufficient to make it ever memorable to them both. 
Eleanor was sure now that she was loved.  No words, be their
eloquence what it might, could be more impressive than that eager,
melancholy gaze.

Why did he look so into her eyes?  Why did he not speak to her? 
Could it be that he looked for her to make the first sign?

And he, though he knew but little of women, even he knew that he was
loved.  He had only to ask, and it would be all his own, that
inexpressible loveliness, those ever-speaking but yet now mute eyes,
that feminine brightness and eager, loving spirit which had so
attracted him since first he had encountered it at St. Ewold's.  It
might, must, all be his own now.  On no other supposition was it
possible that she should allow her hand to remain thus clasped within
his own.  He had only to ask.  Ah, but that was the difficulty.  Did
a minute suffice for all this?  Nay, perhaps it might be more than a
minute.

"Mrs. Bold--" at last he said and then stopped himself.

If he could not speak, how was she to do so?  He had called her by
her name, the same name that any merest stranger would have used! 
She withdrew her hand from his and moved as though to return to her
seat.  "Eleanor!" he then said in his softest tone, as though the
courage of a lover were as yet but half-assumed, as though he were
still afraid of giving offence by the freedom which he took.  She
looked slowly, gently, almost piteously up into his face.  There was
at any rate no anger there to deter him.

"Eleanor!" he again exclaimed, and in a moment he had her clasped to
his bosom.  How this was done, whether the doing was with him or her,
whether she had flown thither conquered by the tenderness of his
voice, or he with a violence not likely to give offence had drawn her
to his breast, neither of them knew; nor can I declare.  There was
now that sympathy between them which hardly admitted of individual
motion.  They were one and the same--one flesh--one spirit--one life.

"Eleanor, my own Eleanor, my own, my wife!"  She ventured to look up
at him through her tears, and he, bowing his face down over hers,
pressed his lips upon her brow--his virgin lips, which, since a beard
first grew upon his chin, had never yet tasted the luxury of a
woman's cheek.

She had been told that her yea must be yea, or her nay, nay, but she
was called on for neither the one nor the other.  She told Miss
Thorne that she was engaged to Mr. Arabin, but no such words had
passed between them, no promises had been asked or given.

"Oh, let me go," said she, "let me go now.  I am too happy to
remain--let me go, that I may be alone."  He did not try to hinder
her; he did not repeat the kiss; he did not press another on her
lips.  He might have done so, had he been so minded.  She was now all
his own.  He took his arm from round her waist, his arm that was
trembling with a new delight, and let her go.  She fled like a roe to
her own chamber, and then, having turned the bolt, she enjoyed the
full luxury of her love.  She idolised, almost worshipped this man
who had so meekly begged her pardon.  And he was now her own.  Oh,
how she wept and cried and laughed at the hopes and fears and
miseries of the last few weeks passed in remembrance through her
mind.

Mr. Slope!  That anyone should have dared to think that she who had
been chosen by him could possibly have mated herself with Mr. Slope! 
That they should have dared to tell him, also, and subject her bright
happiness to such needless risk!  And then she smiled with joy as she
thought of all the comforts that she could give him--not that he
cared for comforts, but that it would be so delicious for her to
give.

She got up and rang for her maid that she might tell her little boy
of his new father, and in her own way she did tell him.  She desired
her maid to leave her, in order that she might be alone with her
child, and then, while he lay sprawling on the bed, she poured forth
the praises, all unmeaning to him, of the man she had selected to
guard his infancy.

She could not be happy, however, till she had made Mr. Arabin take
the child to himself and thus, as it were, adopt him as his own.  The
moment the idea struck her she took the baby up in her arms and,
opening her door, ran quickly down to the drawing-room.  She at once
found, by his step still pacing on the floor, that he was there, and
a glance within the room told her that he was alone.  She hesitated a
moment and then hurried in with her precious charge.

Mr. Arabin met her in the middle of the room.  "There," said she,
breathless with her haste; "there, take him--take him, and love him."

Mr. Arabin took the little fellow from her and, kissing him again and
again, prayed God to bless him.  "He shall be all as my own--all as
my own," said he.  Eleanor, as she stooped to take back her child,
kissed the hand that held him and then rushed back with her treasure
to her chamber.

It was thus that Mr. Harding's younger daughter was won for the
second time.  At dinner neither she nor Mr. Arabin were very bright,
but their silence occasioned no remark.  In the drawing-room, as we
have before said, she told Miss Thorne what had occurred.  The next
morning she returned to Barchester, and Mr. Arabin went over with his
budget of news to the archdeacon.  As Doctor Grantly was not there,
he could only satisfy himself by telling Mrs. Grantly how that he
intended himself the honour of becoming her brother-in- law.  In the
ecstasy of her joy at hearing such tidings Mrs. Grantly vouchsafed
him a warmer welcome than any he had yet received from Eleanor.

"Good heavens!" she exclaimed--it was the general exclamation of the
rectory.  "Poor Eleanor!  Dear Eleanor!  What a monstrous injustice
has been done her!  Well, it shall all be made up now."  And then she
thought of the signora.  "What lies people tell," she said to
herself.

But people in this matter had told no lies at all.



CHAPTER XLIX

The Beelzebub Colt


When Miss Thorne left the dining-room, Eleanor had formed no
intention of revealing to her what had occurred, but when she was
seated beside her hostess on the sofa, the secret dropped from her
almost unawares.  Eleanor was but a bad hypocrite, and she found
herself quite unable to continue talking about Mr. Arabin as though
he were a stranger while her heart was full of him.  When Miss
Thorne, pursuing her own scheme with discreet zeal, asked the young
widow whether, in her opinion, it would not be a good thing for Mr.
Arabin to get married, she had nothing for it but to confess the
truth.  "I suppose it would," said Eleanor rather sheepishly. 
Whereupon Miss Thorne amplified on the idea.  "Oh, Miss Thorne," said
Eleanor, "he is going to be married: I am engaged to him."

Now Miss Thorne knew very well that there had been no such engagement
when she had been walking with Mrs. Bold in the morning.  She had
also heard enough to be tolerably sure that there had been no
preliminaries to such an engagement.  She was, therefore, as we have
before described, taken a little by surprise.  But nevertheless, she
embraced her guest and cordially congratulated her.

Eleanor had no opportunity of speaking another word to Mr. Arabin
that evening, except such words as all the world might hear; and
these, as may be supposed, were few enough.  Miss Thorne did her best
to leave them in privacy, but Mr. Thorne, who knew nothing of what
had occurred, and another guest, a friend of his, entirely interfered
with her good intentions.  So poor Eleanor had to go to bed without
one sign of affection.  Her state, nevertheless, was not to be
pitied.

The next morning she was up early.  It was probable, she thought,
that by going down a little before the usual hour of breakfast she
might find Mr. Arabin alone in the dining-room.  Might it not be that
he also would calculate that an interview would thus be possible? 
Thus thinking, Eleanor was dressed a full hour before the time fixed
in the Ullathorne household for morning prayers.  She did not at once
go down.  She was afraid to seem to be too anxious to meet her lover,
though heaven knows her anxiety was intense enough.  She therefore
sat herself down at her window, and repeatedly looking at her watch,
nursed her child till she thought she might venture forth.

When she found herself at the dining-room door, she stood a moment, 
hesitating to turn the handle; but when she heard Mr. Thorne's voice
inside she hesitated no longer.  Her object was defeated, and she
might now go in as soon as she liked without the slightest imputation
on her delicacy.  Mr. Thorne and Mr. Arabin were standing on the
hearth-rug, discussing the merits of the Beelzebub colt; or rather,
Mr. Thorne was discussing, and Mr. Arabin was listening.  That
interesting animal had rubbed the stump of his tail against the wall
of his stable and occasioned much uneasiness to the Ullathorne master
of the horse.  Had Eleanor but waited another minute, Mr. Thorne
would have been in the stables.

Mr. Thorne, when he saw his lady guest, repressed his anxiety.  The
Beelzebub colt must do without him.  And so the three stood, saying
little or nothing to each other, till at last the master of the
house, tiding that he could no longer bear his present state of
suspense respecting his favourite young steed, made an elaborate
apology to Mrs. Bold and escaped.  As he shut the door behind him
Eleanor almost wished that he had remained.  It was not that she was
afraid of Mr. Arabin, but she hardly yet knew how to address him.

He, however, soon relieved her from her embarrassment.  He came up to
her, and taking both her hands in his, he said, "So, Eleanor, you and
I are to be man and wife.  Is it so.?"

She looked up into his face, and her lips formed themselves into a
single syllable.  She uttered no sound, but he could read the
affirmative plainly in her face.

"It is a great trust," said he, "a very great trust."

"It is--it is," said Eleanor, not exactly taking what he had said in
the sense that he had meant.  "It is a very, very great trust, and I
will do my utmost to deserve it."

"And I also will do my utmost to deserve it," said Mr. Arabin very
solemnly.  And then, winding his arm round her waist, he stood there
gazing at the fire, and she, with her head leaning on his shoulder,
stood by him, well satisfied with her position.  They neither of them
spoke, or found any want of speaking.  All that was needful for them
to say had been said.  The yea, yea, had been spoken by Eleanor in
her own way--and that way had been perfectly satisfactory to Mr.
Arabin.

And now it remained to them each to enjoy the assurance of the
other's love.  And how great that luxury is!  How far it surpasses
any other pleasure which God has allowed to his creatures!  And to a
woman's heart how doubly delightful!

When the ivy has found its tower, when the delicate creeper has found
its strong wall, we know how the parasite plants grow and prosper. 
They were not created to stretch forth their branches alone and
endure without protection the summer's sun and the winter's storm. 
Alone they but spread themselves on the ground and cower unseen in
the dingy shade.  But when they have found their firm supporters, how
wonderful is their beauty; how all-pervading and victorious!  What is
the turret without its ivy, or the high garden wall without the
jasmine which gives it its beauty and fragrance?  The hedge without
the honeysuckle is but a hedge.

There is a feeling still half-existing, but now half-conquered by the
force of human nature, that a woman should be ashamed of her love
till the husband's right to her compels her to acknowledge it.  We
would fain preach a different doctrine.  A woman should glory in her
love, but on that account let her take the more care that it be such
as to justify her glory.

Eleanor did glory in hers, and she felt, and had cause to feel, that
it deserved to be held as glorious.  She could have stood there for
hours with his arm round her, had fate and Mr. Thorne permitted it. 
Each moment she crept nearer to his bosom and felt more and more
certain that there was her home.  What now to her was the
archdeacon's arrogance, her sister's coldness, or her dear father's
weakness?  What need she care for the duplicity of such friends as
Charlotte Stanhope?  She had found the strong shield that should
guard her from all wrongs, the trusty pilot that should henceforward
guide her through the shoals and rocks.  She would give up the heavy
burden of her independence and once more assume the position of a
woman and the duties of a trusting and loving wife.

And he, too, stood there fully satisfied with his place.  They were
both looking intently on the fire, as though they could read there
their future fate, till at last Eleanor turned her face towards his. 
"How sad you are," she said, smiling; and indeed his face was, if not
sad, at least serious.  "How sad you are, love!"

"Sad," said he, looking down at her; "no, certainly not sad."  Her
sweet, loving eyes were turned towards him, and she smiled softly as
he answered her.  The temptation was too strong even for the demure
propriety of Mr. Arabin, and bending over her, he pressed his lips to
hers.

Immediately after this Mr. Thorne appeared, and they were both
delighted to hear that the tail of the Beelzebub colt was not
materially injured.

It had been Mr. Harding's intention to hurry over to Ullathorne as
soon as possible after his return to Barchester, in order to secure
the support of his daughter in his meditated revolt against the
archdeacon as touching the deanery; but he was spared the additional
journey by hearing that Mrs. Bold had returned unexpectedly home.  As
soon as he had read her note he started off, and found her waiting
for him in her own house.

How much each of them had to tell the other, and how certain each was
that the story which he or she had to tell would astonish the other!

"My dear, I am so anxious to see you," said Mr. Harding, kissing his
daughter.

"Oh, Papa, I have so much to tell you!" said the daughter, returning
the embrace.

"My dear, they have offered me the deanery!" said Mr. Harding,
anticipating by the suddenness of the revelation the tidings which
Eleanor had to give him.

"Oh, Papa," said she, forgetting her own love and happiness in her
joy at the surprising news.  "Oh, Papa, can it be possible?  Dear
Papa, how thoroughly, thoroughly happy that makes me!"

"But, my dear, I think it best to refuse it."

"Oh, Papa!"

"I am sure you will agree with me, Eleanor, when I explain it to you. 
You know, my dear, how old I am.  If I live I--"

"But, Papa, I must tell you about myself."

'Well, my dear."

"I do so wonder how you'll take it."

"Take what?"

"If you don't rejoice at it, if it doesn't make you happy, if you
don't encourage me, I shall break my heart."

"If that be the case, Nelly, I certainly will encourage you."

"But I fear you won't.  I do so fear you won't.  And yet you can't
but think I am the most fortunate woman living on God's earth."

"Are you, dearest? Then I certainly will rejoice with you.  Come,
Nelly, come to me and tell me what it is."

"I am going--"

He led her to the sofa and, seating himself beside her, took both her
hands in his.  "You are going to be married, Nelly.  Is not that it?"

"Yes," she said faintly.  "That is, if you will approve;" and then
she blushed as she remembered the promise which she had so lately
volunteered to him and which she had so utterly forgotten in making
her engagement with Mr. Arabin.

Mr. Harding thought for a moment who the man could be whom he was to
be called upon to welcome as his son-in-law.  A week since he would
have had no doubt whom to name.  In that case he would have been
prepared to give his sanction, although he would have done so with a
heavy heart.  Now he knew that at any rate it would not be Mr. Slope,
though he was perfectly at a loss to guess who could possibly have
filled the place.  For a moment he thought that the man might be
Bertie Stanhope, and his very soul sank within him.

"Well, Nelly?"

"Oh, Papa, promise to me that, for my sake, you will love him."

"Come, Nelly, come; tell me who it is."

"But will you love him, Papa?"

"Dearest, I must love anyone that you love."  Then she turned her
face to his and whispered into his ear the name of Mr. Arabin.

No man that she could have named could have more surprised or more
delighted him.  Had he looked round the world for a son-in-law to his
taste, he could have selected no one whom he would have preferred to
Mr. Arabin.  He was a clergyman; he held a living in the
neighbourhood; he was of a set to which all Mr. Harding's own
partialities most closely adhered; he was the great friend of Dr.
Grantly; and he was, moreover, a man of whom Mr. Harding knew nothing
but what he approved.  Nevertheless, his surprise was so great as to
prevent the immediate expression of his joy.  He had never thought of
Mr. Arabin in connexion with his daughter; he had never imagined that
they had any feeling in common.  He had feared that his daughter had
been made hostile to clergymen of Mr. Arabin's stamp by her
intolerance of the archdeacon's pretensions.  Had he been put to
wish, he might have wished for Mr. Arabin for a son-in-law; but had
he been put to guess, the name would never have occurred to him.

"Mr. Arabin!" he exclaimed; "impossible!"

"Oh, Papa, for heaven's sake don't say anything against him!  If you
love me, don't say anything against him.  Oh, Papa, it's done and
mustn't be undone--oh, Papa!"

Fickle Eleanor!  Where was the promise that she would make no choice
for herself without her father's approval?  She had chosen, and now
demanded his acquiescence.  "Oh, Papa, isn't he good?  Isn't he
noble?  Isn't he religious, high-minded, everything that a good man
possibly can be?"  She clung to her father, beseeching him for his
consent.

"My Nelly, my child, my own daughter!  He is; he is noble and good
and high-minded; he is all that a woman can love and a man admire. 
He shall be my son, my own son.  He shall be as close to my heart as
you are.  My Nelly, my child, my happy, happy child!"

We need not pursue the interview any further.  By degrees they
returned to the subject of the new promotion.  Eleanor tried to prove
to him, as the Grantlys had done, that his age could be no bar to his
being a very excellent dean, but those arguments had now even less
weight on him than before.  He said little or nothing but sat,
meditative.  Every now and then he would kiss his daughter and say
"yes," or "no," or "very true," or "well, my dear, I can't quite
agree with you there," but he could not be got to enter sharply into
the question of "to be, or not to be" Dean of Barchester.  Of her and
her happiness, of Mr. Arabin and his virtues, he would talk as much
as Eleanor desired--and to tell the truth, that was not a little--but
about the deanery he would now say nothing further.  He had got a new
idea into his head--why should not Mr. Arabin be the new dean?



CHAPTER L

The Archdeacon is Satisfied with the State of Affairs


The archdeacon, in his journey into Barchester, had been assured by
Mr. Harding that all their prognostications about Mr. Slope and
Eleanor were groundless.  Mr. Harding, however, had found it very
difficult to shake his son-in-law's faith in his own acuteness.  The
matter had, to Dr. Grantly, been so plainly corroborated by such
patent evidence, borne out by such endless circumstances, that he at
first refused to take as true the positive statement which Mr.
Harding made to him of Eleanor's own disavowal of the impeachment. 
But at last he yielded in a qualified way.  He brought himself to
admit that he would at the present regard his past convictions as a
mistake, but in doing this he so guarded himself that if, at any
future time, Eleanor should come forth to the world as Mrs. Slope, he
might still be able to say: "There, I told you so.  Remember what you
said and what I said; and remember also for coming years, that I was
right in this matter--as in all others."

He carried, however, his concession so far as to bring himself to
undertake to call at Eleanor's house, and he did call accordingly,
while the father and daughter were yet in the middle of their
conference.  Mr. Harding had had so much to hear and to say that he
had forgotten to advise Eleanor of the honour that awaited her, and
she heard her brother-in-law's voice in the hall while she was quite
unprepared to see him.

"There's the archdeacon," she said, springing up.

"Yes, my dear.  He told me to tell you that he would come and see
you, but to tell the truth I had forgotten all about it."

Eleanor fled away, regardless of all her father's entreaties.  She
could not now, in the first hours of her joy, bring herself to bear
all the archdeacon's retractions, apologies, and congratulations.  He
would have so much to say and would be so tedious in saying it;
consequently, the archdeacon, when he was shown into the drawing-
room, found no one there but Mr. Harding.

"You must excuse Eleanor," said Mr. Harding.

"Is anything the matter?" asked the doctor, who at once anticipated
that the whole truth about Mr. Slope had at last come out.

"Well, something is the matter.  I wonder now whether you will be
much surprised."

The archdeacon saw by his father-in-law's manner that after all he
had nothing to tell him about Mr. Slope.  "No," said he, "certainly
not--nothing will ever surprise me again."  Very many men now-a-days
besides the archdeacon adopt or affect to adopt the nil admirari
doctrine; but nevertheless, to judge from their appearance, they are
just as subject to sudden emotions as their grandfathers and
grandmothers were before them.

"What do you think Mr. Arabin has done?"

"Mr. Arabin!  It's nothing about that daughter of Stanhope's, I
hope?"

"No, not that woman," said Mr. Harding, enjoying his joke in his
sleeve.

"Not that woman!  Is he going to do anything about any woman?  Why
can't you speak out, if you have anything to say?  There is nothing I
hate so much as these sort of mysteries."

"There shall be no mystery with you, Archdeacon, though of course it
must go no further at present."

"Well."

"Except Susan.  You must promise me you'll tell no one else."

"Nonsense!" 