nging by his bridle to the weather-cock of the steeple.
Matters were now very plain to me: the village had been covered with
snow overnight; a sudden change of weather had taken place; I had sunk
down to the churchyard whilst asleep, gently, and in the same
proportion as the snow had melted away; and what in the dark I had
taken to be a stump of a little tree appearing above the snow, to
which I had tied my horse, proved to have been the cross or weather-
cock of the steeple!

Without long consideration I took one of my pistols, shot the bridle
in two, brought the horse, and proceeded on my journey. [Here the
Baron seems to have forgot his feelings; he should certainly have
ordered his horse a feed of corn, after fasting so long.]

He carried me well--advancing into the interior parts of Russia. I
found travelling on horseback rather unfashionable in winter,
therefore I submitted, as I always do, to the custom of the country,
took a single horse sledge, and drove briskly towards St. Petersburg.
I do not exactly recollect whether it was in Eastland or Jugemanland,
but I remember that in the midst of a dreary forest I spied a terrible
wolf making after me, with all the speed of ravenous winter hunger. He
soon overtook me. There was no possibility of escape. Mechanically I
laid myself down flat in the sledge, and let my horse run for our
safety. What I wished, but hardly hoped or expected, happened
immediately after. The wolf did not mind me in the least, but took a
leap over me, and falling furiously on the horse, began instantly to
tear and devour the hind-part of the poor animal, which ran the faster
for his pain and terror. Thus unnoticed and safe myself, I lifted my
head slyly up, and with horror I beheld that the wolf had ate his way
into the horse's body; it was not long before he had fairly forced
himself into it, when I took my advantage, and fell upon him with the
butt-end of my whip. This unexpected attack in his rear frightened him
so much, that he leaped forward with all his might: the horse's
carcase dropped on the ground, but in his place the wolf was in the
harness, and I on my part whipping him continually: we both arrived in
full career safe at St. Petersburg, contrary to our respective
expectations, and very much to the astonishment of the spectators.

I shall not tire you, gentlemen, with the politics, arts, sciences,
and history of this magnificent metropolis of Russia, nor trouble you
with the various intrigues and pleasant adventures I had in the
politer circles of that country, where the lady of the house always
receives the visitor with a dram and a salute. I shall confine myself
rather to the greater and nobler objects of your attention, horses and
dogs, my favourites in the brute creation; also to foxes, wolves, and
bears, with which, and game in general, Russia abounds more than any
other part of the world; and to such sports, manly exercises, and
feats of gallantry and activity, as show the gentleman better than
musty Greek or Latin, or all the perfume, finery, and capers of French
wits or /petit-maîtres/.



                             CHAPTER III

  /An encounter between the Baron's nose and a door-post, with its
  wonderful effects--Fifty brace of ducks and other fowl destroyed
  by one shot--Flogs a fox out of his skin--Leads an old sow home in
  a new way, and vanquishes a wild boar./

It was some time before I could obtain a commission in the army, and
for several months I was perfectly at liberty to sport away my time
and money in the most gentleman-like manner. You may easily imagine
that I spent much of both out of town with such gallant fellows as
knew how to make the most of an open forest country. The very
recollection of those amusements gives me fresh spirits, and creates a
warm wish for a repetition of them. One morning I saw, through the
windows of my bed-room, that a large pond not far off was covered with
wild ducks. In an instant I took my gun from the corner, ran down-
stairs and out of the house in such a hurry, that I imprudently struck
my face against the door-post. Fire flew out of my eyes, but it did
not prevent my intention; I soon came within shot, when, levelling my
piece, I observed to my sorrow, that even the flint had sprung from
the cock by the violence of the shock I had just received. There was
no time to be lost. I presently remembered the effect it had on my
eyes, therefore opened the pan, levelled my piece against the wild
fowls, and my fist against one of my eyes. [The Baron's eyes have
retained fire ever since, and appear particularly illuminated when he
relates this anecdote.] A hearty blow drew sparks again; the shot went
off, and I killed fifty brace of ducks, twenty widgeons, and three
couple of teals. Presence of mind is the soul of manly exercises. If
soldiers and sailors owe to it many of their lucky escapes, hunters
and sportsmen are not less beholden to it for many of their successes.
In a noble forest in Russia I met a fine black fox, whose valuable
skin it would have been a pity to tear by ball or shot. Reynard stood
close to a tree. In a twinkling I took out my ball, and placed a good
spike-nail in its room, fired, and hit him so cleverly that I nailed
his brush fast to the tree. I now went up to him, took out my hanger,
gave him a cross-cut over the face, laid hold of my whip, and fairly
flogged him out of his fine skin.

Chance and good luck often correct our mistakes; of this I had a
singular instance soon after, when, in the depth of a forest, I saw a
wild pig and sow running close behind each other. My ball had missed
them, yet the foremost pig only ran away, and the sow stood
motionless, as fixed to the ground. On examining into the matter, I
found the latter one to be an old sow, blind with age, which had taken
hold of her pig's tail, in order to be led along by filial duty. My
ball, having passed between the two, had cut his leading-string, which
the old sow continued to hold in her mouth; and as her former guide
did not draw her on any longer, she had stopped of course; I therefore
laid hold of the remaining end of the pig's tail, and led the old
beast home without any further trouble on my part, and without any
reluctance or apprehension on the part of the helpless old animal.

Terrible as these wild sows are, yet more fierce and dangerous are the
boars, one of which I had once the misfortune to meet in a forest,
unprepared for attack or defence. I retired behind an oak-tree just
when the furious animal levelled a side-blow at me, with such force,
that his tusks pierced through the tree, by which means he could
neither repeat the blow nor retire. Ho, ho! thought I, I shall soon
have you now! and immediately I laid hold of a stone, wherewith I
hammered and bent his tusks in such a manner, that he could not
retreat by any means, and must wait my return from the next village,
whither I went for ropes and a cart, to secure him properly, and to
carry him off safe and alive, in which I perfectly succeeded.



                              CHAPTER IV

  /Reflections on Saint Hubert's stag--Shoots a stag with cherry-
  stones; the wonderful effects of it--Kills a bear by extraordinary
  dexterity; his danger pathetically described--Attacked by a wolf,
  which he turns inside out--Is assailed by a mad dog, from which he
  escapes--The Baron's cloak seized with madness, by which his whole
  wardrobe is thrown into confusion./

You have heard, I dare say, of the hunter and sportsman's saint and
protector, St. Hubert, and of the noble stag, which appeared to him in
the forest, with the holy cross between his antlers. I have paid my
homage to that saint every year in good fellowship, and seen this stag
a thousand times, either painted in churches, or embroidered in the
stars of his knights; so that, upon the honour and conscience of a
good sportsman, I hardly know whether there may not have been
formerly, or whether there are not such crossed stags even at this
present day. But let me rather tell what I have seen myself. Having
one day spent all my shot, I found myself unexpectedly in presence of
a stately stag, looking at me as unconcernedly as if he had known of
my empty pouches. I charged immediately with powder, and upon it a
good handful of cherry-stones, for I had sucked the fruit as far as
the hurry would permit. Thus I let fly at him, and hit him just on the
middle of the forehead, between his antlers; it stunned him--he
staggered--yet he made off. A year or two after, being with a party in
the same forest, I beheld a noble stag with a fine full grown cherry-
tree above ten feet high between his antlers. I immediately
recollected my former adventure, looked upon him as my property, and
brought him to the ground by one shot, which at once gave me the
haunch and cherry-sauce; for the tree was covered with the richest
fruit, the like I had never tasted before. Who knows but some
passionate holy sportsman, or sporting abbot or bishop, may have shot,
planted, and fixed the cross between the antlers of St. Hubert's stag,
in a manner similar to this? They always have been, and still are,
famous for plantations of crosses and antlers; and in a case of
distress or dilemma, which too often happens to keen sportsmen, one is
apt to grasp at anything for safety, and to try any expedient rather
than miss the favourable opportunity. I have many times found myself
in that trying situation.

What do you say of this, for example? Daylight and powder were spent
one day in a Polish forest. When I was going home a terrible bear made
up to me in great speed, with open mouth, ready to fall upon me; all
my pockets were searched in an instant for powder and ball, but in
vain; I found nothing but two spare flints: one I flung with all my
might into the monster's open jaws, down his throat. It gave him pain
and made him turn about, so that I could level the second at his back-
door, which, indeed, I did with wonderful success; for it flew in, met
the first flint in the stomach, struck fire, and blew up the bear with
a terrible explosion. Though I came safe off that time, yet I should
not wish to try it again, or venture against bears with no other
ammunition.

There is a kind of fatality in it. The fiercest and most dangerous
animals generally came upon me when defenceless, as if they had a
notion or an instinctive intimation of it. Thus a frightful wolf
rushed upon me so suddenly, and so close, that I could do nothing but
follow mechanical instinct, and thrust my fist into his open mouth.
For safety's sake I pushed on and on, till my arm was fairly in up to
the shoulder. How should I disengage myself? I was not much pleased
with my awkward situation--with a wolf face to face; our ogling was
not of the most pleasant kind. If I withdrew my arm, then the animal
would fly the more furiously upon me; that I saw in his flaming eyes.
In short, I laid hold of his tail, turned him inside out like a glove,
and flung him to the ground, where I left him.

The same expedient would not have answered against a mad dog, which
soon after came running against me in a narrow street at St.
Petersburg. Run who can, I thought; and to do this the better, I threw
off my fur cloak, and was safe within doors in an instant. I sent my
servant for the cloak, and he put it in the wardrobe with my other
clothes. The day after I was amazed and frightened by Jack's bawling,
"For God's sake, sir, your fur cloak is mad!" I hastened up to him,
and found almost all my clothes tossed about and torn to pieces. The
fellow was perfectly right in his apprehensions about the fur cloak's
madness. I saw him myself just then falling upon a fine full-dress
suit, which he shook and tossed in an unmerciful manner.



                              CHAPTER V

  /The effects of great activity and presence of mind--A favourite
  hound described, which pups while pursuing a hare; the hare also
  litters while pursued by the hound--Presented with a famous horse
  by Count Przobossky, with which he performs many extraordinary
  feats./

All these narrow and lucky escapes, gentlemen, were chances turned to
advantage by presence of mind and vigorous exertions, which, taken
together, as everybody knows, make the fortunate sportsman, sailor,
and soldier; but he would be a very blamable and imprudent sportsman,
admiral, or general, who would always depend upon chance and his
stars, without troubling himself about those arts which are their
particular pursuits, and without providing the very best implements,
which insure success. I was not blamable either way; for I have always
been as remarkable for the excellency of my horses, dogs, guns, and
swords, as for the proper manner of using and managing them, so that
upon the whole I may hope to be remembered in the forest, upon the
turf, and in the field. I shall not enter here into any detail of my
stables, kennel, or armoury; but a favourite bitch of mine I cannot
help mentioning to you; she was a greyhound, and I never had or saw a
better. She grew old in my service, and was not remarkable for her
size, but rather for her uncommon swiftness. I always coursed with
her. Had you seen her you must have admired her, and would not have
wondered at my predilection, and at my coursing her so much. She ran
so fast, so much, and so long in my service, that she actually ran off
her legs; so that, in the latter part of her life, I was under the
necessity of working and using her only as a terrier, in which quality
she still served me many years.

Coursing one day a hare, which appeared to me uncommonly big, I pitied
my poor bitch, being big with pups, yet she would course as fast as
ever. I could follow her on horseback only at a great distance. At
once I heard a cry as it were of a pack of hounds--but so weak and
faint that I hardly knew what to make of it. Coming up to them, I was
greatly surprised. The hare had littered in running; the same had
happened to my bitch in coursing, and there were just as many leverets
as pups. By instinct the former ran, the latter coursed: and thus I
found myself in possession at once of six hares, and as many dogs, at
the end of a course which had only begun with one.

I remember this, my wonderful bitch, with the same pleasure and
tenderness as a superb Lithuanian horse, which no money could have
bought. He became mine by an accident, which gave me an opportunity of
showing my horsemanship to a great advantage. I was at Count
Przobossky's noble country-seat in Lithuania, and remained with the
ladies at tea in the drawing-room, while the gentlemen were down in
the yard, to see a young horse of blood which had just arrived from
the stud. We suddenly heard a noise of distress; I hastened down-
stairs, and found the horse so unruly, that nobody durst approach or
mount him. The most resolute horsemen stood dismayed and aghast;
despondency was expressed in every countenance, when, in one leap, I
was on his back, took him by surprise, and worked him quite into
gentleness and obedience with the best display of horsemanship I was
master of. Fully to show this to the ladies, and save them unnecessary
trouble, I forced him to leap in at one of the open windows of the
tea-room, walked round several times, pace, trot, and gallop, and at
last made him mount the tea-table, there to repeat his lessons in a
pretty style of miniature which was exceedingly pleasing to the
ladies, for he performed them amazingly well, and did not break either
cup or saucer. It placed me so high in their opinion, and so well in
that of the noble lord, that, with his usual politeness, he begged I
would accept of this young horse, and ride him full career to conquest
and honour in the campaign against the Turks, which was soon to be
opened, under the command of Count Munich.

I could not indeed have received a more agreeable present, nor a more
ominous one at the opening of that campaign, in which I made my
apprenticeship as a soldier. A horse so gentle, so spirited, and so
fierce--at once a lamb and a Bucephalus, put me always in mind of the
soldier's and the gentleman's duty! of young Alexander, and of the
astonishing things he performed in the field.

We took the field, among several other reasons, it seems, with an
intention to retrieve the character of the Russian arms, which had
been blemished a little by Czar Peter's last campaign on the Pruth;
and this we fully accomplished by several very fatiguing and glorious
campaigns under the command of that great general I mentioned before.

Modesty forbids individuals to arrogate to themselves great successes
or victories, the glory of which is generally engrossed by the
commander--nay, which is rather awkward, by kings and queens who never
smelt gunpowder but at the field-days and reviews of their troops;
never saw a field of battle, or an enemy in battle array.

Nor do I claim any particular share of glory in the great engagements
with the enemy. We all did our duty, which, in the patriot's,
soldier's, and gentleman's language, is a very comprehensive word, of
great honour, meaning, and import, and of which the generality of idle
quidnuncs and coffee-house politicians can hardly form any but a very
mean and contemptible idea. However, having had the command of a body
of hussars, I went upon several expeditions, with discretionary
powers; and the success I then met with is, I think, fairly and only
to be placed to my account, and to that of the brave fellows whom I
led on to conquest and to victory. We had very hot work once in the
van of the army, when we drove the Turks into Oczakow. My spirited
Lithuanian had almost brought me into a scrape: I had an advanced
fore-post, and saw the enemy coming against me in a cloud of dust,
which left me rather uncertain about their actual numbers and real
intentions: to wrap myself up in a similar cloud was common prudence,
but would not have much advanced my knowledge, or answered the end for
which I had been sent out; therefore I let my flankers on both wings
spread to the right and left and make what dust they could, and I
myself led on straight upon the enemy, to have nearer sight of them:
in this I was gratified, for they stood and fought, till, for fear of
my flankers, they began to move off rather disorderly. This was the
moment to fall upon them with spirit; we broke them entirely--made a
terrible havoc amongst them, and drove them not only back to a walled
town in their rear, but even through it, contrary to our most sanguine
expectation.

The swiftness of my Lithuanian enabled me to be foremost in the
pursuit; and seeing the enemy fairly flying through the opposite gate,
I thought it would be prudent to stop in the market-place, to order
the men to rendezvous. I stopped, gentlemen; but judge of my
astonishment when in this market-place I saw not one of my hussars
about me! Are they scouring the other streets? or what is become of
them? They could not be far off, and must, at all events, soon join
me. In that expectation I walked my panting Lithuanian to a spring in
this market-place, and let him drink. He drank uncommonly, with an
eagerness not to be satisfied, but natural enough; for when I looked
round for my men, what should I see, gentlemen! the hind part of the
poor creature--croup and legs were missing, as if he had been cut in
two, and the water ran out as it came in, without refreshing or doing
him any good! How it could have happened was quite a mystery to me,
till I returned with him to the town-gate. There I saw, that when I
rushed in pell-mell with the flying enemy, they had dropped the
portcullis (a heavy falling door, with sharp spikes at the bottom, let
down suddenly to prevent the entrance of an enemy into a fortified
town) unperceived by me, which had totally cut off his hind part, that
still lay quivering on the outside of the gate. It would have been an
irreparable loss, had not our farrier contrived to bring both parts
together while hot. He sewed them up with sprigs and young shoots of
laurels that were at hand; the wound healed, and, what could not have
happened but to so glorious a horse, the sprigs took root in his body,
grew up, and formed a bower over me; so that afterwards I could go
upon many other expeditions in the shade of my own and my horse's
laurels.



                              CHAPTER VI

  /The Baron is made a prisoner of war, and sold for a slave--Keeps
  the Sultan's bees, which are attacked by two bears--Loses one of
  his bees; a silver hatchet, which he throws at the bears, rebounds
  and flies up to the moon; brings it back by an ingenious
  invention; falls to the earth on his return, and helps himself out
  of a pit--Extricates himself from a carriage which meets his in a
  narrow road, in a manner never before attempted nor practised
  since--The wonderful effects of the frost upon his servant's
  French horn./

I was not always successful. I had the misfortune to be overpowered by
numbers, to be made prisoner of war; and, what is worse, but always
usual among the Turks, to be sold for a slave. [The Baron was
afterwards in great favour with the Grand Seignior, as will appear
hereafter.] In that state of humiliation my daily task was not very
hard and laborious, but rather singular and irksome. It was to drive
the Sultan's bees every morning to their pasture-grounds, to attend
them all the day long, and against night to drive them back to their
hives. One evening I missed a bee, and soon observed that two bears
had fallen upon her to tear her to pieces for the honey she carried. I
had nothing like an offensive weapon in my hands but the silver
hatchet, which is the badge of the Sultan's gardeners and farmers. I
threw it at the robbers, with an intention to frighten them away, and
set the poor bee at liberty; but, by an unlucky turn of my arm, it
flew upwards, and continued rising till it reached the moon. How
should I recover it? how fetch it down again? I recollected that
Turkey-beans grow very quick, and run up to an astonishing height. I
planted one immediately; it grew, and actually fastened itself to one
of the moon's horns. I had no more to do now but to climb up by it
into the moon, where I safely arrived, and had a troublesome piece of
business before I could find my silver hatchet, in a place where
everything has the brightness of silver; at last, however, I found it
in a heap of chaff and chopped straw. I was now for returning: but,
alas! the heat of the sun had dried up my bean; it was totally useless
for my descent: so I fell to work, and twisted me a rope of that
chopped straw, as long and as well as I could make it. This I fastened
to one of the moon's horns, and slid down to the end of it. Here I
held myself fast with the left hand, and with the hatchet in my right,
I cut the long, now useless end of the upper part, which, when tied to
the lower end, brought me a good deal lower: this repeated splicing
and tying of the rope did not improve its quality, or bring me down to
the Sultan's farm. I was four or five miles from the earth at least
when it broke; I fell to the ground with such amazing violence, that I
found myself stunned, and in a hole nine fathoms deep at least, made
by the weight of my body falling from so great a height: I recovered,
but knew not how to get out again; however, I dug slopes or steps with
my finger-nails [the Baron's nails were then of forty years' growth],
and easily accomplished it.

Peace was soon after concluded with the Turks, and gaining my liberty,
I left St. Petersburg at the time of that singular revolution, when
the emperor in his cradle, his mother, the Duke of Brunswick, her
father, Field-Marshal Munich, and many others were sent to Siberia.
The winter was then so uncommonly severe all over Europe, that ever
since the sun seems to be frost-bitten. At my return to this place, I
felt on the road greater inconveniences than those I had experienced
on my setting out.

I travelled post, and finding myself in a narrow lane, bid the
postillion give a signal with his horn, that other travellers might
not meet us in the narrow passage. He blew with all his might; but his
endeavours were in vain, he could not make the horn sound, which was
unaccountable, and rather unfortunate, for soon after we found
ourselves in the presence of another coach coming the other way: there
was no proceeding; however, I got out of my carriage, and being pretty
strong, placed it, wheels and all, upon my head: I then jumped over a
hedge about nine feet high (which, considering the weight of the
coach, was rather difficult) into a field, and came out again by
another jump into the road beyond the other carriage: I then went back
for the horses, and placing one upon my head, and the other under my
left arm, by the same means brought them to my coach, put to, and
proceeded to an inn at the end of our stage. I should have told you
that the horse under my arm was very spirited, and not above four
years old; in making my second spring over the hedge, he expressed
great dislike to that violent kind of motion by kicking and snorting;
however, I confined his hind legs by putting them into my coat-pocket.
After we arrived at the inn my postillion and I refreshed ourselves:
he hung his horn on a peg near the kitchen fire; I sat on the other
side.

Suddenly we heard a /tereng! tereng! teng! teng!/ We looked round, and
now found the reason why the postillion had not been able to sound his
horn; his tunes were frozen up in the horn, and came out now by
thawing, plain enough, and much to the credit of the driver; so that
the honest fellow entertained us for some time with a variety of
tunes, without putting his mouth to the horn--"The King of Prussia's
March," "Over the Hill and over the Dale," with many other favourite
tunes; at length the thawing entertainment concluded, as I shall this
short account of my Russian travels.

/Some travellers are apt to advance more than is perhaps strictly
true; if any of the company entertain a doubt of my veracity, I shall
only say to such, I pity their want of faith, and must request they
will take leave before I begin the second part of my adventures, which
are as strictly founded in fact as those I have already related./



                             CHAPTER VII

  /The Baron relates his adventures on a voyage to North America,
  which are well worth the reader's attention--Pranks of a whale--A
  sea-gull saves a sailor's life--The Baron's head forced into his
  stomach--A dangerous leak stopped à posteriori./

I embarked at Portsmouth in a first-rate English man-of-war, of one
hundred guns, and fourteen hundred men, for North America. Nothing
worth relating happened till we arrived within three hundred leagues
of the river St. Laurence, when the ship struck with amazing force
against (as we supposed) a rock; however, upon heaving the lead we
could find no bottom, even with three hundred fathom. What made this
circumstance the more wonderful, and indeed beyond all comprehension,
was, that the violence of the shock was such that we lost our rudder,
broke our bowsprit in the middle, and split all our masts from top to
bottom, two of which went by the board; a poor fellow, who was aloft
furling the mainsheet, was flung at least three leagues from the ship;
but he fortunately saved his life by laying hold of the tail of a
large sea-gull, who brought him back, and lodged him on the very spot
from whence he was thrown. Another proof of the violence of the shock
was the force with which the people between decks were driven against
the floors above them; my head particularly was pressed into my
stomach, where it continued some months before it recovered its
natural situation. Whilst we were all in a state of astonishment at
the general and unaccountable confusion in which we were involved, the
whole was suddenly explained by the appearance of a large whale, who
had been basking, asleep, within sixteen feet of the surface of the
water. This animal was so much displeased with the disturbance which
our ship had given him--for in our passage we had with our rudder
scratched his nose--that he beat in all the gallery and part of the
quarter-deck with his tail, and almost at the same instant took the
mainsheet anchor, which was suspended, as it usually is, from the
head, between his teeth, and ran away with the ship, at least sixty
leagues, at the rate of twelve leagues an hour, when fortunately the
cable broke, and we lost both the whale and the anchor. However, upon
our return to Europe, some months after, we found the same whale
within a few leagues of the same spot, floating dead upon the water;
it measured above half a mile in length. As we could take but a small
quantity of such a monstrous animal on board, we got our boats out,
and with much difficulty cut off his head, where, to our great joy, we
found the anchor, and above forty fathom of the cable, concealed on
the left side of his mouth, just under his tongue. [Perhaps this was
the cause of his death, as that side of his tongue was much swelled,
with a great degree of inflammation.] This was the only extraordinary
circumstance that happened on this voyage. One part of our distress,
however, I had like to have forgot: while the whale was running away
with the ship she sprung a leak, and the water poured in so fast, that
all our pumps could not keep us from sinking; it was, however, my good
fortune to discover it first. I found it a large hole about a foot
diameter; you will naturally suppose this circumstance gives me
infinite pleasure, when I inform you that this noble vessel was
preserved, with all its crew, by a most fortunate thought! in short, I
sat down over it, and could have dispensed with it had it been larger;
nor will you be surprised when I inform you I am descended from Dutch
parents. [The Baron's ancestors have but lately settled there; in
another part of his adventures he boasts of royal blood.]

My situation, while I sat there, was rather cool, but the carpenter's
art soon relieved me.



                             CHAPTER VIII

  /Bathes in the Mediterranean--Meets an unexpected companion--
  Arrives unintentionally in the regions of heat and darkness, from
  which he is extricated by dancing a hornpipe--Frightens his
  deliverers, and returns on shore./

I was once in great danger of being lost in a most singular manner in
the Mediterranean: I was bathing in that pleasant sea near Marseilles
one summer's afternoon, when I discovered a very large fish, with his
jaws quite extended, approaching me with the greatest velocity; there
was no time to be lost, nor could I possibly avoid him. I immediately
reduced myself to as small a size as possible, by closing my feet and
placing my hands also near my sides, in which position I passed
directly between his jaws, and into his stomach, where I remained some
time in total darkness, and comfortably warm, as you may imagine; at
last it occurred to me, that by giving him pain he would be glad to
get rid of me: as I had plenty of room, I played my pranks, such as
tumbling, hop, step, and jump, &c., but nothing seemed to disturb him
so much as the quick motion of my feet in attempting to dance a
hornpipe; soon after I began he put me out by sudden fits and starts:
I persevered; at last he roared horridly, and stood up almost
perpendicularly in the water, with his head and shoulders exposed, by
which he was discovered by the people on board an Italian trader, then
sailing by, who harpooned him in a few minutes. As soon as he was
brought on board I heard the crew consulting how they should cut him
up, so as to preserve the greatest quantity of oil. As I understood
Italian, I was in most dreadful apprehensions lest their weapons
employed in this business should destroy me also; therefore I stood as
near the centre as possible, for there was room enough for a dozen men
in this creature's stomach, and I naturally imagined they would begin
with the extremities; however, my fears were soon dispersed, for they
began by opening the bottom of the belly. As soon as I perceived a
glimmering of light I called out lustily to be released from a
situation in which I was now almost suffocated. It is impossible for
me to do justice to the degree and kind of astonishment which sat upon
every countenance at hearing a human voice issue from a fish, but more
so at seeing a naked man walk upright out of his body; in short,
gentlemen, I told them the whole story, as I have done you, whilst
amazement struck them dumb.

After taking some refreshment, and jumping into the sea to cleanse
myself, I swam to my clothes, which lay where I had left them on the
shore. As near as I can calculate, I was near four hours and a half
confined in the stomach of this animal.



                              CHAPTER IX

  /Adventures in Turkey, and upon the river Nile--Sees a balloon
  over Constantinople; shoots at, and brings it down; finds a French
  experimental philosopher suspended from it--Goes on an embassy to
  Grand Cairo, and returns upon the Nile, where he is thrown into an
  unexpected situation, and detained six weeks./

When I was in the service of the Turks I frequently amused myself in a
pleasure-barge on the Marmora, which commands a view of the whole city
of Constantinople, including the Grand Seignior's Seraglio. One
morning, as I was admiring the beauty and serenity of the sky, I
observed a globular substance in the air, which appeared to be about
the size of a twelve-inch globe, with somewhat suspended from it. I
immediately took up my largest and longest barrel fowling-piece, which
I never travel or make even an excursion without, if I can help it; I
charged with a ball, and fired at the globe, but to no purpose, the
object being at too great a distance. I then put in a double quantity
of powder, and five or six balls: this second attempt succeeded; all
the balls took effect, and tore one side open, and brought it down.
Judge my surprise when a most elegant gilt car, with a man in it, and
part of a sheep which seemed to have been roasted, fell within two
yards of me. When my astonishment had in some degree subsided, I
ordered my people to row close to this strange aërial traveller.

I took him on board my barge (he was a native of France): he was much
indisposed from his sudden fall into the sea, and incapable of
speaking; after some time, however, he recovered, and gave the
following account of himself, viz.: "About seven or eight days since,
I cannot tell which, for I have lost my reckoning, having been most of
the time where the sun never sets, I ascended from the Land's End in
Cornwall, in the island of Great Britain, in the car from which I have
been just taken, suspended from a very large balloon, and took a sheep
with me to try atmospheric experiments upon: unfortunately, the wind
changed within ten minutes after my ascent, and instead of driving
towards Exeter, where I intended to land, I was driven towards the
sea, over which I suppose I have continued ever since, but much too
high to make observations.

"The calls of hunger were so pressing, that the intended experiments
upon heat and respiration gave way to them. I was obliged, on the
third day, to kill the sheep for food; and being at that time
infinitely above the moon, and for upwards of sixteen hours after so
very near the sun that it scorched my eyebrows, I placed the carcase,
taking care to skin it first, in that part of the car where the sun
had sufficient power, or, in other words, where the balloon did not
shade it from the sun, by which method it was well roasted in about
two hours. This has been my food ever since." Here he paused, and
seemed lost in viewing the objects about him. When I told him the
buildings before us were the Grand Seignior's Seraglio at
Constantinople, he seemed exceedingly affected, as he had supposed
himself in a very different situation. "The cause," added he, "of my
long flight, was owing to the failure of a string which was fixed to a
valve in the balloon, intended to let out the inflammable air; and if
it had not been fired at, and rent in the manner before mentioned, I
might, like Mahomet, have been suspended between heaven and earth till
doomsday."

The Grand Seignior, to whom I was introduced by the Imperial, Russian,
and French ambassadors, employed me to negotiate a matter of great
importance at Grand Cairo, and which was of such a nature that it must
ever remain a secret.

I went there in great state by land; where, having completed the
business, I dismissed almost all my attendants, and returned like a
private gentleman; the weather was delightful, and that famous river
the Nile was beautiful beyond all description; in short, I was tempted
to hire a barge to descend by water to Alexandria. On the third day of
my voyage the river began to rise most amazingly (you have all heard,
I presume, of the annual overflowing of the Nile), and on the next day
it spread the whole country for many leagues on each side! On the
fifth, at sunrise, my barge became entangled with what I at first took
for shrubs, but as the light became stronger I found myself surrounded
by almonds, which were perfectly ripe, and in the highest perfection.
Upon plumbing with a line my people found we were at least sixty feet
from the ground, and unable to advance or retreat. At about eight or
nine o'clock, as near as I could judge by the altitude of the sun, the
wind rose suddenly, and canted our barge on one side: here she filled,
and I saw no more of her for some time. Fortunately we all saved
ourselves (six men and two boys) by clinging to the tree, the boughs
of which were equal to our weight, though not to that of the barge: in
this situation we continued six weeks and three days, living upon the
almonds; I need not inform you we had plenty of water. On the forty-
second day of our distress the water fell as rapidly as it had risen,
and on the forty-sixth we were able to venture down upon /terra
firma/. Our barge was the first pleasing object we saw, about two
hundred yards from the spot where she sunk. After drying everything
that was useful by the heat of the sun, and loading ourselves with
necessaries from the stores on board, we set out to recover our lost
ground, and found, by the nearest calculation, we had been carried
over garden-walls, and a variety of enclosures, above one hundred and
fifty miles. In four days, after a very tiresome journey on foot, with
thin shoes, we reached the river, which was now confined to its banks,
related our adventures to a boy, who kindly accommodated all our
wants, and sent us forward in a barge of his own. In six days more we
arrived at Alexandria, where we took shipping for Constantinople. I
was received kindly by the Grand Seignior, and had the honour of
seeing the Seraglio, to which his highness introduced me himself.



                              CHAPTER X

  /Pays a visit during the siege of Gibraltar to his old friend
  General Elliot--Sinks a Spanish man-of-war--Wakes an old woman on
  the African coast--Destroys all the enemy's cannon; frightens the
  Count d'Artois, and sends him to Paris--Saves the lives of two
  English spies with the identical sling that killed Goliath; and
  raises the siege./

During the late siege of Gibraltar I went with a provision-fleet,
under Lord Rodney's command, to see my old friend General Elliot, who
has, by his distinguished defence of that place, acquired laurels that
can never fade. After the usual joy which generally attends the
meeting of old friends had subsided, I went to examine the state of
the garrison, and view the operations of the enemy, for which purpose
the General accompanied me. I had brought a most excellent refracting
telescope with me from London, purchased of Dollond, by the help of
which I found the enemy were going to discharge a thirty-six pounder
at the spot where we stood. I told the General what they were about;
he looked through the glass also, and found my conjectures right. I
immediately, by his permission, ordered a forty-eight pounder to be
brought from a neighbouring battery, which I placed with so much
exactness (having long studied the art of gunnery) that I was sure of
my mark.

I continued watching the enemy till I saw the match placed at the
touch-hole of their piece; at that very instant I gave the signal for
our gun to be fired also.

About midway between the two pieces of cannon the balls struck each
other with amazing force, and the effect was astonishing! The enemy's
ball recoiled back with such violence as to kill the man who had
discharged it, by carrying his head fairly off, with sixteen others
which it met with in its progress to the Barbary coast, where its
force, after passing through three masts of vessels that then lay in a
line behind each other in the harbour, was so much spent, that it only
broke its way through the roof of a poor labourer's hut, about two
hundred yards inland, and destroyed a few teeth an old woman had left,
who lay asleep upon her back with her mouth open. The ball lodged in
her throat. Her husband soon after came home, and endeavoured to
extract it; but finding that impracticable, by the assistance of a
rammer he forced it into her stomach. Our ball did excellent service;
for it not only repelled the other in the manner just described, but,
proceeding as I intended it should, it dismounted the very piece of
cannon that had just been employed against us, and forced it into the
hold of the ship, where it fell with so much force as to break its way
through the bottom. The ship immediately filled and sank, with above a
thousand Spanish sailors on board, besides a considerable number of
soldiers. This, to be sure, was a most extraordinary exploit; I will
not, however, take the whole merit to myself; my judgment was the
principal engine, but chance assisted me a little; for I afterwards
found, that the man who charged our forty-eight pounder put in, by
mistake, a double quantity of powder, else we could never have
succeeded so much beyond all expectation, especially in repelling the
enemy's ball.

General Elliot would have given me a commission for this singular
piece of service; but I declined everything, except his thanks, which
I received at a crowded table of officers at supper on the evening of
that very day.

As I am very partial to the English, who are beyond all doubt a brave
people, I determined not to take my leave of the garrison till I had
rendered them another piece of service, and in about three weeks an
opportunity presented itself. I dressed myself in the habit of a
/Popish priest/, and at about one o'clock in the morning stole out of
the garrison, passed the enemy's lines, and arrived in the middle of
their camp, where I entered the tent in which the Prince d'Artois was,
with the commander-in-chief, and several other officers, in deep
council, concerting a plan to storm the garrison next morning. My
disguise was my protection; they suffered me to continue there,
hearing everything that passed, till they went to their several beds.
When I found the whole camp, and even the sentinels, were wrapped up
in the arms of Morpheus, I began my work, which was that of
dismounting all their cannon (above three hundred pieces), from forty-
eight to twenty-four pounders, and throwing them three leagues into
the sea. Having no assistance, I found this the hardest task I ever
undertook, except swimming to the opposite shore with the famous
Turkish piece of ordnance, described by Baron de Tott in his Memoirs,
which I shall hereafter mention. I then piled all the carriages
together in the centre of the camp, which, to prevent the noise of the
wheels being heard, I carried in pairs under my arms; and a noble
appearance they made, as high at least as the rock of Gibraltar. I
then lighted a match by striking a flint stone, situated twenty feet
from the ground (in an old wall built by the Moors when they invaded
Spain), with the breech of an iron eight-and-forty pounder, and so set
fire to the whole pile. I forgot to inform you that I threw all their
ammunition-waggons upon the top.

Before I applied the lighted match I had laid the combustibles at the
bottom so judiciously, that the whole was in a blaze in a moment. To
prevent suspicion I was one of the first to express my surprise. The
whole camp was, as you may imagine, petrified with astonishment: the
general conclusion was, that their sentinels had been bribed, and that
seven or eight regiments of the garrison had been employed in this
horrid destruction of their artillery. Mr. Drinkwater, in his account
of this famous siege, mentions the enemy sustaining a great loss by a
fire which happened in their camp, but never knew the cause; how
should he? as I never divulged it before (though I alone saved
Gibraltar by this night's business), not even to General Elliot. The
Count d'Artois and all his attendants ran away in their fright, and
never stopped on the road till they reached Paris, which they did in
about a fortnight; this dreadful conflagration had such an effect upon
them that they were incapable of taking the least refreshment for
three months after, but, chameleon-like, lived upon the air.

/If any gentleman will say he doubts the truth of this story, I will
fine him a gallon of brandy and make him drink it at one draught./

About two months after I had done the besieged this service, one
morning, as I sat at breakfast with General Elliot, a shell (for I had
not time to destroy their mortars as well as their cannon) entered the
apartment we were sitting in; it lodged upon our table: the General,
as most men would do, quitted the room directly; but I took it up
before it burst, and carried it to the top of the rock, when, looking
over the enemy's camp, on an eminence near the sea-coast I observed a
considerable number of people, but could not, with my naked eye,
discover how they were employed. I had recourse again to my telescope,
when I found that two of our officers, one a general, the other a
colonel, with whom I spent the preceding evening, and who went out
into the enemy's camp about midnight as spies, were taken, and then
were actually going to be executed on a gibbet. I found the distance
too great to throw the shell with my hand, but most fortunately
recollecting that I had the very sling in my pocket which assisted
David in slaying Goliath, I placed the shell in it, and immediately
threw it in the midst of them: it burst as it fell, and destroyed all
present, except the two culprits, who were saved by being suspended so
high, for they were just turned off: however, one of the pieces of the
shell fled with such force against the foot of the gibbet, that it
immediately brought it down. Our two friends no sooner felt /terra
firma/ than they looked about for the cause; and finding their guards,
executioner, and all, had taken it in their heads to die first, they
directly extricated each other from their disgraceful cords, and then
ran down to the sea-shore, seized a Spanish boat with two men in it,
and made them row to one of our ships, which they did with great
safety, and in a few minutes after, when I was relating to General
Elliot how I had acted, they both took us by the hand, and after
mutual congratulations we retired to spend the day with festivity.



                              CHAPTER XI

  /An interesting account of the Baron's ancestors--A quarrel
  relative to the spot where Noah built his ark--The history of the
  sling, and its properties--A favourite poet introduced upon no
  very reputable occasion--queen Elizabeth's abstinence--The Baron's
  father crosses from England to Holland upon a marine horse, which
  he sells for seven hundred ducats./

You wish (I can see by your countenances) I would inform you how I
became possessed of such a treasure as the sling just mentioned. (Here
facts must be held sacred.) Thus then it was: I am a descendant of the
wife of Uriah, whom we all know David was intimate with; she had
several children by his majesty; they quarrelled once upon a matter of
the first consequence, viz., the spot where Noah's ark was built, and
where it rested after the flood. A separation consequently ensued. She
had often heard him speak of this sling as his most valuable treasure:
this she stole the night they parted; it was missed before she got out
of his dominions, and she was pursued by no less than six of the
king's body-guards: however, by using it herself she hit the first of
them (for one was more active in the pursuit than the rest) where
David did Goliath, and killed him on the spot. His companions were so
alarmed at his fall that they retired, and left Uriah's wife to pursue
her journey. She took with her, I should have informed you before, her
favourite son by this connection, to whom she bequeathed the sling;
and thus it has, without interruption, descended from father to son
till it came into my possession. One of its possessors, my great-
great-great-grandfather, who lived about two hundred and fifty years
ago, was upon a visit to England, and became intimate with a poet who
was a great deer-stealer; I think his name was Shakespeare: he
frequently borrowed this sling, and with it killed so much of Sir
Thomas Lucy's venison, that he narrowly escaped the fate of my two
friends at Gibraltar. Poor Shakespeare was imprisoned, and my ancestor
obtained his freedom in a very singular manner. Queen Elizabeth was
then on the throne, but grown so indolent, that every trifling matter
was a trouble to her; dressing, undressing, eating, drinking, and some
other offices which shall be nameless, made life a burden to her; all
these things he enabled her to do without, or by a deputy! and what do
you think was the only return she could prevail upon him to accept for
such eminent services? setting Shakespeare at liberty! Such was his
affection for that famous writer, that he would have shortened his own
days to add to the number of his friend's.

I do not hear that any of the queen's subjects, particularly the
/beef-eaters/, as they are vulgarly called to this day, however they
might be struck with the novelty at the time, much approved of her
living totally without food. She did not survive the practice herself
above seven years and a half.

My father, who was the immediate possessor of this sling before me,
told me the following anecdote:--

He was walking by the sea-shore at Harwich, with this sling in his
pocket; before his paces had covered a mile he was attacked by a
fierce animal called a seahorse, open-mouthed, who ran at him with
great fury; he hesitated a moment, then took out his sling, retreated
back about a hundred yards, stooped for a couple of pebbles, of which
there were plenty under his feet, and slung them both so dexterously
at the animal, that each stone put out an eye, and lodged in the
cavities which their removal had occasioned. He now got upon his back,
and drove him into the sea; for the moment he lost his sight he lost
also ferocity, and became as tame as possible: the sling was placed as
a bridle in his mouth; he was guided with the greatest facility across
the ocean, and in less than three hours they both arrived on the
opposite shore, which is about thirty leagues. The master of the
/Three Cups/, at Helvoetsluys, in Holland, purchased this marine
horse, to make an exhibition of, for seven hundred ducats, which was
upwards of three hundred pounds, and the next day my father paid his
passage back in the packet to Harwich.

/--My father made several curious observations in this passage, which
I will relate hereafter./



                             CHAPTER XII

  /The frolic; its consequences--Windsor Castle--St. Paul's--College
  of Physicians--Undertakers, sextons, &c., almost ruined--Industry
  of the apothecaries./

                             THE FROLIC.

This famous sling makes the possessor equal to any task he is desirous
of performing.

I made a balloon of such extensive dimensions, that an account of the
silk it contained would exceed all credibility; every mercer's shop
and weaver's stock in London, Westminster, and Spitalfields
contributed to it: with this balloon and my sling I played many
tricks, such as taking one house from its station, and placing another
in its stead, without disturbing the inhabitants, who were generally
asleep, or too much emplo