yed to observe the peregrinations of their
habitations. When the sentinel at Windsor Castle heard St. Paul's
clock strike thirteen, it was through my dexterity; I brought the
buildings nearly together that night, by placing the castle in St.
George's Fields, and carried it back again before daylight, without
waking any of the inhabitants; notwithstanding these exploits, I
should have kept my balloon, and its properties a secret, if
Montgolfier had not made the art of flying so public.

On the 30th of September, when the College of Physicians chose their
annual officers, and dined sumptuously together, I filled my balloon,
brought it over the dome of their building, clapped the sling round
the golden ball at the top, fastening the other end of it to the
balloon, and immediately ascended with the whole college to an immense
height, where I kept them upwards of three months. You will naturally
inquire what they did for food such a length of time? To this I
answer, Had I kept them suspended twice the time, they would have
experienced no inconvenience on that account, so amply, or rather
extravagantly, had they spread their table for that day's feasting.

Though this was meant as an innocent frolic, it was productive of much
mischief to several respectable characters amongst the clergy,
undertakers, sextons, and grave-diggers: they were, it must be
acknowledged, sufferers; for it is a well-known fact, that during the
three months the college was suspended in the air, and therefore
incapable of attending their patients, no deaths happened, except a
few who fell before the scythe of Father Time, and some melancholy
objects who, perhaps to avoid some trifling inconvenience here, laid
the hands of violence upon themselves, and plunged into misery
infinitely greater than that which they hoped by such a rash step to
avoid, without a moment's consideration.

If the apothecaries had not been very active during the above time,
half the undertakers in all probability would have been bankrupts.



                             CHAPTER XIII

                         A TRIP TO THE NORTH

  /The Baron sails with Captain Phipps, attacks two large bears, and
  has a very narrow escape--Gains the confidence of these animals,
  and then destroys thousands of them; loads the ship with their
  hams and skins; makes presents of the former, and obtains a
  general invitation to all city feasts--A dispute between the
  Captain and the Baron, in which, from motives of politeness, the
  Captain is suffered to gain his point--The Baron declines the
  offer of a throne, and an empress into the bargain./

We all remember Captain Phipps's (now Lord Mulgrave) last voyage of
discovery to the north. I accompanied the captain, not as an officer,
but as a private friend. When we arrived in a high northern latitude I
was viewing the objects around me with the telescope which I
introduced to your notice in my Gibraltar adventures. I thought I saw
two large white bears in violent action upon a body of ice
considerably above the masts, and about half a league distance. I
immediately took my carbine, slung it across my shoulder, and ascended
the ice. When I arrived at the top, the unevenness of the surface made
my approach to those animals troublesome and hazardous beyond
expression: sometimes hideous cavities opposed me, which I was obliged
to spring over; in other parts the surface was as smooth as a mirror,
and I was continually falling: as I approached near enough to reach
them, I found they were only at play. I immediately began to calculate
the value of their skins, for they were each as large as a well-fed
ox: unfortunately, at the very instant I was presenting my carbine my
right foot slipped, I fell upon my back, and the violence of the blow
deprived me totally of my senses for nearly half an hour; however,
when I recovered, judge of my surprise at finding one of those large
animals I have been just describing had turned me upon my face, and
was just laying hold of the waistband of my breeches, which were then
new and made of leather: he was certainly going to carry me feet
foremost, God knows where, when I took this knife (showing a large
clasp knife) out of my side-pocket, made a chop at one of his hind
feet, and cut off three of his toes; he immediately let me drop and
roared most horribly. I took up my carbine and fired at him as he ran
off; he fell directly. The noise of the piece roused several thousand
of these white bears, who were asleep upon the ice within half a mile
of me; they came immediately to the spot. There was no time to be
lost. A most fortunate thought arrived in my pericranium just at that
instant. I took off the skin and head of the dead bear in half the
time that some people would be in skinning a rabbit, and wrapped
myself in it, placing my own head directly under Bruin's; the whole
herd came round me immediately, and my apprehensions threw me into a
most piteous situation to be sure: however, my scheme turned out a
most admirable one for my own safety. They all came smelling, and
evidently took me for a brother Bruin; I wanted nothing but bulk to
make an excellent counterfeit: however, I saw several cubs amongst
them not much larger than myself. After they had all smelt me, and the
body of their deceased companion, whose skin was now become my
protector, we seemed very sociable, and I found I could mimic all
their actions tolerably well; but at growling, roaring, and hugging
they were quite my masters. I began now to think that I might turn the
general confidence which I had created amongst these animals to my
advantage.

I had heard an old army surgeon say a wound in the spine was instant
death. I now determined to try the experiment, and had again recourse
to my knife, with which I struck the largest in the back of the neck,
near the shoulders, but under great apprehensions, not doubting but
the creature would, if he survived the stab, tear me to pieces.
However, I was remarkably fortunate, for he fell dead at my feet
without making the least noise. I was now resolved to demolish them
every one in the same manner, which I accomplished without the least
difficulty; for although they saw their companions fall, they had no
suspicion of either the cause or the effect. When they all lay dead
before me, I felt myself a second Samson, having slain my thousands.

To make short of the story, I went back to the ship, and borrowed
three parts of the crew to assist me in skinning them, and carrying
the hams on board, which we did in a few hours, and loaded the ship
with them. As to the other parts of the animals, they were thrown into
the sea, though I doubt not but the whole would eat as well as the
legs, were they properly cured.

As soon as we returned I sent some of the hams, in the captain's name,
to the Lords of Admiralty, others to the Lords of the Treasury, some
to the Lord Mayor and Corporation of London, a few to each of the
trading companies, and the remainder to my particular friends, from
all of whom I received warm thanks; but from the city I was honoured
with substantial notice, viz., an invitation to dine at Guildhall
annually on Lord Mayor's day.

The bear-skins I sent to the Empress of Russia, to clothe her majesty
and her court in the winter, for which she wrote me a letter of thanks
with her own hand, and sent it by an ambassador extraordinary,
inviting me to share the honours of her crown; but as I never was
ambitious of royal dignity, I declined her majesty's favour in the
politest terms. The same ambassador had orders to wait and bring my
answer to her majesty /personally/, upon which business he was absent
about three months: her majesty's reply convinced me of the strength
of her affections, and the dignity of her mind; her late indisposition
was entirely owing (as she, kind creature! was pleased to express
herself in a late conversation with the Prince Dolgoroucki) to my
cruelty. What the sex see in me I cannot conceive, but the Empress is
not the only female sovereign who has offered me her hand.

Some people have very illiberally reported that Captain Phipps did not
proceed as far as he might have done upon that expedition. Here it
becomes my duty to acquit him; our ship was in a very proper trim till
I loaded it with such an immense quantity of bear-skins and hams,
after which it would have been madness to have attempted to proceed
further, as we were now scarcely able to combat a brisk gale, much
less those mountains of ice which lay in the higher latitudes.

The captain has since often expressed a dissatisfaction that he had no
share in the honours of that day, which he emphatically called /bear-
skin day/. He has also been very desirous of knowing by what art I
destroyed so many thousands, without fatigue or danger to myself;
indeed, he is so ambitious of dividing the glory with me, that we have
actually quarrelled about it, and we are not now upon speaking terms.
He boldly asserts I had no merit in deceiving the bears, because I was
covered with one of their skins; nay, he declares there is not, in his
opinion, in Europe, so complete a bear naturally as himself among the
human species.

He is now a noble peer, and I am too well acquainted with good manners
to dispute so delicate a point with his lordship.



                             CHAPTER XIV

  /Our Baron excels Baron Tott beyond all comparison, yet fails in
  part of his attempt--Gets into disgrace with the Grand Seignior,
  who orders his head to be cut off--Escapes, and gets on board a
  vessel, in which he is carried to Venice--Baron Tott's origin,
  with some account of that great man's parents--Pope Ganganelli's
  amour--His Holiness fond of shell-fish./

Baron de Tott, in his Memoirs, makes as great a parade of a single act
as many travellers whose whole lives have been spent in seeing the
different parts of the globe; for my part, if I had been blown from
Europe to Asia from the mouth of a cannon, I should have boasted less
of it afterwards than he has done of only firing off a Turkish piece
of ordnance. What he says of this wonderful gun, as near as my memory
will serve me, is this:--"The Turks had placed below the castle, and
near the city, on the banks of Simois, a celebrated river, an enormous
piece of ordnance cast in brass, which would carry a marble ball of
eleven hundred pounds weight. I was inclined," says Tott, "to fire it,
but I was willing first to judge of its effect; the crowd about me
trembled at this proposal, as they asserted it would overthrow not
only the castle, but the city also; at length their fears in part
subsided, and I was permitted to discharge it. It required not less
than three hundred and thirty pounds' weight of powder, and the ball
weighed, as before mentioned, eleven hundredweight. When the engineer
brought the priming, the crowds who were about me retreated back as
fast as they could; nay, it was with the utmost difficulty I persuaded
the Pacha, who came on purpose, there was no danger: even the engineer
who was to discharge it by my direction was considerably alarmed. I
took my stand on some stone-work behind the cannon, gave the signal,
and felt a shock like that of earthquake! At the distance of three
hundred fathom the ball burst into three pieces; the fragments crossed
the strait, rebounded on the opposite mountain, and left the surface
of the water all in a foam through the whole breadth of the channel."

This, gentlemen, is, as near as I can recollect, Baron Tott's account
of the largest cannon in the known world. Now, when I was there not
long since, the anecdote of Tott's firing this tremendous piece was
mentioned as a proof of that gentleman's extraordinary courage.

I was determined not to be outdone by a Frenchman, therefore took this
very piece upon my shoulder, and, after balancing it properly, jumped
into the sea with it, and swam to the opposite shore, from whence I
unfortunately attempted to throw it back into its former place. I say
unfortunately, for it slipped a little in my hand just as I was about
to discharge it, and in consequence of that it fell into the middle of
the channel, where it now lies, without a prospect of ever recovering
it: and notwithstanding the high favour I was in with the Grand
Seignior, as before mentioned, this cruel Turk, as soon as he heard of
the loss of his famous piece of ordnance, issued an order to cut off
my head. I was immediately informed of it by one of the Sultanas, with
whom I was become a great favourite, and she secreted me in her
apartment while the officer charged with my execution was, with his
assistants, in search of me.

That very night I made my escape on board a vessel bound to Venice,
which was then weighing anchor to proceed on her voyage.

The last story, gentlemen, I am not fond of mentioning, as I
miscarried in the attempt, and was very near losing my life into the
bargain: however, as it contains no impeachment of my honour, I would
not withhold it from you.

Now, gentlemen, you all know me, and can have no doubt of my veracity.
I will entertain you with the origin of this same swaggering, bouncing
Tott.

His reputed father was a native of Berne, in Switzerland; his
profession was that of a surveyor of the streets, lanes, and alleys,
vulgarly called a scavenger. His mother was a native of the mountains
of Savoy, and had a most beautiful large wen on her neck, common to
both sexes in that part of the world; she left her parents when young,
and sought her fortune in the same city which gave his father birth;
she maintained herself while single by acts of kindness to our sex,
for she never was known to refuse them any favour they asked, provided
they did but pay her some compliment beforehand. This lovely couple
met by accident in the street, in consequence of their being both
intoxicated, for by reeling to one centre they threw each other down;
this created mutual abuse, in which they were complete adepts; they
were both carried to the watch-house, and afterwards to the house of
correction; they soon saw the folly of quarrelling, made it up, became
fond of each other, and married; but madam returning to her old
tricks, his father, who had high notions of honour, soon separated
himself from her; she then joined a family who strolled about with a
puppet-show. In time she arrived at Rome, where she kept an oyster-
stand. You have all heard, no doubt of Pope Ganganelli, commonly
called Clement XIV.: he was remarkably fond of oysters. One Good
Friday, as he was passing through this famous city in state, to assist
at high mass at St. Peter's Church, he saw this woman's oysters (which
were remarkably fine and fresh); he could not proceed without tasting
them. There were about five thousand people in his train; he ordered
them all to stop, and sent word to the church he could not attend mass
till next day; then alighting from his horse (for the Pope always
rides on horseback upon these occasions) he went into her stall, and
ate every oyster she had there, and afterwards retired into the cellar
where she had a few more. This subterraneous apartment was her
kitchen, parlour, and bed-chamber. He liked his situation so much that
he discharged all his attendants, and to make short of the story, His
Holiness passed the whole night there! Before they parted he gave her
absolution, not only for every sin she had, but all she might
hereafter commit.

/Now, gentlemen, I have his mother's word for it (and her honour
cannot be doubted), that Baron Tott is the fruit of that amour. When
Tott was born, his mother applied to His Holiness, as the father of
her child; he immediately placed him under the proper people, and as
he grew up gave him a gentleman's education, had him taught the use of
arms, procured him promotion in France, and a title, and when he died
he left him a good estate./



                              CHAPTER XV

  /A further account of the journey from Harwich to Helvoetsluys--
  Description of a number of marine objects never mentioned by any
  traveller before--Rocks seen in this passage equal to the Alps in
  magnitude; lobsters, crabs, &c., of an extraordinary magnitude--A
  woman's life saved--The cause of her falling into the sea--Dr.
  Hawes' directions followed with success./

I omitted several very material parts in my father's journey across
the English Channel to Holland, which, that they may not be totally
lost I will now faithfully give you in his own words, as I heard him
relate them to his friends several times.

"On my arrival," says my father, "at Helvoetsluys, I was observed to
breathe with some difficulty; upon the inhabitants inquiring into the
cause, I informed them that the animal upon whose back I rode from
Harwich across to their shore did not swim! Such is their peculiar
form and disposition, that they cannot float or move upon the surface
of the water; he ran with incredible swiftness upon the sands from the
shore, driving fish in millions before him, many of which were quite
different from any I had yet seen, carrying their heads at the
extremity of their tails. I crossed," continued he, "one prodigious
range of rocks, equal in height to the Alps (the tops or highest parts
of these marine mountains are said to be upwards of one hundred
fathoms below the surface of the sea), on the sides of which there was
a great variety of tall, noble trees, loaded with marine fruit, such
as lobsters, crabs, oysters, scollops, mussels, cockles, &c. &c.; some
of which were a cart-load singly! and none less than a porter's! All
those which are brought on shore and sold in our markets are of an
inferior dwarf kind, or, properly, waterfalls, /i.e./, fruit shook off
the branches of the tree it grows upon by the motion of the water, as
those in our gardens are by that of the wind! The lobster-trees
appeared the richest, but the crab and oysters were the tallest. The
periwinkle is a kind of shrub; it grows at the foot of the oyster-
tree, and twines round it as the ivy does the oak. I observed the
effect of several accidents by shipwreck, &c., particularly a ship
that had been wrecked by striking against a mountain or rock, the top
of which lay within three fathoms of the surface. As she sank she fell
upon her side, and forced a very large lobster-tree out of its place.
It was in the spring, when the lobsters were very young, and many of
them being separated by the violence of the shock, they fell upon a
crab-tree which was growing below them; they have, like the farina of
plants, united, and produced a fish resembling both. I endeavoured to
bring one with me, but it was too cumbersome, and my salt-water
Pegasus seemed much displeased at every attempt to stop his career
whilst I continued upon his back; besides, I was then, though
galloping over a mountain of rocks that lay about midway the passage,
at least five hundred fathom below the surface of the sea, and began
to find the want of air inconvenient, therefore I had no inclination
to prolong the time. Add to this, my situation was in other respects
very unpleasant; I met many large fish, who were, if I could judge by
their open mouths, not only able, but really wished to devour us; now,
as my Rosinante was blind, I had these hungry gentlemen's attempts to
guard against, in addition to my other difficulties.

"As we drew near the Dutch shore, and the body of water over our heads
did not exceed twenty fathoms, I thought I saw a human figure in a
female dress then lying on the sand before me with some signs of life;
when I came close I perceived her hand move: I took it into mine, and
brought her on shore as a corpse. An apothecary, who had just been
instructed by Dr. Hawes [the Baron's father must have lived very
lately if Dr. Hawes was his preceptor], of London, treated her
properly, and she recovered. She was the rib of a man who commanded a
vessel belonging to Helvoetsluys. He was just going out of port on a
voyage, when she, hearing he had got a mistress with him, followed him
in an open boat. As soon as she had got on the quarter-deck she flew
at her husband, and attempted to strike him with such impetuosity,
that he thought it most prudent to slip on one side, and let her make
the impression of her fingers upon the waves rather than his face: he
was not much out in his ideas of the consequence; for meeting no
opposition, she went directly overboard, and it was my unfortunate lot
to lay the foundation for bringing this happy pair together again.

"I can easily conceive what execrations the husband loaded me with
when, on his return, he found this gentle creature waiting his
arrival, and learned the means by which she came into the world again.
However, great as the injury is which I have done this poor devil, I
hope he will die in charity with me, as my motive was good, though the
consequences to him are, it must be confessed, horrible."



                             CHAPTER XVI

  /This is a very short chapter, but contains a fact for which the
  Baron's memory ought to be dear to every Englishman, especially
  those who may hereafter have the misfortune of being made
  prisoners of war./

On my return from Gibraltar I travelled by way of France to England.
Being a foreigner, this was not attended with any inconvenience to me.
I found, in the harbour of Calais, a ship just arrived with a number
of English sailors as prisoners of war. I immediately conceived an
idea of giving these brave fellows their liberty, which I accomplished
as follows:--After forming a pair of large wings, each of them forty
yards long, and fourteen wide, and annexing them to myself, I mounted
at break of day, when every creature, even the watch upon deck, was
fast asleep. As I hovered over the ship I fastened three grappling
irons to the tops of the three masts with my sling, and fairly lifted
her several yards out of the water, and then proceeded across to
Dover, where I arrived in half an hour! Having no further occasion for
these wings, I made them a present to the governor of Dover Castle,
where they are now exhibited to the curious.

As to the prisoners, and the Frenchmen who guarded them, they did not
awake till they had been near two hours on Dover Pier. The moment the
English understood their situation they changed places with their
guard, and took back what they had been plundered of, but no more, for
they were too generous to retaliate and plunder them in return.



                             CHAPTER XVII

  /Voyage eastward--The Baron introduces a friend who never deceived
  him: wins a hundred guineas by pinning his faith upon that
  friend's nose--Game started at sea--Some other circumstances which
  will, it is hoped, afford the reader no small degree of
  amusement./

In a voyage which I made to the East Indies with Captain Hamilton, I
took a favourite pointer with me; he was, to use a common phrase,
worth his weight in gold, for he never deceived me. One day when we
were, by the best observations we could make, at least three hundred
leagues from land, my dog pointed; I observed him for near an hour
with astonishment, and mentioned the circumstance to the captain and
every officer on board, asserting that we must be near land, for my
dog smelt game. This occasioned a general laugh; but that did not
alter in the least the good opinion I had of my dog. After much
conversation pro and con, I boldly told the captain I placed more
confidence in Tray's nose than I did in the eyes of every seaman on
board, and therefore proposed laying the sum I had agreed to pay for
my passage (viz., one hundred guineas) that we should find game within
half an hour. The captain (a good, hearty fellow) laughed again,
desired Mr. Crowford the surgeon, who was prepared, to feel my pulse;
he did so, and reported me in perfect health. The following dialogue
between them took place; I overheard it, though spoken low, and at
some distance.

CAPTAIN
His brain is turned; I cannot with honour accept his wager.

SURGEON
I am of a different opinion; he is quite sane, and depends more upon
the scent of his dog than he will upon the judgment of all the
officers on board; he will certainly lose, and he richly merits it.

CAPTAIN
Such a wager cannot be fair on my side; however, I'll take him up, if
I return his money afterwards.

During the above conversation Tray continued in the same situation,
and confirmed me still more in my former opinion. I proposed the wager
a second time, it was then accepted.

Done! and done! were scarcely said on both sides, when some sailors
who were fishing in the long-boat, which was made fast to the stern of
the ship, harpooned an exceeding large shark, which they brought on
board and began to cut up for the purpose of barrelling the oil, when,
behold, they found no less than /six brace of live partridges/ in this
animal's stomach!

They had been so long in that situation, that one of the hens was
sitting upon four eggs, and a fifth was hatching when the shark was
opened!!! This young bird we brought up by placing it with a litter of
kittens that came into the world a few minutes before! The old cat was
as fond of it as of any of her own four-legged progeny, and made
herself very unhappy, when it flew out of her reach, till it returned
again. As to the other partridges, there were four hens amongst them;
one or more were, during the voyage, constantly sitting, and
consequently we had plenty of game at the captain's table; and in
gratitude to poor Tray (for being a means of winning one hundred
guineas) I ordered him the bones daily, and sometimes a whole bird.



                            CHAPTER XVIII

                      A SECOND TRIP TO THE MOON.

  /A second visit (but an accidental one) to the moon--The ship
  driven by a whirlwind a thousand leagues above the surface of the
  water, where a new atmosphere meets them and carries them into a
  capacious harbour in the moon--A description of the inhabitants,
  and their manner of coming into the lunarian world--Animals,
  customs, weapons of war, wine, vegetables, &c./

I have already informed you of one trip I made to the moon, in search
of my silver hatchet; I afterwards made another in a much pleasanter
manner, and stayed in it long enough to take notice of several things,
which I will endeavour to describe as accurately as my memory will
permit.

I went on a voyage of discovery at the request of a distant relation,
who had a strange notion that there were people to be found equal in
magnitude to those described by Gulliver in the empire of BROBDIGNAG.
For my part I always treated that account as fabulous: however, to
oblige him, for he had made me his heir, I undertook it, and sailed
for the South seas, where we arrived without meeting with anything
remarkable, except some flying men and women who were playing at leap-
frog, and dancing minuets in the air.

On the eighteenth day after we had passed the Island of Otaheite,
mentioned by Captain Cook as the place from whence they brought Omai,
a hurricane blew our ship at least one thousand leagues above the
surface of the water, and kept it at the height till a fresh gale
arising filled the sails in every part, and onwards we travelled at a
prodigious rate; thus we proceeded above the clouds for six weeks. At
last we discovered a great land in the sky, like a shining island,
round and bright, where, coming into a convenient harbour, we went on
shore, and soon found it was inhabited. Below us we saw another earth,
containing cities, trees, mountains, rivers, seas, &c., which we
conjectured was this world which we had left. Here we saw huge figures
riding upon vultures of a prodigious size, and each of them having
three heads. To form some idea of the magnitude of these birds, I must
inform you that each of their wings is as wide and six times the
length of the main sheet of our vessel, which was about six hundred
tons burthen. Thus, instead of riding upon horses, as we do in this
world, the inhabitants of the moon (for we now found we were in Madam
Luna) fly about on these birds. The king, we found, was engaged in a
war with the sun, and he offered me a commission, but I declined the
honour his majesty intended me. Everything in /this/ world is of
extraordinary magnitude! a common flea being much larger than one of
our sheep: in making war, their principal weapons are radishes, which
are used as darts: those who are wounded by them die immediately.
Their shields are made of mushrooms, and their darts (when radishes
are out of season) of the tops of asparagus. Some of the natives of
the dog-star are to be seen here; commerce tempts them to ramble;
their faces are like large mastiffs', with their eyes near the lower
end or tip of their noses: they have no eyelids, but cover their eyes
with the end of their tongues when they go to sleep; they are
generally twenty feet high. As to the natives of the moon, none of
them are less in stature than thirty-six feet: they are not called the
human species, but the cooking animals, for they all dress their food
by fire, as we do, but lose not time at their meals, as they open
their left side, and place the whole quantity at once in their
stomach, then shut it again till the same day in the next month; for
they never indulge themselves with food more than twelve times a year,
or once a month. All but gluttons and epicures must prefer this method
to ours.

There is but one sex either of the cooking or any other animals in the
moon; they are all produced from trees of various sizes and foliage;
that which produces the cooking animal, or human species, is much more
beautiful than any of the others; it has large straight boughs and
flesh-coloured leaves, and the fruit it produces are nuts or pods,
with hard shells at least two yards long; when they become ripe, which
is known from their changing colour, they are gathered with great
care, and laid by as long as they think proper: when they choose to
animate the seed of these nuts, they throw them into a large cauldron
of boiling water, which opens the shells in a few hours, and out jumps
the creature.

Nature forms their minds for different pursuits before they come into
the world; from one shell comes forth a warrior, from another a
philosopher, from a third a divine, from a fourth a lawyer, from a
fifth a farmer, from a sixth a clown, &c. &c., and each of them
immediately begins to perfect themselves, by practising what they
before knew only in theory.

When they grow old they do not die, but turn into air, and dissolve
like smoke! As for their drink, they need none; the only evacuations
they have are insensible, and by their breath. They have but one
finger upon each hand, with which they perform everything in as
perfect a manner as we do who have four besides the thumb. Their heads
are placed under their right arm, and when are going to travel, or
about any violent exercise, they generally leave them at home, for
they can consult them at any distance; this is a very common practice;
and when those of rank or quality among the Lunarians have an
inclination to see what's going forward among the common people, they
stay at home, /i.e./, the body stays at home, and sends the head only,
which is suffered to be present /incog./, and return at pleasure with
an account of what has passed.

The stones of their grapes are exactly like hail; and I am perfectly
satisfied that when a storm or high wind in the moon shakes their
vines, and breaks the grapes from the stalks, the stones fall down and
form our hail showers. I would advise those who are of my opinion to
save a quantity of these stones when it hails next, and make Lunarian
wine. It is a common beverage at St. Luke's. Some material
circumstances I had nearly omitted. They put their bellies to the same
use as we do a sack, and throw whatever they have occasion for into
it, for they can shut and open it again when they please, as they do
their stomachs; they are not troubled with bowels, liver, heart, or
any other intestines, neither are they encumbered with clothes, nor is
there any part of their bodies unseemly or indecent to exhibit.

Their eyes they can take in and out of their places when they please,
and can see as well with them in their hand as in their head! and if
by any accident they lose or damage one, they can borrow or purchase
another, and see as clearly with it as their own. Dealers in eyes are
on that account very numerous in most parts of the moon, and in this
article alone all the inhabitants are whimsical: sometimes green and
sometimes yellow eyes are the fashion. I know these things appear
strange; but if the shadow of a doubt can remain on any person's mind,
I say, let him take a voyage there himself, and then he will know I am
a traveller of veracity.



                             CHAPTER XIX

  /The Baron crosses the Thames without the assistance of a bridge,
  ship, boat, balloon, or even his own will: rouses himself after a
  long nap, and destroys a monster who lived upon the destruction of
  others./

My first visit to England was about the beginning of the present
king's reign. I had occasion to go down to Wapping, to see some goods
shipped, which I was sending to some friends at Hamburgh; after that
business was over, I took the Tower Wharf in my way back. Here I found
the sun very powerful, and I was so much fatigued that I stepped into
one of the cannon to compose me, where I fell fast asleep. This was
about noon: it was the fourth of June; exactly at one o'clock these
cannon were all discharged in memory of the day. They had been all
charged that morning, and having no suspicion of my situation, I was
shot over the houses on the opposite side of the river, into a
farmer's yard, between Bermondsey and Deptford, where I fell upon a
large hay-stack, without waking, and continued there in a sound sleep
till hay became so extravagantly dear (which was about three months
after), that the farmer found it his interest to send his whole stock
to market: the stack I was reposing upon was the largest in the yard,
containing above five hundred load; they began to cut that first. I
woke with the voices of the people who had ascended the ladders to
begin at the top, and got up, totally ignorant of my situation: in
attempting to run away I fell upon the farmer to whom the hay
belonged, and broke his neck, yet received no injury myself. I
afterwards found, to my great consolation, that this fellow was a most
detestable character, always keeping the produce of his grounds for
extravagant markets.



                              CHAPTER XX

  /The Baron slips through the world: after paying a visit to Mount
  Etna he finds himself in the South Sea; visits Vulcan in his
  passage; gets on board a Dutchman; arrives at an island of cheese,
  surrounded by a sea of milk; describes some very extraordinary
  objects--Lose their compass; their ship slips between the teeth of
  a fish unknown in this part of the world; their difficulty in
  escaping from thence; arrive in the Caspian Sea--Starves a bear to
  death--A few waistcoat anecdotes--In this chapter, which is the
  longest, the Baron moralises upon the virtue of veracity./

Mr. Drybones' "Travels to Sicily," which I had read with great
pleasure, induced me to pay a visit to Mount Etna; my voyage to this
place was not attended with any circumstances worth relating. One
morning early, three or four days after my arrival, I set out from a
cottage where I had slept, within six miles of the foot of the
mountain, determined to explore the internal parts, if I perished in
the attempt. After three hours' hard labour I found myself at the top;
it was then, and had been for upwards of three weeks, raging: its
appearance in this state has been so frequently noticed by different
travellers, that I will not tire you with descriptions of objects you
are already acquainted with. I walked round the edge of the crater,
which appeared to be fifty times at least as capacious as the Devil's
Punch-Bowl near Petersfield, on the Portsmouth Road, but not so broad
at the bottom, as in that part it resembles the contracted part of a
funnel more than a punch-bowl. At last, having made up my mind, in I
sprang feet foremost; I soon found myself in a warm berth, and my body
bruised and burnt in various parts by the red-hot cinders, which, by
their violent ascent, opposed my descent: however, my weight soon
brought me to the bottom, where I found myself in the midst of noise
and clamour, mixed with the most horrid imprecations; after recovering
my senses, and feeling a reduction of my pain, I began to look about
me. Guess, gentlemen, my astonishment, when I found myself in the
company of Vulcan and his Cyclops, who had been quarrelling, for the
three weeks before mentioned, about the observation of good order and
due subordination, and which had occasioned such alarms for that space
of time in the world above. However, my arrival restored peace to the
whole society, and Vulcan himself did me the honour of applying
plasters to my wounds, which healed them immediately; he also placed
refreshments before me, particularly nectar, and other rich wines,
such as the gods and goddesses only aspire to. After this repast was
over Vulcan ordered Venus to show me every indulgence which my
situation required. To describe the apartment, and the couch on which
I reposed, is totally impossible, therefore I will not attempt it; let
it suffice to say, it exceeds the power of language to do it justice,
or speak of that kind-hearted goddess in any terms equal to her merit.

Vulcan gave me a very concise account of Mount Etna: he said it was
nothing more than an accumulation of ashes thrown from his forge; that
he was frequently obliged to chastise his people, at whom, in his
passion, he made it a practice to throw red-hot coals at home, which
they often parried with great dexterity, and then threw them up into
the world to place them out of his reach, for they never attempted to
assault him in return by throwing them back again. "Our quarrels,"
added he, "last sometimes three or four months, and these appearances
of coals or cinders in the world are what I find you mortals call
eruptions." Mount Vesuvius, he assured me, was another of his shops,
to which he had a passage three hundred and fifty leagues under the
bed of the sea, where similar quarrels produced similar eruptions. I
should have continued here as an humble attendant upon Madam Venus,
but some busy tattlers, who delight in mischief, whispered a tale in
Vulcan's ear, which roused in him a fit of jealousy not to be
appeased. Without the least previous notice he took me one morning
under his arm, as I was waiting upon Venus, agreeable to custom, and
carried me to an apartment I had never before seen, in which there
was, to all appearance, /a well/ with a wide mouth: over this he held
me at arm's length, and saying, "/Ungrateful mortal, return to the
world from whence you came/," without giving me the least opportunity
of reply, dropped me in the centre. I found myself descending with an
increasing rapidity, till the horror of my mind deprived me of all
reflection. I suppose I fell into a trance, from which I was suddenly
aroused by plunging into a large body of water illuminated by the rays
of the sun!!

I could, from my infancy, swim well, and play tricks in the water. I
now found myself in paradise, considering the horrors of mind I had
just been released from. After looking about me some time, I could
discover nothing but an expanse of sea, extending beyond the eye in
every direction; I also found it very cold, a different climate from
Master Vulcan's shop. At last I observed at some distance a body of
amazing magnitude, like a huge rock, approaching me; I soon discovered
it to be a piece of floating ice; I swam round it till I found a place
where I could ascend to the top, which I did, but not without some
difficulty. Still I was out of sight of land, and despair returned
with double force; however, before night came on I saw a sail, which
we approached very fast; when it was within a very small distance I
hailed them in German; they answered in Dutch. I then flung myself
into the sea, and they threw out a rope, by which I was taken on
board. I now inquired where we were, and was informed, in the great
Southern Ocean; this opened a discovery which removed all my doubts
and difficulties. It was now evident that I had passed from Mount Etna
through the centre of the earth to the South Seas: this, gentlemen,
was a much shorter cut than going round the world, and which no man
has accomplished, or ever attempted, but myself; however, the next
time I perform it I will be much more particular in my observations.

I took some refreshment, and went to rest. The Dutch are a very rude
sort of people; I related the Etna passage to the officers, exactly as
I have done to you, and some of them, particularly the Captain, seemed
by his grimace and half-sentence to doubt my veracity; however, as he
had kindly taken me on board his vessel, and was then in the very act
of administering to my necessities, I pocketed the affront.

I now in my turn began to inquire where they were bound? To which they
answered, they were in search of new discoveries; "/and if/," said
they, "/your story is true, a new passage is really discovered, and we
shall not return disappointed/." We were now exactly in Captain Cook's
first track, and arrived the next morning in Botany Bay. This place I
would by no means recommend to the English government as a receptacle
for felons, or place of punishment; it should rather be the reward of
merit, nature having most bountifully bestowed her best gifts upon it.

We stayed here but three days; the fourth after our departure a most
dreadful storm arose, which in a few hours destroyed all our sails,
splintered our bowsprit, and brought down our topmast; it fell
directly upon the box that enclosed our compass, which, with the
compass, was broken to pieces. Every one who has been at sea knows the
consequences of such a misfortune: we now were at a loss where to
steer. At length the storm abated, which was followed by a steady,
brisk gale, that carried us at least forty knots an hour for six
months! [we should suppose the Baron has made a little mistake, and
substituted /months/ for /days/] when we began to observe an amazing
change in everything about us: our spirits became light, our noses
were regaled with the most aromatic effluvia imaginable: the sea had
also changed its complexion, and from green became white!! Soon after
these wonderful alterations we saw land, and not at any great distance
an inlet, which we sailed up near sixty leagues, and found it wide and
deep, flowing with milk of the most delicious taste. Here we landed,
and soon found it was an island consisting of one large cheese: we
discovered this by one of the company fainting away as soon as we
landed: this man always had an aversion to cheese; when he recovered,
he desired the cheese to be taken from under his feet: upon
examination we found him perfectly right, for the whole island, as
before observed, was nothing but a cheese of immense magnitude! Upon
this the inhabitants, who are amazingly numerous, principally sustain
themselves, and it grows every night in proportion as it is consumed
in the day. Here seemed to be plenty of vines, with bunches of large
grapes, which, upon being pressed, yielded nothing but milk. We saw
the inhabitants running races upon the surface of the milk: they were
upright, comely figures, nine feet high, have three legs, and but one
arm; upon the whole, their form was graceful, and when they quarrel,
they exercise a straight horn, which grows in adults from the centre
of their foreheads, with great adroitness; they did not sink at all,
but ran and walked upon the surface of the milk, as we do upon a
bowling-green.

Upon this island of cheese grows great plenty of corn, the ears of
which produce loaves of bread, ready made, of a round form like
mushrooms. We discovered, in our rambles over this cheese, seventeen
other rivers of milk, and ten of wine.

After thirty-eight days' journey we arrived on the opposite side to
that on which we landed: here we found some blue mould, as cheese-
eaters call it, from whence spring all kinds of rich fruit; instead of
breeding mites it produced peaches, nectarines, apricots, and a
thousand delicious fruits which we are not acquainted with. In these
trees, which are of an amazing size, were plenty of birds' nests;
amongst others was a king-fisher's of prodigious magnitude; it was at
least twice the circumference of the dome of St. Paul's Church in
London. Upon inspection, this nest was made of huge trees curiously
joined together; there were, let me see (/for I make it a rule always
to speak within compass/), there were upwards of five hundred eggs in
the nest, and each of them was as large as four common hogsheads, or
eight barrels, and we could not only see, but hear the young ones
chirping within. Having, with great fatigue, cut open one of these
eggs, we let out a young one unfeathered, considerably larger than
twenty full-grown vultures. Just as we had given this youngster his
liberty the old kingfisher lighted, and seizing our captain, who had
been active in breaking the egg, in one of her claws, flew with him
above a mile high, and then let him drop into the sea, but not till
she had beaten all his teeth out of his mouth with her wings.

Dutchmen generally swim well: he soon joined us, and we retreated to
our ship. On our return we took a different route, and observed many
strange objects. We shot two wild oxen, each with one horn, also like
the inhabitants, except that it sprouted from between the eyes of
these animals; we were afterwards concerned at having destroyed them,
as we found, by inquiry, they tamed these creatures, and used them as
we do horses, to ride upon and draw their carriages; their flesh, we
were informed, is excellent, but useless where people live upon cheese
and milk. When we had reached within two days' journey of the ship we
observed three men hanging to a tall tree by their heels; upon
inquiring the cause of their punishment, I found they had all been
travellers, and upon their return home had deceived their friends by
describing places they never saw, and relating things that never
happened: this gave me no concern, /as I have ever confined myself to
facts/.

As soon as we arrived at the ship we unmoored, and set sail from this
extraordinary country, when, to our astonishment, all the trees upon
shore, of which there were a great number very tall and large, paid
their respects to us twice, bowing to exact time, and immediately
recovered their former posture, which was quite erect.

By what we could learn of this CHEESE, it was considerably larger than
the continent of all Europe!

After sailing three months we knew not where, being still without
compass, we arrived in a sea which appeared to be almost black: upon
tasting it we found it most excellent wine, and had great difficulty
to keep the sailors from getting drunk with it: however, in a few
hours we found ourselves surrounded by whales and other animals of an
immense magnitude, one of which appeared to be too large for the eye
to form a judgment of: we did not see him till we were close to him.
This monster drew our ship, with all her masts standing, and sails
bent, by suction into his mouth, between his teeth, which were much
larger and taller than the mast of a first-rate man-of-war. After we
had been in his mouth some time he opened it pretty wide, took in an
immense quantity of water, and floated our vessel, which was at least
500 tons burthen, into his stomach; here we lay as quiet as at anchor
in a dead calm. The air, to be sure, was rather warm, and very
offensive. We found anchors, cables, boats, and barges in abundance,
and a considerable number of ships, some laden and some not, which
this creature had swallowed. Everything was transacted by torch-light;
no sun, no moon, no planet, to make observations from. We were all
generally afloat and aground twice a-day; whenever he drank, it became
high water with us; and when he evacuated, we found ourselves aground;
upon a moderate computation, he took in more water at a single draught
than is generally to be found in the Lake of Geneva, though that is
above thirty miles in circumference. On the second day of our
confinement in these regions of darkness, I ventured at low water, as
we called it when the ship was aground, to ramble with the Captain,
and a few of the other officers, with lights in our hands; we met with
people of all nations, to the amount of upwards of ten thousand; they
were going to hold a council how to recover their liberty; some of
them having lived in this animal's stomach several years; there were
several children here who had never seen the world, their mothers
having lain in repeatedly in this warm situation. Just as the chairman
was going to inform us of the business upon which we were assembled,
this plaguy fish, becoming thirsty, drank in his usual manner; the
water poured in with such impetuosity, that we were all obliged to
retreat to our respective ships immediately, or run the risk of being
drowned; some were obliged to swim for it, and with difficulty saved
their lives. In a few hours after we were more fortunate, we met again
just after the monster had evacuated. I was chosen chairman, and the
first thing I did was to propose splicing two main-masts together, and
the next time he opened his mouth to be ready to wedge them in, so as
to prevent his shutting it. It was unanimously approved. One hundred
stout men were chosen upon this service. We had scarcely got our masts
properly prepared when an opportunity offered; the monster opened his
mouth, immediately the top of the mast was placed against the roof,
and the other end pierced his tongue, which effectually prevented him
from shutting his mouth. As soon as everything in his stomach was
afloat, we manned a few boats, who rowed themselves and us into the
world. The daylight, after, as near as we could judge, three months'
confinement in total darkness, cheered our spirits surprisingly. When
we had all taken our leave of this capacious animal, we mustered just
a fleet of ninety-five ships, of all nations, who had been in this
confined situation.

We left the two masts in his mouth, to prevent others being confined
in the same horrid gulf of darkness and filth. Our first object was to
learn what part of the world we were in; this we were for some time at
a loss to ascertain: at last I found, from former observations, that
we were in the Caspian Sea! which washes part of the country of the
Calmuck Tartars. How we came here is was impossible to conceive, as
this sea has no communication with any other. One of the inhabitants
of the Cheese Island, whom I had brought with me, accounted for it
thus:--that the monster in whose stomach we had been so long confined
had carried us here through some subterraneous passage; however, we
pushed to shore, and I was the first who landed. Just as I put my foot
upon the ground a large bear leaped upon me with its fore-paws; I
caught one in each hand, and squeezed him till he cried out most
lustily; however, in this position I held him till I starved him to
death. You may laugh, gentlemen, but this was soon accomplished, as I
prevented him licking his paws. From hence I travelled up to St.
Petersburg a second time: here an old friend gave me a most excellent
pointer, descended from the famous bitch before-mentioned, that
littered while she was hunting a hare. I had the misfortune to have
him shot soon after by a blundering sportsman, who fired at him
instead of a covey of partridges which he had just set. Of this
creature's skin I have had this waistcoat made (showing his
waistcoat), which always leads me involuntarily to game if I walk in
the fields in the proper season, and when I come within shot, /one of
the buttons constantly flies off, and lodges upon the spot where the
sport is/; and as the birds rise, being always primed and cocked, I
never miss them. Here are now but three buttons left. I shall have a
new set sewed on against the shooting season commences.

When a covey of partridges is disturbed in this manner, by the button
falling amongst them, they always rise from th