e ground in a direct
line before each other. I one day, by forgetting to take my ramrod out
of my gun, shot it straight through a leash, as regularly as if the
cook had spitted them. I had forgot to put in any shot, and the rod
had been made so hot with the powder, that the birds were completely
roasted by the time I reached home.

Since my arrival in England I have accomplished what I had very much
at heart, viz., providing for the inhabitant of the Cheese Island,
whom I had brought with me. My old friend, Sir William Chambers, who
is entirely indebted to me for all his ideas of Chinese gardening, by
a description of which he has gained such high reputation; I say,
gentlemen, in a discourse which I had with this gentlemen, he seemed
much distressed for a contrivance to light the lamps at the new
buildings, Somerset House; the common mode with ladders, he observed,
was both dirty and inconvenient. My native of the Cheese Island popped
into my head; he was only nine feet high when I first brought him from
his own country, but was now increased to ten and a half: I introduced
him to Sir William, and he is appointed to that honourable office. He
is also to carry, under a large cloak, a utensil in each coat pocket,
instead of those four which Sir William has /very properly/ fixed for
private purposes in so conspicuous a situation, the great quadrangle.

He has also obtained from Mr. PITT the situation of messenger to his
Majesty's lords of the bed-chamber, whose principal employment will
/now/ be, divulging the secrets of the Royal household to their
/worthy/ Patron.



                              SUPPLEMENT

  /Extraordinary flight on the back of an eagle, over France to
  Gibraltar, South and North America, the Polar Regions, and back to
  England, within six-and-thirty hours./

About the beginning of his present Majesty's reign I had some business
with a distant relation who then lived on the Isle of Thanet; it was a
family dispute, and not likely to be finished soon. I made it a
practice during my residence there, the weather being fine, to walk
out every morning. After a few of these excursions I observed an
object upon a great eminence about three miles distant: I extended my
walk to it, and found the ruins of an ancient temple: I approached it
with admiration and astonishment; the traces of grandeur and
magnificence which yet remained were evident proofs of its former
splendour: here I could not help lamenting the ravages and
devastations of time, of which that once noble structure exhibited
such a melancholy proof. I walked round it several times, meditating
on the fleeting and transitory nature of all terrestrial things; on
the eastern end were the remains of a lofty tower, near forty feet
high, overgrown with ivy, the top apparently flat; I surveyed it on
every side very minutely, thinking that if I could gain its summit I
should enjoy the most delightful prospect of the circumjacent country.
Animated with this hope, I resolved, if possible, to gain the summit,
which I at length effected by means of the ivy, though not without
great difficulty and danger; the top I found covered with this
evergreen, except a large chasm in the middle. After I had surveyed
with pleasing wonder the beauties of art and nature that conspired to
enrich the scene, curiosity prompted me to sound the opening in the
middle, in order to ascertain its depth, as I entertained a suspicion
that it might probably communicate with some unexplored subterranean
cavern in the hill; but having no line I was at a loss how to proceed.
After revolving the matter in my thoughts for some time, I resolved to
drop a stone down and listen to the echo: having found one that
answered my purpose I placed myself over the hole, with one foot on
each side, and stooping down to listen, I dropped the stone, which I
had no sooner done than I heard a rustling below, and suddenly a
monstrous eagle put up its head right opposite my face, and rising up
with irresistible force, carried me away seated on its shoulders: I
instantly grasped it round the neck, which was large enough to fill my
arms, and its wings, when extended, were ten yards from one extremity
to the other. As it rose with a regular ascent, my seat was perfectly
easy, and I enjoyed the prospect below with inexpressible pleasure. It
hovered over Margate for some time, was seen by several people, and
many shots were fired at it; one ball hit the heel of my shoe, but did
me no injury. It then directed its course to Dover cliff, where it
alighted, and I thought of dismounting, but was prevented by a sudden
discharge of musketry from a party of marines that were exercising on
the beach; the balls flew about my head, and rattled on the feathers
of the eagle like hail-stones, yet I could not perceive it had
received any injury. It instantly reascended and flew over the sea
towards Calais, but so very high that the Channel seemed to be no
broader than the Thames at London Bridge. In a quarter of an hour I
found myself over a thick wood in France, where the eagle descended
very rapidly, which caused me to slip down to the back part of its
head; but alighting on a large tree, and raising its head, I recovered
my seat as before, but saw no possibility of disengaging myself
without the danger of being killed by the fall; so I determined to sit
fast, thinking it would carry me to the Alps, or some other high
mountain, where I could dismount without any danger. After resting a
few minutes it took wing, flew several times round the wood, and
screamed loud enough to be heard across the English Channel. In a few
minutes one of the same species arose out of the wood, and flew
directly towards us; it surveyed me with evident marks of displeasure,
and came very near me. After flying several times round, they both
directed their course to the south-west. I soon observed that the one
I rode upon could not keep pace with the other, but inclined towards
the earth, on account of my weight; its companion perceiving this,
turned round and placed itself in such a position that the other could
rest its head on its rump; in this manner they proceeded till noon,
when I saw the rock of Gibraltar very distinctly. The day being clear,
notwithstanding my degree of elevation, the earth's surface appeared
just like a map, where land, sea, lakes, rivers, mountains, and the
like were perfectly distinguishable; and having some knowledge of
geography, I was at no loss to determine what part of the globe I was
in.

Whilst I was contemplating this wonderful prospect a dreadful howling
suddenly began all around me, and in a moment I was invested by
thousands of small, black, deformed, frightful looking creatures, who
pressed me on all sides in such a manner that I could neither move
hand or foot: but I had not been in their possession more than ten
minutes when I heard the most delightful music that can possibly be
imagined, which was suddenly changed into a noise the most awful and
tremendous, to which the report of cannon, or the loudest claps of
thunder could bear no more proportion than the gentle zephyrs of the
evening to the most dreadful hurricane; but the shortness of its
duration prevented all those fatal effects which a prolongation of it
would certainly have been attended with.

The music commenced, and I saw a great number of the most beautiful
little creatures seize the other party, and throw them with great
violence into something like a snuff-box, which they shut down, and
one threw it away with incredible velocity; then turning to me, he
said they whom he had secured were a party of devils, who had wandered
from their proper habitation; and that the vehicle in which they were
enclosed would fly with unabating rapidity for ten thousand years,
when it would burst of its own accord, and the devils would recover
their liberty and faculties, as at the present moment. He had no
sooner finished this relation than the music ceased, and they all
disappeared, leaving me in a state of mind bordering on the confines
of despair.

When I had recomposed myself a little, and looking before me with
inexpressible pleasure, I observed that the eagles were preparing to
light on the peak of Teneriffe: they descended on the top of the rock,
but seeing no possible means of escape if I dismounted determined me
to remain where I was. The eagles sat down seemingly fatigued, when
the heat of the sun soon caused them both to fall asleep, nor did I
long resist its fascinating power. In the cool of the evening, when
the sun had retired below the horizon, I was roused from sleep by the
eagle moving under me; and having stretched myself along its back, I
sat up, and reassumed my travelling position, when they both took
wing, and having placed themselves as before, directed their course to
South America. The moon shining bright during the whole night, I had a
fine view of all the islands in those seas.

About the break of day we reached the great continent of America, that
part called Terra Firma, and descended on the top of a very high
mountain. At this time the moon, far distant in the west, and obscured
by dark clouds, but just afforded light sufficient for me to discover
a kind of shrubbery all around, bearing fruit something like cabbages,
which the eagles began to feed on very eagerly. I endeavoured to
discover my situation, but fogs and passing clouds involved me in the
thickest darkness, and what rendered the scene still more shocking was
the tremendous howling of wild beasts, some of which appeared to be
very near: however, I determined to keep my seat, imagining that the
eagle would carry me away if any of them should make a hostile
attempt. When daylight began to appear, I thought of examining the
fruit which I had seen the eagles eat, and as some was hanging which I
could easily come at, I took out my knife and cut a slice; but how
great was my surprise to see that it had all the appearance of roast
beef regularly mixed, both fat and lean! I tasted it, and found it
well flavoured and delicious, then cut several large slices and put in
my pocket, where I found a crust of bread which I had brought from
Margate; took it out, and found three musket-balls that had been
lodged in it on Dover cliff. I extracted them, and cutting a few
slices more, made a hearty meal of bread and cold beef fruit. I then
cut down two of the largest that grew near me, and tying them together
with one of my garters, hung them over the eagle's neck for another
occasion, filling my pockets at the same time. While I was settling
these affairs I observed a large fruit like an inflated bladder, which
I wished to try an experiment upon: and striking my knife into one of
them, a fine pure liquor like Hollands gin rushed out, which the
eagles observing, eagerly drank up from the ground. I cut down the
bladder as fast as I could, and saved about half a pint in the bottom
of it, which I tasted, and could not distinguish it from the best
mountain wine. I drank it all, and found myself greatly refreshed. By
this time the eagles began to stagger against the shrubs. I
endeavoured to keep my seat, but was soon thrown to some distance
among the bushes. In attempting to rise I put my hand upon a large
hedgehog, which happened to lie among the grass upon its back: it
instantly closed round my hand, so that I found it impossible to shake
it off. I struck it several times against the ground without effect;
but while I was thus employed I heard a rustling among the shrubbery,
and looking up, I saw a huge animal within three yards of me; I could
make no defence, but held out both my hands, when it rushed upon me,
and seized that on which the hedgehog was fixed. My hand being soon
relieved, I ran to some distance, where I saw the creature suddenly
drop down and expire with the hedgehog in its throat. When the danger
was past I went to view the eagles, and found them lying on the grass
fast asleep, being intoxicated with the liquor they had drank. Indeed,
I found myself considerably elevated by it, and seeing everything
quiet, I began to search for some more, which I soon found; and having
cut down two large bladders, about a gallon each, I tied them
together, and hung them over the neck of the other eagle, and the two
smaller ones I tied with a cord round my own waist. Having secured a
good stock of provisions, and perceiving the eagles begin to recover,
I again took my seat. In half an hour they arose majestically from the
place, without taking the least notice of their incumbrance. Each
reassumed its former station; and directing their course to the
northward, they crossed the Gulf of Mexico, entered North America, and
steered directly for the Polar regions, which gave me the finest
opportunity of viewing this vast continent that can possibly be
imagined.

Before we entered the frigid zone the cold began to affect me; but
piercing one of my bladders, I took a draught, and found that it could
make no impression on me afterwards. Passing over Hudson's Bay, I saw
several of the Company's ships lying at anchor, and many tribes of
Indians marching with their furs to market.

By this time I was so reconciled to my seat, and become such an expert
rider, that I could sit up and look around me; but in general I lay
along the eagle's neck, grasping it in my arms, with my hands immersed
in its feathers, in order to keep them warm.

In those cold climates I observed that the eagles flew with greater
rapidity, in order, I suppose, to keep their blood in circulation. In
passing Baffin's Bay I saw several large Greenlandmen to the eastward,
and many surprising mountains of ice in those seas.

While I was surveying these wonders of nature it occurred to me that
this was a good opportunity to discover the north-west passage, if any
such thing existed, and not only obtain the reward offered by
government, but the honour of a discovery pregnant with so many
advantages to every European nation. But while my thoughts were
absorbed in this pleasing reverie I was alarmed by the first eagle
striking its head against a solid transparent substance, and in a
moment that which I rode experienced the same fate, and both fell down
seemingly dead.

Here our lives must inevitably have terminated, had not a sense of
danger, and the singularity of my situation, inspired me with a degree
of skill and dexterity which enabled us to fall near two miles
perpendicular with as little inconveniency as if we had been let down
with a rope: for no sooner did I perceive the eagles strike against a
frozen cloud, which is very common near the poles, than (they being
close together) I laid myself along the back of the foremost, and took
hold of its wings to keep them extended, at the same time stretching
out my legs behind to support the wings of the other. This had the
desired effect, and we descended very safe on a mountain of ice, which
I supposed to be about three miles above the level of the sea.

I dismounted, unloaded the eagles, opened one of the bladders, and
administered some of the liquor to each of them, without once
considering that the horrors of destruction seemed to have conspired
against me. The roaring of waves, crashing of ice, and the howling of
bears, conspired to form a scene the most awful and tremendous: but
notwithstanding this, my concern for the recovery of the eagles was so
great, that I was insensible of the danger to which I was exposed.
Having rendered them every assistance in my power, I stood over them
in painful anxiety, fully sensible that it was only by means of them
that I could possibly be delivered from these abodes of despair.

But suddenly a monstrous bear began to roar behind me, with a voice
like thunder. I turned round, and seeing the creature just ready to
devour me, having the bladder of liquor in my hands, through fear I
squeezed it so hard, that it burst, and the liquor flying in the eyes
of the animal, totally deprived it of sight. It instantly turned from
me, ran away in a state of distraction, and soon fell over a precipice
of ice into the sea, where I saw it no more.

The danger being over, I again turned my attention to the eagles, whom
I found in a fair way of recovery, and suspecting that they were faint
for want of victuals, I took one of the beef fruit, cut it into small
slices, and presented them with it, which they devoured with avidity.

Having given them plenty to eat and drink, and disposed of the
remainder of my provision, I took possession of my seat as before.
After composing myself, and adjusting everything in the best manner, I
began to eat and drink very heartily; and through the effects of the
mountain wine, as I called it, was very cheerful, and began to sing a
few verses of a song which I had learned when I was a boy: but the
noise soon alarmed the eagles, who had been asleep, through the
quantity of liquor which they had drank, and they rose seemingly much
terrified. Happily for me, however, when I was feeding them I had
accidentally turned their heads towards the south-east, which course
they pursued with a rapid motion. In a few hours I saw the Western
Isles, and soon after had the inexpressible pleasure of seeing Old
England. I took no notice of the seas or islands over which I passed.

The eagles descended gradually as they drew near the shore, intending,
as I supposed, to alight on one of the Welsh mountains; but when they
came to the distance of about sixty yards two guns were fired at them,
loaded with balls, one of which took place in a bladder of liquor that
hung to my waist; the other entered the breast of the foremost eagle,
who fell to the ground, while that which I rode, having received no
injury, flew away with amazing swiftness.

This circumstance alarmed me exceedingly, and I began to think it was
impossible for me to escape with my life; but recovering a little, I
once more looked down upon the earth, when, to my inexpressible joy, I
saw Margate at a little distance, and the eagle descending on the old
tower whence it had carried me on the morning of the day before. It no
sooner came down than I threw myself off, happy to find that I was
once more restored to the world. The eagle flew away in a few minutes,
and I sat down to compose my fluttering spirits, which I did in a few
hours.

I soon paid a visit to my friends, and related these adventures.
Amazement stood in every countenance; their congratulations on my
returning in safety were repeated with an unaffected degree of
pleasure, and we passed the evening as we are doing now, every person
present paying the highest compliments to my COURAGE and VERACITY.





                          THE SECOND VOLUME



                               PREFACE

                         TO THE SECOND VOLUME

Baron Munchausen has certainly been productive of much benefit to the
literary world; the numbers of egregious travellers have been such,
that they demanded a very Gulliver to surpass them. If Baron de Tott
dauntlessly discharged an enormous piece of artillery, the Baron
Munchausen has done more; he has taken it and swam with it across the
sea. When travellers are solicitous to be the heroes of their own
story, surely they must admit to superiority, and blush at seeing
themselves out-done by the renowned Munchausen: I doubt whether any
one hitherto, Pantagruel, Gargantua, Captain Lemuel, or De Tott, has
been able to out-do our Baron in this species of excellence: and as at
present our curiosity seems much directed to the interior of Africa,
it must be edifying to have the real relation of Munchausen's
adventures there before any further intelligence arrives; for he seems
to adapt himself and his exploits to the spirit of the times, and
recounts what he thinks should be most interesting to his auditors.

I do not say that the Baron, in the following stories, means a satire
on any political matters whatever. No; but if the reader understands
them so, I cannot help it.

If the Baron meets with a parcel of negro ships carrying whites into
slavery to work upon their plantations in a cold climate, should we
therefore imagine that he intends a reflection on the present traffic
in human flesh? And that, if the negroes should do so, it would be
simple justice, as retaliation is the law of God! If we were to think
this a reflection on any present commercial or political matter, we
should be tempted to imagine, perhaps, some political ideas conveyed
in every page, in every sentence of the whole. Whether such things are
or are not the intentions of the Baron the reader must judge.

We have had not only wonderful travellers in this vile world, but
splenetic travellers, and of these not a few, and also conspicuous
enough. It is a pity, therefore, that the Baron has not endeavoured to
surpass them also in this species of story-telling. Who is it can read
the travels of Smellfungus, as Sterne calls him, without admiration?
To think that a person from the North of Scotland should travel
through some of the finest countries in Europe, and find fault with
everything he meets--nothing to please him! And therefore, methinks,
the Tour to the Hebrides is more excusable, and also perhaps Mr.
Twiss's Tour in Ireland. Dr. Johnson, bred in the luxuriance of
London, with more reason should become cross and splenetic in the
bleak and dreary regions of the Hebrides.

The Baron, in the following work, seems to be sometimes philosophical;
his account of the language of the interior of Africa, and its analogy
with that of the inhabitants of the moon, show him to be profoundly
versed in the etymological antiquities of nations, and throw new light
upon the abstruse history of the ancient Scythians, and the
Collectanea.

His endeavour to abolish the custom of eating live flesh in the
interior of Africa, as described in Bruce's Travels, is truly humane.
But far be it from me to suppose, that by Gog and Magog and the Lord
Mayor's show he means a satire upon any person or body of persons
whatever: or, by a tedious litigated trial of blind judges and dumb
matrons following a wild goose chase all round the world, he should
glance at any trial whatever.

Nevertheless, I must allow that it was extremely presumptuous in
Munchausen to tell half the sovereigns of the world that they were
wrong, and advise them what they ought to do; and that instead of
ordering millions of their subjects to massacre one another, it would
be more to their interest to employ their forces in concert for the
general good; as if he knew better than the Empress of Russia, the
Grand Vizier, Prince Potemkin, or any other butcher in the world. But
that he should be a royal Aristocrat, and take the part of the injured
Queen of France in the present political drama, I am not at all
surprised; but I suppose his mind was fired by reading the pamphlet
written by Mr. Burke.



                             CHAPTER XXI

  /The Baron insists on the veracity of his former Memoirs--Forms a
  design of making discoveries in the interior parts of Africa--His
  discourse with Hilaro Frosticos about it--His conversation with
  Lady Fragrantia--The Baron goes, with other persons of
  distinction, to Court; relates an anecdote of the Marquis de
  Bellecourt./

All that I have related before, said the Baron, is gospel; and if
there be any one so hardy as to deny it, I am ready to fight him with
any weapon he pleases. Yes, cried he, in a more elevated tone, as he
started from his seat, I will condemn him to swallow this decanter,
glass and all perhaps, and filled with kerren-wasser [a kind of ardent
spirit distilled from cherries, and much used in some parts of
Germany]. Therefore, my dear friends and companions, have confidence
in what I say, and pay honour to the tales of Munchausen. A traveller
has a right to relate and embellish his adventures as he pleases, and
it is very unpolite to refuse that deference and applause they
deserve.

Having passed some time in England since the completion of my former
memoirs, I at length began to revolve in my mind what a prodigious
field of discovery must be in the interior part of Africa. I could not
sleep with the thoughts of it; I therefore determined to gain every
proper assistance from Government to penetrate the celebrated source
of the Nile, and assume the viceroyship of the interior kingdoms of
Africa, or, at least, the great realm of Monomotapa. It was happy for
me that I had one most powerful friend at court, whom I shall call the
illustrious Hilaro Frosticos. You perchance know him not by that name;
but we had a language among ourselves, as well we may, for in the
course of my peregrinations I have acquired precisely nine hundred and
ninety-nine leash of languages. What! gentlemen, do you stare? Well, I
allow there are not so many languages spoken in this vile world; but
then, have I not been in the moon? and trust me, whenever I write a
treatise upon education, I shall delineate methods of inculcating
whole dozens of languages at once, French, Spanish, Greek, Hebrew,
Cherokee, &c., in such a style as will shame all the pedagogues
existing.

Having passed a whole night without being able to sleep for the vivid
imagination of African discoveries, I hastened to the levee of my
illustrious friend Hilaro Frosticos, and having mentioned my intention
with all the vigour of fancy, he gravely considered my words, and
after some awful meditations thus he spoke: /Olough, ma genesat, istum
fullanah, cum dera kargos belgarasah eseum balgo bartigos
triangulissimus!/ However, added he, it behoveth thee to consider and
ponder well upon the perils and the multitudinous dangers in the way
of that wight who thus advanceth in all the perambulation of
adventures: and verily, most valiant sire and Baron, I hope thou wilt
demean thyself with all that laudable gravity and precaution which, as
is related in the three hundred and forty-seventh chapter of the
Prophilactics, is of more consideration than all the merit in this
terraqueous globe. Yes, most truly do I advise thee unto thy good, and
speak unto thee, most valiant Munchausen, with the greatest esteem,
and wish thee to succeed in thy voyage; for it is said, that in the
interior realms of Africa there are tribes that can see but just three
inches and a half beyond the extremity of their noses; and verily thou
shouldest moderate thyself, even sure and slow; they stumble who walk
fast. But we shall bring you unto the Lady Fragrantia, and have her
opinion of the matter. He then took from his pocket a cap of dignity,
such as described in the most honourable and antique heraldry, and
placing it upon my head, addressed me thus:--"As thou seemest again to
revive the spirit of ancient adventure, permit me to place upon thy
head this favour, as a mark of the esteem in which I hold thy valorous
disposition."

The Lady Fragrantia, my dear friends, was one of the most divine
creatures in all Great Britain, and was desperately in love with me.
She was drawing my portrait upon a piece of white satin, when the most
noble Hilaro Frosticos advanced. He pointed to the cap of dignity
which he had placed upon my head. "I do declare, Hilaro," said the
lovely Fragrantia, "'tis pretty, 'tis interesting; I love you, and I
like you, my dear Baron," said she, putting on another plume: "this
gives it an air more delicate and more fantastical. I do thus, my dear
Munchausen, as your friend, yet you can reject or accept my present
just as you please; but I like the fancy, 'tis a good one, and I mean
to improve it: and against whatever enemies you go, I shall have the
sweet satisfaction to remember you bear my favour on your head!"

I snatched it with trepidation, and gracefully dropping on my knees, I
three times kissed it with all the rapture of romantic love. "I
swear," cried I, "by thy bright eyes, and by the lovely whiteness of
thine arm, that no savage, tyrant, or enemy upon the face of the earth
shall despoil me of this favour, while one drop of the blood of the
Munchausens doth circulate in my veins! I will bear it triumphant
through the realms of Africa, whither I now intend my course, and make
it respected, even in the court of Prester John."

"I admire your spirit," replied she, "and shall use my utmost interest
at court to have you despatched with every pomp, and as soon as
possible; but here comes a most brilliant company indeed, Lady
Carolina Wilhelmina Amelia Skeggs, Lord Spigot, and Lady Faucet, and
the Countess of Belleair."

After the ceremonies of introduction to this company were over, we
proceeded to consult upon the business; and as the cause met with
general applause, it was immediately determined that I should proceed
without delay, as soon as I obtained the sovereign approbation. "I am
convinced," said Lord Spigot, "that if there be any thing really
unknown and worthy of our most ardent curiosity, it must be in the
immense regions of Africa; that country, which seems to be the oldest
on the globe, and yet with the greater part of which we are almost
utterly unacquainted; what prodigious wealth of gold and diamonds must
not lie concealed in those torrid regions, when the very rivers on the
coast pour forth continual specimens of golden sand! 'Tis my opinion,
therefore, that the Baron deserves the applause of all Europe for his
spirit, and merits the most powerful assistance of the sovereign."

So flattering an approbation, you may be sure, was delightful to my
heart, and with every confidence and joy I suffered them to take me to
court that instant. After the usual ceremonies of introduction,
suffice it to say that I met with every honour and applause that my
most sanguine expectations could demand. I had always a taste for the
fashionable /je ne sais quoi/ of the most elegant society, and in the
presence of all the sovereigns of Europe I ever found myself quite at
home, and experienced from the whole court the most flattering esteem
and admiration. I remember, one particular day, the fate of the
unfortunate Marquis de Bellecourt. The Countess of Rassinda, who
accompanied him, looked most divinely. "Yes, I am confident," said the
Marquis de Bellecourt to me, "that I have acted according to the
strictest sentiments of justice and of loyalty to my sovereign. What
stronger breast-plate than a heart untainted? and though I did not
receive a word nor a look, yet I cannot think--no, it were impossible
to be misrepresented. Conscious of my own integrity, I will try again
--I will go boldly up." The Marquis de Bellecourt saw the opportunity;
he advanced three paces, put his hand upon his breast and bowed.
"Permit me," said he, "with the most profound respect, to----." His
tongue faltered--he could scarcely believe his sight, for at that
moment the whole company were moving out of the room. He found himself
almost alone, deserted by every one. "What!" said he, "and did he turn
upon his heel with the most marked contempt? Would he not speak to me?
Would he not even hear me utter a word in my defence?" His heart died
within him--not even a look, a smile from any one. "My friends! Do
they not know me? Do they not see me? Alas! they fear to catch the
contagion of my----. Then," said he, "adieu!--'tis more than I can
bear. I shall go to my country seat, and never, never will return.
Adieu, fond court, adieu!--"

The venerable Marquis de Bellecourt stopped for a moment ere he
entered his carriage. Thrice he looked back, and thrice he wiped the
starting tear from his eye. "Yes," said he, "for once, at least, truth
shall be found--in the bottom of a well!"

Peace to thy ghost, most noble marquis! a King of kings shall pity
thee; and thousands who are yet unborn shall owe their happiness to
thee, and have cause to bless the thousands, perhaps, that shall never
even know thy name; but Munchausen's self shall celebrate thy glory!



                             CHAPTER XXII

  /Preparations for the Baron's expedition into Africa--Description
  of his chariot; the beauties of its interior decorations; the
  animals that drew it, and the mechanism of the wheels./

Everything being concluded, and having received my instructions for
the voyage, I was conducted by the illustrious Hilaro Frosticos, the
Lady Fragrantia, and a prodigious crowd of nobility, and placed
sitting upon the summit of the whale's bones at the palace; and having
remained in this situation for three days and three nights, as a trial
ordeal, and a specimen of my perseverance and resolution, the third
hour after midnight they seated me in the chariot of Queen Mab. It was
a prodigious dimension, large enough to contain more stowage than the
tun of Heidelberg, and globular like a hazel-nut: in fact, it seemed
to be really a hazel-nut grown to a most extravagant dimension, and
that a great worm of proportionable enormity had bored a hole in the
shell. Through this same entrance I was ushered. It was as large as a
coach-door, and I took my seat in the centre, a kind of chair self-
balanced without touching anything, like the fancied tomb of Mahomet.
The whole interior surface of the nutshell appeared a luminous
representation of all the stars of heaven, the fixed stars, the
planets, and a comet. The stars were as large as those worn by our
first nobility, and the comet, excessively brilliant, seemed as if you
had assembled all the eyes of the beautiful girls in the kingdom, and
combined them, like a peacock's plumage, into the form of a comet--
that is, a globe, and a bearded tail to it, diminishing gradually to a
point. This beautiful constellation seemed very sportive and
delightful. It was much in the form of a tadpole! and, without
ceasing, went, full of playful giddiness, up and down, all over the
heaven on the concave surface of the nutshell. One time it would be at
that part of the heavens under my feet, and in the next minute would
be over my head. It was never at rest, but for ever going east, west,
north, or south, and paid no more respect to the different worlds than
if they were so many lanterns without reflectors. Some of them he
would dash against and push out of their places; others he would burn
up and consume to ashes: and others again he would split into
fritters, and their fragments would instantly take a globular form,
like spilled quicksilver, and become satellites to whatever other
worlds they should happen to meet with in their career. In short, the
whole seemed an epitome of the creation, past, present, and future;
and all that passes among the stars during one thousand years was here
generally performed in as many seconds.

I surveyed all the beauties of the chariot with wonder and delight.
"Certainly," cried I, "this is heaven in miniature!" In short, I took
the reins in my hand. But before I proceed on my adventures, I shall
mention the rest of my attendant furniture. The chariot was drawn by a
team of nine bulls harnessed to it, three after three. In the first
rank was a most tremendous bull named John Mowmowsky; the rest were
called Jacks in general, but not dignified by any particular
denomination. They were all shod for the journey, not indeed like
horses, with iron, or as bullocks commonly are, to drag on a cart; but
were shod with men's skulls. Each of their feet was, hoof and all,
crammed into a man's head, cut off for the purpose, and fastened
therein with a kind of cement or paste, so that the skull seemed to be
a part of the foot and hoof of the animal. With these skull-shoes the
creatures could perform astonishing journeys, and slide upon the
water, or upon the ocean, with great velocity. The harnesses were
fastened with golden buckles, and decked with studs in a superb style,
and the creatures were ridden by nine postillions, crickets of a great
size, as large as monkeys, who sat squat upon the heads of the bulls,
and were continually chirping at a most infernal rate, loud in
proportion to their bodies.

The wheels of the chariot consisted of upwards of ten thousand
springs, formed so as to give the greater impetuosity to the vehicle,
and were more complex than a dozen clocks like that of Strasburgh. The
external of the chariot was adorned with banners, and a superb festoon
of laurel that formerly shaded me on horseback. And now, having given
you a very concise description of my machine for travelling into
Africa, which you must allow to be far superior to the apparatus of
Monsieur Vaillant, I shall proceed to relate the exploits of my
voyage.



                            CHAPTER XXIII

  /The Baron proceeds on his voyage--Convoys a squadron to Gibraltar
  --Declines the acceptance of the island of Candia--His chariot
  damaged by Pompey's Pillar and Cleopatra's Needle--The Baron out-
  does Alexander--Breaks his chariot, and splits a great rock at the
  Cape of Good Hope./

Taking the reins in my hand, while the music gave a general salute, I
cracked my whip, away they went, and in three hours I found myself
just between the Isle of Wight and the main land of England. Here I
remained four days, until I had received part of my accompaniment,
which I was ordered to take under my convoy. 'Twas a squadron of men-
of-war that had been a long time prepared for the Baltic, but which
were now destined for the Mediterranean. By the assistance of large
hooks and eyes, exactly such as are worn in our hats, but of a greater
size, some hundredweight each, the men-of-war hooked themselves on to
the wheels of the vehicle: and, in fact, nothing could be more simple
or convenient, because they could be hooked or unhooked in an instant
with the utmost facility. In short, having given a general discharge
of their artillery, and three cheers, I cracked my whip, away we went,
helter skelter, and in six jiffies I found myself and all my retinue
safe and in good spirits just at the rock of Gibraltar. Here I
unhooked my squadron, and having taken an affectionate leave of the
officers, I suffered them to proceed in their ordinary manner to the
place of their destination. The whole garrison were highly delighted
with the novelty of my vehicle; and at the pressing solicitations of
the governor and officers I went ashore, and took a view of that
barren old rock, about which more powder has been fired away than
would purchase twice as much fertile ground in any part of the world!
Mounting my chariot, I took the reins, and again made forward, in mad
career, down the Mediterranean to the isle of Candia. Here I received
despatches from the Sublime Porte, entreating me to assist in the war
against Russia, with a reward of the whole island of Candia for my
alliance. At first I hesitated, thinking that the island of Candia
would be a most valuable acquisition to the sovereign who at that time
employed me, and that the most delicious wines, sugar, &c., in
abundance would flourish on the island; yet, when I considered the
trade of the East India Company, which would most probably suffer by
the intercourse with Persia through the Mediterranean, I at once
rejected the proposal, and had afterwards the thanks of the Honourable
the House of Commons for my propriety and political discernment.

Having been properly refreshed at Candia, I again proceeded, and in a
short time arrived in the land of Egypt. The land of this country, at
least that part of it near the sea, is very low, so that I came upon
it ere I was aware, and the Pillar of Pompey got entangled in the
various wheels of the machine, and damaged the whole considerably.
Still I drove on through thick and thin, till, passing over that great
obelisk, the Needle of Cleopatra, the work got entangled again, and
jolted at a miserable rate over the mud and swampy ground of all that
country; yet my poor bulls trotted on with astonishing labour across
the Isthmus of Suez into the Red Sea, and left a track, an obscure
channel, which has since been taken by De Tott for the remains of a
canal cut by some of the Ptolemies from the Red Sea to the
Mediterranean; but, as you perceive, was in reality no more than the
track of my chariot, the car of Queen Mab.

As the artists at present in that country are nothing wonderful,
though the ancient Egyptians, 'tis said, were most astonishing
fellows, I could not procure any new coach-springs, or have a
possibility of setting my machine to rights in the kingdom of Egypt;
and as I could not presume to attempt another journey overland, and
the great mountains of marble beyond the source of the Nile, I thought
it most eligible to make the best way I could, by sea, to the Cape of
Good Hope, where I supposed I should get some Dutch smiths and
carpenters, or perhaps some English artists; and my vehicle being
properly repaired, it was my intention thence to proceed, overland,
through the heart of Africa. The surface of the water, I well knew,
afforded less resistance to the wheels of the machine--it passed along
the waves like the chariot of Neptune; and in short, having gotten
upon the Red Sea, we scudded away to admiration through the pass of
Babelmandeb to the great Western coast of Africa, where Alexander had
not the courage to venture.

And really, my friends, if Alexander had ventured toward the Cape of
Good Hope he most probably would have never returned. It is difficult
to determine whether there were then any inhabitants in the more
southern parts of Africa or not; yet, at any rate, this conqueror of
the world would have made but a nonsensical adventure; his miserable
ships, not contrived for a long voyage, would have become leaky, and
foundered, before he could have doubled the Cape, and left his Majesty
fairly beyond the limits of the then known world. Yet it would have
been an august exit for an Alexander, after having subdued Persia and
India, to be wandering the Lord knows where, to Jup or Ammon, perhaps,
or on a voyage to the moon, as an Indian chief once said to Captain
Cook.

But, for my part, I was far more successful than Alexander; I drove on
with the most amazing rapidity, and thinking to halt on shore at the
Cape, I unfortunately drove too close, and shattered the right side
wheels of my vehicle against the rock, now called the Table Mountain.
The machine went against it with such impetuosity as completely
shivered the rock in a horizontal direction; so that the summit of the
mountain, in the form of a semi-sphere, was knocked into the sea, and
the steep mountain becoming thereby flattened at the top, has since
received the name of the Table Mountain, from its similarity to that
piece of furniture.

Just as this part of the mountain was knocked off, the ghost of the
Cape, that tremendous sprite which cuts such a figure in the Lusiad,
was discovered sitting squat in an excavation formed for him in the
centre of the mountain. He seemed just like a young bee in his little
cell before he comes forth, or like a bean in a bean-pod; and when the
upper part of the mountain was split across and knocked off, the
superior half of his person was discovered. He appeared of a bottle-
blue colour, and started, dazzled with the unexpected glare of the
light: hearing the dreadful rattle of the wheels, and the loud
chirping of the crickets, he was thunder-struck, and instantly giving
a shriek, sunk down ten thousand fathoms into the earth, while the
mountain, vomiting out some smoke, silently closed up, and left not a
trace behind!



                             CHAPTER XXIV

  /The Baron secures his chariot, &c., at the Cape and takes his
  passage for England in a homeward-bound Indiaman--Wrecked upon an
  island of ice, near the coast of Guinea--Escapes from the wreck,
  and rears a variety of vegetables upon the island--Meets some
  vessels belonging to the negroes bringing white slaves from
  Europe, in retaliation, to work upon their plantations in a cold
  climate near the South Pole--Arrives in England, and lays an
  account of his expedition before the Privy Council--Great
  preparations for a new expedition--The Sphinx, Gog and Magog, and
  a great company attend him--The ideas of Hilaro Frosticos
  respecting the interior parts of Africa./

I perceived with grief and consternation the miscarriage of all my
apparatus; yet I was not absolutely dejected: a great mind is never
known but in adversity. With permission of the Dutch governor the
chariot was properly laid up in a great storehouse, erected at the
water's edge, and the bulls received every refreshment possible after
so terrible a voyage. Well, you may be sure they deserved it, and
therefore every attendance was engaged for them, until I should
return.

As it was not possible to do anything more I took my passage in a
homeward-bound Indiaman, to return to London, and lay the matter
before the Privy Council.

We met with nothing particular until we arrived upon the coast of
Guinea, where, to our utter astonishment, we perceived a great hill,
seemingly of glass, advancing against us in the open sea; the rays of
the sun were reflected upon it with such splendour, that it was
extremely difficult to gaze at the phenomenon. I immediately knew it
to be an island of ice, and though in so very warm a latitude,
determined to make all possible sail from such horrible danger. We did
so, but all in vain, for about eleven o'clock at night, blowing a very
hard gale, and exceedingly dark, we struck upon the island. Nothing
could equal the distraction, the shrieks, and despair of the whole
crew, until I, knowing there was not a moment to be lost, cheered up
their spirits, and bade them not despond, but do as I should request
them. In a few minutes the vessel was half full of water, and the
enormous castle of ice that seemed to hem us in on every side, in some
places falling in hideous fragments upon the deck, killed one half of
the crew; upon which, getting upon the summit of the mast, I contrived
to make it fast to a great promontory of the ice, and calling to the
remainder of the crew to follow me, we all escaped from the wreck, and
got upon the summit of the island.

The rising sun soon gave us a dreadful prospect of our situation, and
the loss, or rather iceification, of the vessel; for being closed in
on every side with castles of ice during the night, she was absolutely
frozen over and buried in such a manner that we could behold her under
our feet, even in the central solidity of the island. Having debated
what was best to be done, we immediately cut down through the ice, and
got up some of the cables of the vessel, and the boats, which, making
fast to the island, we towed it with all our might, determined to
bring home island and all, or perish in the attempt. On the summit of
the island we placed what oakum and dregs of every kind of matter we
could get from the vessel, which, in the space of a very few hours, on
account of the liquefying of the ice, and the warmth of the sun, were
transformed into a very fine manure; and as I had some seeds of exotic
vegetables in my pocket, we shortly had a sufficiency of fruits and
roots growing upon the island to supply the whole crew, especially the
bread-fruit tree, a few plants of which had been in the vessel; and
another tree, which bore plum-puddings so very hot, and with such
exquisite proportion of sugar, fruit, &c., that we all acknowledged it
was not possible to taste anything of the kind more delicious in
England: in short, though the scurvy had made such dreadful progress
among the crew before our striking upon the ice, the supply of
vegetables, and especially the bread-fruit and pudding-fruit, put an
almost immediate stop to the distemper.

We had not proceeded thus many weeks, advancing with incredible
fatigue by continual towing, when we fell in with a fleet of Negro-
men, as they call them. These wretches, I must inform you, my dear
friends, had found means to make prizes of those vessels from some
Europeans upon the coast of Guinea, and tasting the sweets of luxury,
had formed colonies in several new discovered islands near the South
Pole, where they had a variety of plantations of such matters as would
only grow in the coldest climates. As the black inhabitants of Guinea
were unsuited to the climate and excessive cold of the country, they
formed the diabolical project of getting Christian slaves to work for
them. For this purpose they sent vessels every year to the coast of
Scotland, the northern parts of Ireland, and Wales, and were even
sometimes seen off the coast of Cornwall. And having purchased, or
entrapped by fraud or violence, a great number of men, women, and
children, they proceeded with their cargoes of human flesh to the
other end of the world, and sold them to their planters, where they
were flogged into obedience, and made to work like horses all the rest
of their lives.

My blood ran cold at the idea, while every one on the island also
expressed his horror that such an iniquitous traffic should be
suffered to exist. But, except by open violence, it was found
impossible to destroy the trade, on account of a barbarous prejudice,
entertained of late by the negroes, that the white people have no
souls! However, we were determined to attack them, and steering down
our island upon them, soon overwhelmed them: we saved as many of the
white people as possible, but pushed all the blacks into the water
again. The poor creatures we saved from slavery were so overjoyed,
that they wept aloud through gratitude, and we experienced every
delightful sensation to think what happiness we should shower upon
their parents, their brothers and sisters and children, by bringing
them home safe, redeemed from slavery, to the bosom of their native
country.

Having happily arrived in England, I immediately laid a statement of
my voyage, &c., before the Privy Council, and entreated an immediate
assistance to travel into Africa, and, if possible, refit my former
machine, and take it along with the rest. Everything was instantly
granted to my satisfaction, and I received orders to get myself ready
for departure as soon as possible.

As the Emperor of China had sent a most curious animal as a present to
Europe, which was kept in the Tower, and it being of an enormous
stature, and capable of performing the voyage with /clat/, she was
ordered to attend me. She was called Sphinx, and was one of the most
tremendous though magnificent figures I ever beheld. She was harnessed
with superb trappings to a large flat-bottomed boat, in which was
placed an edifice of wood, exactly resembling Westminster Hall. Two
balloons were placed over it, tackled by a number of ropes to the
boat, to keep up a proper equilibrium, and prevent it from
overturning, or filling, from the prodigious weight of the fabric.

The interior of the edifice was decorated with seats, in the form of
an amphitheatre, and crammed as full as it could hold with ladies and
lords, as a council and retinue for your humble servant. Nearly in the
centre was a seat elegantly decorated for myself, and on either side
of me were placed the famous Gog and Magog in all their pomp.

The Lord Viscount Gosamer being our postillion, we floated gallantly
down the river, the noble Sphinx gambolling like the huge leviathan,
and towing after her the boat and balloons.

Thus we advanced, sailing gently, into the open sea; being calm
weather, we could scarcely feel the motion of the vehicle, and passed
our time in grand debate upon the glorious intention of our voyage,
and the discoveries that would result.

"I am of opinion," said my noble friend, Hilaro Frosticos, "that
Africa was originally inhabited for the greater part, or, I may say,
subjugated by lions which, next to man, seem to be the most dreaded of
all mortal tyrants. The country in general--at least, what we have
been hitherto able to discover, seems rather inimical to human life;
the intolerable dryness of the place, the burning sands that overwhelm
whole armies and cities in general ruin, and the hideous life many
roving hordes are compelled to lead, incline me to think, that if ever
we form any great settlements therein, it will become the grave of our
countrymen. Yet it is nearer to us than the East Indies, and I cannot
but imagine, that in many places every production of China, and of the
East and West Indies, would flourish, if properly attended to. And as
the country is so prodigiously extensive and unknown, what a source of
discovery must not it contain! In fact, we know less about the
interior of Africa than we do of the moon; for in this latter we
measure the very prominences, and observe the va