rieties and
inequalities of the surface through our glasses--

 "Forests and mountains on her spotted orb.

"But we see nothing in the interior of Africa, but what some compilers
of maps or geographers are fanciful enough to imagine. What a happy
event, therefore, should we not expect from a voyage of discovery and
colonisation undertaken in so magnificent a style as the present! what
a pride--what an acquisition to philosophy!"



                             CHAPTER XXV

  /Count Gosamer thrown by Sphinx into the snow on the top of
  Teneriffe--Gog and Magog conduct Sphinx for the rest of the voyage
  --The Baron arrives at the Cape, and unites his former chariot,
  &c., to his new retinue--Passes into Africa, proceeding from the
  Cape northwards--Defeats a host of lions by a curious stratagem--
  Travels through an immense desert--His whole company, chariot,
  &c., overwhelmed by a whirlwind of sand--Extricates them, and
  arrives in a fertile country./

The brave Count Gosamer, with a pair of hell-fire spurs on, riding
upon Sphinx, directed the whole retinue towards the Madeiras. But the
Count had no small share of an amiable vanity, and perceiving great
multitudes of people, Gascons, &c., assembled upon the French coast,
he could not refrain from showing some singular capers, such as they
had never seen before: but especially when he observed all the members
of the National Assembly extend themselves along the shore, as a piece
of French politeness, to honour this expedition, with Rousseau,
Voltaire, and Beelzebub at their head; he set spurs to Sphinx, and at
the same time cut and cracked away as hard as he could, holding in the
reins with all his might, striving to make the creature plunge and
show some uncommon diversion. But sulky and ill-tempered was Sphinx at
the time: she plunged indeed--such a devil of a plunge, that she
dashed him in one jerk over her head, and he fell precipitately into
the water before her. It was in the Bay of Biscay, all the world knows
a very boisterous sea, and Sphinx, fearing he would be drowned, never
turned to the left or the right out of her way, but advancing furious,
just stooped her head a little, and supped the poor count off the
water, into her mouth, together with the quantity of two or three tuns
of water, which she must have taken in along with him, but which were,
to such an enormous creature as Sphinx, nothing more than a spoonful
would be to any of you or me. She swallowed him, but when she had got
him in her stomach, his long spurs so scratched and tickled her, that
they produced the effect of an emetic. No sooner was he in, but out he
was squirted with the most horrible impetuosity, like a ball or a
shell from the calibre of a mortar. Sphinx was at this time quite sea-
sick, and the unfortunate count was driven forth like a sky-rocket,
and landed upon the peak of Teneriffe, plunged over head and ears in
the snow--/requiescat in pace!/

I perceived all this mischief from my seat in the ark, but was in such
a convulsion of laughter that I could not utter an intelligible word.
And now Sphinx, deprived of her postillion, went on in a zigzag
direction, and gambolled away after a most dreadful manner. And thus
had everything gone to wreck, had I not given instant orders to Gog
and Magog to sally forth. They plunged into the water, and swimming on
each side, got at length right before the animal, and then seized the
reins. Thus they continued swimming on each side, like tritons,
holding the muzzle of Sphinx, while I, sallying forth astride upon the
creature's back, steered forward on our voyage to the Cape of Good
Hope.

Arriving at the Cape, I immediately gave orders to repair my former
chariot and machines, which were very expeditiously performed by the
excellent artists I had brought with me from Europe. And now
everything being refitted, we launched forth upon the water: perhaps
there never was anything seen more glorious or more august. 'Twas
magnificent to behold Sphinx make her obeisance on the water, and the
crickets chirp upon the bulls in return of the salute; while Gog and
Magog, advancing, took the reins of the great John Mowmowsky, and
leading towards us chariot and all, instantly disposed of them to the
forepart of the ark by hooks and eyes, and tackled Sphinx before all
the bulls. Thus the whole had a most tremendous and triumphal
appearance. In front floated forwards the mighty Sphinx, with Gog and
Magog on each side; next followed in order the bulls with crickets
upon their heads; and then advanced the chariot of Queen Mab,
containing the curious seat and orrery of heaven; after which appeared
the boat and ark of council, overtopped with two balloons, which gave
an air of greater lightness and elegance to the whole. I placed in the
galleries under the balloons, and on the backs of the bulls, a number
of excellent vocal performers, with martial music of clarionets and
trumpets. They sung the "Watery Dangers," and the "Pomp of Deep
Cerulean!" The sun shone glorious on the water while the procession
advanced toward the land, under five hundred arches of ice,
illuminated with coloured lights, and adorned in the most grotesque
and fanciful style with sea-weed, elegant festoons, and shells of
every kind; while a thousand water-spouts danced eternally before and
after us, attracting the water from the sea in a kind of cone, and
suddenly uniting with the most fantastical thunder and lightning.

Having landed our whole retinue, we immediately began to proceed
toward the heart of Africa, but first thought it expedient to place a
number of wheels under the ark for its greater facility of advancing.
We journeyed nearly due north for several days, and met with nothing
remarkable except the astonishment of the savage natives to behold our
equipage.

The Dutch Government at the Cape, to do them justice, gave us every
possible assistance for the expedition. I presume they had received
instruction on that head from their High Mightinesses in Holland.
However, they presented us with a specimen of some of the most
excellent of their Cape wine, and showed us every politeness in their
power. As to the face of the country, as we advanced, it appeared in
many places capable of every cultivation, and of abundant fertility.
The natives and Hottentots of this part of Africa have been frequently
described by travellers, and therefore it is not necessary to say any
more about them. But in the more interior parts of Africa the
appearance, manners, and genius of the people are totally different.

We directed our course by the compass and the stars, getting every day
prodigious quantities of game in the woods, and at night encamping
within a proper enclosure for fear of the wild beasts. One whole day
in particular we heard on every side, among the hills, the horrible
roaring of lions, resounding from rock to rock like broken thunder. It
seemed as if there was a general rendezvous of all these savage
animals to fall upon our party. That whole day we advanced with
caution, our hunters scarcely venturing beyond pistol shot from the
caravan for fear of dissolution. At night we encamped as usual, and
threw up a circular entrenchment round our tents. We had scarce
retired to repose when we found ourselves serenaded by at least one
thousand lions, approaching equally on every side, and within a
hundred paces. Our cattle showed the most horrible symptoms of fear,
all trembling, and in cold perspiration. I directly ordered the whole
company to stand to their arms, and not to make any noise by firing
till I should command them. I then took a large quantity of tar, which
I had brought with our caravan for that purpose, and strewed it in a
continued stream round the encampment, within which circle of tar I
immediately placed another train or circle of gunpowder, and having
taken this precaution, I anxiously waited the lions' approach. These
dreadful animals, knowing, I presume, the force of our troop, advanced
very slowly, and with caution, approaching on every side of us with an
equal pace, and growling in hideous concert, so as to resemble an
earthquake, or some similar convulsion of the world. When they had at
length advanced and steeped all their paws in the tar, they put their
noses to it, smelling it as if it were blood, and daubed their great
bushy hair and whiskers with it equal to their paws. At that very
instant, when, in concert, they were to give the mortal dart upon us,
I discharged a pistol at the train of gunpowder, which instantly
exploded on every side, made all the lions recoil in general uproar,
and take to flight with the utmost precipitation. In an instant we
could behold them scattered through the woods at some distance,
roaring in agony, and moving about like so many Will-o'-the-Wisps,
their paws and faces all on fire from the tar and the gun-powder. I
then ordered a general pursuit: we followed them on every side through
the woods, their own light serving as our guide, until, before the
rising of the sun, we followed into their fastnesses and shot or
otherwise destroyed every one of them, and during the whole of our
journey after we never heard the roaring of a lion, nor did any wild
beast presume to make another attack upon our party, which shows the
excellence of immediate presence of mind, and the terror inspired into
the savage enemies by a proper and well-timed proceeding.

We at length arrived on the confines of an immeasurable desert--an
immense plain, extending on every side of us like an ocean. Not a
tree, nor a shrub, nor a blade of grass was to be seen, but all
appeared an extreme fine sand, mixed with gold-dust and little
sparkling pearls.

The gold-dust and pearls appeared to us of little value, because we
could have no expectation of returning to England for a considerable
time. We observed, at a great distance, something like a smoke arising
just over the verge of the horizon, and looking with our telescopes we
perceived it to be a whirlwind tearing up the sand and tossing it
about in the heavens with frightful impetuosity. I immediately ordered
my company to erect a mound around us of a great size, which we did
with astonishing labour and perseverance, and then roofed it over with
certain planks and timber, which we had with us for the purpose. Our
labour was scarcely finished when the sand came rolling in like the
waves of the sea; 'twas a storm and river of sand united. It continued
to advance in the same direction, without intermission, for three
days, and completely covered over the mound we had erected, and buried
us all within. The intense heat of the place was intolerable; but
guessing, by the cessation of the noise, that the storm was passed, we
set about digging a passage to the light of day again, which we
effected in a very short time, and ascending, perceived that the whole
had been so completely covered with the sand, that there appeared no
hills, but one continued plain, with inequalities or ridges on it like
the waves of the sea. We soon extricated our vehicle and retinue from
the burning sands, but not without great danger, as the heat was very
violent, and began to proceed on our voyage. Storms of sand of a
similar nature several times attacked us, but by using the same
precautions we preserved ourselves repeatedly from destruction. Having
travelled more than nine thousand miles over this inhospitable plain,
exposed to the perpendicular rays of a burning sun, without ever
meeting a rivulet, or a shower from heaven to refresh us, we at length
became almost desperate, when, to our inexpressible joy, we beheld
some mountains at a great distance, and on our nearer approach
observed them covered with a carpet of verdure and groves and woods.
Nothing could appear more romantic or beautiful than the rocks and
precipices intermingled with flowers and shrubs of every kind, and
palm-trees of such a prodigious size as to surpass anything ever seen
in Europe. Fruits of all kinds appeared growing wild in the utmost
abundance, and antelopes and sheep and buffaloes wandered about the
groves and valleys in profusion. The trees resounded with the melody
of birds, and everything displayed a general scene of rural happiness
and joy.



                             CHAPTER XXVI

  /A feast on live bulls and kava--The inhabitants admire the
  European adventurers--The Emperor comes to meet the Baron, and
  pays him great compliments--The inhabitants of the centre of
  Africa descended from the people of the moon proved by an
  inscription in Africa, and by the analogy of their language, which
  is also the same with that of the ancient Scythians--The Baron is
  declared sovereign of the interior of Africa on the decease of the
  Emperor--He endeavours to abolish the custom of eating live bulls,
  which excites much discontent--The advice of Hilaro Frosticos upon
  the occasion--The Baron makes a speech to an Assembly of the
  states, which only excites greater murmurs--He consults with
  Hilaro Frosticos./

Having passed over the nearest mountains we entered a delightful vale,
where we perceived a multitude of persons at a feast of living bulls,
whose flesh they cut away with great knives, making a table of the
creature's carcase, serenaded by the bellowing of the unfortunate
animal. Nothing seemed requisite to add to the barbarity of this feast
but /kava/, made as described in Cook's voyages, and at the conclusion
of the feast we perceived them brewing this liquor, which they drank
with the utmost avidity. From that moment, inspired with an idea of
universal benevolence, I determined to abolish the custom of eating
live flesh and drinking of kava. But I knew that such a thing could
not be immediately effected, whatever in future time might be
performed.

Having rested ourselves during a few days, we determined to set out
towards the principal city of the empire. The singularity of our
appearance was spoken of all over the country as a phenomenon. The
multitude looked upon Sphinx, the bulls, the crickets, the balloons,
and the whole company, as something more than terrestrial, but
especially the thunder of our fire-arms, which struck horror and
amazement into the whole nation.

We at length arrived at the metropolis, situated on the banks of a
noble river, and the emperor, attended by all his court, came out in
grand procession to meet us. The emperor appeared mounted on a
dromedary, royally caparisoned, with all his attendants on foot
through respect for his Majesty. He was rather above the middle
stature of that country, four feet three inches in height, with a
countenance, like all his countrymen, as white as snow! He was
preceded by a band of most exquisite music, according to the fashion
of the country, and his whole retinue halted within about fifty paces
of our troop. We returned the salute by a discharge of musketry, and a
flourish of our trumpets and martial music. I commanded our caravan to
halt, and dismounting, advanced uncovered, with only two attendants,
towards his Majesty. The emperor was equally polite, and descending
from his dromedary, advanced to meet me. "I am happy," said he, "to
have the honour to receive so illustrious a traveller, and assure you
that everything in my empire shall be at your disposal."

I thanked his Majesty for his politeness, and expressed how happy I
was to meet so polished and refined a people in the centre of Africa,
and that I hoped to show myself and company grateful for his esteem,
by introducing the arts and sciences of Europe among the people.

I immediately perceived the true descent of this people, which does
not appear of terrestrial origin, but descended from some of the
inhabitants of the moon, because the principal language spoken there,
and in the centre of Africa, is very nearly the same. Their alphabet
and method of writing are pretty much the same, and show the extreme
antiquity of this people, and their exalted origin. I here give you a
specimen of their writing [/Vide Otrckocsus de Orig. Hung./ p. 46]:--
Stregnah, dna skoohtop.

These characters I have submitted to the inspection of a celebrated
antiquarian, and it will be proved to the satisfaction of every one,
in his next volume, what an immediate intercourse there must have been
between the inhabitants of the moon and the ancient Scythians, which
Scythians did not by any means inhabit a part of Russia, but the
central part of Africa, as I can abundantly prove to my very learned
and laborious friend. The above words, written in our characters, are
/Sregnah dna skoohtop/; that is, The Scythians are of heavenly origin.
The word /Sregnah/, which signifies /Scythians/, is compounded of
/sreg/ or /sre/, whence our present English word sire, or sir: and
/nah/, or /gnah/, knowledge, because the Scythians united the
essentials of nobility and learning together: /dna/ signifies heaven,
or belonging to the moon, from /duna/, who was anciently worshipped as
goddess of that luminary. And /skooh-top/ signifies the origin or
beginning of anything, from /skoo/, the name used in the moon for a
point in geometry, and /top/ or /htop/, vegetation. These words are
inscribed at this day upon a pyramid in the centre of Africa, nearly
at the source of the river Niger; and if any one refuses his assent,
he may go there to be convinced.

The emperor conducted me to his court amidst the admiration of his
courtiers, and paid us every possible politeness that African
magnificence could bestow. He never presumed to proceed on any
expedition without consulting us, and looking upon us as a species of
superior beings, paid the greatest respect to our opinions. He
frequently asked me about the states of Europe, and the kingdom of
Great Britain, and appeared lost in admiration at the account I gave
him of our shipping, and the immensity of the ocean. We taught him to
regulate the government nearly on the same plan with the British
constitution, and to institute a parliament and degrees of nobility.
His majesty was the last of his royal line, and on his decease, with
the unanimous consent of the people, made me heir to the whole empire.
The nobility and chiefs of the country immediately waited upon me with
petitions, entreating me to accept the government. I consulted with my
noble friends, Gog and Magog, &c., and after much consultation it was
agreed that I should accept the government, not as actual and
independent monarch of the place, but as viceroy to his Majesty of
England.

I now thought it high time to do away the custom of eating of live
flesh and drinking of kava, and for that purpose used every persuasive
method to wean the majority of the people from it. This, to my
astonishment, was not taken in good part by the nation, and they
looked with jealousy at those strangers who wanted to make innovations
among them.

Nevertheless, I felt much concern to think that my fellow-creatures
could be capable of such barbarity. I did everything that a heart
fraught with universal benevolence and good will to all mankind could
be capable of desiring. I first tried every method of persuasion and
incitement. I did not harshly reprove them, but I invited frequently
whole thousands to dine, after the fashion of Europe, upon roasted
meat. Alas, 'twas all in vain! my goodness nearly excited a sedition.
They murmured among themselves, spoke of my intentions, my wild and
ambitious views, as if I, O heaven! could have had any personal
interested motive in making them live like men, rather than like
crocodiles and tigers. In fine, perceiving that gentleness could be of
no avail, well knowing that when complaisance can effect nothing from
some spirits, compulsion excites respect and veneration, I prohibited,
under the pain of the severest penalties, the drinking of kava, or
eating of live flesh, for the space of nine days, within the districts
of Angalinar and Paphagalna.

But this created such an universal abhorrence and detestation of my
government, that my ministers, and even myself, were universally
pasquinadoed; lampoons, satires, ridicule, and insult, were showered
upon the name of Munchausen wherever it was mentioned; and in fine,
there never was a government so much detested, or with such little
reason.

In this dilemma I had recourse to the advice of my noble friend Hilaro
Frosticos. In his good sense I now expected some resource, for the
rest of the council, who had advised me to the former method, had
given but a poor specimen of their abilities and discernment, or I
should have succeeded more happily. In short, he addressed himself to
me and to the council as follows:--

"It is in vain, most noble Munchausen, that your Excellency endeavours
to compel or force these people to a life to which they have never
been accustomed. In vain do you tell them that apple-pies, pudding,
roast beef, minced pies, or tarts, are delicious, that sugar is sweet,
that wine is exquisite. Alas! they cannot, they will not comprehend
what deliciousness is, what sweetness, or what the flavour of the
grape. And even if they were convinced of the superior excellence of
your way of life, never, never would they be persuaded; and that if
for no other reason, but because force or persuasion is employed to
induce them to it. Abandon that idea for the present, and let us try
another method. My opinion, therefore, is, that we should at once
cease all endeavours to compel or persuade them. But let us, if
possible, procure a quantity of /fudge/ from England, and carelessly
scatter it over all the country; and from this disposal of matters I
presume--nay, I have a moral certainty, that we shall reclaim this
people from horror and barbarity."

Had this been proposed at any other time, it would have been violently
opposed in the council; but now, when every other attempt had failed,
when there seemed no other resource, the majority willingly submitted
to they knew not what, for they absolutely had no idea of the manner,
the possibilities of success, or how they could bring matters to bear.
However, 'twas a scheme, and as such they submitted. For my part, I
listened with ecstasy to the words of Hilaro Frosticos, for I knew
that he had a most singular knowledge of human kind, and could humour
and persuade them on to their own happiness and universal good.
Therefore, according to the advice of Hilaro, I despatched a balloon
with four men over the desert to the Cape of Good Hope, with letters
to be forwarded to England, requiring, without delay, a few cargoes of
fudge.

The people had all this time remained in a general state of ferment
and murmur. Everything that rancour, low wit, and deplorable ignorance
could conceive to asperse my government, was put in execution. The
most worthy, even the most beneficent actions, everything that was
amiable, were perverted into opposition.

The heart of Munchausen was not made of such impenetrable stuff as to
be insensible to the hatred of even the most worthless wretch in the
whole kingdom; and once, at a general assembly of the states, filled
with an idea of such continued ingratitude, I spoke as pathetic as
possible, not, methought, beneath my dignity, to make them feel for
me: that the universal good and happiness of the people were all I
wished or desired; that if my actions had been mistaken, or improper
surmises formed, still I had no wish, no desire, but the public
welfare, &c. &c. &c.

Hilaro Frosticos was all this time much disturbed; he looked sternly
at me--he frowned, but I was so engrossed with the warmth of my heart,
my intentions, that I understood him not: in a minute I saw nothing
but as if through a cloud (such is the force of amiable sensibility)--
lords, ladies, chiefs--the whole assembly seemed to swim before my
sight. The more I thought on my good intentions, the lampoons which so
much affected my delicacy, good nature, tenderness--I forgot myself--I
spoke rapid, violent--beneficence--fire--tenderness--alas! I melted
into tears!

"Pish! pish!" said Hilaro Frosticos.

Now, indeed, was my government lampooned, satirised, carribonadoed,
bepickled, and bedevilled. One day, with my arm full of lampoons, I
started up as Hilaro entered the room, the tears in my eyes: "Look,
look here, Hilaro!--how can I bear all this? It is impossible to
please them; I will leave the government--I cannot bear it! See what
pitiful anecdotes--what surmises: I will make my people feel for me--I
will leave the government!"

"Pshaw!" says Hilaro. At that simple mono-syllable I found myself
changed as if by magic! for I ever looked on Hilaro as a person so
experienced--such fortitude, such good sense. "There are three sails,
under the convoy of a frigate," added Hilaro, "just arrived at the
Cape, after a fortunate passage, laden with the fudge that we
demanded. No time is to be lost; let it be immediately conducted
hither, and distributed through the principal granaries of the
empire."



                            CHAPTER XXVII

  /A proclamation by the Baron--Excessive curiosity of the people to
  know what fudge was--The people in a general ferment about it--
  They break open all the granaries in the empire--The affections of
  the people conciliated--An ode performed in honour of the Baron--
  His discourse with Fragrantia on the excellence of the music./

Some time after I ordered the following proclamation to be published
in the Court Gazette, and in all the other papers of the empire:--

  BY THE MOST MIGHTY AND PUISSANT LORD,
  HIS EXCELLENCY THE
  LORD BARON MUNCHAUSEN.

  Whereas a quantity of fudge has been distributed through all the
  granaries of the empire for particular uses; and as the natives
  have ever expressed their aversion to all manner of European
  eatables, it is hereby strictly forbidden, under pain of the
  severest penalties, for any of the officers charged with the
  keeping of the said fudge to give, sell, or suffer to be sold, any
  part or quantity whatever of the said material, until it be
  agreeable unto our good will and pleasure.

  Dated in our Castle of Gristariska
    this Triskill of the month of
    Griskish, in the year Moulikasra-
    navas-kashna-vildash.

This proclamation excited the most ardent curiosity all over the
empire. "Do you know what this fudge is?" said Lady Mooshilgarousti to
Lord Darnarlaganl. "Fudge!" said he, "Fudge! no: what fudge?" "I
mean," replied her Ladyship, "the enormous quantity of fudge that has
been distributed under guards in all the strong places in the empire,
and which is strictly forbidden to be sold or given to any of the
natives under the severest penalties." "Lord!" replied he, "what in
the name of wonder can it be? Forbidden! why it must, but pray do you,
Lady Fashashash, do you know what this fudge is? Do you, Lord
Trastillauex? or you, Miss Gristilarkask? What! nobody know what this
fudge can be?"

It engrossed for several days the chit-chat of the whole empire.
Fudge, fudge, fudge, resounded in all companies and in all places,
from the rising until the setting of the sun; and even at night, when
gentle sleep refreshed the rest of mortals, the ladies of all that
country were dreaming of fudge!

"Upon my honour," said Kitty, as she was adjusting her modesty piece
before the glass, just after getting out of bed, "there is scarce
anything I would not give to know what this fudge can be." "La! my
dear," replied Miss Killnariska, "I have been dreaming the whole night
of nothing but fudge; I thought my lover kissed my hand, and pressed
it to his bosom, while I, frowning, endeavoured to wrest it from him:
that he kneeled at my feet. No, never, never will I look at you, cried
I, till you tell me what this fudge can be, or get me some of it.
Begone! cried I, with all the dignity of offended beauty, majesty, and
a tragic queen. Begone! never see me more, or bring me this delicious
fudge. He swore, on the honour of a knight, that he would wander o'er
the world, encounter every danger, perish in the attempt, or satisfy
the angel of his soul."

The chiefs and nobility of the nation, when they met together to drink
their kava, spoke of nothing but fudge. Men, women, and children all,
all talked of nothing but fudge. 'Twas a fury of curiosity, one
general ferment, and universal fever--nothing but fudge could allay
it.

But in one respect they all agreed, that government must have had some
interested view, in giving such positive orders to preserve it, and
keep it from the natives of the country. Petitions were addressed to
me from all quarters, from every corporation and body of men in the
whole empire. The majority of the people instructed their
constituents, and the parliament presented a petition, praying that I
would be pleased to take the state of the nation under consideration,
and give orders to satisfy the people, or the most dreadful
consequences were to be apprehended. To these requests, at the
entreaty of my council, I made no reply, or at best but unsatisfactory
answers. Curiosity was on the rack; they forgot to lampoon the
government, so engaged were they about the fudge. The great assembly
of the states could think of nothing else. Instead of enacting laws
for the regulation of the people, instead of consulting what should
seem most wise, most excellent, they could think, talk, and harangue
of nothing but fudge. In vain did the Speaker call to order; the more
checks they got the more extravagant and inquisitive they were.

In short, the populace in many places rose in the most outrageous and
tumultuous manner, forced open the granaries in all places in one day,
and triumphantly distributed the fudge through the whole empire.

Whether on account of the longing, the great curiosity, imagination,
or the disposition of the people, I cannot say--but they found it
infinitely to their taste; 'twas intoxication of joy, satisfaction,
and applause.

Finding how much they liked this fudge, I procured another quantity
from England, much greater than the former, and cautiously bestowed it
over all the kingdom. Thus were the affections of the people regained;
and they, from hence, began to venerate, applaud, and admire my
government more than ever. The following ode was performed at the
castle, in the most superb style, and universally admired:--

  ODE.

  Ye bulls and crickets, and Gog, Magog,
  And trump'ts high chiming anthrophog,
  Come sing blithe choral all in /og/,
  Caralog, basilog, fog, and bog!

  Great and superb appears thy cap sublime,
    Admired and worshipp'd as the rising sun;
  Solemn, majestic, wise, like hoary Time,
    And fam'd alike for virtue, sense, and fun.

  Then swell the noble strain with song,
    And elegance divine,
  While goddesses around shall throng,
    And all the muses nine.

  And bulls, and crickets, and Gog, Magog,
  And trumpets chiming anthrophog,
  Shall sing blithe choral all in /og/,
  Caralog, basilog, fog, and bog!

This piece of poetry was much applauded, admired, and /encored/ in
every public assembly, celebrated as an astonishing effort of genius;
and the music, composed by Minheer Gastrashbark Gkrghhbarwskhk, was
thought equal to the sense!--Never was there anything so universally
admired, the summit of the most exquisite wit, the keenest praise, the
most excellent music.

"Upon my honour, and the faith I owe my love," said I, "music may be
talked of in England, but to possess the very soul of harmony the
world should come to the performance of this ode." Lady Fragrantia was
at that moment drumming with her fingers on the edge of her fan, lost
in a reverie, thinking she was playing upon---- Was it a forte piano?

"No, my dear Fragrantia," said I, tenderly taking her in my arms while
she melted into tears; "never, never, will I play upon any other----!"

Oh! 'twas divine, to see her like a summer's morning, all blushing and
full of dew!



                            CHAPTER XXVIII

  /The Baron sets all the people of the empire to work to build a
  bridge from their country to Great Britain--His contrivance to
  render the arch secure--Orders an inscription to be engraved on
  the bridge--Returns with all his company, chariot, etc., to
  England--Surveys the kingdoms and nations under him from the
  middle of the bridge./

"And now, most noble Baron," said the illustrious Hilaro Frosticos,
"now is the time to make this people proceed in any business that we
find convenient. Take them at this present ferment of the mind, let
them not think, but at once set them to work." In short, the whole
nation went heartily to the business, to build an edifice such as was
never seen in any other country. I took care to supply them with their
favourite kava and fudge, and they worked like horses. The tower of
Babylon, which, according to Hermogastricus, was seven miles high, or
the Chinese wall, was a mere trifle, in comparison to this stupendous
edifice, which was completed in a very short space of time.

It was of an immense height, far beyond anything that ever had been
before erected, and of such gentle ascent, that a regiment of cavalry
with a train of cannon could ascend with perfect ease and facility. It
seemed like a rainbow in the heavens, the base of which appeared to
rise in the centre of Africa, and the other extremity seemed to stoop
into great Britain. A most noble bridge indeed, and a piece of masonry
that has outdone Sir Christopher Wren. Wonderful must it have been to
form so tremendous an arch, especially as the artists had certain
difficulties to labour against which they could not have in the
formation of any other arch in the world--I mean, the attraction of
the moon and planets: Because the arch was of so great a height, and
in some parts so elongated from the earth, as in a great measure to
diminish in its gravitation to the centre of our globe; or rather,
seemed more easily operated upon by the attraction of the planets: So
that the stones of the arch, one would think, at certain times, were
ready to fall /up/ to the moon, and at other times to fall down to the
earth. But as the former was more to be dreaded, I secured stability
to the fabric by a very curious contrivance: I ordered the architects
to get the heads of some hundred numbskulls and blockheads, and fix
them to the interior surface of the arch, at certain intervals, all
the whole length, by which means the arch was held together firm, and
its inclination to the earth eternally established; because of all the
things in the world, the skulls of these kind of animals have a
strange facility of tending to the centre of the earth.

The building being completed, I caused an inscription to be engraved
in the most magnificent style upon the summit of the arch, in letters
so great and luminous, that all vessels sailing to the East or West
Indies might read them distinct in the heavens, like the motto of
Constantine.

  KARDOL BAGARLAN KAI TON FARINGO SARGAI RA
  MO PASHROL VATINEAC CAL COLNITOS RO NA FILNAT
  AGASTRA SA DINGANNAL FANO.

That is to say, "As long as this arch and bond of union shall exist,
so long shall the people be happy. Nor can all the power of the world
affect them, unless the moon, advancing from her usual sphere, should
so much attract the skulls as to cause a sudden elevation, on which
the whole will fall into the most horrible confusion."

An easy intercourse being thus established between Great Britain and
the centre of Africa, numbers travelled continually to and from both
countries, and at my request mail coaches were ordered to run on the
bridge between both empires. After some time, having settled the
government to my satisfaction, I requested permission to resign, as a
great cabal had been excited against me in England; I therefore
received my letters of recall, and prepared to return to Old England.

In fine, I set out upon my journey, covered with applause and general
admiration. I proceeded with the same retinue that I had before--
Sphinx, Gog and Magog, &c., and advanced along the bridge, lined on
each side with rows of trees, adorned with festoons of various
flowers, and illuminated with coloured lights. We advanced at a great
rate along the bridge, which was so very extensive that we could
scarcely perceive the ascent, but proceeded insensibly until we
arrived on the centre of the arch. The view from thence was glorious
beyond conception; 'twas divine to look down on the kingdoms and seas
and islands under us. Africa seemed in general of a tawny brownish
colour, burned up by the sun: Spain seemed more inclining to a yellow,
on account of some fields of corn scattered over the kingdom; France
appeared more inclining to a bright straw-colour, intermixed with
green; and England appeared covered with the most beautiful verdure. I
admired the appearance of the Baltic Sea, which evidently seemed to
have been introduced between those countries by the sudden splitting
of the land, and that originally Sweden was united to the western
coast of Denmark; in short, the whole interstice of the Gulf of
Finland had no being, until these countries, by mutual consent,
separated from one another. Such were my philosophical meditations as
I advanced, when I observed a man in armour with a tremendous spear or
lance, and mounted upon a steed, advancing against me. I soon
discovered by a telescope that it could be no other than Don Quixote,
and promised myself much amusement in the rencounter.



                             CHAPTER XXIX

  /The Baron's retinue is opposed in a heroic style by Don Quixote,
  who in his turn is attacked by Gog and Magog--Lord Whittington,
  with the Lord Mayor's show, comes to the assistance of Don Quixote
  --Gog and Magog assail his Lordship--Lord Whittington makes a
  speech, and deludes Gog and Magog to his party--A general scene of
  uproar and battle among the company, until the Baron, with great
  presence of mind, appeases the tumult./

"What art thou?" exclaimed Don Quixote on his potent steed. "Who art
thou? Speak! or, by the eternal vengeance of mine arm, thy whole
machinery shall perish at sound of this my trumpet!"

Astonished at so rude a salutation, the great Sphinx stopped short,
and bridling up herself, drew in her head, like a snail when it
touches something that it does not like: the bulls set up a horrid
bellowing, the crickets sounded an alarm, and Gog and Magog advanced
before the rest. One of these powerful brothers had in his hand a
great pole, to the extremity of which was fastened a cord of about two
feet in length, and to the end of the cord was fastened a ball of
iron, with spikes shooting from it like the rays of a star; with this
weapon he prepared to encounter, and advancing thus he spoke:--

"Audacious wight! that thus, in complete steel arrayed, doth dare to
venture cross my way, to stop the great Munchausen. Know then, proud
knight, that thou shalt instant perish 'neath my potent arm."

When Quixote, Mancha's knight, responded firm:--

"Gigantic monster! leader of witches, crickets, and chimeras dire!
know thou, that here before yon azure heaven the cause of truth, of
valour, and of faith right pure shall ordeal counter try it!"

Thus he spoke, and brandishing his mighty spear, would instant
prodigies sublime perform, had not some wight placed 'neath the tail
of dark Rosinante furze all thorny base; at which, quadrupedanting,
plunged the steed, and instant on the earth the knight roared /credo/
for his life.

At that same moment ten thousand frogs started from the morions of Gog
and Magog, and furiously assailed the knight on every side. In vain he
roared, and invoked fair Dulcinea del Toboso: for frogs' wild croaking
seemed more loud, more sonorous than all his invocations. And thus in
battle vile the knight was overcome, and spawn all swarmed upon his
glittering helmet.

"Detested miscreants!" roared the knight; "avaunt! Enchanters dire and
goblins could alone this arduous task perform; to rout the knight of
Mancha, foul defeat, and war, even such as ne'er was known before.
Then hear, O del Toboso! hear my vows, that thus in anguish of my soul
I urge, midst frogs, Gridalbin, Hecaton, Kai, Talon, and the Rove!
[for such the names and definitions of their qualities, their separate
powers.] For Merlin plumed their airy flight, and then in watery
moonbeam dyed his rod eccentric. At the touch ten thousand frogs,
strange metamorphosed, croaked even thus: And here they come, on high
behest, to vilify the knight that erst defended famed virginity, and
matrons all bewronged, and pilgrims hoar, and courteous guise of all!
But the age of chivalry is gone, and the glory of Europe is
extinguished for ever?"

He spake, and sudden good Lord Whittington, at head of all his raree-
show, came forth, armour antique of chivalry, and helmets old, and
troops, all streamers, flags and banners glittering gay, red, gold,
and purple; and in every hand a square of gingerbread, all gilded
nice, was brandished awful. At a word, ten thousand thousand Naples
biscuits, crackers, buns, and flannel-cakes, and hats of gingerbread
encountered in mid air in glorious exaltation, like some huge storm of
mill-stones, or when it rains whole clouds of dogs and cats.

The frogs, astonished, thunderstruck, forgot their notes and music,
that before had seemed so terrible, and drowned the cries of knight
renown, and mute in wonder heard the words of Whittington, pronouncing
solemn:--"Goblins, chimeras dire, or frogs, or whatsoe'er enchantment
thus presents in antique shape, attend and hear the words of peace;
and thou, good herald, read aloud the Riot Act!"

He ceased, and dismal was the tone that softly breathed from all the
frogs in chorus, who quick had petrified with fright, unless redoubted
Gog and Magog, both with poles, high topped with airy bladders by a
string dependent, had not stormed against his lordship. Ever and anon
the bladders, loud resounding on his chaps, proclaimed their fury
against all potent law, coercive mayoralty; when he, submissive, thus
in cunning guile addressed the knights assailant:--"Gog, Magog,
renowned and famous! what, my sons, shall you assail your father,
friend, and chief confessed? Shall you, thus armed with bladders vile,
attack my title, eminence, and pomp sublime? Subside, vile discord,
and again return to your true 'legiance. Think, my friends, how oft
your gorgeous pouch I've crammed, all calapash, green fat, and
calapee. Remember how you've feasted, stood inert for ages, until size
immense you've gained. And think, how different is the service of
Munchausen, where you o'er seas, cold, briny, float along the tide,
eternal toiling like to slaves of Algiers and Tripoli. And ev'n on
high, balloon like, through the heavens have journeyed late, upon a
rainbow or some awful bridge stretched eminent, as if on earth he had
not work sufficient to distress your potent servitudes, but he should
also seek in heaven dire cause of labour! Recollect, my friends, even
why or wherefore should you thus assail your lawful magistrate, or why
desert his livery? or for what or wherefore serve this German Lord
Munchausen, who for all your labour shall alone bestow some fudge and
heroic blows in war? Then cease, and thus in amity return to
friendship aldermanic, bungy, brown, and sober."

Ceased he then, right worshipful, when both the warring champions
instant stemmed their battle, and in sign of peace and unity
returning, 'neath their feet reclined their weapons. Sudden at a
signal either stamped his foot sinistrine, and the loud report of
bursten bladder stunned each ear surrounding, like the roar of thunder
from on high convulsing heaven and earth.

'Twas now upon the saddle once again the knight of Mancha rose, and in
his hand far balancing his lance, full tilt against the troops of
bulls opposing run. And thou, shrill Crillitrilkril, than whom no
cricket e'er on hob of rural cottage, or chimney black, more gladsome
turned his merry note, e'en thou didst perish, shrieking gave the
ghost in empty air, the sport of every wind; for e'en that heart so
jocund and so gay was pierced, harsh spitted by the lance of Mancha,
while undaunted thou didst sit between the horns that crowned
Mowmowsky. And now Whittington advanced, 'midst armour antique and the
powers Magog and Gog, and with his rod enchanting touched the head of
every frog, long mute and thunderstruck, at which, in universal chorus
and salute, they sung blithe jocund, and amain advanced rebellious
'gainst my troop.

While Sphinx, though great, gigantic, seemed instinctive base and
cowardly, and at the sight of storming gingerbread, and powers, Magog
and Gog, and Quixote, all against her, started fierce, o'erturning
boat, balloons, and all; loud roared the bulls, hideous, and the crash
of wheels, and chaos of confusion drear, resounded far from earth to
heaven. And still more fierce in charge the great Lord Whittington,
from poke of ermine his famed Grimalkin took. She screamed, and harsh
attacked my bulls confounded; lightning-like she darted, and from half
the troop their eyes devouring tore. Nor could the riders, crickets
throned sublime, escape from rage, from fury less averse than cannons
murder o'er the stormy sea. The great Mowmowsky roared amain and
plunged in anguish, shunning every dart of fire-eyed fierce Grimalkin.
Dire the rage of warfare and contending crickets, Quixote and great
Magog; when Whittington advancing--"Good, my friends and warriors,
headlong on the foe bear down impetuous." He spoke, and waving high
the mighty rod, tipped wonderful each bull, at which more fierce the
creatures bellowed, while enchantment drear devoured their vitals. And
all had gone to wreck in more than mortal strife, unless, like Neptune
orient from the stormy deep, I rose, e'en towering o'er the ruins of
my fighting troops. Serene and calm I stood, and gazed around
undaunted; nor did aught oppose against my foes impetuous. But sudden
from chariot purses plentiful of fudge poured forth, and scattered it
amain o'er all the crowd contending. As when old Catherine or the
careful Joan doth scatter to the chickens bits of bread and crumbs
fragmented, while rejoiced they gobble fast the proffered scraps in
general plenty and fraternal peace, and "hush," she cries, "hush!
hush!"



                             CHAPTER XXX

  /The Baron arrives in England--the Colossus of Rhodes comes to
  congratulate him--Great rejoicings on the Baron's return, and a
  tremendous concert--The Baron's discourse with Fragrantia, and her
  opinion of the Tour to the Hebrides./

Having arrived in England once more, the greatest rejoicings were made
for my return; the whole city seemed one general blaze of
illumination, and the Colossus of Rhodes, hearing of my astonishing
feats, came on purpose to England to congratulate me on such
unparalleled achievements. But above all other rejoicings on my
return, the musical oratorio and song of triumph were magnificent in
the extreme. Gog and Magog were ordered to take the maiden tower of
Windsor, and make a tambourine or great drum of it. For this purpose
they extended an elephant's hide, tanned and prepared for the design,
across the summit of the tower, from parapet to parapet, so that in
proportion this extended elephant's hide was to the whole of the
castle what the parchment is to a drum, in such a manner that the
whole became one great instrument of war.

To correspond with this, Colossus took Guildhall and Westminster
Abbey, and turning the foundations towards the heavens, so that the
roofs of the edifices were upon the ground, he strung them across with
brass and steel wire from side to side, and thus, when strung, they
had the appearance of most noble dulcimers. He then took the great
dome of St. Paul's, raising it off the earth with as much facility as
you would a decanter of claret. And when once risen up it had the
appearance of a quart bottle. Colossus instantly, with his teeth,
cracked off the superior part of the cupola, and then applying his
lips to the instrument, began to sound it like a trumpet. 'Twas
martial beyond description--/tantara!/--/tara!/--/ta!/

During the concert I walked in the park with Lady Fragrantia: she was
dressed that morning in a /chemise à la reine/. "I like," said she,
"the dew of the morning, 'tis delicate and ethereal, and, by thus
bespangling me, I think it will more approximate me to the nature of
the rose [for her looks were like Aurora]; and to confirm the
vermilion I shall go to Spa." "And drink the Podhon spring?" added I,
gazing at her from top to toe. "Yes," replied the lovely Fragrantia,
"with all my heart; 'tis the drink of sweetness and delicacy. Never
were there any creatures like the water-drinkers at spa; they seem
like so many thirsty blossoms on a peach-tree, that suck up the shower
in the scorching heat. There is a certain something in the waters that
gives vigour to the whole frame, and expands every heart with rapture
and benevolence. They drink! good gods! how they do drink! and then,
how they sleep! Pray, my dear Baron, were you ever at the falls of
Niagara?" "Yes, my lady," replied I, surprised at such a strange
association of ideas; "I have been, many years ago, at the Falls of
Niagara, and found no more difficulty in swimming up and down the
cataracts than I should to move a minuet." At that moment she dropped
her nosegay. "Ah," said she, as I presented it to her, "there is no
great variety in these polyanthuses. I do assure you, my dear Baron,
that there is taste in the selection of flowers as well as everything
else, and were I a girl of sixteen I should wear some rosebuds in my
bosom, but at five-and-twenty I think it would be more /apropos/ to
wear a full-blown rose, quite ripe, and ready to drop off the stalk
for want of being pulled--heigh-ho!" "But pray, my lady," said I, "how
do you like the concert?" "Alas!" said she, languishingly, while she
laid her hand upon my shoulder, "what are these bodiless sounds and
vibration to me? and yet what an exquisite sweetness in the songs of
the northern part of our island:--'/Thou art gone awa' from me,
Mary!/' How pathetic and divine the little airs of Scotland and the
Hebrides! But never, never can I think of that same Doctor Johnson--
that CONSTABLE, as Fergus MacLeod calls him--but I have an idea of a
great brown full-bottomed wig and a hogshead of porter! Oh, 'twas
base! to be treated everywhere with politeness and hospitality, and in
return invidiously to smellfungus them all over; to go to the country
of Kate of Aberdeen, of Auld Robin Gray, 'midst rural innocence and
sweetness, take up their plaids, and dance. Oh! Doctor, Doctor!"

"And what would you say, Fragrantia, if you were to write a tour to
the Hebrides?" "Peace to the heroes," replied she, in a delicate and
theatrical tone; "peace to the heroes who sleep in the isle of Iona;
the sons of the wave, and the chiefs of the dark-brown shield! The
tear of the sympathising stranger is scattered by the wind over the
hoary stones as she meditates sorrowfully on the times of old! Such
could I say, sitting upon some druidical heap or tumulus. The fact is
this, there is a right and wrong handle to everything, and there is
more pleasure in thinking with pure nobility of heart than with the
illiberal enmities and sarcasm of a blackguard."



                             CHAPTER XXXI

  /A litigated contention between Don Quixote, Gog, Magog, &c.--A
  grand court assembled upon it--The appearance of the company--The
  matrons, judges, &c.--The method of writing, and the use of the
  fashionable amusement quizzes--Wauwau arrives from the country of
  Prester John, and leads the whole Assembly a wild-goose chase to
  the top of Plinlimmon, and thence to Virginia--The Baron meets a
  floating island in his voyage to America--Pursues Wauwau with his
  whole company through the deserts of North America--His curious
  contrivance to seize Wauwau in a morass./

The contention between Gog and Magog, and Sphinx, Hilaro Frosticos,
the Lord Whittington, &c., was productive of infinite litigation. All
the lawyers in the kingdom were employed, to render the affair as
complex and gloriously uncertain as possible; and, in fine, the whole
nation became interested, and were divided on both sides of the
question. Colossus took the part of Sphinx, and the affair was at
length submitted to the decision of a grand council in a great hall,
adorned with seats on every side in form of an amphitheatre. The
assembly appeared the most mag