d him. For just an
instant Peter was startled, but only for an instant. His long
ears told him at once that that noise was made by some one
scratching among the leaves, and he knew that no one who did not
wear feathers could scratch like that.

"Now who can that be?" thought Peter, and stole forward very
softly towards the place from which the sound came. Presently, as
he peeped between the stems of the young trees, he saw the brown
leaves which carpeted the ground fly this way and that, and in
the midst of them was an exceedingly busy person, a little
smaller than Welcome Robin, scratching away for dear life. Every
now and then he picked up something.

His head, throat, back and breast were black. Beneath he was
white. His sides were reddish-brown. His tail was black and
white, and the longer feathers of his wings were edged with
white. It was Chewink the Towhee, sometimes called Ground Robin.

Peter chuckled, but it was a noiseless chuckle. He kept perfectly
still, for it was fun to watch some one who hadn't the least idea
that he was being watched. It was quite clear that Chewink was
hungry and that under those dry leaves he was finding a good
meal. His feet were made for scratching and he certainly knew how
to use them. For some time Peter sat there watching. He had just
about made up his mind that he would make his presence known and
have a bit of morning gossip when, happening to look out beyond
the edge of the little thicket, he saw something red. It was
something alive, for it was moving very slowly and cautiously
towards the place where Chewink was so busy and forgetful of
everything but his breakfast. Peter knew that there was only one
person with a coat of that color. It was Reddy Fox, and quite
plainly Reddy was hoping to catch Chewink.

For a second or two Peter was quite undecided what to do. He
couldn't warn Chewink without making his own presence known to
Reddy Fox. Of course he could sit perfectly still and let Chewink
be caught, but that was such a dreadful thought that Peter didn't
consider it for more than a second or two. He suddenly thumped
the ground with his feet. It was his danger signal which all his
friends know. Then he turned and scampered lipperty-lipperty-lip
to a thick bramble-tangle not far behind him.

At the sound of that thump Chewink instantly flew up in a little
tree. Then he saw Reddy Fox and began to scold. As for Reddy, he
looked over towards the bramble-tangle and snarled. "I'll get you
one of these days, Peter Rabbit," said he. "I'll get you one of
these days and pay you up for cheating me out of a breakfast."
Without so much as a glance at Chewink, Reddy turned and trotted
off, trying his best to look dignified and as if he had never
entertained such a thought as trying to catch Chewink.

>From his perch Chewink watched until he was sure that Reddy Fox
had gone away for good. Then he called softly, "Towhee! Towhee!
Chewink! Chewink! All is safe now, Peter Rabbit. Come out and
talk with me and let me tell you how grateful to you I am for
saving my life."

Chewink flew down to the ground and Peter crept out of the
bramble-tangle. "It wasn't anything," declared Peter. "I saw
Reddy and I knew you didn't, so of course I gave the alarm. You
would have done the same thing for me. Do you know, Chewink, I've
wondered a great deal about you."

"What have you wondered about me?" asked Chewink.

"I've wondered what family you belong to," replied Peter.

Chewink chuckled. "I belong to a big family," said he. "I belong
to the biggest family among the birds. It is the Finch and
Sparrow family. There are a lot of us and a good many of us don't
look much alike, but still we belong to the same family. I
suppose you know that Rosebreast the Grosbeak and Glory the
Cardinal are members of my family."

"I didn't know it," replied Peter, "but if you say it is so I
suppose it must be so. It is easier to believe than it is to
believe that you are related to the Sparrows."

"Nevertheless I am," retorted Chewink.

"What were you scratching for when I first saw you?" asked Peter.

"Oh, worms and bugs that hide under the leaves," replied Chewink
carelessly. "You have no idea how many of them hide under dead
leaves."

"Do you eat anything else?" asked Peter.

"Berries and wild fruits in season," replied Chewink. "I'm very
fond of them. They make a variety in the bill of fare."

"I've noticed that I seldom see you up in the tree tops,"
remarked Peter.

"I like the ground better," replied Chewink. "I spend more of my
time on the ground than anywhere else."

"I suppose that means that you nest on the ground," ventured
Peter.

Chewink nodded. "Of course," said he. "As a matter of fact, I've
got a nest in this very thicket. Mrs. Towhee is on it right now,
and I suspect she's worrying and anxious to know what happened
over here when you warned me about Reddy Fox. I think I must go
over and set her mind at rest."

Peter was just about to ask if he might go along and see that
nest when a new voice broke in.

"What are you fellows talking about?" it demanded, and there
flitted just in front of Peter a little bird the size of a
Sparrow but lovelier than any Sparrow of Peter's acquaintance. At
first glance he seemed to be all blue, and such a lovely bright
blue. But as he paused for an instant Peter saw that his wings
and tail were mostly black and that the lovely blue was brightest
on his head and back. It was Indigo the Bunting.

"We were talking about our family," replied Chewink. "I was
telling Peter that we belong to the largest family among the
birds."

"But you didn't say anything about Indigo," interrupted Peter.
"Do you mean to say that he belongs to the same family?"

"I surely do," replied Indigo. "I'm rather closely related to the
Sparrow branch. Don't I look like a Sparrow?"

Peter looked at Indigo closely. "In size and shape you do," he
confessed, "but just the same I should never in the world have
thought of connecting you with the Sparrows."

"How about me?" asked another voice, and a little brown bird flew
up beside Indigo, twitching her tail nervously. She looked very
Sparrow-like indeed, so much so, that if Peter had not seen her
with her handsome mate, for she was Mrs. Indigo, he certainly
would have taken her for a Sparrow.

Only on her wings and tail was there any of the blue which made
Indigo's coat so beautiful, and this was only a faint tinge.

"I'll have to confess that so far as you are concerned it isn't
hard to think of you as related to the Sparrows," declared Peter.
"Don't you sometimes wish you were as handsomely dressed as
Indigo?"

Mrs. Indigo shook her head in a most decided way. "Never!" she
declared. "I have worries enough raising a family as it is, but
if I had a coat like his I wouldn't have a moment of peace. You
have no idea how I worry about him sometimes. You ought to be
thankful, Peter Rabbit, that you haven't a coat like his. It
attracts altogether too much attention."

Peter tried to picture himself in a bright blue coat and laughed
right out at the mere thought, and the others joined with him.
Then Indigo flew up to the top of a tall tree not far away and
began to sing. It was a lively song and Peter enjoyed it
thoroughly. Mrs. Indigo took this opportunity to slip away
unobserved, and when Peter looked around for Chewink, he too had
disappeared. He had gone to tell Mrs. Cbewink that he was quite
safe and that she bad nothing to worry about.




CHAPTER XXXIII  A Royal Dresser and a Late Nester.

Jenny and Mr. Wren were busy. If there were any busier little
folks anywhere Peter Rabbit couldn't imagine who they could be.
You see, everyone of those seven eggs in the Wren nest had
hatched, and seven mouths are a lot to feed, especially when
every morsel of food must be hunted for and carried from a
distance. There was little time for gossip now. Just as soon as
it was light enough to see Jenny and Mr. Wren began feeding those
always hungry babies, and they kept at it with hardly time for an
occasional mouthful themselves, until the Black Shadows came
creeping out from the Purple Hills. Wren babies, like all other
bird babies, grow very fast, and that means that each one of them
must have a great deal of food every day. Each one of them often
ate its own weight in food in a day and all their food had to be
hunted for and when found carried back and put into the gaping
little mouths. Hardly would Jenny Wren disappear in the little
round doorway of her home with a caterpillar in her bill than she
would hop out again, and Mr. Wren would take her place with a
spider or a fly and then hurry away for something more.

Peter tried to keep count of the number of times they came and
went but soon gave it up as a bad job. He began to wonder where
all the worms and bugs and spiders came from, and gradually he
came to have a great deal of respect for eyes sharp enough to
find them so quickly. Needless to say Jenny was shorter-tempered
than ever. She had no time to gossip and said so most
emphatically. So at last Peter gave up the idea of trying to find
out from her certain things he wanted to know, and hopped off to
look for some one who was less busy. He had gone but a short
distance when his attention was caught by a song so sweet and so
full of little trills that he first stopped to listen, then went
to look for the singer.

It didn't take long to find him, for he was sitting on the very
tiptop of a fir-tree in Farmer Brown's yard. Peter didn't dare go
over there, for already it was broad daylight, and he had about
made up his mind that he would have to content himself with just
listening to that sweet singer when the latter flew over in the
Old Orchard and alighted just over Peter's head. "Hello, Peter!"
he cried.

"Hello, Linnet!" cried Peter. "I was wondering who it could be
who was singing like that. I ought to have known, but you see
it's so long since I've heard you sing that I couldn't just
remember your song. I'm so glad you came over here for I'm just
dying to talk to somebody."

Linnet the Purple Finch, for this is who it was, laughed right
out. "I see you're still the same old Peter," said he. "I suppose
you're just as full of curiosity as ever and just as full of
questions. Well, here I am, so what shall we talk about?"

"You," replied Peter bluntly. "Lately I've found out so many
surprising things about my feathered friends that I want to know
more. I'm trying to get it straight in my head who is related to
who, and I've found out some things which have begun to make me
feel that I know very little about my feathered neighbors. It's
getting so that I don't dare to even guess who a person's
relatives are. If you please, Linnet, what family do you belong
to?"

Linnet flew down a little nearer to Peter. "Look me over, Peter,"
said he with twinkling eyes. "Look me over and see if you can't
tell for yourself."

Peter stared solemnly at Linnet. He saw a bird of Sparrow size
most of whose body was a rose-red, brightest on the head, darkest
on the back, and palest on the breast. Underneath he was whitish.

His wings and tail were brownish, the outer parts of the feathers
edged with rose-red. His bill was short and stout.

Before Peter could reply, Mrs. Linnet appeared. There wasn't so
much as a touch of that beautiful rose-red about her. Her
grayish-brown back was streaked with black, and her white breast
and sides were spotted and streaked with brown. If Peter hadn't
seen her with Linnet he certainly would have taken her for a
Sparrow. She looked so much like one that he ventured to say, "I
guess you belong to the Sparrow family."

"That's pretty close, Peter. That's pretty close," declared
Linnet. "We belong to the Finch branch of the family, which makes
the sparrows own cousins to us. Folks may get Mrs. Linnet mixed
with some of our Sparrow cousins, but they never can mistake me.
There isn't anybody else my size with a rose-red coat like mine.
If you can't remember my song, which you ought to, because there
is no other song quite like it, you can always tell me by the
color of my coat. Hello! Here comes Cousin Chicoree. Did you ever
see a happier fellow than he is?  I'll venture to say that he has
been having such a good time that he hasn't even yet thought of
building a nest, and here half the people of the Old Orchard have
grown families. I've a nest and eggs myself, but that madcap
is just roaming about having a good time. Isn't that so,
Chicoree?"

"Isn't what so?" demanded Chicoree the Goldfinch, perching very
near to where Linnet was sitting.

"Isn't it true that you haven't even begun thinking about a
nest?" demanded Linnet. Chicoree flew down in the grass almost
under Peter's nose and began to pull apart a dandelion which had
gone to seed. He snipped the seeds from the soft down to which
they were attached and didn't say a word till he was quite
through. Then he flew up in the tree near Linnet, and while he
dressed his feathers, answered Linnet's question.

"It's quite true, but what of it?" said he. "There's time enough
to think about nest-building and household cares later. Mrs.
Goldfinch and I will begin to think about them about the first of
July. Meanwhile we are making the most of this beautiful season
to roam about and have a good time. For one thing we like
thistledown to line our nest, and there isn't any thistledown
yet. Then, there is no sense in raising a family until there is
plenty of the right kind of food, and you know we Goldfinches
live mostly on seeds. I'll venture to say that we are the
greatest seed-eaters anywhere around. Of course when the babies
are small they have to have soft food, but one can find plenty of
worms and bugs any time during the summer. Just as soon as the
children are big enough to hunt their own food they need seeds,
so there is no sense in trying to raise a family until there are
plenty of seeds for them when needed. Meanwhile we are having a
good time. How do you like my summer suit, Peter?"

"It's beautiful," cried Peter. "I wouldn't know you for the same
bird I see so often in the late fall and sometimes in the winter.
I don't know of anybody who makes a more complete change. That
black cap certainly is very smart and becoming."

Chicoree cocked his head on one side, the better to show off that
black cap. The rest of his head and his whole body were bright
yellow. His wings were black with two white bars on each. His
tail also was black, with some white on it. In size he was a
little smaller than Linnet and altogether one of the smartest
appearing of all the little people who  wear feathers. It was a
joy just to look at him. If Peter had known anything about
Canaries, which of course he didn't, because Canaries are always
kept in cages, he would have understood why Chicoree the
Goldfinch is often called the Wild Canary.

Mrs. Goldfinch now joined her handsome mate and it was plain to
see that she admired him quite as much as did Peter. Her wings
and tail were much like his but were more brownish than black.
She wore no cap it all and her back and head were a grayish-brown
with an olive tinge. Underneath she was lighter, with a tinge of
yellow. All together she was a very modestly dressed small
person. As Peter recalled Chicoree's winter suit, it was very
much like that now worn by Mrs. Goldfinch, save that his wings
and tail were as they now appeared.

All the time Chicoree kept up a continual happy twittering,
breaking out every few moments into song. It was clear that he
was fairly bubbling over with joy.

"I suppose," said Peter, "it sounds foolish of me to ask if you
are a member of the same family as Linnet."

"Very foolish, Peter. Very foolish," laughed Chicoree. "Isn't my
name Goldfinch, and isn't his name Purple Finch? We belong to the
same family and a mighty fine family it is. Now I must go over to
the Old Pasture to see how the thistles are coming on."

Away he flew calling, "Chic-o-ree, per-chic-o-ree, chic-o-ree!"
Mrs. Goldfinch followed. As they flew, they rose and fell in the
air in very much the same way that Yellow Wing the Flicker does.

"I'd know them just by that, even if Chicoree didn't keep calling
his own name," thought Peter. "It's funny how they often stay
around all winter yet are among the last of all the birds to set
up housekeeping. As I once said to Jenny Wren, birds certainly
are funny creatures."

"Tut, tut, tut, tut, tut! It's no such thing, Peter Rabbit. It's
no such thing," scolded Jenny Wren as she flew last Peter on her
way to hunt for another worm for her hungry babies.



CHAPTER, XXXIV  Mourner the Dove and Cuckoo.

A long lane leads from Farmer Brown's barnyard down to his
cornfield on the Green Meadows. It happened that very early one
morning Peter Rabbit took it into his funny little head to run
down that long lane to see what he might see. Now at a certain
place beside that long lane was a gravelly bank into which Farmer
Brown had dug for gravel to put on the roadway up near his house.
As Peter was scampering past this place where Farmer Brown had
dug he caught sight of some one very busy in that gravel pit.
Peter stopped short, then sat up to stare.

It was Mourner the Dove whom Peter saw, an old friend of whom
Peter is very fond. His body was a little bigger than that of
Welcome Robin, but his long slender neck, and longer tail and
wings made him appear considerably larger. In shape he reminded
Peter at once of the Pigeons up at Farmer Brown's. His back was
grayish-brown, varying to bluish-gray. The crown and upper parts
of his head were bluish-gray. His breast was reddish-buff,
shading down into a soft buff. His bill was black and his feet
red. The two middle feathers of his tail were longest and of the
color of his back. The other feathers were slaty-gray with little
black bands and tipped with white. On his wings were a few
scattered black spots. Just under each ear was a black spot. But
it was the sides of his slender neck which were the most
beautiful part of Mourner. When untouched by the Jolly Little
Sunbeams the neck feathers appeared to be in color very like his
breast, but the moment they were touched by the Jolly Little
Sunbeams they seemed to be constantly changing, which, as you
know, is called iridescence. Altogether Mourner was lovely in a
quiet way.

But it was not his appearance which made Peter stare; it was what
he was doing. He was walking about and every now and then picking
up something quite as if he were getting his breakfast in that
gravel pit, and Peter couldn't imagine anything good to eat down
there. He knew that there were not even worms there. Besides,
Mourner is not fond of worms; he lives almost altogether on seeds
and grains of many kinds. So Peter was puzzled. But as yon know
he isn't the kind to puzzle long over anything when he can use
his tongue.

"Hello, Mourner!" he cried. "What under the sun are you doing in
there? Are you getting your breakfast?"

"Hardly, Peter; hardly," cooed Mourner in the softest of voices.
"I've had my breakfast and now I'm picking up a little gravel for
my digestion." He picked up a tiny pebble and swallowed it.

"Well, of all things!" cried Peter. "You must be crazy. The idea
of thinking that gravel is going to help your digestion. I should
say the chances are that it will work just the other way."

Mourner laughed. It was the softest of little cooing laughs, very
pleasant to hear. "I see that as usual you are judging others by
yourself," said he. "You ought to know by this time that you can
do nothing more foolish. I haven't the least doubt that a
breakfast of gravel would give you the worst kind of a
stomach-ache. But you are you and I am I, and there is all the
difference in the world. You know I eat grain and hard seeds. Not
having any teeth I have to swallow them whole. One part of my
stomach is called a gizzard and its duty is to grind and crush my
food so that it may be digested. Tiny pebbles and gravel help
grind the food and so aid digestion. I think I've got enough now
for this morning, and it is time for a dust bath. There is a
dusty spot over in the lane where I take a dust bath every day."

"If you don't mind," said Peter, "I'll go with you."

Mourner said he didn't mind, so Peter followed him over to the
dusty place in the long lane. There Mourner was joined by Mrs.
Dove, who was dressed very much like him save that she did not
have so beautiful a neck. While they thoroughly dusted themselves
they chatted with Peter.

"I see you on the ground so much that I've often wondered if you
build your nest on the ground," said Peter.

"No," replied Mourner. "Mrs. Dove builds in a tree, but usually
not very far above the ground. Now if you'll excuse us we must
get back home. Mrs. Dove has two eggs to sit on and while she is
siting I like to be close at hand to keep her company and make
love to her."

The Doves shook the loose dust from their feathers and flew away.
Peter watched to see where they went, but lost sight of them
behind some trees, so decided to run up to the Old Orchard. There
he found Jenny and Mr. Wren as busy as ever feeding that growing
family of theirs. Jenny wouldn't stop an instant to gossip. Peter
was so brimful of what he had found out about Mr. and Mrs. Dove
that he just had to tell some one. He heard Kitty the Catbird
meowing among the bushes along the old stone wall, so hurried
over to look for him. As soon as he found him Peter began to tell
what he had learned about Mourner the Dove.

"That's no news, Peter," interrupted Kitty. "I know all about
Mourner and his wife. They are very nice people, though I must
say Mrs. Dove is one of the poorest housekeepers I know of. I
take it you never have seen her nest."

Peter shook his head. "No," said he, "I haven't. What is it
like?"

Kitty the Catbird laughed. "It's about the poorest apology for a
nest I know of," said he. "It is made of little sticks and mighty
few of them. How they hold together is more than I can understand.
I guess it is a good thing that Mrs. Dove doesn't lay more than
two eggs, and it's a wonder to me that those two stay in the
nest. Listen! There's Mourner's voice now. For one who is so
happy he certainly does have the mournfullest sounding voice. To
hear him you'd think he was sorrowful instead of happy. It always
makes me feel sad to hear him."

"That's true," replied Peter, "but I like to hear him just the
same. Hello! Who's that?"

>From one of the trees in the Old Orchard sounded a long, clear,
"Kow-kow-kow-kow-kow-kow!" It was quite unlike any voice Peter
had heard that spring.

"That's Cuckoo," said Kitty. "Do you mean to say you don't know
Cuckoo?"

"Of course I know him," retorted Peter. "I had forgotten the
sound of his voice, that's all." Tell me, Kitty, is it true that
Mrs. Cuckoo is no better than Sally Sly the Cowbird and goes
about laying her eggs in the nests of other birds? I've heard
that said of her."

"There isn't a word of truth in it," declared Kitty emphatically.
"She builds a nest, such as it is, which isn't much, and she
looks after her own children. The Cuckoos have been given a bad
name because of some good-for-nothing cousins of theirs who live
across the ocean where Bully the English Sparrow belongs, and
who, if all reports are true, really are no better than Sally Sly
the Cowbird. It's funny how a bad name sticks. The Cuckoos have
been accused of stealing the eggs of us other birds, but I've
never known them to do it and I've lived neighbor to them for a
long time, I guess they get their bad name because of their
habit of slipping about silently and keeping out of sight as much
as possible, as if they were guilty of doing something wrong and
trying to keep from being seen. As a matter of fact, they are
mighty useful birds. Farmer Brown ought to be tickled to death
that Mr. and Mrs. Cuckoo have come back to the Old Orchard this
year."

"Why?" demanded Peter.

"Do you see that cobwebby nest with all those hairy caterpillars
on it and around it up in that tree?" asked Kitty.

Peter replied that he did and that he had seen a great many nests
just like it, and had noticed how the caterpillars ate all the
leaves near them.

"I'll venture to say that you won't see very many leaves eaten
around that nest," replied Kitty. "Those are called
tent-caterpillars, and they do an awful lot of damage. I can't
bear them myself because they are so hairy, and very few birds
will touch them. But Cuckoo likes them. There he comes now; just
watch him."

A long, slim Dove-like looking bird alighted close to the
caterpillar's nest. Above he was brownish-gray with just a little
greenish tinge. Beneath he was white. His wings were
reddish-brown. His tail was a little longer than that of Mourner
the Dove. The outer feathers were black tipped with white, while
the middle feathers were the color of his back. The upper half of
his bill was black, but the under half was yellow, and from this
he is called the Yellow-billed Cuckoo. He has a cousin very much
like himself in appearance, save that his bill is all black and
he is listed the Black-billed Cuckoo.

Cuckoo made no sound but began to pick off the hairy caterpillars
and swallow them. When he had eaten all those in sight he made
holes in the silken web of the nest and picked out the
caterpillars that were inside. Finally, having eaten his fill, he
flew off as silently as he had come and disappeared among the
bushes farther along the old stone wall. A moment later they
heard his voice, "Kow-kow-how-kow-kow-kow-kow-kow!"

"I suppose some folks would think that it is going to rain,"
remarked Kitty the Catbird. "They have the silly notion that
Cuckoo only calls just before rain, and so they call him the Rain
Crow. But that isn't so at all. Well, Peter, I guess I've
gossiped enough for one morning. I must go see how Mrs. Catbird
is getting along."

Kitty disappeared and Peter, having no one to talk to, decided
that the best thing he could do would be to go home to the dear
Old Briar-patch.



CHAPTER XXXV  A Butcher and a Hummer.

Not far from the Old Orchard grew a thorn-tree which Peter Rabbit
often passed. He never had paid particular attention to it. One
morning he stopped to rest under it. Happening to look up, he saw
a most astonishing thing. Fastened on the sharp thorns of one of
the branches were three big grasshoppers, a big moth, two big
caterpillars, a lizard, a small mouse and a young English
Sparrow. Do you wonder that Peter thought he must be dreaming? He
couldn't imagine how those creatures could have become fastened
on those long sharp thorns. Somehow it gave him an uncomfortable
feeling and he hurried on to the Old Orchard, bubbling over with
desire to tell some one of the strange and dreadful thing he had
seen in the thorn-tree.

As he entered the Old Orchard in the far corner he saw Johnny
Chuck sitting on his doorstep and hurried over to tell him the
strange news. Johnny listened until Peter was through, then told
him quite frankly that never had he heard of such a thing, and
that he thought Peter must have been dreaming and didn't know it.

"You're wrong, Johnny Chuck. Peter hasn't been dreaming at all,"
said Skimmer the Swallow, who, you remember, lived in a hole in a
tree just above the entrance to Johnny Chuck's house. He had been
sitting where he could hear all that Peter had said.

"Well, if you know so much about it, please explain," said Johnny
Chuck rather crossly.

"It's simple enough," replied Skimmer. "Peter just happened to
find the storehouse of Butcher the Loggerhead Shrike. It isn't a
very pleasant sight, I must admit, but one must give Butcher
credit for being smart enough to lay up a store of food when it
is plentiful."

"And who is Butcher the Shrike?" demanded Peter. "He's a new one
to me.

"He's new to this location," replied Skimmer, "and you probably
haven't noticed him. I've seen him in the South often. There he
is now, on the tiptop of that tree over yonder."

Peter and Johnny looked eagerly. They saw a bird who at first
glance appeared not unlike Mocker the Mockingbird. He was dressed
wholly in black, gray and white. When he turned his head they
noticed a black stripe across the side of his face and that the
tip of his bill was hooked. These are enough to make them forget
that otherwise he was like Mocker. While they were watching him
he flew down into the grass and picked up a grasshopper. Then he
flew with a steady, even flight, only a little above the ground,
for some distance, suddenly shooting up and returning to the
perch where they had first seen him. There he ate the grasshopper
and resumed his watch for something else to catch.

"He certainly has wonderful eyes," said Skimmer admiringly. "He
mast have seen that grasshopper way over there in the grass
before he started after it, for he flew straight there. He
doesn't waste time and energy hunting aimlessly. He sits on a
high perch and watches until he sees something he wants. Many
times I've seen him sitting on top of a telegraph pole. I
understand that Bully the English Sparrow has become terribly
nervous since the arrival of Butcher. He is particularly fond of
English Sparrows. I presume it was one of Bully's children you
saw in the thorn-tree, Peter. For my part I hope he'll frighten
Bully into leaving the Old Orchard. It would he a good thing for
the rest of us."

"But I don't understand yet why he fastens his victims on those
long thorns," said Peter.

"For two reasons," replied Skimmer. "When he catches more
grasshoppers and other insects than he can eat, he sticks them on
those thorns so that later he may be sure of a good meal if it
happens there are no more to be caught when he is hungry. Mice,
Sparrows, and things too big for him to swallow he sticks on the
thorns so that he can pull them to pieces easier. You see his
feet and claws are not big and stout enough to hold his victims
while he tears them to pieces with his hooked bill. Sometimes,
instead of sticking them on thorns, he sticks them on the barbed
wire of a fence and sometimes he wedges them into the fork of two
branches."

"Does he kill many birds?" asked Peter.

"Not many," replied Skimmer, "and most of those he does kill are
English Sparrows. The rest of us have learned to keep out of his
way. He feeds mostly on insects, worms and caterpillars, but he
is very fond of mice and he catches a good many. He is a good
deal like Killy the Sparrow Hawk in this respect. He has a
cousin, the Great Northern Shrike, who sometimes comes down in
the winter, and is very much like him. Hello! Now what's
happened?"

A great commotion had broken out not far away in the Old Orchard.
Instantly Skimmer flew over to see what it was all about and
Peter followed. He got there just in time to see Chatterer the
Red Squirrel dodging around the trunk of a tree, first on one
side, then on the other, to avoid the sharp bills of the angry
feathered folk who had discovered him trying to rob a nest of its
young.

Peter chuckled. "Chatterer is getting just what is due him, I
guess," he muttered. "It reminds me of the time I got into a
Yellow Jacket's nest. My, but those birds are mad!"

Chatterer continued to dodge from side to side of the tree while
the birds darted down at him, all screaming at the top of their
voices. Finally Chatterer saw his chance to run for the old stone
wall. Only one bird was quick enough to catch up with him and
that one was such a tiny fellow that he seemed hardly bigger than
a big insect. It was Hammer the Hummingbird. He followed
Chatterer clear to the old stone wall. A moment later Peter heard
a humming noise just over his head and looked up to see Hummer
himself alight on a twig, where he squeaked excitedly for a few
minutes, for his voice is nothing but a little squeak.

Often Peter had seen Hummer darting about from flower to flower
and holding himself still in mid-air in front of each as he
thrust his long bill into the heart of the blossom to get the
tiny insects there and the sweet juices he is so fond of. But
this was the first time Peter had ever seen him sitting still. He
was such a mite of a thing that it was hard to realize that he
was a bird. His back was a bright, shining green. His wings and
tail were brownish with a purplish tinge. Underneath he was
whitish, But it was his throat on which Peter fixed his eyes. It
was a wonderful ruby-red that glistened and shone in the sun like
a jewel.

Hummer lifted one wing and with his long needle-like bill
smoothed the feathers under it. Then he darted out into the air,
his wings moving so fast that Peter couldn't see them at all. But
if he couldn't see them he could hear them. You see they moved so
fast that they made a sound very like the humming of Bumble the
Bee. It is because of this that he is called the Hummingbird. A
fey' minutes later he was back again and now he was joined by
Mrs. Hummer. She was dressed very much like Hummer but did not
have the beautiful ruby throat. She stopped only a minute or two,
then darted over to what looked for all the world like a tiny cup
of moss. It was their nest.

Just then Jenny Wren came along, and being quite worn out with
the work of feeding her seven babies, she was content to rest for
a few moments and gossip. Peter told her what he had discovered.

"I know all about that," retorted Jenny. "You don't suppose I
hunt these trees over for food without knowing where my neighbors
are living, do you? I'd have you to understand, Peter, that that
is the daintiest nest in the Old Orchard. It is made wholly of
plant down and covered on the outside with bits of that gray
moss-like stuff that grows on the bark of the trees and is called
lichens. That is what makes that nest look like nothing more than
a knot on the branch. Chatterer made a big mistake when he
visited this tree. Hummer may he a tiny fellow but he isn't
afraid of anybody under the sun. That bill of his is so sharp and
he is so quick that few folks ever bother him more than once.
Why, there isn't a single member of the Hawk family that Hummer
won't attack. There isn't a cowardly feather on him."

"Does he go very far south for the winter?" asked Peter. "He is
such a tiny fellow I don't see how he can stand a very long
journey."

"Huh!" exclaimed Jenny Wren. "Distance doesn't bother Hummer any.
You needn't worry about those wings of his. He goes clear down to
South America. He has ever so many relatives down there. You
ought to see his babies when they first hatch out. They are no
bigger than bees. But they certainly do grow fast. Why, they are
flying three weeks from the time they hatch. I'm glad I don't
have to pump food down the throats of my youngsters the way Mrs.
Hummingbird has to down hers."

Peter looked perplexed. "What do you mean by pumping food down
their throats?" he demanded.

"Just what I say," retorted Jenny Wren. "Mrs. Hummer sticks her
bill right down their throats and then pumps up the food she has
already swallowed. I guess it is a good thing that the babies
have short bills."

"Do they?" asked Peter, opening his eyes very wide with surprise.

"Yes," replied Jenny. "When they hatch out they have short bills,
but it doesn't take them a great while to grow long."

"How many babies does Mrs. Hummer usually have?" asked Peter.

"Just two," replied Jenny. "Just two. That's all that nest will
hold. But goodness gracious, Peter, I can't stop gossiping here
any longer. You have no idea what a care seven babies are."

With a jerk of her tail off flew Jenny Wren, and Peter hurried
back to tell Johnny Chuck all he had found out about Hummer the
Hummingbird.



CHAPTER XXXVI  A Stranger and a Dandy.

Butcher the Shrike was not the only newcomer in the Old Orchard.
There was another stranger who, Peter Rabbit soon discovered, was
looked on with some suspicion by all the other birds of the Old
Orchard. The first time Peter saw him, he was walking about on
the ground some distance off. He didn't hop but walked, and at
that distance he looked all black. The way he carried himself and
his movements as he walked made Peter think of Creaker the
Grackle. In fact, Peter mistook him for Creaker. That was because
he didn't really look at him. If he had he would have seen at
once that the stranger was smaller than Creaker.

Presently the stranger flew up in a tree and Peter saw that his
tail was little more than half as long as that of Creaker. At
once it came over Peter that this was a stranger to him, and of
course his curiosity was aroused. He didn't have any doubt
whatever that this was a member of the Blackbird family, but
which one it could be he hadn't the least idea. "Jenny Wren will
know," thought Peter and scampered off to hunt her up.

"Who is that new member of the Blackbird family who has come
to live in the Old Orchard?" Peter asked as soon as he found
Jenny Wren.

"There isn't any new member of the Blackbird family living in
the Old Orchard," retorted Jenny Wren tartly.

"There is too," contradicted Peter. "I saw him with my own
eyes. I can see him now. He's sitting in that tree over yonder
this very minute. He's all black, so of course he must be a
member of the Blackbird family."

"Tut, tut, tut, tut, tut!" scolded Jenny Wren. "Tut, tut,
tut, tut, tut! That fellow isn't a member of the Blackbird
family at all, and what's more, he isn't black. Go over there
and take a good look at him; then come back and tell me if you
still think he is black."

Jenny turned her back on Peter and went to hunting worms. There
being nothing else to do, Peter hopped over where he could get
a good look at the stranger. The sun was shining full on him, and
he wasn't black at all. Jenny Wren was right. For the most part
he was very dark green. At least, that is what Peter thought at
first glance. Then, as the stranger moved, he seemed to be a
rich purple in places. In short he changed color as he turned.
His feathers were like those of Creaker the Grackle--iridescent.
All over he was speckled with tiny light spots. Underneath he
was dark brownish-gray. His wings and tail were of the same color,
with little touches of buff. His rather large bill was yellow.

Peter hurried back to Jenny Wren and it must be confessed he
looked sheepish. "You were right, Jenny Wren; he isn't black at
all," confessed Peter. "Of course I was right. I usually am,"
retorted Jenny. "He isn't black, he isn't even related to the
Blackbird family, and he hasn't any business in the Old Orchard.
In fact, if you ask me, he hasn't any business in this country
anyway. He's a foreigner. That's what he is--a foreigner."

"But you haven't told me who he is," protested Peter.

"He is Speckles the Starling, and he isn't really an American at
all," replied Jenny. "He comes from across the ocean the same as
Bully the English Sparrow. Thank goodness he hasn't such a
quarrelsome disposition as Bully. Just the same, the rest of us
would be better satisfied if he were not here. He has taken
possession of one of the old homes of Yellow Wing the Flicker,
and that means one less house for birds who really belong here.
If his family increases at the rate Bully's family does, I'm
afraid some of us will soon be crowded out of the Old Orchard.
Did you notice that yellow bill of his?"

Peter nodded. "I certainly did," said he. "I couldn't very well
help noticing it."

"Well, there's a funny thing about that bill," replied Jenny.
"In winter it turns almost black. Most of us wear a different
colored suit in winter, but our bills remain the same."

"Well, he seems to be pretty well fixed here, and I don't see
but what the thing for the rest of you birds to do is to make
the best of the matter," said Peter. "What I want to know is
whether or not he is of any use."

"I guess he must do some good," admitted Jenny Wren rather
grudgingly. "I've seen him picking up worms and grubs, but he
likes grain, and I have a suspicion that if his family becomes
very numerous, and I suspect it will, they will eat more of
Farmer Brown's grain than they will pay for by the worms and bugs
they destroy. Hello! There's Dandy the Waxwing and his friends."

A flock of modestly dressed yet rather distinguished looking
feathered folks had alighted in a cherry-tree and promptly began
to help themselves to Farmer Brown's cherries. They were about
the size of Winsome Bluebird, but did not look in the least like
him, for they were dressed almost wholly in beautiful, rich, soft
grayish-brown. Across the end of each tail was a yellow band. On
each, the forehead, chin and a line through each eye was
velvety-black. Each wore a very stylish pointed cap, and on the
wings of most of them were little spots of red which looked like
sealing-wax, and from which they get the name of Waxwings. They
were slim and trim and quite dandified, and in a quiet way were
really beautiful.

As Peter watched them he began to wonder if Farmer Brown would
have any cherries left. Peter himself can do pretty well in the
matter of stuffing his stomach, but even he marvelled at the way
those birds put the cherries out of sight. It was quite clear to
him why they are often called Cberrybirds.

"If they stay long, Farmer Brown won't have any cherries left,"
remarked Peter.

"Don't worry," replied Jenny Wren. "They won't stay long. I
don't know anybody equal to them for roaming about. Here are most
of us with families on our hands and Mr. and Mrs. Bluebird with a
second family and Mr. and Mrs. Robin with a second set of eggs,
while those gadabouts up there haven't even begun to think about
housekeeping yet. They certainly do like those cherries, but I
guess Farmer Brown can stand the loss of what they eat. He may
have fewer cherries, but he'll have more apples because of them."

"Bow's that?" demanded Peter.

"Oh," replied Jenny Wren, "they were over here a while ago when
those little green cankerworms threatened to eat up the whole
orchard, and they stuffed themselves on those worms just the same
as they are stuffing themselves on cherries now. They are very
fond of small fruits but most of those they eat are the wild kind
which are of no use at all to Farmer Brown or anybody else. Now
just look at that performance, will you?"

There were five of the Waxwings and they were now seated side by
side on a branch of the cherry tree. One of them had a plump
cherry which he passed to the next one. This one passed it on to
the next, and so it went to the end of the row and halfway back
before it was finally eaten. Peter laughed right out. "Never in
my life have I seen such politeness," said he.

"Huh!" exclaimed Jenny Wren. "I don't believe it was politeness
at all. I guess if you got at the truth of the matter you would
find that each one was stuffed so full that he thought he didn't
have room for that cherry and so passed it along."

"Well, I think that was politeness just the same," retorted
Peter. "The first one might have dropped the cherry if he
couldn't eat it instead of passing it along." Just then the
Waxwings flew away.

It was the very middle of the summer before Peter Rabbit again
saw Dandy the Waxwing. Quite by chance he discovered Dandy
sitting on the tiptop of an evergreen tree, as if on guard. He
was on guard, for in that tree was his nest, though Peter didn't
know it at the time. In fact, it was so late in the summer that
most of Peter's friends were through nesting and he had quite
lost interest in nests. Presently Dandy flew down to a lower
branch and there he was joined by Mrs. Waxwing. Then Peter was
treated to one of the prettiest sights he ever had seen. They
rubbed their bills together as if kissing. They smoothed each
other's feathers and altogether were a perfect picture of two
little lovebirds. Peter couldn't think of another couple who
appeared quite so gentle and loving.

Late in the fall Peter saw Mr. and Mrs. Waxwing and their family
together. They were in a cedar tree and were picking off and
eating the cedar berries as busily as the five Waxwings had picked
Farmer Brown's cherries in the early summer. Peter didn't know it
but because of their fondness for cedar berries the Waxwings were
often called Cedarbirds or Cedar Waxwings.



CHAPTER XXXVII  Farewells and Welcomes.

All through the long summer Peter Rabbit watched his feathered
friends and learned things in regard to their ways he never had
suspected. As he saw them keeping the trees of the Old Orchard
free of insect pests working in Farmer Brown's garden, and
picking up the countless seeds of weeds everywhere, he began to
understand something of the wonderful part these feathered
folks have in keeping the Great World beautiful and worth while
living in.

He had many a hearty laugh as he watched the bird babies learn
to fly and to find their own food. All summer long they were
going to school all about him, learning how to watch out for
danger, to use their eyes and ears, and all the things a bird
must know who would live to grow up.

As autumn drew near Peter discovered that his friends were
gathering in flocks, roaming here and there. It was one of the
first signs that summer was nearly over, and it gave him just a
little feeling of sadness. He heard few songs now, for the
singing season was over. Also he discovered that many of the most
beautifully dressed of his feathered friends had changed their
finery for sober traveling suits in preparation for the long
journey to the far South where they would spend the winter. In
fact he actually failed to recognize some of them at first.

September came, and as the days grew shorter, some of Peter's
friends bade him good-by. They were starting on the long journey,
planning to take it in easy stages for the most part. Each day
saw some slip away. As Peter thought of the dangers of the long
trip before them he wondered if he would ever see them again. But
some there were who lingered even after Jack Frost's first visit.
Welcome and Mrs. Robin, Winsome and Mrs. Bluebird. Little Friend
the Song Sparrow and his wife were among these. By and by even
they were forced to leave.

Sad indeed and lonely would these days have been for Peter had it
not been that with the departure of the friends he had spent so
many happy hours with came the arrival of certain other friends
from the Far North where they had made their summer homes. Some
of these stopped for a few days in passing. Others came to stay,
and Peter was kept busy looking for and welcoming them.

A few old friends there were who would stay the year through.
Sammy Jay was one. Downy and Hairy the Woodpeckers were others.
And one there was whom Peter loves dearly. It was Tommy Tit the
Chickadee.

Now Tommy Tit had not gone north in the spring. In fact, he had
made his home not very far from the Old Orchard. It just happened
that Peter hadn't found that home, and had caught only one or two
glimpses of Tommy Tit. Now, with household cares ended and his
good-sized family properly started in life, Tommy Tit was no
longer interested in the snug little home he had built in a
hollow birch-stub, and he and Mrs. Chickadee spent their time
flitting about hither, thither, and yon, spreading good cheer.
Every time Peter visited the Old Orchard he found him there, and
as Tommy was always ready for a bit of merry gossip, Peter soon
ceased to miss Jenny Wren.

"Don't you dread the winter, Tommy Tit?" asked Peter one day,
as he watched Tommy clinging head down to a twig as he picked
some tiny insect eggs from the under side.

"Not a bit," replied Tommy. "I like winter. I like cold weather.
It makes a fellow feel good from the tips of his claws to the
tip of his bill. I'm thankful I don't have to take that long
journey most of the birds have to. I discovered a secret a long
time ago, Peter; shall I tell it to you?"

"Please, Tommy," cried Peter. "You know how I love secrets."

"Well," replied Tommy Tit, "this is it: If a fellow keeps his
stomach filled he will beep his toes warm."

Peter looked a, little puzzled. "I--I--don't just see what your
stomach has to do with your toes," said he.

Tommy Tit chuckled. It was a lovely throaty little chuckle. "Dee,
dee, dee!" said he. "What I mean is, if a fellow has plenty to
eat he will keep the cold out, and I've found that if a fellow
uses his eyes and isn't afraid of a little work, he can find
plenty to eat. At least I can. The only time I ever get really
worried is when the trees are covered with ice. If it were not
that Farmer Brown's boy is thoughtful enough to hang a piece of
suet in a tree for me, I should dread those ice storms more than
I do. As I said before, plenty of food keeps a fellow warm."

"I thought it was your coat of feathers that kept you warm," said
Peter.

"Oh, the feathers help," replied Tommy Tit. "Food makes heat and
a warm coat keeps the heat in the body. But the heat has got to
be there first, or the feathers will do no good. It's just the
same way with your own self, Peter. You know you are never really
warm in winter unless you have plenty to eat..."

"That's so," replied Peter thoughtfully. "I never happened to
think of it before. Just the same, I don't see how you find food
enough on the trees when they are all bare in winter."

"Dee, Dee, Chickadee!
Leave that matter just to me,"

Chuckled Tommy Tit. "You ought to know by this time Peter Rabbit,
that a lot of different kinds of bugs lay eggs on the twigs and
trunks of trees. Those eggs would stay there all winter and in
the spring hatch out into lice and worms if it were not for me.
Why, sometimes in a single day I find and eat almost five hundred
eggs of those little green plant lice that do so much damage in
the spring and summer. Then there are little worms that bore in
just under the bark, and there are other creatures who sleep the
winter away in little cracks in the bark. Oh, there is plenty for
me to do in the  winter. I am one of the policemen of the trees.
Downy and Hairy the Woodpeckers, Seep-Seep the Brown Creeper and
Yank-Yank the Nuthatch are others. If we didn't stay right here
on the job all winter, I don't know what would become of the Old
Orchard."

Tommy Tit hung head downward from a twig while he picked some tiny
insect eggs from the under side of it. It didn't seem to make the
least difference to Tommy whether he was right side up or upside
down. He was a little animated bunch of black and white feathers,
not much bigger than Jenny Wren. The top of his head, back of his
neck and coat were shining black. The sides of his head and neck
were white. His back was ashy. His sides were a soft cream-buff,
and his wing and tail feathers were edged with white. His tiny
bill was black, and his little black eyes snapped and twinkled in
a way good to see. Not one among all Peter's friends is such a
merry-hearted little fellow as Tommy Tit the Chickadee. Merriment
and happiness bubble out of him all the time, no matter what the
weather is. He is the friend of everyone and seems to feel that
everyone is his friend.

"I've noticed," said Peter, "that birds who do not sing at any
other time of year sing in the spring. Do you have a spring song,
Tommy Tit?"

"Well, I don't know as you would call it a song, Peter," chuckled
Tommy. "No, I hardly think you would call it a song. But I have a
little love call then which goes like this: Phoe-be! Phoe-be!"

It was the softest, sweetest little whistle, and Tommy had
rightly called it a love call. "Why, I've often heard that in the
spring and didn't know it was your voice at all," cried Peter.
"You say Phoebe plainer than does the bird who is named Phoebe,
and it is ever so much softer and sweeter. I guess that is
because you whistle it."

"I guess you guess right," replied Tommy Tit. "Now I can't stop
to talk any longer. These trees need my attention. I want Farmer
Brown's boy to feel that I have earned that suet I am sure he
will put out for me as soon as the snow and ice come. I'm not the
least bit afraid of Farmer Brown's boy. I had just as soon take
food from his hand as from anywhere else. He knows I like
chopped-up nut-meats, and last winter I used to feed from his
hand every day." Peter's eyes opened very wide with surprise.
"Do you mean to say," said he, "that you and Farmer Brown's boy
are such friends that you dare sit on his hand?"

Tommy Tit nodded his little black-capped head vigorously.
"Certainly," said he. "Why not? What's the good of having friends
if you can't trust them? The more you trust them the better
friends they'll be."

Just the same, I don't see how you dare to do it," Peter replied.
"I know Farmer Brown's boy is the 